INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN
KILIC INSAAT ITHALAT
THRACAT SANAYI VE TICARET
ANONIM SIRKETI

Claimant
and
TURKMENISTAN

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/10/1

 

DECISION ON ARTICLE VII.2 OF THE
TURKEY-TURKMENISTAN BILATERAL INVESTMENT TREATY

 

Members of th unal:
Professor William W. Park
Professor Philippe Sands QC
Mr J. William Rowley QC (President)

Secretary of the Tribunal: Ms Mairée Uran-Bidegain

Representing Claimant Representing Respondent

Robert Volterra Yasemin Cetinel Peter M. Wolrich Giilperi YGriiker
Sameer Sattar Ali R Giirsel Sibel Yurtuttan
Chris Stephen Miriam K. Harwood Alev Giirel
Tihomir Mak Gabriela Alvarez Avila Berin Hickmet
Bernhard Meier Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Volterra Fietta

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 7 May 2012

Jennifer Morrison
Zeynep Gunday
Diora Ziyaeva

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt
& Mosle LLP

Giirel Y6riiker Law Offices

eer nun PF WN

re

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

Introduction 1
The Facts 12
Claimant’s Case. 18
Respondent’s Case. 24
Tribunal’s Approach to the BIT Issue: 33
Authentication and Interpretation Principles Applicable to the BIT...........0.c eee 33

Number of Authentic Versions of the BIT

 

Accurate Translations into English of Authentic Versions of the BIT..........0.0..c0ee 38
Meaning and Effect of Article VII.2 of the BIT oo... cece eects ee ceeeececneeeeeeeeee 43
Costs 51

 

The Tribunal’s Operative Decision 52

INTRODUCTION

On 30 December 2009, Claimant, Kilig insaat ithalat ihracat Sanayi ve Ticaret
Anonim Sirketi (also referred to as “Kilic”), a company with registered offices in
Istanbul, Turkey, filed a Request for Arbitration (“Request”) before the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) alleging
breaches by Respondent, Turkmenistan (referred to indistinctively as “Turkmenistan”
or “Respondent”) of the Agreement Between the Republic of Turkey and
Turkmenistan Concerning the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments,

which entered into force on 13 March 1997 (“BIT”).

The Request was registered by the Secretary-General of ICSID on 19 January 2010, in
accordance with Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment

Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (“ICSID Convention”).

Claimant and Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “parties.” The

parties’ respective representatives and their addresses are listed above.

The First Tribunal

14

On 20 March, 2010, Claimant informed the Centre that pursuant to Rule 2(3) of the
Centre’s Rule of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings, it elected to have the
Tribunal constituted in accordance with Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.
The Centre acknowledged Claimant’s election by letter dated 22 March 2010, and the

parties proceeded with the appointment of the arbitrators.

On 7 December 2010, a tribunal (“First Tribunal’) was constituted, comprising
Professor William W. Park (USA), appointed by Claimant, Professor Philippe Sands
QC (UK/France), appointed by Respondent, and Professor Emmanuel Gaillard
(France), appointed as its President by the Chairman of the Administrative Council of
ICSID, in accordance with Article 38 of the ICSID Convention. Ms. Aissatou Diop,

ICSID, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 8 December 2010, the Centre requested each party to make an initial advance
payment of US$ 100,000.00 to cover the costs of the proceedings in the first three to
six months of the case. The Centre received the payment from the parties in due

course.

On 31 January 2011, the First Tribunal held a first session, alone without the parties,
by telephone-conference, in order to meet the time limit for the Tribunal’s first
session set forth under Rule 13(1) of the Centre’s Rules of Procedure for Arbitration

Proceedings.

Objections to Jurisdiction

1.8

1.10

On 11 February 2011, having been made aware of Respondent’s objections to
jurisdiction and proposal that these proceedings be bifurcated as between jurisdiction
and merits, the First Tribunal invited the parties to provide submissions on the issue

of the bifurcation of these proceedings.

On 22 February 2011, Respondent wrote to the First Tribunal setting out its brief
submission on the nature of (but not justifications for) its objections to jurisdiction, as

Requested in the Tribunal’s letter of 11 February 2011.

On 2 March 2011, Claimant wrote to the First Tribunal setting out its response to the
First Tribunal’s letter of 11 February 2011, and to Respondent’s submission of 22
February 2011.

First Meeting

1.11

1.12

On 14 March 2011, the First Tribunal held a procedural consultation with the parties
(“First Meeting”) by teleconference at 12:00 p.m., Washington, D.C. time.

During the course of the First Meeting, the parties confirmed, inter alia, that:

(a) the rules applicable to this arbitration are the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings as amended as of 10 April 2006

(“Rules”);

(b) the First Tribunal had been constituted in accordance with the ICSID

Convention and the Rules;

(c) the proceedings would be held in Paris; and

(d) the language of the proceedings would be in English.

1.13

As regards the written and oral procedures to be adopted in the arbitration, after

hearing each party’s oral presentation, the First Tribunal decided that:

(a) Respondent would have three weeks to elaborate on the nature of each
of the five grounds on which it based its objections to jurisdiction;

(b) Claimant would have three weeks thereafter to respond;

(c) in their respective submissions, each party was to provide alternative
procedural calendars, one with bifurcation and one without; and

(d) the First Tribunal would then decide on bifurcation.

The Parties’ Further Comments on Jurisdiction

1.14

1.15

On 4 April 2011, Respondent provided further observations on the issue of bifurcation
of the proceedings and the nature of its objections to jurisdiction, as directed by the

Tribunal during the First Meeting.

On 25 April 2011, Claimant provided further observations on the issue of bifurcation
of the proceedings and set out its response to Respondent’s letter of 4 April 2011, as

directed by the Tribunal during the First Meeting.

The Second Tribunal

1.16

1.17

1.18

On 2 May 2011, Professor Gaillard resigned from the Tribunal. On 3 May 2011, the
Secretary-General notified the parties of the vacancy on the First Tribunal and

suspended the proceeding in accordance with Rule 10(2).

On 24 May 2011, the First Tribunal was reconstituted (“Tribunal”), with Professor
Park and Professor Sands continuing, and with the appointment, by the Chairman of
the Administrative Council of ICSID, of Mr J. William Rowley QC, as its President.

In accordance with Rule 12, the proceeding resumed on that same date.

On 24 August 2011, the Secretary General announced to the parties and the Tribunal
that Ms. Diop would take a temporary leave of absence and that Ms. Mairée Uran
Bidegain, had been designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal during her
absence. On 10 January 2012, the Secretary-General of ICSID informed the parties
and the Tribunal that Ms. Mairée Uran Bidegain would continue serving as Secretary

of the Tribunal on a permanent basis.

Decision on Bifurcation and Early Determination of BIT Issues

1.19

1.20

1.21

On 30 June 2011, having considered the parties’ submissions on bifurcation, the
Tribunal issued a reasoned decision on bifurcation, declining to direct bifurcation of
the proceedings. In reaching this decision, the Tribunal made it clear that it had in no
way pre-judged the outcome of any of the jurisdictional objections raised, that
Respondent was fully entitled to maintain such objections as it considered
appropriate, and that they would be addressed as joined to the merits of the dispute in
the manner envisaged by Article 41 of the ICSID Convention. However, having
regard to the parties’ differences concerning Article VII.2 of the BIT, and the
significance of that issue, the Tribunal considered it would be appropriate, at an early

stage, to determine:

(a) the number of authentic versions of the BIT; and

(b) to the extent there are authentic version(s) of the BIT in languages
other than English - accurate translations into English of any authentic

version(s) of the BIT.

Mindful of the need for early resolution of these issues in order to avoid unnecessary
cost and argument later in the proceedings, the Tribunal also indicated that it wished

to explore further the meaning and effect of Article VII.2 of the BIT.

Having also considered the parties’ respective proposed timetables, and bearing in
mind that the case was registered with the Centre some 15 months earlier, the
Tribunal established the timetable for the case, fixing all procedural steps up to and
including the production of a hearing bundle on 29 October 2012. The hearing date

was to be fixed at a later date.

As regards its questions concerning Article VII.2 of the BIT, referred to at 1.19 above
(“BIT Issues”), the timetable provided for two rounds of simultaneous written

submissions as follows:

(a) by 1 August 2011, submissions on what constitutes authentic versions /
accurate English translation(s) of the BIT, as well as the meaning and
effect of Article VII.2, together with documentary testimonial or expert

evidence relied upon; and

4

(b) by 15 August 2011, simultaneous reply submissions on what
constitutes authentic versions / accurate English translation(s) of the
BIT, as well as the meaning and effect of Article VII.2, together with

documentary, testimonial or expert evidence relied upon.

Subsequent Procedural Matters

1.22

1.23

1.24

1.25

1.26

1.27

On 13 July 2011, Claimant requested that the procedural calendar be extended by an
additional step, to allow it to file a Rejoinder on Jurisdiction if Respondent submits its
objections to jurisdiction with its Counter-Memorial on the Merits (making that
pleading Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Memorial on

Jurisdiction).

On the same date, the Tribunal invited Respondent to submit its comments, if any, on

Claimant’s request by 18 July 2011, which Respondent provided in due course.

On 1 August 2011, the parties exchanged written submissions on the BIT Issues.
Claimant’s submission was supported by an email to Claimant from Mrs. Ozbilgic, a
report from Mr. Fuat Kasimcan and an expert report from Professor Yusuf Caliskan.
Respondent’s submission was supported by a legal opinion by Dr. Emre Oktem and

Dr. Mehmet Karli.

On 15 August 2011, the parties exchanged written reply submissions on the BIT
Issues. Claimant’s submission was supported by a report from Mr Ibrahim Uslu.
Respondent’s submission was supported by a second legal opinion from Dr. Oktem

and Dr. Karli and an expert report from Professor Jacklin Kornfilt.

On 8 September 2011, following consultation with the parties, and with their
agreement, the Tribunal fixed the dates of 14-18 January 2013 for the oral hearing on
the merits and jurisdiction - the hearing to take place at the World Bank’s facilities in

Paris.

On the same date, the Tribunal advised the parties that, unless they were content that
the BIT Issues should be decided on the papers, the Tribunal considered that a one-
day, in-person, oral hearing would be of assistance, to be attended by counsel and the

parties’ legal experts.

1.28

1.29

1.30

1.31

1.32

1.33

1.34

The Tribunal also advised the parties that, having considered the parties’ submissions
regarding Claimant’s application to add a final (fifth) Memorial/pleading four weeks
after Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, it was not, for the moment, disposed to add
the requested fifth memorial. The Tribunal noted that this was not a case in which
jurisdictional objections would appear suddenly in the Counter-Memorial (Claimant
having already been made aware of Respondent’s jurisdictional objections through
two sets of written exchanges). In these circumstances, the Tribunal noted that
Claimant would be in a position to deal initially with Respondent’s objections, to the
extent that it wished, in its Memorial. However, should it turn out that any new
objections were raised for the first time in Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, the

matter could be revisited.

On 15 September 2011, the parties commented on the Tribunal’s suggestion to hold a

one-day hearing on the BIT Issues.

On 23 September 2011, having considered the parties’ comments, the Tribunal fixed
17 January 2012 for a one-day hearing in London on the BIT Issues. At the same
time, it confirmed Paris as the place for the substantive hearing on 14-18 January
2013. The parties were also invited to discuss, with a view to agreeing, a proposal on

the approach to/time allocation for the hearing on the BIT Issues.

Having been advised shortly thereafter of Mr Volterra’s unavailability on 17 January
2012, and having confirmed the availability of all counsel, and their experts, on 20
January 2012, the Tribunal requested the parties to block 20 January 2012 for the BIT

Issues hearing.

On 3 October 2011, Claimant wrote to the Centre stating that Mr Fatih Serbest had

been dismissed as counsel of record for Claimant in the case.

On 4 October 2011, the Tribunal advised the parties that the hearing on BIT Issues in

London was confirmed for 20 January 2012, starting at 10:00 a.m.

On that same date, Claimant advised the Centre that it had appointed Ms Yasemin
Cetinel to act on its behalf as its legal representative along with Volterra Fietta (which

firm had been on record from the start) in these proceedings.

1.35

1.36

1.37

1.38

1.39

On 24 October 2011, Claimant advised the Centre that the parties had agreed to
amend the pleading schedule set out in the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1 of 30
June 2011, which agreement, amongst other things, would lead to a new hearing date-
June 2013 being suggested. The parties requested the Tribunal to endorse this agreed
schedule. Respondent agreed with the content of Claimant’s communication on 25

October 2011.

On 4 November 2011, the Tribunal advised the parties that it was in general
agreement with the new proposed timetable and confirmed its availability for a five-
day hearing in Paris, commencing on 17 June 2013. The parties were also advised
that their proposed new schedule was problematic with respect to the timetable for
disclosure of documents. The parties were therefore requested to propose a slight
adjustment. Once a new proposal had been agreed, the Tribunal indicated it would be

pleased to consider it for endorsement.

On 23 November 2011, the Centre requested Claimant to make a second advance
payment of US $125,040.00 and Respondent to make a second advance payment of
US $125,000.00.

By correspondence dated 2 November 2011, 25 November 2011 and 30 November
2011, the parties provided their proposals for the conduct of the 20 January 2012 BIT
Issues hearing. Respondent proposed, inter alia, that the hearing should focus on
what the experts had to say. It favoured expert conferencing with the parties’ legal
experts, and suggested that its linguistic expert, Professor Kornfilt, attend for
examination and subsequent questioning by Claimant. Claimant indicated that it did
not require any of Respondent’s experts to attend the hearing to be cross-examined
and thus did not see the need for them to attend. Claimant also noted that Respondent
had declined to Request that Claimant make available any of its experts for cross

examination.

On 11 December 2011, the Tribunal advised the parties, inter alia, that it continued to
feel that it would be helpful for the parties’ legal experts to attend the hearing to
enable the members of the Tribunal to raise questions directly with them.
Accordingly, the Tribunal invited the parties to arrange for the attendance of their
respective legal experts at the 20 January 2012 hearing. Since neither party had

notified the other that it required the other parties’ expert(s) for cross-examination, the

7

1.40

1.41

1.42

1.43

1.44

Tribunal proposed that the legal experts appear together, to respond to such questions
as the Tribunal might have. Counsel for the parties would then have the opportunity
to ask questions arising from the answers given to the Tribunal’s questions.
Respondent was also invited to have its linguistic expert available by video-

conference facility, against the event the Tribunal had questions.

On 13 December 2011, Respondent advised the Tribunal that it objected to the
attendance of Mr Kasimcan, Mrs Ozbilgi¢ and Mr Uslu, stating that the Tribunal had
only required the legal experts to attend and these experts did not fit in such category,
and that the appearance of these three officials of the Government of the Republic of

Turkey, would contravene Article 27 of the ICSID Convention.

On 19 December 2011, following further correspondence with the parties relating to
the conduct of the 20 January 2012 hearing, the Tribunal advised that there would be
an opportunity for counsel to make brief opening statements, following which the
experts were requested to be available for questions (there would be no need for
introductory statements, or testimony in chief), following which there would be an

opportunity for counsel to make brief closing statements.

As regards Respondent’s objection to the attendance of Mr Kasimcan, Mrs Ozbilgi¢
and Mr Uslu, based on Article 27 of the Convention, the Tribunal clarified that, when
it issued its 11 December 2011 invitation, it principally had in mind the attendance
(for Claimant) of Professor Caliskan. Nevertheless, it advised that it did not consider
Respondent’s objection to be well founded and that, if Claimant wished them to
attend, they might do so. If they did, and should the Tribunal question any of them,

counsel would be given the opportunity to ask follow-on questions.

On 23 December 2011, following further correspondence from the parties in which
inter alia, Claimant did not state that it wished Mr Kasimcan, Mrs Oxbilgi¢ and Mr
Uslu to attend, the Tribunal confirmed that it did not feel that the attendance of the

three officials would be sufficiently helpful as to warrant their travel to London.

On that same date, Claimant advised the Tribunal that the parties had agreed to a
further amendment of the pleading schedule. Whilst the proposed amendment would

not affect the 20 January 2012 BIT Issues hearing, it would affect the planned

1.45

1.46

1.47

1.48

1.49

1.50

merits/jurisdictional hearing of 14-18 June 2013. Amongst other things, a new

hearing date was suggested for October 2013.

On 3 January 2012, neither party having made the second advance payment that had

been requested on 23 November 2011, the Centre followed up with the parties.

On 4 January 2012, Respondent’s counsel advised that Respondent’s second advance

payment would be made by the next week at the latest.

On 5 January 2012, Claimant’s counsel advised that Claimant expected to make its

second advance payment within 30 days.

On the same day, following a number of exchanges between the Tribunal and the
parties on the proposed new schedule, the Tribunal advised the parties that it would be
sensible to discuss these matters in person, and to fix a new schedule that worked for

all concerned during the hearing in London on 20 January 2012.

On 17 January 2012, Claimant wrote to the Centre, denying Respondent’s assertion
(see Section 4, Respondent’s Case) that the Turkish version of the BIT published on
the Turkish Undersecretariat of the Treasury’s website states that Turkish is one of the
authentic languages in which the BIT was executed. A copy of the Turkish version of

the BIT as downloaded from the website was attached.

On the same day, Respondent wrote to the Centre:

(a) providing a revised certified translation into English of the authentic
Russian version of the BIT (Exhibit R-1 (revised)), with a letter from
the translators explaining the reason for the submission of the revised

translation; and

(b) advising that the Turkish version of the BIT that was on the
Undersecretariat’s website in early August 2011 had indeed listed

Turkish as an authentic language of the BIT.

The 20 January 2012 Hearing

1.51 The BIT Issues hearing was held, as scheduled, in London on 20 January 2012 at the
IDRC, 70 Fleet Street, London, EC4Y 1EU, United Kingdom. The hearing was

recorded and transcribed.

1.52 At the hearing, the Tribunal heard oral testimony from the following experts

presented by Claimant:
(a) Professor Yusuf Caliskan

1.53 The Tribunal also heard oral testimony from the following experts presented by

Respondent:
(a) Dr. Emre Oktem
(b) Dr. Mehmet Karli
(c) Dr. Jaklin Kornfilt

1.54 In the light of the parties’ prior agreement and the Tribunal’s directions, the available

time at the hearing was divided roughly equally.

1.55 During the course of the hearing, and having regard to the revised English translation
of the Russian version of Article VII.2 that had been filed on 17 January 2012,
counsel for Respondent invited the Tribunal to appoint a qualified Russian expert
translator to provide a further translation of Article VIL2.! When questioned about
Respondent’s invitation, Claimant’s counsel suggested that such a course would be
highly unusual and advised that Claimant had no desire for further expenditures for
such a translation. However, Claimant’s counsel also advised that this was “not an

informed response”.”

1.56 At the conclusion of the hearing, when the question of the payment of the second

advances and the future scheduling were discussed, the Tribunal was advised that:
(a) Claimant would be in a position to make its payment within 30 days;

‘Transcript of 20 January 2012 Hearing, pp. 167/21 - 168/11.
? Jd. at p. 184/8 - 184/24,

1.57

1.58

1.59

1.60

1.61

1.62

(b) Respondent had now made payment of the requested second advance;

and

(c) because the decision on the BIT Issues had the potential to be
dispositive of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, the parties were agreed that
the Tribunal should decide the BIT Issues prior to considering a new
timetable based on the parties’ proposed amendment of the previously

settled pleading schedule.

On 10 February 2012, Respondent wrote to the Tribunal, noting that Claimant had not
paid its share and requesting that the funds it had disbursed be exclusively used for
payment of expenses already incurred in connection with the 20 January 2012

hearing.

On 13 February 2012, the Centre informed the parties of Claimant’s default in the
payment of the second advance requested from it. Claimant was requested to confirm

that it intended to and would make such payment by 20 February 2012.

On 20 February 2012, Claimant informed the Centre that it had paid its share of the

second advance payment.

On 22 February 2012, the Centre advised the parties that, because of the Tribunal’s
continuing uncertainty as to the accuracy of the two English translations tendered by
Respondent of Article VII.2 of the authentic Russian language version of the BIT, and
the possible relevance of the English translation of Article VII.2 of the Turkish
language version of the BIT published in the Turkish Official Gazette on 15 January
1995, it proposed to request two independent and qualified expert translators to

provide it with English language translations of the relevant texts.

The parties were provided with the names and credentials of the translators that had
been identified, together with the text of the Tribunal’s proposed instructions to them.
The parties were asked to comment by | March 2012 on the instructions the Tribunal

proposed to issue to the expert translators.

On 27 February 2012, Respondent confirmed that it was content with the Tribunal’s

proposal to instruct independent expert translators. It proposed that a further question

1.63

1.64

1.65

2.1

be asked to the Russian-English translator and raised a question as to the potential

suitability of the Turkish-English translator.

On 28 February 2012, Claimant advised the Tribunal “that it does not agree to the
Tribunal taking up the Respondent’s proposal on this point” (i.e., the appointment by

the Tribunal of an independent translator(s)).

On 6 March 2012, having regard to the absence of agreement of the parties to the
Tribunal’s retainer of/instructions to independent translators, the Tribunal advised the
parties that it would proceed by analysing the BIT Issues on the existing record of the
evidence and argument before it. The Tribunal reserved the right to instruct an

independent expert in the event that it considered it necessary to do so.

Following the hearing, the members of the Tribunal deliberated by various means of
communications including a meeting in London, United Kingdom, on 20 January
2012 and by a teleconference thereafter. In reaching its conclusions in this Decision,
the Tribunal has taken into account all pleadings, documents, testimony, expert

opinions and oral submissions filed or made so far in this case.

THE FACTS

A review of disputing parties’ submissions, witness statements, expert reports and the
oral testimony given at the hearing indicates that, with few exceptions, the factual
matrix of the negotiation and conclusion of the BIT is either agreed or not seriously
disputed.* Put another way, most of the differences between the parties as regards the
BIT issues have to do with: (a) the proper construction of the concluding statement in
the Russian version of the BIT which provides “[e]xecuted on May 2, 1992 in two
authentic copies in Turkish, Turkmen, English and the Russian language” - i.e., the
number of authentic versions of the BIT; (b) the accurate English translation of the
authentic Russian version of Article VII.2 of the BIT; and, (c) the parties’ competing

visions as to the proper construction (meaning and effect) of Article VII.2 of the BIT.

* The parties differed on whether an English or a Turkish text was used in the negotiations, but, in the end, and given
the absence of clear evidence, nothing turned on this point.

12

2.2 In particular, Claimant construes Article VII.2 of the BIT to mean that “recourse to
the domestic courts of the Respondent prior to seeking dispute resolution through
international arbitration is only an optional choice for the investor, not a compulsory

requirement”. ‘

2.3 Respondent construes Article VII.2 of the BIT to require “prior submission of a
dispute to national courts as a condition precedent to the commencement of

international arbitration against Turkmenistan”.°

24 We set out in detail below a summary of the facts most relevant to a determination of

the BIT Issues - either as agreed, not disputed or determined by the Tribunal.
Signing of the BIT
2.5 The BIT was signed on 2 May 1992 in Ashgabat, the capital of Turkmenistan.

2.6 It is common ground that the parties signed both an English language version and a
Russian language version of the BIT at that time. It is common ground that both are

authentic versions of the BIT.

2.7 Neither of the parties produced signed copies of the BIT in any other language, and
the Tribunal concludes on the basis of the evidence before it that the BIT was signed

only in its English and Russian versions.
2.8 The authentic English version of the BIT provides that the Treaty was:

“DONE at Ashghbat on the day of May 2, 1992 in two

authentic copies in Russian and English.” 6
2.9 The authentic Russian version of the BIT (translated into English) states:

“Executed on May 2, 1992 in two authentic copies in Turkish,

Turkmen, English and Russian languages.” 7

* Claimant’s Submission of | August 2011, para 21.
* Respondent’s Submission of | August 2011, para. 55.

® Request for Arbitration, Annex D; Exhibit R-2 (hereinafter all references to the English version of the BIT will be
deemed references to these two identical documents submitted by Claimant and Respondent, respectively).

13

Article VII.2 of the BIT

2.10 The text of Article VII.2 that appears in the English version of the BIT provides, in

pertinent part as follows:

“2. If these desputes (sic) cannot be settled in this way within
six months following the date of the written notification
mentioned in paragraph 1, the dispute can be submitted, as the

investor may choose, to:
(a)...
(b) ...
(Cc)...

provided that, if the investor concerned has brought the dispute
before the courts of justice of the Party that is a party to the
dispute and a final award has not been rendered within one

year.”

2.11 The text of Article VIL.2 that appears in the Russian version of the BIT (translated

literally into English) provides, in pertinent part, as follows:

“2. If the referenced conflicts cannot be settled in this way
within six months following the date of the written notification
mentioned in paragraph 1, the conflict may be submitted at

investors choice to
(a)
(b)

(c) The Court of Arbitration of the Paris
International Chamber of Commerce, on the
condition that, if the concerned investor

submitted the conflict to the court of the Party,

 

7 Exhibit R-1; Exhibit R-1 (revised).

that is a Party to the conflict, and a final
arbitral award on compensation of damages has

not been rendered within one year.” 8

Context of the BIT and Circumstances of its Conclusions

2.12

2.13

2.14

2.15

2.16

217

2.18

“Id.

The BIT was signed shortly after Turkmenistan established its independence as a

sovereign state, after many years as part of the Soviet Union.

Turkey was one of the first countries to recognise the newly-declared independence of
the four former Turkick Republics - Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and
Kazakhstan - in November and December 1991, and to establish diplomatic relations

with them, which was accomplished by early 1992.

Between 1991 and 1993, approximately 1,200 delegations of Turkish government
representatives visited these new states and, during the same period, Turkey signed

more than 140 treaties with them.

It was against this background that the Prime Minister of Turkey at the time,
Suleyman Demirel, conducted an eight-day tour of the Turkick States beginning on 27

April 1992.

During this tour, inter-alia, Turkey signed BITs with each of the four Turkic States

within a five-day period, i.e., between 28 April 1992 and 2 May 1992.

The Turkey-Kyrgyzstan BIT was signed on 28 April 1992. This bilateral investment
treaty, which is stated to be “DONE ... in two authentic copies in English”, contains
exactly the same Article VII.2 provisions as are found in the English language version

of the BIT.

The Turkey-Uzbekistan BIT was also signed on 28 April 1992. This treaty is also
stated to be “DONE at Tashkent on the day of 28/4/1992 in two authentic copies in
English”. Article VII.2 of the English version of the Turkey-Uzbekistan BIT is

exactly the same as Article VII.2 of the English version of the BIT.

2.19 The Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT was signed on 1 May 1992. It provides that it was
“DONE at Alma Ata on the day of 1 May 1992 in two authentic copies each in
Turkish, Kazak (sic), English and Russian.” The text of Article VII.2 of the English
and Turkish versions of the Turkey-Kazakh BIT are identical to the texts of the
authentic English version of the BIT and the “official” Turkish version of the BIT that

was published in the Turkish Official Gazette on 15 January 1995.
Turkish Ratification of the BIT

2.20 Turkey ratified its investment treaties with the four Turkick States using its ordinary
procedures of ratification, culminating in their publication in the Official Gazette on

15 January 1995.

2.21 The first step in the ratification involved sending the four treaties, together with their

respective draft Laws of Approbation to the Turkish Parliament in 1993.

2.22 The letter which submitted the BIT to the Turkish Parliament included, inter alia,
explanatory notes on the treaty’s text. The following description was provided for

Article VII:

“Article 7 - This article regulates the resolution of investment
disputes which may arise between a Party and an investor of
the other Party. According to the procedure which has been
foreseen, the Parties will first try to resolve the dispute by way
of negotiations, in the event the dispute is not resolved within 6
months, provided that the access to local judicial bodies
remains open, the right to proceed to international arbitration
may be used. In addition, if the investor has brought the
dispute before local judicial bodies and the final decision is
obtained, it will not be possible for the investor to proceed to
international arbitration; however, in the event that no final
decision is obtained within I year and that both of the Parties

have signed these treaties, the dispute may be brought before

° Exhibit EO/MK-6.

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

(ICSID) ...”

The purpose of the last paragraph is to avoid the repetition of
discussion of the disputes which were finally resolved by local

courts, before international bodies. ld

2.23 The four Laws of Approbation (for the Turkick States’ BITs) were published in the
Official Gazette in September 1994.

2.24 The Turkish Council of Ministers adopted ratification decrees for the four treaties at
the end of 1994 and during the first days of 1995. In the case of the BIT, and as noted
above, the respective ratification decree was published in the Official Gazette, dated
15 January 1995, which also included both the authentic English text and an “official”

Turkish text.

2.25 The “official” Turkish text of Article VII as published in the Official Gazette is set

out, in pertinent part, below in certified English translation:

“2. In the event that these disputes cannot be settled within six
months following the date of the written notification stated in
paragraph I above, such dispute can be submitted to the below
stated International Judicial Authorities as per the decision of
the investor; provided that the investor has brought the subject
matter of the dispute to the judicial court of the host Party in
accordance with the procedures and laws of the host Party and

that a decision has not been rendered within one year:
(a)...
(b) ...

(c) 2

' Exhibit EO/MK-15, p. 3.

" Exhibit R-3. ‘The English translation of the Turkish text was provided by Respondent. However, Claimant does not
dispute the translation, nor did it provide an alternative translation. (In its letter concerning bifurcation dated 25 April
2011, Claimant provided what appears to be an incorrect Turkish text of Article VIL2, translated into English.

17

3. CLAIMANT’S CASE

Number of Authentic Versions of the BIT

3.1 Claimant contends that there are only two authentic versions of the BIT; the English
and Russian language versions. These are said to be the only versions of the BIT that
were signed by the Contracting States. Claimant argues that both expressly state that

there are only two authentic copies.”
3.2 The authentic English version of the BIT provides that the treaty was:

“DONE at Ashgabat on the day of May 2, 1992 in two

authentic copies in Russian and English.”

3.3 By contrast, Claimant initially alleged that the authentic Russian version of the BIT

(translated into English) states:

“it is comprised on May 2, 1992 in two authentic copies in

Turkish, Turkmen, English and the Russian language. vis

3.4 Claimant asserts that the English version of the BIT clearly identifies the two
authentic copies as the Russian and English versions. Although the authentic Russian
version refers to two authentic copies in four languages, Claimant argues that the two
authentic copies referred to in the Russian version are the signed Russian and English

versions.

3.5 Claimant further argues that no signed versions of the BIT exist in Turkish or

Turkmen. However, it maintains that, in order to satisfy national constitutional law

 

Respondent pointed out this error in its submission on the BIT Issues dated 1 August 2011. Claimant did not seek to
refute Respondent's position on this point).

'2 Respondent has produced two copies of the Turkish text, under Exhibits R-3 and EO/MK-6 and Exhibits R-4 and
EO/MK -37, neither of which is signed. No copy of the Turkmen text was produced - Respondent advising that none
could be found.

' Although a dispute developed as to the accurate Russian-English translation of BIT Article VII.2, the parties
eventually agreed on the translation of this clause. Claimant provided this translation in its | August 2011 submission
but appeared to have abandoned it in its 15 August 2011 submission, when it instead referred to Respondent’s
submitted translation using the word “Executed on...”. See Claimant’s Submission of 15 August 2011 { 7, citing
Respondent’s submitted translation. The English translations of the Russian version submitted under Exhibits R-1 or
R-1 (revised), do not include the word “comprise” but instead “Executed on...”.

3.6

3.7

3.8

3.9

requirements, both Turkey and Turkmenistan were required to produce “official”
translations of the (or one of the) authentic version(s) of the BIT for publication in
their respective Official Gazettes. The relevant laws of the two countries make it

clear that these “official” translations are not authentic versions of the BIT.

Article 3.1(2) of Turkey’s Law No. 244 (unofficially translated into English by

Claimant, but not contested by Respondent) states:

“The Turkish text of which is the subject of international treaty
ratification or accession is published in the Official Gazette
with one of the specified authentic language or languages of
the treaty as an attachment to the Decree of the Council of

Ministers pursuant to the above paragraph. vid

Article 24.3. of the Law of Turkmenistan on the International Treaties of
Turkmenistan (unofficially translated into English by Claimant, but not contested by

Respondent) states:

“The international agreements of Turkmenistan, whose
authentic texts are comprised in the foreign languages, are
published on one of these languages with the official

translation into the Turkmen language. nls

Claimant notes that Respondent accepts that the English and Russian language

versions of the BIT are both authentic.

Claimant relies on a report made to it of Mr Ibraham Uslu, General Manager of the
General Directorate of Foreign Trade of the Undersecretariat of Treasury of Turkey 6

(“Undersecretariat”), who states in his report, inter alia, that;

“Normally, Bilateral Investment Treaty negotiations are

conducted in English. ... English is used in the drafting stage

' Claimant’s Submission of | August 2011, para. 7.

8 Id. at para. 9.

‘© Claimant says that the role of the Underscretariat is to conduct procedures and negotiations concerning the
agreements to be concluded with foreign countries in relation to the bilateral encouragement and protection of
investments.

and in the abridgement stage as this enables parties to see
more clearly whether as a result of negotiations they reached a
compromise on the issues. Then, in the signature stage, this
English draft agreement ... is translated into the languages of
the Contracting Parties and the Agreement is signed in the
languages of the Contracting Parties, along with English. In
the Bilateral Investment Treaty between Turkmenistan and
Turkey, however, the observed procedure could not be applied
.... _In this BIT, the English draft text of the agreement was used
by the Turkish side and the Russian translation was made in
Turkmenistan and these texts were signed by the Contracting
Parties. The translated Turkish text, however, was prepared in
Turkey to fulfil the procedural requirements of the approval
stage. In this context, the Turkish text is not the authentic text
of the agreement, but it is the official translation made

according to the approval procedure.”

“In order for Turkish language version to be authentic, the
Contracting Parties should sign the translated Turkish text ...
The publication of the unsigned translated text in the Official
Gazette shall not constitute as evidence that it is an authentic

version of the BIT.”

“There is no signed version of the Turkish Text for the

Turkmenistan-Turkey BIT.”

3.10 Claimant contends that Respondent’s claim that there exists an authentic Turkmen
version of the BIT is undermined by its own, unexplained concession that no copy of

such a text can be found.

20

3.11

3.12

It also rejects Respondent’s contention that the Undersecretariat’s website “declares
Turkish as one of the authentic languages of the BIT’. 0 Although, Claimant did not
provide an English language translation of the Turkish version of the BIT as
published in the Official Gazette in either of its BIT Issues submissions, it wrote to
the Tribunal on 17 January 2012, to point out what it described as a material error
contained in Respondent’s 1 August 2011 submission. It stated that the Turkish
version of the BIT that had been filed by Respondent (which was described as having
been published on the Undersecretariat’s website and which was said to state that
Turkish is one of the authentic languages in which the BIT was executed) “is not a

version of the Turkish BIT that is actually published on the website in question.” 1s

Claimant further advised that the Turkish version of the BIT that is published on the
website clearly states that “there are only two authentic languages in which the BIT
was executed; English and Russian.” '° A notarised copy of the Turkish version of

the BIT as downloaded from the website was provided.

Accurate Translation into English of Authentic Versions of the BIT

3.13

3.14

3.15

The English language version of the BIT upon which Claimant relies is not

questioned by either party.

Claimant did not provide an English language translation of the Russian version of the
Treaty. It accepts the translation of the Russian text tendered by Respondent with its
submission, 1 August 2011, i.e., as set out in R-1. It does not accept the accuracy of

Respondent’s revised translation of the Russian text, as set out in R-1 (revised).

As noted above, Claimant does not accept the Turkish version of the Treaty to be
authentic. Nevertheless, it contends that: (a) Respondent relies upon an inaccurate,
unverified and non-authoritative Turkish-language version of the BIT (i.e., the
Turkish version said to have been found on the Undersecreatriat’s website - see

paragraph 19 of Respondent’s 1 August 2011 submission (Exhibits R-4 and EO/MK-

’ Claimant’s Submission of 15 August 2011, para 9, citing to Respondent’s Submission of 1 August 2011, para 21.

S Letter from Claimant to the Tribunal dated 17 January 2012, p. 1

Ig

21

37)); and (b) the English translation of the BIT published in Turkey’s Official Gazette
(Exhibits R-3 and EO/MK-6) is erroneous.

3.16 In support of the latter point, Claimant refers to the Turkey-Latvia BIT which has
exactly the same dispute settlement provision as found in Article VII.2 of the BIT and
which was authenticated in 1997 in three languages (Turkish, Latvian and English),

each of which is stated to be equally authentic.

3.17 Claimant points to the fact that, although the English language versions of Article
VIL.2 in the two treaties are identical, the authentic Turkish language version of the
Turkey-Latvia BIT states clearly that an investor has an option or discretionary power

to bring a dispute to the courts of the host state.

3.18 Claimant maintains that because the Turkish version of the relevant provision of this
treaty is authentic, this shows that a translation mistake was made when the same
authentic English language version of Article VII.2 of the BIT was translated into

Turkish for publication in the Official Gazette.
Meaning and Effect of Article VII.2

3.19 Claimant argues that the meaning and effect of Article VII.2 as found in the two
authentic copies of the BIT is plain; that the investor has the option to pursue
resolution of the dispute before Turkmenistan’s domestic courts, but that it is not
required to do so before resorting to ICSID arbitration. If it chooses to exercise that
option, it is unable to initiate international arbitration proceedings before the expiry of

one year.

3.20 In support of its interpretation of Article VII.2, Claimant relies on the ordinary
meaning of the words used, a letter from Mr Fuat Kasimcan, Head of Department of
the Turkish Ministry of Economy of the Undersecretariat, dated 22 July 2011, which
confirms the optionality of the text, and an email from Mrs Zergul Ozbilgic, of the

Undersecretariat of Foreign Trade, dated 7 July 2011, to the same effect.

3.21 Claimant also points to the decision of the Rumeli tribunal which, having considered
Article VII of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT (which used precisely the same language
as the BIT), concluded:

22

“317. By contrast with the Turkish version, the English and
Russian versions of the Treaty do not require a prior
submission of the dispute to local courts before initiation of
arbitration proceedings before ICSID. The Arbitral Tribunal
considers therefore that no such requirement had to be fulfilled

by Claimants before starting this arbitration. 20

3.22 In addition, Claimant points to the Sistem decision which considered the same
language as that contained in Article VII.2 of the BIT and, it is said, concluded that
resort to local remedies was not a mandatory precondition to ICSID arbitration. That

tribunal held:

“106. The Respondent takes the view that the words ‘provided
that, if the investor concerned has brought the dispute before
the courts of justice of the Party that is a party to the dispute
and a final award has not been rendered within one year’ in
Article VII(2) apply only to Article VII(2)(c). The Tribunal
need take no position on the question because Sistem has not
instituted any proceedings in the national courts against the

Krygyz Republic.””!

3.23 Claimant refers to the undisputed authentic English version of the BIT which states:

“\.. provided that, if the investor concerned has brought the
dispute before the courts of justice of the Party that is a party
to the dispute and a final award has not been rendered within

one year.”

3.24 Claimant contends that Respondent’s own certified translation of the authentic
Russian version, which accompanied its 1 August 2011 submission, contains a

formulation which is identical in its meaning:

* Rumeli Telecom A.S. and Telsim Mobile Telekomik A.S.Y.O.N. Hizmetleri A.S. v Republic of Kazakstan, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/05/16, Award of 29 July 2008, para 317.

* Sistem Muhendislik Insaat Sanayi ve Ticaret A.S. v Krygyz Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/06/1), Decision on
Jurisdiction dated 13 September 2007, para. 106.

23

3.25

3.26

3.27

4.

“\.. on the condition that, if the concerned investor submitted
the conflict to the court of the Party, that is a Party to the
conflict, and a final arbitral award on compensation of

damages has not been rendered within one year.”

Claimant points out that if either one of the conditional clauses “provided that” or “if”
were removed from the provisions,” it would be clear that the investor had to pursue
local remedies. Thus, the presence of “if” in both the English and Russian authentic
versions confirms that the Contracting States deliberately adopted the actual
formulation of the clause. Claimant describes as “self-serving” Respondent’s original
argument that the word “if’ is merely intended to emphasise the strength of the
preceding conditions. Moreover, such an interpretation deprives the second
conditional word of any meaning. Claimant contended that Respondent’s revised
translation was to be rejected because it constituted an interpretation rather than a

translation of the text.

As regards Respondent’s argument that, even if the authentic English and Russian
versions of the BIT may plausibly be interpreted in the manner suggested above, this
“may be the result of a mistake in translation”, Claimant says that Respondent’s
speculative contention, that the BIT was originally negotiated and drafted in Turkish,

and only later translated into English and Russian, is central to this argument.

Claimant points out that this speculation is directly contrary to the statements by Mr
Kasimcan and Mr Uslu that the first/original version of the BIT was in English. It
was subsequently translated into Russian in Turkmenistan; it was signed in English

and Russian, and, only later, translated into Turkish.

RESPONDENT’S CASE

Number of Authentic Versions of the BIT

Al

By way of relevant background, Respondent points out that Turkey was one of the
first countries to recognise the newly-declared independence of the four former

Turkic Republics (Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan) in

* In the Russian translation, “on the condition that” or “if”.

24

42

43

44

45

4.6

47

November and December 1991. Between 1991 and 1993 Turkey signed more than

140 treaties with them.

Respondent says that, given the political circumstances and Turkey’s strong interest in
establishing its relationships with these countries, speed appears to have been a
primary concern. Thus, it says that it is not surprising that accuracy in the documents

sometimes suffered in the process.

Respondent asserts that Turkey was the driving force in the process of negotiating
BITs with the former republics. It argues that this is reflected in the fact that Turkey’s
BITs with the Turkic States contain almost identical language: this demonstrates that

Turkey undoubtedly drafted the texts of the treaties that were used in each case.

Turkmenistan contends that the determination of the authentic versions of the BIT
gives rise to questions of interpretation due to the different language versions of the
BIT, and that such issues of interpretation are to be resolved by applying the

principles set forth in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (“WCLT”).

Article 31 of the VCLT, which contains the general rule on treaty interpretation,
requires that treaties be interpreted “in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in light of its object

and purpose”.

In cases where the test set forth in Article 31 leaves the meaning ambiguous or
obscure, or leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable, Article 32
permits consideration of supplementary means of interpretation, such as the
preparatory works of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, to confirm or

determine the meaning.

Respondent points out that the VCLT contains a provision devoted entirely to
interpretation issues which arise when treaties are executed in different languages.

Article 33 provides:

“Interpretation of treaties authenticated in two or more

languages

J. When a treaty has been authenticated in two or more
languages, the text is equally authoritative in each language,
25

48

49

4.10

4.11

unless the treaty provides or the parties agree that, in case of

divergence, a particular text shall prevail.

2. A version of the treaty in a language other than one of those
in which the text was authenticated shall be considered an
authentic text only if the treaty so provides or the parties so

agree.

3. The terms of the treaty are presumed to have the same

meaning in each authentic text.

4, Except where a particular text prevails in accordance with
paragraph 1, when a comparison of the authentic texts
discloses a difference of meaning which the application of
articles 31 and 32 does not remove, the meaning which best
reconciles the texts, having regard to the object and purpose of

the treaty, shall be adopted 23

Respondent argues that the BIT was done in four languages: Turkish, English,

Russian and Turkmen, each of which is authentic.

“Authentification” is defined in Article 10 of the VCLT and includes signature by the
state parties, or any other procedure provided for in the treaty or agreed to by the State

Parties.

Respondent’s case focuses on the Russian, English and Turkish versions of the BIT.
Respondent says that the Russian version is authentic by virtue of the fact that it was
executed by the Parties and also because it expressly refers to “authentic copies in the

Turkish, Turkmen, English and Russian language”.”4

The English version of the BIT is authentic by virtue of the fact that it was executed
by the Parties and states that English as well as Russian are authentic languages.
However, it argues that Claimant’s reliance on its construction of the English version

is untenable, given that it recognises that the Russian version as authentic, and the

* Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, art. 33, May 23, 1969, 1155 U.N.T.S. 331.

* Respondent's Submission 1 August 2011, para. 17, citing Exhibit R-1.

26

4.12

4.13

4.14

Russian version recognises the Turkish version as authentic. In addition, Respondent
argues that since English is a language that is foreign to both Turkmenistan and
Turkey, it is unlikely that the English version best reflects the intent of the parties.
Rather, it is contended that the Turkish version was undoubtedly the original text that

was discussed in negotiations and agreed by the Parties.°

The Turkish version of the BIT is said to be authentic by reason of the fact that the
Russian version expressly refers to the Turkish version as one of the “authentic
copies”. It thus qualifies as authentic by reason of Article 33(2) of the VCLT,
because it was designated as such by the Contracting Parties to the treaty. In addition,
the Turkish version of the treaty found on the Undersecretariat’s website in early July
2011 is reported by Oktem and Karli to list Turkish, Russian and English as authentic

languages.”°

Relying on Dr. Oktem and Dr. Karli, Respondent also argues that Turkey has
designated Turkish as an authentic language for every investment treaty which it has
entered into, except where English has been designated as the sole authentic language
and, thus, that there are no Turkish BITs in which the language of the other State is

designated as authentic, but Turkish is not so designated.

Respondent rejects Claimant’s suggestion that the Russian version of the BIT
“expressly state[s] that there are only two authentic versions of the BIT,” one in
Russian and one in English. 7 Respondent argues that the phrase “two authentic
copies” in the Russian version means that the BIT was executed “... in two authentic
physical copies each of the Turkish, Turkmen, English and Russian versions”. 28

Providing for two copies in each language would permit each of the two parties to

> Dr. Oktem and Dr. Karli argue that the Turkish version was the model text supplied by Turkey for the BITs that
were simultaneously being negotiated with the four Turkic States. The Turkish version of all those treaties are
virtually identical versions. Thus, given the linguistic similarity between Turkish and Turkmen, it is most probable
that the BIT between Turkey and Turkmenistan was negotiated in Turkish and thus the Turkish version is the original
text negotiated and agreed by the parties.

© In its letter to the Tribunal of 17 January 2012, in response to Claimant's letter of the same date, Respondent
accepts that the Turkish version of the BIT that is currently on the Turkish government's website does not refer to an
authentic version of the BIT in English. It leaves it to “the appreciation of the Tribunal” as to why the Turkish
government changed the Turkish version on its website following Respondent's filing of its 15 August 2011
submissions.

* Respondent’s Submission of 15 August 2011, para 19, citing to Claimant’s submission of 1 August 2011, para. 3.

*5 Respondent’s Submission of 15 August 2011, para. 19.

27

have an executed copy in each of the four languages, which makes simple good sense.
Moreover, while there is no indication of priority in the text of the BIT, Turkish
comes first, and it would seem highly implausible that an inauthentic language would
be mentioned first. Finally, Respondent contends that the use of the word “copy” in
each of the treaties relied on by Claimant, refers not to the number of official versions
or languages of the treaties, but rather to the number of physical copies made of each

of these official versions in each of its official languages.
Accurate Translations into English of Authentic Versions of the BIT

4.15 Respondent submitted certified English translations of the Russian (an initial and a
revised version) and Turkish texts of the BIT. It notes that a Turkmen version of the

BIT could not be found.

4.16 The “official” Turkish version of the BIT, as published in the Official Gazette on 15

January 1995 (in certified English translation), provides:

“2. In the event that these disputes cannot be settled within six
months following the date of the written notification stated in
paragraph I above, such dispute can be submitted to the below
stated International Judicial Authorities as per the decision of
the investor; provided that the investor has brought the subject
matter of the dispute to the judicial court of the host Party in
accordance with the procedures and laws of the host Party and

that a decision has not been rendered within one year:
(a) ...
(b) ...

929

(c) ..

4.17 Respondent says that Claimant provided an incorrect Turkish text of Article VII.2 in
its letter concerning bifurcation dated 25 April 2011, which it translated in pertinent

part as follows:

» Exhibit R-3.

28

“\.. Of the investor has brought the subject matter of the dispute
to the judicial court of the host Party in accordance with the
procedures and laws of the host Party and if a decision has not

been rendered within one year.”*°

4.18 The first certified English translation of the Russian version of the BIT proposed by

Respondent (R-1) reads in pertinent part as follows:

“2. If the referenced conflicts cannot be settled in this way
within six months following the date of the written notification
mentioned in paragraph 1, the conflict may be submitted at

investor’s choice to
(a) ...
(b) ...

(c) The Court of Arbitration of the Paris
International Chamber of Commerce, on the
condition that, if the concerned investor
submitted the conflict to the court of the Party,
that is a Party to the conflict, and a final
arbitral award on compensation of damages has

not been rendered within one year.”

4.19 The second certified English translation of the Russian version of Article VII-2 of the
BIT proposed by Respondent (R-1 (revised), which was filed on 17 January 2012),

reads in pertinent part:

“2. If the referenced conflicts cannot be settled in this way
within six months following the date of the written notification
mentioned in paragraph 1, the conflict may be submitted at

investor’s choice to

(a) ....

* Respondent’s Submission of 1 August 2011, para. 28.

29

4.20

(b) ...

(c) The Court of Arbitration of the Paris
International Chamber of Commerce, on the
condition that the concerned investor submitted
the conflict to the court of the Party, that is a
Party to the conflict, and a final arbitral award
on compensation of damages has not been

rendered within one year.”

The only change made to the initial translation - the removal of the word “if”
following the words “on the condition that,” in sub-paragraph (c), - was explained by
the translators in their covering letter to counsel for Respondent in the following

terms:

“Please be advised that in our translation dated July 30, 2011
into English of the Russian version of the Turkey-Turkmenistan
BIT, we translated to the best of the translator’s knowledge and
ability, the following segment of Article VII.2 of the BIT:

[Russian text of pertinent part of VII.2 (c)]

into English as follows:

‘on the condition that, if the concerned investor submitted the
conflict to the court of the Party, that is a Party to the conflict,
and a final arbitral award on compensation of damages has not

been rendered within one year.’

The above translation is a literal translation of the words in
Russian in the order in which they appear in the Russian text.
However, it does not accurately reflect the meaning of the
Russian version of this segment of Article VII.2 of the BIT. The
correct meaning of the above quoted text of the Russian version

of the BIT is:

‘on_the condition that the concerned investor submitted the

conflict to the court of the Party, that is a Party to the conflict,
30

and a final arbitral award on compensation of damages has not

been rendered within one year.’

This is because the phrase ‘...[ Russian text ] ...’, which
literally reads word-by word in Russian ‘... on the condition
that, if’ is used in order to make the sentence conditional but

should correctly be translated as ‘... on the condition that’ to
properly convey the meaning. The ‘if’ in the Russian text is
part of the correct syntax needed in Russian to create the
conditional, but it does not create a second or separate
conditional. In fact, the complete phrase ’ ... [Russian text]
...” is used in Russian as a single expression to mean ‘on the

condition that’ or ‘if’.

We are therefore providing you with a revised translation in

which that change, and only that change, has been made.

Meaning and Effect of Article VII.2

4.21

4.22

Respondent contends that where there are textual differences in treaties done in
multiple languages, the VCTL (Article 33) requires that “the meaning which best
reconciles the texts, having regard to the object and purpose of the treaty, shall be
adopted.”*! Turkmenistan maintains that, notwithstanding the different phrasing of
Article VII.2 in each of the English, Russian and Turkish versions of the treaty, a
clear intention can be gleaned that the parties contemplated submission of a dispute to
international arbitration only after the investor had submitted it to the national courts

of the host state, and a period of one year had been allowed for a decision.

This interpretation is said to accord with the “ordinary meaning” of the text of Article
VIL2. The Phrase “provided that” used in the Turkish and English versions and the
phrase “on the condition that” used in the Russian version, clearly means that
submission to national courts and the allowance of a one year period for a decision is
a condition that has to be fulfilled before recourse to international arbitration. The

different placement of the conditional phrase, either at the head or at the conclusion of

*! See Respondent’s Submission of 15 August 2011, para. 24.

31

4.23

4.24

4.25

4.26

4.27

Article VII.2, is a difference in form rather than substance, and does not change the

meaning of the provision.

The addition of the word “if” in the English version is said, most likely, to have been
a syntactical error, made when the original Turkish text was being translated. Its
inclusion in the Russian version, as explained by the translators, is part of the correct
syntax to create a condition and does not create a second or separate conditional. In
neither case, does it change the meaning of the clause, but rather emphasises and

strengthens the prior conditional phrase “provided that” / “on the condition that”.

Such a good faith interpretation of the ordinary meaning of the text of Article VII.2 is

said to be consistent with the treaty’s context.

Respondent maintains that its construction of the Russian and English texts is
supported by the clear (and mandatory) text of Article VII.2 that is contained in the
Turkish version. Assuming the Turkish text to be authentic, Respondent asserts that
only its construction of the English and Russian texts can be reconciled with the
Turkish. Should the Tribunal conclude that only the English and Russian texts are
authentic, the ambiguity or obscurity of the English text permits the Tribunal to
consider supplementary means of interpretation. These include the “official” Turkish
version of Article VII.2 as published in the Official Gazette (which is agreed to be
mandatory) to confirm its contention as to the meaning of the authentic version of the

BIT.

With respect to Mr Kasimcan’s letter and Mrs Ozbilgi¢’s email supporting Claimant’ s
interpretation of Article VII of the BIT, Respondent argues that neither should be
given weight. This is because the interpretation by only one party to a treaty is not
binding or authoritative. Only a corresponding endorsement of that view by
Turkmenistan would constitute an authoritative interpretation as evidence of the

intention of the parties to the BIT.

Respondent finally relies on the principle of in dubio mitius, which posits that, in the
case of doubt, treaty obligations must be interpreted restrictively, in deference to the
sovereignty of states. Respecting a provision that requires prior submission of a
dispute to national courts before a state can be subjected to the jurisdiction of an

international arbitration is the correct application of this principle.

32

5.1

5.2

6.1

6.2

6.3

TRIBUNAL’S APPROACH TO THE BIT ISSUES

The Tribunal starts its analysis by outlining the applicable rules for the establishment
of the authentic and definitive text of a treaty, the general rules of treaty
interpretation, when supplementary means of interpretation may be employed, and the
applicable rules for the interpretation of treaties authenticated in two or more

languages.

The Tribunal then deals separately with the three principal substantive issues that

require to be determined:
(a) the number of authentic versions of the BIT;

(b) the accurate translation into English of any authentic version of the

BIT done in a language other than English; and
(c) the meaning and effect of Article VII.2 of the BIT

AUTHENTICATION AND INTERPRETATION PRINCIPLES APPLICABLE
TO THE BIT

The VCLT establishes the analytical framework, guidelines and rules for the
determination of the authenticity of the text of treaties and the interpretation of such

texts.

Turkmenistan has been a signatory to the VCLT since 2 February 1996.7

Accordingly, the VCLT is applicable to Turkmenistan.

Turkey is not a signatory to the VCLT. However, customary international law is part
of the applicable law in Turkey. 3 Accordingly, the Tribunal proceeds on the basis
that the provisions of the VCLT that reflect customary international law are to be

treated as part of the Turkish legal system and are applicable to Turkey.

* See Vienna Convention on the Laws of Treaties, May 23, 1969, 1155 U.N.T.S. 331, Multilateral Treaties Deposited
with the Secretary General, XXIII - 1, 2.

* Oktem & Karli, Legal Opinion on the 1992 Turkey-Turkmenistan BIT, Part IIL.2.b. This is not contested by
Claimant.

33

6.4

6.5

7.

Articles 31 through 33 of the VCLT provide for the rules of interpretation of
international treaties, and the case law of the International Court of Justice (“ICJ’”’)

confirms that these articles reflect customary international law.™4

In these circumstances, there being no suggestion by Claimant that the Tribunal ought
not to have regard to the principles and rules established by the VCLT, where
appropriate its relevant provisions are referred to and used by the Tribunal in its

analysis of the three substantive questions below.

NUMBER OF AUTHENTIC VERSIONS OF THE BIT

Ordinary Meaning of the Texts

7A

7.2

73

It is common ground that both the English and Russian versions of the BIT were
signed by the parties on 2 May 1992, and may thus be regarded as authentic versions
of the BIT by reason of Article 10(b) of the VCLT.**

Respondent’s case for the authenticity of the Turkish version of the treaty rests on the
fact that the Russian version of the BIT expressly refers to the Turkish version as one
of the “authentic copies”. It is therefore said to qualify as authentic by reason of
Article 33(2) of the VCLT, because it was designated as such by the Contracting

Parties to the treaty.
Article 33 of the VCLT provides:

“Interpretation of treaties authenticated in two or more

languages

J. When a treaty has been authenticated in two or more

languages, the text is equally authoritative in each language,

* For example the ICJ applied Articles 31 and 32 even in cases when one or both parties were not parties to the
Convention, on the grounds that these articles reflect customary international law. See Sovereignty Over Pulau
Litigan and Pulau Sipidan, (Indonesia v. Malaysia), 2002 1.C.J. Rep. 625 (December 17), 137. See also, Kasikili /
Sedudu Island (Botswana / Namibia) 1999 1.C.J. Rep,. 1045 (December 13), 325 and LaGrand (Germany v U.S.),
2001, 1.C.J. Rep. 466 (June 27), 1101, where the ICJ established that the rules contained in Article 33 also reflected
customary international law.

* Article 10 of the VCLT provides that: “The text of a treaty is established as authentic and definitive: (a) by such
procedure as may be provided for in the text or agreed upon by the States participating in its drawing up; or (b)
failing such procedure, by the signature, signature add referendum, or initialling by the representatives of those
States of the text of the treaty or of the Final Act of a conference incorporating the text.”

34

74

1S

7.6

V7

unless the treaty provides or the parties agree that, in case of

divergence, a particular text shall prevail.

2. A version of the treaty in a language other than one of those
in which the text was authenticated shall be considered an
authentic text only if the treaty so provides or the parties so

agree.

3. The terms of the treaty are presumed to have the same

meaning in each authentic text.

4, Except where a particular text prevails in accordance with
paragraph 1, when a comparison of the authentic texts
discloses a difference of meaning which the application of
articles 31 and 32 does not remove, the meaning which best
reconciles the texts, having regard to the object and purpose of

the treaty, shall be adopted.”

Claimant asserts that an initial difficulty with Respondent’s case on this point is that

the authentic English version of the BIT provides that the treaty was:

“DONE at Ashkabat on the day of May 2, 1992 in_two

 

authentic copies in Russian and English”. (emphasis added)

Moreover, the Russian text also refers to two authentic copies, albeit in four

languages.

Respondent seeks to explain the apparent difference in the number of authentic
versions of the treaty, as referred to in the English and Russian versions, on the basis
that the number of “copies” in each of the treaties refers not to the number of
authentic languages or versions of the treaty, but rather to the number of physical

copies made of each of the authentic versions in each of its authentic languages.

In the result, for Respondent, the phrase “two authentic copies” in the Russian version
means that the BIT was executed “in two authentic physical copies each of the

Turkish, Turkmen, English and Russian versions”.

35

7.8

7.9

7.10

7AL

The Tribunal notes, however, that Respondent was unable to produce signed copies of
either the Turkish or Turkmen versions of the treaty which it argues were signed by
the parties. This suggests that, even if Turkish or Turkmen versions of the BIT were
available in Ashgabat on 2 May 1992, they were not executed by the parties. In any
event, no such copies are part of the record and there is therefore no evidence to

indicate that such versions were actually signed by the parties.

Had a Turkish version existed and been signed at that time, one would expect it to
have been published in its executed format in the Turkish Official Gazette. However,
this did not occur. Moreover, Mr Uslu who is the General Manager of the
Undersecretariat (the role of which is to conduct procedures and negotiations
concerning such treaties) stated in his report, submitted by Claimant, that “[t]here is
no signed version of the Turkish text for the Turkmenistan-Turkey BIT.” He also
explained that during the negotiations of the BIT, an English draft of the text was used
by the Turkish side during the negotiations and that the Russian translation was made

in Turkmenistan before the English and Russian versions were signed.

The Tribunal further notes that, even if it could be said that the Turkish version of the
text should be considered as authentic, on the basis that the authentic Russian version
of the treaty so provides or that the parties had so agreed (i.e., pursuant to Article 33
(2) of the VCLT), the question would then turn to the identification of such an
authentic text. There is no evidence before the Tribunal as to which, if any, particular
Turkish version of the text the Contracting Parties might have been referring to in the

Russian version of the BIT.*°

Finally, Respondent has not produced any copy even of an unsigned version of the
allegedly authentic Turkmen version, stating that it has been unable to locate any
copy. In the Tribunal’s view this confirms that the evidence points to a conclusion

that it is highly unlikely that any Turkmen version was actually ever signed.

* The closest thing to a Turkish version of the BIT that seems, on the evidence before us, to have existed at the time is
the Turkish version of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT that was signed on 1 May 1992. There is also Mr Uslu’s evidence
that the translated Turkish text of the BIT was prepared in Turkey to fulfill the procedural requirements of the
approval stage.

36

Supplementary Means of Interpretation

712

7.13

7.14

7AS

Article 32 of the VCLT provides that:

“Recourse may be had to supplementary means of
interpretation, including preparatory works of the treaty and
the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to confirm the
meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to
determine the meaning when the interpretation according to

article 31:
(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or

(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or

unreasonable”

Here, the ordinary meaning of the text of the Russian version of the BIT concerning
the number of authentic languages of the treaty appears to the Tribunal to qualify as
“ambiguous or obscure”. The Tribunal may therefore look at the circumstances of the

conclusion of the BIT for assistance on the number of its authentic versions.

The circumstances surrounding the conclusion of the BIT include its drafting,
execution and adoption. As noted above, the evidence points strongly to the fact that

it was only signed in its English and Russian language versions.

A conclusion that there are only two authentic texts of the BIT - English and Russian -
is further supported by the application of the provisions of Article 33(1) and (4) which

provide that:

“T. Where a treaty has been authenticated in two or more
languages, the text is equally authoritative in each language,
unless the treaty provides or the parties agree that, in case of

divergence, a particular text shall prevail.

4, Except where a particular text prevails in accordance
with paragraph I, when a comparison of the authentic text
discloses a difference of meaning which the application of

37

7.16

8.1

8.2

8.3

8.4

Article 31 and 32 does not remove, the meaning which best
reconciles the text, having regard to the object and purpose of

the treaty, shall be adopted” :.

Had the Tribunal concluded that it was unable to remove the difference of meaning in
the English and Russian text by the application of Articles 31 and 32, it would have
reached the same conclusion based on the application of Article 33(4) on the basis
that the identification of only the English and Russian texts as authentic is an
approach that “best reconciles” the divergent texts in the Russian and English versions

of the BIT.

ACCURATE TRANSLATIONS INTO ENGLISH OF AUTHENTIC
VERSIONS OF THE BIT

Having concluded that the only authentic version of the BIT in a language other than
English is the Russian version, the next issue concerns the identification of an

accurate translation of the Russian version into English.

One reason for translating the text of the Russian version of the BIT into English is to
enable the non-Russian speaking Tribunal to construe properly the Russian text. Had
the Tribunal been composed of Russian speakers, such a translation may not have
been required. In such circumstances, the Tribunal would have looked to the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the Russian version of the treaty in their context
and in the light of its object and purpose as required by Article 31(1) of the VCLT.
This indicates the importance of the role of an accurate translation in these

circumstances, and the need to identify an appropriate translator.

Until Respondent filed R-1 (revised) - on 17 January 2012, there was no disagreement
as to the accurate translation into English of the Russian text. It was agreed that the
certified translation made by Language Innovations, LLC, dated 30 July 2001, was an

accurate translation from Russian into English of Article VII.2.

A first point may be made that the Tribunal does not accept the proposition made by
counsel for Claimant in his closing address, following the receipt of the revised
translation, that the parties are still in agreement about the Russian-English translation

of Article VII.2. All that was, and is now, agreed is that Respondent’s initial

38

8.5

8.6

8.7

8.8

8.9

8.10

8.11

translation of the Russian text constituted a word-for-word, literal, translation of the

Russian words used in the text of the treaty.

However, accurate translation of, for example, a sentence in one language into
another, requires something more than a literal and word-for-word translation of each

and every word employed in the text that is being translated.

The first definition of the verb “translate” found in the Oxford Concise Dictionary, 7

ed. is “[t]o express the sense of (word, sentence ...) in or into another language”.

Similarly, Collins Pocket Dictionary, Canadian edition, defines translate as to “[t]urn

from one language into another; interpret”.

The Tribunal thus considers it to be necessary and proper for a translation to convey

accurately the complete sense of the Russian text when it is translated into English.

In its letter of 17 January 2012, Respondent’s translator explains that the literal
translation it provided in the form of R-1 does not accurately reflect the meaning of
the Russian version of this segment of Article VII.2 of the BIT (see para. 4.20 above).
The translator goes on to state that the correct meaning (or sense) of the Russian text
is conveyed properly by a translation which removes the word “if” from the second
line of sub-paragraph (c). This is because the inclusion of the word “if” in the
Russian text, while part of the correct syntax required in Russian to create the
conditional, does not operate to create a second or separate conditional, as the original

translation into English (R-1) provided.

The Tribunal is cognizant of the fact that the revised translation was produced only
three days before the 20 January 2012 hearing. Equally, however, it recognizes that
Respondent offered a plausible explanation for the reasons and timing of the revision.
Moreover, Claimant did not object at that time to its introduction. Nor did Claimant
request the opportunity, or time, to provide a translation from another expert, or
request the attendance of Respondent’s translator at the hearing (or at a later date) for

cross-examination.

The matter of the revised translation was addressed by counsel for each of the parties

during their closing arguments.

39

8.12 Counsel for Respondent explained that Respondent had not submitted the revised
translation lightly. It did so, he said, only after asking six Russian-speakers in his
office, who knew nothing about the case, to read the relevant passage in Russian and
to advise whether resort to local courts prior to arbitration was mandatory or optional.

All, he said, advised that it was mandatory. He concluded:

“Now, I am not asking you to believe that; I can’t put anything
in evidence here. But what I am asking you to do is the
following: either to rely upon and accept what the translator in
this sworn statement says, that this now gives you the accurate
meaning, this mandatory meaning in the Russian; or, if you
don’t believe that or don’t feel that that’s sufficient, I would ask
you to go out and get a Tribunal-appointed Russian expert to
read that, and I tell you in ten minutes or less they will tell you

that this language in Russian is mandatory.

We are prepared to agree in advance: go ahead and do that,

and see what that comes up with. And I predict - - I mean, I

would be very surprised if there were any other result, because

we asked so many different people and they all, without any

hesitation, said that this is clearly mandatory language”. 7

8.13 In his closing speech, counsel for Claimant dealt briefly with the revised translation of
the Russian BIT in terms set out below, but did not address Respondent’s invitation to

the Tribunal to retain its own expert:

“The Tribunal will have noted that the parties were in
agreement on the translation and interpretation of that treaty

until a number of days ago.

I want to emphasise for the Tribunal that the parties are still in
agreement about the translation; what they do not agree about
is the interpretation because the translated words say what they

say, and there appears to be - - and I’ve heard nothing from the

*’ Transcript, supra note 1 p.167/21 - 168/11.

40

respondent’s side to the contrary - - there appears to be
agreement that the translation ends up with the English words
as the parties have been using up until the most recent
submission on the point by the respondent. The difference now
is not translation but interpretation, and that’s a meaningful

distinction I would put to the Tribunal. nis

8.14 However, when asked for his own position on Respondent’s proposition that the

8.15

8.16

Tribunal appoint a Russian language expert, Mr Volterra on behalf of Claimant

replied that:

“T think that would be highly unusual. It would be a strange
thing to do just in relation to the Russian text, and not the
English text, and not the various Turkish texts. The Claimant
has no desire to have further expenditures, and thinks it would
be sufficient to have the pleadings of the parties on this point.
And I say that, Mr President, without having had any time to do
more than read the letter sent by the respondent. I’ve been out
of the country and doing other things, so this is not an informed

response. 3?

The Tribunal indicated to counsel for Claimant that it might come back to him, and

give him additional time to consider the matter.

Following the hearing, on 22 February 2012, the Tribunal wrote to the parties to
advise that having regard to: (a) the continuing uncertainty as to the accuracy of the
translations into English of the Russian text of Article VII.2; and (b) the possible
relevance of the translation into English of the Turkish version of Article VII.2 (as
published in the Official Gazette), the Tribunal had decided to request two
independent and qualified expert translators to provide it with English language
translations of the relevant texts. The parties were provided with CVs for the
proposed experts as well as the proposed instructions they were to receive. The

Tribunal further advised that the parties would be given a reasonable opportunity to

*8 Td. at pp. 173/5 — 174/4.
Id. at p. 184/13- 24.

4l

8.17

8.18

8.19

comment on such translations once they were in hand, and that the Tribunal would
welcome comments, if any, on the Tribunal’s intended instructions and on the choice

of translators.

On 27 February 2012, counsel for Respondent responded to the Tribunal with the

proposal that the Tribunal’s translator also be asked the following question:

“Does the Russian phrase, ‘pri uslovii, esli’, when used in a
sentence create a double conditional or is it a construct that is
used to create a single conditional the way either the words ‘on
the condition that’, or the word ‘if’ create in the English

language?”

Respondent’s counsel had no comment or objection with respect to the proposed

Russian translator, but raised a question concerning the proposed Turkish translator.

On 28 February 2012, counsel for Claimant responded to the Tribunal. With respect

to the proposed retainer of a Russian expert by the Tribunal, counsel wrote:

“The Claimant reiterates for the avoidance of doubt that it does
not agree to the Tribunal taking up the Respondent’s proposal

on this point.”

He continued:

“Tf the Tribunal insists on taking up the Respondent’s proposal,

as appears to be the case, the Claimant has the following

observations:
1. the Respondent alone should pay for this exercise;
4, the Claimant objects to the Respondent’s request that

the Russian-English translator be asked not only to
provide the translation of the text of Article 7 (2) of the
BIT but also to give an opinion on, or make an
interpretation in relation to, certain Russian words. It
is notable that the Respondent does not seek to pretend

42

8.20

8.21

8.22

8.23

9.1

that what it is asking for is a translation. It goes
without saying that opinions and interpretations are not
translations. It would not be appropriate in relation to
the stated objective of the Tribunal in this exercise for

the Tribunal to accede to the Respondent’s request.”

Having regard to the responses of the parties to the Tribunal’s proposal to instruct
independent translators, including Claimant’s objection, the Tribunal advised the
parties that it would, for the time being, proceed to decide the BIT Issues on the
present record, whilst reserving the right to instruct independent translators if

considered necessary.

In proceeding on this basis, the Tribunal notes that the revised translation provided by
Respondent provides additional evidence before the Tribunal on the Russian sense
(i.e., the accurate translation into English of the Russian) of the Russian text version

of Article VII.2.

Accordingly, based on the explanation provided by Respondent’s translators for the
revisions of their original translation (which it accepts as reasonable), the Tribunal
concludes that the accurate translation of the authentic Russian text of Article VIL2 of
the BIT for present purposes (i.e., the one that conveys its true sense in Russian) is
that set out in R-1 (revised). That is to say, a translation that has the word “if”
removed from the second line of sub-paragraph (c). In the view of the Tribunal, this

more accurately conveys in the English language the sense of the Russian text.

The remaining task for the Tribunal (addressed in the next Section below) is therefore
to determine the meaning and effect of the authentic Russian and English texts of the
BIT, having regard to the applicable provisions of the VCLT and, of course, the

submissions of the parties.

MEANING AND EFFECT OF ARTICLE VII.2 OF THE BIT

The competing positions of the parties on the meaning and effect of Article VII.2 of
the BIT are: for Claimant, the provision is to be interpreted as meaning that the prior
submission of the dispute to local courts before the initiation of arbitration

proceedings is optional; for Respondent, the provision means that the prior

43

9.2

submission of the dispute to local courts before the initiation of arbitration

proceedings is mandatory.

These positions require to be assessed by consideration of the Russian and English

texts of Article VII. 2, being the only two authentic versions of the text of the BIT.

The Russian Text

9.3

Looking first at the Russian text, in what the Tribunal has found to be its accurate
English translation (R-1 revised), no difficulties appear to arise. There is only one
ordinary meaning of the relevant words found in sub-paragraph (c) (“..., on the
condition that the concerned investor submitted the conflict to the court of the Party,
that is a party to the conflict, and a final award of compensation of damages has not
been rendered within one year.”). The ordinary meaning of these words in their
context and in the light of the object and purpose of the treaty requires the submission
of the dispute to local courts prior to the initiation of arbitration proceedings, whether
before ICSID, ‘“‘ad hoc” (in accordance with the UNCITRAL Rules), or before the
ICC Court of Arbitration in Paris.

The English Text

9.4

9.5

9.6

Turning to the authentic English version of Article VII.2, Claimant seeks support for
its position (i.e., that the plain meaning of the words is to provide an option to the
investor either to pursue resolution before the Respondent’s domestic courts or to
proceed straight to arbitration) from statements made by Mr Kasimcan and Mrs

Ozbilgic and the decisions of the Rumeli and Sistem tribunals.

The Tribunal finds that neither the statements nor the decisions are dispositive or

persuasive.
Mrs Ozbilgig’s email to Claimant of 7 July 2011, states that:

“\.. it is not true to translate the Turkish Text as if it mean the
Mandatory requirement to apply local Turkmen courts, because
it clearly states ‘IF the investor has gone to the local court but
the decision could not be rendered within 1 year then he can

apply to international arbitration’”.

44

9.7

9.8

9.9

The difficulty with this statement, which limits its value, is that the certified English
translation of the “official” Turkish text (Exhibit R-3, provided by Respondent and
not contested by Claimant) does not contain the word “if’. The absence of the word
“if? has the effect of making mandatory the requirement of recourse “to the judicial

court of the host Party”. The text provides in relevant part:

“In the event that these disputes cannot be settled within six
months following ... such dispute can be submitted to the below
stated International Judicial Authorities as per the decision of
the investor; provided that the investor has brought the subject
matter of the dispute to the judicial court of the host Party in
accordance with the procedures and laws of the host Party and

that a decision has not been rendered within one year.”

Mr Kasimcan’s report of 22 July 2011 also contains the same approach with respect to
the accurate text of the Turkish version of the BIT, writing in the word “if”. For this

reason the Tribunal finds the view there expressed to lack persuasive authority.

As regard prior arbitral awards, the Tribunal considers that the Rumeli decision is also
unpersuasive.*° The Rumeli tribunal concluded that the English and Russian versions
of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT did not require a prior submission of the dispute to
local courts. However, the tribunal in that case simply states this in conclusory terms:
it provides no analysis or reasoning in support of that conclusion. Moreover, the
tribunal’s reasoning in that case seems to have disregarded the Turkish text, which in
that case was authentic, and plainly imposed a mandatory requirement to have

recourse to the local courts.*!

It is not immediately apparent to the Tribunal in the
present case that the Rumeli tribunal’s reliance on the English and Russian versions
alone is consistent with the requirements of Articles 33(1) and (4) of the VCLT. It
may be that the Rumeli tribunal had a reasoned basis for excluding the Turkish text,

but it does not appear to have set out that reasoning in its award.

“ Mr Stephen, counsel for Claimant, rightly agreed that the reasoning in Rumeli was not entirely helpful. See
Transcript, supra note 1, p. 73/5 - 10.

“' The Tribunal rejects Claimant’s argument that the “official” Turkish version of the BIT was mistranslated. The
Tribunal reaches this conclusion having regard to the mandatory Russian text of the BIT and because of the identity of
the “official” Turkish text with the authentic Turkish text in the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT.

45

9.10 With respect to the award in the Sistem case, where the tribunal concluded that a
claimant is not obliged to seek local remedies prior to turning to arbitration, the
Tribunal in the present case does not see a sufficient basis in the Sistem award to

support the proposition for which Claimant argues in the present case.
9.11 The relevant parts of the Sistem award provide:

“The Respondent takes the view that the words ‘provided that,
if the investor concerned has brought the dispute before the
courts of justice of the Party that is a party to the dispute and a
final award has not been rendered within one year’ in Article

VII.2(2) apply only to Article VII.2(2)(c)[of the BIT]. wh
The Tribunal then concludes that it:

“take[s] no position on the question because Sistem has not
instituted any proceedings in the national courts against the

Krygyz Republic.”

9.12 A difficulty with reliance on the conclusion of that tribunal in the present case is that
the Sistem tribunal’s latter statement makes little sense when taken on its own. It may
be that what the tribunal meant to say “because Sistem has not brought a case to the

Ice?

9.13 If this is right, the Sistem decision is of little persuasive value. It appears from the
account of the Sistem case that the respondent there did not raise the same argument
as the Respondent in the present case. It appears from the award that the Sistem
tribunal did not consider the question that is before this Tribunal and disposed of the

matter on a different basis, having regard to the different arguments of the parties.
Meaning of the English Version is Ambiguous and/or Obscure
9.14 Respondent describes the English text as grammatically awkward, and says that the

phrasing is mangled and non-sensical. The Tribunal agrees that the phrasing of the

* Sistem, supra note 21, para 106.

* Article VII.2(2)(c) of the relevant BIT relates to the submission of disputes to the ICC Court of Arbitration in Paris.

46

9.15

9.16

English is grammatically incorrect. Not only is it inelegant, as was conceded by
Claimant, but the pertinent part of Article VII.2 contains a single word which does not
immediately appear that it ought to be present, and would not be present if the text
had been drafted by a native speaker. There are two different single words that might
be removed: the word “if” could be removed (after which the relevant text would read
“provided that, the investor concerned has brought the dispute before the courts ...
and a final award has not been rendered in one year.”), or the word “and” could
removed (after which the relevant text would read “provided that, if the investor
concerned has brought the dispute before the courts ... a final award has not been
rendered in one year.”). On either approach, the removal of one of those two words
(but not both) would give the phrase grammatical coherence. An issue that arises is

which, if any, of the two words might be removed.

Professor Kornfilt, expert on linguistics, testified with considerable clarity and
persuasiveness, that one would normally not expect two conditionals together
(“provided that” followed by “if’), which is the only way one gets to an “optional”
text. On the other hand, the conjunctive, “and”, has no business in any text, unless the

local court provision is mandatory.

‘When questioned by Professor Park as to whether any linguistic principle would
suggest the removal of one of the extra words in preference to the other, Professor

Kornfilt said that while she might not be able to formulate a principle she felt that:

“leaving out the “if” would be preferable to leaving out the “and”, because
there is already a bit of text, namely the “provided that”, which is a

conditional ... just the way “if” is also a conditional.

So this is why I would tend to, I would lean towards a solution towards well-
formedness that would leave out the “if” and retain the “provided that” as the
only conditional, and leave in the “and”, therefore, as under the two options

you gave me. vt

* Transcript, supra note | p. 154/9-18.

47

917

Her evidence has not been challenged by Claimant.*

In the event, the Tribunal concludes that attempting to interpret the relevant English
text in accordance with Article 31 of the VCLT leaves its meaning ambiguous or
obscure. In these circumstances, it is appropriate for the Tribunal to consider

supplementary means of interpretation as permitted under Article 32 of the VCLT.

Supplementary Means of Interpretation

9.18

9.19

9.20

One supplementary means of interpretation is to consider the circumstances of the
conclusion of the BIT. The circumstances include the process relating to the
negotiation, conclusion and signing of the BIT in Ashgabat on 2 May 1992, as well as

events leading up to its ratification.*°

Amongst these circumstances, the Tribunal notes that Turkey entered into four treaties
with the Turkick States within a very short period of time, namely five days, in late
April / early May 1992. Each of these four treaties included authentic English
versions, and each such version includes substantially identical provisions as those
that are to be found in Article VII.2 of the BIT. In addition, the authentic Turkish text
of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT, which was entered into just one day before the BIT,
contains substantially identical terms (i.e., requiring mandatory recourse to the local
courts) as those found in the official Turkish text of the BIT that was published in
Turkey’s Official Gazette on 15 January 1995.47

The Tribunal is bound to note a convergence on a mandatory recourse to the local
courts in: (a) the authentic Russian text of the BIT (R-1, revised); (b) the authentic
Turkish text of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT, which employs the same text as Article
VIL.2 of the BIT; and (c) the official English-Turkish translation of Article VII of the
BIT that was published in Turkey’s Official Gazette. Against that, the only text that
can be said to point against the mandatory recourse to the local courts is the authentic

text of the English version of the BIT.

* Although Professor Kornfilt was speaking here about the English version of the Russian text, as translated literally,
her testimony applies equally to the authentic English text of Article VII.2.

“ Transcript, supra note | pp. 137/5 - 138/19.

*' The Turkish legal experts for both parties agree on this point.

48

9.21

Only a

9.22

9.23

These circumstances surrounding the conclusion of the BIT lead the Tribunal to
conclude that the better view is that the English language version of Article VII.2 is
properly to be interpreted as requiring mandatory recourse to the local courts.** This
view best reconciles the interpretation of the texts, having regard to the circumstances
surrounding their adoption. The contrary view does not appear to find support in other

circumstances surrounding the conclusion of the BIT.
Mandatory Meaning Ri iles the Two Authentic Texts

To the extent that it might not be possible to resolve the possible difference in
meaning of the English and Russian text through the application of Articles 31 and
32, the Tribunal can, in accordance with the principles reflected in Article 33(4) of the

VCLT, adopt the meaning which would best reconcile the two texts.

To the extent that this had been necessary — and the Tribunal concludes that it is not -
the Tribunal would have had no hesitation in concluding that the ambiguity of the
English text could only be reconciled with the clearly mandatory Russian text by the
determination that the English text also required a mandatory recourse to the local
courts. This follows, because what is plainly mandatory cannot be optional, but what

may either be mandatory or optional, can be seen as mandatory.

The Effect of a Mandatory Text

9.24

In each of its written submissions on the BIT Issues, Respondent reserved its rights to
develop further its jurisdictional arguments. However, at the 20 January hearing, in
its opening and closing submissions, counsel for Respondent formally requested the
Tribunal to dismiss the case in its entirety for lack of jurisdiction if it concluded that
pursuant to Article VII.2, as properly construed, a prior submission of the dispute to
local courts was mandatory before ICSID arbitration proceedings could properly be

instituted.

*S The Tribunal does not disregard Exhibit EO/MK-15, the Council of Ministers’ letter to the Turkish Parliament,
which described Article VII in terms which support the meaning of the relevant text as being optional. However, such
a memorandum describing the draft Law on the Approbation of the Approval of the BIT is trumped by the subsequent
publication in the Official Gazette of the “official” Turkish translation of the authentic English version of the BIT in
terms which are unquestionably mandatory.

49

9.25

9.26

9.27

Counsel for Claimant responded to this request in his closing submissions. After
noting certain complaints Claimant had previously made in relation to the proceedings

prior to the hearing, he observed:

“\.. [T]here was a formal request put forward by the
[R]espondent that the Tribunal promptly dismiss for lack of

jurisdiction the claim of the claimant after this hearing.

... But what is the Tribunal going to do now? There is an issue
before it [the Tribunal] which could be dispositive on the
jurisdictional basis of the case. Is the Tribunal going to wait
until 2013 or 2014 to decide upon it, and waste all of our time
and money? Obviously, not. Well, I hope it’s not going to

choose to waste all of our time and money.

So what does it have to do? Well, obviously it has to render a
decision on this point and obviously, as we are going to discuss
in a little while, that’s going to have an effect on the schedule
for the pleadings, because I don’t want to advise my client that
it should proceed with drafting a memorial in a case in which
during the course of the writing or shortly thereafter there is
going to be a decision that will conclude that there is no
jurisdiction of this Tribunal”.”

Subject to the procedural concerns that Claimant has raised, it appears to agree with
Respondent that a decision on jurisdiction should be made at this stage, insofar as it

relates to the meaning and effect of Article VII.2.

In this regard, the Tribunal notes that on its own case Claimant has not treated Article
VIL2 as imposing a mandatory requirement to have recourse to the local courts of
Turkmenistan, and states in its written submissions that it “has chosen not to pursue
domestic remedies, instead exercising its rights to commence the current

proceedings”.*° There is therefore no dispute that Claimant has not had recourse to

* Transcript, supra note 1. pp. 178/1-4 - 179/2-17.

* Claimant’s Submission, 1 August 2011, para. 14.

50

9.28

9.29

9.30

9.31

10.

10.1

the local courts. Moreover, Claimant has stated that its decision not to have recourse
to the local was one that it has chosen, and although it has not provided reasons for
the exercise of such choice, it has not argued that recourse to the local courts was not

available.

Nevertheless, and notwithstanding the parties’ apparent consensus that the Tribunal
should, if it is able to do so, provide a definitive ruling on its jurisdiction, the Tribunal
notes that the parties have not yet provided submissions on the effect of non-
compliance with the provisions of Article VII.2 of the BIT, assuming it to require

mandatory recourse to the courts of Turkmenistan in the present case.

In these circumstances, the Tribunal invites the parties to make submissions, within
10 days of the receipt of this Decision, as to whether they wish to have an opportunity
to make written/oral submissions with respect to the consequences to be drawn from

Claimant’s non-compliance with the mandatory provisions of Article VII.2.

In the event that the parties wish to do so, the Tribunal will fix a timetable for further

submissions on that point.

In the event that the parties do not wish to do so, and are content for the Tribunal to
determine its jurisdiction on the basis of Claimant’s admitted non-compliance with
the provisions of Article VII.2, the Tribunal will supplement this Decision and issue

an Award dismissing jurisdiction.

COSTS

At this stage, the Tribunal takes due note of the parties’ positions and requests with
respect to costs. The Tribunal reserves this question for decision at a later stage along

with the issuance of an Award.

51

11. THE TRIBUNAL’S OPERATIVE DECISION

11.1 For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal unanimously DECIDES AND DECLARES

that:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
[Signed]

Prof.W.W. Park
Arbitrator

there are two authentic versions of the BIT, being the English and
Russian versions, both signed in Ashkabat on 2 May 1992;

the translation into English of the Russian version of the BIT that is
found in Exhibit R-1 (revised) is to be treated as accurate;

the meaning and effect of Article VII.2 of the BIT is that a concerned
investor is required to submit its dispute to the courts of the
Contracting Party with which a dispute has arisen, and must not have
received a final award within one year from the date of submission of
its case to the local courts, before it can institute arbitration
proceedings in one of the fora in the manner permitted by Article

VIL2.

the decision on costs is deferred to a later stage of the arbitration.

[Signed]
Prof. Philippe Sands QC
Arbitrator

[Signed]

Mr J. William Rowley QC
President

52

