INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between

KILIC¢ iNSAAT ITHALAT {HRACAT SANAYi VE TICARET ANONIM SIRKETI

Applicant
and

TURKMENISTAN

Respondent
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/1

Annulment Proceeding

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee

Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President
Professor Karl-Heinz Boéckstiegel, Member

Professor Hi-Taek Shin, Member

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Mairée Uran Bidegain

Date of dispatch to the Parties: July 14, 2015

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Kili¢ insaat ithalat ihracat Sanayi
ve Ticaret Anonim Sirketi:

Dr. Hamid G. Gharavi
Mr. Sergey Alekhin
Derains & Gharavi
25 rue Balzac
75008 Paris, France
and
Ms. Yasemin Cetinel
Ms. Ayca Aydin
Cetinel Law Firm
Vali Konagi Cad. Prof. Dr. Miifide Kiiley Sok
Camlibel Apt. 51/3 Nisantasi
Istanbul, Turkey

Representing Turkmenistan:

Mr. Peter M. Wolrich
Ms. Sabrina Ainouz
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
6, avenue Vélasquez
75008 Paris, France
and
Mr. Ali R. Gursel
Ms. Jennifer Morrison
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Maya Akar Center
Buyukdere Caddesi No. 100-102
Kat 23, No.89 Esentepe 34394
Istanbul, Turkey
and
Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, S.C.
Torre Chapultepec
Ruben Dario 281, Piso 9
Col. Bosque de Chapultepec
11580 México, D.F., Mexico
and
Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW,
Washington, D.C. 20006, U.S.A.
and
Ms. Sibel Yurttutan
Ms. Alev Giirel
Giirel & YGriiker Law Firm
Ahi Evran Caddesi
Polaris Plaza, Kat 25 No. 89
Maslak 34398
Istanbul, Turkey

V.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW OF THE APPLICATION ..........:0:cssseseeseeee 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 3
THE DISPUTE AND THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS .........:0:ccssssssesesseeseese 5
THE APPLICABLE LEGAL FRAMEWORK: ARTICLE 52 OF THE ICSID
CONVENTION 9
1. MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS ......::scescssssssesssssssssesseseeseeseesesseessssssseneeseeneeses 10
A. The Positions of the PArtics...c.c.ccccccccceestecece cece eee ee ee eeceseseeseeseeeseeneneteneeeenes 10
B. Analysis of the C i 12
2. FAILURE TO STATE REASONS. .....cs+cssc0ssessessessessessssssesseseeseeseesessessessessseseeseesess 15
A. Positions of the Parties IS
B. Analysis of the C i IS
3. SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF
PROCEDURE 18
A. Positions of the Parties 18
B. Analysis of the C i 18
GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT ..........cccccscesessesssssneeeeeeseeseeseeseesessessnsssensensenseeeeeeeses 20
1. THE MEANING OF ARTICLE VII.2 OF THE BIT .......+cesc0ssesvesssssessssssesvessesseeseeses 20
A. Manifest Excess of Power «0.0.0.0:
a) Summary of the Positions of the Parties ....cccccccccccccse eee cess sete teneteeeeeeeeees 20
b) Analysis of the C i 27
B. Failure to State Reas 38
a) Summary of the Positions of the Parties ....cccccccccccccse eee cess sete teneteeeeeeeeees 38
b) Analysis of the C i 4]
C. Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure .....c.ccccccececee eee 45
a) Summary of the Positions of the Parties ....cccccccccccccse eee cess sete teneteeeeeeeeees 45
b) Analysis of the C i 47

 

J. THE EFFECT OF ARTICLE VII.2 AS INTERPRETED BY THE TRIBUNAL......48

 

A. Manifest Excess of Power «0.0.0.0:

 

a) Summary of the Positions of the Parties

b) Analysis of the C i 49

 

VI.

VIL.

COSTS

DECISION

B. Failure to State R

 

a) Summary of the Positions of the Parties
b) Analysis of the C

C. Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure .....c.ccccccececee eee

 

a) Summary of the Positions of the Parties
b) Analysis of the C
THE TRIBUNAL'S DECISION ON COSTS. ....ssssssssssssesvesvesseseeseeseesessnsssesesneeseenes
A. Summary of the Positions Of the PArtieS.....c.ccccccccee ete tete tee ete estes
B. Analysis of the C

 

 

 

 

iii

 

 

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Arbitration Rules

Applicant / Kilig

Application

Award

Background Paper

BIT / Treaty

Continuation Decision

Decision on Bifurcation

ICSID Convention

ICSID or the Centre

C-[xx] / R-[xx]

Counter-Memorial

CLA-[x] / RLA-[xx]

Interpretation Decision

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

Kihg insaat ithalat ihracat Sanayi ve Ticaret
Anonim Sirketi

Application for annulment of the Award dated
January 13, 2014 submitted by Kilig ingaat
ithalat fhracat Sanayi ve Ticaret Anonim Sirketi

Tribunal’s Award dated July 2, 2013, as
rectified on September 20, 2013

Background Paper on Annulment for the
Administrative Council of ICSID

Agreement between the Republic of Turkey and
Turkmenistan Concerning the Reciprocal
Promotion and Protection of Investments signed
on May 2, 1992, and entered into force on
March 13, 1997

Kilig’s Request for Continuation of the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award

Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1 (Decision on
Bifurcation) dated June 30, 2011

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other
States dated March 18, 1965

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

Exhibit [Applicant] [Respondent]
Turkmenistan’s Counter-Memorial on
Annulment dated October 20, 2014

Legal Authority [Applicant] [Respondent]

Tribunal’s Decision on Article VII.2 of the
Turkey-Turkmenistan Bilateral Investment
Treaty dated May 7, 2012

Memorial

Reply

Rejoinder

Respondent / Turkmenistan

Separate Opinion

Tr. [page:line(s)]

Vienna Convention / VCLT

Kilig’s Memorial on Annulment dated August
4, 2014

Kilig’s Reply on Annulment dated December
23, 2014

Turkmenistan’s Rejoinder on Annulment dated
February 25, 2015

Turkmenistan

Separate Opinion of Professor William W. Park
dated May 20, 2013

Transcript of the hearing on annulment held on
April 28, 2015

1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW OF THE APPLICATION

This case concerns an application for annulment of the award rendered on July 2, 2013 in
the arbitration proceeding between Kuli¢ insaat ithalat ihracat Sanayi ve Ticaret Anonim
Sirketi (“Applicant” or “Kilig”) and Turkmenistan (“Turkmenistan” or “Respondent”)
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/1), as rectified on September 20, 2013 and incorporating the
Tribunal’s Decision on Article VII.2 of the Turkey-Turkmenistan Bilateral Investment

Treaty of May 7, 2012 (the “Award”).

The application, dated January 13, 2014, was filed on January 16, 2014, in accordance
with Article 52 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States
and Nationals of Other States dated March 18, 1965 (the “ICSID Convention”), and Rule
50 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”)
(the “Application”). The Application was submitted within the time period provided for
in Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention.

The original dispute was submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the ICSID Convention
and the Agreement between the Republic of Turkey and Turkmenistan Concerning the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments signed in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan

on May 2, 1992, which entered into force on March 13, 1997 (the “BIT” or “Treaty”).

Applicant, Claimant to the original proceeding, is a construction company with registered

offices in Istanbul, Turkey.

Applicant and Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties”. The

Parties’ respective representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

The Award was rendered by an arbitral tribunal composed of Mr. William Rowley Q.C.,
(a national of Canada), Professor William W. Park (a national of the United States), and
Professor Philippe Sands (a national of France and the United Kingdom) (the “Tribunal’”).
In the Award, the Tribunal dismissed Claimant’s claim in its entirety for lack of
jurisdiction on the basis that Claimant had failed to submit its dispute to the local courts

of the Host State, which, as interpreted by the Tribunal, was a precondition to the existence

of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Article VII.2 of the BIT (the dispute resolution

provision).

7. This decision of the ad hoc Committee rules on Applicant’s allegations that the Tribunal
“acted in excess of power, failed to state reasons and seriously departed from a
fundamental rule of procedure when it concluded that in order to properly construe the
provisions of Article VII.2, they had to be read as if the ‘if’ were not included.”! Applicant
further alleges, inter alia, that “the Tribunal based its interpretation of a legal text on
extraordinary considerations that contravene the BIT and the intention of the drafters, as
well as the canons of interpretation set in the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of

Treaties” (the “Vienna Convention” or “WCLT”).”

! See Memorial, para. 10. Article VII of the Turkey-Turkmenistan BIT in the authentic English version of the
Treaty provides, in relevant part, as follow:

 

1. Disputes between one of the Parties and one investor of the other Party, in connection with his investment, shall be notified
in writing, including a [sic] detailed information, by the investor to the recipient Party of the investment. As far as possible, the
investor and the concerned Party shall endeavour to settle these disputes by consultations and negotiations in good faith.

2. If these desputes [sic] cannot be settled in this way within six month following the date of the written notification mentioned
in paragraph 1, the dispute can be submitted, as the investor may choose, to:

 

 

(a) [ICSID};
(b) [UNCITRAL]; or
(c) [ICC International Court of Arbitration);

provided that [if] the investor concerned has brought the dispute before the courts of justice of the Party that is a party to the
dispute and a final award has not been rendered within one year.

2 Memorial, para. 1.

IL.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On January 27, 2014, the Secretary-General registered the Application in accordance with
Rule 50(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules and transmitted the Notice of Registration to
the Parties. On that same day, the Parties were notified that pursuant to Rule 54(2) of the

Arbitration Rules, the enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed.

By letter of March 3, 2014, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the Arbitration Rules, the
Secretary-General notified the Parties that an ad hoc Committee had been constituted. The
ad hoc Committee is composed of Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda (Spanish) as President,
Professor Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel (German) and Professor Hi-Taek Shin (Korean) as
Members (the “Committee”). The Parties were also informed that the annulment
proceeding was deemed to have begun on that date and that Ms. Mairée Uran Bidegain

would serve as Secretary of the Committee.

By letter of April 2, 2014, Applicant requested a continuation of the stay of enforcement
of the Award (the “Continuation Request”). Respondent filed a reply to the Continuation
Request on April 14, 2014. Applicant submitted comments on the reply on April 29, 2014,
and Respondent filed observations on Applicant’s comments of late April on May 13,

2014.

On May 20, 2014, the Committee held a first session with the Parties by telephone

conference.

On May 27, 2014, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 1, setting forth the

procedural calendar and the general rules applicable to the proceedings.

On June 5, 2014, the Committee rendered its Decision on the Applicant’s Continuation
Request ordering that the stay of enforcement of the Award be maintained subject to

provision of a bank guarantee by Applicant.

On July 21, 2014, Applicant informed the Committee and Respondent that it was not
successful in securing an agreement with a banking institution to provide an unconditional

and irrevocable bank guarantee in accordance with the Committee’s decision of June 5,

20.

21.

2014. It further requested a short extension to provide the bank guarantee, which was

granted by the Committee.

On August 11, 2014, Applicant confirmed that it could not secure the bank guarantee and
asked the Committee to reconsider its decision. On August 15, 2014, Respondent

requested the Committee to deny Applicant’s request to change its decision.

On August 19, 2014, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 2 terminating the stay

of enforcement of the Award under Arbitration Rule 54(3).

In accordance with the procedural schedule set forth in Procedural Order No. 1, Applicant
filed its Memorial on Annulment on August 4, 2014, accompanied by a witness statement
of Mrs. Zergiil Ozbilgig (the “Memorial”), and Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial

on Annulment on October 20, 2014 (the “Counter-Memorial’”).

On December 16, 2014, Applicant requested a brief extension of the time limit to file its
Reply Memorial on Annulment, and the Committee granted the extension on the same
day. On December 24, 2014, Applicant filed its Reply Memorial on Annulment dated
December 23, 2014, accompanied by an expert opinion of Professor Rudolf Dolzer (the

“Reply”).

On February 25, 2015, Respondent filed its Rejoinder Memorial on Annulment (the

“Rejoinder”).

A hearing on annulment was held at the World Bank’s headquarters in Washington, D.C.,
U.S.A., on April 28, 2015 (the “Hearing”).

The following persons attended the Hearing:

Members of the ad hoc Committee

Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda
Dr. Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel
Prof. Hi-Taek Shin

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee

Ms. Mairée Uran Bidegain

22.

23.

iil.

24.

25.

3 These project
mosque, spor

Applicant

Dr. Hamid Gharavi Derains & Gharavi
Mr. Sergey Alekhin Derains & Gharavi
Mr. Daniel Parga Derains & Gharavi
Ms. Yasemin Cetinel Cetinel
Ms. Ayga Aydin Cetinel

Respondent

Mr. Peter M. Wolrich Curtis, Mallet-Prevost Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Ali R. Giirsel Curtis, Mallet-Prevost Colt & Mosle LLP
Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila Curtis, Mallet-Prevost Colt & Mosle LLP
Ms. Sabrina Ainouz Curtis, Mallet-Prevost Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Francisco Sanchez. Curtis, Mallet-Prevost Colt & Mosle LLP

The Parties filed their submissions on costs on May 29, 2015.

The proceeding was closed on July 13, 2015.

THE DISPUTE AND THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS

In 2005, 2007 and 2008, Kilig, or its affiliated companies, entered into a number of
building contracts with various municipal governors, ministries and other officials of the
Turkmen State in connection with projects in the Turkmen cities of Mary, Dashoguz and
Ashgabat. Kulig alleged that, during the course of construction of the various projects,*
issues arose between the contracting parties as to their respective performance under the

relevant contracts.*

In December 2009, Kilig filed a request for arbitration before ICSID. The case was
registered in January 2010. A Tribunal comprised of Professor Emmanuel Gaillard
(President, French, appointed by the Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID),
Professor William W. Park (appointed by Claimant), and Professor Philippe Sands
(appointed by Respondent), was constituted in December 2010 (the “First Tribunal’).

included the construction of a conference center, certain residential and commercial buildings, a
cilities, a university, and schools (see Memorial, para. 23).

 

 

4 The allegations include non-payment of advances and progress payments, failures to certify and pay in full for
the completed projects, levying fines, drawing on bank guarantees, expulsion of Kilig from the construction sites,
confiscation of movable assets, harassment and coercion of Kilig’s personnel and interference with the management
of construction areas (see Memorial, para. 24).

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

In early February 2011, Respondent raised jurisdictional objections based on Claimant’s
non-compliance with Article VII.2 of the BIT and disagreements regarding whether the
English, Russian and/or Turkish language versions were authentic versions of the BIT,

and requested bifurcation of the proceedings between jurisdiction and merits.

On May 2, 2011, after the First Tribunal had held a procedural consultation with the
Parties, and the Parties had filed their submissions on the issue of bifurcation of the
proceedings and the nature of Respondent’s jurisdictional objections in April 2011,
Professor Gaillard resigned as President of the First Tribunal. The Tribunal was
reconstituted on May 24, 2011, with Mr. J. William Rowley (Canadian, appointed by the
Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID) as its President (jointly with Professors

Park and Sands, the “Tribunal’).

On June 30, 2011, the Tribunal issued a Decision on Bifurcation and Early Determination
of BIT Issues in which it decided against bifurcation, but also found that it would be
appropriate to determine (a) the number of authentic versions of the BIT; and (b) to the
extent there were authentic version(s) of the BIT in languages other than English —
determine the accurate translations into English of the authentic version(s).> The Tribunal
also indicated that it wished to explore further the meaning and effect of Article VII.2 of
the BIT and requested the Parties’ submissions thereon (collectively referred to as the

“BIT Issues”).°
On January 20, 2012, a one-day hearing on the BIT Issues took place in London, United

Kingdom (the “January hearing”).

On May 7, 2012, the Tribunal issued a Decision on Article VII.2 of the Turkey-

Turkmenistan BIT (the “Interpretation Decision”), in which it determined that:

(a) there are two authentic versions of the BIT, being the English and Russian
versions, both signed in Ashkabat on 2 May 1992;

(b

the translation into English of the Russian version of the BIT that is found in
Exhibit R-1 (revised) is to be treated as accurate;

5 Interpretation Decision, para. 1.19; Award, para. 1.2.18.

© Interpretation Decision, para. 1.20; Award, para. 1.2.19.

(c) the meaning and effect of Article VII.2 of the BIT is that a concerned investor
is required to submit its dispute to the courts of the Contracting Party with
which a dispute has arisen, and must not have received a final award within
one year from the date of submission of its case to the local courts, before it
can institute arbitration proceedings in one of the fora in the manner permitted
by Article VII.2.”

31. The Tribunal further determined that:

[N]otwithstanding the parties’ apparent consensus that the Tribunal should, if it is
able to do so, provide a definitive ruling on its jurisdiction, the Tribunal notes that
the parties have not yet provided submissions on the effect of non-compliance with
the provisions of Article VII.2 of the BIT, assuming it to require mandatory
recourse to the courts of Turkmenistan in the present case.

In these circumstances, the Tribunal invites the parties to make submissions,
within 10 days of the receipt of this Decision, as to whether they wish to have an
opportunity to make written/oral submissions with respect to the consequences to
be drawn from Claimant’s non-compliance with the mandatory provisions of
Article VII.2.8

32. The Interpretation Decision was signed by all members of the Tribunal.

33. On December 7, 2012, and further to two respective rounds of submissions by the Parties
on the meaning and effect of Article VIL.2, as specified in paragraph 31 above, a hearing
on “the single question of the jurisdictional effect of the requirement for prior recourse to

the courts of Turkmenistan” took place in London, United Kingdom.?

34. At the close of this hearing, the Tribunal invited the Parties to file 10-page post-hearing
submissions on “the ability of this Tribunal to suspend these proceedings in the event that
it would determine that the MEN provision does not encompass dispute resolution, and in
the event it would determine that recourse to the Turkmenistan courts would not be futile,”
which the Parties submitted in due course, followed by their claims for costs and

comments thereon.

7 Interpretation Decision, para. 11.1; see also Award, para. 1.2.52.
8 Interpretation Decision, paras. 9.28 and 9.29; Award, para. 1.2.53.
° Award, paras. 1.2.62-1.2.68.

35. In its Award, the Tribunal considered that there were “three principal substantive

10

questions to be addressed in relation to the single jurisdictional question,”'® namely:

(a) is Article VII.2’s requirement for prior recourse to the courts of Turkmenistan
a condition of Turkmenistan’s consent to ICSID arbitration;

o

does the BIT’s Article II.2 MFN provision encompass the BIT’s [dispute
resolution provisions] DRPs contained in Article VII.2, so as to permit
Claimant to rely on the DRPs of the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT; and

(c

in the event that Claimant is not exempted from the mandatory prior recourse
provisions of Article VII.2 by reason of the operation of Article II.2 MFN
provision, is it otherwise exempted because compliance with the provisions of
Article VII.2 would have been ineffective or futile?

36. The Award was signed by all members of the Tribunal. Professor William W. Park also
issued a Separate Opinion (the “Separate Opinion”). The Majority of the Tribunal
composed of Mr. Rowley and Prof. Sands (the “Majority”), explains the object of the

Separate Opinion as follows:

In his Separate Opinion, our colleague Professor Park concludes, like the majority,
that the wording of Article VII.1 imposes jurisdictional preconditions requiring
notice of a dispute and an endeavour to settle by negotiation. He departs from the
majority, however, in finding that Article VII.2’s requirements for local litigation
and “no-judgment-within-a-year” are not conditions precedent and go only to
‘ripeness’ and the admissibility of the claim, as opposed to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal.!!

37. In its Award of July 2, 2013, the Majority of the Tribunal declined to uphold jurisdiction
and held that:

(i) Article VII of the BIT expressly articulates a multi-layered, sequential dispute
resolution system providing for a sequence of separate dispute resolution
procedures through which a dispute will escalate, if not resolved, in the former
step. The Tribunal views the inclusion of such a multi-tiered system [...] to
be in accordance with the provisions of Article 26 of the ICSID Convention;'?

(ii) According to the Majority, the adoption of language which requires that a
series of steps shall be taken, and which provide for a right to arbitrate,
provided that another step has been taken, is an obvious construction of a
condition precedent. [...] When such conditions are set out in the DRPs of a

"Id. para. 5.1.1.
4 Jd. para. 6.5.1.
” See Id., para. 6.2.6.

BIT (as conditions of the Contracting Parties’ offer to arbitrate), [...]
compliance with them constitutes a jurisdictional requirement [not a question
of admissibility], in the sense that a failure to meet the conditions has the
consequence that there exists no jurisdiction to be exercised;!*

iii) In the absence of jurisdiction, the Tribunal has no power to suspend these
. J P P
proceedings even if it was minded to do so;!4

(iv) Article I.2’s MFN provision of the BIT, does not encompass or apply to the
BIT’s dispute resolution provision so as to permit Claimant to rely on the
dispute resolution provision of the Switzerland-Turkmenistan BIT, which did
not require prior recourse to local courts;!*

(v.

Based on the evidentiary record, the Tribunal was unable to conclude that it
would have been ineffective or futile for Claimant to have sought to comply
with Article VII.2’s requirement for prior recourse to the courts of
Turkmenistan. Accordingly, Claimant was not exempted from the application
of Article VII.2.'°

IV. THE APPLICABLE LEGAL FRAMEWORK: ARTICLE 52 OF THE ICSID
CONVENTION

38. Article 52 of the ICSID Convention provides in relevant part:

(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in writing
addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following grounds:

(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;
(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;
(c) that there was corruption on the part of a member of the Tribunal;

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure; or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

(2) The application shall be made within 120 days after the date on which the
award was rendered [...].

8 See Id. paras. 6.2.9 and 6.3.15.
4 See Id. para. 6.6.1.

'5 See Id. para. 7.9.1.

'6 See Id. para. 8.1.21.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

(3) On receipt of the request the Chairman shall forthwith appoint from the Panel
of Arbitrators an ad hoc Committee of three persons. [...]. The Committee shall
have the authority to annul the award or any part thereof on any of the grounds set
forth in paragraph (1).

(4) The provisions of Articles 41-45, 48, 49, 53 and 54, and of Chapters VI and
VII shall apply mutatis mutandis to proceedings before the Committee.
Rule 50(1) of the Arbitration Rules further confirms the grounds for annulment set forth

under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention.

Applicant has applied for annulment on grounds of manifest excess of powers, failure to
give reasons and serious departure of a fundamental rule of procedure. In their pleadings,
the Parties interpret differently the pertinent provisions of Article 52. The Committee will

address at the outset the Parties’ different understandings of Article 52.

The Committee has considered the extensive factual and legal arguments presented by the
Parties in their written submissions and oral argument during the Hearing. Below, the
Committee discusses the arguments of the Parties that it considers relevant for its decision.
The Committee’s reasoning addresses what the Committee considers to be determinative

factors in deciding the disputed issues and, accordingly, the relief sought by the Parties.

J. MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS
A. The Positions of the Parties

Applicant has submitted that the reference to powers in Article 52(1)(b) is to be understood
as to those powers that stem from the agreement of the parties to submit their dispute to
the arbitral tribunal and it is with reference to the agreement of the parties and the “powers”
stemming therefrom that it must be determined whether a tribunal has exceeded its powers.
According to Applicant, “manifest” is to be understood in the sense of significant or
consequential and not necessarily obvious. When an extensive analysis may be required
to determine whether a tribunal has exceeded its powers that does not mean that that excess

is not manifest. Applicant discusses three instances where a tribunal manifestly exceeds

its powers.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

First, when it exercises jurisdiction if none exist or conversely when a tribunal fails to
exercise the jurisdiction it has. Such failure, as argued by Applicant, constitutes always a
manifest excess of powers, while “if an error is committed in relation to the merits, it will
rarely constitute an excess of power and rarely mandate the annulment of an award. A
jurisdictional error is of an entirely different character. It manifestly constitutes an excess
of power in all cases.”!’ Applicant refers to the report of its legal expert Prof. Dolzer who
notes Schreuer’s comment that “[t]he distinction between non-application of the proper
Jaw and erroneous application of the proper law is relevant to questions of the merits but
not to questions of jurisdiction. An erroneous application of the law applicable to
jurisdiction may lead to an excess of powers and may be a ground for annulment.”!*
Applicant submits that ad hoc Committees that have diverged on the standard of
misapplication of the law have converged in that “the standard required for a tribunal to
manifestly exceed its powers is lower with respect to misapplication of the principles of

treaty interpretation regarding jurisdictional issues.”!°

Second, failure by a tribunal to apply the proper law may amount to an excess of powers.
Under this heading Applicant includes cases in which the tribunal purports to apply the
applicable law but in reality applies rules of law other than those agreed by the parties or

de facto disregards a provision of the BIT or of the Vienna Convention.

Third, gross misapplication of the law has led to the annulment of arbitral awards on
grounds of manifest excess of powers. Applicant contends that, “[...] in fact a full review,
which suggests even an appeal, is particularly warranted when dealing with jurisdictional

issues.”?°

For Respondent, the legal standard of manifest excess of powers is not lower with respect
to jurisdictional determinations than it is for determination of the merits. Respondent
recalls that Applicant’s thesis has been rejected by commentators and not supported by

annulment decisions. There is no basis for this distinction in the ICSID Convention and

"7 Reply, para. 50.
8 Id. para. 71.
Id. para. 72.
2 Td. para. 73.

47.

48.

49.

50.

it was rejected by the drafters of the Convention. An excess of powers is manifest when

it is self-evident, easy to discern.

Respondent points out that awards have been annulled for failure to apply the proper law
only in four occasions in extreme circumstances where the tribunal ignored provisions of
the applicable law or the applicable law as a whole. Awards have not been annulled when
the law has only partly been applied or has been applied incorrectly; only a “gross or

721 would

egregious error that effectively amounts to the non-application of the proper law
justify annulment. Hence consistent with this premise mere divergence of interpretations

cannot justify annulment.

B. Analysis of the Committee

The Parties diverge on the meaning of “manifest” and on whether the threshold of manifest
excess of powers is a lower threshold with regard to jurisdiction. On the meaning of
“manifest” the divergence relates to whether manifest means obvious without need for
deep analysis or the excess of powers may be manifest even if it requires extensive

analysis.

The Parties have referred to decisions of annulment committees in support of either
understanding of the meaning of “manifest.” While the present Committee is not bound
to use the same criteria as previous committees, it will consider and take into account for

its own decision reasoning used by previous committees regarding the relevant issues.

The Repsol ad hoc committee understood manifest in the sense of “obvious by itself”
simply by reading the award.”? The Wena ad hoc committee understood “manifest” as
“self-evident rather than the product of elaborate interpretations one way or the other.

When the latter happens the excess of power is no longer manifest.””> Similarly, the CDC

21 Counter-Memorial, para. 47, citation of Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/16), Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Application for Annulment of the Award, June 29, 2010 (CLA-
34), para. 164.

% Repsol YPF Ecuador, S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador) (ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/10), Decision on the Application for Annulment, January 8, 2007 (RLA-5), para. 36.

°3 Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on the Application by
the Arab Republic of Egypt for Annulment of the Arbitral Award dated December 8, 2000, February 5, 2002
(“Wena Decision”) (CLA-62), para. 25.

51.

52.

53.

54.

ad hoc committee stated: “[...] the excess must be plain on its face for annulment to be an
available remedy. Any excess apparent in a Tribunal’s conduct, if susceptible of argument

‘one way or the other’, is not manifest.”?+

On the other hand, for the Vivendi I ad hoc committee “manifest” means excess with clear
and serious implications. Thus it concluded that, “the Tribunal exceeded its powers in the
sense of Article 52(1)(b), in that the Tribunal, having jurisdiction over the Tucuman claims
failed to decide those claims. Given the clear and serious implications of that decision for
Claimants in terms of Article 8(2) of the BIT, and the surrounding circumstances, the

Committee can only conclude that the excess of powers was manifest.”

The Soufraki ad hoc committee found that the choice between these approaches was
unnecessary: “[A] strict opposition between two different meanings of ‘manifest’ - either
‘obvious’ or ‘serious’ - is an unnecessary debate. It seems to this Committee that a
manifest excess of power implies that the excess of power should at once be textually

obvious and substantively serious.”?°

The Committee concurs in that it is unnecessary to consider the two approaches as
alternatives. The term ‘manifest’ would by itself seem to correspond to ‘obvious’ or
‘evident’, but it follows from the very nature of annulment as an exceptional measure that
it should not be resorted to unless the tribunal’s excess had serious consequences for a

party.

The second discrepancy in the Parties’ views relates to the application of the proper law
in the jurisdictional context. It is undisputed that failure to apply the proper law is one
instance of the tribunal exceeding its powers by acting outside the scope of the Parties’
agreement to arbitrate. The Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative

Council of ICSID (the “Background Paper”) notes that annulment committees concur in

2 CDC Group PLC v. Republic of Seychelles (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee
on the Application for Annulment of the Republic of Seychelles, June 29, 2005 (CLA-64), para. 41.

°8 Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal (formerly Compagnie Générale des Eaux) v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002 (“Vivendi I Decision”)
(CLA-43), para. 115.

2 Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7), Decision of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Application for Annulment of Mr. Soufraki (“Soufraki Decision”) (CLA-35), para. 40.

13

that “a Tribunal’s complete failure to apply the proper law or acting ex aequo et bono

without agreement of the parties to do so as required by the ICSID Convention could

constitute a manifest excess of powers.”?”

55. Applicant has argued that a lesser standard applies in the context of a decision on
jurisdiction. Applicant contends that any jurisdictional mistake is necessarily a manifest
excess of powers. This argument has been made before other annulment committees, but
it has been rejected on the ground that there is no basis in Article 52(1)(b) to make an
exception for issues of jurisdiction. Faced with the assertion that all jurisdictional errors

should be manifest, the Soufraki ad hoc committee saw,

[...] no reason why the rule that an excess of power must be manifest in order to
be annullable should be disregarded when the question under discussion is a
jurisdictional one. Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention does not distinguish between
findings on jurisdiction and findings on the merits. As noted by the ad hoc
committee in MTD Chile; ‘... the grounds for annulment do not distinguish
formally ... between jurisdictional errors and errors concerning the merits of the
dispute and ... manifest excess of powers could well occur on a question of merits.”

It follows that the requirement that an excess of power must be “manifest” applies
equally if the question is one of jurisdiction. A jurisdictional error is not a separate
category of excess of power. Only if an ICSID tribunal commits a manifest excess
of power, whether on a matter related to jurisdiction or to the merits, is there a
basis for annulment.**

56. The present Committee concurs that there is no basis in the Convention for the distinction
propounded by Applicant and that, therefore, the same threshold applies to matters of
jurisdiction and the merits in order for the Committee to find that an excess of powers is

manifest.

2 Background Paper on Annulment For the Administrative Council of ICSID, August 10, 2012 (“Background
Paper”) (CLA-67), para. 94.

28 Soufraki Decision (CLA-35), paras, 118-119. See also Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Pert,
S.A. v. Republic of Peru (also known as Empresas Lucchetti, S.A. and Lucchetti Peru, S.A. v. The Republic of Peru)
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4), Decision on Annulment, September 5, 2007 (“Lucchetti Annulment Decision”)
(CLA-48), para. 101.

 

 

57.

58.

59.

60.

2. FAILURE TO STATE REASONS
A. Positions of the Parties

According to Applicant, an award falls short of this requirement when it fails to give
reasons on an issue or to deal with a question, or the reasons are insufficient, inadequate,
frivolous or contradictory. By reference to the Soufraki case, Applicant understands that
reasons are insufficient or inadequate when reasons cannot in themselves be a reasonable

basis for the solution arrived at by a tribunal.”

Respondent agrees that failure to state reasons justifies the annulment of the award, but
disputes that failure to state reasons be confused with a failure to state correct or
convincing reasons. Respondent submits that, “an examination of reasons cannot be
transformed into a re-examination of the correctness of the factual and legal premises on
which the award is based.”*” According to Respondent, the threshold for failure to state
reasons is very high, it is not different for jurisdictional decisions, and annulment on this

ground should only occur in a clear case and when a tribunal fails to state any reasons.*!

B. Anal)

 

of the Committee

The Parties differ on how the ground of annulment for failure to state reasons should be
applied in the case of a jurisdictional award and on the level of scrutiny by the Committee
of the reasons themselves. Applicant argues that sufficient and adequate reasons have
greater importance when jurisdictional issues are involved and that the Committee should

consider the adequacy or sufficiency of reasons.

It is undisputed that a reader of an award should be able to follow the reasoning of the
tribunal and how the reasoning leads the tribunal to its decision. As expressed in the often
quoted statement of the MINE ad hoc committee, “the requirement to state reasons is

satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point

2° Memorial, para. 152 (referring to the Soufraki Decision (CLA-35), paras 122-123).
30 Counter-Memorial, para. 63.
31 Td. para. 60.

61.

62.

A. to Point B. and eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of law.”°?

This statement applies equally to awards on jurisdiction and awards on the merits. As in
the case of manifest excess of powers, the ICSID Convention does not make in this respect
a distinction between jurisdictional or merit issues. No jurisprudence has been brought to
the attention of the Committee in support of the distinction advocated by Applicant except
the reference to Sir Frank Berman’s Dissenting Opinion in the Luchetti Annulment
Decision® which is not shared by the majority of that committee. For the reasons pointed
out above in this paragraph and with regard to manifest excess of powers under the ICSID
Convention, the review of the present Committee of the reasons for denial of jurisdiction
in the Award should not be more or less strict than a review of reasons in an award on the

merits.

Respondent has taken issue with Applicant’s contention that reasons should be sufficient
and adequate. Applicant’s contention is based on the statement in Soufraki to the effect
that “even short of a total failure, some defects in the statement of reasons could give rise
to annulment [...]. [I]nsufficient or inadequate reasons refer to reasons that cannot, in
themselves, be a reasonable basis for the solution arrived at.”*4 Applicant also quotes the
Soufraki ad hoc committee’s holding that “insufficient or inadequate reasons as well as

contradictory reasons can spur an annulment.”*>

The Committee first observes that a word of caution is in order in respect of use of words
such as “adequate” or “sufficient” in the context of annulment. The doctrine and the case
Jaw warn about the danger of the review of reasons becoming an appellate review: “[o]nce
an ad hoc committee starts looking into whether the tribunal explanation is sufficient to
constitute a statement of reasons, it has already embarked upon a quality control of the
award. The formal test of the presence of a statement of reasons blends into a substantive

test of adequacy and correctness and the distinction between annulment and appeal

® Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4), Decision
on the Application by Guinea for Partial Annulment of the Arbitral Award dated January 6, 1988 (CLA-39), para.

5.09.

3 See Reply, para. 81, n.103 (referring to Lucchetti Annulment Decision, Dissenting Opinion of Sir Franklin
Berman (CLA-48)).

Quoted in Reply, para. 152.

3 Id.

63.

64.

becomes blurred.”*° The Soufraki ad hoc committee quoted by Applicant was aware that
the assessment of the insufficiency or inadequacy of reasons might easily place an ad hoc
committee in a court of appeal role. It stated: “[i]nsufficient or inadequate reasons as a
ground for annulment have thus to be distinguished from wrong or unconvincing reasons.”
In support of this statement, the Soufraki ad hoc committee refers to the Wena ad hoc
committee’s explanation that “Article 52(1)(e) does not allow any review of the
challenged Award which would lead the ad hoc Committee to reconsider whether the

reasons underlying the Tribunal’s decisions were appropriate or not, convincing or not.”*

The Soufraki ad hoc committee also refers to the Vivendi I ad hoc committee. This
committee provided what can be considered the leading statement on the application of

Article 52(1)(e):

[...] it is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that Article 52(1)(e)
concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an award, not
the failure to state correct or convincing reasons [ Provided that the reasons
given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues that were before the
tribunal, their correctness is beside the point in terms of Article 52(1)(e).
Moreover, reasons may be stated succinctly or at length, and different legal
traditions differ in their modes of expressing reasons. Tribunals must be allowed
a degree of discretion as to the way in which they express their reasoning.**

 

In the Committee’s view, annulment under Article 52(1)(e) should only occur in a
clear case. This entails two conditions: first, the failure to state reasons must leave
the decision on a particular point essentially lacking in any expressed rationale;
and the second, that point must itself be necessary to the tribunal’s decision.”

To conclude on this point, the present Committee, consistent with its limited role, will not
judge the correctness or persuasiveness of the reasons provided by the Tribunal but only

determine whether the Award “enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from

Point A. to Point B.”

86, Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2009) (CLA-32), p. 1003, at para. 363.
57 Soufraki Decision (CLA-35), para. 123. Emphasis in the original.

38 Id. para. 124, referring to Vivendi I Decision, para. 64.

® Vivendi I Decision, para. 65.

65.

66.

67.

68.

3. SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE
A. Positions of the Parties

The Parties agree that the rule of procedure must be fundamental and the departure must
be serious, but diverge on the meaning of “serious.” For Applicant, “serious” means that
the departure from the fundamental rule may have had an impact on the tribunal’s award.
On the other hand, Respondent argues that “serious” means that the violation of the
fundamental rule of procedure caused the tribunal to reach a result substantially different

from what it would have been if the rule had been observed.

B. Analysis of the Committee

The Committee wishes first to clarify that the Background Paper does not acknowledge
Respondent’s statement that “/aJd hoc committees have consistently interpreted the
departure to be ‘serious’ if it has a material impact on the tribunal’s decision [...]”*° The
Background Paper only acknowledges that “/sJome ad hoc Committees have required that
the departure have a material impact on the outcome of the award for the annulment to
succeed.”4! Evidently what the Background Paper acknowledges is that a few ad hoc

committees had required that the departure must have a material impact.

The Committee also notes that the determination of “whether an alleged fundamental rule
of procedure has been seriously breached is usually very fact specific, involving an

examination of the conduct of the proceeding before the Tribunal.”4”

The fact specific
nature of this determination led an annulment committee to state that “the assessment of
the seriousness criterion [...] should always be made on a case-by-case basis,”** which
may make difficult the comparison of the decisions of ad hoc committees adduced by the

Parties.

The Committee further notes that each party claims the Wena Annulment Decision to its

advantage. Respondent finds support in the statement “[i]n order to be a ‘serious’

* Rejoinder, para. 17.
+! Background Paper (CLA-67), para. 101. Emphasis added by the Committee.

2 Id.

8 Malicorp Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/18), Decision on the Application for
Annulment, July 3, 2013 (RLA-35), para. 37.

69.

70.

71.

departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, the violation of such a rule must have
caused the Tribunal to reach a result substantially different from what it would have
awarded had such rule been observed.”#+ On the other hand, Applicant refers to the
dismissal of the request for annulment because the applicant in Wena did not show the

impact that this issue may have had on the award. *>

The Committee observes that Professor Schreuer in his analysis of the meaning of
“serious” in the practice of annulment committees reaches a conclusion in favor of the
potential effect on the award relying on the same sentence of Wena as Respondent does in
this proceeding to opposite effect. He comments as follows: “[i]n order to be serious the
departure must be more than minimal. It must be substantial. In addition, the cases confirm
that this departure must potentially have caused the tribunal to render an award

‘substantially different from what it would have awarded had the rule been observed.””*°

The Committee is of the view that the choice between the two positions whether the
departure had a material effect or had the potential to have a material effect will depend
on the circumstances of the case and, therefore, it does not lend itself to a choice in
abstract, valid in all cases. For instance, it is conceivable, to use an obvious example, that
the right to be heard by a party is violated. If the tribunal has not heard that party on a
relevant matter for its decision, it will never be known whether the tribunal would have
decided differently had it heard the party in question. However in such a case it would be

sufficient for an annulment committee to rely on the potential material effect on the award.

The Committee will be guided by these considerations in its analysis of the arguments of

the Parties.

4 Wena Decision (CLA-62), para. 58.
+5 Reply, para. 89.

46 C. Schreuer et al. (CLA-32), p. 982, at para. 287. The quotation is from Wena, precisely the same as used by
Respondent in defense of its position.

72.

73.

74.

75.

GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT

The Committee’s consideration of the Parties’ arguments follows the structure used by
Applicant in its Memorial on Annulment. Applicant contends that the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers, failed to give reasons and departed seriously from fundamental rules
of procedure in respect of the meaning of Article VII.2 of the BIT and of the effect of
Article VII.2 as interpreted by the Tribunal. Applicant has also pleaded that the Tribunal

manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to give reasons for its decision on costs.

J. THE MEANING OF ARTICLE VII.2 OF THE BIT
A. Manifest Excess of Powers

a) Summary of the Positions of the Parties

Applicant claims that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers on seven grounds. First,
Applicant argues that the Tribunal improperly allocated the burden of proof. Respondent
had raised the objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and it was for Respondent to
prove it. According to Applicant, when a respondent raises an affirmative defense it is for
that respondent to prove the elements comprising such defense. In this case, Respondent
raised as defense that Article VII.2 should be read as imposing a mandatory recourse to
local courts for one year before resorting to international arbitration; the burden of proof

was on Respondent.

Applicant points out that Respondent did not submit any documentary or testimonial proof
showing that the parties to the BIT intended to impose a mandatory recourse to the
judiciary. Applicant further notes that none of the BITs concluded by Respondent and
publicly available provide for mandatory recourse to the local courts. Applicant submits
that the Tribunal should have dismissed the objection for lack of proof and exercised

jurisdiction on this ground alone.

Second, Applicant argues that the Tribunal failed to exercise jurisdiction, as it was entitled
to do, on the plain reading of the English and Russians versions of the BIT. Applicant
explains that the English authentic version served as the negotiation text used by the BIT
parties. Applicant further argues that the disputed words “if” and “and” in Article VII.2

have both meaning: “[t]he word ‘if? introduces the hypothetical situation where an

20

76.

77.

78.

investor, at its own discretion, has chosen to bring a dispute before the local courts. In turn
the word ‘and’ is the link between the situation where the investor has had recourse to the
local courts and the fact that no award has been rendered within the year.”*’ The revised
Russian translation eliminates “if’. According to Applicant, “to the extent that the
Tribunal relied on the Russian version of the BIT to interpret Article VII.2, the
interpretation should have been based on the translation by an independent expert and not

on a revised interpretation of Respondent’s hired gun.”“*

Third, Applicant questions the reasons for the Tribunal not to be persuaded by the
decisions in the cases of Rumeli and Sistem because both of them were brought under BITs
containing the same language as Article VII.2. Applicant points out that neither state party
to these cases ever tried to annul these awards, nor sought to clarify the clauses in their
BITs with Turkey, which are similar to Article VII.2. Applicant contends that “[b]y de
facto disregarding the case law on this very same point in relation to BITs concluded
moreover within the same relevant period of time with neighboring Turkic States and
Turkey and/or the corresponding accepted practice amongst States, the Tribunal

manifestly exceeded its powers.””?

Fourth, Applicant contends that, assuming that an interpretation of the text of Article VII.2
was necessary, the Tribunal failed to interpret the BIT in good faith, to give effect to the
object and purpose of the BIT, and ignored the ordinary meaning of Article VII.2, the
statements of Turkish officials and Applicant’s legal expert. In contrast, the Tribunal
relied on assumptions made by Respondent’s experts who were not involved in drafting,

signing and ratifying any of the four BITs with the Central Asia Turkic States.

Fifth, according to Applicant, Turkey’s intent that recourse to the local judiciary is
optional is confirmed by Turkey’s own practice. Applicant points out that out of a total
of 85 BITs signed by Turkey only four require mandatory recourse to the local courts.
Applicant argues that this is not a policy concern of Turkmenistan since “no other publicly

available BITs signed by Turkmenistan include a provision similar to that in Article VII.2

“7 Memorial, para. 207.

48 [d. para. 212. Underlining in the original.
* Id. para. 229.

21

79.

80.

81.

[...]”° Applicant adds in support of its argument that when Turkey has been a respondent
in ICSID arbitration it did not “raise the mandatory nature of the recourse to local courts
before resorting to arbitration as a jurisdictional objection, even though several of the
arbitrations it was involved in were based on BITs that included provisions very similar
and, in some cases, identical to the disputed one in the Turkey-Turkmenistan BIT without

the investor having exercised any recourse before the Turkish judiciary.”*!

Sixth, Applicant claims that to interpret Article VII.2 as requiring prior recourse to the
local courts violates the object and purpose of the BIT and leads to an absurd result.
Applicant points out that the interpretation of the Tribunal would mean that “Turkey
prompted and negotiated a legal instrument that imposed on its own nationals, which were
the only investors at the time and for a foreseeable future under the BIT, to litigate their
investment dispute with the Turkmen State before the newly established Turkmen courts.
The formula, as moreover interpreted by the Tribunal, would allow a Turkmen court to
dismiss under any legal pretext the claims of the Turkish investors against the State within
less than a year to be exempt from any liability, save for an action for denial of justice,

which need to meet a higher threshold.”*

Seventh, Applicant adduces here various grounds related to the reliance of the Tribunal
on the revised English translation, on a linguistic expert to interpret the authentic English
version of the BIT, on the non-existent authentic version of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT,
and on the Turkish translation of the English authentic version as published in the Official
Gazette. Applicant contends that each of these instances are independent violations of

Article 52(1)(b), particularly because they were arbitrarily imposed over Claimant.

As regards Respondent’s request that certain documents be rejected by the Committee,”
Applicant argues that they are not new under the terms of Procedural Order No. 1, because
Mrs. Ozbilgi¢ did not provide new evidence in her witness statement and affidavit. The

submission letters of Turkish BITs to Turkey’s parliament (the “Submission Letters”)

50 Id. para. 296.
5! Td. para. 297.
22 Id. para. 302.

53 See infra, para. 90.

22

82.

83.

84.

“relate to all three grounds for annulment raised by Kilig in these proceedings, and in any
event are intrinsically linked to the Turkish BITs and publicly available,” and the same

applies to the Turkish BITs referred therein.**

Respondent denies that the Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law. Respondent
contends that the Tribunal interpreted and applied the relevant provisions of the BIT in
light of the Vienna Convention. Respondent equally affirms that the Tribunal did not
commit any error of law and in support refers to similar interpretative approaches adopted
by tribunals in the interpretation of agreements concluded in multiple languages.
According to Respondent, “[a] tribunal does not manifestly exceed its powers by adopting
an interpretation of the applicable law that conforms with the interpretation of some prior

tribunals and differs with that of others.”*>

As to the burden of proof, Respondent disputes that the Tribunal misallocated the burden
of proof because, “while it is true that Respondent is the applicant with respect to the
objection to jurisdiction at issue, it is also true that it is Claimant that bore the burden of
establishing Turkmenistan’s consent to arbitration.”°° Respondent further affirms to be a
vain effort of Applicant to seek support in Article 26 of the ICSID Convention for the
allegation that Turkmenistan bore the burden of proof. Article 26 does not require any
specific allocation of the burden of proof to determine whether the prior recourse to the
local courts is optional or mandatory. Moreover, according to Respondent, the Tribunal’s
Interpretation Decision was not grounded on Kilig’s failure to meet its burden of proof in
this respect. Respondent points out that, under the guise of the alleged misapplication of
the rules on burden of proof, Applicant seeks a de novo review of the Tribunal’s

assessment of all the evidence, which the Committee cannot do.

Then Respondent turns to the argument that the Tribunal failed to apply the plain meaning
of the English and Russian versions of the BIT. Respondent notes that Applicant, in its
Request for Arbitration and relying only on the English version of the BIT, “recognized

that, on its face, Article VII.2 of the BIT mandatorily requires prior submission of a dispute

54 Reply, para. 11.

58 Counter-Memorial, para. 76.
6 Id. para. 81.

23

85.

86.

87.

to national courts.”°’ Respondent further notes that only at the time the submissions on
bifurcation were presented to the Tribunal did Kilig change its position. In this respect,
Respondent argues that, “Kilig¢’s own change of position on the meaning of the English
version of Article VII.2 of the BIT is the clearest proof that, as the Tribunal correctly

found, there is no plain meaning of the English authentic version.”°*

Respondent also points out that, to elicit the plain meaning of Article VII.2, Applicant
needs to rewrite the text of the English version and undermines the “plain meaning”
argument. Respondent argues that the revised translation conveys precisely the complete
sense of the Russian text. Respondent affirms that it is inadmissible that Applicant
challenges the Tribunal’s reliance on Respondent’s revised English translation of the
authentic Russian version of the BIT when Applicant itself never submitted an English
translation of the authentic Russian version of Article VII despite the request of the
Tribunal to do so in Procedural Order No. 1. Furthermore, Kilig never agreed or consented
to the first translation of the Russian version submitted by Respondent and objected to the

appointment of an independent expert to confirm the revised Russian translation.

According to Respondent, Kilig’s new translation and analysis of the authentic Russian
version are inadmissible because they are entirely new arguments never made by
Applicant in the arbitration proceeding, and the new translation is incorrect and

ambiguous.

In respect of the third ground relied on by Applicant, Respondent points out that there is
no stare decisis in international arbitration, at most, previous awards may provide
guidance, but an arbitral tribunal is not bound by them. In any case Respondent disputes
that the Tribunal disregarded the Sistem and Rumeli awards. According to Respondent,
“the Tribunal carefully reviewed and studied the Rumeli and Sistem awards and found

them unpersuasive for the purpose of interpreting the prior recourse requirement in Article

57 Id. para. 90.

38 Id.

24

88.

89.

90.

VII.2 of the BIT.”® Furthermore, divergence of interpretation does not warrant annulment

for manifest excess of powers.

Respondent contends that the Tribunal interpreted the text of Article VII.2 in strict
accordance with the principles of interpretation in the Vienna Convention and did not
violate the object and purpose of the BIT in its analysis of the ordinary meaning of the
terms in each of the authentic versions. Respondent surmises that, “[w]hatever policy
considerations Turkey and Turkmenistan may have taken into account in agreeing upon
the Article VII.2 requirement of prior recourse, they specifically and expressly have

chosen to do so and their choice must be respected.”

Respondent rejects the argument of Applicant that the Tribunal did not give proper weight
to the evidence submitted in the underlying arbitration. Respondent affirms again that an
annulment is not an appeal and annulment committees do not have the authority to review
the original tribunal’s factual findings or to reassess the probative value of the evidence
submitted. Furthermore, even if the documents in question were found “to represent
Turkey’s view of Article VIL.2, they could not constitute an authoritative interpretation of
the intention of the parties to the BIT in the absence of an endorsement of that view by

Turkmenistan.”®!

Respondent refers to the new statement of Mrs. Ozbilgig submitted for the first time in
this annulment proceeding. According to Respondent, this statement should be rejected
because it is new evidence not submitted in the underlying arbitration and should be
disregarded pursuant to Sections 16.2 and 16.3 of Procedural Order No. 1. In any case,
Mrs. Ozbilgig was not fluent in English at the time the BIT was prepared, did not
personally participate in discussions with the Turkic Republic’s representatives on their
BITs with Turkey and her “alleged understandings or intentions when she was a junior
member of GDFI staff in 1992 were obviously not universally held either by her
colleagues or the other State parties to Turkey’s BITs, nor were they conveyed in the

English text of Article VIL.2 in a manner that would be understood by others as she

59 Td. para. 118.
© Id. para. 125.
1 Jd. para. 133.

25

91.

92.

93.

supposedly intended.”®? Respondent also objects to the introduction in the annulment
proceeding of the “Submission Letters” as well as the introduction of certain BITs, all on
the basis that these documents were not before the Tribunal and are unrelated to the

grounds for annulment as required by Procedural Order No.1.°

Respondent turns to Applicant’s criticism of the Award because the Tribunal did not
conclude, based on the BIT Submission Letter to parliament, that recourse to local courts
is optional. Respondent points out that the BIT Submission Letter is just a unilateral
statement, while the BIT as published in the Official Gazette has the status of law in
Turkey. Moreover the Tribunal considered carefully the BIT Submission Letter and

decided that it was trumped by the text of the BIT in the Official Gazette.

Respondent also addresses the argument of Kilig related to other BITs for purposes of
determining the meaning of Article VII.2. Respondent first points out that Applicant’s
argument based on Turkish practice is based on reference to Turkish BITs that were not
submitted in the underlying arbitration. Respondent contends that, in any case, the
examples of BITs referred to by Applicant do not support Applicant’s preferred
interpretation. Thus, the Turkey-Hungary treaty was done in three languages and the
Hungarian version contains a mandatory local court requirement; the Turkey-Switzerland
treaty was also done in three languages and the Turkish version requires first recourse to
the local courts; the Turkish version of the Turkey-Croatia BIT includes a similar
requirement. Respondent affirms that it is not possible to find a clear policy of Turkey.
Turkey signed BITs with mandatory prior submission of a dispute to the local courts

before and after the treaties with the Turkic Republics.

Respondent disputes Applicant’s contention that the Tribunal’s interpretation of Article
VII.2 leads to an absurd result. Respondent explains: “Article VII.2 of the BIT provides
for a mandatory multi-tiered mechanism requiring first a six-month period of settlement
negotiations, then the submission of the dispute to the national courts, and only thereafter

submission to an international tribunal if the national courts have not rendered a decision

© Jd. para. 140.

 Counter-Memorial, para. 32.

26

within one year.”** According to Respondent, this is not unusual in BIT practice and

cannot be criticized as being absurd.

94. On Applicant’s seventh ground, Respondent argues that the Committee does not have
authority to review the Tribunal’s original factual findings.
b) Analysis of the Committee
95. Asa preliminary matter, the Committee needs to address the issue of whether the witness
statement of Mrs. Ozbilgig, the “Submission Letters” and the Turkish BITs not submitted
in the arbitration proceedings are admissible under Procedural Order No. 1. Article 16.2
of this order allows the submission of additional documentation provided that “[...] any
and all additional evidence be related exclusively to the particular grounds for annulment
raised in the Application for annulment and not to the underlying dispute in the original
arbitration.” The Parties disagree on the relation of the additional documents to the
grounds of annulment. For Respondent, Claimant has submitted the new documents as
part of its arguments seeking to appeal the Award rather than its annulment. At the
Hearing Respondent’s counsel stated:
It is precisely because annulment is not and cannot be an appeal that the new
documents submitted by Claimant for the first time in this Annulment Proceeding
must be disregarded. And so it’s not a matter, in our view, of your looking at them,
studying them, and weighing them however you wish; our position is they must be
totally disregarded because these documents include an entirely new Witness
Statement by Mrs. Ozbilgic, who had never presented a Witness Statement in the
prior arbitration and also a number of additional BITs and BIT Submission Letters
which were not before the Kilig Tribunal. And because they were not before the
Kilig Tribunal, they have no bearing on the Tribunal’s reasoning, and they have
no bearing on any relevance to Claimant’s allegation of manifest excess of powers
by that Tribunal because the Tribunal did not have those documents before it.°°
96. In the view of the Committee the terms of Procedural Order No.1 are not as trenchant as
interpreted by Respondent. The key criterion is whether the new documentation relates to
the grounds of annulment rather than whether they were documents before the Tribunal.
This clarification notwithstanding, the documents objected by Respondent had been
submitted in support of arguments that seek a reinterpretation of Article VII.2 by this
64 Id. para. 158.

© Tr. 76:14-22, 77:1-9.

27

97.

98.

99.

Committee, a task that exceeds its mandate as explained by the Committee later in this

decision.

Another preliminary matter to be disposed by the Committee is the relevance of the Sehil
Decision on Jurisdiction of February 13, 2015°°. This decision was issued after Applicant
submitted its Reply and before Respondent submitted the Rejoinder. The arbitration in
that case is an ICSID arbitration brought under the BIT. Counsel to the parties in that
arbitration is the same as in these proceedings. Both Parties have discussed the Sehil
decision in extenso during the Hearing and Respondent in the Rejoinder. Both, the
Tribunal and the Sehil tribunal agree that Article VII(2) is ambiguous. The Sehil tribunal
reached, however, a different interpretation of Article VII.2 from that of the Tribunal.
Evidently the Tribunal did not have before it the Sehil decision and while the Sehil tribunal
was aware of the Award and the Interpretation Decision it nonetheless reached a different

conclusion.

Applicant relies on the Sehil decision in support of its argument that the Tribunal exceeded
its powers and submits that the Sehil decision warrants annulment of the Kilig Award “as
otherwise the system would turn into the luck of the draw.”®” Respondent in turn points
out that “there is no basis from Sehil to find that there was a manifest excess of power by
[the] K[i]lig Tribunal in interpreting VII. 2”°* Respondent further asserts that there is no
stare decisis and that it is “not the role of an ad hoc committee to bring about consistency
between conflicting interpretations of an ambiguous decision because a definitive answer

to something that is ambiguous may not exist.”

The Committee is of the view that just because a more recent non-binding interpretation
of an ambiguous provision differs from how that provision has been interpreted earlier

does not mean that the early tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers as argued by

© Muhammet Cap and Sehil Ingaat Endustri ve Ticaret Ltd. Sti. v. Turkmenistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/6),
Decision on Respondent's Objection to Jurisdiction under Article VII (2) of the Turkey-Turkmenistan Bilateral
Investment Treaty, February 13, 2015 (RLA-30).

©) Tr. pp.26:22; 27:1-2; 67:19-22.
© Ty, pp. 129:21-22; 130:1.
© Ty. pp 133:20-22; 134:1-2.

28

100.

101.

102.

103.

Applicant. The Committee will now turn to the grounds argued by Applicant in support

of its contention that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

Applicant’s first argument, as summarized above, is that Tribunal wrongly placed the
burden of proof on Applicant instead of requiring Respondent to sustain its objection to
jurisdiction on the basis that Article VII.2 of the BIT required prior recourse to the local
courts. Applicant alleges that Respondent did not provide any evidence in support of its
allegations and that the Tribunal should have dismissed the objection and exercised

jurisdiction.

The Committee first notes that the Tribunal did not discuss any issue of burden of proof
or any of the Parties discussed the burden of proof as regards the objection to jurisdiction.
The Tribunal did not in any way make it known that its decision was based on lack of
proof provided by Applicant. While it is generally correct that the defense of a claim
would be the responsibility of the defendant, and not of claimant to provide evidence
sustaining it, it is also true that Applicant had to prove that Respondent had consented to
arbitration under Article VIL2. Furthermore, the Tribunal itself has to be satisfied of its

own jurisdiction.

The controversy on this issue relates to the revised English translation of Article VII.2 of
the BIT from the Russian authentic text of the BIT provided by Respondent to the Tribunal
three days before the January hearing.”” Up to that moment, there had been no question
as regards the English and Russian authentic versions of the BIT. Respondent ordered a
new translation because, according to Counsel to Respondent, Russian speakers in the
offices of Counsel noted that the existing English text did not convey accurately the

meaning of the Russian text.

The Interpretation Decision noted that Claimant did not object to the revised translation at
the time it was introduced, “[nJor did Claimant request the opportunity, or time, to provide
a translation from another expert, or request the attendance of Respondent’s translator at

the hearing (or at a later date) for cross-examination.””! The Tribunal further noted that in

10 See para. 29 supra.

7! Interpretation Decision, para. 8.14.

29

the closing arguments at the January hearing Counsel to Respondent requested the
Tribunal to appoint an expert if did not believe in the revised translation or thought
insufficient the sworn statement of the translator. It is also noted by the Tribunal (i) that
Counsel to Claimant emphasized that the difference between the Parties was not on the
translation, but on the interpretation provided by Respondent, and (ii) that on
Respondent’s proposition that the Tribunal appoint a Russian language expert, Counsel to

Claimant stated:

I think that would be highly unusual. It would be a strange thing to do just in
relation to the Russian text, and not the English text, and not the various Turkish
texts. The Claimant has no desire to have further expenditures, and thinks it would
be sufficient to have the pleadings of the parties on this point. And I say that, Mr.
President, without having had any time to do more than to read the letter sent by
the respondent. I’ve been out of the country and doing other things, so this is not
an informed response.”

The Tribunal at this point offered Claimant to come back to the Tribunal on this matter

and gave Claimant additional time to consider the matter.
104. After the January hearing, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties that:

[...] having regard to: (a) the continuing uncertainty as to the accuracy of the
translations into English of the Russian text of Article VII.2; and (b) the possible
relevance of the translation into English of the Turkish version of Article VII.2 (as
published in the Official Gazette), the Tribunal had decided to request two
independent and qualified expert translators to provide it with English language
translations of the relevant texts. The parties were provided with CVs for the
proposed experts as well as the proposed instructions they were to receive. The
Tribunal further advised that the parties would be given a reasonable opportunity
to comment on such translation once they were in hand, and that the Tribunal
would welcome comments, if any, on the Tribunal’s intended instructions and on
the choice of translators.”

105. Respondent proposed to the Tribunal that the translator be asked: “[d]oes the Russian
phrase, ‘pri uslovii, esli’, when used in a sentence create a double conditional or is it a
construct that is used to create a single conditional the way either the words ‘on the

condition that’, or the word ‘if’ create in the English language?”

7 Td. para. 8.14.
3 Td. para. 8.16.
74 Td. para. 8.17.

30

106.

107.

108.

Claimant opposed the proposed retainer of a Russian expert translator by the Tribunal, and
stated that, if the Tribunal insisted, then Respondent should pay for the exercise and

objected to Respondent’s request, indicating that

the Russian-English translator be asked not only to provide the translation of the
text of Article 7(2) of the BIT but also give an opinion on, or make an interpretation
in relation to, certain Russian words.”

Claimant continued that “[i]t is notable that the Respondent does not seek to pretend that
what it is asking for is a translation. It goes without saying that opinions and interpretations
are not translations. It would not be appropriate in relation to the stated objective of the

Tribunal in this exercise for the Tribunal to accede to the Respondents request.”””°

Then the Tribunal advised the Parties that it would proceed to decide the BIT issues on
the present record, but it reserved the right to instruct independent translators if necessary.

The Tribunal did not instruct independent translators and concluded that

[T]he accurate translation of the authentic Russian text of Article VII.2 of the BIT
for present purposes (i.e, the one that conveys its true sense in Russian) is that set
out in R-I (revised). That is to say, a translation that has the word ‘if? removed
from the second line of sub-paragraph (c). In the view of the Tribunal, this more
accurately conveys in the English language the sense of the Russian text.”

The Tribunal was sensitive to the fact that the revised English translation of the Russian
text was introduced three days before the January hearing. It recognized this fact and it
equally recognized that

Respondent offered a plausible explanation for the reasons and timing of the

revision. Moreover, Claimant did not object at that time to its introduction. Nor

did Claimant request the opportunity, or time, to provide a translation from another

expert or request the attendance of Respondent's translator at the hearing (or at a
later date) for cross-examination.”*

109. As recorded in detail in the Interpretation Decision, the Tribunal received no evidence

from Applicant on the meaning of Article VIL2. Claimant had the opportunity to object,

5 Td. para. 8.14.
% Td. para. 8.19.
7 Td. para. 8.22.
8 Td. para. 8.10.

31

110.

111.

112.

to introduce new evidence, to come back to the Tribunal after the January hearing, or to
have independent experts give their translation or interpretation, as Applicant calls it.

Applicant could have also appointed its own expert.

In the view of the Committee the question is not an issue of the Tribunal’s shifting the
burden of proof to Applicant, but of the Tribunal giving Applicant the opportunity to
respond to the new evidence before the Tribunal and how Applicant used this opportunity.
The new evidence, i.e., the revised translation, put in question the understanding that, until
then, the Parties had of the meaning of Article VII.2. Respondent introduced the revised
English translation in support of its objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Applicant
decided not to introduce further evidence in response. An annulment proceeding is not the
appropriate venue for the losing party in ICSID arbitration to make up for failures of the

strategy followed by counsel in the arbitration proceeding.

The second ground adduced by Applicant in support of the manifest excess of powers is
the alleged failure of the Tribunal to rely on the plain reading of the English and Russian
versions of the BIT to decide whether Article VII.2 provided for an optional recourse to

local courts.

Applicant contends that there is a plain meaning of Article VIL2; the meaning of the
English and Russian authentic texts of the BIT, before the revised translation into English
of the Russian version of Article VII.2 was submitted to the Tribunal on January 17, 2012.
The non-Russian speaking Tribunal had before it a revised English translation of the
authentic Russian text and the original English text. The Tribunal stated the following on

the English text:

[...] the phrasing of the English is grammatically incorrect. Not only is it inelegant,
as was conceded by Claimant, but the pertinent part of Article VII.2 contains a
single word which does not immediately appear that it ought to be present, and
would not be present if the text had been drafted by a native speaker. There are
two different single words that might be removed: the word ‘if’ could be removed
[...] or the word ‘and’ could [be] removed [...]. On either approach, the removal
of one of those two words (but not both) would give the phrase grammatical

32

113.

114.

coherence. An issue that arises is which, if any, of the two words might be
removed.”
The Tribunal questioned a linguistics expert presented by Respondent. The Tribunal
considered that the expert “[...] testified with considerable clarity and persuasiveness, that
one would normally not expect two conditionals together (‘provided that’ followed by
‘if?), which is the only way one gets to an ‘optional’ text. On the other hand, the
conjunctive ‘and’ has no business in any text, unless the local court provision is

mandatory.”®°

The Tribunal concluded that “attempting to interpret the relevant English text in
accordance with Article 31 of the VCLT leaves its meaning ambiguous or obscure.”*! It
is not for the Committee to reach its own conclusion on whether the text of Article VII.2
of the authentic English version of the BIT is ambiguous or obscure. The Tribunal
explained that it had difficulty with the use of the double condition “provided that, if” and
how to make sense of the subsequent sentence. For the Committee, what is relevant is
that the Tribunal reached its conclusion after hearing the Parties, analyzing the text and
questioning the translator. It cannot be said that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers by not exercising its jurisdiction on the basis of the plain meaning of Article VII.2.
According to the Tribunal, such plain meaning alleged by Applicant was not supported by

the Tribunal’s analysis of the text.

In its pleadings, Applicant refers to the Tribunal’s email of dated March 6, 2012 whereby

it reserved its right to instruct an independent expert. Applicant argues:

It should have done so once it decided to disregard the initially agreed translation
that was [sic] conform moreover with the authentic English and Russian versions
of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT. The Tribunal members did not speak Russian. To
the extent that the Tribunal relied on the Russian version of the BIT to interpret
Article VII.2, the interpretation should have been based on the translation by an
independent expert, and not a revised interpretation of Respondent’s hired gun.*?

79 Td. para. 9.14.
8 Td. para. 9.15.
81 Td. para. 9.17.

®2 Memorial, para. 212. Underlined text in the original.

33

115.

116.

117.

As we have already seen, the Tribunal tried to hire an expert and Applicant opposed it on
grounds of cost and because of the question added by Respondent on the Russian
expression. The Tribunal at the time refrained from instructing an expert given the Parties’
views and announced that it would decide on the record. The Parties were advised that
the Tribunal would proceed without appointing an expert. Given the opposition of
Applicant to the retention of an expert by the Tribunal during the arbitration proceeding,
it is somewhat incongruous at this stage to argue that the Tribunal should have engaged

such expert.

The third ground advanced by Applicant is the failure of the Tribunal to follow the lead
of the Rumeli and Sistem tribunals in interpreting Article VII.2. While Applicant finds the
Rumeli and Sistem awards persuasive, the Tribunal did not. The Tribunal had no
obligation to follow the interpretation by other arbitral tribunals of BIT articles identical
or similar to Article VII.2. The Tribunal considered both decisions and explained why it
was not persuaded. In the case of the Rumeli award, the Tribunal explains that the Rumeli
tribunal concluded that the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT did not require prior submission of
the dispute to the local courts, but that tribunal reached this conclusion without analysis
or reasoning in support. As a further reason, the Tribunal noted that, “the tribunal’s
reasoning in that case seems to have disregarded the Turkish text, which in that case was
authentic, and plainly imposed a mandatory requirement to have recourse to the local

courts.”

The Tribunal also considered the Sistem award. The Tribunal noted that the Sistem
tribunal concluded that it took “no position on the question because Sistem has not
instituted any proceedings in the national courts against the Kyrgyz Republic.”** The
Tribunal found it difficult to rely on this conclusion because

It appears from the account of the Sistem case that the respondent there did not

raise the same argument as the Respondent in the present case. It appears from the
award that the Sistem tribunal did not consider the question that is before this

85 Interpretation Decision, para. 9.9.

*4 Quotation in para. 9.11 of the Interpretation Decision. The quotation is from para. 106 of the Sistem award, but
the footnote to para. 9.11 of the Interpretation Decision refers the reader to footnote 21. This footnote is in reference
to the Sistem decision on jurisdiction and not to the award (Sistem Muhendislik Insaat Sanayi ve Ticaret A.S. v.
Krygyz Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/06/1), Decision on Jurisdiction, September 13, 2007 (CLA-30).

34,

118.

119.

120.

121.

Tribunal and disposed of the matter on a different basis, having regard to the

different arguments of the parties.*°
In either case and irrespective of the merits of these reasons, they have to be considered
in the context that the Tribunal had no obligation to adopt the views of the Rumeli and
Sistem tribunals. A joint statement of the State parties to a treaty, as argued by Applicant,
reflecting their understanding of controverted provisions may help arbitral tribunals to
reach consistent decisions but states may choose not to issue such statement. To revise
the interpretations and conclusions of tribunals in order to achieve uniformity of case law

is not an objective within the limited terms of an annulment committee.

The fourth ground adduced by Applicant relates to the application of the VCLT to the
interpretation of Article VII.2. The argument developed by Applicant has three angles:
text of the BIT, supplementary means of interpretation and evidence presented by

Applicant.

According to Applicant, the task of the Tribunal was to understand the intent of the state
parties to the BIT but, instead, the Tribunal disregarded Turkey’s intention. In support,
Applicant contends that the Tribunal did not follow each of the stages of interpretation
required for a textual analysis of Article VII.2 under Article 31 of the VCLT. Applicant
highlights two elements of the textual interpretation missing from the analysis of the
Tribunal. First, Applicant points out that Article VII.1 is written in mandatory terms: the
notification of a dispute shall be in writing and the concerned party shall endeavor to settle
the dispute. On the other hand, Article VII.2 is drafted in permissive terms: if the dispute
cannot be settled within six months: “the dispute can be submitted, as the investor may

choose, to [...]”

Secondly, the other missing element is consideration of the contradiction within Article

VII created by an interpretation requiring prior recourse to the local courts, because

the investor is allowed to submit the dispute to arbitration six months after notice
of the dispute while the said investor would have to wait twelve more months to
bring the dispute to arbitration. In other words, a mandatory consideration of the
Treaty reads against this clear provision in that one-year referral (in which no final

85 Interpretation Decision, para. 9.13.

35

122.

123.

124.

judgment is to be obtained) necessarily means that a dispute cannot be submitted

to international arbitration within six months of presenting a notice of dispute.**
The analysis of the text by the Tribunal is focused on whether “if” or “and” should be
deleted from the text. The sentence “provided that, if ...” is analyzed without reference
to the rest of the paragraph or of Article VII. On this limited analysis the Tribunal
concludes that the text is ambiguous. There is no analysis of the context or of the purpose

of the BIT before the Tribunal reaches out to the supplementary means of interpretation.

Among the supplementary means of interpretation the Tribunal considered the
circumstances of the conclusion of the BIT. The Tribunal observed that Turkey entered
into four BITs with Turkic States in the course of five days, the authentic versions of which
include substantially identical provisions as those found in Article VII.2. The Tribunal
also refers to the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT signed the day before the BIT, which in its
Turkish version requires mandatory recourse to the local courts. The Tribunal concludes
that

the better view is that the English language version of Article VII.2 is properly to

be interpreted as requiring mandatory recourse to the local courts. This view best

reconciles the interpretation of the texts, having regard to the circumstances

surrounding their adoption. The contrary view does not appear to find support in

other circumstances surrounding the conclusion of the BIT.*”
Applicant argues that it provided the Tribunal evidence of the intention of Turkey when it
signed the BIT while Respondent did not, and that the Tribunal disregarded Turkey’s
intent and interpretation. In the instant case, the Tribunal considered the statements of
Mrs. Ozbilgi¢ and Mr. Kasimcan and found them not to be dispositive or persuasive. In
the case of Mrs. Ozbilgig because the difficulty with her statement, “which limits its value,
is that the certified English translation of the ‘official’ Turkish text [...] does not contain
the word ‘if’”.8* According to the Tribunal, the same reason applies to the statement of
Mr. Kasimcan. In a footnote the Tribunal explained that it rejected

Claimant’s argument that the ‘official’ Turkish version of the BIT was
mistranslated. The Tribunal reaches this conclusion having regard to the

8 Memorial, para. 246.

87 Interpretation Decision para. 9.21.
88 Id. para. 9.7.

36

mandatory Russian text of the BIT and because of the identity of the ‘official’
Turkish text with the authentic Turkish text in the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT.*°

The statements of Mrs. Ozbilgig and Mr. Kasimcan,” relied on the text of the Submission
Letter of the BIT to the Turkish parliament while the Tribunal relied on the text of the BIT

as published in the Official Gazette. In a further footnote the Tribunal explained that,

[it] does not disregard [...] the Council of Ministers’ letter to the Turkish
Parliament, which described Article VII in terms which support the meaning of
the relevant text as being optional. However, such a memorandum describing the
draft Law on the Approbation of the Approval of the BIT is trumped by the
subsequent publication in the Official Gazette of the ‘official’ Turkish translation
of the authentic English version of the BIT in terms which are unquestionably
mandatory.”!

125. The Committee concludes that the Tribunal considered the evidence submitted by
Applicant but for the reasons given was not convinced. The supplementary means of
interpretation were properly used since it had reached the conclusion that the text was
ambiguous. Nonetheless the Committee notes that the Tribunal reached the conclusion
that the text is ambiguous without an express analysis of the context of Article VII.2 and
of the object and purpose of the BIT as required by Art. 31 of the VCLT. From the
Tribunal’s Award it is not quite clear whether these steps were ignored, found to be
irrelevant, or used but not mentioned before reaching out for the supplementary means of
interpretation for the interpretation of Art. VII.2 of the BIT. What is clear is that the
Tribunal generally took into account the relevant Articles of the VCLT: The Award
expressly mentions Respondent’s reasoning on the object and purpose of the BIT,”
expressly cites Arts. 31 and 32 VCLT with special references to the context and object
and purpose”? and states that the Majority finds Prof. Park’s reasoning based on the “key
purposes of the BIT” not persuasive.** Even though one might consider that these

references could have been reiterated in further detail before interpreting Article VII.2 as

89 Id.n. 41.

° Mrs. Ozbilgig and Mr. Kasimcan, officials of the Turkish government, submitted, on behalf of Claimant, an
email and a letter respectively, during the course of the arbitration proceedings advocating for the optionality of
Art. VII. 2. See Interpretation Decision, para. 3.20.

°" Id. n, 48.

° See Award, paras. 3.3.54 -3.3.56.
%3 Id. paras. 5.2.1-5.2.6.

° Id. para. 6.5.4.

 

37

126.

127.

128.

129.

ambiguous, the Committee finds that the Tribunal’s use of the supplementary means of

interpretation is at least plausible if one considers the full context of the Award.

Under the fifth ground, Applicant argues that Turkey’s own practice confirms Turkey’s
intent that recourse to the local judiciary is optional. Applicant grounds its argument on
an extensive review of the practice of Turkey as signatory of 85 BITs. There is no record
that such practice was presented by Applicant to the Tribunal. It may have been helpful to
that Tribunal, but this proceeding is not the venue to re-argue the case with new arguments

and evidence that was not before the Tribunal.

The sixth ground advanced by Applicant is that mandatory recourse to the local judiciary
would violate the object and purpose of the BIT and lead to an absurd result. Applicant is
concerned that, if the local courts would decide on the investor’s claim before one year,
the investor would lose the protection afforded by the BIT safe for an action for denial of
justice. As a general matter, it is arguable that optional recourse to local courts may be
considered as more fitting with the purpose of the BIT, but mandatory prior recourse to
the local courts is not per se absurd or contrary to the BIT’s purpose, even if it limits the
grounds on which an investor could pursue its claims in arbitration if the courts decide

within a year.

The seventh ground aggregates four arguments that, except for the argument related to the
Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT, the Committee has already considered as part of the six other
grounds for manifest excess of powers. The Committee will consider the argument in
respect of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT as part of the next section. As regards the other
grounds and for the reasons explained above, the Committee reaches the conclusion that

Applicant has not proven that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

B. Failure to State Reasons

a) Summary of the Positions of the Parties

Applicant claims that the Tribunal failed to state reasons in the following thirteen instances

because it failed:

38

(i) to explain the question of the burden of proof, the rules on evidence or the

tules of interpretation that followed,
(ii) to balance the probative value of the evidence on the record,

(iii) to explain why it relied on the revised English translation of the Russian

authentic version of the BIT,
(iv) to explain why it relied on a linguistic expert to interpret a legal text,

(v) to explain why it consider as interpretation the evidence provided by the

Turkish State whereas this was evidence of the intention of the drafter,

(vi) to explain why it relied on the Turkish authentic version of the Turkey-

Kazakhstan BIT when no signed or authentic version was on the record,

(vii) to explain why it relied on the Turkish authentic version of the Turkey-
Kazakhstan BIT and it refused to rely on the English and Russian authentic

versions of that BIT,

(viii) to explain why it relied on the Turkish version of the BIT when it ruled

that only English and Russian authentic versions existed,

(ix) to explain why it relied on the Turkish version of the BIT published in the
Official Gazette and the Turkish version of the Kazakh-Turkey BIT and not

on the Turkish authentic version of the Turkey-Latvia BIT,

(x) to explain the contradiction between its statement at paragraph 9.23 of the
Decision that the Russian authentic version of the BIT is “clearly mandatory”
with respect to the recourse to the local judiciary and the efforts and acrobatics
it and Respondent had to undertake to reach this holding via moreover a
revised opinion/translation and/or its general holding at paragraph 9.2.6 of the

Award that the “meaning of that requirement was mostly not clear,”

°5 Memorial, para. 306.10. Emphasis in the original footnotes omitted.

39

130.

131.

132.

(xi) to explain why it expected the arbitral tribunal in Rumeli to state reasons

for the dismissal of a similar jurisdictional objection,

(xii) to explain why the Tribunal expected Kyrgyzstan to raise the same
argument as Turkmenistan for the Sistem decision to be given probative value,

and

(xiii) to explain “the practical considerations of its findings and what would
have been the scope of substantive protection that Claimant would be entitled
to should its recourse to the local judiciary lead to an adverse award within

one year.”°°

According to Applicant, each one of these acts and omissions of the Tribunal constitutes

a failure to state reasons under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

Respondent replies: “[t]he Tribunal explained why it found that Article VII.2 provided for
mandatory recourse to local courts, on both a legal and factual basis. The Tribunal
explained how it determined the number of authentic versions of the BIT, how it
interpreted Article VII.2 in accordance with the Vienna Convention and in particular (i)
how it interpreted the authentic Russian version of the BIT as providing for mandatory
recourse to local courts, (ii) why it concluded that the authentic English version was
ambiguous, (iii) and in light of this ambiguity, how it had recourse to supplemental means
of interpretation to elucidate the meaning of the authentic English version of the BIT and
concluded that Article VII.2 requires mandatory recourse to local courts as a precondition

to commencing an arbitration.”*”

Respondent addresses each one of Applicant’s allegations. According to Respondent, the
Tribunal (i) explained the rules on interpretation that followed, (ii) considered all the
evidence on the record, (iii) provided ample reasons why it found that the accurate
translation into English of the authentic Russian version of Article VII.2 was Respondent’s

revised translation, (iv) explained how Respondent’s linguistic expert’s report confirmed

°% Id. para. 306.13

°” Counter-Memorial, para. 190.

40

133.

134.

135.

the Tribunal’s conclusion that the authentic English version of Article VIL.2 of the BIT is
ambiguous, (v) explained why the evidence of Turkey’s unilateral intent did not help
interpreting Article VIL.2, (vi) explained that it relied on the Turkish version of the Turkey-
Kazakhstan BIT as a supplemental means of interpretation under Article 32 of the Vienna
Convention, (vii) explained why it relied on the authentic Turkish version of the Turkey-
Kazakhstan BIT, (viii) explained that it relied on the Turkish version of the BIT as a
supplemental means of interpretation under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention, (ix)
explained why it relied on the official Turkish text of the BIT as published in the Official
Gazette and the Turkish version of the Kazakh-Turkey BIT, (x) amply explained why it
found the local court requirement as “clearly mandatory” in the authentic Russian version
of Article VII.2, (xi) explained why it did not find the Rumeli award convincing, (xii)
explained why it did not find the Sistem award convincing, and (xiii) was not called upon
to decide on the scope of substantive protection that Claimant would be entitled to in case

of an adverse judgment of the local courts within one year.

b) Analysis of the Committee

At the outset, the Committee notes that arbitral tribunals have no obligation to expressly
address, in their awards, every single issue and argument raised by the parties. Tribunals
have discretion to focus on those issues and arguments that they find determinative for
their decision and not to address in their awards arguments of the parties that they find to
be irrelevant. Even more so, making use of that discretion is not by itself a reason for

nullification under Article 52.1(e) of the ICSID Convention.

Nevertheless, the Committee will take one by one the arguments of Applicant in support
of its claim that the Tribunal failed to state reasons; in so doing the Committee is mindful
that it is not its mandate to review the quality or sufficiency of the reasons as it has already

noted earlier in this decision.

The first argument in support of failure to state reasons is related to the burden of proof
and the rules of evidence or interpretation followed by the Tribunal. As regards the burden
of proof, the Committee has already found that Applicant’s argument is misplaced and not
supported by what the Tribunal did. The Tribunal gave an opportunity to present evidence

in response to the new evidence introduced by Respondent three days before the January

41

136.

137.

138.

hearing. Applicant did not present its own evidence to rebut Respondent’s evidence and it

did not object to the introduction of Respondent’s evidence at the time.

As to the rules of interpretation, the Tribunal relied on Articles 31 and 32 of the VCLT as
explained it in its Interpretation Decision: “[i]n the event, the Tribunal concludes that
attempting to interpret the relevant English text in accordance with Article 31 of the VCLT
leaves its meaning ambiguous or obscure. In these circumstances, it is appropriate for the
Tribunal to consider supplementary means of interpretation as permitted under Article 32
of the VCLT.”*® Then the Tribunal considers the circumstances of the conclusion of the

BIT as supplementary means of interpretation under Article 32 of the VCLT.

It is correct, as argued by Applicant, that the Tribunal did not expressly consider the
context of Article VII.2 or the object and purpose of the BIT in its analysis of Article VII.2
under Article 31 of the VCLT. The Tribunal reached the conclusion on the obscurity or
ambiguity of the text of this article without following each of the steps to interpret a treaty
under Article 31 of the VCLT. From that conclusion the Tribunal passed on to the
supplementary means of interpretation. Article 32 provides that recourse may be had to
supplementary means of interpretation, “including the preparatory work of the treaty and
the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the
application of article 31, or to determine the meaning when the interpretation according to
article 31: (a) Leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure, or [...].” The Tribunal acted
consequently to its conclusion on the obscurity of the text. With regard to how the Tribunal
reached the conclusion on the ambiguity of the text, the Committee already concluded that
the Tribunal’s reasoning can be at least considered plausible though more detail might
have made that reasoning clearer. Tribunals have a considerable discretion in how much

detail they present at every single step of their legal reasoning in their awards.

Applicant questions the selection by the Tribunal, without giving reasons, of the
translation of the Russian version of the BIT as revised by Respondent. The Tribunal
explained the selection on the basis that it found it to be the accurate English translation.

Applicant also questions the reliance of the Tribunal on the Turkish text of the Turkey-

°8 Interpretation Decision, para. 9.17.

42

139.

140.

141.

Kazakhstan BIT. The Tribunal explained that, under Article 32 of the VCLT, it relied on
BITs concluded around the date of the Turkey-Turkmenistan BIT. The Turkey-
Kazakhstan BIT was concluded a day before the Turkey-Turkmenistan BIT.

Applicant also states that the Tribunal failed to give reasons for the rules of evidence that
it followed. As a general matter, under the ICSID Arbitration Rules tribunals have ample
discretion in the appreciation of the evidence furnished by the parties. In particular,
Applicant argues that the Tribunal failed to explain why the probative value of the BIT
Submission Letter was lower than that of the non-authentic and mistranslated version of
the BIT. The Tribunal relied on a text published in the Official Gazette of Turkey; unless
corrected this would be the law of the country as against an explanatory document to the
parliamentarians. The Tribunal cannot be blamed for paying due attention to a text that

by definition is the law of Turkey.

Applicant also criticizes the Tribunal for not giving reasons for the weight given to the
Turkish text of the BIT published in the Official Gazette when it had found that the English
and Russian versions were the authentic versions of the BIT. The Tribunal had recourse
to the Turkish text after it found the English text obscure. The text published in the Official
Gazette is the law of Turkey; it needs no further explanation that the text of a published

law carries considerable weight.

Applicant is particularly critical of the use by the Tribunal of the Turkish version of the
Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT when no authentic or signed version was on the record and
disregarded the authentic Turkish version of the Turkey-Latvia BIT, which clearly
provided optional prior recourse to the local courts. Applicant notes that the Tribunal
reflected this argument of Applicant in the Decision and it had been discussed at the
January hearing, but “the Tribunal failed to discuss this argument at all in its legal analysis,
and therefore did not state the reasons why it apparently dismissed the Turkey-Latvia

BIT.”

%® Reply, para. 214.9. Emphasis in the original.

43

142.

143.

144.

Under the “Claimant’s Case” the Tribunal described the argument of Applicant in the
context of the discussion on the accurate translation into English of authentic versions of
the BIT. The description of the Tribunal is as follows:

Claimant points to the fact that, although the English language versions of Article

VII.2 in the two treaties are identical, the authentic Turkish language version of

the Turkey-Latvia BIT states clearly that an investor has an option or discretionary
power to bring a dispute to the courts of the host state.

Claimant maintains that because the Turkish version of the relevant provision of

this treaty is authentic, this shows that a translation mistake was made when the

same authentic English language version of Article VII.2 of the BIT was translated

into Turkish for publication in the Official Gazette.'°°
Notwithstanding recording Applicant’s argument and the discussion at the January
hearing, the Tribunal did not address the argument of Applicant in its reasoning. On the
other hand, the Tribunal explained why it considered the Kazakhstan BIT and the other
BITs with Turkic states. The Tribunal was concerned with the circumstances of the
conclusion of the Turkey-Turkmenistan BIT and noted: “[t]he closest thing to a Turkish
version of the BIT that seems, on the evidence before us, to have existed at the time is the
Turkish version of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT that was signed on 1 May 1992.”!°! As
indicated during the arbitration hearing, the Latvia BIT was entered a few years later in
1997 and was only published in 1999. The concentration of the attention of the Tribunal
on Turkey’s BITs with Turkic states is consistent with the reliance of the Tribunal on the
terms of Article 32 of the VCLT. The Tribunal explained its focus on the treaties
concluded contemporaneously with the Turkey-Turkmenistan BIT, it did not need to give

reasons why it did not consider others.

A constant thread in Applicant’s arguments is that the revised English version of Article
VII.2 is an interpretation of the Russian text rather than a translation. The so-called
interpretation was explained to the Tribunal at the January hearing. The Tribunal relied
on the explanations of the linguistic expert. The Tribunal was non-Russian speaking; it
had two versions of the English text. The Tribunal decided in favor of the revised English

version, which the Tribunal found to be the accurate version. The Tribunal had proposed

100 Interpretation Decision, paras. 3.16-3.17.
101 Td. n. 36.

145.

146.

147.

148.

102

to the Parties to engage an expert. Applicant did not agree on the terms of reference.
While the Tribunal retained its right to appoint an expert, it never promised that it would
appoint one. The Tribunal was very clear that it would decide on the record as it stood.

The Tribunal did not need to explain further why it did not retain an expert itself.

As regards the Rumeli award, Applicant argues that, “the Tribunal failed to state the
reasons why it imposed a certain persuasiveness test requiring a particular reasoning from

the Rumeli tribunal.”!

As the Committee reads the Decision, the Tribunal simply stated
that it was not persuaded because the Rumeli tribunal did not provide an analysis or
reasoning to support its conclusion. The Committee believes it is timely to repeat that the
Tribunal had no obligation to follow the Rumeli tribunal interpretation of an article
equivalent to Article VII.2. At best arbitral tribunals may be guided by or find persuasive
the decisions of other tribunals; they may also ignore them. In the instant case, the

Tribunal considered the award, was unconvinced and stated why.

Applicant raises the same issue in respect of the Sistem award. To avoid repetition, the

Committee refers mutatis mutandis to its comments in the previous paragraph.

The last ground argued by Applicant to state that the Tribunal failed to state reasons is
related to the effect of the interpretation of the Tribunal and will be more appropriately
addressed later in this decision. As regards the other arguments for failure to state reasons,

Applicant has failed to convince the Committee of their merit.

C. Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

a) Summary of the Positions of the Parties

Applicant argues that the Tribunal disregarded the rules on the burden of proof by failing
to place the burden on Respondent; the improper reversal of the burden of proof is an
abuse of the Tribunal’s discretion to form its own view on the relevance and weight to be
accorded to the evidence. In addition, Applicant adduces the following as grounds for
annulment under this heading (i) the de facto delegation to interpret the BIT text in dispute

to a translator, (ii) that the Tribunal based its ruling on an unsigned document or unproven

Reply, para. 214.11.

45

149.

150.

151.

152.

to be the authentic Turkish version of the BIT, (iii) that the Tribunal did not treat the
Parties equally, and (iv) that the Tribunal relied on the Turkish authentic version of the

Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT and refused to rely on its English and Russian authentic versions.

It is Applicant’s contention that each of these acts or omissions constitutes a serious

departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

Respondent affirms that the burden of proof lies with Claimant to demonstrate that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction, and explains that
[w]hile it is true that Respondent is the applicant with respect to the objection to
jurisdiction at issue, it is also true that it is Claimant who bears the burden of
establishing Turkmenistan’s consent to arbitration. The question of whether or not
Article VII.2 requires that the dispute be submitted to local courts as a precondition
to the host State’s consent is dispositive of the existence of Turkmenistan’s consent
to arbitrate the present case.”"!°°
Respondent adds that, in any event, the Tribunal did not rule on the interpretation and
meaning of Article VII.2 of the BIT on the ground that Kilig did not meet its burden of

proof.

As regards Applicant’s arguments on the Tribunal’s delegation of the mission to interpret
Article VII.2 of the BIT to a translator and the Tribunal’s reliance on the Turkish version
of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT, Respondent affirms that it is another attempt to obtain a
review by the Committee of the evidence submitted in the arbitration. Respondent recalls

the arguments made in response in the discussion on the manifest excess of powers.

Then Respondent addresses Applicant’s argument that the Tribunal treated the Parties
unequally in its treatment and assessment of the evidence. This argument is related to the
Tribunal’s reliance on the Turkish version of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT. According to
Respondent “the Tribunal carefully reviewed and weighed all of the evidence submitted
by both Parties and concluded that Article VII.2 provides for mandatory recourse to local

courts. In doing so, the Tribunal did not depart from any rule of procedure.”!*+

63 Counter-Memorial, para. 178.
104 Td, para. 188.

46

153.

154.

155.

b) Analysis of the Committee

The Committee recalls what it has said under previous sections on the question of the
shifting of the burden of proof. The argument of Applicant is based on Applicant’s belief
that Respondent did not prove that the State parties to the BIT had the intention to
introduce a mandatory recourse to the local courts. The Tribunal evaluated the evidence
that was presented by the Parties and decided otherwise. The decision of the Tribunal is
not based, as Applicant’s argument would seem to imply, on Applicant’s failure to
discharge its burden of proof. Respondent introduced new evidence and the Tribunal gave
an opportunity to Applicant to respond. This is part of the equal treatment of the Parties
in a judicial procedure. How or why Applicant took or did not take advantage of this

opportunity is a matter for Applicant itself to judge.

Applicant contends that the Tribunal based its ruling on “an unsigned document and/or
unproven to be the authentic Turkish version.”!°° The Committee will not second-guess
the Tribunal’s appreciation of the evidence on which it relied. It will simply observe that
the “ruling” of the Tribunal was not only based on the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT. The
Tribunal relied on other BITs “in addition” to the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT.

Applicant further complains of unequal treatment by the Tribunal because it “relied on the
[alleged] Turkish authentic version of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT whereas it refused to
rely on the English and Russian authentic versions thereof (which were identical to the
English and Russian authentic versions of the BIT) including for the purposes of
translating into English the Russian authentic version of the BIT [...].’”!°° The English and
Russian authentic versions of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT were identical to the authentic
English and Russian versions of the BIT, hence the reasons for not relying on the English
version of the Turkey-Kazakhstan BIT would be the same as explained by the Tribunal
for not relying on the authentic English version of the BIT. In this context it is
understandable that the Tribunal would look into the Turkish version of the Turkey-

Kazakhstan-BIT that the Tribunal considered authentic and that contained substantially

105 Memorial, para. 316.
106 Td, para. 319.

47

156.

157.

158.

159.

identical terms to those of the BIT as published in the Official Gazette. The Tribunal went

on to note: “[t]he Turkish legal experts for both parties agree on this point.”!°”

In the view of the Committee the Tribunal did not “refuse” to rely on any particular version
of the various treaties before it. The Tribunal considered them and for the reasons that the
Tribunal explained it found a particular version more convincing. The fact that it did not
find convincing the arguments of Applicant is not a basis for a claim of unequal treatment

in the appreciation of evidence.

Applicant has also argued under this heading that it delegated the interpretation of the BIT
to a translator. In the view of the Committee, a translation of a document is not a
delegation to interpret the document. A translation has to make sense in the language that
it is translated into, whether the translation is literal or liberal. The consideration of this
issue by the Tribunal cannot be isolated of what else the Tribunal did to ascertain the
meaning of the text and that the Committee has by now repeated a number of times in this

decision.

In sum, for the above reasons the Committee is unable to conclude that the Tribunal

departed from a fundamental rule of procedure.

1. THE EFFECT OF ARTICLE VII.2 AS INTERPRETED BY THE TRIBUNAL
A. Manifest Excess of Powers

a) Summary of the Positions of the Parties

Applicant contends that the Tribunal exceeded its powers by disregarding or grossly
misapplying the BIT and the Vienna Convention, by grossly misapplying or failing to set
the standard to excuse Claimant from recourse to local courts, and by de facto imposing a
recourse to local courts in order to test the futility test and thus not allowing derogation

from the mandatory recourse as it exists under international law.

107 Interpretation Decision, para. 9.19, n. 47.

48

160.

161.

162.

163.

Respondent argues that the Tribunal’s finding that Article VII.2 provides for mandatory
recourse to the local courts as a precondition to jurisdiction cannot constitute an egregious
error when other tribunals before and after the Award have found that similar provisions
requiring mandatory recourse to local courts constituted preconditions to jurisdiction, as

opposed to admissibility.

b) Analysis of the Committee
Applicant by and large repeats the arguments presented under the chapter on The Meaning

of Article VII.2. Applicant explains that it is

not challenging for annulment purposes the Tribunal’s conclusion that the
requirements set forth in a dispute settlement clause form part of the State’s
consent to arbitration. Claimant, however, challenges the Tribunal’s specific
finding that Article VII.2 of the BIT contains a mandatory recourse to local courts
that is a precondition to its jurisdiction for the simple reason that there is no
requirement of mandatory recourse to local courts [...]”!

Here Applicant remits to its arguments on the meaning of Article VII.2. The Committee
will address these arguments to the extent that they refer to the application of the VCLT

in the context of the effect of the interpretation of Article VII.2.

In the Award the Tribunal sets the stage for the application of Articles 31 and 32 of the
VCLT by referring to the principles of interpretation enumerated in the comments of the

ILC on the Final Draft of the Convention of 1966. The Tribunal states:

Article 31(1) envisages the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of a treaty
in their context. Treaty terms are obviously not drafted in isolation, and their
meaning can only be determined by considering the entire text. The context will
include the remaining terms of the sentence and of the paragraph; the entire article
at issue; and the remainder of the treaty. i.e., its text including its preamble and
annexes and the other means mentioned in Articles 31(2) and 31(3).!”

The Tribunal reasons:

It is a fundamental principle that an agreement is formed by offer and acceptance.
But for an agreement to result, there must be acceptance of the offer as made. It
follows that an arbitration agreement, such as would provide for the Centre to have
jurisdiction under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, can only come into

108 Memorial, para. 327.
109 Award, para. 5.2.6.

49

164.

165.

existence through a qualifying investor’s acceptance of a host state’s standing offer

as made [...]”!"°
Then the Tribunal states that “in order for the necessary consent/agreement in writing to
result, the offer must have been accepted on the basis of, and having regard to, the
conditions explicitly set out in the BIT.”!!! The Tribunal concludes: “the requirements set
forth in Article VII.2 are to be treated as conditions, and that the failure to meet those
conditions goes to the existence of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, and are not to be treated as
issues of admissibility.”!!? Having found that the conditions for jurisdiction have not been

met, the Tribunal concludes that it has no jurisdiction to suspend the proceedings.

Applicant’s substantive argument is that the result of the interpretation defeats the crucial
component of an effective treaty protection, namely, access to a fair and efficient means
of settlement. Applicant is concerned that if a final decision from a local court is issued
within one year, then the investor is barred from bringing a claim to arbitration unless it
can show denial of justice. Applicant’s criticism is based on arbitrator Park’s separate
opinion: “[i]f the investor in the current proceedings files a second arbitration following a
swift judgment denying treaty rights, the claim can be heard only if a new tribunal treats
the proviso as something other than the ab initio jurisdictional precondition asserted in the

Award.”!'3
The Tribunal addressed the issue raised in Arbitrator Park’s opinion as follows:

Just as a requirement to exhaust local remedies may be disregarded when it can be
shown that no remedy is available, or an attempt at exhaustion would be futile, an
ICSID tribunal that was presented with evidence that a respondent’s domestic
court had decided unfairly against a claimant investor, albeit within one year, could
nevertheless exercise jurisdiction assuming that the other conditions had been met.
In other words, the mere fact that domestic proceedings had been initiated, and
they had been unfairly concluded within a year, would not of itself be a bar to
jurisdiction.''*

400 Td. para. 6.2.1. Emphasis in the original.
4 Td. para. 6.3.14.

12 Td. para. 6.3.15.

13 Separate Opinion, para. 22.

44 Award, para. 6.5.4.

50

166. Irrespective of the merits of the reasoning of the Majority of the Tribunal, this is a matter

16

16

115
116
17
cl

118

and Admi

ori

that would be decided by another tribunal unbound by findings of the Tribunal. For the
Committee, the determinant factor is that the Tribunal had considered the conditions as
conditions precedent to consent to jurisdiction and consequently it decided that it had no
jurisdiction to suspend the proceeding. Faced with the same question, other tribunals have
decided differently on questions of jurisdiction and admissibility; it is not for the

Committee to favor one or the other of these positions.

7. Applicant questions the futility standard chosen by the Tribunal and how the Tribunal
applied it. Applicant refers to the following statement of the Tribunal:
Article VII.2 of the BIT does not require the exhaustion of local remedies as the
concept is understood under international law. It simply requires an investor with
a dispute to take the matter to the host state’s courts and not have received a final
award within one year.'!>
This notwithstanding, according to Applicant, the Tribunal applied the same standard as
if the local remedies rule would apply. Applicant contends that, on the basis of Daimler
and Ambiente Ufficio, the test should be lower: “the Tribunal should have checked whether
(i) recourse to a local court was available, and (ii) the investor was not prevented from

complying with the requirement to go before the local courts.”!!¢

od

It is not evident, and Applicant does not explain it, in what way the standard set by Daimler
is lower. The Daimler tribunal stated “the Claimant has not asserted that it lacked a cause
of action before the Argentine courts or that it was in some other way prevented from
complying with the requirements of Article 10(2).”!!7 The Ambiente Ufficio tribunal is
more explicit: “the threshold to be met for the futility exception to be realized in the

present case cannot possibly be considered higher than in the context of diplomatic

protection; on the contrary, it is arguably rather lower.”!!8

Award, para. 8.1.7.
Memorial, para. 347.

Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1), Award, August 22, 2012
LA-173), para. 191, quoted in Memorial, para. 347.

Ambiente Ufficio S.p.A. and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/9), Decision on Jurisdiction
ility, February 8, 2013 (CLA-171), para. 602, quoted in Memorial, para. 344. Underlining in the

 

ginal.

51

169.

170.

171.

The Committee first observes that the Tribunal did not affirm that the threshold must be
lower, but “arguably” lower, a qualified affirmation. Secondly and more importantly,
Applicant did not argue in the underlying arbitration whether the standard to apply should
be lower because recourse to the local courts under Article VII.2 of the BIT was analogous
but not identical to an obligation to exhaust remedies under international law. Rather,
Applicant argued in its counter-memorial in the arbitration proceeding that the rule of
exhaustion of local remedies was a flexible rule. Applicant did not establish a difference
between the standard to apply in the case of the requirements of Article VII.2 as opposed
to the applicable standard under the exhaustion of local remedies rule. Applicant left it in
the hands of the Tribunal: “[i]t is the prerogative of the international tribunal before which
the issue is raised to determine whether local remedies worth exhausting are indeed
available and effective, rather than merely theoretical or illusory.”!!? This is what the

Tribunal did.

Thirdly, the Tribunal had no obligation to follow the precedents advocated by Applicant
because they had not been brought to the attention of the Tribunal and because of the non-

applicability of the stare decisis doctrine in international arbitration.

As regards the application of the standard, Applicant claims that the Tribunal failed to
apply it or applied it in a manner that rendered moot any possible derogation of the
mandatory recourse to the judiciary. Here the arguments of Applicant relate to the
appreciation by the Tribunal of the evidence submitted by Applicant. The Tribunal
reviewed it and found that “Claimant has tendered no evidence - whether in the form of a
witness or expertise - to support its assertion. Nor has Claimant sought to offer any
explanation or account as to its failure to tender such evidence.”!”° The Tribunal

commented further:

Claimant’s futility analysis is based principally on broad statements and third party
studies/reports, to the effect that the Turkmen judiciary lacks independence, and
that the Turkmen authorities would have had a particular aversion to Turkish
investors. The Tribunal considers, however, that if a party to proceedings such as
these is to make a futility argument, it has the onus of showing that recourse to the
Contracting State’s courts would be futile or ineffective, and that requires the

49 Reply, n. 434, referring to Claimant’s Counter-Memorial, para. 35 (CLA-18)
20 Award, para. 8.1.5.

52

172.

173.

174.

tendering of probative evidence that goes to the specificity of the issue in dispute.
It is not enough to make generalized allegations about the insufficiency of a state’s
legal system. Against the backdrop of relevant Turkmen laws introduced into the
record by Respondent, such material as has been relied upon by Claimant cannot
constitute sufficient evidence of unavailability or ineffectiveness. '7!
The appreciation of evidence is the prerogative of the Tribunal and it is not the
Committee’s mandate to re-appraise it. The Committee will return to Applicant’s
argument below when considering Applicant’s claim of a serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure.

Given the flexibility argued by Applicant itself, and the implicit discretion of the Tribunal
in setting the threshold, the Committee finds that Applicant has failed to show how the

Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in setting the threshold or in applying it.

B. Failure to State Reasons

a) Summary of the Positions of the Parties

Applicant contends that the Tribunal failed to explain the following: (i) “how and why
Article VIL2 of the BIT did not bar substantive claims under the BIT in case of unfair
judgment within a year nor to identify the scope of the substantive protections and
underlying reasons,”!? (ii) why it applied the futility standard of the exhaustion of local
remedies, (iii) how a judge in Turkmenistan could decide a complex case within one year
while ensuring the minimum required quality and due process safeguards, (iv) “why the
impossibility to find Turkmen lawyers willing to testify and represent a foreign investor
against the State was not compelling evidence,”!”* (v) “why the reports issued by reputable
independent international institutions flagging the lack of independence, ethics and
qualifications of the Turkmen judiciary did not constitute compelling evidence,”!** (vi)
why the anti-Turkish declaration of the President of Respondent did not constitute
compelling evidence, (vii) what standard or what constituted compelling evidence for an

investor to be excused from the recourse to the judiciary.

21 Td. para. 8.1.10.

'22 Memorial, para. 373.
123 Td, para. 376.

24 Td. para. 377.

53

175.

176.

177.

Respondent contends that the Tribunal provided ample reasons for its decision: (i)
pursuant to Article 25 of the ICSID Convention for a tribunal to have jurisdiction there
need be a written agreement to arbitrate between the host state and the foreign investor,
(ii) for an agreement there is the need of an offer and an acceptance of the offer, (iii)
Article 26 of the ICSID Convention permits a State to require prior exhaustion of judicial
remedies, (iv) Article VII.2 of the BIT provides for a sequence of separate resolution
procedures through which a dispute will escalate, if not resolved in the former step, (v)
such a multi-layered dispute resolution system is in accordance with the ICSID
Convention, (vi) “the adoption of language which requires that a series of steps ‘shall’ be
taken, and which provide for a right to arbitrate ‘provided that’ another step has been

taken, is “an obvious construction of a condition precedent,”!?5

and (vii) the failure to meet
the conditions means that jurisdiction cannot be exercised. According to Respondent, this

line of reasoning fully enables the reader to follow the Tribunal from point A to point B.

b) Analysis of the Committee
The Committee has already dealt with the question of why Article VII.2 did not bar
substantive claims under the BIT in case of an unfair judgment by the Turkmen courts.
Applicant questions why the Tribunal applied the futility standard of the exhaustion of
local remedies while it recognized that there was no exhaustion of local remedies required.
This question has just been addressed and the reason should be obvious to Applicant: in
the pleadings before the Tribunal, Applicant argued that the situation before the Tribunal

was “analogous” to a situation where the local remedies rule applies.
Applicant further questions,

how it could be possible for a Turkmen judge to settle a dispute involving the
construction of a major public utility project across the nation with different public
entities involved and several hundred million USD at stake, that gives rise to
complex factual, legal and quantification issues by way of a final award or decision
within one year while ensuring the minimum required quality and due process
safeguards. '6

'25 Counter-Memorial, para. 236, sixth bullet.

26 Memorial, para. 375.

54

178.

179.

180.

181.

Applicant is concerned here about the integrity of proceedings rushed to completion within
a year in order for Respondent to avoid arbitration. This concern may be understandable,
but this matter was not raised before the Tribunal. The Tribunal did not need to raise it

motu proprio.

Applicant also questions why the Tribunal found not compelling the evidence presented
by Applicant. Among other reasons the Tribunal explained that, “Claimant has tendered
no evidence - whether in the form of a witness or expertise - to support its assertion. Nor
has Claimant sought to offer any explanation or account as to its failure to tender such
evidence.”!2” For the Committee it is clear that, for the Tribunal, compelling evidence is

9128 je.

“probative evidence that goes to the specificity of the issue in dispute, , Specific

witness or expertise evidence, rather than general statements or reports.

The Committee concludes that the Tribunal provided reasons and Applicant’s argument

in this respect fails.

C. Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

a) Summary of the Positions of the Parties

Applicant argues that the Tribunal departed from a fundamental rule of procedure when
“de facto imposed a test or means of evidence that could not have been met other than by
recourse to the local courts to assess the futility test or the standard that needs to be met to
be excused from the local recourse requirement.”!?? In addition, the Tribunal refused

to shift the burden of proof on Turkmenistan on the question of futility and

derogation from the mandatory recourse to the local judiciary requirement once it

was confronted with international reports relied upon by Claimant on the Turkmen

judiciary’s shortcomings, the statements of its President against Turkish investors,

the taking of Claimant’s assets, and the impossibility to access local attorneys.'*”
Respondent notes that, apart from the issues related to burden of proof and unequal

treatment of the Parties, Applicant does not point to other specific rules of procedure that

27 Award, para. 8.1.5.
28 Td. 8.1.10.

29 Memorial, para. 381.
130 Td, para. 382.

55

182.

183.

the Tribunal allegedly violated. Respondent refers to the arguments already made earlier

in this respect.

b) Analysis of the Committee

Applicant disputes again the allocation of the burden of proof by the Tribunal. The starting
point for the Tribunal was that the party who claimed futility of the recourse to the local
courts had to prove such futility. The Tribunal, for the reasons already discussed under
the claim of failure to provide reasons, considered insufficient the evidence presented by
Applicant, as opposed to the evidence provided by Respondent. The Tribunal explained
the type of evidence that was missing to support Applicant’s claim: “Claimant has
tendered no evidence - whether in the form of a witness or expertise - to support its
assertion. Nor has Claimant sought to offer any explanation or account as to its failure to

tender such evidence.”!*!

It is not a question of reversing the burden of proof but of whether the evidence presented
by Applicant in the arbitration proceeding was sufficient. The Tribunal considered that
evidence and found it insufficient to prove the futility of recourse to the local courts as
against the test set by the Tribunal. Thus the Tribunal dismissed the cases of Mr. Arslan
and Mr. Bozbey adduced by Applicant in support of the futility argument because it did

t.'°?_ In the first case because “to the Tribunal’s

not consider their subject matter relevan
mind, Mr. Arslan’s evidence was not directed to the availability and efficacy of the
Turkmen judicial system to handle investor-state disputes.”!? As to Mr. Bozbey’s
evidence, a criminal case, the Tribunal considered it not to be on point. The Tribunal
noted that there was no suggestion that Mr. Bozbey had any relationship with Kilig and
added: “It is thus difficult to see how his [Mr. Bozbey’s] complaints, even if justified, are
relevant to Kilig’s complaints about the unavailability of or futility in having recourse to

Respondent’s courts over its BIT claims.”'*4 The Tribunal also noted that the case of

31 Award, para. 8.1.5.

132

See Id. para. 8.1.16. Mr. Osman Arslan, one of Kilig’s project manager, submitted a witness statement in the

arbitration on the question of Turkmenistan’s alleged animosity against those adverse to the government. Claimant
also relied in reports by the UN Human Rights Committee relating to a complaint by Mr. Omar Faruk Bozbey, a
Turkish investor in Turkmenistan. See Award paras. 4.3.10-4.3.11.

133 Award para. 8.1.16.

134 Td. para. 8.1.19.

56

184.

185.

186.

187.

Applicant was not helped in Mr. Bozbey’s case by the UN Human Rights Committee’s

finding that his claims were not substantiated.

Applicant has raised as a separate question whether the Tribunal treated the Parties in the
proceeding equally, in particular whether it had imposed a test that Applicant could not
meet because, as the Tribunal admitted, there had been no previous cases of a similar

nature before the Arbitrazh Court, in Turkmenistan.
The Tribunal recognized:

Respondent has not lead evidence of a track record of proceedings before the

Arbitrazh Court involving investment disputes brought against Respondent.

Although this is explained on the basis that there have been none, the more

important point is that the onus is not on Respondent to prove the availability and

efficacy of its court systems to manage investor related disputes. Rather, the onus

is on Claimant to show, on sufficient evidence, that such recourse is unavailable

or would be futile in respect of the matters at issue in this case, including in

relation to this party and to matters in dispute.”'*°
According to Applicant, the test set by the Tribunal to prove the ineffectiveness of recourse
to the local courts is set at a level of evidence that by the Tribunal’s own terms would be
practically impossible to meet: that evidence needs to be “in respect of the matters at issue
in this case” notwithstanding the Tribunal’s acknowledgement that there is “no [...] lead
evidence of a track record of proceedings before the Arbitrazh Court involving investment
dispute brought against Respondent. Although this is explained on the basis that there
have been none [...].”'° Lack of evidence in support of an argument of a party does not
necessarily mean that the tribunal treated the parties differently. The ineffectiveness of
the courts was a matter to be proven by Applicant, not Respondent. It is a question of who

carries the burden of proof rather than whether the Tribunal had treated the Parties fairly.

The Tribunal could have been more inclined to look with a critical eye to the paper
evidence presented by Respondent in view of the criticism of third party reports of highly
reputable institutions submitted by Claimant, at least in the case of the EBRD, an

institution whose objective among others is to strengthen the rule of law in countries such

85 Award, para. 8.1.15.
36 Td. para. 8.1.15.

57

188.

189.

190.

191.

as Turkmenistan. But the Committee is not in a position to second-guess the Tribunal’s
decision and Claimant was responsible for proving its contention. The Tribunal, based on
the evidentiary record, was not able “to conclude that it would have been ineffective or
futile for Claimant to have sought to comply with Article VII.2’s requirement for prior

recourse to the courts of Turkmenistan.”!37

To conclude, the Committee finds that Applicant has not proven that the Tribunal departed

from a fundamental rule of procedure.

2. THE TRIBUNAL'S DECISION ON COSTS
A. Summary of the Positions of the Parties

Applicant contends that the Tribunal provided contradictory and insufficient or inadequate
reasons for its decision on costs. In support, Applicant refers to the Tribunal’s statement
that Claimant asserted far-reaching claims but at the beginning of the proceeding the
Tribunal decided that the jurisdictional objections raised by Respondent did not require
bifurcation. Furthermore, the Tribunal recognized that Article VII.2 was an unsettled
question and yet, according to the Tribunal, Applicant “should have regarded the
possibility that Article VII.2 of the BIT was requiring mandatory recourse to local

courts.”!38

Applicant refers to the Tribunal blaming Applicant for not explaining its decision not to
seek to comply with the provisions of Article VII.2. Applicant argues that it believed in
good faith that recourse to the local courts was optional and “advanced extensive practical
considerations why it would have been futile or counter-productive to exercise this judicial

recourse all of which were rejected but not considered to be made in bad faith.”!*°

Applicant pleads that the costs part of the Award be annulled for failure to state reasons

or manifest excess of powers even if the rest of the Award is not annulled.

187 Td. para. 8.1.21.
38 Memorial, para. 386.
89 Td, para. 387.

58

192.

193.

194.

195.

149 Counter-Memori:

Respondent refers to the wide discretion of the Tribunal under Article 61(2) of the ICSID
Convention and to the decisions of annulment committees in the MINE and CDC cases,
and concludes that “[i]n light of this standard practice, it appears doubtful that the
Tribunal’s award on costs, rendered in accordance with its discretionary power under
Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, could be annulled on the grounds of manifest

excess of powers or failure to state reasons.”!4°

Respondent contends that, in any event, the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers
or failed to provide reasons. Respondent explains that the Tribunal reasoned as follows:
(i) the Tribunal referred to the provisions of Article 61(2), (ii) the Tribunal noted that each
of the Parties had asked the Tribunal to exercise discretion in its favor, (iii) the Tribunal
noted that Applicant disregarded entirely the possibility that the requirement to have first
recourse to the local courts under Article VIL2 may not be optional, (iv) the Tribunal also
noted that, after the decision of the Tribunal on the meaning of Article VII.2, Applicant
did not explain its decision not to comply with said article, (v) the Tribunal also noted that
that it was not evident that Applicant’s request complied fully with the notice requirements
of Article VII.2, (vi) the Tribunal considered that in these circumstances Applicant
exercised a right “on the basis of an expectation that there would be potentially serious
challenges to jurisdiction or admissibility,”'*! (vii) hence the Tribunal considered that

Applicant should bear some of the consequences of its actions.

Respondent also refers to the Request for Arbitration where Applicant recognized that the
BIT mandatorily requires prior submission of a dispute to national courts and knowingly

chose not to comply with this requirement.

B. Analysis of the Committee

Tribunals have, under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, ample discretion in deciding
how to allocate costs of the arbitration. The Tribunal provided reasons for its decision.
Applicant questions some of the reasons, in particular (i) the reliance of the Tribunal on

Applicant’s far-reaching claims notwithstanding that the jurisdictional objections raised

 

, para. 274.

441 Id, para. 275, fifth bullet.

59

196.

197.

198.

142

by Respondent did not require bifurcation; and (ii) the Tribunal’s recognition that Article
VIL2 of the BIT was an unsettled question and “yet, considers that Claimant should have
regarded the possibility that Article VII.2 of the BIT was requiring mandatory recourse to

local courts.”!”

The reason of “far-reaching claims” has to be seen in context and the time when the
relevant statements were made. The Tribunal uses this expression in the Award at the end
of the proceedings and in a sentence to indicate that, because the claims were far reaching,
Applicant “must have expected Respondent to take [them] seriously and to defend [them]
accordingly.”'#? The Tribunal would not have been in a position to qualify the claims as
far reaching at the time it considered the bifurcation request. Furthermore, the Tribunal
decided not to bifurcate the proceeding because it could result in undue cost and delay and
two of the jurisdictional objections appeared “intertwined with issues and evidence that
may relate to the merits of the case.”'*+ Far reaching claims may be intertwined with
issues and evidence that may relate to the merits. There is no contradiction between the

two.

Applicant considers the qualification by the Tribunal of a question as “unsettled” to
contradict the Tribunal’s statement that Applicant should have regarded the possibility of
a mandatory requirement to local courts. It would seem logical to the Committee that, if
a question is unsettled, the Parties would be aware of either possible outcome and act
accordingly; particularly, when in the Request for Arbitration Applicant itself seems to

have understood differently Article VII.2 of the BIT.

To conclude, the Committee finds no merit in the claim that the Tribunal manifestly

exceeded its power or failed to provide reasons in its decision on costs in the Award.

Memorial, paras. 385 and 386.

43 Award, para. 9.2.6.

“4 Decision on Bifurcation, p. 2.

60

VI.

199.

200.

201.

202.

203.

COSTS

Applicant requests that

a. in case the Award is annulled, the Tribunal order Respondent to bear the entirety of
Applicant’s legal fees and the costs of the annulment proceeding;

b. in the alternative and assuming that the Award is annulled, the Tribunal order
Respondent to bear the entirety of the costs of the annulment proceeding;

c. ina third alternative, and assuming that the Award is not annulled, the Tribunal order
each Party to bear its own legal costs, and the costs of the annulment proceeding split
in equal parts between the Parties; and

d. ina fourth alternative, and assuming that the Award is not annulled, the Tribunal does
not order the shifting of Respondent’s legal costs to Applicant.,

On the other hand, Respondent requests an award of costs in respect of all the costs
incurred in connection with this proceeding, including the Tribunal’s legal fees and

expenses and the costs of its representation.

As provided in Applicant’s statement of costs, dated May 29, 2015, Applicant’s paid legal
fees and expenses incurred in connection with this proceeding amount to EUR 532,231.99,
USD 364,526.45, TRY 20,129.04 and GBP 219.73USD, including USD 360,000.00 paid
to ICSID on account of the fees and expenses of the Members of the Committee and the

charges for the use of the ICSID facilities.

According to Respondent’s statement of costs, dated May 29, 2015, Respondent’s legal
fees and expenses amount to USD 920,651.98.

The Tribunal’s fees and expenses as well as the charges for the use of the ICSID facilities
have been paid out of the advances made by Applicant and amount to USD 282,296.70,
divided as follows (in USD):

61

204.

205.

an

206.

207.

208.

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses: USD 208,699.71
ICSID’s administrative charges: USD 64,000.00
ICSID’s expenses (estimated): !4° USD 9,596.99

Article 52 (4) of the ICSID Convention provides that the provisions of Chapters VI and
VII shall apply mutatis mutandis to proceedings before the Committee. According to Rule
53 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, “the provisions of these Rules shall apply mutatis
mutandis to any procedure relating to the interpretation, revision or annulment of an award

and to the decision of the Tribunal or Committee.”
Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention reads as follows:

[t]he Tribunal shall, except as the parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses
incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings and shall decide how
and by whom these expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal
and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such
decision shall form part of the award.
Article 61 of the ICSID Convention gives the Tribunal discretion to allocate all costs of
the arbitration, including attorney’s fees and other costs, between the Parties as it deems

appropriate.

Rule 47(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides that the Tribunal’s Award “shall

contain [...] (j) any decision [...] regarding the cost of the proceeding.”

Although the Committee has found no ground for annulment, the issues raised by
Applicant had sufficient merit for the Committee to decide in the exercise of its discretion
that each Party shall bear in full its own legal costs and expenses incurred in connection
with the proceedings and that Applicant shall bear the Committee’s fees and expenses and

ICSID’s charges for the use of its facilities.

'45 The amount includes estimated charges (courier, printing and copying) in respect of the dispatch of this
Decision.

62

VII. DECISION

209. For the reasons given above, the Committee decides:

(a) to dismiss the Application in its entirety;

(b) that Applicant shall bear all charges for the use of the ICSID facilities in connection

with this proceeding and the fees and expenses of the members of the Committee; and

(c) that each party shall bear its own litigation costs and expenses incurred with respect

to this proceeding.

63

U dha hes z

Professor Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel Professor Hi-Taek Shin
Member Member
Date: 07-14-2015 Date: 07-14-2015
DP

i
Nw, q:
1
-
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda

President of the Committee
Date: 07-14-2015

