ARBITRATION INSTITUTE

OF THE

STOCKHOLM CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

SCC Arbitration EA (2016/095)

KOMPOZIT LLC

(Russian Federation)

Claimant

REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA

Respondent

 

EMERGENCY AWARD ON INTERIM MEASURES
Place of Arbitration: Stockholm

14 June 2016

 

 

L Parties and Counsel

1. Claimant

KOMPOZIT LLC

Office 31

13 Telezhnaya Street, lit. B
191024 Saint Petersburg
Russian Federation

Represented by:

2. Respondent

Dr Egishe Dzhazoyan
Mr Aisling Billington

KING & SPALDING International LLP

125 Old Broad Street

London EC2N 1AR

United Kingdom

Tel: +44.207 551 7518

Fax: +44 207 551 7575

E-mails: edzhazoyan@kslaw.com
abillington@kslaw.com

REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA

Represented by:

Government of the Republic of Moldova
Piata Marii Adunari Nationale, 1
Chisinau MD-2033

Republic of Moldova

Tel: +373 22 250 101

Fax: +373 22 242 696

E-mail: petitii@gov.md

Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Moldova
31 August 1989 Street, 82

Chisinau MD-2012

Republic of Moldova

Tel: +373 22 234 795

Fax: +373 22 234 797

Email: secretariat@justice.gov.md

Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration of
the Republic of Moldova

31 August 1989 Street, 80

Chisinau MD-2012

Republic of Moldova

Tel: +373 22 578 207
Fax: +373 22 232 302
Email: secdep@mfa.md

. The Claimant and the Respondent will hereinafter be referred to jointly as the

“Parties”. The Respondent may hereinafter be referred to as “the Republic of
Moldova” or the Respondent.

Procedural History

- On 9 June 2016, the Claimant filed an Application for the Appointment of an

Emergency Arbitrator and for an Emergency Decision on Interim Measures (the
“Application”) with the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of
Commerce (the “SCC”), pursuant to Appendix II of the 2010 SCC Arbitration Rules.

. In its Application the Claimant confirmed, inter alia, that the SCC had jurisdiction

over the dispute between the Parties and that the relevant fees in the total sum of EUR
15,000 had been transferred to the SCC’s account.!

. On 9 June 2016, the SCC Secretariat sent the Application and its exhibits to the

Respondent by courier and by email, pursuant to Article 3 of Appendix II of the 2010
SCC Arbitration Rules. The receipts issued by the courier service provider and the
corresponding signatures of the recipients apposed on the delivery sheet of the courier
service provider, together with the reading receipts of the emails sent by the SCC,
which the SCC has communicated to the Emergency Arbitrator, show that the SCC’s
notification of the Application was received by the Respondent. Copies of these
receipts are attached hereto. According to the SCC Secretariat the Respondent did not
make any contact with the SCC further to the SCC’s notification.

. By letter of 10 June 2016, the SCC Secretariat informed the Parties, inter alia, that the

SCC Board appointed as Emergency Arbitrator (the “Emergency Arbitrator”):

José Rosell

Bredgade 30

DK-1260 Kopenhavn K

Denmark

Tel: +33.6.08.72.67.22

E-mail: jose.rosell@arb-intal.com

- In its letter of 10 June 2016, the SCC Secretariat also informed the Parties that the

SCC did not manifestly lacked jurisdiction over this dispute and that the seat of the
emergency proceedings shall be Stockholm.

» On 10 June 2016, the SCC Secretariat sent by email a letter to the Emergency

Arbitrator, with copy to the Parties, whereby it referred the Application, together with

 

" Exhibit C-1.

the exhibits attached thereto, to the Emergency Arbitrator. In addition, the SCC
Secretariat informed the Emergency Arbitrator that the emergency decision should be
made by 15 June 2016 and that the costs of the emergency proceedings would be
finally determined when the emergency decision would be made. A copy of this letter
was also sent to the Parties.

. By letter dated 10 June 2016, the Emergency Arbitrator:

(a) invited the Respondent to inform the Emergency Arbitrator, the
Claimant and the SCC, as to whether the Respondent would be
represented by an outside counsel in the emergency
proceedings, no later than 10 June 2016,

(b) directed the Respondent to submit an answer to the Claimant’s
Application, no later than 11 June 2016,

(c) invited the Parties to inform the Emergency Arbitrator, as to
whether the emergency decision to grant or to deny the interim
measures requested by the Claimant should take the form of an
order or an award, no later than 10 June 2016.

. The said Emergency Arbitrator’s letter of 10 June 2016 was sent to the Parties by

email. With respect to the Claimant, the Emergency Arbitrator used the email
addresses, which were requested by the Claimant in its Application.” With respect to
the Respondent, the Emergency Arbitrator used the email addresses proposed by the
Claimant’, ie. secretariat@justice.gov.md and secdep@mfa.md. The Emergency
Arbitrator has sent all the subsequent communications by email to the aforementioned
email addresses. None of the emails sent by the Emergency Arbitrator to the Parties
were rejected by the recipients.

- By email dated 10 June 2016, the Respondent informed the Emergency Arbitrator,

with copy to the Respondent, that the decision on the interim measures should take
the form of an award, as permitted by Article 32(3) of the 2010 SCC Arbitration
Rules.

- By email dated 11 June 2016, the Emergency Arbitrator took note that the Respondent

did not reply to the Emergency Arbitrator’s letter of 10 June 2016, and asked the
Respondent whether it wished to submit any comments.

. By email of the same date, ie. 11 June 2016, the Respondent stated that it had no

further comments.

-On 11 June 2016, the Emergency Arbitrator informed the Parties that he will

commence the drafting of the award.

 

* At #8.

* Application, #10

16. By email dated 12 June 2016, the Emergency Arbitrator took note that the Respondent
had decided not to submit a reply to the Application within the time frame fixed in the
Emergency Arbitrator’s letter of 10 June 2016, and declared the emergency
proceedings closed.

17. The Respondent has not participated in these emergency proceedings and has not
made any contact with the Emergency Arbitrator; consequently the Emergency
Arbitrator will solely refer herein to the positions expressed by the Claimant in the
Application, and to the exhibits it has submitted in support of its allegations.

Ill. Summary of the Dispute

18. The Claimant contends that the Respondent has breached various provisions of the
Convention between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government
of the Republic of Moldova on Encouragement and Mutual Protection of Investments
dated 17 March 1998 ( the “Treaty”), which was ratified by the Respondent on 9 July
1998 and by the Russian Federation on 28 May 2001.4

19. The Claimant alleges that by acquiring 10,160 shares (the “Shares”) in JSC
“Moldova Agroindbank” Commercial Bank® (the “Bank”), a Moldovan bank founded
in 1991, made an investment, which was approved by the National Bank of Moldova
(the “National Bank”). The Claimant further alleges that the National Bank is an
organ of the Respondent, and, therefore, the latter is responsible and accountable for
the National Bank’s actions under the Treaty.

20. The Shares were acquired by the Claimant on or about 17 April 2015. On or about 24
April 2015, the National Bank requested the Claimant to provide various documents
and information in order to carry out a review of the Bank’s shareholders. The
Claimant provided the documents and information on 6 August 2015.°

2

. The Claimant participated in two shareholders’ meetings of the Bank on 24 April
2015 and 22 September 2015, respectively. The National Bank did not raise any
complaints regarding the Claimant’s shareholding in the Bank or its participation in
these two shareholders’ meetings.’

2

v

- Between 12 January 2016 and 24 February 2016, the National Anti-Corruption Center
decided to block the Shares for short period of times, which were, thereafter, extended.
by the Buyukan district court in Chisinau for a longer period.®

 

* Exhibit C-2.

2 According to the Claimant the spelling in Moldovan language is BC “Moldova-Agroindbank”S.A.
° Exhibit C-11.

7 Exhibit C-12.

* Exhibits C-13, C-14, C-15 and C-16.

23. On 2 March 2016, the National Bank issued the decision No. 43 (the “Decision aB”y,
which came into effect on the same date, whereby it decided that:

i. the Claimant and 19 other shareholders in the Bank (the “Decision 43
Investors”) were acting in concert and had acquired a “substantial
share” in the share capital of the Bank without the National Bank’s
permission (paragraph 1 of the operative part of the Decision 43),

ii. most of the shareholders rights of the Decision 43 Investors were
immediately suspended, such as the right to vote, to call and hold
general shareholders meetings, to add questions to the agenda, to
nominate candidates for the Council of the Bank, the management
bodies and the audit committee, and to receive dividends (paragraph 2
of the operative part of the Decision 43),

iii. the Decision 43 Investors had to dispose of their shares in the Bank
within a 3-month period from the date of the Decision 43, failing
which their shares would be cancelled, pursuant to Article 15-6(3) of
the Moldovan Law on Financial Institutions No. 550 dated 21 July
1995 (the “Financial Institutions Law”) (paragraph 3 of the operative
part of the Decision 43).'°

24.On 16 March 2016, the National Anti-Corruption Center sent a letter to the
Claimant’s security broker, requiring the latter to notify the National Bank of any
attempts by the Claimant to dispose of the Shares.!

25. The Claimant requested the National Bank to annul the Decision 43, but the National
Bank rejected such request on 7 April 2016."

26. On the same date, i.e. 7 April 2016, the National Commission of the Financial Market
of Moldova (the “Commission”) issued the decree No. 15/2 “On stages, terms,
sequence and procedures of the annulment of shares and issuance of new shares in
JSC “Moldova Agroindbank” Commercial Bank” ( “Decree 15/2”).'> This decree
was issued to implement the provisions of the Decision 43. According to the Claimant
the Commission is an organ of the Respondent, and is thus responsible and
accountable for Commissions’ actions under the Treaty.'*

27. The Claimant contends that the Commission (i) did not have any authority to issue the
Decree 15/2 because it is not supposed to regulate banks and (ii) breached Article 46
of the Moldova’s Constitution, which provides that no person should be deprived of

° Exhibit C-18,
”° Exhibit C-19.
" Exhibit C-17.
” Exhibit C-20.
'S Exhibit C-21.

'* Application, #35.

Vv.

his property other than in case of public need as established by law and on the
condition of fair and prior compensation.

28. In addition, the Claimant alleges that the Decree 15/2 contains unreasonable, arbitrary
and/or punitive provisions and that the Claimant is independent and is not acting in
concert with the other Decision 43 Investors with whom the Claimant is not in any
way connected.

29. Moreover, the Bank’s CEO has publicly confirmed that the Bank’s management will
proceed to cancel the shares belonging to the Decision 43 Investors, by reducing the
Bank’s share’s capital by 43.11%.

30. The Claimant contends that there exists a grave and tangible risk that all the Shares
will be cancelled, due to the fact that the 2 June 2016 deadline stipulated in the
Decision 43 to sell them has elapsed. Indeed, pursuant to Article 15-6(3) of the
Financial Institutions Law, the management board of the Bank is now obliged to pass
a resolution to cancel the Shares within 15 days, ie. by 17 June 2016.

Interim Relief Sought by the Claimant

31. The Claimant requests the Emergency Arbitrator to order that:

(a) the National Bank refrain from taking any further steps concerning the
enforcement/implementation of the provisions of (i) paragraph 2 and 3 of the
operative part of its Decision No. 43 and (ii) paragraph 7 of the Decree No. 15/2
issued by the Commission on 7 April 2016,

(b) the Commission refrain from taking any further steps concerning the
enforcement/implementation of the provisions of paragraph 2 of Decree 15/2, and

(c

2

the Respondent (whether acting through the national Bank and/or the
Commission or otherwise) refrain from otherwise interfering with the Claimant’s
shareholding in the Bank, including (but not limited to) from taking any further
steps relating to the cancellation of the Shares,

pending resolution of the present dispute by way of a final award on the merits.

The Arbitration Agreement
32. Article 10 of the Treaty provides that:

“1. Any dispute between one Contracting Party and investor of the other
Contracting Party which occurred in connection with investment, including the
disputes connected with amount, terms and conditions, procedure of payment of
compensation provided in the article 6 of this Convention, or procedure of
payment of compensation provided in the article 8 of this Convention, will be the
subject of written notification followed by detailed comments which will be sent
by investor to the Contracting Party involved in the dispute.

A.1. The Applicability of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules

37. The Claimant submitted the Application on the basis of Article 1 of Appendix II to
the 2010 SCC Arbitration Rules and contended that the dispute of the Parties should
be resolved in accordance thereto, since Article 10 of the Treaty includes a reference
to the SCC Arbitration Rules.'

38. As mentioned in paragraph 18 above, the Treaty is dated 17 March 1998, and was
ratified by the Respondent on 9 July 1998 and by the Russian Federation on 28 May
2001. At the time of the signature of the Treaty, the 1988 version of the SCC
Arbitration Rules were applicable. During the period between the signature and the
ratification of the Treaty by the Russian Federation, the new 1999 version of the SCC
Arbitration Rules came into effect. Thus, the contracting parties were aware that,
during this period the SCC Arbitration Rules mentioned in Article 10 of the Treaty
had been amended. Nonetheless, no specific mention or agreement was made
regarding the version of the SCC Arbitration Rules that should apply to the disputes
between one contracting state and the investors of the other contracting state. If, the
contracting parties wished to be bound by a specific version of the SCC Arbitration
Rules, they were free to make an agreement in this regard.

39. Therefore, it is fair to assume that when the contracting parties to the Treaty included
a reference to the SCC Arbitration Rules, they anticipated that the SCC Arbitration
Rules could be further amended in the future, as this is the case for the major
arbitration rules,

40. This assumption is consistent with Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
the Treaties, which provides that the relevant provision of the treaty should be
interpreted, infer alia, in accordance with its meaning, context and in light of its
object and purpose.

41.

Therefore, it can be concluded that ratione temporis the 2010 SCC Arbitration Rules
can apply to the disputes, which may arise out of the Treaty, while the 2010 SCC
Arbitration Rules are in force.

42. The following question to be addressed is whether the provisions related to the
Emergency Arbitration contained in the 2010 version of the SCC Arbitration Rules
can apply to the disputes related to the Treaty, since the emergency arbitration
proceedings were neither contemplated in the 1988 version, nor in the 1999 version of
the SCC Arbitration Rules.

4

&

. The Preamble of the 2010 version provides that:
“Under any arbitration agreement referring to the Arbitration

Rules of the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of
Commerce (the “Arbitration Rules”) the parties shall be

"” Application, ##1, 13 and 56.

deemed to have agreed that the following rules, or such
amended rules, in force on the date of the commencement of
the arbitration, or the filing of an application for the
appointment of an Emergency Arbitrator, shall be applied
unless otherwise agreed by the parties.”

44. Since Article 10 of the Treaty refers to the SCC Arbitration Rules and its Preamble
provides that the parties are deemed to have agreed to the rules contained therein, the
contracting parties to the Treaty are deemed to have agreed to the provisions
contained in Appendix II of the 2010 SCC Arbitration Rules, in the absence of an opt
out agreement between the contracting parties'®, as this is the case in this emergency
arbitration.

45. The Claimant, on his side, by filing the Application has agreed to the Respondent’s
standing offer to arbitrate under the SCC Arbitration Rules, for the duration of the
validity of the Treaty, as contemplated therein; the SCC Arbitration Rules applicable
are those in force at the time of such filing, i.e. the 2010 SCC Arbitration Rules.

46. The commentators of the 2010 SCC Arbitration Rules confirmed that the Emergency
Arbitrator Rules are available to the parties, regardless the date when the arbitration
agreement was made. Thus, they are applied retroactively to arbitration agreements
entered into prior to the effective date of the 2010 SCC Arbitration Rules.!”

47. Based on the foregoing analysis, the Emergency Arbitrator concludes that it has,
prima facie, jurisdiction under the 2010 SCC Arbitration Rules.2°

A.2. Claimant is an Investor having made an Investment under the Treaty

48. The Claimant states that it is a legal entity incorporated in accordance with Russian
laws in the Russian Federation and is registered in Saint Petersburg, Russian
Federation.”! The Claimant also contends that it is an ‘investor’ under the Treaty.”

49. The Claimant states that, on or about 17 April 2016, it acquired the Shares for USD
615,757.58, using its own financial resources obtained as a result of its operational
activity and, as a consequence, it made an investment, The Claimant contends that the
Shares are an ‘investment’ under the Treaty.”?

 

'S International Arbitration in Sweden. A practitioner's Guide, Ulf Franke, Annette Magnusson, Jakob
Ragnwaldh and Martin Wallin (eds), p.111, Exhibit CA-8., n. 41

” bid.

?° A similar conclusion was reached in a recent Award on Emergency Measures in Evrobalt LLC v the Republic
of Moldova (SCC Emergency Arbitration EA 2016/082, ##24-30, Exhibit CA-7.

*! Application, #6; Exhibit C-4.
® Application, #17.

3 Application, ##18 and 27.

   

 

50. Based on the foregoing the Emergency Arbitrator concludes, prima facie, that the
Claimant qualifies as an ‘investor’ under Article 1(1) of the Treaty and that the
acquisition of the Shares by the Claimant qualifies as an ‘investment’ under Article
1(2) of the Treaty.

A.3. The Cooling-Off Period

51. Article 10(1) of the Treaty provides that “[t]he Parties in dispute [i.e. the investor and
the host state] will try, as far as possible, to resolve such dispute amicably”.

52. Furthermore, Article 10(2) of the Treaty provides that “[i]/the dispute is not resolved
in such a way within six months from the date of written notification” (the “Cooling-
Off Period”), which is mentioned in Article 10(1) of the Treaty, the dispute can,
thereafter, be submitted to arbitration.

53. The Claimant has sent the written notice to the Respondent as required under Article
10(2), on 2 June 2016 (the “Notice of Dispute”).”4

54. Although the Cooling-Off Period has not yet expired, the Claimant contends that it is
entitled to apply for the appointment of an emergency arbitrator and for an emergency
decision on interim measures for various reasons, as set out in its Application?’, which
may be summarized as follows:

(a)the Cooling-Off is limited, if at all applicable, to commencement of
substantive arbitration proceedings. If it would apply to appointment of an the
Emergency Arbitrator then the Emergency Arbitrator procedure would be
deprived of its purpose as means of providing urgent interim relief prior to the
formation of the arbitral tribunal,

(b) it would be unequitable and procedurally unfair to the Claimant if the
Cooling-Off period would apply to the appointment of an Emergency
Arbitrator, because interim measures could not be ordered as a matter of
urgency and the Claimant would suffer serious and irreparable harm,

(c) the Cooling-Off Period does not apply in this case due to the effect of the
most favored nation clause, which is contained in Article 3 of the Treaty,

(d) the Claimant attempted to resolve this dispute amicably, as explained below,

(e) even if, the Cooling-Off Period would apply an Emergency Arbitrator ought
to be appointed and interim measures ought to be made in this dispute for the
following reasons:

i. The Cooling-Off Period is a mere procedural requirement,
directory and discretionary in nature, such that failure to
comply does not affect the arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction. In
support of this argument the Claimant relies on the following

* Exhibit C-10.

* At #25

iii.

?° Exhibit CA-4.
*7 Exhibit CA-5.
°8 Application, #25 f) ii), and #26.

” Ibid.

12

awards: Ronald S. Lauder v Czech Republic®® and Biwater
Gauff Tanzania) Limited v United Republic of Tanzania.”

Article 10 of the Treaty provides that the dispute should be
resolved by amicable means where possible. However, the
Claimant’s attempts proved impossible, since the Respondent
failed to engage in such attempts. Among these attempts, the
Claimant refers to the Notice of Dispute dated 2 June 2016,
which requested that the Respondent should respond by 10
June 2016 due to the urgency of the matter. According to the
Claimant, the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Moldova
provided a response on 3 June 2016, stating that the Ministry of
Justice was not authorized to conduct negotiations with regard
to the resolution of this dispute and was not in a position to take
any actions aimed at suspending the National Bank’s Decision
43 or the Decree 15/2, and that it deemed feasible and desirable
to continue with measures aimed at amicable resolution of the
dispute, including by way of negotiations with the National
Bank. **

Non-compliance with a notice of period does not affect a
tribunal’s jurisdiction when the negotiations are futile and when
the notice period set forth in the Treaty has elapsed by the time
the tribunal considers the matter, both of which are the case
here, as alleged by the Claimant. In support of this latter
argument, the Claimant relies on the words of the tribunal in
the Biwatter Gauff’s case.” In support of the futility argument,
the Claimant cites Professor Schreuer, who considers, in
particular, that “the decisive criterion for disregarding the
waiting periods in the cases when the claimants had not
complied with them was the evident futility of any negotiations”
and that “/t/here would be no point in requiring negotiations if
negotiations were not likely to lead to a settlement” The
Claimant also relies on the Biwatter Gauff’s case in which the
tribunal concluded that declining jurisdiction on the basis of
non-compliance with a notice period “would have curious
effects”, including “forcing the claimant to do nothing until six
months have elapsed, even where further negotiations are

°° Christoph Schreuer, 7ravelling the BIT Route. Of Waiting Periods, Umbrella Clauses and Forks in the Road,
5(2) J. World Inv. & Trade 231, 248-249 (2004), Exhibit CA-6.

55

56.

Ix.

57.

58.

59.

*" [bid.

13

obviously futile, or settlement obviously impossible for any
2 31
reason”.

iv. Considering the utmost urgency, the Claimant argues that it is
important that it is able to submit the Application without delay
and subsequently commence substantive arbitral proceedings
within the 30 days of the Emergency Arbitrator’s Decision in
order to avoid that the latter ceases to be binding pursuant to
Article 9 of Appendix II of the 2010 SCC Arbitration Rules.

On this issue, the Emergency Arbitrator considers that, in this case, the Cooling-Off
Period provided for in the Treaty is not applicable, primarily due to the Respondent’s
refusal to engage in settlement discussions when it received the Notice of Dispute.
Indeed, Article 10(1) includes the language “as far as possible”, which implies that
when the parties are not able to resolve the dispute amicably, then the investor is
entitled to submit the dispute to arbitration, pursuant to Article 10(2) of the Treaty.
The Claimant has sent a Notice of Dispute containing detailed comments to the
Respondent, as required in Article 10(1) of the Treaty. On his side, the Respondent
has not made possible the amicable settlement of the dispute by refusing to negotiate
with the Claimant.

In these circumstances, the Emergency Arbitrator concludes that since the dispute was
not resolved within the Cooling-Off Period due to the Respondent’s attitude, the
Claimant became entitled to refer the dispute to arbitration, as provided for in Article
10(2) of the Treaty, without having to wait until the expiration of the six-month
period. Since this finding suffices to exclude the requirement of the Cooling-Off
Period, the Emergency Arbitrator does not deem necessary to examine the other
grounds developed by the Claimant, in respect of this issue.

The Standards to be met for the granting of Interim Measures

The powers of the Emergency Arbitrator with respect to the issuance of Interim
Measures derive from Article 1 of the Appendix II of the 2010 SCC Arbitration
Rules, which refer to Article 32 (1)-(3) of these rules.

Thus, the powers of the Emergency Arbitrator are the same than those conferred to
the arbitral tribunals under Article 32(1) of the 2010 SCC Arbitration Rules, which
provides that:

“The Arbitral Tribunal may, at the request of a party, grant any
interim measures it deems appropriate.”

The scope of these powers is sufficiently wide to enable the Emergency Arbitrator to
grant the measures sought by the Claimant in this emergency arbitration. However,

14
Article 32 does not specify the standards, which have to be met by the Claimant in
order to obtain the requested interim measures.

60. According to the Claimant, the standards to be met by its request for interim measures
should be determined in accordance with Swedish law.*

6

- This position is consistent with the SCC Board’s decision to fix Stockholm as the
place of this emergency arbitration.*?

62. Since Swedish law is the Jex arbitrii in this case, the Emergency Arbitrator has taken
into account Article 25(4) of the Swedish Arbitration Act, which provides that the
arbitrators have the authority to grant interim measures, unless the parties have agreed
otherwise. Therefore, both the 2010 SCC Arbitration Rules and Swedish law gives the
relevant authority to the Emergency Arbitrator to grant interim measures in this case.

6

ow

. The Claimant submits, alternatively, that the Emergency Arbitrator can be guided by
international law, as the governing law of the Treaty.

64. Furthermore, the Claimant contends that the Emergency Arbitrator can be guided, in
particular, by Article 17-17A of the UNCITRAL Model Law on International
Commercial Arbitration (2006) (the “Model Law”). In this regard, the Claimant
refers to the Emergency Decision rendered by the distinguished emergency arbitrator
in the SCC Case No. EA 2014/072, in which the latter relied upon the Model Law
when he justified his reasoning.*4

65. The Emergency Arbitrator also considers that he can be guided by the Model Law in
order to identify the conditions for granting interim measures in international
arbitration, in the absence of any specific standards required by the Swedish
Arbitration Act.

66. The Emergency Arbitrator will now examine whether the Claimant has met the
applicable standards in order to prevail in this emergency proceedings, taking into
account that the measures requested by the Claimant seek to suspend the cancelation
process of the Shares and that the relief sought by the Claimant is pending of the
resolution of this dispute by way of a final award on the merits, as stated at the end of
paragraph 90 of the Application.

A.1. Urgency

67. The Emergency Arbitrator finds appropriate to require the Claimant to comply with
the urgency test, in particular, since Article 7 of Appendix II of the 2010 SCC
Arbitration Rules provide that the urgency is inherent in the emergency proceedings.

68. To comply with the urgency test it should be established prime facie that an imminent
harm might be caused to the applicant, if the requested interim measure is not granted

 

*» Application, #14.
* See paragraphs 25-26.

* TSIKinvest LLC v the Republic of Moldova (SCC Emergency Arbitration No. EA 2014/053), Exhibit CA-1.

15

by the emergency arbitrator before such measure can be obtained from the arbitral
tribunal.

69. The Claimant contends that it has met the urgency requirement, as explained in the
Application and in particular in paragraph 42 of the Application.

7

)

. According to the Decision 43 the Claimant was compelled to sell the Shares by 2 June
2016.*° Since the Shares were not sold, the management board of the Bank has to pass
a resolution to cancel the Shares within 15 days from that date, ie. 17 June 2016,
according to Article 15-6(3) of the Financial Institutions Law.°°

71. Based on the above mentioned texts, it is obvious that there is an imminent risk that
the Shares are cancelled by 17 June 2016. Therefore, the Emergency Arbitrator finds
that the Claimant has established that there is urgency in granting an interim relief in
order to prevent the cancelation of the Shares. However, the Emergency Arbitrator is
not convinced that there is an urgency to decide, at this stage, on the restoration of the
Claimant’s rights, as shareholder*’, for the reasons expressed below in sub-section
A3.

A.2. Prima Facie Reasonable Possibility to Succeed on the Merits

72. In its Application, the Claimant relies on two previous Emergency Decisions rendered
under the auspices of the SCC, which involved the Republic of Moldova in similar
factual circumstances.** Although the two distinguished arbitrators reached different
conclusions, both of them referred to this standard in their respective Emergency
Decisions.

73. This standard is contemplated in Article 17A(1)(a) of the Model Law, which provides
that the arbitrator has to be satisfied that there is “a reasonable possibility that the
requesting party will succeed on the merits of the claim”.

74. The Claimant has, therefore, to demonstrate that, prima facie, there is a reasonable
possibility to succeed on the merits.

75. The Claimant’s main argument in this regard is that the Decision 43 amounts to clear
breaches of its rights as a shareholder of the Bank. The Claimant denies that it acted
in concert with the other Decision 43 Investors regarding the acquisition of certain
share capital of the Bank and that it acquired the Shares without the permission of the
Bank, as stated in the Decision 43. Furthermore, the Claimant sustains that the

°° Exhibit C-18, operative part, b) 3.

* Exhibit C-19,

*” See paragraph 2 of the operative part of the Decision 43.

*8 TSIKinvest LLC v the Republic of Moldova (SCC Emergency Arbitration No. EA 2014/053), CA-1 (reference

to this case has already been made here above); Evrobalt LLC v the Republic of Moldova (SCC
Emergency Arbitration No. EA 2016/082), Exhibit CA-7.

 

16

National Bank failed to provide “any substantiated explanation or evidence” on
which the latter relied to render the Decision 43.”

7

i.

Based on the explanations developed by the Claimant in its Application and on the
exhibits submitted in support of the Claimant’s arguments, the Emergency Arbitrator
finds that, prima facie, there is a reasonable possibility that the Claimant succeeds on
the merits of the dispute before the arbitral tribunal, once it is formed. Indeed, the
Emergency Arbitrator considers that the actions of the Respondent, either directly or
through its organs, namely the National Bank and the Commission, may lead the
arbitral tribunal to determine that the Respondent has breached the provisions of the
Treaty, in particular Articles 3.1, due to the prima facie discriminatory measures that
it has taken against the Claimant.

A.3. Irreparable Harm — Substantial/Significant Prejudice

77. The Claimant submits that the test of “substantial/significant prejudice” should be
applied in this case instead of the “irreparable harm”, as required in Article 17A(1)(a)
of the Model Law and as it is often applied by ICSID Tribunals. The Claimant also
submits that it meets both criteria in this case."”

78. According to the Claimant, the latter will suffer substantial prejudice if the Decision
43 and the Decree 15/2 becomes effective. The result of this prejudice will be a
complete loss of the Claimant’s investment and, by extension, of its business in
Moldova."!

79. The Claimant claims that it seeks to protect its legal rights to ownership of the Shares,
and any and all related rights and interest which forms part of its investment in
Moldova, such as the right to participate in shareholder meetings with voting rights,
the right to appoint directors, the right to receive dividends on an indefinite basis;
those rights being protected by articles 3(1), 3(2) and 6 of the Treaty.

80. The Claimant contends that the Respondent’s actions bear the risk of indefinitely
prohibiting the Claimant form purchasing any further shares in the Bank, and have the
effect of preventing the Claimant from making investments in the banking industry in
Moldova, due to the requirement to obtain the National Bank’s prior approval prior to
the acquisition of a “substantive stake”, ie. more than 1%, in any Moldovan bank,
which may not be obtained by the Claimant based on the “integrity” criteria set forth
in Article 32(3) and (4) of the Regulation, further to the National Bank’s findings in
the Decision 43.7

* Application, #50.
* Application, footnote 34.
"' Application, #68.

“ Application, ##72-75; Exhibit C-19, Article 15-6(4); Exhibit C-12: the National Bank’s Regulation on
Holding Equity Interest in the Capital of Banks No. 127, dated 27 June 2013 (the “Regulation”), Article
71.

 

17

8

- Therefore, due to the nature of the rights mentioned above and the actions taken by
the Respondent, an award of monetary compensation would be insufficient to remedy
the forced sale of the Shares.*®

8

Nv

. The Claimant requests the Emergency Arbitrator to preserve the status quo. In support
of its request, the Claimant refers to the case PNG Sustainable Development Program
Ltd. V Independent State of Papua New Guinea.“ The Emergency Arbitrator agrees
with the Claimant that the PNG tribunal’s order the to refrain the respondent from
transferring any of the claimant’s shares to a third party supports the relief sought by
the Claimant regarding (i) the provisions of paragraph 3 of the operative part of the
Decision 43 and paragraph 7 of the Decree 15/2, and (ii) the actions that could be
taken by the Respondent with respect to the cancelation of the Shares.

83. However, the Claimant also seeks to recover its shareholding rights, which were
suspended by the Decision 43.*> The Emergency Arbitrator finds, prima facie, that the
National Bank’s decision to suspend the Claimant’s rights as shareholder, which are
mentioned in paragraph 2. of the operative part of the Decision 43 is neither
permanent nor irrevocable. Therefore, the Emergency Arbitrator considers that it is
more appropriate for the arbitral tribunal that will examine the merits of the case to
make a determination on this issue, should the Claimant decide to submit a new
request for an interim measure to this effect, at a later stage.

84. The Claimant further contends that it has also a right to safeguard the procedural
integrity of the arbitration and the enforceability of a final award, even if such
measures are directed against the judiciary, as this was the case, notably, in the ICSID
arbitration No. ARB/97/4*°, although no such request has been made by the Claimant
in this emergency proceeding. In any event, the Emergency Arbitrator does not see
how the argument related to the enforceability of a final award is relevant in the case
of an emergency award.

85. Furthermore, the Claimant states that tribunals have granted provisional measures in
order to prevent a host state from taking actions which may affect the investor’s
ability to operate its business, as this is the case here.*” However, the Emergency
Arbitrator is not convinced that this kind of requests for interim measures should be
submitted to an emergency arbitrator, unless the exceptional circumstances of the case
would justify it, which is not the case in this emergency arbitration.

86. Regarding the irreparable harm test, the Claimant quotes the Burlington tribunal:

“it is not essential that provisional measures be necessary to
prevent irreparable harm, but that the harm spared the
petitioner by such measures must be significant and that it

 

“8 Application, ##70-71, and 76.
“ Exhibit CA-9.
“ Paragraph b) 2. of the operative part.

“° Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, A.S. v Slovak Republic, Procedural Order No. 4, 11 January 1999 (Exhibit
CA-13)

*”’ Application #82.

 

 

exceeds greatly the damage caused to the party affected
thereby.”

87. In the previously cited case of PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. V
Independent State of Papua New Guinea”, the tribunal noted as follows:

“The degree of “gravity” or “seriousness” of harm that is
necessary for an order of provisional relief cannot be Specified
with precision, and depends in part on the circumstances of the
case, the nature of the relief requested and the relative harm to
be suffered by each party; suffice it to say that substantial,
serious harm, even if not irreparable, is generally sufficient to
Satisfy this element of the standard for granting provisional
measures.”

88. The Claimant, thus, stresses the trend to adopt a greater flexibility of the “substantial
prejudice” test in investor-state arbitrations and cites in this regard the UNCITRAL
case of Paushok v Mongolia’ in which the tribunal observed that “irreparable harm”
in international law has a flexible meaning”, and that “[t]he possibility of monetary

ip does not ily elimii the possible need for interim measures”.
The Emergency Arbitrator shares this view of the Paushok tribunal, which can be
applied in the present case to the extent that even if it is assumed that the Claimants
may receive certain compensation at the time of the sale of the Shares further to the
Decision 43, this compensation will not necessarily reflect the real value of the
Shares.

 

89. Based on the foregoing, the Emergency Arbitrator finds that the Claimant has
established that it is very likely that it will suffer a harm, if the Respondent is not
prevented from cancelling the Shares.

A.4. The Respondent’s Prejudice

90. The Claimant contends that the Respondent will not suffer any harm if the requested
interim relief is granted and that the Respondent will be able to proceed with the
enforcement of the Decision 43 and the Decree 15/2 if the arbitral tribunal ultimately
finds that the Respondent has not breached the provisions of the Treaty. Therefore,
the requested interim relief constitutes an appropriate and proportional measure in this
case, according to the Claimant. The latter sustains that in any event, the decisions of
the Emergency Arbitrator have a limited temporal effect, which highlights the lack of
any real prejudice.

9

- The Emergency Arbitrator finds that there is a serious likelihood that the Claimant
will suffer a significant prejudice if the Respondent is not ordered to refrain from

 

6 Burlington Resources Inc. v Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID case No. ARB/08/5, Procedural order No. 1,29 June
2009, #81, Exhibit CA-16.

® Tid.

* Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Company and CJSC Vostoknefiegaz Company v Government of
Mongolia, Order on Interim Measures, 2 September 2008, ##68-70, Exhibit CA-18.

19

cancelling the Shares. In contrast, the potential harm that may cause to the
Respondent the granting of this specific interim relief seems to be, prima facie,
limited. Therefore, an order to prevent the cancelation of the Shares would constitute
a proportional measure in this emergency arbitration.

X. Decisions
92. For the foregoing reasons, the Emergency Arbitrator:

(1) Orders that the National Bank refrain from taking any further steps concerning the
enforcement/implementation of the provisions of paragraph 3 of the operative part
of the Decision 43 and paragraph 7 of Decree 15/2 (in so far as the said provisions
of Decree 15/2 concern the National Bank);

(2) Orders that the Respondent (whether acting through the national Bank and/or the
Commission or otherwise) refrain from taking any further steps relating to the
cancellation of the Shares,

pending resolution of the present dispute by way of a final award on the merits,

93. All other requests submitted by the Claimant, which have not been granted by the
Emergency Arbitrator in paragraph 90 of this Emergency Award, are dismissed.

94. The decisions of the Emergency Arbitrator will cease to be binding in the cases set
out in Article 9(4) of the 2010 SCC Arbitration Rules

Seat of the Emergency Arbitration: Stockholm, Sweden

Date: 14 June 2016

THE EMMERGENCY ARBITRATOR

oo thd.

José Rosell

 

