EXCERPTS

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Krederi Ltd.
v.

Ukraine

ICSID Case No. ARB/14/17

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Dr. August Reinisch, President
Dr. Markus Wirth, Arbitrator
Dr. Gavan Griffith QC, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Ella Rosenberg

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 2 July 2018

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

TABLE OF CONTENTS®
I. INTRODUCTION
IT. THE PARTIES AND RELEVANT ENTITIES .

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. The Parties
B. [Company A]
C. [Company B]
D. [Company C]
E. [Company D]
Ill. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
IV. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 14
A. Case 1: [...] 15
B. Case 2: [...] 15
C. Case 3: [...] 15
D. Case 4: [...] 15
V. THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS AND REQUESTS FOR RELIEF..........:-c0cessessessessssssesseeeeseese 15
VI. JURISDICTION 15
A. The Parties’ Positions 15
(1) Respondent’s Position 15
a. Respondent has not consented to ICSID arbitration 0.0.0.0... 15

(i) There is no express consent to ICSID arbitration in the UK-Ukraine BIT
15

(ii) Consent to ICSID arbitration cannot be imported by operation of the
MEN clause at Article 3 of the UK-Ukraine BIT.
b. Claimant’s bad faith and/or illegality in making the investment preclude it
from protection under the UK-Ukraine BIT....

 

 

(i) Claimant’s investment was made in violation of Ukrainian law ............ 16
(ii) Claimant’s investment was not made in good faith or was unlawful ..... 16

c. Claimant does not qualify for protection under the UK-Ukraine BIT because

Respondent was not aware that Claimant was a foreign investor... 16

d. Claimant is not entitled to protections under the UK-Ukraine BIT because it

invested through two Ukrainian intermediaries «0.0.0.0... cece 16
(2) Claimant’s Position 16

 

* The page numbers in the Table of Contents of these Excerpts do not correspond to the original page numbers of the
Award.

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

a. There is in principle consent to ICSID arbitration in Article 8(2) BIT......... 16
b. The MFN Clause in the UK-Ukraine BIT can be interpreted as importing a

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

dispute resolution provision from another dispute resolution provision............. 16
c. Claimant’s investment was made in conformity with the laws in force in
Ukraine 16
Claimant’s investment was made in good faith... eects 16
d. 16
B.  Tribunal’s Analysis 17
(1) Introduction 17
(2) The ratione materiae and ratione personae jurisdictional requirements under
Article 25 ICSID Convention
(3) The jurisdictional requirements under the BIT ...........ccccccceesseseeseseetestesesteeetenees 19
(4) Consent to ICSID jurisdiction 21
a. Implied acceptance of ICSID jurisdiction ......0.0.. eee eee eeeeeeees 22
b. Consent to ICSID jurisdiction in Article 8 of the Treaty «0.0.0. 22
c. The UK-Ukraine BIT’s MEN clause as basis for consent.............0:0ceeee 27
(5) Investment made in violation of host State laW ..........ccccseeeceeeesesseesneeeeeeneenees 45
(6) Violation of registration requirement............0.0:ceseeseeseeeseeseeseeseeseeseseeneeseeneenees 47
(7) Credit fi i 49
(8) Investment not made in good faith/corruption allegations .............ccccceeeceeeeee 51
VIL. LIABILITY 56
A. Fair and equitable treatment 56
(1) The Parties’ Positions 56
a. Claimant’s Position 56
b. Respondent’s Position .........ccccseeseeeeseeseseeeesseeseeseseeseseseseesseeieeesseeteeeees 56
(2) Tribunal’s Analysis 56
a. Denial of Justice 59
(i) Denial of access to the COULtS........cceeceseeeeeeeeeeseeeeeseseeeeseseeeeeeaeeeeeeaeeeeee 61
(ii) Undue delay 62
(iii) Serious defects in the adjudicative process .........c cece 64
(iv) No mere misapplication of the ]aW 0.0.0... eee eeeeeeeeneeeneeeeneeees 66
(v) Exhaustion of local remedies ..........:ccccsecececeseeeeseeeeeeseseeeeseseeeeeeseneeeeaeeeeee 67

 

(vi) Limited standard of review ....
b. The Four Cases before the Ukrainian Coutts ...........cccccseseseeseseeestetestenees 72

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

 

 

(i) Case 1: ] 73
1. Jurisdiction of administrative or commercial/economic courts ......... 74
2. Challenge after expiry of statute of limitations 0.0.0.0... cee 75
3. No fair opportunity to make its CaS€ ....... ccc eee eeeeeeneneeeeee 80
4. Failure to provide third parties an opportunity to be heard................ 83

(ii) Case 2: [...]; Claim in the economic/commercial courts to invalidate the

contracts for the lease/sale of Plot 1 from KCC to [Company A] ............... 83
1. Challenge after expiry of statute of limitations «00.0.0... 84
2. Failure to provide “equality of rights of all participants” .........0..0.... 85

(iii) Case 3: [...]; Claim in the economic/commercial courts to return Plot 1
from [Company D] to KCC... eee eee ee eseeeeeeeeeseeseseneseteneeeeeneees 88

1. Lack of standing of the Prosecutor

 

2. Fundamentally wrong outcome, substantive due process violation... 90
3. Procedural due process violations in the course of the proceedings .. 93

(iv) Case 4: [...]; Claim in the economic/commercial courts to invalidate
KCC approvals for the lease and sale of Plots 2 and 3, the lease and sale
contracts and [Company A’s] ownership certificates ...........

 

 

1. Fundamentally wrong outcome, substantive due proce:
leading to the loss of Plots 2 and 3...

 

 

a) Wrong grounds for invalidation of KCC decisions.....

b) Breach of the “bilateral restitution” principle under Article 216

 

UCC 97
c) Granting a legally unavailable remedy in the form of the
invalidation of land ownership certificates ....0...0.. eee 99

 

c. Related Fair and Equitable Treatment Claims ...........000.

 

 

 

d. Harassing Criminal Investigations Against Claimant’s Subsidiaries.......... 101

B. Full Protection and Security 102
(1) The Parties’ Positions 102

a. Claimant’s Position 102

b. Respondent’s Position... ccc eeeeseeeseeeeeeeseesseeseeeeseeseeeeeeenees 102

(2) Tribunal’s Analysis 102

 

C. Unreasonable or Discriminatory Impairment of the Management, Maintenance, Use,

 

 

 

Enjoyment and Disposal of the Investment . 105
(1) The Parties’ Positions 106
a. Claimant’s Position 106
b. Respondent’s Position... ccc eeeeseeeseeeeeeeseesseeseeeeseeseeeeeeenees 106

iii

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) Tribunal’s Analysis 106
D. Expropriation 109
(1) The Parties’ Positions 109
a. Claimant’s Position 109
b. Respondent’s Position ........c.cceccseseeeeseeeeseeeeeeeeteeeeeeeeeeeteeesesseeeeeeeeeeees 109
(2) Tribunal’s Analysis 109
a. The Requirement of Due Process Under the UK-Ukraine BIT’s
Expropriation Clause 112
b. Judicial Expropriation ...0...0.cee ec cececee eee ee cece eens eeeeeeeeeeeeteeeteeeneeeees 113
E. Conclusions on Liability 116
VIII.COSTS 117
A. The Parties’ Requests as to Costs and Expenses of the Proceedings ..
(1) Claimant’s Position 117
(2) Respondent’s Position 117
B. The Tribunal’s Decision 117
IX. DECISION 124

 

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Arbitration Rules

BIT

CCU

CLA-

Claimant or Krederi

Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections

and Reply on the Merits

Claimant Memorial

Claimant Post-Hearing Brief

Claimant Rejoinder to Preliminary Objections

Claimant Submission on Costs

COB

ECHR

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

Bilateral Investment Treaty

Claimant’s Exhibits

Commercial Code of Ukraine

Claimant’s Legal Authorities

Krederi Limited

Claimant’s Defence to Preliminary
Objections and Reply on the Merits dated 16
December 2016

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits dated 20
July 2015

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief dated 29
September 2017

Claimant’s Rejoinder to Preliminary
Objections dated 17 July 2017

Claimant’s Submission on Costs dated 25
September 2017

Close of Business

European Convention on Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms dated 4 November
1950

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

ECtHR

FET

FCN

ICC

ICSID or the Centre

ICSID Convention

TIA

KCC

Krederi

MFN

No.

PCA

vi

European Court of Human Rights

Fair and equitable treatment

Friendship, Commerce and Navigation
(Treaty)

International Chamber of Commerce

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18 March 1965

International Investment Agreement

Kiev City Council

Krederi Limited

Most Favored Nation

Number

Page

Permanent Court of Arbitration

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

R-

RLA-

Request

Respondent

Respondent Counter-Memorial

Respondent Post-Hearing Brief

Respondent Rejoinder on the Merits

Respondent Reply to Preliminary Objections

Respondent Submission on Costs

SCC

Hearing transcript, [hearing day:page:line]

Treaty or UK-Ukraine BIT

UAH

Respondent’s Exhibits

Respondent’s Legal Authorities

Request for Arbitration

Ukraine

Respondent’s Preliminary Objections and
Counter-Memorial on the Merits dated 26
February 2016

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief dated 29
September 2017

Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits dated
17 July 2017

Respondent’s Reply to Preliminary
Objections dated 25 May 2017

Respondent’s Submission on Costs dated 24
September 2017

Stockholm Chamber of Commerce

Transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction and
the merits

Bilateral Investment Agreement between the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Government of Ukraine for the Promotion
and Reciprocal Protection of Investments,
dated 10 February 1993

Ukrainian Hryvnia

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

UBO

UCC

UK

UNCITRAL

US

USD

VCLT

IM

Ultimate Beneficial Owner

Ukrainian Civil Code

United Kingdom

United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law

United States of America

United States Dollars

Vienna Convention on the Law of the
Treaties, concluded in Vienna on 23 May
1969

Paragraph(s)

Vili

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Krederi Ltd.:

Professor Loukas Mistelis

Mistelis & Haddadin Ltd

26/28 Hammersmith Grove, Suite 430
London W6 7BA

United Kingdom

Ms. Maria Kitromilidou

Kannava, Kitromilidou & Co LLC
(KPK Legal)

Markou Botsari 3, 2nd & 3rd floors
3040 Limassol, Cyprus

P.O. Box 59511, 4011 Limassol
Cyprus

Ms. Oksana Malenko

Attorney's Partnership "Interactio"
55A Khoryva Street

04071 Kyiv

Ukraine

Mr. Armenak Ohanesian
Ohanesian's Law Office
Chokolivs'ky Ave, 27B-19
03087 Kyiv, Ukraine

POB 4, 04071 Kyiv
Ukraine

Dr. Harris Bor
Barrister

20 Essex Street
London WC2R 3AL
United Kingdom

Dr. Roberto Castro de Figueiredo
Advocate

Representing Ukraine:

Dr. Andrei Yakovlev
Ms. Dorothy Murray
Mr. Alexis Namdar
King Wood Mallesons
Octagon Point

St Martins Court

5 Cheapside

London, EC2V 6AA
United Kingdom

Mr. Michael Siroyezhko

Mr. Maksym Kodunov
Ministry of Justice of Ukraine
13 Horodetskogo Street
Kyiv, 01001

Ukraine

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

I. INTRODUCTION

1, This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of (i) the Agreement for the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of Ukraine,
which came into force on 10 February 1993 (““Treaty” or “UK-Ukraine BIT”);! and (ii) the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of

Other States, which entered into force on 14 October 1966 (“ICSID Convention”).”

2. The dispute relates to Claimant’s real estate investments in Ukraine, including the
acquisition of three land plots in central Kiev ([...] (Plots 1 and 3) and on [...] (Plot 2) on
which Claimant had plans to develop a multi-functional complex including a luxury hotel,
shopping area, multi-level parking, residential, office, and retail spaces. In Claimant’s
view, the land plots were lost as a result of various measures by Ukraine, most importantly
four court proceedings allegedly conducted in an irregular fashion falling short of due

process.

I. THE PARTIES AND RELEVANT ENTITIES

A. THE PARTIES

3; Claimant is Krederi Limited (“Krederi” or “Claimant’”). Krederi is incorporated under the
laws of England and Wales with company No. 6210742. It has its registered address at 20-
22 Bedford Row, London WCIR 4JS.3

4. Respondent is Ukraine (“Ukraine” or “Respondent”).

' Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Government of Ukraine for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments (London, 10 February 1993),
entered into force 10 February 1993, CE-1.

? Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and National of Other States (ICSID
Convention), (Washington D.C., 18 March 1965).

3 Articles of Association of Krederi Ltd. and Companies House Certification, CE-2.

1

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

5.

Claimant and Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The Parties’
respective representatives and their addresses are listed on page (ix) above. Although they
are not parties to the dispute, the corporate entities described below are relevant to the facts

of the case.

B. [Company A]

[J

C. [COMPANY B]

[J

D. [Company C]

[ed

E. [Company D]

TIL.

[Lod

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

Claimant submitted its Request for Arbitration (“Request”) to the Centre on | July 2014,
together with exhibits CE-1 through CE-62.

The Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request on 21 July 2014, pursuant to
Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention. In the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General.
of ICSID invited the Parties to proceed to constitute an arbitral tribunal in accordance with
Articles 37 to 40 of the ICSID Convention.

The Parties agreed that the Tribunal would be constituted in accordance with Article

37(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention and would consist of three arbitrators, one appointed by

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

each Party (“co-arbitrators”), and the third arbitrator, the President of the Tribunal, to be

appointed by a list ranking procedure.*
13. The agreed method of constitution was as follows:

(i) By 5 September 2014, Claimant would appoint an arbitrator;
(ii) By 30 September 2014, Respondent would appoint an arbitrator;

(iii) | The two party-appointed arbitrators in consultation with the Parties
would provide a list of no more than six names to both Parties by 20
October 2014;

(iv) | By 27 October 2014, each party would strike out up to two of those
names and rank the remaining names in order of preference;

(v) By 31 October 2014, the two appointed arbitrators, without further
consultation with the parties, would appoint the President of the
Tribunal from the ranked lists; and

(vi) If either Party failed to make an appointment or the two party-
appointed arbitrators were unable to reach an agreement on the
identity of the President of the Arbitral Tribunal within the specified
time limits, then the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council
would make the appointment of arbitrators or President not yet
appointed among the Parties’ ranked arbitrators list.°

14. On 5 September 2014, Claimant appointed Dr. Markus Wirth, as arbitrator, and Dr. Wirth
accepted the appointment by letter of 22 September 2014. Together with his acceptance,

Dr. Wirth provided the Parties with a declaration of his independence and impartiality.

15. Respondent attempted to appoint an arbitrator by letters of 29 September 2014, 7 October
2014, and 9 October 2014. However, each of the potential appointees could not accept their

appointments.

16. By letter of 14 October 2014, the Centre wrote to the Parties “notfing] that the Respondent

ha[d] appointed an arbitrator pursuant to the parties’ agreed method, but the appointees

+ Claimant’s communications of 6 August 2014, 21 August 2014, and 5 September 2014; Respondent's letters of 11
August 2014 and 4 September 2014.

> Letters from ICSID to the Parties of 5 September 2014 and 15 October 2014.

3

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

20.

21.

ha[d] declined their appointments. The parties’ agreement on the method of constitution of
the Tribunal [did] not foresee such circumstance.” The Centre accordingly invited the
Parties to clarify the method and/or to consult in view of amending such method, including

the remaining time limits.

By letter of 15 October 2014, Claimant proposed an amended method of constitution of
the Tribunal. By letter of the same date, Respondent appointed an arbitrator. The
Secretariat of the Centre acknowledged receipt of the Parties’ letters and (i) invited
Respondent to indicate whether it accepted Claimant’s proposed amendment to the method
of constitution of the Tribunal in this case and (ii) indicated that it would seek the

acceptance of the arbitrator appointed by Respondent.

By letter of 16 October 2014, Respondent disagreed with Claimant’s proposed amendment

to the method of constitution of the Tribunal.

By letter of 22 October 2014, given that the Parties were unable to agree on an amended
method for constituting the Tribunal, the Centre informed the Parties that “unless the
parties agree otherwise, if any arbitrators are missing on the Tribunal on October 31, 2014,

the Chairman of the Administrative Council shall make the appointment(s).”

By letter of 31 October 2014, ICSID informed the Parties that the arbitrator that
Respondent had appointed was unable to accept his appointment. The Centre invited the
Parties to inform it whether they would like to revise the method of constitution of the
Tribunal by 3 November 2014. It also advised the Parties that failing an agreement on a
revised method of constitution, and given that Respondent had been unable an appoint an
arbitrator within the agreed period of time, the Chairman of the Administrative Council
(the “Chairman”) would make this appointment from the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators

without consultation with the Parties.

Additionally, with respect to the appointment of the President of the Tribunal, ICSID
invited the Parties to also confirm, by 3 November 2014, whether they wished to maintain
the list procedure, as agreed by the Parties and set forth in the Centre’s letter of 15 October
2014, with revised deadlines. ICSID informed the Parties that failing an agreement by the

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

22.

230

24.

25.

26.

27.

Parties, the Chairman would make the appointment directly from the ICSID Panel of
Arbitrators in consultation with the Parties, as per ICSID practice.

By letter of 3 November 2014, Respondent requested an extension to Monday 10
November 2014, COB, for the Parties to seek to reach an agreement on a revised method

of constitution.

By letter of the same date, Claimant rejected Respondent’s request for an extension and

requested that the Chairman appoint an arbitrator on behalf of Respondent.

In a further letter of 3 November 2014, Respondent advised Claimant and the Centre that
it was in the process of contacting three candidates to confirm if they would be prepared to
accept an appointment, and stated that Claimant’s request for the Chairman to appoint an

arbitrator on behalf of Respondent was premature.

Also on 3 November 2014, ICSID wrote to the Parties stating that, unless and until the
Parties communicated that they had reached an alternative agreement as to the method of
the constitution of the Tribunal, the Centre would continue the process of appointment by

the Chairman starting with the appointment of the co-arbitrator.

By letter of 4 November 2014, Respondent appointed Dr. Gavan Griffith QC as arbitrator.
On 6 November 2014, ICSID informed the Parties of Dr. Griffith’s acceptance of his

appointment.

On 10 November 2014, the Centre confirmed the further agreement of the Parties

concerning the appointment of the President of the Tribunal. The Parties agreed as follows:

(i) by 25 November 2014, the two party-appointed arbitrators would provide
an agreed list of 6 names to the parties;

(ii) by 2 December 2014, the Parties would strike out up to two of those names,
and would rank the remaining names in order of preference;

(iii) by 16 December 2014, the two party-appointed arbitrators would appoint
the President of the Tribunal, and if by that date the two party-appointed
arbitrators are unable to reach agreement on the identity of the President of
the Tribunal, the Chairman of the Administrative Council shall proceed to
appoint the President of the Tribunal.

5

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

28.

29.

31.

32.

On 2 December 2014, after receiving the respective list rankings, ICSID confirmed that the
Parties had agreed to appoint Professor Albert Jan van den Berg as President of the

Tribunal.

On 4 December 2014, the Acting Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the
ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”), notified
the Parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal
was constituted. The Tribunal was composed of Professor Albert Jan van den Berg, a
national of the Netherlands, President, appointed by agreement of the Parties; Dr. Markus
Wirth, a national of Switzerland, appointed by Claimant, and Dr. Gavan Griffith QC, a
national of Australia, appointed by Respondent. Moreover, Mr. James Claxton, ICSID

Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1), the Tribunal held a first session with the
Parties on 20 February 2015, at the World Bank’s offices in Paris, France.

Following the first session, on 5 March 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. |
recording the agreement of the Parties on procedural matters. Procedural Order No. |
provides, inter alia, that the applicable Arbitration Rules are those in effect from 10 April
2006, that the procedural language is English, and that the place of the proceedings is to be
Paris, France. Procedural Order No. | sets out the agreed schedule for the jurisdictional

and merits phases of the proceedings.
In accordance with Procedural Order No. 1, it was agreed that:

(i) by 22 June 2015, Claimant would file its Memorial on the Merits;

(ii) by 21 December 2015, Respondent would file its Preliminary Objections
and Counter-Memorial on the Merits;

(iti) by 17 October 2016, Claimant would file its Defence to Preliminary
Objections and Reply on the Merits;

(iv) by 19 December 2016, the Respondent would file its Reply to
Preliminary Objections and Rejoinder on the Merits; and

(v) by 3 February 2017, the Claimant would file its Rejoinder to Preliminary
Objections.

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

33.

35.

36.

37.

39.

40.

On 30 April 2015, the Secretary-General informed the Parties that Ms. Mairee Uran-
Bidegain was appointed as the Secretary of the Tribunal in this case, replacing Mr. James

Claxton.

On 22 June 2015, the Tribunal acknowledged the Parties’ agreement to extend the deadline
for the submission of Claimant’s Memorial to 20 July 2015, and their proposal to amend

the procedural calendar for this proceeding.

On 20 July 2015, Claimant submitted its Memorial (“Claimant Memorial”), together with
exhibits CE-1 to CE-68, legal authorities CLA-1 to CLA-36 as well as six witness
als

statements, and three expert reports: [..

 

Following exchanges between the Parties, it was agreed to extend the deadline for the
submission of Respondent’s Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial
on the Merits to 16 February 2016.6

On 26 February 2016, Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial on the Merits
(“Respondent Counter-Memorial”), together with exhibits R-1 through R-107, legal
authorities RLA-1 through RLA-79, and the expert report of [...]. On 1 March 2016,

Respondent sent a correction of its supporting documentation.

By letter of 7 March 2016, the Centre requested that Respondent provide an English

translation of its exhibits submitted in Ukrainian, as required by Procedural Order No. 1.

On 9 September 2016, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID informed the Parties that
Ms. Ella Rosenberg had been appointed to serve as the Secretary of the Tribunal, replacing

Ms. Mairee Uran-Bidegain.

Also on 9 September 2016, the Parties submitted a joint request to the Tribunal regarding
a) the proposed timetable for the document production phase, and b) the possibility of

revising the hearing dates.

© Communication from ICSID of 22 July 2015; Letter from King & Wood Mallesons of 13 January 2016;
Communication from ICSID of 15 January 2016.

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

41.

42.

43.

By email of 12 September 2016, the Tribunal decided not to amend the hearing dates but
approved the Parties’ proposed changes to the timetable for the document production phase
provided that the Parties agreed on a schedule until the hearing that would maintain the

previously agreed hearing dates, i.e., 4 to 7 April 2017.

On 16 September 2016, as requested by the Tribunal, the Parties submitted a joint proposal

for a revised timetable.

Also on 16 September 2016, Claimant provided the Tribunal with its Redfem schedule and
asked the Tribunal to decide on an outstanding document request. Claimant advised the
Tribunal that all the other requests made by the Parties had been agreed and all documents

would be produced accordingly.

On 19 September 2016, the Tribunal approved the Parties’ joint proposal for the procedural

calendar. The timetable established was as follows:

. 14 October 2016: Document production (as ordered of non-objected
documents);

. 14 December 2016: Claimant to file its Defence to Preliminary Objections
and Reply on Merits;

. 24 February 2017: Respondent to file Reply to Preliminary Objections and
Rejoinder on Merits;

. 17 March 2017: Claimant to file Rejoinder to Preliminary Objections;

. 28 February 2017: Parties’ notification of witnesses and experts;
. 21 March 2017: Pre-hearing organizational teleconference;
. 3 to 7 April 2017: Hearing on jurisdiction and the merits;

. 28 April 2017: Parties to file post-hearing memorials;
. 19 May 2017: Parties to file reply post-hearing memorials;

. 2 June 2017: Parties to file their respective submissions on costs.

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

Also on 19 September 2016, the Tribunal issued a decision on Claimant’s outstanding

document request.

On 26 September 2016, Respondent wrote to the Tribunal requesting alternate hearing
dates. Respondent cited insufficient time in the current timetable for the Parties to
adequately prepare for the hearing as no documents had been exchanged and further

material submissions and evidence had yet to be advanced.

On 4 October 2016, the Tribunal noted that Respondent’s power of attorney on file had
expired and invited Respondent to provide either a current power of attorney or another
document executed by Respondent confirming that its counsel was duly authorized to
represent Ukraine in these proceedings. Subsequently, on 2 November 2016, Respondent

provided a power of attorney covering the period up to 31 December 2016.

Following exchanges between the Parties and the Tribunal, on 13 October 2016, the
Tribunal confirmed that the hearing dates would be moved to 4-8 September 2017, and
requested the Parties to provide a joint proposal for the remainder of the procedural

calendar.
On | November 2016, the procedural calendar was amended as follows:

. 16 December 2016: Claimant to file its Defence to Preliminary Objections
and Reply on Merits;

. 24 April 2017: Respondent to file its Reply to Preliminary Objections and
Rejoinder on Merits;

. 5 June 2017: Claimant to file its Rejoinder to Preliminary Objections;
. 7 July 2017: Parties’ notification of witnesses and experts;

. 14 August 2017: Pre-hearing organizational teleconference;

. 4-8 September 2017: Hearing on jurisdiction and the merits;

. 29 September 2017: Both Parties to file post-hearing memorials;

. 20 October 2017: Both Parties to file reply post-hearing memorials;

. 17 November 2017: Both Parties to file their respective costs submission.

9

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

50.

Sk.

52.

53.

54,

On 16 December 2016, Claimant submitted its Defence to Preliminary Objections and
Reply on the Merits (“Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the
Merits”) together with exhibits CE-72 to CE-81 and legal authorities CLA-37 to CLA-61.

On 27 December 2016, the Tribunal noted that Respondent’s power of attorney on file was
set to expire on 31 December 2016, and invited Respondent to provide either a current
power of attorney or other document executed by Respondent confirming that its counsel
was duly authorized to represent Ukraine in these proceedings. As no answer had been
received, on 6 February 2017, the Secretariat requested an update from Respondent on the

status of its power of attorney.

By letter of 27 March 2017, the Centre informed the Parties that
Professor Albert Jan van den Berg had submitted his resignation in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 8(2). Pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 10(2), the proceeding was
suspended until the vacancy resulting from the resignation of Professor van den Berg could
be filled. As contemplated by ICSID Arbitration Rule 11(1), the vacancy was to be filled
using the same method by which his appointment was made. Following exchanges between

the Parties, an agreed protocol and timetable for the replacement process was established.

On 20 April 2017, after receiving the respective list rankings, ICSID confirmed that the
Parties had agreed to appoint Professor August Reinisch, a national of Austria, as President
of the Tribunal and that the Tribunal was reconstituted. Its members are: Prof. August
Reinisch (Austrian), President, appointed by his co-arbitrators in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 11(1); Dr. Markus Wirth (Swiss), appointed by Claimant; and Gavan
Griffith QC (Australian), appointed by Respondent. The proceeding was resumed pursuant
to ICSID Arbitration Rule 12.

By letter of 9 May 2017, the Tribunal established the following procedural calendar:

. 22 May 2017: Respondent to file its Reply to Preliminary Objections and
Rejoinder on the Merits;

. 5 July 2017: Claimant to file its Rejoinder to Preliminary Objections;

. 28 July 2017: Parties’ notification of witnesses and experts;

10

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

. The pre-hearing meeting was to take place, as planned, on 14 August 2017
and all of the remaining dates as regards the hearing and post-hearing
matters were to remain unaffected.

Following exchanges between the Parties, on 12 May 2017, the Tribunal granted
Respondent’s request for an extension to file its Reply to Preliminary Objections. As a

result, a new procedural calendar was established as follows:

. 25 May 2017: Respondent to file its Reply to Preliminary Objections and
Rejoinder on Merits;

. 8 July 2017: Claimant to file Rejoinder to Preliminary Objections;
. 8 July 2017: Respondent to file Rejoinder on the Merits;

. 28 July 2017: Parties’ notification of witnesses and experts;

. All remaining dates remain unchanged.

On 25 May 2017, Respondent submitted its Reply to Preliminary Objections (“Respondent
Reply to Preliminary Objections”), with legal authorities RLA-80 to RLA-93 and the
expert report of [...]. In addition, Respondent stated with regards to its power of attorney

the following:

Subsequently, on 29 August 2017, Respondent provided an updated power of attorney
covering the period up to 31 December 2017.

On 13 July 2017, the Tribunal approved the Parties’ agreement to extend the deadline for
the submission of Claimant’s Rejoinder to Preliminary Objections and Respondent’s
Rejoinder on the Merits to 17 July 2017.

Accordingly, on 17 July 2017, Claimant filed its Rejoinder to Preliminary Objections
(Claimant Rejoinder to Preliminary Objections”), together with legal authorities CLA-62
through CLA-71.

Also on 17 July 2017, Respondent filed its Rejoinder on the Merits (“Respondent Rejoinder
on the Merits”), together with the Second Expert Report of [...], the First Expert Opinion

11

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

of [...], the First Expert Opinion of [...] as well as exhibits R-108 through R-123 and legal
authorities RLA-94 through RLA-122.

A pre-hearing procedural teleconference was held on 14 August 2017, regarding the
organization of the hearing to be held from 4 to 8 September 2017, at the World Bank in

Paris, France.

On 15 August 2017, Respondent requested that the witness statement of [...] be stricken
from the record since Claimant’s counsel had informed that [...] would not be attending

the hearing.

On 17 August 2017, Claimant submitted observations on Respondent’s request for the
exclusion of [...]’s evidence, and filed a request to submit a new legal authority, OAO
Tatneft v. Ukraine, (PCA Case No. 118005), Award on the Merits, dated 29 July 2014. By
letter of the same date, Respondent objected to Claimant’s request of 17 August 2017.

On 19 August 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 concerning the
organization of the hearing to be held from 4 to 8 September 2017 at the World Bank in
Paris, France. In particular, Procedural Order No. 2 established the agreed allocation of
time between the Parties, the manner of time keeping, the sequence of the hearing, the list
of witnesses and experts, as well as the scope and manner of witness and expert

examination.

In addition, in Procedural Order No. 2, the Tribunal settled the two outstanding applications
of the Parties. The Tribunal decided not to allow [...]’s evidence to be kept on record,
however allowed Claimant to introduce the contents of the witness statement as part of its
submission. It also granted Claimant’s request to add a new legal authority, OAO Tatneft
vy. Ukraine, (PCA Case No. 118005), Award on the Merits, dated 29 July 2014.

Pursuant to Section 45 of Procedural Order No. 2, by letter of 21 August 2017, the Tribunal

invited the Parties to address, inter alia, the following matters at the upcoming hearing:

i The jurisdictional issue of consent to ICSID arbitration under the BIT as
well as the question of consent “importation” via the Treaty’s MEN clause;

12

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

ii. the lawfulness of the investment (financing, registration);

iii. the standard of review of domestic court proceedings appropriate under
BIT protection standards;

iv. the application of BIT protection standards regarding the conduct of the
four cases; expropriation by denial of justice; and

v. valuation issues.

67. A hearing on jurisdiction and the merits was held in Paris from 4 to 8 September 2017 (the

“Hearing”). The following persons were present at the Hearing:

Tribunal:
Professor Dr. August Reinisch
Dr. Markus Wirth
Dr. Gavan Griffith, QC

ICSID Secretariat:
Ms. Ella Rosenberg

For Claimant:
Professor Loukas Mistelis
Dr. Harris Bor
Dr. Roberto Castro de Figueiredo

Ms. Oksana Malenko
Mr. Armenak Ohanesian

For Respondent:
Dr. Andrei Yakovlev
Ms. Dorothy Murray
Mr. Alexis Namdar
Mr. Edmund Northcott
Mr. Andrei Kolupaev
Mr. Tatiana Kolga
Mr. Igor Nagai
Mr. Michael Siroyezhko
Mr. Artem Zubko

Court Reporter:
Ms. Diana Burden
Ms. Laurie Carlisle

President
Arbitrator
Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal

Mistelis & Haddadin

20 Essex Street

Tauil & Chequer Advogados in
Association with Mayer Brown LLP

Mistelis & Haddadin
Mistelis & Haddadin

KWM Europe LLP
KWM Europe LLP
KWM Europe LLP
KWM Europe LLP
Lexwell & Partners
Lexwell & Partners
Lexwell & Partners
Ukrainian Ministry of Justice
Ukrainian Ministry of Justice

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

68.

69.

70.

71.

Interpreters:
Ms. Ludmila Davis
Mr. Boris Kovaltchouk
Mr. Oleks Nesnov

During the Hearing, the following persons were examined:

On behalf of Claimant:
bel

On behalf of Respondent:
bel

The Parties filed simultaneous post-hearing briefs on 29 September 2017 (“Claimant Post-
Hearing Brief’ and “Respondent Post-Hearing Brief’). By letter of 5 October 2017,
Claimant filed objections to certain points raised by Respondent in its post-hearing brief.
On 10 October 2017, Respondent filed a response to Claimant’s observations of 5 October
2017.

Respondent filed its submission on costs on 24 November 2017 (“Respondent Submission
on Costs”), and Claimant filed its submission on costs on 25 November 2017 (“Claimant

Submission on Costs”).

The proceeding was closed on 26 June 2018.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

A. CASE 1: [

J

 

B. Case 2: [...]

C. CASE 3: [...]

D. CASE 4: [...]

Vv.

VI.

THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS AND REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

JURISDICTION

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

(1) Respondent’s Position

 

[..J
a. Respondent has not d to ICSID arbi
[..]
(i) There is no express consent to ICSID arbitration in the UK-
Ukraine BIT
[..]
(ii) Consent to ICSID arbitration cannot be imported by operation of
the MEN clause at Article 3 of the UK-Ukraine BIT
LJ
b. Claimant’s bad faith and/or illegality in making the investment preclude it
from protection under the UK-Ukraine BIT
[J

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

(i) Claimant’s investment was made in violation of Ukrainian law

(ii) Claimant’s investment was not made in good faith or was unlawful

c. Claimant does not qualify for protection under the UK-Ukraine BIT because
Respondent was not aware that Claimant was a foreign investor

d. Claimant is not entitled to protections under the UK-Ukraine BIT because it

invested through two Ukrainian intermediaries

(2) Claimant’s Position

a. There is in principle consent to ICSID arbitration in Article 8(2) BIT

b. The MFN Clause in the UK-Ukraine BIT can be interpreted as importing a dispute
resolution provision from another dispute resolution provision

c.  Claimant’s investment was made in conformity with the laws in force in Ukraine

d. Claimant’s investment was made in good faith

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

B. TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

232.

233.

234,

235.

236.

(1) Introduction

This Tribunal must first decide whether it has jurisdiction which requires that the
conditions of Article 25 ICSID Convention are fulfilled including, most importantly, that

the Parties have consented to the jurisdiction of the Centre and thus of this Tribunal.”

In fact, the Parties’ difference of views has centred on the ratione voluntatis issue of
whether Respondent has effectively consented to ICSID jurisdiction. While the Parties
have not focused on the ratione materiae and ratione personae requirements under Article
25 of the ICSID Convention, it is clear that the Tribunal has to satisfy itself that such

requirements are also fulfilled.

Further, it will address the specific jurisdictional/admissibility challenges raised by
Respondent which has argued that the investment was neither made in accordance with

host State law nor in good faith and would thus not merit protection under the Treaty.

(2) The ratione materiae and ratione personae jurisdictional requirements under
Article 25 ICSID Convention

Claimant has asserted* that the ratione materiae and ratione personae jurisdictional

requirements pursuant to Article 25 ICSID Convention are fulfilled. Still, it is the duty of

a tribunal constituted pursuant to the ICSID Convention to satisfy itself of the fulfilment

of these jurisdictional prerequisites.
Article 25 ICSID Convention provides:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State
(or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State
designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State which the parties to the dispute consent in writing

7 When applying the law (whether national or international), the Tribunal is of the view that it is not bound by the
arguments and sources invoked by the Parties. The principle iura novit curia — or better, iura novit arbiter — allows
the Tribunal to form its own opinion of the meaning of the law, provided that it does not surprise the Parties with a
legal theory that was not subject to debate and that the Parties could not anticipate.

* Claimant Memorial, { 183.

17

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their consent,
no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

237. The Tribunal will assess the question of whether Claimant’s activities qualify as an
investment in the sense of Article 25 ICSID Convention pursuant to a “Salini light-test”
which has emerged as the prevailing approach by ICSID tribunals over the last years and
which developed the original Salini-test,? holding that in fact only “the three objective
criteria of (i) a contribution, (ii) a certain duration, and (iii) an element of risk are necessary
elements of an investment.”!°

238. In the present case, it is undisputed that a substantial amount of money was used by Krederi
to acquire the three land plots in central Kiev through its subsidiaries. These acquisitions
were intended to be developed over the subsequent years into profit-making real estate
projects. It is evident that such long-term activities carried a number of commercial and
other risks. It thus appears obvious that Claimant’s activities can be regarded as an
“investment” pursuant to Article 25 ICSID Convention and it is noteworthy that such a

qualification was not challenged by Respondent during the proceedings.

239. In regard to the ratione personae jurisdictional requirement for legal persons, the ICSID
Convention defines “national of another Contracting State” as “any juridical person which
had the nationality of a Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute [...] and

any juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute

° Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco, 1CSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001, CLA-38, [ 52 (“The doctrine generally considers that investment infers: contributions, a
certain duration of performance of the contract and a participation in the risks of the transaction (cf. commentary by
E. Gaillard, cited above, p. 292). In reading the Convention’s preamble, one may add the contribution to the economic
development of the host State of the investment as an additional condition”). Investment tribunals have focused on: a
certain duration, a certain regularity of profit and return, the assumption of risk, a substantial commitment, and a
significant contribution to the host State’s development as typical characteristics of an investment. See also C.
SCHREUER, L. MALINTOPPI, A. REINISCH, A. SINCLAIR, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY (2"! edn., 2009)
128 et seq., RLA-85.

10 Electrabel S.A. v. Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/19, Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and
Liability, 30 November 2012, CLA-16, { 5.43. See also Deutsche Bank AG v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/2, Award, 31 October 2012, 295; GEA Group Aktiengesellschaft v. Ukraine, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/08/16, Award, 31 March 2011, RLA-47, | 151; Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/20, Award, 14 July 2010, § 110 (“[...] that the criteria of (i) a contribution, (ii) a certain duration, and (iii) an
element of risk, are both necessary and sufficient to define an investment within the framework of the ICSID
Convention.”).

  

 

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award
[...] and which, because of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a

national of another Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention.”!!

240. In the present case, it is unquestioned that Claimant, Krederi Ltd., is a company established
under the law of the UK which has been a Contracting Party of the ICSID Convention since

1967. Claimant thus qualifies as a “national of another Contracting State” pursuant to

Article 25 ICSID Convention.

241. It is also undisputed that Ukraine has been a Contracting Party of the ICSID Convention
since 2000. Thus, the second ratione personae jurisdictional requirement pursuant to

Article 25 ICSID Convention, that Respondent be a Contracting Party, is also fulfilled.

242. The Tribunal will now turn to the controversial issue of whether the Parties to the dispute

have effectively consented to the jurisdiction of the Centre. '*

(3) The jurisdictional requirements under the BIT

243. It is well-established that in addition to fulfilling the jurisdictional requirements of Article
25 ICSID Convention, an investment tribunal must assure itself that an investment meets

the jurisdictional requirements of the applicable BIT or IIA, pursuant to what has been

13

referred to as the so-called double-barrelled test'’ in ICSID cases. In the past, most tribunals

have applied such a double-barrelled test in regard to the jurisdictional requirement of an

1! Article 25(2)(b) ICSID Convention.

2 See below | 262 et seq.

13 Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka v. Slovak Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision on Objections to
Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999, { 68 (“A two-fold test must therefore be applied in determining whether this Tribunal has
the competence to consider the merits of the claim: whether the dispute arises out of an investment within the meaning
of the Convention and, if so, whether the dispute relates to an investment as defined in the Parties’ consent to ICSID
arbitration, in their reference to the BIT and the pertinent definitions contained in Article 1 of the BIT.”), Mytilineos
Holdings SA v. The State Union of Serbia & Montenegro and Republic of Serbia, UNCITRAL Partial Award on
Jurisdiction, 8 September 2006, J 112 (“It is the established practice of ICSID tribunals to assess whether a specific
transaction qualifies as an “investment” under the ICSID Convention, independently of the definition of investment
in a BIT or other applicable investment instrument, in order to fulfil the ratione materiae prerequisite of Article 25 of
the Convention.”); Malaysian Historical Salvors Sdn, Bhd v. The Government of Malaysia, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/05/10, Award on Jurisdiction, 28 May 2007, 1 55 (“Under the double-barreled test, a finding that the Contract
satisfied the definition of “investment” under the BIT would not be sufficient for this Tribunal to assume jurisdiction,
if the Contract failed to satisfy the criterion of an “investment” within the meaning of Article 25.”).

19

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

244,

245.

246.

247.

248.

249,

“investment”. However, this equally applies to the other jurisdictional requirements that

may be expressed in both the ICSID Convention and in the applicable investment treaty.'*

Article 1(a)(i)-(v) of the Treaty contains a wide asset-based definition of “investment”
including movable and immovable property, shares, claims to money, intellectual property
rights and business concessions. It does not remove indirect ownership of any of these

assets from the investment definition, e.g. by requiring direct shareholding.

Thus, Krederi’s investments in the Kiev real property market through its majority-owned
and fully controlled Ukrainian subsidiaries, [Company C] and [Company D], qualify as
investments under the Treaty. Respondent’s argument that Claimant is not entitled to

protection under the Treaty because it invested through two intermediaries is thus rejected.

Claimant, Krederi Ltd., is a “company established and operating under the laws of England
and Wales”! and thus qualifies as a corporation “incorporated or constituted under the law
in force in any part of the United Kingdom” pursuant to Article 1(c)(1)(bb) of the Treaty,

defining the notion of “investor”.
Ukraine is a Contracting Party of the Treaty.

There is no indication in the Treaty that in addition to the objective definitions of
investment and investor, the host State must have specific knowledge of the foreign
character of an investment and/or investor at the time of the alleged breach as submitted

by Respondent.'®

In fact, it is one of the characteristics of investment treaties that they automatically cover
an unidentified range of foreign investors and investments that fulfil the requirements laid
down in the abstract definitions of such treaties. There is no need for a host State to be

aware of specific investments made by investors of the other contracting party.

'4 See Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. The Czech Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, 14 April 2009, RLA-37, | 74
(“It is common ground between the parties that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is contingent upon the fulfilment of the
jurisdictional requirements of both the ICSID Convention and the relevant BIT. [...].”).

5 Claimant Memorial, { 3.
'6 Respondent Counter-Memorial, #¥f 34.2, 49.

20

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

250.

251.

252.

253.

254.

255.

256.

Where, however, contracting parties make treaty protection explicitly dependent upon an
authorization or approval requirement for individual investments, they thereby have a tool
to actually receive specific knowledge of the foreign character of an investment. In the case
of treaty provisions of this kind such knowledge (as the precondition for approval) can be

regarded as a requirement for treaty protection.

Since the UK-Ukraine BIT does not contain any indication of a “specific knowledge” or
an approval requirement the question whether Ukraine was actually aware of the fact that
Claimant was foreign is irrelevant and does not remove Claimant for the protection of the

Treaty.

Since the “legality of the investment”, an issue that relates to the investment definition
under the Treaty, was specifically challenged by Respondent, it will be separately

addressed below.!”

(4) Consent to ICSID jurisdiction

Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of the Centre and this Tribunal because it considers

that it has not offered such “consent” through Article 8 of the Treaty or otherwise.

Claimant bases its jurisdictional case in regard to consent mainly on two arguments: first,
that Article 8 of the Treaty contains Respondent’s offer of consent and, second, that the
Treaty’s MFN clause expressly includes dispute settlement and thus permits Claimant to
accept Respondent’s offer of consent to ICSID arbitration found in its BITs with third

States.

Respondent rejects this claim and argues that consent cannot be “imported” through an

MEN clause.

The Tribunal further notes that Claimant withdrew its additional claim that jurisdiction of
the Centre may be based on Respondent’s implied or tacit acceptance in the course of the

present proceedings. Therefore, this argument will be addressed only in passing.

"7 See below {If 344 et seq.

21

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

257.

258.

259.

260.

261.

262.

a. Implied acceptance of ICSID jurisdiction

According to Claimant, it gave notice of dispute in early 2013 and, on 15 January 2014,

informed Respondent that it would file a request for arbitration with ICSID.

In Claimant’s view, “Respondent ha[d] been asked to object within a certain period of time
should it not wish to refer the matter to ICSID.”!* Since there was no formal objection
before its Counter-Memorial, this would satisfy the requirement for “consent” by

Respondent.

Respondent opposes this view and asserts that “there can be no ‘implied or tacit’ consent

to investor — state international arbitration”!”

and that “Claimant’s unilaterally imposed
deadline for Respondent to object to jurisdiction did not, and could not, create any legal
rights or obligations for it or Respondent, nor does the fact that Respondent offered to

negotiate the dispute.”?”

In the course of the Hearing, Claimant dropped the implicit acceptance claim.”! Thus, the
Tribunal does not have to address the issue whether consent to ICSID arbitration may be

implicitly agreed upon by not objecting to it.

In the Tribunal’s view, a failure to object to correspondence cannot amount to consent

required both under the ICSID Convention and under Article 8 of the Treaty.

b. Consent to ICSID jurisdiction in Article 8 of the Treaty

In particular at the Hearing, Claimant insisted that, instead of relying on an implied or tacit
acceptance of consent to ICSID arbitration, Respondent’s consent to such arbitration is

already expressed in Article 8 of the Treaty.

The Parties agree that the Treaty’s dispute settlement clause provides for investor-State

arbitration as a matter of principle (“... be submitted to international arbitration if the

'8 Request, | 67.
© Respondent Counter-Memorial, ¥ 89.

20 Thid.

2! Hearing Transcript, DS:P1033:L19-20. See also Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, J 65.

22

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

investor concerned so wishes.”). However, it is disputed whether Article 8 contains the
Contracting Parties’ offer of consent to ICSID arbitration in the sense of Article 25 ICSID

Convention.

264. For the purpose of analyzing this issue it seems helpful to recall the text of Article 8 of the

Treaty. It provides as follows:
Settlement of Disputes between an Investor and a Host State

(1) Disputes between an investor of one Contracting Party and the
other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under
this Agreement in relation to an investment of the former which have
not been amicably settled, shall, after a period of three months from
written notification of a claim, be submitted to international
arbitration if the investor concerned so wishes.

(2) Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration, the
investor and the Contracting Party concerned in the dispute may
agree to refer the dispute either to:

(a) the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes (having regard to the provisions, where applicable, of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States, opened for signature at
Washington DC on 18 March 1965 and the Additional Facility for
the Administration of Conciliation, Arbitration and Fact-Finding
Proceedings); or

(b) the Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of
Commerce; or

(c) an international arbitrator or ad hoc arbitration tribunal to be
appointed by a special agreement or established under the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law.

If after a period of three months from written notification of the
claim there is no agreement to one of the above alternative
procedures, the dispute shall at the request in writing of the investor
concerned be submitted to arbitration under the Arbitration Rules of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law as then

23

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

265.

266.

267.

268.

269.

270.

in force. The parties to the dispute may agree in writing to modify
these Rules.

According to Claimant, a correct reading of Article 8(1) provides it, as a “Contracting Party

investor”, with the right to refer a dispute to either ICSID, ICC, or UNCITRAL arbitration.

While Claimant acknowledges that Article 8 may be worded in a “rather infelicitous”
manner,”” it emphasizes that there is a relevant divergence in the two authentic language

versions of Article 8(2) which should be construed in favor of the Ukrainian text.

The Ukrainian version of Article 8(2) of the Treaty indeed differs from the above-rendered
English version. Instead of reading “Where the dispute is referred to international
arbitration, the investor and the Contracting Party concerned in the dispute may agree to
refer the dispute either to [...]”, a literal translation of the Ukrainian text — as rendered by
Respondent in its Opening Statement as well as Post-Hearing Brief — reads as follows:
“Where the dispute has been referred to international arbitration, the Contracting Party

investor and the concerned in the dispute may agree to refer the dispute either to [...]”.??

According to Claimant, the Ukrainian version should take precedence because it was the
version which was accepted by the Ukrainian legislator and had become Ukrainian law,”*
and because the only reasonable construction would be the one that would give the investor
a choice of three different investor-State arbitration procedures to which the contracting

State party had already consented in principle.
To this Tribunal, such an interpretation cannot be maintained.

To start with, it is clear that both language versions are equally authentic as expressly

provided for in the Treaty’s final clauses.*° Thus, any inconsistency between these versions

2 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, {| 50 (“While the BIT language in Article 8 is rather infelicitous, Claimant submitted
that an effective, meaningful and good faith interpretation exists.”).

2 Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, {| 13. See also UK-Ukraine BIT, CE-1.

2 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, 51.

25 UK-Ukraine BIT, CE-I (“Done in duplicate at London this 10th day of February 1993 in the English and Ukrainian
languages, both texts being equally authoritative.”).

24

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

271.

272.

273.

274.

has to be solved by the customary rules of treaty interpretation as enshrined in the VCLT.”°

It should be noted though that in respect of the Treaty the rules of the VCLT do not only
apply as customary international law since the VCLT was ratified by the UK in 1972 and

adhered to by Ukraine in 1986, well before the conclusion of the Treaty in 1993.

Pursuant to Article 33(4) VCLT, “[...] when a comparison of the authentic texts discloses
a difference of meaning which the application of articles 31 and 32 does not remove, the
meaning which best reconciles the texts, having regard to the object and purpose of the

treaty, shall be adopted.”

Thus, treaty interpreters are enjoined to first resort to the traditional interpretation rule
contained in Article 31, as well as to the supplementary means of interpretation in order to
remove any inconsistency, and then attempt to reconcile different meanings “having regard

to the object and purpose of the treaty”.

In the Tribunal’s view, a comparison of the Ukrainian language version with the English
version of Article 8(2) of the Treaty reveals a number of logical inconsistencies of the
former version which would render part of the dispute settlement provision meaningless.
This would clearly contradict an interpretation guided by Article 31 VCLT as well as the
principle ut res magis valeat quam pereat (effet utile) according to which each treaty
provision should be given a meaningful interpretation rather than one which would deprive

it of meaning.’

Article 8 of the Treaty has a fairly clear structure: its paragraph 1 provides, in regard to
“disputes between an investor of one Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party
concerning an obligation of the latter under [the BIT]’” for a three-month period during

which an attempt at amicable settlement must be made. It further provides that, after such

?6 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, CLA-39.

2” Korea — Definite Safeguard Measure on Imports of Certain Dairy Products, AB-1999-8, WT/DS98/AB/R, 14
December 1999, {| 80 (“We have also recognized, on several occasions, the principle of effectiveness in the
interpretation of treaties (ut res magis valeat quam pereat) which requires that a treaty interpreter: ‘... must give
meaning and effect to all the terms of the treaty. An interpreter is not free to adopt a reading that would result in
reducing whole clauses or paragraphs of a treaty to redundancy or inutility’.” (emphasis added, footnotes omitted);
Eureko B.V. v. Republic of Poland, Partial Award, 19 August 2005, RLA-20, § 248 (“It is a cardinal rule of the
interpretation of treaties that each and every operative clause of a treaty is to be interpreted as meaningful rather than
meaningless.”).

25

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

275.

276.

271.

278.

attempt, the dispute shall “be submitted to international arbitration if the investor concerned

so wishes.”

In spite of the use of obligatory language (“shall”) Article 8(1) does not provide for a choice
between different types of investment arbitration to investors. Rather, Article 8(2) makes
it clear that there are three options of investment arbitration (ICSID, ICC, and UNCITRAL
arbitration) on which the disputing parties “may agree” (“[...] the investor and the

Contracting Party concerned in the dispute may agree to refer the dispute either to [...]”).

Further, Article 8(2) last sentence of the Treaty provides for a fall-back option in case the
parties cannot agree upon any of the investment arbitration options: the investor then has
the right to submit the dispute to UNCITRAL arbitration (“[...] the dispute shall at the
request in writing of the investor concerned be submitted to arbitration under the

Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.”).

To provide for such a fall-back in favour of UNCITRAL arbitration would be meaningless,
if Article 8 provided for an immediate right of an investor to choose any of the three options
already in its paragraph 1. Article 8(2) last sentence of the Treaty is very explicit in stating
that the fall-back option of UNCITRAL comes into play where the parties cannot agree on
any of the above-mentioned three alternative procedures (“If after a period of three months
from written notification of the claim there is no agreement to one of the above alternative

procedures, [...]”).

This wording also clearly contradicts Claimant’s suggestion that the “default consent” to
UNCITRAL resulted from the fact that ICSID became available only after the conclusion
of the Treaty, which entered into force in 1994, since Ukraine became a Contracting Party
to the ICSID Convention only in 2000.78 Claimant thereby alludes to differently worded
dispute settlement clauses found in other BITs which indeed provide for UNCITRAL or
other arbitration procedures as a fall-back where either ICSID and/or ICSID Additional

Facility are not available. In the present case, however, the Treaty’s wording is very clear

°8 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, | 53 (“This historical fact, the non-availability of ICSID arbitration at the time of
signing the BIT, is arguably the reason for the inclusion of the default consent.”).

26

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

279.

280.

281.

282.

283.

284.

in that it provides for UNCITRAL arbitration in case “there is no agreement to one of the

above alternative procedures.”

This rather clear and logical structure contrasts with an inconsistent meaning derived from
the literal reading of the Ukrainian version of Article 8 if understood as giving the investor
a right to choose any of the three investment arbitration procedures. It would ignore that
the wording “agree” presupposes an agreement with another party and it would render

Article 8(2) last sentence meaningless.

Thus, the Tribunal finds that the above interpretation based on the English text reflects the
correct interpretation of Article 8. Therefore, Ukraine cannot be regarded as having

consented to ICSID arbitration via Article 8 of the Treaty alone.

This finding is without prejudice to Claimant’s alternative argument that it can accept the
consent given by Ukraine to ICSID arbitration in other third country investment treaties as

a result of the Treaty’s MFN clause.
It is this argument to which the Tribunal will turn next.

c. The UK-Ukraine BIT’s MFN clause as basis for consent

In the alternative, Claimant argues that this Tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute as a

result of the UK-Ukraine BIT’s MEN clause.

In Claimant’s view, Article 3 also clearly extends to dispute settlement, by expressly stating
that the MFN treatment applies “to the provisions of Articles 1 to 11 of this Agreement.”
Thus, one could rely on the MEN clause in order to import consent given by Ukraine to
ICSID arbitration in BITs with third countries. The availability of ICSID arbitration and
the choice between ICSID arbitration and other forms of investment arbitration as provided
for in third party BITs constituted more favourable treatment which Ukraine was bound to

extend to UK investors according to Article 3 of the Treaty.

27

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

285. Claimant specifically relies on Garanti Koza v. Turkmenistan and RosInvestCo v.
Russia®® for the proposition that consent to investment arbitration may be imported via an

MEN clause.

286. Claimant further emphasizes that in light of the inconsistent jurisprudence of investment
tribunals on this particular issue, special attention should be given to the fact that numerous
tribunals, including those that rejected the importation of more favorable procedural
provisions from third party BITs through MEN clauses, have acknowledged that MFN
clauses expressly stating that they apply to all provisions of the basic treaty, like the one in

Article 3(3) of this BIT, could be read to include consent to ICSID arbitration.*!

287. Respondent, while agreeing that the Treaty’s MFN clause applies to Article 8,°? rejects the
idea that it might be used to import consent to ICSID arbitration. In its view, consent is a
fundamental matter that cannot be imported from a third-party treaty. Rather, MFN clauses
can only serve to overcome procedural hurdles such as waiting periods or requirements to

exhaust domestic remedies; they cannot found consent were no consent is given in the BIT.

288. In Respondent’s view, neither Garanti Koza v. Turkmenistan nor Roslnvest v. Russia can
be relied upon for the proposition that consent to investment arbitration can be imported
via an MEN clause. According to Respondent, the tribunal in Garanti Koza v.
Turkmenistan already found consent in Article 8(1) of the Turkmenistan-UK BIT and
imported only the right to choose between different arbitration procedures. Similarly, the

tribunal in RosInvest v. Russia only extended the scope of existing consent to arbitration.

°° Garanti Koza LLP v. Turkmenistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/20, Decision on the Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack
of Consent, 3 July 2013, CLA-63.

% RosInvestCo UK Ltd. v. The Russian Federation, SCC Case No. V 079/2005, Award on Jurisdiction, October 2007,
CLA-68.

3! Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, {{[ 57-61, relying on Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No.
ARB/97/7, Decision of the Tribunal on Objection to Jurisdiction, 25 January 2000, | 52; National Grid PLC v. The
Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on Jurisdiction, 20 June 2006, RLA-27, | 85;  Wintershall
Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/14, Award, 8 December 2008, RLA-34, [ 167;
and Plama Consortium Limited y. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8
February 2005, RLA-19, 204.

* Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, | 18.

 

28

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

289. The Tribunal shares the view of the tribunal in Tza Yap Shum v. Republic of Peru*> that the
precise reach of MFN clauses remains “one of the quaestiones vexatae (or maybe the
quaestio vexata) in investment arbitration.”*+ The Tribunal further agrees that it is
preferable to look at the precise MFN clause in order to determine its effect than to rely on

general concepts of what the invocation of such clauses may achieve or may not achieve.

290. It thus starts with the express wording of the applicable MFN clause in Article 3 of the

Treaty. This article provides as follows:

291. The scope of Article 3 seems well-defined as a result of paragraph 3; it is clearly meant to
apply to all articles of the Treaty, including Article 8 on investor-State arbitration. But the

question remains whether this extension is also meant to relate to establishing jurisdiction

National Treatment and Most-favoured-nation Provisions

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject
investments or returns of investors of the other Contracting Party to
treatment less favourable than that which it accords to investments
or returns of its own investors or to investments or returns of
investors of any third State.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investors
of the other Contracting Party, as regards their management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of their investments, to
treatment less favourable than that which it accords to its own
investors or to investors of any third State.

(3) For the avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment
provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the
provisions of Articles | to 11 of this Agreement.

or only to procedural issues.

3 Tza Yap Shum v. Republic of Peru, CSID Case No. ARB/07/6, Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, 19 June

2009.
 Tbid., 4193.

29

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

292. As Respondent put it very succinctly in its Closing Statement, it is agreed that Article 3

applies to Article 8; the issue is how.*>

293. Taken literally, Article 3 seems to be very broad which suggests that better dispute

settlement provisions which already contain consent to jurisdiction can be imported.

294. It has been cautioned, and particularly emphasized by Respondent, that in spite of the broad
reference to all Treaty provisions in Article 3(3) not all provisions, such as investor

definitions, temporal application, are covered by an MEN clause.*°

295. Indeed, it is generally accepted that an MFN clause cannot be relied upon to import more
favorable, broader definitions of “investments” and or “investors”.*’ Similarly, tribunals
have rejected the use of MEN provisions to extend the temporal scope of application of a
BIT.** Further, it appears obvious that an MEN clause will not entitle an investor to invoke

the inter-State dispute settlement provision in Article 9 of the Treaty.

296. The real question in this case is thus not whether the MEN clause applies to dispute
settlement, which is undoubtedly provided for by the reference in Article 3(3), but rather
in what sense MFN treatment as contained in Article 3(1) and (2) applies to Article 8. In
particular, whether the application of the Treaty’s MFN clause to Article 8 is limited to
procedural and admissibility issues, such as domestic litigation or exhaustion of local

remedies requirements or waiting periods, as Respondent suggests, or whether it extends

35 Hearing Transcript D5;P1036:L24-25. See also Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, 18 (“The Parties agree that Art.3
of the BIT (MEN treatment to both investors and investments) applies to Art.8. [...] The relevant question is how Art.
3(2) applies to Art. 8 [...].”).

+ Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, { 23.

37 HICEE B.V. v. The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2009-11, Partial Award, 23 May 2011, { 149;
Metal-Tech Ltd. v. The Republic of Uzbekistan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/10/3, Award, 4 October 2013, RLA-64, { 145;
ST-AD GmbH v. Republic of Bulgaria, PCA Case No. 2011-06 (ST-BG), Award on Jurisdiction, 18 July 2013, RLA-
63, | 397; Vannessa Ventures Ltd. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/04/6, Award, 16
January 2013, {| 133; Société Générale v. Dominican Republic, UNCITRAL, LCIA Case No. UN 7927, Award on
Preliminary Objections, 19 September 2008, {[ 40-41.

38 Technicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award, 29
May 2003, {] 69.

   

30

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

297.

298.

299.

300.

to jurisdictional questions, such as the right to accept a host State’s consent to jurisdiction

given in a more favourable third party BIT, as suggested by Claimant.

The Parties’ arguments are clearly inspired by the post Maffezini v. Spain debate. This
debate goes back to the 2000 decision on jurisdiction in Maffezini v. Spain.*? Back then,
an ICSID tribunal permitted an Argentine investor to “avoid” an 18-month waiting period,
requiring claimants to litigate in domestic courts before being permitted to access ICSID

arbitration, by relying on the applicable BIT’s MFN clause.

Since then, investment tribunals have come out at opposite ends not only whether MFN
clauses are limited to substantive treatment or can be invoked to import “procedural”
benefits under other IIAs, but also, in particular, whether “procedural” benefits are

restricted to admissibility issues or could extend to questions of jurisdiction.

While it is clear that these decisions of other investment tribunals, whether established
pursuant to the ICSID Convention or under other arbitration rules, do not have any binding
authority for this Tribunal, they may provide helpful guidance and even persuasive
authority on the strength of their reasoning.*° Since the Parties have also relied on these
decisions in their submissions and oral arguments, the Tribunal will inquire as to what

extent they are helpful to solve the issues presented to it.

In fact, the seeming inconsistency of many post-Maffezini v. Spain cases, with numerous
decisions allowing and others rejecting reliance on MFN clauses may have been more

apparent than real considering that most tribunals permitted reliance on MEN clauses to

%° Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/97/7, Decision of the Tribunal on Objection to Jurisdiction, 25 January 2000.

49 ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited v. The Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/16, Award, 2 October 2006, CLA-51, | 293 (“It is true that arbitral awards do not constitute binding
precedent. [...] However, cautious reliance on certain principles developed in a number of those cases, as persuasive
authority, may advance the body of law, which in turn may serve predictability in the interest of both investors and
host States.”).

31

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

import procedural advantages, such as shorter or no waiting periods,*! but not to import

jurisdiction where no jurisdiction was provided for in the basic treaty.*?
301. As formulated by the tribunal in Plama v. Bulgaria:

[i]t is one thing to add to the treatment provided in one treaty more
favorable treatment provided elsewhere. It is quite another thing to
replace a procedure specifically negotiated by parties with an
entirely different mechanism.**

302. Still, even this fragile attempt to construe order in a field of inconsistent practice proved
difficult to maintain. On the one hand, tribunals in cases like Wintershall v. Argentina,®

ICS v. Argentina,*® Daimler v. Argentina‘’ and Kilig v. Turkmenistan® basically treated

4! Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision of the Tribunal on
Objection to Jurisdiction, 25 January 2000, {ff 54-64; MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile,
ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7, Award, 25 May 2004, CLA-8, ff 100-104; Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3 August 2004, RLA-87, {ff 102-105; Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v. The
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/10, Decision of the Tribunal on Preliminary Questions on Jurisdiction,
17 June 2005, CLA-41, 4{[ 29-31; National Grid PLC v. The Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 20 June 2006, RLA-27, {| 79-94; Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and Vivendi
Universal S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/19, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3 August 2006 and
AWG Group Ltd. v. The Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3 August 2006, CLA-41A, {1 52-
68; Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17, Award, 21 June 2011, {{{ 79-108, RLA-103;
Hochtief AG v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/31, Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 October 2011,
RLA-49, If] 59-75; Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercantias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. The Argentine
Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/09/1, Decision on Jurisdiction, 21 December 2012, RLA-56, {ff 59-186.

® Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/13,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 9 November 2004, {| 103-119; Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, (CSID
Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 February 2005, RLA-19, ff 183-227; Vladimir Berschader and
Moise Berschader v. The Russian Federation, SCC Case No. 080/2004, Award, 21 April 2006, {1 159-206; Telenor
Mobile Communications AS v. The Republic of Hungary, 1CSID Case No. ARB/04/15, Award, 13 September 2006,
CLA-29, {1 90-101; Mr. Tza Yap Shum v. Republic of Peru, CSID Case No. ARB/O7/6, Decision on Jurisdiction and
Competence, 19 June 2009, If 199-216; Austrian Airlines AG v. The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award, 9
October 2009, ff 92-140.

8 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8
February 2005, RLA-19.

+ Tbid., | 209.

45 Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/14, Award, 8 December 2008, RLA-
34.

46 ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited (United Kingdom) v. The Republic of Argentina, UNCITRAL, PCA
Case No. 2010-9, Award on Jurisdiction, 10 February 2012, ff 274-313.

4” Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1, Award, 22 August 2012, RLA-
54, 205-278.

48 Kilig Insaat Ithalat thracat Sanayi ve Ticaret Anonim Sirketi v. Turkmenistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/1, Award,
2 July 2013.

   

 

32

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

all procedural issues as jurisdictional with the consequence that MFN was limited to

“substantive” treatment.

303. On the other hand, some tribunals like the one in RosInvestCo v. Russia*? held that the right
to submit an investment claim also formed part of the “treatment” covered by the BIT with
the consequence that investors could rely on an MEN clause in order to accept the consent
given to dispute settlement in third party BITs.*° This conclusion was corroborated by the
fact that the BIT’s exceptions to MFN treatment related explicitly to preferential trade
agreements and to tax matters only.*! Thus, the RosInvestCo v. Russia tribunal found that

“the MFN-clauses in Article 3 are also applicable to submissions to arbitration in other

Treaties.”*?

304. It is important to note though that the majority of these cases were decided on the basis of
MEN clauses that were much less explicit than the one in the present case, and that, in a
number of cases, the tribunals expressly qualified their findings, to the effect that they
acknowledged that through express wording, States may extend or limit the reach of MFN

clauses.

*° RosInvestCo UK Ltd. v. The Russian Federation, SCC Case No. V079/2005, Award on Jurisdiction, October 2007,
CLA-68.

°° Ibid., J 130 (“[...] difficult to doubt that an expropriation interferes with the investor’s use and enjoyment of the
investment, and that the submission to arbitration forms a highly relevant part of the corresponding protection for the
investor by granting him, in case of interference with his ‘use’ and ‘enjoyment’, procedural options of obvious and
great significance compared to the sole option of challenging such interference before the domestic courts of the host
state.”).

5! Article 7 UK-USSR BIT (“The provisions of Articles 3 and 4 of this Agreement shall not be construed so as to
oblige one Contracting Party to extend to the investors of the other the benefit of any treatment, preference or privilege
resulting from (a) any existing or future customs union, organisation for mutual economic assistance or similar
international agreement, whether multilateral or bilateral, to which either of the Contracting Parties is or may become
a party, or (b) any international agreement or arrangement relating wholly or mainly to taxation or any domestic
legislation relating wholly or mainly taxation.”).

* RosInvestCo UK Ltd. v. The Russian Federation, SCC Case No. V079/2005, Award on Jurisdiction, October 2007,
CLA-68, § 135 (“[...] it can certainly not be presumed that the Parties ‘forgot’ arbitration when drafting and agreeing
on Article 7. Had the Parties intended that the MFN clauses should also not apply to arbitration, it would indeed have
been easy to add a subsection (c) to that effect in Article 7. The fact that this was not done, in the view of the Tribunal,
is further confirmation that the MFN-clauses in Article 3 are also applicable to submissions to arbitration in other
Treaties.”).

33

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

305. In fact, treaty-makers have reacted to the Maffezini v. Spain jurisprudence and thus

specifically rejected its approach in some treaties and in others specifically endorsed it.

306. Some treaty-makers have stated that the MFN clause does not encompass mechanisms for
the settlement of investment disputes provided for in third party BITs.*? In other cases,

parties to a BIT have used interpretative declarations stating their view that MFN clauses

do not extend to dispute resolution “and that this has always been their intention.”**

307. On the contrary, a number of States have expressly endorsed the Maffezini v. Spain
approach and formulated MFN clauses in a way to remove any doubt that dispute
settlement was intended to be covered by them.** The clarification added to the MEN clause
of the UK model investment treaty, to which the formulation of the present Treaty

corresponds, is another example.”° It provides:

For the avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment
provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the
provisions of Articles 1 to 11 of this agreement.*”

3 Colombia-Switzerland Agreement, 17 May 2006, annex (“For greater certainty, it is further understood that the
most favourable nation treatment [...] does not encompass mechanisms for the settlement of investment disputes
provided for in other international agreements concluded by the Party concerned.”), cited in Ziegler, ‘The Nascent
International Law on Most-Favoured-Nation (MFN) Clauses in Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs)’, European
Yearbook of International Economic Law 77, at 95 (2010); similar clauses can be found in the Canada-Peru FIPA
2006, Annex B.4; Article 5(4) ASEAN-China Investment Agreement (2009); Article IV (2) Colombian Model BIT
(2009).

* National Grid ple v. The Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on Jurisdiction, 20 June 2006, RLA-27, | 85
(“[...] the Argentine Republic and Panama exchanged diplomatic notes with an “interpretative declaration” of the
MEN clause in their 1996 investment treaty to the effect that, the MFN clause does not extend to dispute resolution
clauses, and that this has always been their intention.”).

°5 Article 3(3) Austrian Model BIT 2008 (“Each Contracting Party shall accord to investors of the other Contracting
Party and to their investments or returns treatment no less favourable than that it accords to its own investors and their
investments or to investors of any third country and their investments or returns with respect to the management,
operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment, sale and liquidation as well as dispute settlement of their investments or
returns, whichever is more favourable to the investor.”).

56 Chester Brown and Audley Sheppard, ‘United Kingdom’, in Ch. Brown (ed.), Commentaries on Selected Model
Investment Treaties (Oxford University Press 2013) 697, 728 (“Where Article 3(3) is included, it therefore provides
an answer to the controversial question whether the MFN provision also applies to procedural issues such as investor-
State dispute settlement.”).

57 Article 3(3) UK Model BIT 1991, RLA-83, RLA-84.

34

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

308. In investment jurisprudence, the introductory language (“For the avoidance of doubt [...]”)
has usually been regarded as confirming that this broad understanding of the MFN clause
has always been the UK approach. For instance, in National Grid v. Argentina, an ICSID
tribunal found that this wording indicated that it has been the understanding of the UK that
also dispute settlement was within the reach of MFN clauses in previously concluded BITs
“all along”.* In a similar way, the tribunal in the AWG v. Argentina case™ inferred from

this language the UK’s pre-existing intention to include dispute settlement.®!

309. Even tribunals rejecting the Maffezini v. Spain approach generally acknowledge that the

contracting parties to a BIT are, in principle, free to provide for such an approach.

310. Importantly, they are also clear that this may not only relate to applying the MFN clause to

procedural and admissibility issues, but also to the scope of jurisdiction.

311. For instance, the ICSID tribunal in Salini v. Jordan” held that the applicable MFN clause
in the Jordan-Italy BIT was not broad enough to form the basis for ICSID jurisdiction over
contractual disputes, as provided for in other BITs of the host State. The tribunal stressed
that the applicable MFN clause, as opposed to others, neither directly referred to dispute

settlement nor broadly covered ‘all matters’ of the basic BIT as in Maffezini v. Spain,® and

°8 National Grid ple v. The Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on Jurisdiction, 20 June 2006, RLA-27.

5° Thid., 4 85 (“Since 1991, the MFN clause in the UK model investment treaty has included a third paragraph stating
that: ‘For the avoidance of doubt’, the MFN clause extends to Articles | to 11 of the treaty and, hence, to dispute
resolution matters. The implication in the wording of this additional paragraph is that, all along, this was the UK’s
understanding of the meaning of the MFN clause in previously concluded investment treaties.”).

© Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/03/19 and AWG Group Ltd. v. The Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3
August 2006, CLA-41A.

6! Tbid., J 58 (“The inference to be drawn from this language is that this new paragraph, by its terms, is intended to
clarify what had been the United Kingdom’s preexisting intention in negotiating its BITs: that the most-favored-nation
clause is to cover all the articles (i.e. Articles | to 11) of the treaty.”).

© Salini Costruttori S.p.A and Italstrade S.p.A v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/13,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 November 2004.

3 Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision of the Tribunal on Objection
to Jurisdiction, 25 January 2000.

35

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

that it could not identify any intention of the parties to have dispute settlement included in

the reach of MFN treatment.

312. Similarly, the tribunal in Plama v. Bulgaria,®° which rejected the argument that its
jurisdiction could be based on dispute settlement clauses in third party BITs through the
MEN clause of the applicable BIT, acknowledged that the parties might have done so by

using other language. The Plama v. Bulgaria tribunal famously stated that:

[...] an MEN provision in a basic treaty does not incorporate by
reference dispute settlement provisions in whole or in part set forth
in another treaty, unless the MEN provision in the basic treaty leaves
no doubt that the Contracting Parties intended to incorporate them.°°

313. The Plama v. Bulgaria tribunal emphasized the crucial importance of consent to arbitration
as a basis for jurisdiction which must be “clear and unambiguous”.®’ However, it
acknowledged that such consent may be given by reference, i.e., through an MEN clause,
as long as the reference is such “that the parties’ intention to import the arbitration

provision of the other agreement is clear and unambiguous.”® The reason that the Plama

© Salini Costruttori S.p.A and Italstrade S.p.A v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/13,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 November 2004, {| 118 (“The Tribunal observes that the circumstances of this case are
different. Indeed, Article 3 of the BIT between Italy and Jordan does not include any provision extending its scope of
application to dispute settlement. It does not envisage “all rights or all matters covered by the agreement”.
Furthermore, the Claimants have submitted nothing from which it might be established that the common intention of
the Parties was to have the most-favored-nation clause apply to dispute settlement. Quite on the contrary, the intention
as expressed in Article 9(2) of the BIT was to exclude from ICSID jurisdiction contractual disputes between an
investor and an entity of a State Party in order that such disputes might be settled in accordance with the procedures
set forth in the investment agreements. Lastly, the Claimants have not cited any practice in Jordan or Italy in support
of their claims.”).

5 Plama Consortium Limited y. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8
February 2005, RLA-19.

66 Thid., J 223.

°7 Tbid., { 198 “Nowadays, arbitration is the generally accepted avenue for resolving disputes between investors and
states. Yet, that phenomenon does not take away the basic prerequisite for arbitration: an agreement of the parties to
arbitrate. It is a well-established principle, both in domestic and international law, that such an agreement should be
clear and unambiguous.”).

8 bid., {200 (“[...] a reference may in and of itself not be sufficient; the reference is required to be such as to make
the arbitration clause part of the contract (i.e., in this case, the Bulgaria~-Cyprus BIT). This is another way of saying
that the reference must be such that the parties’ intention to import the arbitration provision of the other agreement is
clear and unambiguous.”).

36

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

315.

v. Bulgaria tribunal rejected the possibility to “import” consent to jurisdiction was that it

found that the applicable MFN clause was not “clear and unambiguous” in this regard.

The tribunal in Telenor v. Hungary” also found that an MEN clause could not be relied
upon in order to expand the scope of ICSID jurisdiction to claims that the BIT parties had
excluded from the Hungary-Norway BIT. Under the BIT such jurisdiction was limited to
issues concerning the amount and payment of compensation in case of expropriation.
Nevertheless, the Telenor v. Hungary tribunal accepted that the parties may have done so
by using different language permitting even the importation of jurisdiction via an MFN

clause. The tribunal said that:

[i]n the absence of language or context to suggest the contrary, the
ordinary meaning of ‘investments shall be accorded treatment no
less favourable than that accorded to investments made by investors
of any third State’ is that the investor’s substantive rights in respect
of the investments are to be treated no less favourably than under a
BIT between the host State and a third State, and there is no warrant
for construing the above phrase as importing procedural rights as
well. It is one thing to stipulate that the investor is to have the benefit
of MFN investment treatment but quite another to use an MFN
clause in a BIT to bypass a limitation in the very same BIT when the
parties have not chosen language in the MFN clause showing an
intention to do this, as has been done in some BITs.”!

Even the majority of the SCC tribunal in Berschader v. Russia’ which found that the
expression “all matters covered by the present Treaty” did not really mean that the MFN
provision extended to all matters covered by the Treaty and thus rejected the idea “that the

parties intended the MEN provision to extend to the dispute resolution clause,””>

© Tbid., (“A clause reading ‘a treatment which is not less favourable than that accorded to investments by investors of.
third states’ as appears in Article 3(1) of the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT, cannot be said to be a typical incorporation by
reference clause as appearing in ordinary contracts. It creates doubt whether the reference to the other document (in
this case the other BITs concluded by Bulgaria) clearly and unambiguously includes a reference to the dispute
settlement provisions contained in those BITs.”).

7 Telenor Mobile Communications AS y. The Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/15, Award, 13
September 2006, CLA-29.

1! [bid., J 92 (emphasis in original).

® Vladimir Berschader and Moise Berschader v. The Russian Federation, SCC Case No. 080/2004, Award, 21 April
2006.

3 Tbid., | 194.

37

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

acknowledged that an MFN clause could “incorporate by reference an arbitration clause

from another BIT” if that could be unambiguously deduced from the Contracting Parties’

intent.”

316. Ina similar way, the SCC tribunal in Renta 4 v. Russia,’ which rejected the claimant’s
attempt to rely on the specific limited MFN clause of the Spain-Russia BIT in order to
avoid a narrow dispute settlement clause,” acknowledged that there was no authority for
the proposition that MFN treatment was generally limited to “primary” or substantive
obligations and that “access to international arbitration has been a fundamental and
constant desideratum for investment protection and therefore a weighty factor in
considering the object and purpose of BITs.””’ The tribunal’s statement that there was “no

textual basis or legal rule to say that ‘treatment’ does not encompass the host state’s

078

acceptance of international arbitration”’® clearly indicates that the treatment referred to in

MEN clauses may include consent to arbitration.

317. Asa result, it appears clear and generally accepted that, as a matter of principle, parties to
BITs are free to offer consent to ICSID jurisdiction via an MEN clause. Even all the cases
that have rejected that this was the effect of the applicable MFN clauses do not dispute that,
in general, negotiating parties have the possibility to formulate MFN clauses in a way that

they also “import” consent to ICSID arbitration.

74 Ibid., 4 181 (“[...] the principle that an MEN provision in a BIT will only incorporate by reference an arbitration
clause from another BIT where the terms of the original BIT clearly and unambiguously so provide or where it can
otherwise be clearly inferred that this was the intention of the contracting parties.”).

75 Renta 4 S.V.S.A, Ahorro Corporacion Emergentes F.1., Ahorro Corporacion Eurofondo F.1., Rovime Inversiones
SICAV S.A., Quasar de Valors SICAV S.A., Orgor de Valores SICAV S.A., GBI 9000 SICAV S.A. v. The Russian
Federation, SCC No. 24/2007, Award on Preliminary Objections, 20 March 2009.

7 Article 10 Spain-Russia BIT (“1. Any dispute between one Party and an investor of the other Party relating to the
amount or method of payment of the compensation due under Article 6 of this Agreement, shall be communicated in
writing, together with a detailed report by the investor to the Party in whose territory the investment was made. The
two shall, as far as possible, endeavour to settle the dispute amicably. 2. If the dispute cannot be settled thus within
six months of the date of the written notification referred to by [sic] either of the following, the choice being left to
the investor: [Stockholm Chamber of Commerce arbitration or UNCITRAL arbitration].”).

7 Renta 4 S.V.S.A, Ahorro Corporacién Emergentes F.1., Ahorro Corporacién Eurofondo F.1., Rovime Inversiones
SICAV S.A., Quasar de Valors SICAV S.A., Orgor de Valores SICAV S.A., GBI 9000 SICAV S.A. v. The Russian
Federation, SCC No. 24/2007, Award on Preliminary Objections, 20 March 2009, {| 100.

8 Thid., J 101.

38

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

318.

319.

321.

322.

The question thus is whether this was done by the MFN clause in Article 3 of the UK-
Ukraine BIT.

Indeed, the question for this Tribunal is what the contracting parties of the Treaty really
intended, and more precisely whether they expressed their intention with sufficient clarity

for a tribunal tasked with interpreting and applying the treaty.

In this regard, the view expressed by the Plama vy. Bulgaria tribunal,’”? on which both

Parties have relied, seems to be most explicit and clear.

As already mentioned above, the Plama v. Bulgaria tribunal rejected the possibility to
“import” consent to jurisdiction because it found that the applicable MFN clause was not
“clear and unambiguous” in this regard.*° Thus, it held that “the MFN provision of the
Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT cannot be interpreted as providing consent to submit a dispute under
the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT to ICSID arbitration and that the claimant cannot rely on dispute
settlement provisions in other BITs to which Bulgaria is a Contracting Party in the present

case.”*!

What seems remarkable though is that the same tribunal characterized Article 3(3) of the
UK Model BIT, which is identical to Article 3(3) of the BIT applicable in the present case,
as an example of a “clear and unambiguous” expression of the intention of the Contracting
Parties to permit the “importation” of consent to jurisdiction from third party BITs. It stated

that:

[...] the intention to incorporate dispute settlement provisions must
be clearly and unambiguously expressed. This is, for example, the
case with the UK Model BIT, which provides in its Article 3(3):

® Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8
February 2005, RLA-19.

89 Tbid., | 200 (“A clause reading ‘a treatment which is not less favourable than that accorded to investments by
investors of third states’ as appears in Article 3(1) of the Bulgaria~-Cyprus BIT, cannot be said to be a typical
incorporation by reference clause as appearing in ordinary contracts. It creates doubt whether the reference to the other
document (in this case the other BITs concluded by Bulgaria) clearly and unambiguously includes a reference to the
dispute settlement provisions contained in those BITs.”).

81 Thid., | 227.

39

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

For avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment
provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply
to the provisions of Articles I to 11 of this Agreement.

Articles 8 and 9 of the UK Model BIT provide for dispute
settlement. The drafters of the UK Model BIT rightly noted that
there could be doubt and expressly neutralized that doubt.*?

323. Even arbitrators who have very categorically stated why, in their view, “in principle, an
MEN clause cannot import, in part or in toto, a dispute settlement mechanism from a third
party BIT into the BIT which is the basic treaty applicable to the dispute”** have made an
“{mportant caveat.”** They have accepted that an “interpretation of the MFN clause is only
necessary when the intention of the parties concerning its applicability or inapplicability to

the dispute settlement mechanism is not expressly stated or clearly ascertained.”*>

324. The example referred to by Professor Stern in her Dissenting Opinion in Impregilio v.
Argentina for such an express and clear intention to permit the “importation” of a dispute
settlement mechanism from a third-party BIT into the BIT is Article 3(3) of the UK Model
BIT which corresponds to Article 3(3) of the BIT applicable in the present case:

There are indeed cases where the parties expressly state that the
MEN clause applies to the dispute settlement mechanism. This has
been done, for example, by the drafters of the UK Model BIT, who
have provided in Article 3(3) that ‘for avoidance of doubt MFN
treatment shall apply to certain specified provisions of the BIT
including the dispute settlement provision’.*°

325. These considerations indeed strongly suggest that the MFN clause of the BIT which refers

to investors’ treatment “as regards their management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or

82 Tbid., | 204 (emphasis in original).

83 Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic, I1CSID Case No. ARB/O7/17, Concurring and Dissenting Opinion of
Professor Brigitte Stern, {| 16 (emphasis in original). See also Zachary Douglas, The International Law of Investment
Claims, Cambridge 2009, CLA-40, | 679 (“An MEN clause in the basic treaty can only be relied upon to incorporate
jurisdictional provisions in a third treaty where the MFN clause clearly envisages that possibility. The most notable
example is the UK Model BIT, Article 3(3) of which provides: For avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment
provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the provisions of Articles 1 to 11 of this Agreement.”).

4 Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O7/17, Concurring and Dissenting Opinion of
Professor Brigitte Stern, {| 17.

85 Tbid.

86 Thid., | 18.

 

40

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

disposal of their investments” in Article 3(2) and confirms in Article 3(3) that such
treatment “shall apply to the provisions of Articles 1 to 11 of this Agreement” which
include the “Settlement of Disputes between an Investor and a Host State” contained in
Article 8, can be invoked by a UK investor in order to “import” a dispute settlement

mechanism from a third party BIT.
326. But the Tribunal does not need to finally decide this issue.

327. Even if it may remain questionable whether the specific MFN clause applicable in this case
can serve to import jurisdiction given elsewhere, the ICSID tribunal in Garanti Koza v.
Turkmenistan*’ has provided a reasonable and convincing interpretation of both an MFN

and a dispute settlement clause which correspond to the ones applicable in the present case.

328. In that case, the UK construction company, Garanti Koza, was allowed to rely on the MFN
clause of the Turkmenistan-UK BIT,** which also clarified that it applied to the BIT’s
dispute settlement provisions,*? in order to directly access ICSID arbitration, instead of the

fall-back option of UNCITRAL arbitration.

329. As in the UK-Ukraine BIT, the investor-State dispute settlement provision contained in
Article 8(2) of the Turkmenistan-UK BIT permitted unilateral access to UNCITRAL
arbitration only, while ICSID and ICC arbitration had to be agreed upon by the disputing

parties.°°

81 Garanti Koza LLP v. Turkmenistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/1 1/20, Decision on the Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack
of Consent, 3 July 2013, CLA-63.

88 Article 3(2) Turkmenistan-UK BIT (“Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject nationals or companies
of the other Contracting Party, as regards their management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of their
investments, to treatment less favourable than that which it accords to its own nationals or companies or to nationals
or companies of any third State.”).

8° Article 3(3) Turkmenistan-UK BIT (“For the avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment provided for in
paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the provisions of Articles | to 11 of this Agreement.”).

° Article 8 Turkmenistan-UK BIT (‘“(1) Disputes between a national or company of one Contracting Party and the
other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under this Agreement in relation to an investment of the
former which have not been amicably settled shall, after a period of four [months] from written notification of a claim,
be submitted to international arbitration if the national or company concerned so wishes. (2) Where the dispute is
referred to international arbitration, the national or company and the Contracting Party concerned in the dispute may
agree to refer the dispute either to: [(a) ICSID; (b) ICC; (c) UNCITRAL arbitration]. If after a period of four months
from written notification of the claim there is no agreement to one of the above alternative procedures, the dispute

4l

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

330. In the view of the Garanti Koza v. Turkmenistan tribunal, the mandatory language of
Article 8(1) of the Turkmenistan-UK BIT already contained the State Parties’ consent to
submit disputes to international arbitration. Thus, Article 8(1) “establish(es) unequivocally
Turkmenistan’s consent to submit disputes with U.K. investors to international arbitration.
That consent satisfies the fundamental condition that the State must have consented to

participate in arbitration before it may be required to do so.”?!

331. Thus, the tribunal held that as a first step, a provision according to which a dispute “shall
be submitted” to international arbitration after a four-month notification period, constituted
a valid offer of consent. It recognized though that this did not solve the issue what kind of

arbitration a contracting party had consented to.”

332. The Garanti Koza v. Turkmenistan tribunal then turned to Article 8(2) of the
Turkmenistan-UK BIT, which it interpreted in the same manner as this Tribunal did in the
Section above.” That tribunal said “that Turkmenistan expressed in the BIT its willingness
to consider three possible kinds of arbitration whenever it was notified by a U.K. investor
of a claim under the BIT -- ICSID Arbitration, ICC Arbitration, and UNCITRAL
Arbitration. Article 8(2) is equally clear that the fall-back option, failing a case-specific

94

agreement to use one of the first two kinds of arbitration, is UNCITRAL Arbitration.

333. It then continued to inquire whether the lacking consent to ICSID could be imported via

more favorable dispute settlement provisions.*°

334. The Garanti Koza v. Turkmenistan tribunal found that the BIT’s MFN clause (particularly

as a result of its clarifying language) was broad enough to allow the claimant to rely on

shall at the request in writing of the national or company concerned be submitted to arbitration under the Arbitration
Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law as then in force. The parties to the dispute may
agree in writing to modify these Rules.”)
°! Garanti Koza LLP v. Turkmenistan, (CSID Case No. ARB/11/20, Decision on the Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack
of Consent, 3 July 2013, CLA-63, {| 29.

% Tbid., 1 30.

% See above {262 er seq.

°* Garanti Koza LLP v. Turkmenistan, (CSID Case No. ARB/11/20, Decision on the Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack
of Consent, 3 July 2013, CLA-63, | 36.

9% Thid., 1 39.

  
  

42

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

other BITs which clearly expressed Turkmenistan’s consent to be sued before an ICSID
tribunal.*° In other words, the MEN clause gave investors a choice between ICSID, ICC,
and UNCITRAL arbitration since the contracting States had already agreed to investment
arbitration in principle. Thus, the MFN clause did not serve to import consent, but merely

the choice between different arbitration systems. It thus concluded that:

[...] where Turkmenistan: (a) has expressly consented in the basic
U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT to submit investment disputes with U.K.
investors to international arbitration, (b) has provided in the same
BIT that U.K. investors and their investments will not be subjected
to treatment less favorable than that accorded to investors of other
States or their investments, (c) has expressly provided that the MFN
treatment so accorded ‘shall apply’ to the dispute resolution
provision of the BIT, and (d) has provided investors of third States,
specifically Switzerland, with an unrestricted choice between ICSID
Arbitration and UNCITRAL Arbitration, there is no reason why
Turkmenistan’s consent to ICSID Arbitration in its BIT with
Switzerland may not be relied upon by a U.K. investor, if the
provision for ICSID Arbitration or an unrestricted choice between
ICSID Arbitration and UNCITRAL Arbitration provides treatment
more favorable to the investor than the treatment provided by the
base treaty.”

335. In regard to the last issue, while “[a]cknowledging the difficulty of establishing that ICSID
Arbitration is objectively more favorable to an investor than UNCITRAL Arbitration for
all purposes,” the Garanti Koza v. Turkmenistan tribunal accepted “the Claimant’s
principal argument [...] that it is more favorable to have a choice between the two than not

to have a choice.”

w
wo
a

Indeed, this Tribunal also considers that it need not embark on the difficult assessment
whether any of the three arbitration mechanisms available in investment arbitration and

mentioned in Article 8 of the Treaty is more favorable than any other. It concurs with the

42 (“In the BIT before us, we find the answer to whether the MEN clause (Article 3) should be applied to
the investor-state arbitration article (Article 8) in the specific language of Article 3(3) of the U.K.-Turkmenistan
BIT.”).

°” Tbid., 79 (emphasis added).
%8 Thid., 190.

 

43

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

337.

338.

339.

340.

view that the availability of a choice between different forms of arbitration is a more

favorable treatment of investors than limiting them to only one form.

The Tribunal considers that the choices provided for in third party BITs, such as those
between ICSID and UNCITRAL arbitration given to investors from Austria in the 1996
Austria/Ukraine BIT or between ICSID, ICSID Additional Facility and UNCITRAL
arbitration given to investors from Canada in the 1994 Canada-Ukraine BIT, constitute
more favorable treatment than the offer of consent to UNCITRAL arbitration only in

Article 8 of the Treaty.

The dissenter in the Garanti Koza v. Turkmenistan case found that Turkmenistan’s
consent to arbitration was not contained in Article 8(1), but only in Article 8(2) of the
Turkmenistan-UK BIT, which in effect meant that it was limited to UNCITRAL

arbitration.

She also disagreed with the majority’s interpretation of the BIT’s MFN clause which she
found applicable to dispute settlement only when the parties had already agreed on dispute

settlement. In her view:

[tlo give effect to the MFN clause contained in Article 3(3), the
foreign investor must first be in a dispute settlement relationship
with the host state. A problem of treatment can only arise when the
foreign investor is treated in a certain way while entertaining a
specific relationship with the host state. If there is no relationship
between the host state and the foreign investor, the question of more
or less favourable treatment is not at stake and thus, the MFN
principle does not apply. The so-called ‘choice’ that supposedly
derives from an MEN provision and which has been extensively
used by the majority to justify its approach in casu, does not come
into play if a problem of treatment cannot be identified under the
U.K.-Turkmenistan BIT.!°

Thus, in effect, she denied the capability of an MFN clause to import jurisdiction at all

however explicitly treaty-makers may have expressed their intentions. In fact, her view

°° Garanti Koza LLP y. Turkmenistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/20, Decision on the Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack
of Consent, Dissenting Opinion by Laurence Boisson de Chazournes, 3 July 2013.

100 Tbid., {40 (emphasis in original).

44

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

341.

342.

343.

344.

implied that an MFN clause could never “import” dispute settlement from third party
treaties. Since this Tribunal has held that the scope and effect of an MFN clause depends
upon its formulation, such a sweeping rejection appears unjustified, in particular, in the
light of views of tribunals like Salini v. Jordan, Plama v. Bulgaria, Telenor v. Hungary,

and others, discussed above.'°!

Rather, the Tribunal concurs with the majority of the Garanti Koza v. Turkmenistan case.
The MEN clause of the UK-Ukraine BIT, which expressly extends to dispute settlement,
can be relied upon to import the more favorable choice of different forms of investment
arbitration given to third party investors than only UNCITRAL arbitration as provided for
in Article 8(2) of the Treaty. This potential is reinforced by the fact that Ukraine has already

effectively consented to international arbitration in Article 8(1) of the Treaty,

The Tribunal thus concludes that the ratione voluntatis requirement of consent to ICSID

jurisdiction is fulfilled.
A minority of the Tribunal disagrees with the above conclusion for the following reasons:

(i) Article 8(1) does not provide the requisite consent under the BIT to refer claims
by investors to “international arbitration”. Absent express consent given within
three months, the requisite Contracting Party’s consent solely arises under Article
8(2) where Ukraine’s consent to international arbitration is confined to UNCITRAL

Rules; and

(ii) the MEN provision in Article 3 does not abrogate the limitations to jurisdiction
arising under the last paragraph of Article 8(2) to enable ICSID arbitration as an
alternative. Hence, according to the minority, Article 8 excludes the possibility of

jurisdiction being found to arise under the MEN clause, Article 3.

(5) Investment made in violation of host State law

According to Respondent, the investment was not made in accordance with Ukrainian law

and should thus be considered to be outside the protection of the Treaty. In its written

1 See above If 310 et seq.

45

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

345.

346.

347.

348.

102

submissions Respondent raised two arguments why it considered that the investment was
not made in accordance with Ukrainian law: first, Respondent argued that Krederi had

102 Second, it maintained that

failed to register its investment as required by Ukrainian law.
Krederi had made its investment with “borrowed funds” in violation of Ukrainian law.!©
While the first defence was expressly withdrawn during the Hearing,!™ the second was

maintained and emphasized in Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief.!°>

The applicable BIT contains a so-called in accordance with host State law-clause. Pursuant
to Article 1(a) of the Treaty investment “means every kind of investment made in

conformity with the law in force in the territory of each of the Contracting Parties [...].”

The Tribunal notes that there has been a certain degree of uncertainty whether such “in
accordance with host State law”-clauses stipulate jurisdictional requirements, issues of

admissibility or relate to the merits of a case.!°

The Tribunal further notes that in the present case, the clause does not qualify the
obligations of a host State to admit a foreign investment. Rather, it clearly defines the
notion of investment covered by the Treaty and thus excludes investments not made “in

accordance with host State law” from the coverage of the Treaty.

Still, the Tribunal shares the concern of numerous investment tribunals that such a
requirement should not unduly restrict the protective scope of a BIT. It thus affirms the

existing jurisprudence on “in accordance with host State law”-clauses to the effect that the

Respondent Counter-Memorial, {1 47 et seq.

05 Thid., ff 42 et seq.

104 Hearing Transcript, D5:P990:L17-18.

05 Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, | 27.

106 Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award, 2 August 2006, RLA-
28, 190; Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/25, Award, 16 August 2007, { 401; loannis Kardassopoulus v. Georgia, ICSID Case No. ARB/O5/18,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 6 July 2007, { 182.

46

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

violations of host State law must have been sufficiently serious and that minor errors and

infractions of host State law do not lead to an exclusion of investment treaty protection.!°”

(6) Violation of registration requirement

349. In its Counter-Memorial, Respondent alleges that Krederi is not protected under the Treaty
because it failed to register its investment as required by Ukrainian law.!°* Respondent

particularly relies on Article 395 of the Commercial Code of Ukraine.

350. The Parties and their experts diverged sharply on whether such a registration requirement
was indeed mandatory at the time the investment was made or not and what a failure to

comply with such a duty entailed.

351. However, the Tribunal does not need to decide the issue because the argument that there
was a violation of a registration requirement on the part of the investor was withdrawn by

Respondent during the Hearing.'”

352. Nevertheless, the Tribunal considers that to the extent that an “in accordance with host

State law’-clause may be regarded to stipulate a jurisdictional requirement, it is necessary

1°7 Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, (CSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004, { 86 (“to exclude
an investment on the basis of such minor errors would be inconsistent with the object and purpose of the Treaty.”);
Desert Line Projects LLC v. The Republic of Yemen, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/17, Award, 6 February 2008, {| 106
(“As far as concerns the issue of the certificate, the threshold inquiry is whether Article 1(1) corresponds to mere
formalism or to some material objective. The Arbitral Tribunal has no hesitation in opting for the second alternative.
A purely formal requirement would by definition advance no real interest of either signatory State; to the contrary, it
would constitute an artificial trap depriving investors of the very protection the BIT was intended to provide. [...]”);
SAUR International SA v. Republic of Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/4, Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability,
6 June 2012 (Resubmitted), {308 (“[...] La condition de ne pas commettre de violation grave de l’ordre juridique est
une condition tacite, propre 4 tout APRI, car en tout état de cause, il est incompréhensible qu’un Etat offre le bénéfice
de la protection par un arbitrage d’investissement si l’investisseur, pour obtenir cette protection, a agit (sic) 4 l’encontre
du droit.”/ “[...] The requirement of not having committed a serious violation of the legal regime is a tacit condition,
inherent in every BIT, because it cannot be understood under any circumstance that a State is offering the benefit of
protection through investment arbitration when the investor, to obtain that protection, has committed an unlawful
action.”); Hochtief AG v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31, Decision on Liability, 29 December
2014, J 199 (“investments that are [...] dependent upon government approvals that were not in fact obtained, or which
were effected by fraud or corruption can be caught by a provision such as Article 2(2) of the Argentina-Germany BIT.
But not every technical infraction of a State’s lati iated with an i: will operate so as to deprive
that investment of the protection of a Treaty that contains such a provision.”).

 

108 Respondent Counter-Memorial, [47 et seq.
109 Hearing Transcript, D5:P990:L17-18.

47

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

353.

354.

355.

356.

357.

to address the question whether a potential violation of a registration requirement could

deprive it of its jurisdiction on its own motion.

In this regard, the Tribunal notes that even the Parties’ experts appeared to agree that a
failure to comply with such a duty did not lead to administrative or other sanctions, but
merely entailed a loss of rights and privileges under the Ukrainian foreign investment law

as well other rights and privileges for foreign investors under the Commercial Code.!!°

Thus, it appears questionable whether also a loss of BIT protection would follow. This may
be the case if one considers treaties part of the law of the land. But as discussed above, the
law itself provides only for the forfeiture of rights and privileges of foreign investors under

the foreign investment law and the Commercial Code.

Even if that were the case, e.g. if one took the BIT’s “in accordance with host State law”
provision literally, the question remains whether a mere non-registration would be a

sufficiently grave violation of host State law to deprive an investor of its BIT rights.

This Tribunal endorses the existing investment arbitration jurisprudence on “in accordance
with host State law” clauses to the effect that violations of host State must have been
sufficiently serious and that minor errors and infractions of host State law do not lead to an

exclusion of investment treaty protection.!!!

The Tribunal “agrees with the view that not every trivial, minor contravention of the law

should lead to a refusal of jurisdiction.”!!”

In particular, the Tribunal notes that the allegedly violated Ukrainian registration obligation
did not serve the purpose of permitting the host State a screening of the type of investment

intended to be made so as to make a deliberate choice whether or not to approve it. Rather,

10 Hearing Transcript, D3:P604:L9-18, D3:P631:L9-18, D3:P638:L23-P639:L5.
11! See above note 107.

12 Mamidoil Jetoil Greek Petroleum Products Societe Anonyme S.A. v. Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/24, Award,
30 March 2015, {| 483.

48

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

359.

361.

362.

113

it formed a routine requirement apparently intended to ensure that foreign exchange rules

could be monitored more easily.

In the case at hand, if Krederi failed to comply with its duty to register, such a minor
infraction cannot have the consequence of depriving it of protection under the Treaty or

depriving this Tribunal of its jurisdiction over the dispute.

(7) Credit financing

It is in its Counter-Memorial the Respondent alleges that Krederi should not be protected
under the Treaty because it had made its investment into [Company C] with “borrowed
funds” in violation of Ukrainian law.''? This illegality argument is maintained in its Post-

Hearing Brief.!!*

Claimant rejects this argument by stating that the two pieces of legislation arguably
prohibiting the setting up of companies by loan financing were not applicable at the
relevant time,!! and that the prohibition never applied to inter-company loans but only to
loans obtained from financial institutions.''° Claimant further disputes that a genuine loan
agreement lay behind the inter-company loans and argues that it was financing within a

group which did not have to be repaid and thus does not constitute money “borrowed.”!!7

It is not disputed between the Parties that Krederi’s investment in [Company C] through
which it ultimately acquired the land plots via [Company D] was made through loans
obtained by [...], a related company; what is disputed is the question of whether the
Ukrainian laws invoked by Respondent in fact made inter-company financing unlawful

and, if so, whether such a contravention of Ukrainian law amounts to a violation of the “in

Respondent Counter-Memorial, {| 42 et seq.

14 Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, {| 27 et seq.

45 Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, | 52

 

116 Thid., J 53.
"7 Hearing Transcript, DS:P990:L22-25-P991:L1, Claimant Closing (Prof. Mistelis: “[...] we have clearly stated that
in this case it's money flowing within a there's no of there's no loan

there's no security provided and no reliance on such standards could be used.”).

49

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

accordance with host State law” provision of the Treaty to the effect that the investor is not

protected by it.

363. Article 13(3) of the Ukrainian Law on Commercial Enterprises''* in force at the time of

the State registration of [Company C] on 11 November 2008 and Article 86(3) of the

119

Commercial Code of Ukraine'’’ arguably prohibit the use of borrowed funds as statutory

share capital.
364. Article 13(3) of the Ukrainian Law on Commercial Enterprises provided at the time:

It is prohibited to use public budget funds, loaned or pledged funds
to form the registered (pooled) capital, excluding the cases
envisaged by LoU on Priority Measures to Prevent Financial Crisis
Negative Consequences and on Amendment of Certain Legislative
Acts of Ukraine during the period of its validity. !°

365. Article 86(3) of the Commercial Code of Ukraine contained an almost identical prohibition

plus a number of provisions aimed at securing the financial conditions of the corporate

founders, !7!

366. The Parties have widely diverging views on the meaning of these provisions.

367. It seemed to be common understanding that a temporary prohibition of credit financing of
companies by public institutions may have been a rational measure in the aftermath of the

financial crisis 2008. It remained unclear, however, also during the Hearing, to what extent

118 Commercial Enterprises Law, R-36.

119 Commercial Code of the Ukraine in force as at 11 November 2008, R-37.

'20 Commercial Enterprises Law, R-36t.

121 Commercial Code of the Ukraine in force as at 11 November 2008, R-37t (“It is prohibited to use public budget
funds, loaned or pledged funds to form the registered capital, excluding the cases envisaged by LoU on Priority
Measures to Prevent Financial Crisis Negative Consequences and on Amendment of Certain Legislative Acts of
Ukraine during the period of its validity. The financial condition of the corporate founders of the open joint stock
companies as to their capacity to make the relevant contributions to the registered capital shall be audited by an
individual or corporate auditor. The financial condition of the corporate founders of the open joint stock companies
as to their capacity to make the relevant contributions to the registered capital in the cases envisaged by law shall be
audited by an individual or corporate auditor in accordance with the established procedure, while the welfare of
individual founders shall be confirmed by their income and property declaration attested by the relevant tax authority.”
{emphasis added]).

 

 

50

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

369.

370.

371.

372.

122

such a prohibition would have been intended to apply to the use of money borrowed from

related companies.

Such a broad prohibition of credit financing of share capital of companies would exclude

most foreign investment which is often structured via intra-group financing.

In the absence of clear Ukrainian jurisprudence on the provisions in issue to the effect that
they are also regarded as prohibiting intra-group financing, the Tribunal is disinclined to

read it in such a broad way.

Furthermore, it appears to the Tribunal that a provision which is so unclear in its scope that
it leaves serious doubts as to whether it actually prohibits intra-group financing cannot be
viewed as sufficiently fundamental so that a breach of it can be regarded to constitute a

violation of host State law sufficiently serious to deprive this Tribunal of its jurisdiction.

(8) Investment not made in good faith/corruption allegations

Finally, Respondent has made a somewhat amorphous bad faith argument. According to
Respondent, the investment was not made in good faith and should thus not be considered

protected by the Treaty.

Already in its Counter-Memorial, Respondent maintained that in case of “investor
wrongdoing” claims must be rejected “‘on the basis of a lack of jurisdiction or admissibility,

or as a defence on the merits.”!””

Invoking among others cases like Phoenix v. Czech Republic,'?> Hamester v. Ghana,!™4

and Yukos v. Russia,'> Respondent argues that serious and intentional wrongdoing such

Respondent Counter-Memorial, { 491.

"23 Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. The Czech Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/S, Award, 14 April 2009, RLA-37.
'24 Gustav F W Hamester GmbH & Co KG v. Republic of Ghana, I\CSID Case No. ARB/07/24, Award, 18 June 2010,

RLA-42.

5 Hulley Enterprises Limited v. The Russian Federation, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. AA 226, Award, 18 July 2014,

RLA-72.

51

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

374.

375.

376.

377.

as corruption, fraud or illegality, bad faith or misrepresentation should lead to the dismissal

of investment claims. !”°

It further suggests that the Tribunal should use its wide discretion to infer from a number

127

of red flags'*’ that the investment was originally procured by corruption and thus in

contravention of Ukrainian law.

Respondent submits that “[s]erious allegations of bad faith against Claimant (and those
associated with it) pervade these proceedings.”!?® According to Respondent, the
circumstances surrounding the acquisition of the three land plots present unanswered
questions and red flags which could have serious implications regarding the legality of
Claimant’s investment.'?? Respondent also argues that if the Tribunal finds that Claimant
was negligent and/or reckless in its acquisition of the properties, it has contributed to its

own loss and Respondent should not be liable for such loss.!*°

According to Respondent, in circumstances where wrongful conduct and illegality are
alleged, the Tribunal has the power to shift the burden of proof. It argues that in the instant
case, the Tribunal would be entirely justified in relying on prima facie evidence of illegality

and corruption to shift the burden of proof and draw presumptions from the red flags.'*!

Respondent submits the following facts are red flags of Claimant’s wrongful and bad faith
conduct in acquiring the three land plots: (i) “the purchase price, speed and other features

of the Property transactions”!*? (ii) “the individuals involved in the transactions, and

'26 Respondent Counter-Memorial, { 498.
27 Respondent Counter-Memorial, {| 520-523.

28 Respondent Rejoinder on the Merit

 

s, 154. See also Respondent Counter-Memorial, { 493.

'29 Respondent Rejoinder on the Merits, {| 154-201.
180 Tbid., 154.

31 [bid., 4 158.

132 Tbid., 157, 159-172.

52

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

378.

379.

381.

connections between them”,!*? and (iii) “the failure of Claimant to conduct adequate due

diligence.”'*4

Respondent concludes that in such circumstances, Claimant does not seek the protections

of the Treaty with clean hands and should not be able to avail itself of them.'?°

7136 maintains that the

Claimant rejects these allegations as “wholly unsubstantiated,
transactions leading to the acquisition of the land plots were lawful and regular and made

in good faith.

Claimant argues that Respondent has not been able to establish bad faith or corruption on
the part of Claimant and that its bad faith argument is “a red herring.”!>7 Claimant submits
that “[t]here is nothing suspicious or extraordinary about the purchase price, terms of the

99138

sale or speed of the transactions’””’”* and rejects the contents of [...]’s report as “information

rather than evidence” most of which was gathered in the public domain.!*?

According to Claimant, “[t]he Respondent has no findings of civil or criminal wrongdoing
against the Claimant or against [Company C] or [Company D] or, indeed, any other party
in the contractual chain, despite having the full powers of the Prosecutor's Office.”!4°

Instead, Claimant argues that several facts point to its good faith. [...]

133 Thid., YI] 157, 173-196.

134 Thid., Wf 157, 197-201.

135 Respondent Post Hearing Brief, J 34.

136 Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, {| 156.
137 Hearing Transcript D5:P1018L20.

138 Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, {[ 157.
139 Hearing DS:P1018:L21-25.

140 Hearing D5:P1017:L13-20.

53

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

384. This Tribunal takes the allegations of investor misconduct on the level of corruption or

related offences very seriously.

385. It clearly is of the view that the “in accordance with host State law” provision of the Treaty
implies that if corruption can be established remedies under the Treaty would become
unavailable because the Tribunal would be deprived of its jurisdiction.'*! But also in the
absence of an express “in accordance with host State law”-clause, such kind of illegality
must be regarded as contrary to the international or transnational ordre public. Violating
core values protected by international law would clearly be not in good faith and lead to

the loss of investment protection under the Treaty.!4”

386. Corruption is certainly a prominent example of an illegality contrary to international

principles which, if proven, leads to the loss of investment protection under a BIT. In this

141 Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award, 2 August 2006, RLA-
28, { 257 (“[...] because Inceysa’s investment was made in a manner that was clearly illegal, it is not included within
the scope of consent expressed by Spain and the Republic of El Salvador in the BIT and, consequently, the disputes
arising from it are not subject to the jurisdiction of the Centre.”); Metal-Tech Ltd. v. The Republic of Uzbekistan,
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/3, Award, 4 October 2013, RLA-64, {| 373 (“Uzbekistan’s consent to ICSID arbitration, as
expressed in Article 8(1) of the BIT, is restricted ‘0 disputes ‘concerning an investment.’ Article 1(1) of the BIT
defines investments to mean only i d in ii with local law. dingly, the present
dispute does not come within the reach of Article 8(1) and is not covered by Uzbekistan’s consent. This means that
this dispute does not meet the consent requirement set in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. Accordingly, failing
consent by the host state under the BIT and the ICSID Convention, this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over this dispute.”);
Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines (Fraport I), 1CSID Case No.
ARB/I1/12, Award, 10 December 2014, RLA-74, § 467 (“Based on the foregoing analysis and after due and thorough
consideration of the Parties’ arguments and the evidence on the record, the Tribunal finds that Fraport violated the
ADL when making its Initial Investment, the latter being consequently excluded as investment protected by the BIT
because of its illegality. The illegality of the investment at the time it is made goes to the root of the host State’s offer
of arbitration under the treaty. [...] Lack of jurisdiction is founded in this case on the absence of consent to arbitration
by the State for failure to satisfy an essential condition of its offer of this method of dispute settlement.” [footnote
omitted]).

142 SAUR International SA v. Republic of Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/4, Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability, 6 June 2012 (Resubmitted), { 308 (“[...] La condition de ne pas commettre de violation grave de l’ordre
juridique est une condition tacite, propre a tout APRI ...”/ “[...] the requirement of not having committed a serious
violation of the legal regime is a tacit condition, inherent in every BIT{...].” [emphasis added]); Fraport AG Frankfurt
Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/12, Award, 10 December 2014,
RLA-74, { 332 (“{...] even absent the sort of explicit legality requirement that exists here, it would still be appropriate
to consider the legality of the investment. As other tribunals have recognized, there is an increasingly well-established
international principle which makes international legal remedies unavailable with respect to illegal investments, at
least when such illegality goes to the essence of the investment.”); Achmea B.V. (formerly Eureko B.V.) v. The Slovak
Republic, PCA Case No. 2008-13, Final Award, 7 December 2012, § 177 (“[an investment may] be denied protection
under that BIT because, for example, the investor acted in bad faith by resorting to fraud or corruption in order to
make the investment.”).

    

 

 

 

 

54

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

regard, the Tribunal is in full agreement with the ICSID tribunals in Hamester v. Ghana,'*

World Duty Free v. Kenya,'+ Metal-Tech v. Uzbekistan,'° and EDF v. Romania.'“°

387. The problem in this case simply is one of lack of sufficient evidence of corruption or what
appears to the Tribunal even an almost deliberate withholding of evidence from the
Tribunal by both Parties. Claimant failed to demonstrate the true ownership structure
behind the Krederi group of companies and Respondent failed to come forward with any
substantiation of irregular payments that may indicate corruption. Instead, it repeatedly

insinuated that the making of the real estate investments was accompanied by corruption.

147

388. However, Respondent not only failed to establish corruption,'*’ it also failed to produce

any relevant evidence for the usual red flags surrounding corruption cases, such as the use
of consultants to which substantial payments have been made in exchange of unexplained
services, any indication of transaction values below market prices, of bid-rigging, etc. In
fact, the red flags expressly mentioned by Respondent, such as “the purchase price, speed
and other features of the Property transactions”,'“* “the individuals involved in the

39149)

transactions, and connections between them”'*’ and “the failure of Claimant to conduct

2150

adequate due diligence”!> remain vague and unsubstantiated.

 

3 Gustav F W Hamester GmbH & Co KG v. The Republic of Ghana, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/24, Award, 18 June
2010, RLA-42, { 123 (“[a]n investment will not be protected if it has been created in violation of national or
international principles of good faith; by way of corruption, fraud, or deceitful conduct; [...].”).

44 World Duty Free Company Limited v. The Republic of Kenya, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/7, Award, 4 October 2006,
RLA-29, ¢ 157 (“[...] bribery is contrary to the international public policy of most, if not all, States or, to use another
formula, to transnational public policy.”).

‘45 Metal-Tech Ltd. v. The Republic of Uzbekistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/10/3, Award, 4 October 2013, RLA-64, {[
290 (“[...] condemnation of corruption under Uzbek law is in conformity with international law and the laws of the
vast majority of States.”).

146 EDF (Services) Limited. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/13, Award, 8 October 2009, § 221 (“The Tribunal
shares the Claimant’s view that a request for a bribe by a State agency is a violation of the fair and equitable treatment
obligation owed to the Claimant pursuant to the BIT, as well as a violation of international public policy, [...]”).

'47 Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, § 30 (“R[espondent] accepts it has been unable definitively to establish
corruption.”).

148 Respondent Rejoinder on the Merits, {f 157, 159-172.

149 Thid., Wf 157, 173-196.

150 Thid., Pf 157, 197-201.

55

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

391.

393.

394.

VIL.

Also, Respondent’s related submissions that because Claimant acted in bad faith the

151

Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over its claims and/or they are inadmissible’°’ are not

substantiated.

Therefore, Respondent’s suggestions that Claimant’s claims should be declared

2

inadmissible on the basis of a “clean hands” doctrine-inspired principle,!*? is not

convincing on factual grounds alone.

Thus, the Tribunal does not consider that Respondent’s objection that the investment had
not been made in good faith and the linked allegations of corruption is sufficiently

substantiated.

LIABILITY

 

A. FAIR AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT

432.

(1) The Parties’ Positions

a. Claimant’s Position

b. Respondent’s Position
[..]

(2) Tribunal’s Analysis

Claimant’s core submission on the merits is that its investment suffered a violation of fair

and equitable treatment, and customary international law guarantees, as a result of denials

'5! Respondent Rejoinder on the Merits, | 154.

152 7hid. (“Claimant should not be allowed [...] any benefit from their own wrongful conduct.”); Respondent Post-
Hearing Brief, {| 34 (“In such circumstances, [Claimant] does not seek the treaty protections with clean hands and
should not be allowed to avail itself of them.”).

56

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

433.

434,

435.

436.

437.

of justice by the Ukrainian courts in the course of the four cases leading to the loss of

ownership over Plots 1, 2 and 3.

Claimant alleges a series of “procedural and substantive failings which, [it] submits, are

serious enough to constitute a breach of Ukraine’s treaty obligations.”!>?

These failings are outlined and detailed in Claimant’s pleadings and refuted in
Respondent’s pleadings. The Tribunal will refer to the actual allegations as well as the legal

arguments of the Parties and assess them below.!*4

Before addressing the individual court cases and the alleged fair and equitable treatment
violations committed by Respondent in the course of these domestic court proceedings the
Tribunal will set out the legal standard of a potential breach of fair and equitable treatment

as a result of a denial of justice.

In this regard, it appears uncontroversial between the Parties that investment jurisprudence
has identified the obligation to accord “due process” and/or conversely the prohibition to
“deny justice” to foreign investors as one of the core obligations contained in the broader

standard of fair and equitable treatment.

Numerous tribunals have reaffirmed the conceptualization of the fair and equitable
treatment standard as a protection standard that comprises various typical “elements” or
“principles”, stating that “transparency, stability and the protection of the investor’s
legitimate expectations play a central role in defining the FET standard, and so does
compliance with contractual obligations, procedural propriety and due process, action in

good faith and freedom from coercion and harassment.”!°5

'53 Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, 71.
54 See below 491.

55 Joan Micula, Viorel Micula, S.C. European Food S.A, S.C. Starmill S.R.L. and S.C. Multipack $.R.L. v. Romania,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/20, Final Award, 11 December 2013, 519 (footnotes omitted).

s7

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

438. Suffice it to rely on two ICSID awards involving Ukraine in which tribunals have aptly
summarized the main principles “embraced”!*® by the fair and equitable treatment

standard.

439. In Bosh y. Ukraine,'°’ an ICSID tribunal relied on previously established criteria to
determine breaches of fair and equitable treatment. The tribunal expressly endorsed the
elements identified in the Lemire v. Ukraine case,'** referring to the following relevant

factors:

[...] ‘whether the State made specific representations to the investor’;
‘whether due process has been denied to the investor’; ‘whether there is an
absence of transparency in the legal procedure or in the actions of the State’;
‘whether there has been harassment, coercion, abuse of power or other bad
faith conduct by the host State’; and ‘whether any of the actions of the State
can be labelled as arbitrary, discriminatory or inconsistent.’!>?

440. In fact, the tribunal in Lemire v. Ukraine had stated that:

[t]he threshold must be defined by the Tribunal, on the basis of the wording

of Article II.3 of the BIT, and bearing in mind a number of factors, including

among others the following:

- whether the State has failed to offer a stable and predictable legal
framework;

- whether the State made specific representations to the investor;

- whether due process has been denied to the investor;

- whether there is an absence of transparency in the legal procedure or in the
actions of the State;

- whether there has been harassment, coercion, abuse of power or other bad
faith conduct by the host State;

- whether any of the actions of the State can be labeled as arbitrary,
discriminatory or inconsistent. '

'86 R. Dolzer and C. Schreuer, Principles of International Investment Law (2012) 133.

51 Bosh International, Inc. and B&P, Ltd Foreign Investments Enterprise v. Ukraine, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/I1,
Award, 25 October 2012, CLA-14.

'58 Joseph Charles Lemire v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18, Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, 14 January
2010, 4 284.

89 Bosh International, Inc. and B&P, Ltd Foreign Investments Enterprise v. Ukraine, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/11,
Award, 25 October 2012, CLA-14, 212.

160 Joseph Charles Lemire v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18, Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, 14 January
2010, 4 284.

58

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

441.

442,

443,

444,

In any of the jurisprudential summaries of the requirements of fair and equitable treatment
the absence of a “denial of justice” or of “due process” figures prominently and it can be
regarded as well accepted that treaty parties which have specifically undertaken to accord
fair and equitable treatment to investors from other treaty parties breach such obligation if

they commit a denial of justice.

a. Denial of Justice

While it is thus generally accepted that, as a matter of principle, a denial of justice may
amount to a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard, it is equally accepted
that only a serious deficiency and failure to accord due process will reach the threshold of
such a fair and equitable treatment violation, as exemplified by the NAFTA tribunal in
Waste Management v. Mexico which required national court decisions to be “[...] either ex

161

facie or on closer examination, evidently arbitrary, unjust or idiosyncratic’ in order to

amount to a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard.

Investment tribunals have characterized this shared understanding in different ways and
have largely endorsed the customary international law principles concerning denial of

justice.'

A helpful restatement of the concept of denial of justice can be found in Iberdrola v.

3

Guatemala,'® where an ICSID tribunal stated that under international law a denial of

justice could constitute:

(i) the unjustified refusal of a tribunal to hear a matter within its competence or
any other State action having the effect of preventing access to justice; (ii)
undue delay in the administration of justice; and (iii) the decisions or actions of
State bodies that are evidently arbitrary, unfair, idiosyncratic or delayed. In this

'61 Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, 30 April 2004, CLA-4, J

130.

162 Article 9 Harvard Research Draft on the Law of State Responsibility (“[...] gross deficiency in the administration

of judicial or remedial proce:
the proper administration of j

  
 

. failure to provide those guarantees which are generally considered indispensable to
tice, or a manifestly unjust judgment.”), cited in: E. M. Borchard, ‘The Law of

Responsibility of States for Damage Done in their Territory to the Person or Property of Foreigners’, AJIL Spec.
Suppl. 23 (1929), 131, at 173.

63 Tberdrola Energia S.A. v. The Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/5, Award, 17 August 2012.

59

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

matter, the Tribunal shares the position of the Claimant in that ‘... denial of
justice is not a mere error in interpretation of local law, but an error that no
merely competent judge could have committed and that shows that a minimally
adequate system of justice has not been provided.’!*

445. These traditional aspects are echoed by the tribunal in Azinian v. Mexico which held that:

[a] denial of justice could be pleaded if the relevant courts refuse to entertain a
suit, if they subject it to undue delay, or if they administer justice in a seriously
inadequate way.'®

446. To these elements the Azinian v. Mexico tribunal added:

[...] a fourth type of denial of justice, namely the clear and malicious
misapplication of the law. This type of wrong doubtless overlaps with the
notion of ‘pretence of form’ to mask a violation of international law. [...].'°

447. In the recent Philip Morris v. Uruguay award,'®’ an ICSID tribunal made clear that for a
breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard a high threshold was required. In the

tribunal’s view,

[flor a denial of justice to exist under international law there must be ‘clear
evidence of [...] an outrageous failure of the judicial system’ or a demonstration
of ‘systemic injustice’ or that ‘the impugned decision was clearly improper and
discreditable.”'®*

448. This high threshold is also reflected in the Philip Morris v. Uruguay tribunal’s finding that

although “[...] there were a number of procedural improprieties and a failure of form”

169

before the domestic courts,'°’ these did not amount to a denial of justice under international

law.

164 Tbid., unofficial English translation, {[ 432.

165 Robert Azinian, Kenneth Davitian, & Ellen Baca v. The United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2,
Award, | November 1999, CLA-17, 102.

466 Thid., 4 103.

‘61 Philip Morris Brand Sarl, Philip Morris Products S.A. and Abal Hermanos S.A. v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay,
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7, Award, 8 July 2016, CLA-47.

168 Thid., 500.
169 Thid., | 578.

60

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

449, In this Tribunal’s understanding a number of elements have to be taken into account in

order to assess whether a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard has occurred

through a denial of justice:

i)

ii)

iii)

iv)

v)

vi)

It can arise from a denial of access to courts in the domestic legal arena, the

classical concept of a denial of “access to justice”.

It may also stem from overly long proceedings, pursuant to the old adage of

“justice delayed, justice denied”.

Most frequently a denial of justice may result from a serious defect in the
adjudicative process, such as a violation of equal treatment of the parties or of
various other core rights of litigants, such as the right to be heard and to present

evidence, etc.

Rather exceptionally, a totally irrational or abusive outcome going beyond mere

misapplication of the law may constitute a denial of justice.

Further, it must be kept in mind that in most situations the internal legal system
may remedy some of the above-mentioned irregularities and that this requires

some form of exhaustion of local remedies.

Finally, since investment tribunals are not sitting as appeal courts over domestic

adjudicators they only apply a limited review.

450. These elements should be understood more precisely as set out below.

(i) Denial of access to the courts

451. The right of access to the courts or other adjudicatory bodies is a basic aspect of due

process. Refusing such access constitutes the classical case of denial of justice.

61

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

452.

453.

454.

455.

456.

This is also widely recognized by investment tribunals. The tribunal in Azinian v. Mexico
held that “[a] denial of justice could be pleaded if the relevant courts refuse to entertain a

suit [...].”!7° Similarly, the tribunal in Iberdrola vy. Guatemala,'”' stated that:

[...] under international law a denial of justice could constitute: (i) the unjustified
refusal of a tribunal to hear a matter within its competence or any other State action
having the effect of preventing access to justice [...].!”*

The tribunal in AMTO v. Ukraine‘ held that:

[denial of justice relates to the administration of justice, and some
understandings of the concept include both judicial failure and also legislative
failures relating to the administration of justice (for example, denying access to
the courts).!*

The “legislative failures” referred to in the AMTO v. Ukraine award possibly stemmed
from domestic procedural law which did not provide for means to effectively pursue one’s

tights. In that specific case, such a claim was rejected by the tribunal because:

[...] the Claimant has failed to demonstrate that the Bankruptcy Law is not
effective for the enforcement of rights within the meaning of Article 10(12) of
the ECT, or that its provisions otherwise constitute a denial of justice.!°

(ii) Undue delay

It is generally accepted that overly long court proceedings, i.e. undue delay which does not

result from the litigants’ actions or inaction, may amount to a denial of justice.

This was clearly stressed by the tribunal in Azinian v. Mexico which held that “{a] denial

of justice could be pleaded if the relevant courts refuse to entertain a suit, if they subject it

1% Robert Azinian, Kenneth Davitian, & Ellen Baca v. The United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2,
Award, 1 November 1999, CLA-17, 102.

"7! Iberdrola Energia S.A. v. The Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/5, Award, 17 August 2012.
"2 Tbid., 432 (unofficial English translation).

"3 Limited Liability Company AMTO v. Ukraine, SCC Case No. 080/2005, Final Award, 26 March 2008.

"4 Tid. 4 75.

"5 Thid., | 89.

62

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

to undue delay, [...].°!7° Similarly the ICSID tribunal in Roussalis v. Romania'”

acknowledged that “undue delay to rule on a dispute may amount to a denial of justice.”!”8

457. At the same time, investment tribunals should be very reluctant to impose their own views
on swift and efficient judicial proceedings on domestic courts. Rather, they ought to be
willing to concede that various factors may contribute to delays which are not thus to be

considered unreasonable.

458. For instance, the tribunal in Oostergetel v. Slovakia,'” while holding that undue delay may
constitute a denial of justice as a matter of principle, stated that “the complexity of the case,
the behaviour of the litigants involved, the significance of the interests at stake, and the

behaviour of the courts themselves are factors to consider in the analysis” whether a delay

was indeed undue. '*°

459. Similarly, the ICSID tribunal in Toto Costruzioni v. Lebanon'*! held that:

“[...] whether justice is rendered within a reasonable delay depends on the
circumstances and the context of the case. Each lawsuit must be analyzed
individually with regard to:

- the complexity of the matter;

- the need for celerity of decision;

- the diligence of claimant in prosecuting its case.”!*?

176 Robert Azinian, Kenneth Davitian, & Ellen Baca v. The United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2,
Award, | November 1999, CLA-17, { 102.

17 Spyridon Roussalis v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/1, Award, 7 December 2011.

"8 Thid., J 602.

179 Jan Oostergetel and Theodora Laurentius v. The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award, 23 April 2012, RLA-
51 also submitted as RLA-122.

180 Thid., | 290 (“The Tribunal agrees with the view [...] that the complexity of the case, the behaviour of the litigants
involved, the significance of the interests at stake, and the behaviour of the courts themselves are factors to consider
in the analysis of a claim of undue delay constituting a denial of justice. Having reviewed the expert evidence and
particularly the timeline of the proceedings submitted by the Parties, the Tribunal is satisfied with the Respondent’s
explanations. No excessive procedural delays resulting in a denial of justice or a violation of Article 3 of the BIT have
been demonstrated.”).

181 Toto Costruzioni Generali S.p.A. v. The Republic of Lebanon, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/12, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 11 September 2009, RLA-99.

182 Thid., | 163 (footnotes omitted).

63

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

460.

461.

462.

463.

464.

It also cautioned, however, that “[although overcharged dockets may explain the fact that
a decision in a civil matter was not rendered within a reasonable time, it does not excuse

the delay.<!8

(iii) Serious defects in the adjudicative process

The core element of due process certainly is that the adjudicator conducts the adjudicatory
process in a proper fashion. Thus, serious defects in the adjudicative process, such as
violations of equal treatment of the parties, the right to be heard or other core rights of

litigants may amount to violations of due process. !*4

Conversely, denial of justice is encapsulated as the arbitrary disregard of due process. Often
reference is made to the famous ICJ dictum in Elettronica Sicula SpA (ELSI) (UnitedStates
of America v. Italy) that arbitrary judicial conduct is “a wilful disregard of due process of

law, [...] which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of judicial propriety.“!85

Many investment tribunals have espoused this notion and clarified that it is indeed a
demanding standard which implies that there must be a serious deficiency in the

adjudicatory process to amount to a denial of justice.

For instance, in Genin v. Estonia,'*® an ICSID tribunal held that in order to constitute an

“arbitrary act that violates the Tribunal’s ‘sense of juridical propriety”’'®’ “[...] any

183 Tbid., J 162.
184 Deutsche Bank AG v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, \CSID Case No. ARB/09/2, Award, 31 October
2012, { 420 (“[...] conduct that does not offend judicial propriety, that complies with due process and the right to be

heard.”).

185 Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI), (United States of America v. Italy), International Court of Justice, Judgment, 20
July 1989, { 128 (“Arbitrariness is not so much something opposed to a rule of law, as something opposed to the rule

of law. [...] It is a wilful disregard of due process of law, an act which shocks, or at leas

 

surprises, a sense of judicial

propriety.”).

186 Alex Genin, Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v. The Republic of Estonia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/99/2,
Award, 25 June 2001, RLA-14.

187 Thid., | 371 (footnotes omitted),

64

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

procedural irregularity that may have been present would have to amount to bad faith, a

wilful disregard of due process of law or an extreme insufficiency of action.” !88

465. Similarly, the tribunal in Oostergetel y. Slovakia,'® noted:

[...] that a claim for denial of justice under international law is a demanding
one. To meet the applicable test, it will not be enough to claim [...] that a
judicial procedure was incompetently conducted, or that the actions of the judge
in question were probably motivated by corruption. A denial of justice implies
the failure of a national system as a whole to satisfy minimum standards.'!”

466. The tribunal in Arifx. Moldovam emphasised that a denial of justice or lack of due process
results from “fundamentally unfair and biased proceedings” or when the outcome is not
just wrong or debatable, but so “egregiously wrong” that “no honest, competent court”

could have reached such a result:

The responsibility of States not to breach the fair and equitable treatment
standard through a denial of justice is engaged if and when the judiciary has
rendered final and binding decisions after fundamentally unfair and biased
proceedings or which misapplied the law in such an egregiously wrong way,
that no honest, competent court could have possibly done so.'”?

467. Similarly, the tribunal in Rompetrol v. Romania insisted that:

[...] it would not regard any breach, or indeed any series of breaches, of
procedural safeguards provided by national or international law in the context
of a criminal investigation or prosecution as giving rise to the breach of an
obligation of fair and equitable treatment. All will depend on the nature and
strength of the evidence in the particular case, on the impact of the events
complained about on the protected investor or investment, and on the severity
and persistence of any breaches that can be duly proved, as well as on whatever
justification the respondent State may offer for the course of events.'%

188 Ibid.

'89 Jan Oostergetel and Theodora Laurentius v. The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award, 23 April 2012, RLA-
51 also submitted as RLA-122.

19 Thid., 273.

'°! Mr, Franck Charles Arif v. Republic of Moldova, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/23, Award, 8 April 2013, RLA-59.
192 Tbid., 4 442.

'°3 The Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3, Award, 6 May 2013, RLA-61, 279.

65

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

468.

469.

470.

471.

472.

(iv) No mere misapplication of the law

When a domestic judgment or administrative decision is egregiously wrong and not merely

erroneous it may amount to a violation of due process.

This view was adopted by the tribunal in Arif v. Moldova'™ which held that “outrageously
wrong, final and binding decisions” may constitute a breach of fair and equitable treatment
by the judiciary.!°° It cautioned though that it must have “misapplied the law in such an

egregiously wrong way, that no honest, competent court could have possibly done so.”!°°

But tribunals have emphasized that such “manifestly wrong or unjust judgments” are to be

distinguished from merely erroneous outcomes.

The investment tribunal in AMTO v. Ukraine'®” clearly espoused the view that a denial of

justice cannot arise from a mere misapplication of the law. It said:

[...] [iJn the absence of any demonstrated procedural irregularity or
interference, the Claimant’s objection to these decisions is simply that they are
wrong in law. This Tribunal is not a court of appeal for the decisions of the
Ukrainian courts and, in any event, the Tribunal does not accept that these
decisions are wrong in law.'%*

Similarly, the tribunal in Oostergetel v. Slovakia,!” held that a claim for denial of justice
under international law is a demanding one and that “to meet the applicable test, it will not

be enough to claim that municipal law has been breached, that the decision of a national

194 Mr. Franck Charles Arif v. Republic of Moldova, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/23, Award, 8 April 2013, RLA-59.

195 Tbid., 4 445 (“[...] the State can be held responsible for an unfair and inequitable treatment of a foreign indirect
investor if and when the judiciary breached the standard by fundamentally unfair proceedings and outrageously wrong,
final and binding decisions.”).

196 Thid., J 442.

197 Limited Liability Company AMTO y. Ukraine, SCC Case No. 080/2005, Final Award, 26 March 2008.

198 Thid., J 80.

199 Jan Oostergetel and Theodora Laurentius v. The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award, 23 April 2012, RLA-
51 also submitted as RLA-122.

66

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

473.

474.

475.

476.

court is erroneous, [...].”?° Rather, a “denial of justice implies the failure of a national

system as a whole to satisfy minimum standards.”?"!

(v) Exhaustion of local remedies

The ICSID Convention does not require parties to exhaust local remedies before instituting

202

ICSID proceedings.~”” However, this only relates to the consent to ICSID arbitration and

thus the issue of bringing an ICSID claim.

It is another question whether in the case of alleged due process violations committed by
the courts of host States, local remedies must be exhausted in order to assess whether States
have in fact violated such due process obligations. This relates to the issue of at what point
in time such wrongs were committed and to the possibility of remedying judicial wrongs.
In effect, it may amount to an implicit requirement for denial of justice claims that is similar

to an exhaustion of local remedies.

On this basis, a number of tribunals have suggested that the exhaustion of local remedies
is a required substantive element of a claim for denial of justice or breach of fair and
equitable treatment and is thus different from the traditional rule of exhaustion of local
remedies as a procedural prerequisite for the exercise of diplomatic protection or the

institution of investment claims.

For instance, in Chevron v. Ecuador,?°? a UNCITRAL tribunal noted that the parties made
“a distinction between the traditional exhaustion of local remedies rule under international

law and the objection to be considered here [...] that a ‘Claimant must first exhaust the

200 Thid., | 273.

21 Ibid.

202

Article 26 second sentence ICSID Convention makes it clear that a Contracting Party has to make the exhaustion

of local remedies an express condition of consent to ICSID arbitration. (“A Contracting State may require the
exhaustion of local administrative or judicial remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration under this
Convention.”).

203 Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v. The Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, PCA Case
No. 34877, Interim Award, 1 December 2008.

67

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

remedies available to it within the [local] court system before a State can be held liable for

denial of justice’ [...].°?

477. The Chevron y. Ecuador tribunal explicitly agreed with Jan Paulsson “that exhaustion of
local remedies is a required substantive element of a claim for denial of justice.”°° It stated

that:

[t]his exhaustion requirement can be viewed as a necessary element both for a
denial of justice under customary international law and for the breach of a
substantive BIT obligation such as ‘fair and equitable treatment.’ However, in
both cases, the question concerns the substance of the claims put before the
Tribunal. Despite couching its objection in the language of ripeness and
admissibility, what the Respondent raises is an issue affecting liability.
Exhaustion of local remedies in this context is therefore an issue of the merits,
not jurisdiction.

478. A number of tribunals have held that denial of justice claims implicitly contain an

exhaustion of local remedies requirement.

207

479. For instance, the tribunal in Frontier Petroleum v. Czech Republic™’’ stated that:

[t]he fair and equitable treatment standard has been found on several occasions
to encompass the notion of a denial of justice which, in turn, implies the
requirement to exhaust local remedies.

480. Similarly, the tribunal in Toto Costruzioni v. Lebanon” insisted on an exhaustion of local

remedies as a precondition to raise a denial of justice claim, saying that “[...] a state can

24 Thid., | 232.
285 Jan Paulsson, Denial of Justice in International Law (2007) 111, 125; cited in Chevron Corporation and Texaco
Petroleum Corporation v. The Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 34877, Interim Award, | December
2008, | 235.

26 Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v. The Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, PCA Case
No. 34877, Interim Award, 1 December 2008, 233.

2°” Frontier Petroleum Services Ltd. v. The Czech Republic, PCA, Final Award, IIC 465 (2010), 12 November 2010,
RLA-45.

208 Thid., | 293.

2” Toto Costruzioni Generali S.p.A. v. The Republic of Lebanon, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/12, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 11 September 2009, RLA-99.

68

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

481.

482.

483.

only be held liable for denial of justice when it has not remedied this denial
»210

domestically.
Most recently, the tribunal in Corona v. Dominican Republic?'' clarified that a denial of
justice usually requires an exhaustion of local remedies by holding that “[...] an
administrative act, in and of itself, particularly at the level of a first instance decision-
maker, can [not] constitute a denial of justice under customary international law, when

further remedies or avenues of appeal are potentially available under municipal law.”?!?

It follows from the above that claimants have to actively pursue their claims in the domestic
legal system and cannot simply abandon their claims when they intend to claim a denial of

justice. This requirement was clearly addressed in two investment awards involving

Ukraine.

In Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine? an ICSID tribunal clarified that an investor’s
abandonment of its investment “without any effort at overturning the administrative fault;

and thus to claim an international delict on the theory that there had been an uncompensated

virtual expropriation”?!+

is likely to fail on the merits. The tribunal said:

[...] In such instances, an international tribunal may deem that the failure to
seek redress from national authorities disqualifies the international claim, not
because there is a requirement of exhaustion of local remedies but because the
very reality of conduct tantamount to expropriation is doubtful in the absence
of a reasonable — not necessarily exhaustive — effort by the investor to obtain
correction.?'>

210 Thid., { 164.

211 Corona Materials, LLC v. Dominican Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/14/3, Award on the Respondent’s
Expedited Preliminary Objections in accordance with Article 10.20.5 of the DR-CAFTA, 31 May 2016.

212 Phid., | 248.
213 Generation Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9, Award, 16 September 2003.
214 Tbid., $9 20.30.

215

Ibid. (emphasis in original).

69

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

484.

485.

486.

This reasoning was invoked by the respondent in Lemire v. Ukraine.?'® It argued that
“Claimant should have taken advantage of the available local remedies that would have

been capable of correcting the alleged administrative wrong.”?!7

While the tribunal in Lemire v. Ukraine found that the applicable BIT did not contain an
exhaustion of local remedies requirement”!® and that thus, “the possibility to file a claim
against a specific measure, [was] not burdened by any requirement to previously appeal to

a 22
the national courts,”?!°

it also cautioned that this “{...] does not mean that an investor can
come before an ICSID tribunal with any complaint, no matter how trivial, about any
decision, no matter how routine, taken by any civil servant, no matter how modest his

hierarchical place.”?”°

(vi) Limited standard of review

Finally, it is generally accepted that the standard of review of domestic court decisions is
very limited. Investment tribunals are neither intended, nor empowered to sit as appellate
instances to rule on the correctness of domestic court decisions. Rather, it is their task to
assess whether such court decisions amount to a denial of justice. This was clearly
acknowledged by Claimant, correctly stating that the Tribunal cannot be expected “to
review or to provide the judgment as to whether the Ukrainian courts have decided the
matter substantively correctly, but whether [Company D] has been afforded a fair process

in Ukraine.”

26 Joseph Charles Lemire v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/18, Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, 14 January

2010.

217 Ibid. { 274.

218 Tbid., §] 276 (“The starting point of the Tribunal’s analysis must be the text of the BIT. The BIT — unlike other
Treaties — does not include any clause requiring the initiation or exhaustion of local remedies before the filing of an
investment arbitration. Quite the contrary: Article II.3 deviates from the standard US Model BIT in only one point,

the insertion of the following phrase: *

 

.] For purposes of dispute resolution under Articles VI and VII, a measure

may be arbitrary or discriminatory notwithstanding the fact that a Party has had or has exercised the opportunity to
review such measure in the courts or administrative tribunals of a Party’.”).

209 hid. 277.
220 Thid., | 278.
221 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, | 83.

70

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

487. This limited function of an investment tribunal has clearly become the dominant view. It

was recognized by the tribunal in Azinian v. Mexico which held that:

 

[t]he possibility of holding a State internationally liable for judicial decisions
does not, however, entitle a Claimant to seek international review of the
national court decisions as though the international jurisdiction seized has
plenary appellate jurisdiction. [...] What must be shown is that the court
decision itself constitutes a violation of the treaty. [...] Claimants must [also]
show either a denial of justice, or a pretence of form to achieve an
internationally unlawful end.”?

488. The tribunal in Arif v. Moldova’ also reaffirmed this limited review function of
investment tribunals. Specifically in regard to assessing denial of justice claims, the

tribunal held that:

[...] international tribunals must refrain from playing the role of ultimate
appellate courts. They cannot substitute their own application and interpretation
of national law to the application by national courts. It would blur the necessary
distinction between the hierarchy of instances within the national judiciary and
the role of international tribunals if ‘[a] simple difference of opinion on the part
of the international tribunal is enough’ to allow a finding that a national court
has violated international law.**

489. Also, the tribunal in Lemire v. Ubaine™> confirmed this view and expressly stated that it:

[...] is not thereby suggesting that a breach occurs if the National Council
makes a decision which is different from the one the arbitrators would have
made if they were the regulators. The arbitrators are not superior regulators;
they do not substitute their judgment for that of national bodies applying
national laws. The international tribunal’s sole duty is to consider whether there
has been a treaty violation.””°

 

 

222 Robert Azinian, Kenneth Davitian, & Ellen Baca v. The United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2,
Award, | November 1999, CLA-17, { 82.

23 Mr. Franck Charles Arif v. Republic of Moldova, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/23, Award, 8 April 2013, RLA-59.

24 Ibid., J 441, citing J. Paulsson, Denial of Justice in International Law, Cambridge University Press, 2005, 72
(footnotes omitted).

25 Joseph Charles Lemire v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18, Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, 14 January
2010.

226 Thid., | 283.

71

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

490.

491.

492.

493.

494,

495.

It is on the basis of such an understanding that the Tribunal will not review the Ukrainian
court proceedings on the merits, but rather assess whether they amount to a breach of due

227

process and thus of Article 2 of the Treaty.

b. The Four Cases before the Ukrainian Courts

At the core of the present dispute is the question of whether the treatment before the
Ukrainian courts as a result of which Claimant’s investment was ultimately lost, constituted

a violation of due process.

In this regard, it is clear that the acts of the judiciary are attributable to Ukraine and that, if
they fall short of an international standard as enshrined in fair and equitable treatment,

Ukraine can be held liable under the Treaty.

In the present case, however, what is problematic is the question of whether Claimant,
Krederi, was deprived of the opportunity to make its case before the Ukrainian courts or
whether it was rather third parties that may have suffered from judicial treatment possibly

falling short of fair and equitable treatment.

If there was a denial of justice by the Ukrainian courts, as claimed by Claimant, the question
is to whom was it done: to [Company A], to [Company B], to [Company D], to [Company
C], to Krederi, or to others? Was a potential denial of justice committed via-d-vis
[Company A] in the Ukrainian court cases a fair and equitable treatment violation of
Krederi’s rights under the BIT?

Express allegations of wrongdoing by the Ukrainian courts vis-a-vis the foreign investor
protected by the Treaty, Krederi, are limited, such as the alleged violation of the courts’
duty to notify [Company D] of the court proceedings concerning the annulment of the sale
in Case 2.28 According to Claimant, “[Company D] was not properly notified of the date,

time and place of the court hearing. The writ of summons was delivered to the Prosecutor’s

27 See also the express request by Claimant in Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, { 85 (“The Claimant does not wish the

Tribunal to review the domestic court cases as such. It simply wishes the Tribunal to asse:

the due process and see

 

in the judgments whether the due process is a trigger of protection, and particularly a trigger of Article 2 of the BIT,
and also of the minimum standards of protection under customary international law.”).

28 See below 11 559 et seq.

72

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

496.

497.

498.

Office to be further delivered to [Company D]. However, there is no evidence of delivery
of summons. This would amount to breach of Articles 33, 35 of the Code of Administrative
Proceedings (CAP) of Ukraine, the principle of contradiction and the principle of due
process.””? Also with regard to Case 4, the allegation of substantive due process violations

relate to [Company D] as a direct party to the court proceedings.”*°

As outlined above, Claimant’s main argument is that it suffered from a denial of justice on
the part of Ukraine and that this resulted, among others, from “the Prosecutor’s referral of
the claim to the courts and the courts’ consideration of the claims despite the lapse of
limitation period and inadequate substantiation of the claims by the Prosecutor, the courts’
denial of due process and justice of Claimant and the subsequent attempt by KCC to resell
the properties.””*! In this regard, it is relevant that Claimant refers to a “domino effect”
arguing that the procedural irregularities of the court cases that did not directly involve

[Company D], still affected it in their outcomes.”

This Tribunal will thus dissect the often very general assertions and analyse the four court
cases in detail in order to determine whether specific acts and/or omissions on the part of
Respondent amounted to a breach of due process constituting a violation of fair and

equitable treatment.

(@ Case 1: [...]

Case | was started on [...], when the Deputy Prosecutor of Kiev filed a claim to invalidate
the KCC’s approvals of the lease/sale of Plot 1 to [Company A]. The proceedings were
formally opened on [...], led to a hearing on [...], and resulted in a first instance judgment
of [...], in which the Kiev City District Administrative Court declared the KCC’s approvals

for the lease/sale of Plot | to [Company A] invalid.?%3

229 Claimant Memorial, { 82 (b).

230 See below fff] 602 et seq.

25! Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, { 76.
232 Hearing Transcript D5:P1012:L3-9

233 Decision of the District Administrative Court, [...], CE-42.

73

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

499.

500.

501.

502.

On [...], [Company A] appealed this decision to the second instance court, the Kiev

Regional Administrative Appellate Court, which dismissed the appeal on [...].7>*

A further appeal was brought by [Company A] to the Supreme Administrative Court on
[...], which rejected the appeal on [...].23°

On [...], [Company D] applied for leave to the Supreme Administrative Court to appeal its
decision to the Supreme Court. On [...], the Supreme Court of Ukraine denied [Company

DJ]’s appeal.?*°

In regard to Case 1, the following alleged violations of due process have been raised and
will be scrutinized by the Tribunal: 1) that the case was wrongly litigated in the
administrative, instead of the commercial courts; 2) that the case proceeded although the
statute of limitations had expired; 3) that there was no fair opportunity for the parties to the

proceedings to litigate in the Ukrainian courts; and 4) that [Company D] was deprived of

the opportunity to be heard.

 

Specifically, Claimant alleges that Case 1 was unlawfully heard by an administrative court
and should have been heard in the commercial/economic courts.>” Relying on the expert

opinion by [...],°* Claimant argues that “the dispute on the recognition of the real estate

 

sale transaction as illicit and the cancellation of the Kyiv city council decision [...] should
be subject to the jurisdiction of the economic courts, and therefore the decision of the
administrative courts in the case number [...] is a decision of a court lacking
jurisdiction.” In his expert opinion, [...] stated that in 2010, the Ukrainian Supreme Court

had held that if a State body’s “resolution on disposal of land plots” is challenged and has

 

24 Decision of the Kyiv Appeal Administrative Court, [...], CE-43.

235 Decision of the Supreme Administrative Court of Ukraine,

 

236 Decree of the Supreme Administrative Court of Ukraine, Kyiv [...], R-90.
237 Claimant Memorial, 4 82.

238 Expert Opinion of [...]

23° Claimant Memorial, J 82(a).

74

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

504.

505.

506.

507.

508.

implications for the subsequent acquisition of private parties it shall be subject to the ‘civil

(Economic) jurisdiction’, since there is a dispute on civil right.”?4°

Respondent relies on the report by [...] according to whom there was no uniform practice
on this jurisdictional issue.”! Respondent further argues that Claimant had failed to object

to the administrative court’s exercise of jurisdiction.”

To this Tribunal, it appears that the exact delimitation of jurisdiction between
administrative and commercial courts for the type of cases at issue in the present
proceeding obviously was a matter of contention under Ukrainian law. There was

243 ,

apparently no uniform practice at the crucial time**’ and it was thus hard to argue that the

selection of one forum was clearly wrong.

Furthermore, even if one would accept that the administrative court had been the wrong
venue, such an error does not appear to be sufficiently grave to be qualified as abusive and

contrary to the requirements of due process thus constituting a denial of justice.

In addition, the lack of objections on the part of the legal representatives of [Company A]
as well as Claimant and its affiliated companies indicates that Claimant was not really
aggrieved by the fact that the invalidation proceedings were brought in the administrative

as opposed to the commercial/economic courts, as suggested by Claimant.

The Tribunal thus finds that the fact that the case was possibly instituted before the “wrong”
domestic forum of the Ukrainian administrative courts does not amount to a breach of due

process on the international level.

2. Challenge after expiry of statute of limitations

509.

Claimant specifically alleges that the proceedings in Case 1 were time-barred and thus

unlawfully conducted to the detriment of [Company A] and consequently, Krederi. In fact,

20 Expert Opinion of [...]

4! Second Expert Report of [...]
242 Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, [ 70.
243 This was obviously not only the position of the Respondent, but also acknowledged by Claimant. [...]

75

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

510.

S11.

512.

513.

the alleged disregard of the three-year limitation period forms one of the core complaints
of Claimant’s denial of justice claim. It repeatedly refers to Respondent’s “bad faith and

arbitrary and inconsistent treatment of [its] investment as exemplified by the way the courts
A244

  

dealt with the limitation period [..

According to Claimant, the challenged decisions of the KCC “were adopted respectively
[in 2007] while the claim was filed by the Prosecution only on [...]. It is undisputed that
the Prosecutor of Kyiv City was informed about these decisions of Kyiv City Council in
2007; the court did not consider the issue that the action was time barred.”245

L...], the lawyer of [Company A], complained that the Court did not properly consider the
Prosecutor’s application to extend the limitation period.“ The Prosecutor asked for an
extension because it allegedly only learned of the illegal resolution of the KCC in early
2011. According to Claimant, however, the “Prosecutor knew or ought to have known of
the decision of the Kiev City Council when the decision was made, or shortly thereafter,’*7
and the institution of proceedings was in fact the result of a request by the President of the

Ukraine in [...] to investigate the property sale.?4

According to Claimant “there was a limitation period of three years for any action to be

taken. The court extended without any reasoning the three year period.”

Respondent argues that the Prosecutor filed a timely request for an extension of the
limitation period which was considered by the court as evidenced by the hearing minutes.
Further, since the Prosecutor only learned about the illegality in [...], and started the

proceedings shortly thereafter, it was well within the limitation period.*°

4 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, { 87; Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, {| 76.
See also Claimant Memorial, J 98.

245 Claimant Memorial, 1 60.

246 Ibid.

247 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, | 89.
28 Thid., J 19.
9 Claimant Memorial, 4 60.

280 Respondent Counter-Memorial, [ 286.

76

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

514. It appears undisputed between the Parties that the applicable three-year limitation period
starts to run from the point in time when the Prosecutor knows or should have known about
the illegality. The Parties disagree as to when the Prosecutor actually knew or should have

known these facts.

515. According to Respondent, the Prosecutor had no knowledge “in 2008 or 2009 of the
irregularities in relation to Plot 1.’?! In its view, the Prosecutor only learned of the
irregularities in [...]. Respondent further maintains that there was no evidence provided by

Claimant that the Prosecutor already had such knowledge before 201 1.252

516. This appears to be an impermissible reversal of the burden of proof: if a party wants to
avail itself of a remedy at a point in time that lies beyond an applicable limitation period
by arguing that it had not or could not have known earlier, it is that party’s obligation to
show this. Thus, it was not [Company A’s] duty to prove that the Prosecutor had actually
known of the illegality before [...]. Rather, it was the Prosecutor’s obligation to

demonstrate that it had not and could not have known about the illegality.

517. In fact, the [...] criminal investigations of [Company A] and its winning the tender for Plot

1 indicate that the Prosecutor’s office had some knowledge of irregularities or at least that

it could have gained additional knowledge if acting diligently.

518. Furthermore, the fact that the Prosecutor’s office was regularly invited to attend the KCC
meetings and received its minutes most likely had put the Prosecutor on notice of the

irregularities. At the very least, the Prosecutor should have known after reviewing the files.

25! Respondent Counter-Memorial, {{ 287.
252 Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, 73 (“No documents about the Properties were seized from [Company C/D] in
the search [Furman T: 361, 11-12]. As explained at {| 21-24 of the Rejoinder on the Merits, the criminal cases which
were commenced (but not pursued) against [Company A] and concerned charges of ‘false entrepreneurship and
misdemeanours’ [[...] T: 509, 12-18; [...] 763,19 — 764,3]. No evidence was provided, at the hearing or otherwise by
C, that the criminal investigations (or any search related to those investigations) concerned matters of fact which
overlapped with facts underlying the civil Proceedings brought in 2011.”).

  

 

253 Expert Opinion of [...]

77

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

519.

520.

521.

522.

523.

All of these circumstances make it difficult to comprehend how the court had granted the

extension.

Furthermore, the way the extension was granted by the local court was highly questionable.
The hearing minutes indicate that an extension request had been made and was granted,”
but the decision itself did not give any reasons why the extension had been granted.?*> Even
Respondent’s expert, [...], confirmed that the “ideal position” would have been for the

court to give reasons.7°°

While the appellate administrative court in this case did not address the issue, the appellate
economic court in Case 2, [...] involving the claim to invalidate the contracts for the
lease/sale of Plot | from KCC to [Company A], and relying on Case 1, addressed the
question of the limitation period. Referring to Article 267(5) of the Civil Code of Ukraine
it found that “the infringed right is protected in the event of a finding of good reason of

»257 Tn order to overcome the statute of limitations,

missed limitation period by the court.
the Kiev Economic Court of Appeal considered that the gravity of the breach justified an
extension. According to the Kiev Economic Court of Appeal, the “given circumstances
indicate the gravity of causes of skipping of the statute of limitations and the need to
consider the dispute on the merits.”?°* Thus, it considered that the district administrative

court had been correct in extending or “skipping” the limitation period.

However, the Kiev Economic Court of Appeal was also not very clear as to the “good
reason” why the limitation period was missed. It merely asserted that the Prosecutor’s

office became aware of the irregularities “only in early 2011.”?

For this Tribunal, the question is not whether there was an extension of the statute of
limitations or an assessment of the compliance with the required limitation period that was

compliant or contrary to Ukrainian law. Rather, the issue — from an international due

254 Minutes of the hearing before the Kiev Administrative Court on [...], R-58.
255 Decision of the District Administrative Court, [...], CE-42.

256 Hearing Transcript D4:P759:L11-15 [...]

257 Decision of the Kyiv Economic Court of Appeal, [...], CE-46, p. 30.

258 Ibid.
259 Ibid.

78

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

524.

525.

526.

260 Order of the President of Ukraine to carry out the audit of acquisi
[...], R-53. See also Decision of the Kyiv Economic Court of Appeal,

process perspective — is whether the decisions of the Ukrainian courts permitting the
Prosecutor to bring his claims were made on the basis of manifestly abusive reasoning and

whether this would constitute a sufficiently grave error that can be qualified as a denial of

 

In fact, there are a number of questionable elements surrounding the non- or hardly
reasoned decisions of the Ukrainian courts to allow the Prosecutor to bring the invalidation
proceedings after more than three years: it was not denied by Respondent that the minutes
of the KCC meetings were available to the Prosecutor’s office and that the procedural
irregularity which led to the invalidation, the absence of a formal discussion in the KCC,
could have been detected by studying the minutes. Further, it seems accepted also by the
Ukrainian courts that the Prosecutor’s investigation was triggered by a request of the
President of the Ukraine in March 2011.7

On the other hand, it may not be unreasonable to consider that the Prosecutor’s Office
would not be able to detect all problematic aspects of all KCC decisions, including a
lease/sale transaction approved by the KCC. Thus, an investigation may seem a reasonable

trigger for such detection.

Also, the fact that it was carried out following a request by the President of Ukraine,?°!

though hinting towards a political motivation, cannot be viewed. as absolutely improper.
Many legal systems place the powers of public prosecutors under the political control of
ministers or other high-ranking State officials. Thus, regardless whether under Ukrainian
law it was proper for the President to give instructions to investigate, as argued by

262

Respondent’s expert [...],“°° it appears that such powers, their exercise and the ensuing

investigation cannot be regarded as intrinsically improper and unacceptable.

 

‘ion of the Properties, copied from the court file,
.--], p. 30, CE-46 (“Thus, the Kyiv Prosecutor’s

 

Office became aware about the violation of the law by the Kyiv City Council and the Chairman of the Kyiv City State
Administration in decision making about the lease and alienation of the land plot at [...] in favor of [...] only in early
2011, during verification of the legality of the aforesaid land alienation on behalf of the President of Ukraine.”).

261 Order of the President of Ukraine to carry out the audit of acquisition of the Properties, copied from the court file,
15 March 2011, R-53.

262 Hearing Transcript D4:P864:L 13-25 [...]

79

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

527.

528.

Furthermore, the limitation period had not expired a long time before the institution of the
Prosecutor’s invalidation proceedings and there was obviously some judicial practice in

Ukraine to grant extensions on a routine basis.

As a result, the Tribunal finds that the permission granted to the Prosecutor to institute the
proceedings, by either extending the limitation period or considering that the Prosecutor
acted within the prescribed time-frame, in and of itself constitutes no violation of due

process.

3. No fair opportunity to make its case

529.

531.

Claimant’s core case of a denial of justice involving a lack of due process is that the
proceedings were “[...] unfair and that it ha[d] no real and effective opportunity to present

its case and that justice was administered in a seriously inadequate fashion“?

Specifically, Claimant argues that it did not have enough time to make its case. As
summarized in its post-hearing brief, Claimant was of the view that “one day’s notice, or
15 minutes to prepare a petition, a week to deal with a file, ignoring any application from
the non-state party are not typical of a fair hearing or due process and breach both local

and international standards of due process.“7°*

Claimant further argues that the court decision was suspiciously quickly decided?® and
that the parties did not have sufficient time to prepare their case. In addition, Claimant

argues that the “Court did not fully examine all circumstances of the case”.”°°

Respondent replied that according to Ukrainian procedural rules, an administrative case
should be considered and decided upon within a reasonable time, but no longer than within
one month from the date of the opening of the proceedings in the case and that since the

“proceedings in Case | were formally opened on [...], [Company A] received notice of the

263 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, | 90.

264 Thid.

265 Phid., 21 [...]
266 Claimant Memorial, { 60.

80

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

533.

535.

536.

proceedings at the address which [Company A] admits was its then current address on [...],
the merits hearing was held on [...] and the judgment was issued on [...]. This period of
time was therefore slightly longer than normal and as set out by Ukrainian law.”?°7
Respondent also disputes that [Company A] or [Company D] were deprived of a chance to

make their case.7°

In regard to the claim that [Company A] did not have enough time to present its claim, it
is hard to follow this line of argumentation. The proceeding in Case 1, seeking the
annulment of KCC’s approvals for lease/sale of Plot 1 to [Company A], formally started
on [...]. [Company A] had to prepare for the hearing of [...] on relatively short notice, but
the evidence shows that [Company A] was probably familiar with the substance of the

dispute by the end of [...] or at least by [...].?°

 

The fact that the decision was rendered two days after the hearing (which took place on
[...] and the decision is dated [...]) also does not give rise to due process concerns. Article
122.1 of the Ukrainian Administrative Procedure Code requires decisions to be rendered
within one month after the start of the proceedings.”” It took slightly longer in the present

case. Still, the proceedings came to a relatively quick end.

Usually, denial of justice complaints concerning the length of judicial proceedings concern
overly long proceedings; swift court action as such does not amount to a violation of due
process although it may indicate a lack of deliberations and due scrutiny of the parties’
arguments by a court. However, that has to be established separately and cannot merely be

deduced from the fact that a decision was rendered quickly.

Claimant’s further allegations of violations of equality of treatment before the Ukrainian

courts do not appear to be sufficiently substantiated.

267 Respondent Counter-Memorial, {| 289.

268 Thid.

26 [...] Hearing Transcript D3:P480:L18-23.
20 [...], Hearing Transcript D3:P703:L23-P704:L17.

81

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

537.

539.

540.

541.

The suggestion that the administrative court’s annulment of the KCC’s approvals for
lease/sale of Plot 1 to [Company A] was not sufficiently reasoned is hard to follow. Since
it was apparently primarily based on the technical ground that there was a lack of debate
in the KCC before the actual decision”! and did not turn on complicated substantive issues.
The Tribunal finds it hard to see why a court could not arrive at such a decision within a
short time-frame. In fact, the court concluded from the transcript of the KCC meeting that

the issue of the sale was directly put to a vote without any debate.”””

Also, the other reasons
for the invalidation of the KCC decision stated by the Kiev City District Administrative
Court and upheld on the appellate stages seem to be plausibly reasoned. According to the
Kiev City District Administrative Court, crucial additional approvals such as that by [...]

were missing.?”>

It is the alternative reasoning based on these additional grounds for the invalidation of the
KCC decisions to lease and subsequently to sell Plot | to [Company A] which seems to

insulate the proceedings from another potential denial of justice problem.

If it had been merely the lack of a disc

 

ssion or debate in the KCC preceding the vote in
the Council’s plenary session, the issue would arise whether this could be legitimately
viewed a serious enough issue to invalidate the KCC’s decision to sell Plot 1. As a pure
formality, it could be regarded as a pretext to review the procedure and rescind the decision

in order to reclaim the land plot.

Although Respondent’s expert, [...] carefully avoided characterizing the requirement of
having a debate in the KCC as a mere technicality,” he admitted that a breach of a mere

technicality would not merit the invalidation of an administrative decision.?”

As the administrative court decisions demonstrate though, it was not only the formality of

the lack of a debate in the KCC before taking a vote that led to the invalidation of the two

211 [...] Hearing Transcript D4:P790:L4-6 [...]

 

 

Decision of the District Administrative Court, [...], CE-42, p. 8.
bid., p. 9.

274 Hearing Transcript D4:P796:LI-[...]
25 Hearing Transcript D4:P796:L4-6 [...]

82

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

542.

KCC decisions. Rather, this ground was one among others that in combination led the

courts to invalidate the KCC decisions.

As a result, the Tribunal fails to share Claimant’s view that the proceedings before the

administrative courts in Case | amounted to a procedural denial of justice.

4. Failure to provide third parties an opportunity to be heard

543.

544,

545.

546.

547.

548.

Finally, Claimant alleges that at the hearing before the administrative court “[...] objected
to the case being heard in absence of some defendants (representatives of the parties) and

the third parties.”?”° This complaint apparently refers to an alleged inability of [Company

D] to take part in the proceedings of Case 1.

Respondent counters that since [Company D] never raised any complaint in this regard at
any relevant stage of the proceedings, despite being on notice, there were no grounds for
any complaint.?””

As the record shows, [Company D] was in fact aware of the proceedings in Case | since
late [...], and obviously made a strategic choice not to participate in the proceedings of
Case |. Thus, any allegation that the Ukrainian courts deprived [Company D] of its right

or chance to participate in the proceedings seems factually incorrect.
The Tribunal thus fails to see any basis for the alleged denial of justice.

As a consequence, the Tribunal finds that no denial of justice was established in regard to
Case 1.
(ii) Case 2: [...]; Claim in the economic/commercial courts to

invalidate the contracts for the lease/sale of Plot 1 from KCC to
[Company A]

This case was also initiated by the Deputy Prosecutor of the City of Kiev who applied on

[...] to the Economic Court of Kiev to declare the contracts between KCC and [Company

26 Claimant Memorial, 1 60.

277 Respondent Counter-Memorial, { 292.

83

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

549.

550.

551.

552.

553.

554.

A] for lease and sale of Plot 1 invalid. The proceedings were stayed between [...] and [...]
pending the outcome of Case 1. In [...], the Prosecutor asked for the expansion of the claim
to also invalidate the subsequent transfers of Plot 1. [...], the Economic Court of Kiev

granted the original request, but refused to permit the expanded claim.?’8

Both [Company A] and the Prosecutor appealed. On [...], the second instance court, the
Kiev Economic Court of Appeal, denied [Company A’s] as well as the Prosecutor’s

appeals.?”?

A further appeal by [Company A] to the Supreme Economic Court of Ukraine on [...] was

also denied by the latter court on [...].78°

In regard to Case 2, the following alleged violations of due process have been raised and
will be scrutinized by the Tribunal: 1) that the case proceeded although the statute of
limitations had expired; and 2) that the Ukrainian courts failed to provide “equality of rights

of all participants”.
1. Challenge after expiry of statute of limitations

As in Case 1, Claimant alleges that the proceedings in Case 2 were time-barred since they
were instituted three years after the conclusion of the Lease Agreement of [...] between
the KCC and [Company A] and the Sale and Purchase Agreement dated [...] between Kiev
City Council and [Company A].

According to Claimant, “the Court admitted the case despite having been in breach of the
time limitation provided for by law and without any reasoning for such extension of time

limitation.””8!

Respondent argues that the Prosecutor “presented a reasoned application to the court,

explaining that the Prosecutor’s office has conducted the audit of the legitimacy of the

28 Decision of the Economic Court of Kyiv, [...], CE-45.
9 Decision of the Kyiv Economic Court of Appeal, [...], CE-46.
280 Decision of the Supreme Economic Court of Ukraine, [...], CE-47.

281 GC]

aimant Memorial, {| 65(a).

84

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

555.

556.

557.

558.

acquisition of Plot 1, which revealed the violations on which the claim was based, was

requested and commenced only in [...].”?°?

1 283

As already mentioned in the discussion of the limitation period in Case the appellate

court in the proceedings of Case 2 did address the question directly, requiring “a finding

of good reason of missed limitation period by the court.”?**

As stated above, this Tribunal has some doubts about the court’s logic in granting an
extension under Ukrainian law. As acknowledged by Respondent, “[...] according to
Article 261 of the Ukrainian Civil Code, a limitation period starts when the claimant
became aware, or should have become aware, of the violation which gives rise to the claim
and a court may give protection to a right where the court finds there were good reasons

why the limitation period was missed.”?*°

However, while the Kiev Economic Court of Appeal seemed to rely on this ground for an
extension, it was not very clear as to the “good reason” that the limitation period was
missed. It merely asserted that the Prosecutor’s office only became aware of the
irregularities “{...].”?°°

As explained above, though, this Tribunal finds that as a matter of international law, the
permission granted to the Prosecutor to institute the proceedings, either by extending the
limitation period or by considering that the Prosecutor acted within the prescribed time-

frame, in and of itself does not constitute a violation of due process.

2. Failure to provide “equality of rights of all participants”

559.

282

283,

  

Further, Claimant rather equivocally asserts that “the courts did not provide equality of

rights of all participants in resolving this matter and hence did not comply with due process

Respondent Counter-Memorial, { 318.
ee above If 521 et seq.

284 Decision of the Kiev Economic Court of Appeal, [...], CE-46, p. 30.

285

Respondent Counter-Memorial, { 317.

286 Thid. See also Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, { 278.

85

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

560.

561.

562.

requirements.””8” More specifically, Claimant contends that [Company D] was not
properly notified of the court hearings in Case 2 and thus not given an opportunity to

present its arguments (in relation to other cases).78

Respondent replies that Claimant made this complaint “without any supporting evidence
to demonstrate any prejudice caused to [Company A] or any party during the conduct of
Case 2, for example identifying determinative materials or arguments that a party wished
to submit but was not permitted or able to. A review of the court files shows that [Company
A] took an active part in the proceedings in Case 2, submitting arguments both in writing
and orally. However, those were found by the court to be largely without merit and Case 2
was decided against [Company A].”?%

In regard to the failure to include [Company D] as a party to Case 2, Respondent notes that
“{Company A] strenuously objected the inclusion of review of validity of subsequent
transfers into the ambit of Case 2, and the court sided with [Company A] on this point. In
view of this, as a matter of procedural technicality, the subsequent transferees could not be
joined as third parties in the case. A further action (Case 3) had to be commenced with a
view to dealing with the subsequent contracts for the transfer of Plot 1. It is entirely unclear
to Respondent how Claimant can allege due process breaches by a court system which
found in favour of [...] on such procedural applications.”?

To this Tribunal, it is indeed hard to understand from Claimant’s very general assertions
what exactly it complains about when arguing that “the courts did not provide equality of
rights of all participants in resolving this matter and hence did not comply with due process
requirements.”””! In its post-hearing submissions, Claimant suggests that any due process

breaches of Case | would “infect” the decisions in Case 2.7

287 Claimant Memorial, 4 65(c).

288 Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, { 86.

?89 Respondent Counter-Memorial, {| 323.
20 Thid., | 324 (emphasis in original).

291 Claimant Memorial, { 65(c).

282 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, | 24

86

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

563.

564.

565.

566.

567.

568.

The record does not demonstrate procedural improprieties in the course of Case 2. The
rights of the parties to litigate their cases do not appear to have been violated. Since the
Tribunal also did not find any due process violations in regard to Case 1, the argument of

a potential “contagious” effect on Case 2 appears moot.

As regards the alleged deprivation of [Company D]’s right to participate in Case 2, two

considerations appear crucial to the Tribunal:

Firstly, whether Ukrainian law had to provide a right to an affected third party in
proceedings aimed at the annulment of a contract in order to avoid a due process violation,
and secondly, whether [Company D] actually wanted to be joined to the proceedings in
Case 2.

It clearly follows from the rule of law demands on domestic law that a national legal system
must offer individuals and legal persons an opportunity to challenge measures that affect
their rights or to obtain redress that is capable of remedying the negative implications of
national measures. Such a right to challenge does not necessarily have to be a right to be
joined as a party to pending proceedings. Any legal remedy would suffice, in particular, if
an entity like [Company D] had the opportunity to seek redress for the loss of its property
by either directly challenging the court decision invalidating the sales transaction or by

being able to seek damages from those that were responsible for its loss.

As discussed below, it appears that under Ukrainian law a number of legal remedies were
available in principle to Claimant to recover its loss either from the KCC, [Company A] or
[Company B].?? To what extent these were realistic options is difficult to assess since

Claimant did not pursue any of the potentially available remedies.?*

In the present case, it also seems that [Company D] was not actually seeking to be joined
to Case 2. The fact that [...], the lawyer who also represented [Company D], appeared as

counsel for [Company A], the party to the proceedings in Case 2, and opposed the inclusion

283 See below 623.
24 See below | 624.

87

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

569.

570.

S71.

572.

573.

574.

295

of other parties to Case 2,°” indicates that [Company D] must have been aware of the

proceedings. It is unclear why it did not actively seek to join the proceedings.

Thus, the Tribunal sees no basis for finding that Claimant’s right to participate in the

proceedings in Case 2 had been violated.

As a consequence, the Tribunal finds that no denial of justice was established in regard to
Case 2.

(iii) Case 3: [...]; Claim in the economic/commercial courts to return
Plot 1 from [Company D] to KCC

This case was again initiated by the Deputy Prosecutor of the City of Kiev as a follow-up
to the previous two cases, requesting the return of Plot | from [Company D] on the basis
of Article 388 Ukrainian Civil Code (“UCC”). It was instituted on [...], and on [...] the
first instance court, the Kiev Economic Court, decided that [Company D] had no right of

ownership to Plot | and that it should be returned to the City of Kiev.”

In [...], [Company A], which was named a third party together with [Company B],
appealed to the Kiev Appellate Economic Court and, on [...], [Company A]’s appeal was

denied.”””

On [...], [Company D] which had not appealed the first instance decision appealed both
the first instance and the appellate decisions to the Supreme Economic Court. Leave for
this appeal was granted, but on [...], the Supreme Economic Court rejected [Company D]’s

appeal on the merits and upheld the lower courts’ decisions.”

The substance of the proceedings was a claim for the restitution of Plot | from [Company
D] to the City of Kiev on the basis of Article 388 UCC. Article 388 UCC gives the original

owner of property a rei vindicatio claim, it permits the original owner to seek restitution of

°5 Decision of the Economic Court of Kyiv, [...], CE-45; Hearing Transcript D5:P1053:L4-10; Respondent Closing

Slide

 

Slide 28.

26 Decision of Kyiv Economic Court of Appeal, [...], CE-48.

27 Decision of Kyiv Economic Court of Appeal,

 

.], CE-49.

2°8 Decision of Supreme Commercial Court of Ukraine, [...], CE-50.

88

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

575.

576.

577.

578.

579.

299 GC]

property that was lost, stolen or “departed under a lack of will” even from bona fide

purchasers.

In regard to Case 3, the following alleged violations of due process have been raised and
will be scrutinized by the Tribunal: 1) that the Prosecutor lacked standing to bring this case;
2) that there was a substantive due process violation in the outcome of this case; and 3) that

there were procedural due process violations in the course of the proceedings.

1. Lack of standing of the Prosecutor

Claimant alleges that the Deputy Prosecutor did not have standing to bring the proceedings
in this case.”” It alleges that the Prosecutor only had the power to protect State interests,
but not municipal interests, and added that it “appears that municipal property is not

automatically classified as state property.”>

Respondent replies that the land was in fact State owned and was only managed by the
municipality.*°! It concedes that since 2004, it is possible to designate land as either
municipal or State land, but absent any evidence of a transfer to municipal ownership, the

land plot in issue must be considered State property.

In fact, the record of this case does not clearly indicate any designation of Plot | as
municipal land. However, even if that had been established it is hard to see how an alleged.
wrong qualification of the land at issue may deprive a State prosecutor of legal remedies
according to domestic law leading to a denial of justice on the international level where

such remedy was erroneously granted.

It is hardly conceivable that the institution of legal proceedings aiming at the annulment of
a decision of a municipal entity on the ground of illegality by a State prosecutor entrusted

with defending the public interest, could amount to a gross violation of due process.

aimant Memorial, {{ 70.

30 Ibid.

301 Respondent Counter-Memorial, { 351.

89

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

580.

The Tribunal thus rejects the assertion that the alleged lack of standing of the Deputy

Prosecutor amounts to a violation of fair and equitable treatment.

2. Fund ally wrong outcome, ive due process violation

581.

582.

In regard to Case 3, as a result of which [Company D] was ordered to hand back Plot | to
the KCC, Claimant alleges that this outcome violated [Company D]’s rights as a bona fide
purchaser.°” According to Claimant, the conditions for reclaiming property from a bona
fide purchaser were not fulfilled in the present case.*” The outcome was further reached in
violation of basic standards of the administration of justice. According to Claimant, the
case was similar to the situation in Stretch v. f/A°™ in which the European Court of Human
Rights (“ECtHR”) had held that deprivation of property as a result of a technical breach of
the public body’s internal decision-making process was contrary to Article 1 of the ECHR’s

first additional protocol.3°

Respondent considers that case inapplicable and relies on a basic principle of Ukrainian
law as affirmed by its Supreme Court*” that a local self-governing authority must comply
with its internal law in order to form an effective will in order to part with property. It
maintains that Article 388 UCC was correctly applied by the Ukrainian courts since its

third paragraph “says that property may be taken from the possession of a bona fide

 

purchaser and returned to the original owner, if the property was transferred from that
original owner’s ownership without his will (that is, capacity).”°°7 According to
Respondent, the invalidated decisions of the KCC evidenced that the City of Kiev had

parted with the property without its will.*°

302 Claimant Memorial, {J 70(d), 79(i).

303 Claimant Memorial, {{ 70(d) [...]

3 Stretch v. The United Kingdom, ECtHR 320, 2003, 24 June 2003, R-7.

305 Claimant Memorial, { 85(f).

306 Resolution of the Supreme Economic Court of Ukraine in case No. 916/2129/15, YK-16; Resolution of the Supreme
Court of Ukraine in case No. 916/2129/15, YK-17; Resolution of the Supreme Court of Ukraine in case No.
916/2144/15, YK-18.

5°7 Respondent Counter-Memorial, {| 353.

308 Respondent Counter-Memorial, § 354 [...]

90

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

583.

584.

585.

586.

44

Claimant appears to be alleging a misapplication of Ukrainian law, specifically of the
conditions under which the original owner of property may reclaim it from a bona fide
purchaser. It hardly alleges, however, any breach of international law which might arise

only from “outrageously wrong, final and binding decisions”

of domestic courts as
opposed to from a mere misapplication of domestic law. As discussed above, this Tribunal
will not sit on appeal of decisions of the Ukrainian courts and it will not substitute its
interpretation of Ukrainian law for that of the Ukrainian judiciary.*!°

Only where the interpretation of Ukrainian law appears patently unjust and adopted merely

to the detriment of a party, are suspicions of substantive due process violations raised.

The Tribunal thus has to turn to Article 388 UCC in order to assess whether the
interpretation given by the Ukrainian courts was a plausible one or was egregiously wrong

to the detriment of Claimant.

Article 388 UCC, entitled “Right of the Owner to Claim the Property from Bona Fide

Beneficiary”, states:

1. If the property is purchased on the basis of the paid contract from a person who
had no right to alienate it, and the buyer (a bona fide beneficiary) did not and could
not know about it, the owner shall have the right to claim this property from the
beneficiary only in case if the property:
1) was lost by the owner or by the person to whom the owner transferred
the property into possession;
2) was stolen from the owner or the person to whom the owner transferred
the property into possession;

3) in some other way retired from the possession of the owner or of the
person to whom the owner had transferred the property into possession,
without their will.

2. Property cannot be claimed from a bona fide beneficiary if it was sold per the
procedure established for the fulfilment of the court decisions.

3% Mr. Franck Charles Arif v. Republic of Moldova, \CSID Case No. ARB/11/23, Award, 8 April 2013, RLA-59, {|
S.

580 See above fl 486 ef seq.

91

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

587.

588.

589.

590.

591.

3. If the property was obtained free from a person that did not have the right to
alienate it, the owner shall have the right to claim it from a bona fide beneficiary in
all cases.*!!

Article 388(1)(3) UCC clearly provides for a restitution claim even against a bona fide
purchaser if the property in question “in some other way retired from the possession of the
owner or of the person to whom the owner had transferred the property into possession,

without their will.”

While Respondent explains that the “lack of will” should be understood to include formal
errors in the decision-making process of public entities like the KCC, Claimant does not

offer a detailed explanation as to why this should not be the case.

The question for this Tribunal is not whether Article 388 UCC was correctly applied or
whether a lack of will/intent was correctly identified as a result of the invalidity of the KCC
decision, or whether there should have been a separate assessment of a lack of substantive
will (vice de volonte). Rather, this Tribunal is merely tasked with assessing whether the
decisions of the Ukrainian courts, concluding that the invalidation of the KCC decisions to
sell Plot | implied that there was a lack of will providing the KCC with a right to restitution
under Article 388, was one that no reasonable adjudicator could have reached and that

amounted to a “clear and malicious misapplication of the law.”*!?

To this Tribunal, it appears plausible to assert that the internal decision-making procedures
of State organs are important. They serve the important policy function of leading to a
correct formation of an entity’s will, in the present case of its consent to dispose of property

into public hands.

Thus, the courts’ conclusion that because there was no debate/discussion in the KCC
preceding its approvals for the lease/sale of Plot | the approvals were annullable — though

clearly insisting on a formality — was not unjustifiable. As held by the court in Case 1, the

31! Civil Code of Ukraine, Article 388, R-68.

3” Robert Azinian, Kenneth Davitian, & Ellen Baca v. The United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2,
Award, | November 1999, CLA-17, 103.

92

Kre

deri Ltd. v. Ukraine

Excerpts of the Award

592.

593.

594.

 

314 Cy,

absence of additional crucial approvals also justified the annulment.*! Thus, it is hard to
consider that there were no valid reasons that justified the annulment and consequently the

restitution decision.

3. Procedural due process violations in the course of the proceedings

Finally, Claimant alleges a number of procedural due process violations in regard to Case
3, in particular that a requested postponement of the December 2012 hearing (because
[Company D] had not been duly notified of the proceedings at its correct address) was
rejected>"* and that the lawyer representing [Company A] received only 15 minutes to draft
an application for the recusal of a judge and that the proceedings were continued without

his presence.*!°

Respondent replies that [Company D] had been notified of the [...] hearing at its
“registered address” and that the court was thus correct in continuing the proceedings.*"° It
further points out that [Company D] also failed to appear at the appellate stage, in [...], and
that this shows that “failure to notify was evidently not the operative cause of [Company
D]’s non-appearance.”>!7

In regard to the alleged violation of procedural rights stemming from the short time limit
to formulate an application for the recusal of a judge, Respondent refers to the procedural
tules according to which a reasoned written request for recusal must be made “prior to

commencement of consideration of the case”*!*

and points out that no reasons were given
as to why the lawyer appearing on behalf of [Company A] had no knowledge of the grounds
for recusal before the hearing. It further argues that the court still permitted [...] a recess
to put forward a written application for recusal, but that “upon resumption of the

proceedings, he simply failed to reappear.”?!°

 

ecision of the District Administrative Court, [...], CE-42, p. 9.
aimant Memorial, J 70(a).

55 Thid., | 70(b).

316 R

espondent Counter-Memorial, {] 343-344.

7 Phid., 1 345.
318 hid, | 347.
39 Thid., | 348.

93

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

595.

596.

597.

598.

599.

600.

Equality of the parties and the right to be heard are core elements of a fair trial and must
be respected by the domestic courts of host States. In order to rise to the level of a breach
of due process, however, a party alleging a breach of due process rights must avail itself of

the domestic legal system in order to remedy alleged procedural deficiencies.

A failure to inform a party of claims directed against it and the conduct of legal proceedings
without its participation give rise to serious due process concerns since they may indicate

that a party was deprived of its fundamental procedural rights.

In the present case it appears undisputed, however, that the notice of claim was sent to
[Company D]’s registered address and that notwithstanding having received knowledge of
the proceedings, [Company D] did not challenge them and chose to appeal only at the

second instance level to the supreme court.

Also in regard to the alleged inability to effectively voice opposition to having a judge
decide the issue where grounds of a conflict of interests were suspected by [Company A]’s

lawyer, it is hard to follow Claimant's logic.

While it is difficult to establish whether [...], failed to reappear at the [...] court hearing

320

because he was no longer admitted to the “locked” court room” or out of his own failure

to return within the given time-frame”!

there is nothing in the record to show that [...] or
[Company D], took any legal steps to challenge the alleged deprivation of procedural rights
stemming from the participation of a judge who should have been recused from making a

decision and which was made on the basis of a hearing without the presence of a lawyer.

It can be expected from a party raising a serious procedural impropriety that it defends its
procedural rights by challenging the decisions made on the basis of the alleged impropriety.
In the case at hand, [...] made a belated appeal on [...] against the findings of the first and
second instance in which it challenged the timeliness of the Prosecutor’s request and the

correctness of the courts’ decisions on the City’s restitution claim”? But [Company D]

320 Hearing Transcript D3:P476:L6-15[...]
21 Hearing Transcript D3:P474:L13-17 [...]
2 Decision of Supreme Commercial Court of Ukraine, [...], CE-50, p. 2.

94

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

601.

602.

603.

604.

605.

does not appear to have raised the alleged procedural deficiencies, in particular, the alleged
lack of notice or the alleged lack of independence and impartiality of the lower court judge

as grounds for the appeal.

On the basis of the above considerations, this Tribunal is unable to find that the Respondent

State can be regarded as having committed a denial of justice concerning Case 3.

(iv) Case 4: [...]; Claim in the economic/commercial courts to
invalidate KCC approvals for the lease and sale of Plots 2 and 3,
the lease and sale contracts and [Company A’s] ownership
certificates

This case was initiated by the Prosecutor on [...]. It was brought against KCC and
[Company A], naming [Company D] a third party, seeking the invalidation of KCC’s
approvals for the lease and sale of Plots 2 and 3, of the lease and sale contracts between
KCC and [Company A], and of [Company A]’s ownership certificates for the two land
plots.

On [...], the first instance court, the Economic Court of Kiev, held a formal procedural

hearing. On [...], it granted the Prosecutor’s request.>73

After a first failed appeal attempt for lack of payment of court fees, [Company A] appealed
on [...]. The Kiev Appellate Economic Court denied [Company A’s] appeal on [...]=24

A further appeal by [Company A], dated [...], was rejected by the Supreme Economic
Court of Ukraine on [...].?° A second appeal by [Company A], dated [...], was returned
to [Company A] without review of the merits on [...]. A third appeal by [Company A],
dated [...], was rejected by the Supreme Economic Court of Ukraine due to a missed

deadline on [...].°7

3 Decision of the Economic Court of Kyiy, [...], CE-52.

4 Decision of the Kyiv Appeal Economic Court, [...], CE-53.

%5 Judgment of the Supreme Economic Court, Case 38/484, [...], R-80.
26 Respondent Counter-Memorial, { 365.3.

95

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

606.

607.

608.

609.

610.

611.

In regard to Case 4, Claimant basically alleges that substantive due process violations led

to the loss of Claimant’s land on Plots 2 and 3.

I. Fund ally wrong outcome, ive due process violation leading to the loss of

Plots 2 and 3

In regard to Case 4, as a result of which [Company D] ultimately lost Plots 2 and 3 to the
KCC, Claimant alleges that this outcome was also reached in violation of substantive due
process. It specifically asserts that “a series of grave violations of substantive and
procedural legislation of Ukraine” had been committed.*”’ In fact, these violations are

specifically described in Claimant’s Memorial as follows:

a) Wrong grounds for invalidation of KCC decisions

Claimant appears to argue that the courts wrongly relied upon civil law grounds for the
invalidation of the KCC decisions, although its complaint appears to also reprimand the

use of these civil law grounds for the invalidation of the ensuing land plot transaction.*7

Respondent replies that the courts correctly applied the civil law grounds to the invalidity
of the contracts providing for the transfer of the land plots, while the grounds for the
invalidity of the KCC decision were found in the regulations governing the procedure of
the KCC.”

In fact, Claimant’s gravamen is rather ambiguous since it also asserts that the violation of
the civil law code provisions was wrongly relied upon for the invalidation of the
transactions.3°°

An analysis of the lengthy [...] decision of the Economic Court of Kiev**! demonstrates
that the court broadly discussed both the internal administrative law rules relating to the

procedure, the bases for the legality of KCC decisions as well as the civil law grounds for

27 Claimant Memorial, 78.

8 Claimant Memorial, § 78(a) [...]

29 Respondent Counter-Memorial, {| 368-370.
330 Claimant Memorial, | 78(a)

3! Decision of the Economic Court of Kyiv, [...], CE-52.

96

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

612.

614.

615.

the invalidation of ensuing transactions. It addressed not only the absence of a formal
debate on the issue of deciding upon the lease and sale of the plots, but also other procedural
errors, such as a failure to include the items in the formal agenda, using an expedited
procedure without giving specific reasons, etc.**? In addition, the court addressed the lack
of substantive preconditions for the KCC decisions such as a failure of required approvals
for the partial use of the property as car parks that at the time was only designated for

residential or social buildings.**

In regard to the objections raised, this Tribunal fails to see any severe misapplications of
Ukrainian law and most importantly, does not find any egregious misapplication of the law

of the host State that may amount to a violation of due process.

b) Breach of the “bilateral restitution” principle under Article 216 UCC

Furthermore, Claimant asserts that “[t]he Court also violated Article 216 of the Civil Code
of Ukraine as it did not apply a bilateral restitution and did not allow the parties to return

to the position the[y] would have been had the transaction never occurred.”

In fact, it is unclear what Claimant refers to in regard to this claim. Obviously, Claimant
feels aggrieved that as a result of the invalidation of the transaction between the KCC and

[Company A] it lost Plots 2 and 3 (which it had acquired from [Company A]) to the KCC.

Respondent confirmed that Article 216(1) UCC would have been an effective legal remedy
for [Company D].5° However, it stressed that [Company D] neither availed itself of it nor

of other remedies available to it under Ukrainian law.>*

32 Jbid., p. 4 et seq.

333 bid., p. 13 et seq.

334 Claimant Memorial, 78(b).

335 Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, 4 48.
86 Jhid., 1 50.

97

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

616.

617.

618.

619.

620.

Indeed, it is unclear how Claimant had wished the court to have applied Article 216 UCC
in a way that either [Company A] or [Company D] would have been made whole for the

loss of the land plots.

Article 216(1) UCC provides for restitutio in integrum (as well as, in the alternative, for
damages) between the parties of an invalidated transaction,**” whereas Article 216(2) UCC
also provides a remedy to third parties suffering harm as a result of such invalidity to be

reimbursed by the “guilty party”.*°*

Thus, while the first paragraph of Article 216 UCC deals with the legal consequences of
an invalidated transaction between the Parties to such transaction, paragraph 2 also permits
third parties to claim resulting damages. This is also acknowledged by Respondent
stressing, however, that in both cases the parties have to request restitution or damages
respectively. Furthermore, Respondent alleges that neither [Company A] nor [Company

D] made any such requests.*”

In fact, the court files do not indicate nor does Claimant allege that such requests had been
made either by [Company A]or [Company D]. The parties and their experts did have some
heated exchanges about the practical availability of such a remedy for Claimant,™° but

even Claimant does not assert that they were actually sought.

Under these circumstances, the Tribunal is not in a position to assess whether the Ukrainian
courts wrongly denied the parties any restitution or damages. Furthermore, it appears
obvious to the Tribunal that the specific application of Article 216 UCC requires complex
legal assessments of causality and wrongdoing (argumento “guilty party”) which can give

rise to a violation of an international due process standard only if the reasoning applied is

37 Article 216(1) UCC (“An invalid transaction creates no legal consequences, apart from those related to its
invalidity. In case of a transaction invalidity, each party is obliged to return the other party in kind everything received
for the fulfilment of such transaction. Should this prove to be impossible, in particular if the received benefit lies in
the use of property, work performed, or service provided, the relevant party should reimburse the cost of what has
been received in the prices existing at the moment of reimbursement.”).

38 Article 216(2) UCC, YK 64 (“Should the invalid transaction cause damage or moral damage to the other party to
the transaction or any third party, they are to be reimbursed by the guilty party.”).

3 Respondent Counter-Memorial, § 372 [...]
0 Hearing Transcript P735:L11-16 (Katser); Hearing Transcript P875:L1-10.

98

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

621.

622.

624.

625.

626.

627.

far from anything a reasonable adjudicator may have relied upon in order to arrive at a

certain result.
In the present case, Claimant has not substantiated that this happened.

The same considerations also apply in regard to the question of whether Claimant or its
subsidiary properly pursued their rights in the Ukrainian courts in order to get the
invalidation of the KCC rescinded and/or the purchase price back and/or another form of

redress to be made whole for the loss of the land plots.

In addition to damages under Article 216 UCC, Respondent asserts that Claimant had
additional effective legal options, such as Article 1166 UCC, which allows general tort
claims against a wrongdoer causing property damage, or Article 1173 UCC, which
provides for damages claims against self-governing entities, like the KCC, for harm caused

by illegal decisions regardless of guilt.*!

As with the potential claim under Article 216 UCC, there is no indication in the record that
Claimant or its subsidiary actually instituted any legal proceedings aimed at covering for

the loss of the land plots under either of the potentially legally available remedies.

In such a situation, the Tribunal is unable to find that Respondent breached its due process

obligations under the Treaty.

c) Granting a legally unavailable remedy in the form of the invalidation of land
ownership certificates

Finally, Claimant seems to assert that by invalidating the land ownership certificates, the

Ukrainian courts had granted a legally unavailable remedy.*”

Respondent counters that Ukrainian courts “routinely hold land ownership certificates to

be invalid.”

44 Respondent Closing Slides, Slide 25.
32 Claimant Memorial, 4 78() [..-]
3 Respondent Counter-Memorial, 375.

99

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

628.

629.

630.

631.

632.

Indeed, the claim that domestic courts should not be in a position to invalidate ownership
certificates appears surprising, though, of course, possible. Subsequent assertions by
Claimant indicate, however, that it does not question the power of courts to revoke or
invalidate ownership certificates as a matter of principle, but rather takes issue with the

revocation of the ownership certificates in the specific case.**

This assertion, again focuses on a potential misapplication of Ukrainian law, but fails to
state any grounds as to why such misapplication, if at all, should rise to the level of an

egregious breach so as to constitute a violation of the international due process standard.

As a consequence, the Tribunal finds that no denial of justice was established in regard to
Case 4.

More generally the Tribunal finds that the procedural irregularities in regard to all four
court cases do not rise to the level of an “outrageous failure of the judicial system”. Because
it cannot be said that the Ukrainian courts “administered justice in a seriously inadequate
way” there was no denial of justice amounting to a violation of the fair and equitable

treatment obligation of the Treaty or under customary international law.

c. Related Fair and Equitable Treatment Claims

Claimant’s claims focus on the alleged denial of justice in the course of the four court
proceedings. However, its submissions also contain a number of closely related fair and
equitable treatment claims, such as the claims that “Ukraine has failed to maintain a stable
legal and business framework in subsequently annulling, through its courts, the legal basis
of the investment” and that “Ukraine has failed to act in good faith in unlawfully depriving

Claimant of its investment through its courts.”34>

4 Claimant Memorial, § 85(a) [...]
¥5 Claimant Memorial, 97.

100

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

633.

634.

635.

636.

637.

638.

Although seemingly phrased along the elements identified in investment jurisprudence as
aspects of fair and equitable treatment,*“° a closer look reveals that both arguments

basically replicate the notion that the host State owes the investor due process.

Similarly, Claimant has neither adduced any arguments, nor produced any evidence, that
the stability-related obligations to act consistently may have been violated when it asserts

that “Ukraine has failed to act in a consistent manner towards Claimant.”*4”

In addition, Claimant failed to substantiate how “Ukraine has failed to act transparently

towards Claimant.”*

Therefore, the Tribunal is unable to find any basis for holding Ukraine liable for a breach

of the fair and equitable treatment obligation of the Treaty for the related allegations.

d. Harassing Criminal Investigations Against Claimant’s Subsidiaries

In addition to the core denial of justice claims involving the four court cases addressed
above, Claimant asserts that Ukrainian officials “raided” its local subsidiaries, [Company
D] and [Company C], in the course of criminal investigations which led to an
“intimidation” of their officers.” However, Claimant failed to explain to what extent the
actual conduct of the investigations went beyond the intrinsic nuisance factor of any State
organs investigating private parties for alleged wrongdoing, so as to amount to a level of

harassment that would offend international standards.

The Tribunal is of the view that a host State may indeed violate its obligations under the
fair and equitable treatment standard by instituting proceedings or investigations against
foreign investors in a way that displays grossly harassing features, as evidenced in cases

350

like Swisslion vy. Macedonia**® or Rompetrol v. Romania.**! However, it is also reluctant

© See above fff 437 et seq.
7 Claimant Memorial, 97.

48 Ibid.

¥9 See Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, § 100 [...]

380 Swisslion DOO Skopje v. The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/16, Award, 6
July 2012, RLA-53.

351 The Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/3, Award, 6 May 2013, RLA-61.

101

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

639.

640.

645.

to consider that any exercise of a State’s investigative powers should be considered

potentially falling short of its obligations under the fair and equitable treatment standard.

In the present case, Claimant has failed to indicate in what regard the criminal
investigations had been carried out by Ukrainian authorities against [Company D] and
[Company C] in such an abusive manner that they amounted to a violation of fair and

equitable treatment.

As a consequence, the Tribunal is unable to find that the criminal investigations amounted

to a breach of the Treaty’s fair and equitable treatment standard.

FULL PROTECTION AND SECURITY
(1) The Parties’ Positions

a. Claimant’s Position

b. Respondent’s Position

(2) Tribunal’s Analysis

In addition to its fair and equitable treatment claims, Claimant also asserts that the host
State’s acts and omissions fell short of the obligation under Article 2(2) of the Treaty to
accord full protection and security to Claimant’s investment.>>” Basically, Claimant asserts
that Respondent breached this obligation on the basis of the same conduct**? pleaded for a
violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard discussed above.‘ This is

particularly evident in the claim that Respondent breached its full protection and security

382 Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, [ 134-141.
383 Claimant Memorial, { 139.
354 See above { 491.

102

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

646.

647.

648.

649.

obligation “through the actions of the Prosecutor and the actions and inactions of the

Ukrainian courts.”*°

Further, Claimant alleges that “the raids in the offices of both [Company C]and [Company
D] and the intimidation their officers received are a text book example of lack of full
protection of [sic] security.”

Respondent rejects Claimant’s broad interpretation of the full protection and security
standard and argues that it should be interpreted restrictively to apply only to physical

protection,?*”

adding that even if Claimant’s broad interpretation of the legal standard were
retained, there would have been no breach based on the facts.*°** The Tribunal notes,
however, that in its post-hearing brief, Respondent appears to accept that the full protection
and security standard goes beyond physical protection to also encompass access to the

courts.°°°

Article 2(2) first sentence of the Treaty contains a typical combined fair and equitable

treatment and full protection and security clause which provides as follows:

Investments of investors of each Contracting Party shall at all times be accorded
fair and equitable treatment and shall enjoy full protection and security in the
territory of the other Contracting Party.

This Tribunal is aware that some investment tribunals have been of the opinion that fair
and equitable treatment and full protection and security embody a combined unitary

concept.3?

355 Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, { 134.

356 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, | 100. See also Hearing Transcript D1:P167:L18.

357 Respondent Counter-Memorial, {| 443-450; Respondent Rejoinder on the Merits, { 147.

358 Respondent Rejoinder on the Merits, J 148.

35 Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, § 104 [...]

36 Qecidental Exploration and Production Co. v. The Republic of Ecuador, LCLA Case No. UN3467, Final Award, 1
July 2004, CLA-9, {{ 187 (“The Tribunal accordingly holds that the Respondent has breached its obligations to accord
fair and equitable treatment under Article II (3) (a) of the Treaty. In the context of this finding the question of whether
in addition there has been a breach of full protection and security under this Article becomes moot as a treatment that
is not fair and equitable automatically entails an absence of full protection and security of the investment.”).

103

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

650. In the Tribunal’s view, however, it is hard to believe that contracting parties of a BIT
choose the separate wording of “full protection and security” in order to mean the same
thing as “fair and equitable treatment”. It thus finds it implausible to consider that the two

standards should be interpreted to have an identical meaning.

651. Rather, the Tribunal concurs with the view that the two standards should be interpreted as
separate standards with different meanings that may partly overlap, but focus on different
situations. While “fair and equitable treatment” more broadly protects investments against
interferences by acts and omissions of host States, “full protection and security” requires

host States to exercise a level of due diligence in order to prevent third parties from

interfering with such investments.**!

652. Notwithstanding this broad distinction, it is well accepted that there are overlaps between
the two standards. In particular, in regard to protection that goes beyond physical
protection, it is widely accepted that in formulations like the one in the Treaty at hand,
according to which host States have to accord “full” protection and security, such qualifier
indicates that the standard goes beyond physical security.*°? This reading has been

specifically accepted in regard to the identical full protection and security clause in the

363

United Kingdom-Tanzania BIT in Biwater Gauff vy. Tanzania*® and by Respondent in

regard to Claimant’s claim that it includes the right of access to the courts.*

361 See Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and InterAgua Servicios Integrales del Agua S.A. v. The
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on Liability, 30 July 2010, CLA-2, ¥ 167 (“[...] the
stability of the business environment and legal security are more characteristic of the standard of fair and equitable
treatment, while the full protection and security standard primarily seeks to protect investment from physical harm.
This said, this latter standard may also include an obligation to provide adequate mechanisms and legal remedies for
prosecuting the State organs or private parties responsible for the injury caused to the investor.”).

362 Azurix Corp. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, IC 24, Award, 14 July 2006, CLA-22, | 408
(“[...] when the terms “protection and security” are qualified by “full” and no other adjective or explanation, they
extend, in their ordinary meaning, the content of this standard beyond physical security.”).

363 Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, IIC 330, Award, 24
July 2008, CLA-23, § 729 (“The Arbitral Tribunal adheres to the Azurix holding that when the terms “protection” and
“security” are qualified by “full”, the content of the standard may extend to matters other than physical security.”
{emphasis in original]).

364 Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, § 104 [...]

    

 

104

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

653.

654.

655.

656.

In the present case, Claimant’s allegations under the full protection and security rubric
mostly relate to the same factual allegations dealt with under the fair and equitable
treatment claims. Basically, Claimant asserts that Ukraine’s obligations under the full
protection and security standard were breached “through the actions of the Prosecutor and
the actions and inactions of the Ukrainian courts.”>® Even assuming that fair and equitable
treatment violations would at the same time amount to full protection and security
violations, since the Tribunal did not find such breaches of fair and equitable treatment it

cannot find any full protection and security violations.

Claimant further alleges that “the raids in the offices of both [Company C]and [Company
DJand the intimidation their officers received are a text book example of lack of full
protection of [sic] security.”

In fact, in the Tribunal’s view, this claim more aptly falls under a fair and equitable
treatment claim as well since it does not concern allegations of host State organs failing to
protect an investment against third party attack, but rather alleges that Ukraine’s officials

harassed the investor.

The Tribunal acknowledges that the protection owed under the full protection and security
standard may also be viewed as extending to prevent attacks on investments by organs of
the host State.**’ As stated above, analysing the allegations in the context of the fair and
equitable treatment claims, the Tribunal fails to recognise that the actual conduct of the
criminal investigations against Claimant’s subsidiaries, [Company D] and [Company C],

amounted to a level of harassment that would offend international standards.*°*

C. UNREASONABLE OR DISCRIMINATORY IMPAIRMENT OF THE MANAGEMENT,

565 Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, { 134.
366 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, J 100. See also Hearing Transcript D1:P167:L18.
367 Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. (AAPL) v. Republic of Sri Lanka, ICSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Award, 27 June

1990, RLA-9, Ii] 78-86 (regarding the actions of the Sri Lankan security forces exc:

e and a breach of the full

 

protection and security standard); Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, Award and

concurring and

 

nting opinion, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, IIC 330, 24 July 2008, CLA-23, {| 730 (“The Arbitral

Tribunal also does not consider that the ‘full security’ standard is limited to a State’s failure to prevent actions by third
parties, but also extends to actions by organs and representatives of the State itself.”).

368 See above | 6377 et seq.

105

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

MAINTENANCE, USE, ENJOYMENT AND DISPOSAL OF THE INVESTMENT
(1) The Parties’ Positions

a. Claimant’s Position
b. Respondent’s Position

(2) Tribunal’s Analysis

662. Relying on Article 2(2) second sentence of the Treaty, Claimant also argues that “the
conduct of the Ukrainian courts and Prosecutor amount to unreasonable impairment of its

investment”*©

663. Respondent rejects this claim submitting that there was nothing unreasonable in the actions
of the Prosecutor and/or the courts that would amount to a violation of the applicable
standard of “‘a ‘wilful disregard of due process of law, an act which shocks, or at least
surprises, a sense of judicial propriety””.>”°

664. Indeed, the Tribunal fails to recognize any additional aspects that have not yet been
discussed under the fair and equitable treatment section of this award. Claimant alleges that
the actions of the Ukrainian Prosecutor and the courts amounted to an “unreasonable
impairment of its investment”’.*”! However, there is nothing that would add to what the
Tribunal discussed already in the context of a potential breach of fair and equitable

treatment.3””

665. Article 2(2) second sentence of the Treaty provides as follows:

Neither Contracting Party shall in any way impair by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures the management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or

3 Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, | 143. See also Claimant Memorial, { 132-
137.

3 Respondent Rejoinder, | 149.
Claimant Memorial, ‘{{{ 132-137; Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, { 143.
2 See above WM 491 et seq.

  

106

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

666.

667.

668.

 

disposal of investments in its territory of investors of the other Contracting
Party.

It contains the UK version of what is often referred to as a BIT standard prohibiting
“arbitrary or discriminatory” measures. In practice, the ordinary meaning of the terms
“arbitrary” and “unreasonable” is considered to be identical whereas the notion

“discriminatory” adds another element. “Arbitrary” or “unreasonable” are often understood
»373

as “derived from mere opinion”, “capricious”, “unrestrained”, or “despotic.

The close overlap with the fair and equitable treatment standard is also reflected in the
general acceptance that the notion of “unreasonableness/arbitrariness” has been adequately
explained in the ICJ’s ELSI (United States of America v. Italy) case according to which
“Carbitrariness is not so much something opposed to a rule of law, as something opposed
to the rule of law. [...] It is a wilful disregard of due process of law, an act which shocks,
or at least surprises, a sense of judicial propriety.”>”* The Tribunal shares with the Parties
the view that this judicial pronouncement in the context of interpreting a FCN treaty
provision prescribing “arbitrary or discriminatory measures” lays down useful guidance

which has been relied upon in investment practice.

For instance, the tribunal in Plama y. Bulgaria*> explained the notion of
unreasonableness/arbitrariness in terms of an absence of “reason or fact” when it stated
that “[unreasonable or arbitrary measures — as they are sometimes referred to in other
investment instruments — are those which are not founded in reason or fact but on caprice,

prejudice or personal preference.”>”°

urix Corp. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, IC 24, Award, 14 July 2006, CLA-22,

392 (“In its ordinary meaning, ‘arbitrary’ means ‘derived from mere opinion’, ‘capricious’, ‘unrestrained’, ‘despotic.’
Black’s Law Dictionary defines the term, inter alia, as ‘done capriciously or at pleasure’, ‘not done or acting according
to reason or judgment’, ‘depending on the will alone.’” [footnotes omitted]).

54 Elettronica Sicula S.P.A. (ELSI), (United States of America v. Italy), International Court of Justice, Judgment, 20
July 1989, J 128.

315 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Award, 27 August 2008.
37 Thid., | 184 (footnotes omitted).

107

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

669.

670.

671.

672.

The Tribunal in Toto v. Lebanon*”’ broadened this notion by adding the following aspects:

An unreasonable or discriminatory measure is defined in this case as (i) a
measure that inflicts damage on the investor without serving any apparent
legitimate purpose; (ii) a measure that is not based on legal standards but on
discretion, prejudice or personal preference, (iii) a measure taken for reasons
that are different from those put forward by the decision maker, or (iv) a
measure taken in wilful disregard of due process and proper procedure.*”°

The Tribunal sees no need to enter into the disputed area of whether and to what extent the
prohibition of unreasonable and discriminatory measures overlap with the guarantees
inherent in fair and equitable treatment or not. Suffice it to state that in the present context,

in the “the conduct of the Ukrainian courts and

 

the allegedly unreasonable conduct consis:

Prosecutor’3”?

and that Claimant has not put forward any allegations that would transcend
the claim that the Ukrainian courts and the Prosecutor had violated due process in the way
the court cases were conducted. Since these issues were addressed in detail under the fair

380,

and equitable treatment claim,”*” the Tribunal sees no reason to repeat itself here.

For the sake of completeness, even if a more specific claim had been made (e.g. that the
actions of the Prosecutor in tandem with the courts were intended to inflict damage on the
investor without serving any apparent legitimate purpose or were taken for reasons that
were different from those put forward by them) the Tribunal does not believe that such

allegations could stand scrutiny.

It was the task of the Prosecutor to review and, if necessary, challenge the legality of the
decision-making process of public institutions and, if need be, to bring further action to
protect their financial and other interests. Thus, it can hardly be maintained that the
institution of the court proceedings by the Prosecutor did not serve any “apparent legitimate
purpose” and was only made in order to inflict damage on the investor. Of course, a

successful litigation could, and actually did, result in a situation that led to the loss of the

37 Toto Costruzioni Generali S.p.A. v. Republic of Lebanon, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/12, Award, 7 June 2012.
58 Thid., | 157.
579 Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, 4 143. See also Claimant Memorial, ff 132-

137.

380 See above ff 491 et seq.

108

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

investment, but it is hard to maintain that this was the major purpose. Rather, it was the
protection of the internal decision-making process and safeguarding that property in public
ownership should not be privatized upon a questionable decision-making process that was
at least the apparent legitimate purpose. Likewise, the Prosecutor did not put forward any
different reasons for claiming the restitution of the land plots. The Parties may reasonably
differ as to whether the court cases were correctly decided as a matter of Ukrainian law.
However, it is not possible to argue that they were not based on legal standards but decided

in a wholly discretionary fashion.

Therefore, the Tribunal finds that Claimant failed to establish a violation of the standard
contained in Article 2(2) second sentence of the Treaty protecting against impairment of

investments by unreasonable or discriminatory measures.

D. EXPROPRIATION

690.

691.

(1) The Parties’ Positions
a. Claimant’s Position

[ed

b. Respondent’s Position

[J

(2) Tribunal’s Analysis

Claimant claims to have lost its investment by judicial expropriation. In particular, it argues
that it was unlawfully deprived of its investment which it lost in the various court cases as

a result of a lack of due process/denial of justice.**!

Claimant specifically relies on ADC v. Hungary, arguing that “due process of law in the

expropriation context demands an actual and substantive legal procedure for a foreign

381 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, {{{ 79, 81, 94; Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits,
49 106 [...]

382 ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited v. The Republic of Hungary, \CSID Case No.
ARB/03/16, Award, 2 October 2006, CLA-S1.

109

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

investor to raise its claims against the depriving actions already taken or to be taken against

it. And some basic legal mechanisms, such as reasonable advance notice, a fair hearing,

and an unbiased and impartial adjudicator to assess the actions in dispute, are expected to

be readily available and accessible to the investor to make such legal procedure

meaningful.”>*

692. In this context, Claimant specifically invokes a number of third party BITs concluded by
Ukraine which demand that an expropriation has to be carried out in accordance with “due

process of law” upon which it relies via the Treaty’s MEN clause.**+

693. In Claimant’s view the four court cases concerning the land plots acquired by Krederi
through its subsidiaries fell short of due process and constituted a denial of justice.**° Thus,
the loss of its investment was not only uncompensated but also unlawful under the criteria

of Article 6 of the Treaty.

694. Further, Claimant also argues that compensation is owed for lawful expropriation.?°°

695. Respondent rejects the notion that judicial decisions which rule on the legality of decisions
leading to a transfer of ownership rights in rem and, in particular, that court cases which

determined the title to the three land plots in issue amount to expropriation.**”

696. Specifically invoking Swisslion v. Macedonia*** and Arif vy. Moldova,** Respondent

argues that a “judicial expropriation” requires an “unlawful activity by the court itself’ 3°

383,

Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, J 84.

384 Claimant Memorial, | 147.

385 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, 494 [...]

386 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, | 79.

387 Respondent Rejoinder on the Merits, 4 77 [...]

388 Swisslion DOO Skopje v. The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/16, Award, 6
July 2012, RLA-53.

38° Mr. Franck Charles Arif v. Republic of Moldova, ICSID Case No. ARB/I 1/23, Award, 8 April 2013, RLA-59.

30 Respondent Rejoinder on the Merits, #4 92-95.

110

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

697.

698.

699.

700.

and that no wrongful taking can arise from the legitimate application of Ukrainian law by

the Ukrainian courts.*?!

According to Respondent, Claimant failed to demonstrate unlawful activity by the court
itself. 3?

Before turning to the central issue in dispute whether, i.e., whether the conduct of the
Ukrainian courts and authorities constituted a form of judicial expropriation, the Tribunal
will analyse the applicable expropriation clause of the Treaty, in particular in view of
Claimant’s perceived need to rely on the MEN clause in order to import a due process

requirement.

Claimant submits that the MFN provision in the Treaty should be interpreted to allow for

°° and relies

the importation of more favourable substantive protections in third party BITs
on the MFN clause to import a more favourable provision from the Ukraine-Bosnia and
Herzegovina BIT which “like the Ukraine/UK BIT, prohibits the Ukraine from
expropriating, either directly or indirectly, any foreign investment except for a public
purpose, in the absence of non-discrimination, and against the payment of compensation,

and, in addition provides that there must be due process of law.”

Respondent argues that Claimant cannot import Article 4 of the Ukraine-Bosnia and
Herzegovina BIT, an alternative expropriation standard, through the MEN clause. It argues
that Claimant has not provided the legal basis and reasoning on which it relies to import
such a provision via the MEN clause.*” According to Respondent, “an MEN provision is
not a free for all allowing an investor to ‘pick and mix’ protections of all and any type from
any available treaty. Each protection or provision sough[t] to be imported must be justified

on its own terms.”3°

391 Thid., WH 92-94.

  

32 Thid., W 106-108.
Claimant Defence to Preliminary Objections and Reply on the Merits, | 149-154.

3°4 Claimant Memorial, | 147.
385 Respondent Counter-Memorial, | 465-468.
3% Thid., | 466.

111

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

a. The Requirement of Due Process Under the UK-Ukraine BIT’s Expropriation

Clause

701. Article 6(1) first sentence, the core provision of the expropriation clause of the Treaty,

provides:

Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall not be nationalised,
expropriated or subjected to measures having equivalent effect to
nationalisation or expropriation (hereinafter referred to as “expropriation”) in
the territory of the other Contracting Party except for a public purpose and
against prompt, adequate and effective compensation. [...]

702. This is followed by a second sentence which lays down the specifics of the “compensation”

mentioned in the first sentence.
703. Article 6(1) third sentence of the Treaty finally provides:

[...] The Investor affected shall have a right, under the law of the Contracting
Party making the expropriation, to prompt review, by a judicial or other
independent authority of that Party, of his or its case and of the valuation of
his or its investment in accordance with the principles set out in this
paragraph.

704. Although this sentence does not expressly speak of “due process”, it is generally
recognized that it embodies the notion of what an expropriation in accordance with due
process requires: the possibility to have both the decision to expropriate and, in particular,

the amount of compensation challenged in orderly judicial or other court-like

proceedings.*””

397 See, Article 5(3) Austria/Georgia BIT (2001) (“Due process of law includes the right of an investor of a Contracting
Party which claims to be affected by expropriation by the other Contracting Party to prompt review of its case,
including the valuation of its investment and the payment of compensation in accordance with the provisions of this
Article by a judicial authority or another competent and independent authority of the latter Contracting Party.”).

 

112

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

705.

706.

707.

This understanding of the requirement of due process is also reflected in the reasoning of

the tribunal in ADC v. Hungary’ upon which Claimant relies.>°°

Some basic legal mechanisms, such as reasonable advance notice, a fair
hearing and an unbiased and impartial adjudicator to assess the actions in
dispute, are expected to be readily available and accessible to the investor to
make such legal procedure meaningful. In general, the legal procedure must
be of a nature to grant an affected investor a reasonable chance within a
reasonable time to claim its legitimate rights and have its claims heard. If no
legal procedure of such nature exists at all, the argument that “the actions are
taken under due process of law” rings hollow.4”

Thus, in the Tribunal’s view, the requirement that an expropriation be not only
accompanied by compensation, but also carried out for a public purpose and in accordance
with due process of law is already inherent in Article 6(1) of the Treaty. Therefore, there
is no need to invoke any third-party BIT with an express due process requirement in its

expropriation clause via the MFN clause of the Treaty.

b. Judicial Expropriation

As a general matter, this Tribunal takes the view that it is not excluded that judicial action
may, in certain situations, amount to expropriation. This was recognized by the tribunal in
Saipem vy. Bangladesh*' which found that the host State’s judiciary expropriated the
investor’s immaterial rights under an ICC arbitral award. In its jurisdictional decision the
tribunal held that “[...] there is no reason why a judicial act could not result in an

expropriation.“ And in its award,*°? the same tribunal found that the annulment of an

38 ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited v. The Republic of Hungary, \CSID Case No.
ARB/03/16, Award, 2 October 2006, CLA-S1.

3 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, | 84.

40 ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited y. The Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/16, Award, 2 October 2006, CLA-51, | 435.

401 Saipem S.p.A. v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Decision on jurisdiction and
recommendation on provisional measures, 21 March 2007, CLA-31; Award, 30 June 2009, CLA-32.

402 Saipem S.p.A. v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Decision on jurisdiction and
recommendation on provisional measures, 21 March 2007, CLA-31, { 132.

32,

43 Saipem S.p.A. v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/7, Award, 30 June 2009, CLA-

113

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

ICC award, in which “Saipem’s residual contractual rights under the investment [were]

crystallised”,*°* amounted to an expropriation of such rights.

708. Also, the fact that in disputes over ownership ultimate outcomes will usually not benefit
the State, but a third party, does not, as a matter of principle, exclude the possibility that a

judicial determination may amount to expropriation. This was acknowledged by the

405

tribunal in Rumeli v. Kazakhstan,* which found a creeping expropriation, although the

judiciary’s action did not benefit the State, but a third party.4°°

709. While it is possible that judicial action amounts to expropriation, it is the exception rather
than the norm. In any kind of private law dispute over ownership of movable or immovable
property, courts will make a decision which of the disputing parties claiming ownership
rights prevails. This will result in a finding that one party will be entitled to ownership
whereas the other (or others) will not. Such judicial determinations do not constitute
expropriation. Similarly, where property transfers are held to be invalid, the resulting

transfers of ownership do not amount to expropriation.

710. In this regard the Tribunal concurs with the view expressed by the Saipem v. Bangladesh

27

tribunal**" which found that, in the specific circumstances, the host State’s judicial actions

annulling an ICC award amounted to indirect expropriation,*°* but held that in the peculiar

case of a judicial expropriation the “substantial deprivation” of ownership rights in itself

44 Thid., | 128 (“{...] Saipem’s residual contractual rights under the investment as crystallised in the ICC Award.”).
45 Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, \CSID Case
No. ARB/05/16, Award, 29 July 2008, CLA-12.

406 Thid., 4] 704 (“It is a characteristic of judicial expropriation that it is usually instigated by a private party for his own
benefit, and not that of the State. This is no doubt a relevant consideration, although not in itself decisive, as has
already been observed. The Tribunal considers however, and Respondent indeed accepted in paragraph 259 of its
Rejoinder, that a transfer to a third party may amount to an expropriation attributable to the State if the judicial process
was instigated by the State.”).

407 Saipem S.p.A. v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Award, 30 June 2009, CLA-
32.

408 Thid., J. 129 (“In respect of the taking, the actions of the Bangladeshi courts do not constitute an instance of direct
expropriation, but rather of “measures having similar effects” within the meaning of Article 5(2) of the BIT. Such
actions resulted in substantially depriving Saipem of the benefit of the ICC Award. This is plain in light of the decision
of the Bangladeshi Supreme Court that the ICC Award is “a nullity”. Such a ruling is tantamount to a taking of the
residual contractual rights arising from the investments as crystallised in the ICC Award. As such, it amounts to an
expropriation within the meaning of Article 5 of the BIT.”).

114

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

was not sufficient for a finding of expropriation because otherwise “any setting aside of an
award could then found a claim for expropriation, even if the setting aside was ordered by
the competent state court upon legitimate grounds.*°? Rather, an additional element of
illegality was required in order to turn a judicial decision into an indirect expropriation of

the intangible rights under an arbitral award. In this case, the tribunal found that the

“Bangladeshi courts abused their supervisory jurisdiction over the arbitration process’+!°

and interfered with the arbitral process contrary to the New York Convention.*!!

711. This approach was explicitly endorsed in Swisslion v. Macedonia," in which an ICSID
tribunal held “[...] that a predicate for alleging a judicial expropriation is unlawful activity
by the court itself.4!3 Since there was no such illegality the Swisslion v. Macedonia
tribunal rejected the expropriation claim and argued that otherwise any lawful termination

of contractual rights might easily be qualified as expropriatory.*!*

712. This approach was equally shared by the tribunal in Garanti Koza v. Turkmenistan,‘
which held:

A seizure of property by a court as the result of normal domestic legal
process does not amount to an expropriation under international law unless
there was an element of serious and fundamental impropriety about the
legal process. Actions by state courts to enforce contract rights, including

409 Thid., | 133 (“That said, given the very peculiar circumstances of the present interference, the Tribunal agrees with
the parties that the substantial deprivation of Saipem’s ability to enjoy the benefits of the ICC Award is not sufficient
to conclude that the Bangladeshi courts’ intervention is tantamount to an expropriation. If this were true, any setting
aside of an award could then found a claim for expropriation, even if the setting aside was ordered by the competent
state court upon legitimate grounds.”).

410 Thid., J 159.

411 Thid., Pf 163-169.

412 Swisslion DOO Skopje v. The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/16, Award, 6
July 2012, RLA-53.

413 Thid., 313.

414 Ibid., | 314 (“[...] the courts’ determination of breach of the Share Sale Agreement and its consequential
termination did not breach the Treaty and therefore was not unlawful. The internationally lawful termination of a
contract between a State entity and an investor cannot be equated to an expropriation of contractual rights simply
because the investor’s rights have been terminated; otherwise, a State could not exercise the ordinary right of a
contractual party to allege that its counterparty breached the contract without the State’s being found to be in breach
of its international obligations. Since there was no illegality on the part of the courts, the first element of the Claimant’s
expropriation claim is not established.”).

415 Garanti Koza LLP v. Turkmenistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/20, Award, 19 December 2016, RLA-121.

115

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

713.

714,

715.

716.

717,

rights to terminate a contract, have generally not been held by investment
arbitration tribunals to amount to expropriation, regardless of whether the
state or an instrument of the state is the contract party enforcing its
rights.*!°
The Tribunal recognizes that Claimant also understands that for judicial action to amount
to expropriation a due process violation is required.*"” In order to avoid a situation whereby
any title annulment would constitute indirect expropriation or a measure tantamount to
expropriation it is therefore necessary to ascertain whether an additional element of
procedural illegality or denial of justice was present. Only then may a judicial decision be

qualified as a measure constituting or amounting to expropriation.

Thus, for this Tribunal, it was necessary to ascertain whether the judicial action which led
to the withdrawal of Claimant’s property rights in the contested land plots was tainted by

breaches of due process.

Since the Tribunal has come to the conclusion in its assessment of the fair and equitable
treatment claim that the challenged judicial proceedings do not rise to the level of a breach

418

of due process*'® the Tribunal finds that the judicial proceedings do not constitute indirect

expropriation.
Therefore, Claimant’s claim for expropriation is dismissed.

The Tribunal has carefully considered the Parties’ submissions, including the expert
reports, on damages. However, given its rulings on liability, the Tribunal does not think

that it is necessary to address the Parties’ damages submissions here.

E. CONCLUSIONS ON LIABILITY

718.

For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal dismisses all claims. The Tribunal nonetheless
notes what it considers an unsatisfactory outcome of this case: In the result the investor has

lost the properties it purchased without being recouped the original sale price paid to, and

416 Thid., 4 365.
+17 Claimant Post-Hearing Brief, 9 [...]
418 See above | 631.

116

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

retained by, the City of Kiev. Although the legal process leading to that result has been
held not to violate applicable standards, and the Respondent has flagged that local remedies
may be available to deal with that situation, the Tribunal remains uncomfortable with the

result.

Vill. COSTS

719. Each Party has requested that it be awarded its costs.

A. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS AS TO COSTS AND EXPENSES OF THE PROCEEDINGS

Q) Claimant’s Position

(J

(2) Respondent’s Position

[ed

B. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

731. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the
parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in
connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those
expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the
charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such
decision shall form part of the award.

732. Article 61(2) and further provisions in Articles 28 and 47(j) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules
give no clear guidance as to the manner in which costs should be allocated as between the

Parties and thus endows the Tribunal with wide discretion to allocate all costs of the

117

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

arbitration, including attorney’s fees and other costs, between the parties as it deems

appropriate.*!?

733. This wide discretion enjoyed by ICSID tribunals contrasts with the general rule under the

2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules according to which the costs of the arbitration shall

“in principle” be borne by the unsuccessful party.42°

734. The absence of a clear “loser pays” or “costs follow the event” principle in ICSID
arbitration, coupled with the international dispute settlement tradition prevailing in inter-
State disputes, may explain the fact that in past ICSID practice, most tribunals have simply
“split the costs” by deciding that each party should bear its own costs and that the costs of

the tribunals and the Centre should be borne in equal shares by the parties.

735. This public international law approach to allocating costs between the parties, often also

referred to as the “American” rule, clearly prevailed until a few years ago.7!

419 GEA Group Aktiengesellschaft v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/O8/16, Award, 31 March 2011, 9 362 (“Article
61(2) does not prescribe a particular test for tribunals to assess costs, nor does it place any restrictions on a tribunal’s
ability to do so. In light of this, the Tribunal understands the power granted under this Article to be broad, allowing
the Tribunal discretion in making its determination.”); Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID
Case No. ARB/06/8, Award, 2 September 2011, | 560 (“[...] The Tribunal considers that Article 61(2) of the ICSID
Convention gives it the power to award costs (defined to include legal fees, out of pocket expenses as well as costs of
the arbitration) and the discretion to decide at what level to do so. [...].”); Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of
Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Award, 27 August 2008, {[ 316 (“Article 61 of the ICSID Convention gives
the Arbitral Tribunal the discretion to allocate all costs of the arbitration, including attorney's fees and other costs,
between the Parties as it deems appropriate. [...].”).
#0 Art. 42(1) UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules 2010 (“The costs of the arbitration shall in principle be borne by the
unsuccessful party or parties. However, the arbitral tribunal may apportion each of such costs between the parties if
it determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into account the circumstances of the case.”).
421 Malaysian Historical Salvors SDN BHD v. The Government of Malaysia, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/10, Award on
Jurisdiction, 17 May 2007, { 150 (“The Tribunal is aware that, while it can order the losing party to pay all costs, it is
common ICSID practice for each party to bear its own legal costs and for the arbitration costs to be divided equally
regardless of the outcome of the arbitration.”); Bayview Irrigation District et al v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/05/1, Award, 19 June 2007, J 125 (“The claims were not frivolous, and they were pursued in good faith
and with all due expedition. The claims were, equally, defended in good faith and with due expedition. Both sides
agreed to the separation of the jurisdictional issue, and this proved a sensible and economical step. The Tribunal does
not consider that there is any reason to depart from the normal practice in such cases, according to which each Party
shall bear its own costs, and the costs of the Tribunal shall be divided equally between the Parties.”); EDF (Services)
Limited v. Romania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/13, Award, 8 October 2009, {| 322 (“The Tribunal notes that the
traditional position in investment arbitration, in contrast to commercial arbitration, has been to follow the public
international rule which does not apply the principle that the loser pays the costs of the arbitration and the costs of the
prevailing party. Rather, the practice has been to split the costs evenly, whether the claimant or the respondent prevails.
..).

 

 

118

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

736. It is a more recent development that also ICSID tribunals have started awarding costs (or
parts of the costs) to the successful party in investment cases.*?* This may involve the costs
of the proceedings and also the costs of a party’s legal representation. Such a “loser pays”
principle, also referred to as the “English” rule, intends to put the prevailing party in a
position as if it would not have had to incur the costs of pursuing a claim or defending

against it.473

737. While it is therefore clear that in the absence of a well-defined guidance in the ICSID
Convention and Arbitration Rules, ICSID tribunals remain vested with broad discretion, it
is also required that such discretion be exercised in a rational way, taking into account

relevant factors*** to justify cost decisions.
738. In the opinion of this Tribunal these factors include:

(i) _ First, when assessing the outcome of the proceedings it is necessary to look
at the overall outcome of the case and not merely to consider whether a
claimant prevailed on specific claims. This includes both the jurisdictional
and admissibility aspects as well as the merits of a case. Equally, the

quantum awarded in the ultimate decision has to be put in relation to the

#22 Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador, (CSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award, 2 August 2006, RLA-
28, 1 338; Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Award, 27 August 2008,
{9 316 et seq; Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. The Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009, [ 152;
ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited. v. The Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/16, Award, 2 October 2006, {| 542; Ioannis Kardassopulos and Ron Fuchs v. The Republic of Georgia, 1CSID
Case Nos. ARB/05/18 and ARB/O7/15, Award, 3 March 2010, { 692.

+23 Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Award, 2 September 2011, 1
563 (“[...] The present Tribunal is of the view that a rule under which costs follow the event serves the purposes of
compensating the successful party for its necessary legal fees and expenses, of discouraging unmeritorious actions
and also of providing a disincentive to over-litigation. [...].”); Tulip Real Estate and Development Netherlands B.V.
v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/28, Award, 10 March 2014, {| 466 (“There is no rule in ICSID
arbitration that ‘costs follow the event’, nor does the broad body of arbitral practice suggest that this is the approach
which should be followed in ICSID arbitration proceedings. However, in the exercise of its discretion to allocate costs,
the Tribunal has the authority to award all or part of a party’s costs of the arbitration and its legal fees and expenses.
Taking into account all factors in this case, the Tribunal has decided partially to apply this principle.”).

24 Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Decision on Reconsideration and
Award, 7 February 2017, {{ 620 (“In the Tribunal’s view, the apportionment of costs requires an analysis of all of the
circumstances of the case, including to what extent a party has contributed to the costs of the arbitration and whether
that contribution was reasonable and justified.”).

 

  

119

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

compensation or damages originally claimed in order to assess the relative

“success” of the parties.*?>

(ii) Second, investment tribunals are empowered to take into account the
behaviour of the parties concerning proceedings and more generally. This
includes issues of bona fides, for example, the question whether claims are

brought in good faith or reflect harassing litigation, but also whether claims

426

are fraudulently institute or whether investments are structured for the

sole purpose of instituting investment arbitration.*?” ICSID tribunals have
been quite explicit in awarding costs against a party in case of abuse of

process*”® and frivolous proceedings.*”? Likewise, the good faith of a host

25 Malicorp Limited v. The Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/18, Award, 7 February 2011, {147
(“The outcome of the proceedings is undoubtedly the first factor the Arbitral Tribunal can and must take into account.
In the present case, the outcome is shared, since the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction is rejected, but the
Claimant’s claim is dismissed on the merits. There are good reasons, therefore, to decide that the costs and expenses
should be shared.” [italics in original]).

426 Europe Cement Investment & Trade SA v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/2, Award, 13 August
2009, { 185 (“In the circumstances of this case, where the Tribunal has reached the conclusion that the claim to
jurisdiction is based on an assertion of ownership which the evidence suggests was fraudulent, an award to the
Respondent of full costs will go some way towards compensating the Respondent for having to defend a claim that
had no jurisdictional basis and discourage others from pursuing such unmeritorious claims.”); Cementownia “Nowa
Huta” SA y. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/06/2, Award, 17 September 2009, { 177 (“In the
circumstances of this case, the Arbitral Tribunal intends to employ this principle [“costs follow the event”] for the
following reasons: - The Claimant has filed a fraudulent claim; - The Claimant has failed on all its requests for relief;
- The Claimant has delayed the present arbitration proceeding and therefore raised its costs; [...].”); Alasdair Ross
Anderson et al v. Republic of Costa Rica, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/3, Award, 19 May 2010, { 63 (referring to
“special circumstances [...], such as procedural misconduct, the existence of a frivolous claim, or an abuse of the BIT
process or of the international investment protection regime.”).

27 Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. The Czech Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009, ¥ 151 (“In the
circumstances of this case, the Tribunal intends to employ this principle [“costs follow the event”). The Tribunal has
concluded not only that the Claimant’s claim fails for lack of jurisdiction, but also that the initiation and pursuit of
this arbitration is an abuse of the international investment protection regime under the BIT and, consequently, of the
ICSID Convention. It is also to be noted that the Claimant filed a request for provisional measures which was rejected
in its entirety by the Tribunal and which added to the costs of the proceeding. The Respondent has been forced to go
through the process and should not be penalized by having to pay for its defence.”).

#8 Renée Rose Levy and Gremcitel S.A. v. Republic of Peru, 1CSID Case No. ARB/11/17, Award, 9 January 2015,
4201 (“The Tribunal is of the view that a finding of abuse of process justifies an award of costs against the
unsuccessful party. Thus, the Claimants shall pay for the entirety of the costs of the proceedings, i.e. for the costs of
the Arbitral Tribunal and for the costs of the proceeding.”).

29 Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey, \CSID Case No. ARB/O7/20, Award, 14 July 2010, 99] 153-154 (“In light of the
Tribunal’s finding that the Claimant’s claim was brought before the Centre on the basis of a transaction that did not
correspond to an arrangement that was meant to deploy any legal consequences other than on paper and, as a result,
plainly could not fulfil the requirements of an investment within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention

    

120

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

State should be taken into account when assessing its action even though it

 

430 and vice versa.

  

may be qualified as a breach of investment standards,

(iii) Third, ICSID tribunals are empowered to take into account the behaviour of
the parties during the arbitral proceedings.**! This may include poor and
inefficient pleadings, applying various forms of abusive, harassing or
delaying tactics or engaging in various other forms of inappropriate
litigation techniques. The absence of such behaviour clearly points towards
abstaining from any cost shifting.**? Also the litigating parties’ willingness
to comply with the ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations,
including their duty to make advance payments for the costs of the

proceedings, may be an element to be taken into consideration.***

and Article 1(b) of the Netherlands-Turkey BIT, the Tribunal considers it appropriate that the Claimant bear in full
his legal fees and expenses, as well as the arbitration costs [...].”).

430 Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Decision on Reconsideration and
Award, 7 February 2017, { 621 (“In the Tribunal’s view, after a consideration of all the relevant circumstances, the
principles above may be adjusted to take into account that the respondent is a sovereign State. In particular, it considers
that, even if a tribunal finds that a State has breached its international obligations vis-a-vis an investor, consideration
must be given to the State’s motives and good faith. In particular, where the actions of a State have been guided by its
good faith understanding of the public interest and the State could reasonably doubt that it was breaching its
international obligations, the Tribunal may consider it appropriate to apportion costs in a manner that alleviates the
burden on the respondent State. These considerations apply to situations in which the State is the respondent, not the
claimant.”).

431 Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Award, 2 September 2011, 1
562 (“In this regard [allocating costs], the Tribunal has considered, among other things, the following factors: [...] the
conduct of the Parties during the proceedings; [...]”); Alasdair Ross Anderson et al v. Republic of Costa Rica, \CSID
Case No. ARB(AF)/07/3, Award, 19 May 2010, 4 63 (referring to “special circumstances [...], such as procedural
misconduct.”).

482 Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/2, Award, 2 June 2000, {31
(“[...] on there being no evidence of recklessness or bad faith on the Claimant’s part, this Tribunal is of the opinion
that it would be improper to make an award for such legal costs as the Respondent may have incurred in the defense
of its interests in this arbitration.”); AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erémii Kft v. The Republic of
Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/22, Award, 23 September 2010, {] 15.3.3 (“It is the view of the Tribunal that no
frivolous claim was filed in the proceeding and that no bad faith was observed from the parties. In fact, the Tribunal
notes that the submissions and the argumentations of both parties were presented in a professional manner.
Consequently, the Tribunal concludes that each party shall bear its own costs and expenses and share equally in the
costs and charges of the Tribunal and the ICSID Secretariat.”).

433 Eudoro A. Olguin v. Republic of Paraguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/5, Award, 26 July 2001, 4 85 (“[...] the
conduct of the Republic of Paraguay needlessly prolonged these proceedings by repeatedly failing to meet the
deadlines set by the Tribunal, in particular, the obligations imposed by the ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulations. For the above reasons, this Tribunal feels that it is fair that the parties each contribute part of the expenses

 

 

121

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

(iv) Further, tribunals should take into account a number of additional factors,
such as the reasonableness of the costs claimed, in particular, in relation to
the size, complexity, and significance of the case, but also in relation to the
costs claimed by the other party. Similarly, the question whether a dispute
leads to a “clear-cut” case or whether the outcome was indeed “close”

should be a factor in deciding on costs.**#

739. On the basis of these general considerations, the Tribunal considers that in the present case

the following elements are relevant to the exercise of its discretion:

(i) In regard to the relative success of the Parties, it is clear that while Claimant
succeeded on the jurisdictional level, its claims for breaches of the Treaty,
as well as for compensation for an alleged judicial expropriation were all

dismissed.

(ii) However, both Claimant’s and Respondent’s relative successes on
jurisdiction and the merits were not clear-cut cases. As demonstrated by the
Tribunal’s analysis above, the jurisdictional arguments were fiercely
disputed and both Parties had strong arguments. Similarly, the acts and
omissions on the part of Respondent, although found falling short of
constituting breaches of Article 2 of the Treaty were clearly not beyond
reproach in the sense that they did not come close to a judicial environment

foreign investors would wish to encounter.

arising from these proceedings, dividing the procedural costs in equal shares, and each assuming the costs for their
legal representation.”).

484 Malicorp Limited v. The Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/18, Award, 7 February 2011, {| 148
(“The decision on the merits seems to support this conclusion [to decide that the costs and expenses should be shared],
in the light of the facts. True, the Claimant’s attitude in the way it presented, and later embarked on, the project has
carried particular weight in the outcome of the proceedings. Nonetheless — and in this respect it concurs with the
assessment of the CRCICA Arbitral Tribunal — this Arbitral Tribunal considers that the Respondent was not itself
completely beyond reproach in the phase leading to the conclusion of the Contract.” [italics in original]); Eudoro A.
Olguin v. Republic of Paraguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/5, Award, 26 July 2001, §| 85 (“[...] while the oversight
exercised by the Paraguayan State through its bodies did not rise to a level of negligence that created liability to pay
the losses suffered by the Claimant, it is also true that it cannot be considered to have been exemplary. [...] For the
above reasons, this Tribunal feels that it is fair that the parties each contribute part of the expenses arising from these
proceedings, dividing the procedural costs in equal shares, and each assuming the costs for their legal representation.”).

 

122

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

740.

TAL,

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

its own costs.

to this case.

Respondent’s decision not to pay its share of the advances on the costs of
the proceedings which would have amounted to USD 300,000 contrasts
with its willingness to make rather generous payments to its legal defence

in the total amount of USD 2,191,332.25.

Further, the behaviour of Parties during the proceedings did not always
prove very helpful to the Tribunal. In particular, when it came to
establishing the facts of the case, the Parties both clearly refrained from
telling the whole story. While Respondent insinuated bad faith on the part
of Claimant both when structuring the investment as a strawmen’s operation
and when bringing investment claims, Claimant remained vague and
evasive when it came to the actual background of the investment. Similarly,
Respondent did not display any major effort aimed at trying to shed light on

the underlying alleged bad faith operations or even alleged corruption.

On the other hand, the Tribunal appreciates the cooperative behaviour of
the Parties’ representatives in the conduct of the proceedings. While
strenuously opposing each other, they continued to respect procedural fair

play and abstained from any forms of abusive, harassing or delaying tactics.

In these circumstances and considering that the claims were not frivolous, were pursued
and defended in good faith and with all due expedition, the Tribunal considers that there is

no reason to depart from the traditional practice in ICSID cases that each Party shall bear

For these reasons, and having taken into account all the circumstances of the case, the
Tribunal concludes that the Parties shall bear on an equal basis the fees and expenses of
the members of this Tribunal, and of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment

Disputes, and that each Party shall bear the legal fees and expenses incurred by it in relation

123

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

742. The total costs of the proceedings, including the fees and expenses of the members of the
Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre, amount to USD
627,423.33. These costs are broken down as follows:

Arbitrators’ Fees and Expenses USD 391,303.03
ICSID’s Administrative Fees USD 138,000.00
Direct Expenses USD 98,120.30

Total USD 627,423.33

743. The above costs of the proceedings have been paid out of the advances entirely made by

Claimant.

744. Since Claimant has paid its own as well as Respondent’s shares of the advances on costs
for the proceedings in a total amount of USD 750,000435 and since Respondent has not paid
its share of these advances, Claimant is therefore entitled to receive half of the costs of the
proceedings, i.e. USD 313,711.67, from Respondent. Claimant is further entitled to be
reimbursed the unused remaining balance of the advances as reflected in the Financial

Statement.**°

IX. DECISION

745. Having carefully considered all of the evidence and arguments presented by the Parties,
both in their written pleadings or other correspondence and in oral submissions, the Arbitral

Tribunal decides,
(i) by majority, that it has jurisdiction over the claims raised by Claimant;

(ii) unanimously, that all claims are dismissed;

+85 The Centre received USD 750,000 from Claimant even though Claimant submitted that it paid USD 600,000, see
above, | 720.

436 The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed Financial Statement of the case account.

124

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

(iii)

unanimously, that each Party shall bear its own costs and that the Parties
shall bear the costs of the proceedings in equal shares. Respondent shall
therefore reimburse Claimant the amount of USD 313,711.67
corresponding to its share of the costs of the proceedings advanced by

Claimant.

125

Krederi Ltd. v. Ukraine
Excerpts of the Award

 

[Signed] [Signed]
Dr. Markus Wirth Dr. Gavan Griffith QC
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: 28 June 2018 Date: 28 June 2018
[Signed]

Prof. August Reinisch
President of the Tribunal

Date: 28 June 2018

126

