INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
KS INVEST GMBH AND TLS INVEST GMBH
Claimants

and

KINGDOM OF SPAIN
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/15/25

 

DECISION ON THE PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY PROF. KAJ HOBER

 

Chairman of the Administrative Council
Mr. David R. Malpass

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Francisco Grob D.

Date: May 15, 2020

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing KS Invest GmbH Representing the Kingdom of Spain:
and TLS Invest GmbH:
Mr. Kenneth R. Fleuriet Mr. José Manuel Gutiérrez Delgado
Ms. Amy Roebuck Frey Mr. Pablo Elena Abad
Ms. Heloise Herve Mr. Rafael Gil Nievas
Ms. Isabel San Martin Mr. Alberto Torré Molés
King & Spalding Ms. Elena Ofioro Sainz
12, cours Albert Ier Mr. Mariano Rojo Pérez
75008 Paris Ms. Gloria Maria de la Guardia Limeres
France Mr. Juan Antonio Quesada Navarro

Ms. Ana Maria Rodriguez Esquivias
Mr. Jan K. Schaefer Mr. Javier Comer6n Herrero
King & Spalding Ms. Eugenia Cediel Bruno
TaunusTurm Abogacia General del Estado
Taunustor 1 Dpto. Arbitrajes Internacionales
Frankfurt am Main 60310 c/ Marqués de la Ensenada, 14-16, 2* planta.
Germany 28004, Madrid

Spain

Mr. Reginald R. Smith

Mr. Kevin D. Mohr

King & Spalding

1100 Louisiana, Suite 4000
Houston, TX 77002

USA

Mr. Christopher Smith
King & Spalding

1180 Peachtree St. NE
Atlanta, GA 30309
USA

Mr. Enrique Molina

King & Spalding LLP

1185 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10036

USA

Ms. Veronica Romani Sancho
Mr. Fernando Igartua Arregui
Mr. Luis Gil Bueno

Ms. Inés Vazquez Garcia

Ms. Cristina Matia Garay
Ms. Celia Altable

Ms. Teresa Gutiérrez

Ms. Inés Puig-Samper
Gomez-Acebo & Pombo
Castellana, 216

28046 Madrid

Spain

. PARTIES’ POSITIONS AND PROF. HOBER’S EXPLANATIONS..

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION.
PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

  

A. Prof. Hobér’s Disqualification Proposal and Respondent’s Observation:

 

 

 

 

 

B. Claimants’ Response and Observations ...........:cccccsessessesssessesseeseeseeseeseesesesseeeseneeneesee 10
C. Prof. Hobér’s Explanations 13
ANALYSIS 15
A. Timeli 15
B. Legal Standard 16
C. Application of the Standard 18
DECISION 21

 

INTRODUCTION

This decision addresses Respondent’s proposal to disqualify Prof. Kaj Hobér dated
November 12, 2019, as supplemented on December 5, 2019.

Initially, the Kingdom of Spain proposed the disqualification of Prof. Hobér on the basis
that he lacked independence and impartiality because he was acting as counsel in an
arbitration initiated by Switzerland’s Nord Stream 2 AG under the Energy Charter Treaty
(ECT) against the European Union. Spain subsequently supplemented its proposal, adding
a new ground for disqualification relating to the dissenting opinion issued by Prof. Hobér
in Stadtwerke Miinchen GmbH, RWE Innogy GmbH, and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/1). The present Decision addresses both grounds.

For the reasons set out in section IV below, the proposal to disqualify Prof. Hobér is

rejected.

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

This case was registered by the Secretary-General of ICSID on June 16, 2015. The Tribunal
was constituted on December 7, 2015. The Tribunal was composed of Judge Bruno Simma,
(Germany), President, appointed by agreement of the parties; Prof. Gary Born (US),
appointed by the Claimants; and Sir Daniel Bethlehem (UK), appointed by the Respondent.
Following the resignation of Mr. Born, the Claimants appointed Prof. Kaj Hober and the

Tribunal was reconstituted with its current composition on August 13, 2018.

Following a hearing in London on March 25 and 26, 2019, the parties submitted their
second round of post-hearing briefs on July 12, 2019. On the same date, the parties filed

their respective submissions on costs.

On October 21, 2019, the Respondent submitted a communication to the Tribunal
indicating that it had learned of Prof. Hobér’s involvement as counsel in a case brought by
Nord Stream 2 AG under the ECT against the European Union (the “Nord Stream
Arbitration”). The Respondent stated that Prof. Hobér’s role in that case raised “serious

concerns for the Kingdom of Spain as to the ability of Mr. Kaj Hobér to exercise

independent judgement in the present case.” The Respondent requested that Prof. Hobér
provided additional information about the parties and nature of the dispute in the Nord

Stream arbitration.

By communication of October 27, 2019, Prof. Hobér provided details about the Nord
Stream arbitration. He stated (a) that the claimant is a Swiss company with investments in
the Nord Stream pipeline for transportation of natural gas from Russia to Germany and the
European Market and (b) that the respondent is the European Union. According to Prof.
Hobér, “the dispute concerns the effects of Directive (EU) 2019/692 amending Directive
2009/73/EC of 13 July 2019 concerning common rules for the internal market in natural
gas and the consequent impact of the amending Directive on Nord Stream 2 AG.” Prof.

Hobér also disclosed that he was involved in the preparation of the notice of arbitration.

On November 12, 2019, the Respondent filed a proposal to disqualify Prof. Hobér pursuant
to Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 9 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules (“Prof.

Hobér’s Disqualification Proposal” or the “Proposal”).

Upon receipt of Prof. Hobér’s Disqualification Proposal, the Centre confirmed that, in
accordance with Arbitration Rule 9(6), the proceeding was suspended until a decision was
made by Judge Simma and Sir Daniel Bethlehem (hereinafter, the “Unchallenged
Arbitrators”), as provided for in Article 58 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule
9(4).

On November 13, 2019, the Unchallenged Arbitrators fixed a timetable for the parties’

submissions and Prof. Hobér’s explanations.

As scheduled, the Claimants filed their response to Prof. Hobér’s Disqualification Proposal

on November 25, 2019 (““Claimants’ Response”).

On December 5, 2019, the Respondent filed a second submission entitled “Respondent’s
Additional Observations of the Disqualification of Dr. Kaj Hobér”, in which it sought “to
supplement the Disqualification Proposal” (‘“Respondent’s Supplementary
Submission”). The Respondent added a new ground for disqualification relating to Prof.
Hobér’s dissenting opinion in Stadtwerke Miinchen GmbH, RWE Innogy GmbH, and others
v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/1) (“Stadtwerke’’).

20.

21.

22.

On the same day, the Unchallenged Arbitrators wrote to the parties advising “that it would
be efficient to address all proposed disqualification grounds together” and inviting the
Claimants to indicate whether they agreed to include Respondent’s Supplementary

Submission “into the current disqualification procedure”.

On December 9, 2019, the Claimants confirmed their agreement to “include Spain’s

additional observations with its current disqualification application.”

In response, the Unchallenged Arbitrators set a revised timetable for Prof. Hobér’s
explanations and the parties’ additional submissions. The revised scheduled was

communicated to the parties on December 10, 2019.

In accordance with the revised schedule, on December 23, 2019, Prof. Hobér furnished his

explanations pursuant to Arbitration Rile 9(3).

On December 27, 2019, the Respondent filed further observations on Prof. Hobér’s

Disqualification Proposal (“Respondent’s Additional Observations”).

On January 3, 2020, the Claimants filed their additional observations on Prof. Hobér’s

Disqualification Proposal (“Claimants’ Additional Observations”).

On January 16, 2020, the Unchallenged Arbitrators invited the parties to file a copy of the
reasoned decision of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce Board concerning Spain’s
challenge to Prof. Hobér in FREIF Eurowind Holdings Ltd. v. Kingdom of Spain, SCC
Arbitration V2017/060 (the “SCC Decision”), which had been referenced to by both parties
in their submissions. The parties were also invited to submit comments on the SCC

Decision by January 29, 2020.

On January 23, 2020, the Claimants informed the Unchallenged Arbitrators of the parties’
agreement to introduce the SCC Decision into the record. On the same day, the Respondent

submitted a copy of the SCC Decision.

On January 28, 2020, the Secretary of the Tribunal informed the parties that the
Unchallenged Arbitrators had received a copy of the SCC Decision and that they would

keep it confidential.

On January 29, 2020, the parties filed their respective comments on the SCC Decision.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

On March 12, 2020, the two Unchallenged Arbitrators advised the Secretary-General that
they were unable to decide the Disqualification Proposal as they found themselves “equally
divided”. The parties were thus informed that the Disqualification Proposal would be
decided by the Chairman of the Administrative Council (the “Chairman”) pursuant to

Article 58 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 9(4).

PARTIES’ POSITIONS AND PROF. HOBER’S EXPLANATIONS

PROF. HOBER’S DISQUALIFICATION PROPOSAL AND RESPONDENT’S OBSERVATIONS

In its submissions, the Respondent puts forward two main grounds in support of its
Proposal to Disqualify Prof. Hobér, namely: (i) his role as counsel in the Nord Stream

Arbitration, and (ii) his dissenting opinion in Stadtwerke.

ji) Prof. Hobér’s representation of Nord Stream 2 AG

The Respondent argues that the fact that Prof. Hobér is acting as counsel in the Nord Stream
Arbitration creates a conflict of interest, which prevents Prof. Hobér from exercising

independent and impartial judgment as required by Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention.

The Respondent submits that there is an “intimate relationship” between the Nord Stream
Arbitration and the present case. Both are cases in which EU Law is “at the heart of the
dispute” and where claims are made under Articles 10(1) and 13 of the ECT, concerning

an amendment of the legal framework of the European energy market. !

According to the Respondent, the Disqualification Proposal should be decided pursuant to
Article 57 of the ICSID Convention, ICSID Arbitration Rule 9, and “all sources of Public
International Law mentioned in Article 38 of the Statute of the [ICJ]”’, interpreted in light
of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (VCLT). Applying these rules, the
Respondent submits, the word “manifestly” in Article 57 cannot be interpreted as

permitting “an arbitrator to be more partial or less independent than judges”.? According

' Prof. Hobér’s Disqualification Proposal, {ff 52 and 49.
2 Prof. Hobér’s Disqualification Proposal, {42 and 3.
3 [bid., 424.

28.

29.

30.

31.

to the Respondent, “if there is any reasonable doubt or indication of a lack of impartiality

the ... arbitrator must be disqualified”. *

The Respondent also states that Prof. Hobér has breached his duty to promptly disclose any
circumstance that might call into question his ability to exercise independent judgement
under ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(2) by failing to inform the parties of his involvement in

the Nord Stream Arbitration.

(ii) Prof. Hobér’s dissent in the Stadtwerke case

In its Supplementary Submission, the Respondent contends that Prof. Hobér’s dissenting
opinion in Stadtwerke, a parallel ECT arbitration brought against Spain, constitutes an

additional, self-standing, ground for disqualification.

The Respondent states that there are “substantial similarities” between Stadtwerke and the
present case. Because Prof. Hobér has already expressed his opinion on many of these
“essential issues” and he has done so “in a way that simply leaves no room for a different
determination in the present arbitration”,° he can no longer sit on this arbitration without

“depriving the Respondent of an arbitrator that will exercise an independent judgment”.”

First, Prof. Hobér has “categorically” concluded that the RD 661 regime “contained a
stabilization representation that Claimants were entitled to rely upon, so that no changes
whatsoever could be introduced by the Kingdom of Spain to such regulation.”* To support
his conclusions, Prof. Hobér points to “some of the very same factual elements to which
Claimants make reference in the present proceedings”, such as a press release by the
Ministry of Industry, CNE reports and presentations made by employees from Jnvest in

Spain.° Furthermore, Prof. Hobér’s conclusions are worded in a manner that makes them

4 Ibid., 4,23.

5 Respondent’s Supplementary Submission, § 7.
© Ibid. 47.

7 [bid., 4.17.

* [bid., 4 26.

° Ibid., 427.

32.

33.

34.

35.

“applicable to any investor whatsoever, regardless of whether there was a specific
representation made to it or not.”!°

Second, Prof. Hobér has passed judgment “on the lawfulness of the disputed measures.”!!

According to the Respondent, Prof. Hobér’s Dissenting Opinion is clear in defining the
measures disputed in the present arbitration as “a radical and fundamental change in the
[sic] regulatory framework.”! In addition, Prof. Hobér has also held “that, in his view, the

2013-2014 measures’ effects were retroactive”. |>

According to the Respondent, “a reasonably informed third party would find that very
possibly Dr. Hobér’s position in relation to the facts and issues addressed in this arbitration
is [sic] very clearly prejudged against the Respondent’s position, and that hence this
arbitrator lacks the independence required by the applicable legal standards”.'* Having
decided on much of the facts and legal arguments at issue in this proceeding, he will be

unable to consider this case impartially and independently.

In its Additional Observations, the Respondent denied that it was seeking Prof. Hobér’s
disqualification because it disagreed with his views in the Dissenting Opinion. Other
arbitrators have decided against Spain and have not been challenged. The problem,
according to the Respondent, is that Prof. Hobér’s Dissenting Opinion “leaves no room for
a different decision in this arbitration, hence calling into question his impartiality to act as

15

an independent arbitrator in the present proceeding”.

The Respondent contends that Prof. Hobér’s explanations do not “point out any concrete
difference” between Stadtwerke and this case to substantiate his statement that the two
proceedings are different.'° The “many other elements” that he refers to, which would
distinguish the “factual matrix” of this case from Stadtwerke-such as “statements,

declarations and presentations by representatives of Spain, publications by representatives

” [bid., 4 30.

"' [bid., Section B.

” pbid., 434.

3 pbid., 435.

4 Respondent’s Supplementary Submission, § 10.
'5 Respondent’s Additional Observations, § 25.

6 [hid., 4 28. See also Ff 19, 26-33.

36.

37.

38.

39.

and governmental bodies of Spain, agreements and understandings entered by into by
representatives of Spain etc.” — are, in fact, “the very same evidence on which he based his
Dissenting Opinion”.'’ Moreover, the Respondent contends, Prof. Hobér acknowledges

that “the basic regulatory scheme in Spain is the same in both cases”.!*

In this connection, the Respondent brought to the attention of the Tribunal a challenge that
it filed against Prof. Hobér in an SCC arbitration “for exactly the same reasons as those
presented in this arbitration”. !? This challenge was upheld by the SCC Board in a decision
dated January 7, 2020.

In its comments on the SCC Decision, the Respondent points out that the “only informed
third party” that has addressed Prof. Hobér’s situation, the SCC Board, has agreed with
Spain and has upheld Spain’s challenge.”° This decision concludes that “the Stadtwerke
arbitration includes issues of fact and law which overlap with the present arbitration”, a

situation that is likewise present here.”!

In the Respondent’s view, the standard for disqualification under the SCC Arbitration Rules
and the ICSID Convention is “exactly the same”.”” The Respondent submits that Article
57 and Rule 14(1) “do not require proof of actual dependence or bias; rather it is sufficient
to establish the appearance of dependence or bias — that is to say, reasonable or justifiable
doubts”. This is supported, the Respondent says, by a long and consistent line of

decisions.**

Since obvious similarities exist between the Stadtwerke case and the current proceeding,
the Respondent contends that Prof. Hobér’s Disqualification Proposal should be upheld in

order to preserve Spain’s right to have an impartial arbitrator deciding the case.?°

"” [bid., 4¥ 30-32 (citing Prof. Hobér’s Explanations of December 23, 2019)

'8 [bid., 4 29 (citing Prof. Hobér’s Explanations of December 23, 2019).

" [bid., 434.

2 Respondent’s Comments on the SCC Decision, 7.

2 [bid., 49.

2 Ibid. 4 16.

2 Jbid., § 17. See also the decisions referenced by the Respondent in ff 18-22.
24 See the decisions referenced by the Respondent in ff 18-22.

25 [bid., paras. 23-24.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

CLAIMANTS’ RESPONSE AND OBSERVATIONS

ji) Prof. Hobér’s representation of Nord Stream 2 AG

In their Response, the Claimants contend that Prof. Hobér’s Disqualification Proposal is
untimely and should be dismissed under ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1). Even if it is
considered timely, the Claimants submit that Spain’s Disqualification Proposal lacks any
merit and should be dismissed under the “manifest lack” of impartiality and independence

standard of Article 57 of the ICSID Convention.

On the issue of timeliness, the Claimants contend that the Respondent waited “more than a
month and a half after the circumstances became public” to file Prof. Hobér’s
Disqualification Proposal.?° Although the Claimants accept that neither the ICSID
Convention nor the ICSID Arbitration Rules “specify the number of days that would satisfy
the requirement of a ‘prompt’ application”, the Claimants point out to Spain’s own position
that “one week was sufficient for it to learn the facts of a purported ...conflict... and to file

a challenge” in another case.?’

As to the merits of the challenge, the Claimants submit that Prof. Hobér’s Disqualification
Proposal fails to meet the “demanding standard” of Article 57 of the ICSID Convention,”
which -in their view- the Respondent has completely mischaracterized in its submissions.
This standard requires a “manifest lack of the qualities”, that should be proven by the

Respondent.

In support of their position, the Claimants argue that challenges like this have been
“routinely” rejected and that there is no reason why the Unchallenged Arbitrators should

29 even more so if Spain

“depart from this long line of clear, well established authority’
has failed to objectively prove that Prof. Hobér lacks the impartiality and independence

required to rule over the present proceeding.

2 Claimants’ Response, | 11.
2 [bid., 49.

8 Tbid., 4 12.

2 Ibid., 4 24.

44.

4S.

46.

47.

Specifically, the Claimants allege that the Respondent has adduced no objective evidence
of bias. According to the Claimants, Spain deliberately ignores the facts that the present
arbitration and the Nord Stream Arbitration concern (a) different claimants; (b) different
respondents; (c) in a different subsector of the energy industry. Once this is sorted out,
Spain’s challenge turns solely on the fact that “Nord Stream is basing its claim on Article
10(1) and 13 of the ECT, the same Articles invoked in the present case.”*” However, these
are frequently invoked standards in investment treaty cases. According to the Claimants,
“[i]t would be ludicrous to find that invoking, as counsel, the broadest and most commonly
asserted claims in treaty arbitration means that the individual cannot independently and

impartially assess those claims as arbitrator.”*!

In their comments on the SCC Decision, the Clai noted that the SCC Board accepted
in its decisions that there “is no soft or hard rule preventing individuals from serving as
both arbitrator and counsel in concurrent but unrelated arbitrations”.*? Therefore, the
Claimants argue that Prof. Hobér’s role as counsel in the Nord Stream Arbitration - which
is “unrelated” to the current proceeding - because the only thing they have in common is
that “both arise under the ECT”,*® should not affect the Unchallenged Arbitrators’ decision,

which should follow the “unanimous practice” of rejecting arbitrator’s challenges.**

(ii) Prof. Hobér’s dissent in the Stadtwerke case

In their Additional Observations, the Claimants contend that Spain’s additional ground to
seek Prof. Hobér’s disqualification based on his dissent in Stadtwerke is “procedurally

barred as inequitable” and “does not meet the applicable legal standard.”?>

According to the Claimants, Spain knew of Prof. Hobér’s involvement in Stadtwerke when
he was appointed arbitrator in the current proceeding; yet Spain raised no concern or
objection at the time. Instead, Spain “consented to Prof. Hobér’s service in this arbitration

and waived its right to challenge” or, at a minimum, “should be estopped” from raising its

39 Claimants’ Response, | 28, citing Prof. Hobér’s Disqualification Proposal, | 53.
M [bid., 428.

32 Claimants’ Comments on the SCC Decision, 5.

3 [bid 44.

M [bid., 47.

35 Claimants’ Additional Observations, sections II and III.

ll

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

additional ground for disqualification, in accordance with the “doctrine of estoppel in
international law”.*° Accordingly, Spain ‘lost its chance’ to raise any challenge against
Prof. Hobér, firstly because it waited over a month and a half to file its Proposal and
secondly, by failing to raise any concerns regarding Prof. Hobér’s appointment in this

proceeding back in 2018.

Concerning the merits of the Proposal, the Claimants state that Spain has failed to meet its
burden of proof: “Evidence that an arbitrator holds genuine and good faith views regarding
the legal consequences of a particular fact pattern is not evidence that the arbitrator is

subject to improper influences or partial to a particular party.”*”

In support of their position, the Claimants argue that “tribunals have routinely rejected
challenges to investment treaty arbitrators based on “issue conflicts” related to prior awards
deciding similar factual and legal issues.”** In their view, there is no reason for the
Unchallenged Arbitrators to depart from the “consistent and nearly unanimous line of

3939

jurisprudence”*’ that has routinely rejected the “suggestion that ‘issue conflicts’...are

sufficient to disqualify a challenged arbitrator”.*°

They also state that the present case is easily distinguishable from Caratube v. Kazakhstan,
which Spain relies on to support its position. According to the Claimants, “Claimants in
this arbitration and the claimants in Stadtwerke are completely unrelated - evidence relating
to the Stadtwerke claimants and their investments, which Prof. Hobér will have seen, has

no bearing on Claimants.”*!

In their comments on the SCC Decision, the Claimants emphasized that the SCC Board
was bound by a different legal standard, i.e., the Swedish Arbitration Act which is less

rigorous than the “considerably higher standard” of the ICSID Convention.*”

3 Claimants’ Additional Observations, §{ 8 and 12.

5 [bid., 4 18.

38 [bid., 4.17.

9 Ibid. 4 25.

°° Pbid., 423.

4! pbid., 4 32.

*2 Claimants’ Comments on the SCC Decision, ff 11 and 12.

12

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

Under the Swedish Arbitration Act, an arbitrator will be disqualified “even if there is no
reason to assume he will be partial” but if there exists “any circumstance which may
diminish confidence” in his impartiality. On the other hand, the ICSID Convention
standard requires the moving party to prove that the arbitrator “manifestly” lacks the ability
to exercise independent judgment. In Claimants’ opinion, Spain has failed to meet its

burden of proof.*#

Additionally, the Claimants recalled that they have asserted the doctrine of estoppel in the
present case.*> The Claimants allege that the Respondent knew that Prof. Hobér was sitting
in Stadtwerke when he was nominated as arbitrator, and did not raise any issue until now.
Additionally, since Stadtwerke and the current proceeding “had all but completed by the
summer of 2019”, it’s probable that Prof. Hobér “was digesting the issues of both cases

and forming his views about them during the same time period”.*°

Therefore, Prof. Hobér’s dissenting opinion in Stadtwerke is “not evidence that he has pre-
judged any issues in the present case”, but that he had “developed his views on the issues...
in this case that overlap with Stadtwerke well before he authored his dissent”.*”

The Claimants have also requested that the Respondent bear all costs arising of or in

connection with Prof. Hobér’s Disqualification Proposal.**

PROF. HOBER’S EXPLANATIONS

Prof. Hobér furnished his explanations in two separate documents. His explanations of
December 5, 2019, concerned the Respondent’s initial Proposal and his involvement in the
Nord Stream Arbitration and his explanations of December 23, 2019, addressed the
Respondent’s additional ground for disqualification, i.e., his dissenting opinion in

Stadtwerke.

8 bid. 4 12.
“4 Ibid., paras. 12 and 14.
+5 See paragraph 58 above, and Claimants’ Comments on the SCC Decision, paras. 20-22.

“6 Claimants’ Comments on the SCC Decision, 25.

*7 Id., emphasis in the original.
*8 Claimants’ Response, { 38; Claimants’ Additional Observations, § 33(b).

13

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

In his explanations of December 5, 2019, Prof. Hobér states that he has been impartial and
independent throughout the proceeding and that he will continue to be so until its

conclusion.

Regarding his involvement in the Nord Stream Arbitration, Prof. Hobér confirmed that he
is acting as counsel for Nord Stream in a case against the European Union as a party to the

ECT, which concerns an EU regulation for natural gas.

Prof. Hobér disagrees with Spain’s position that he lacks the qualities of Article 14(1) of
the ICSID Convention. He explains that in his role as counsel, he is not putting forward his
own views but his client’s. He states that arbitrators decide cases based not on their own
personal views but rather on the facts and evidence produced by the parties in the
arbitration. Therefore, the fact that he “act[s] as counsel in an arbitration against the EU —
not Spain — in a dispute which is different from and unrelated to the [present proceeding]
... does not indicate a manifest lack of qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article 14 of
the ICSID Convention”.””

In relation to Spain’s contention that he failed to abide by his duty to disclose under ICSID
Arbitration Rule 6(2), Prof. Hobér states that since his actions do not fail to meet the test

of Article 57 of the ICSID Convention, no disclosure was necessary.

As to his dissenting opinion in Stadtwerke, Prof. Hobér states that although Spain “has been
fully aware” of his involvement in that case, it never raised any concerns until now when

he issued a dissenting opinion that “might not be to its liking”.*”

In contrast with Spain’s position, Prof. Hobér contends that although there are some
similarities between both cases, each case is different. He states that cases are decided based
on the “particular facts, evidence and arguments presented by the parties [in each case]’”*!.
Therefore, the fact that he issued a dissenting opinion in another case does not mean that

he lacks the qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article 14 of the ICSID Convention.

4 Prof. Hobér’s explanations of December 5, 2019.

*° Prof. Hobér’s explanations of December 23, 2019.

5! Id.

IV. ANALYSIS

63. The Chairman of the Administrative Council has considered all of the parties’ submissions

but will refer to them only inasmuch as they are relevant for the present Decision.

A. TIMELINESS
64. — ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1) provides:

A party proposing the disqualification of an arbitrator pursuant to
Article 57 of the Convention shall promptly, and in any event before
the proceeding is declared closed, file its proposal with the
Secretary-General, stating its reasons therefor.

65. Neither the ICSID Convention nor the ICSID Arbitration Rules specify a number of days

within which a disqualification proposal must be filed. Accordingly, the timeliness of a

disqualification proposal must be determined on a case-by-case basis.**

66. For example, in BSG, a disqualification proposal filed 7 days after the tribunal’s ruling
giving rise to the proposal was considered timely.** In Fabrica, a challenge filed 45 days
after the latest fact on which it was based was considered untimely.** In Burlington, two
grounds were dismissed because they related to facts which had been public for more than

4 months prior to filing the challenge.*> And in Interocean, a number of grounds were

 

2 See, e.g., Oil Development Company and Oil Exploration Company v. Federal Republic of
Nigeria, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/20, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify All Members of the Arbitral Tribunal,
October 3, 2017 (“Interocean”), 71; CA-004, BSG Resources Limited, BSG Resources (Guinea) Limited and BCG
Resources (Guinea) SARL v. Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/22, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify
All Members of the Arbitral Tribunal, December 28, 2016 (“BSG”), § 60; Fabrica de Vidrios Los Andes, C.A. and
Owens-Illinois de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, (CSID Case No. ARB/12/21, Decision on the
Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, June 16, 2015 (“Fabrica 2015 Decision”), 4] 40; ConocoPhillips
Petrozuata B.V., ConocoPhillips Hamaca B.V., ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, May 5, 2014 (“Conoco
2014 Decision”), | 39; CA-012, Abaclat and Others v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5, Decision on
the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, February 4, 2014 (“Abaclat 2014 Decision”), 4 68; RA-013,
Burlington Resources, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Decision on the Proposal for
Disqualification of Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuna, December 13, 2013 (“Burlington”), § 73.

53 CA-004, BSG, 4 62.

84 Fabrica 2015 Decision, {fj 44-46.

58 RA-O13, Burlington, f 71-75.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

found untimely, including two invoked 377 days and 305 days after the date on which the

challenging party became aware of the factual basis of the proposal.*°

Here, the Claimants have argued that Spain’s first ground to seek Prof. Hobér’s
disqualification based on his role in the Nord Stream Arbitration should be dismissed

because of untimeliness.

As noted above, the Respondent informed the Tribunal on October 21, 2019, that it had
learned of Prof. Hobér’s involvement in the Nord Stream Arbitration based on a note
published on September 26, 2019. A total of 26 days went by between this date and the
date when the Respondent first brought this matter to the attention of the Tribunal in the
form of an inquiry. The Chairman observes in this regard that the Claimants have not
argued, nor provided any evidence that the Respondent knew or should have known of

Prof. Hobér’s involvement in the Nord Stream Arbitration before September 26, 2019.

Prof. Hobér replied on October 27, 2019, and the Respondent filed its Disqualification
Proposal on November 12, 2019. Thus, another 17 days then passed from Prof. Hobér’s
response of October 27, 2019, and the Respondent’s filing of its Disqualification Proposal
on November 12, 2019.

In view of the foregoing, the Chairman considers that the time period between the facts
relied upon by the Respondent and the filing of the Disqualification Proposal does not

exceed acceptable margins of timeliness.

The Chairman concludes therefore that the Proposal, with respect to this ground, was filed

promptly for the purpose of ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1).

LEGAL STANDARD

Article 57 of the ICSID Convention allows a party to propose the disqualification of any

member of a tribunal. It provides that:

A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the
disqualification of any of its members on account of any fact
indicating a manifest lack of the qualities required by paragraph (1)
of Article 14. A party to arbitration proceedings may, in addition,

56 Interocean, §f 78, 83.

propose the disqualification of an arbitrator on the ground that he
was ineligible for appointment to the Tribunal under Section 2 of
Chapter IV.

73. Several decisions have concluded that the word “manifest” in Article 57 of the Convention
means “evident” or “obvious,” and that it relates to the ease with which the alleged lack of

the required qualities can be perceived.*”
74. The required qualities are stated in Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention, which provides:

Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high
moral character and recognized competence in the fields of law,
commerce, industry or finance, who may be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment. Competence in the field of law shall be of
particular importance in the case of persons on the Panel of
Arbitrators.

75. While the English version of Article 14 refers to “independent judgment,” and the French
version to “toute garantie d’indépendance dans Iexercice de leurs fonctions” (guaranteed
independence in exercising their functions), the Spanish version requires “imparcialidad
de juicio” (impartiality of judgment). Given that all three versions are equally authentic, it
is understood that pursuant to Article 14(1) arbitrators must be both impartial and

independent.**

76. Impartiality refers to the absence of bias or predisposition towards a party. Independence

is characterized by the absence of external control. Independence and impartiality both

57 See, e.g., Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, (CSID Case No.
ARB/12/20, Decision on the Proposal of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to Disqualify Mr. Alvaro Castellanos,
March 2, 2018 (“Blue Bank 2018 Decision”), § 78; CA-004, BSG, § 54; Fabrica de Vidrios Los Andes, C.A. and
Owen s-lllinois de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB/12/21, Reasoned
Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify L. Yves Fortier, Q.C., Arbitrator (“Fabrica 2016 Decision”), §| 33; Conoco
2014 Decision, §] 47; CA-012, Abaclat 2014 Decision, 71.

58 See, e.g., Blue Bank 2018 Decision, 77; CA-004, BSG, 4] 56; Fabrica 2015 Decision, §| 27; ConocoPhillips
Petrozuata B.V., ConocoPhillips Hamaca B.V., ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, July 1, 2015 (“Conoco 2015 Decision”),
480; Conoco 2014 Decision, 4 50; CA-012, Abaclat 2014 Decision, | 74; RA-013, Burlington, § 65; RA-014, Repsol
S.A, and Repsol Butano S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/12/38, Decision on the Proposal to
Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal (“Repsol”), 70; RA-010, Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd. v.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID Case No. ARB/12/20, Decision on the Parties’ Proposals to Disqualify a
Majority of the Tribunal, November 12, 2013 (“Blue Bank 2013 Decision”), 4 58.

17

“protect parties against arbitrators being influenced by factors other than those related to
the merits of the case.”*?

77. Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID Convention do not require proof of actual dependence

or bias; rather, it is sufficient to establish the appearance of dependence or bias.°°

78. The legal standard applied to a proposal to disqualify an arbitrator is an “objective standard
based on a reasonable evaluation of the evidence by a third party.”°! Therefore, the
subjective belief of the party requesting the disqualification is not enough to satisfy the

requirements of the Convention.

79. The Respondent and the Claimant have referred to other sets of standards in their
arguments. While such standards may serve as useful guidance, the Chairman is bound by
the standard set forth in the ICSID Convention. Accordingly, this decision is made in

accordance with Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID Convention.

Cc. APPLICATION OF THE STANDARD
ji) Prof. Hobér’s representation of Nord Stream 2 AG

80. The first ground upon which Spain is seeking to disqualify Prof. Hobér as an arbitrator in

this case relates to his involvement as counsel in the Nord Stream Arbitration.

°° See, e.g., Blue Bank 2018 Decision, § 77; CA-004, BSG, 457; Fabrica 2016 Decision, §| 29; Conoco 2015 Decision,
481; Conoco 2014 Decision, 51; RA-010, Caratube International Oil Company LLP & Mr. Devincci Salah v.
Republic of Kazakhstan, (CSID Case No. ARB/13/13, Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of Mr. Bruno
Boesch, March 20, 2014 (“Caratube”), 4] 53; RA-010, Blue Bank 2013 Decision, § 59; Universal Compression
International Holdings, S.L.U. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID Case No. ARB/10/9, Decision on the
Proposal to Disqualify Prof. Brigitte Stern and Prof. Guido Santiago Tawil, Arbitrators, May 20, 2011 (“Universal”),
4,70; CA-005, Urbaser S.A. and Others v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/07/26, Decision on Claimants’
Proposal to Disqualify Professor Campbell McLachlan, Arbitrator, August 12, 2010 (“Urbaser”), | 43.

See, e.g., CA-004, BSG, 57; Conoco 2015 Decision, | 83; Conoco 2014 Decision, 4 52; RA-010, Caratube, 457;
CA-012, Abaclat 2014 Decision, § 76; RA-013, Burlington, § 66; RA-014, Repsol, 71; RA-010, Blue Bank 2013
Decision, 59.

&l See, e.g., Blue Bank 2018 Decision, § 79; CA-004, BSG, | 58; Fabrica 2016 Decision, 4 30-32; Conoco 2015
Decision, § 84; Conoco 2014 Decision, 4 53; RA-010, Caratube, §j 54; RA-010, Blue Bank 2013 Decision, § 60;
CA-006, Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and InterAguas Servicios Integrales del Agua S.A. v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on the Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of
the Arbitral Tribunal, October 22, 2007, 4 39.

® See, e.g., Blue Bank 2018 Decision, §| 79; CA-004, BSG, | 58; Conoco 2015 Decision, §| 84; Conoco 2014 Decision,
433.

18

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

Spain contends that because of the similarities between the Nord Stream Arbitration and
the present case, Prof. Hobér will be unable to exercise independent and impartial judgment

in this case.

Spain explains that in both cases the respondent’s right to regulate is contested. Spain also
notes that “in both arbitrations claimants have submitted their claims under Articles 10(1)

and 13 of the ECT.”®

It is to be noted that the present arbitration and the Nord Stream Arbitration concern
(i) different claimants; (ii) different respondents; (iii) different subsectors of the energy
industry; and (iv) different measures. As Prof. Hobér indicated in his October 27, 2019
letter, the claimant in the Nord Stream Arbitration is the Swiss owner and operator of a gas
pipeline; the respondent is the European Union. The energy subsector involved is the
transportation of natural gas, and the measures challenged are European EU directives

which are not at stake in the present ICSID proceeding.

Given the multiple differences between the two cases, a third party undertaking a
reasonable evaluation of the facts would not conclude that there is evidence: (i) that
Prof. Hobér manifestly appears to lack the qualities required under Article 14(1) of the
ICSID Convention, or (ii) that Prof. Hobér breached his duty to disclose a circumstance

that might call into question his ability to exercise independent and impartial judgement.

The first ground for disqualification submitted by Spain is therefore dismissed.

(ii) Prof. Hobér’s dissent in the Stadtwerke case
The second ground upon which Spain is seeking to disqualify Prof. Hobér relates to the
Dissenting Opinion he issued in Stadtwerke.

The Respondent’s position is that because Prof. Hobér expressed his views on many “key
issues” at stake in this case, and did so in a way that, according to the Respondent, “leaves

no room for a different decision in this arbitration”, he can no longer sit in this arbitration

8 pbid., | 56.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

without “depriving the Respondent of an arbitrator that will exercise an independent

judgment”.

The Claimants acknowledge that some facts in Stadtwerke overlap with the present case

but maintain that the two cases are not identical. So did Prof. Hobér in his explanations.

First, it should be noted that the circumstance that an arbitrator has expressed views on
issues of law or fact common to two or more parallel arbitrations in which that arbitrator is

involved is not -without more- evidence of partiality or appearance thereof.

Second, the two cases at stake involve investments in Spain by unrelated companies, made
at different times, and in different sectors. These are not distinctions without relevance in
the context of renewable energy cases against Spain, as decisions of ICSID tribunals have
shown. Even in cases where issues could be similar, the arguments and the manner in which
they are presented by different parties could differ depending on the particularities of each

case.

Finally, Stadtwerke and the present arbitration commenced within six months of each other,
in January and June 2015, respectively. In Stadtwerke, the claimants appointed Prof. Hobér
on April 15, 2015. In the present case, the Claimants appointed Prof. Hobér on August 12,

2018, following Mr. Born’s resignation.

The parties could anticipate at the time of Prof. Hobér's appointment that both cases would
deal with similar issues of fact and law. They also knew that one of the cases could be
decided in advance of the other; yet neither party asked that the two cases be decided
simultaneously. Spain did not raise concerns upon the appointment of Prof. Hobér in this
case, and, it should be noted, has appointed the same individuals in several other investor-

State arbitrations.

Accordingly, in these circumstances, a third party undertaking a reasonable evaluation of
the facts would not conclude that Prof. Hobér manifestly appears to lack the required
impartiality and independence to judge this case based on the information and evidentiary

record submitted by the parties in the course of the proceeding.

 Respondent’s Supplementary Submission, {¥ 32, 38 and 17.

20

94.

95.

96.

The proposal to disqualify Prof. Hobér on the basis of his Dissenting Opinion in the

Stadtwerke case is likewise dismissed.

DECISION

Having considered all the facts alleged and the arguments submitted by the parties, and for
the reasons stated above, the Chairman rejects the Respondent's Proposal to Disqualify
Prof. Hobér in this case.

The allocation of costs incurred in connection with his decision is a matter for
determination by the Tribunal in the course of the arbitration in accordance with ICSID

Arbitration Rule 28(1) and the Chairman makes no decision in this regard.

Dark) Melpras

David Malpass
Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council

21

