INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between

KS INVEST GMBH AND TLS INVEST GMBH.
Claimants

and

KINGDOM OF SPAIN
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/15/25

 

DECISION ON THE PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY PROFESSOR GARY BORN,
ARBITRATOR

 

Issued by

Judge Bruno Simma
Sir Daniel Bethlehem QC

Assistant to the President of the Tribunal
Dr. Andreas Miiller

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Francisco D. Grob

Date of dispatch to the Parties: April 30, 2018

Representing KS Invest GmbH and TLS Invest

GmbH:

Mr. Kenneth R. Fleuriet
Ms. Amy Roebuck Frey
Ms. Héloise Hervé
King & Spalding
12, cours Albert Ier
75008 Paris
France

and
Mr. Jan K. Schaefer
King & Spalding
TaunusTurm
Taunustor |
Frankfurt am Main 60310
Germany

and
Mr. Reginald R. Smith
Mr. Kevin D. Mohr
King & Spalding
1100 Louisiana, Suite 4000
Houston, TX 77002
USA

and
Mr. Christopher Smith
King & Spalding
1180 Peachtree St. NE
Atlanta, GA 30309
USA

and
Mr. Enrique Molina
King & Spalding

1185 Avenue of the Americas

New York, NY 10036
USA
and

Ms. Verénica Romani Sancho
Mr. Fernando Igartua Arregui

Mr. Luis Gil Bueno

Ms. Inés Vazquez Garcia
Ms. Cristina Matia Garay
Gomez-Acebo & Pombo
Castellana, 216

28046 Madrid

Spain

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Kingdom of Spain:

Mr. Diego Santacruz Descartin
Mr. Antolin Fernandez Antuiia
Ms. Mé6nica Moraleda Saceda
Mr. Javier Torres Gella

Ms. Amaia Rivas Kortazar

Ms. Elena Ofioro Sainz

Mr. Javier Castro

Mr. Roberto Fernandez Castilla
Ms. Patricia Froehlingsdorf Nicolas
Mr. Alvaro Navas L6pez

Ms. Ana Rodriguez Esquivias
Ms. Gloria de la Guardia limeres
Mr. Yago Fernandez

Abogacia General del Estado
The Ministry of Justice of the
Government of Spain

Calle Ayala, 5

28001 Madrid

Spain

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 3
II. THE DISPUTE 3
Ill. THE PARTIES 3
IV. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND 3
A. The Arbitration Proceeding 3
B. The Disqualification Proposal 5

 

VY. SUMMARY OF PARTIES’ POSITIONS AND PROF. BORN’S EXPLANATIONG........ 6

 

 

 

 

A. Respondent’s Disqualification Proposal and Further ObservationS.............0ccccsesees 6
B. Claimants’ Response and Further Observations ............cccceeeeeeeeeeeseseeeesteeeeeeeeeeeees 9
C. Prof. Born’s Explanations 10
VI. ANALYSIS 11
A. Legal Standard 11
B. Application of the Standard 13
VII. COSTS 14

 

VIII. DECISION 15

INTRODUCTION

This decision rules on Respondent’s proposal dated February 14, 2018, to disqualify Professor
Gary Born as arbitrator in this case (the “Disqualification Proposal”). For the reasons set out

in section VI below, the Disqualification Proposal is rejected.
THE DISPUTE

This case has been submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or the “Centre”) under the Energy Charter Treaty which entered into force for the
Kingdom of Spain and the Federal Republic of Germany on April 16, 1998 (the “ECT”) and
the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of

Other States, which entered into force on October 14, 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

It concerns a dispute between two German investors and the Kingdom of Spain arising out of
measures implemented by the government of Spain modifying the regulatory and economic

regime of renewable energy projects.
THE PARTIES

The Claimants are KS Invest GmbH and TLS Invest GmbH, both limited liability companies
organized under the laws of Germany (together, the Claimants”). The Respondent is the
Kingdom of Spain (“Spain” or the “Respondent”). The Claimants and the Respondent are

collectively referred to as the “Parties”.

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDING

On May 20, 2015, ICSID received a Request for Arbitration from the Claimants against Spain,

which was registered by the Secretary-General of ICSID on June 16, 2015.

By communications received on August 3, 2015, the Parties informed the Centre of their
agreement regarding the number and method for the Tribunal’s constitution. Pursuant to this
agreement, the Claimants appointed Prof. Gary Born, a US national, and the Respondent

appointed Sir Daniel Bethlehem, a British national, as arbitrators.

On December 4, 2015, the Parties informed that they had agreed to appoint Judge Bruno

Simma, a national of Austria and Germany, as President of the Tribunal.

On December 7, 2015, the Secretary-General notified the Parties that all three arbitrators had
accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to have been
constituted in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration

Proceedings (the “ICSID Arbitration Rules”).

The Tribunal held a first session with the Parties on January 12, 2016, by teleconference.

. Between April 2016 and April 2017, the Parties submitted their main pleadings, arguments

and defenses. The Tribunal, in turn, issued five procedural orders concerning various matters

of procedure.

. A little less than a month before the scheduled hearing on jurisdiction and the merits, the

Claimants informed the Tribunal and the Respondent, by a letter received on September 18,
2017, that they had executed an agreement to sell their investments in Spain to a third-party,

the closing being expected for September 20, 2017.!

. Following an exchange between the Parties, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal

postponed the hearing to have sufficient time to examine the documents surrounding the sale

of Claimants’ investment, a postponement request to which the Claimants objected.

. On October 18, 2017, the Tribunal decided to maintain the hearing dates, but to defer the

examination of quantum issues to a later stage.

. A hearing on Jurisdiction and Liability was thus held in Paris from October 23 to 27, 2017

(the “Hearing”).

. During the Hearing, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it had set aside June 20 to 23, 2018,

for the examination of quantum experts, closing statements and any other outstanding matters.

It also provided the Parties with procedural directions for the way forward, including an

' Sale and Purchase Agreement dated September 1, 2017 (Exhibit C-284).

20.

invitation to agree on a document production calendar in relation to Claimants’ sale of their

investments in Spain.

. Through an exchange of communications, the Parties agreed in early December 2018, on a

calendar, which they later modified to run until March 9, 2018.

THE DISQUALIFICATION PROPOSAL

. On February 14, 2018, the Respondent proposed the disqualification of Prof. Gary Born,

pursuant to Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 9 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. It
also requested leave to submit excerpts of, and further comments relating to, the hearing
transcripts of the case Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID
Case No. ARB/14/1), in which Prof. Born is also an arbitrator.

. Upon receipt of the Disqualification Proposal, the Centre confirmed that, in accordance with

ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6), the proceeding was suspended until a decision was taken by the
two unchallenged Members of the Tribunal, Judge Simma and Sir Daniel Bethlehem (the
“Unchallenged Arbitrators”), as provided for in Article 58 of the ICSID Convention and
ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(4).

. On February 17, 2018, the two Unchallenged Arbitrators set a timetable for the Parties’

submissions and Prof. Born’s explanations. They also rejected Respondent’s request for leave
in respect of Masdar v. Spain (see paragraph 17 above), holding that it was not for the Tribunal
to decide whether the Respondent should or should not submit a document in support of its
Disqualification Proposal. As a general rule, no prior leave of the Tribunal is required

provided that the applicable rules of procedure are otherwise met.

On February 23, 2018, the Unchallenged Arbitrators informed the Parties that, for the good
administration of the proceedings, the dates of the Hearing scheduled for June 20 to 23, 2018,
were vacated, a decision that was reached without prejudice to the outcome of the
Disqualification Proposal. The Parties were also informed that the Tribunal would seek new

hearing dates, in consultation with them, once the proceedings were resumed.

21.

Vv.

A

22.

23.

As scheduled, the Claimants filed their comments on the Disqualification Proposal on
February 28, 2018 (“Claimants’ Reply Submission”), and Prof. Born furnished his
explanations on March 13, 2018 (“Prof. Born’s Explanations”). On March 27, 2018, both
Parties submitted additional observations on the Proposal (“Respondent’s Additional

Observations” and “Claimants’ Additional Comments”, respectively).

SUMMARY OF PARTIES’ POSITIONS AND PROF. BORN’S EXPLANATIONS
RESPONDENT’S DISQUALIFICATION PROPOSAL AND FURTHER OBSERVATIONS

The Respondent alleges that Prof. Born manifestly lacks the qualities required by Article
14(1) of the ICSID Convention to serve as an arbitrator in this case and should therefore be
disqualified pursuant to Article 57 of the ICSID Convention. The Respondent relies on three

key facts to sustain this assertion:

(a) Prof. Born’s dissenting opinion in the PCA Case No. 2014-03, Mr. Jiirgen Wirtgen,
Mr. Stefan Wirtgen, Mrs. Gisela Wirtgen, JSW Solar (zwei) GmbH & Co. KG v. The
Czech Republic (“JSW Solar case”), dated October 11, 2017;

(b) Prof. Born’s questioning of counsel in a hearing in the case Masdar Solar & Wind
Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain case (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1) (“Masdar

case’’); and

(c) Prof. Born’s questioning of Mr. Carlos Montoya, a fact witness presented by Spain,

during the Hearing in the present case (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/25).”

Spain contends that Prof. Born’s dissenting Opinion in the JSW Solar case shows that he has
reached an immutable and biased position on key issues at stake in this arbitration. These
include the assessment of investors’ expectations (which he does not seem to balance against
any other consideration in his dissent); the legal effect of regulatory measures concerning
renewable energy prices (which he views as unqualified commitments of stabilization) and

the applicability and effects of EU Law (which he largely downplays if not to reinforce

2 Disqualification Proposal, paras. 2 et seq.

investor’s expectations).> To prove these points, Spain refers to several passages of Prof.
Born’s dissent, including the following which arguably summarizes his views and includes
implicit references to Spain:
47. In my view, it is essential to appreciate this background, both regulatory
and commercial. Put simply, the entire renewable energy sector in the Czech
Republic (as in a number of other states) was based in the commitment of
the state, like the commitments of other states, that the prices paid for
electricity produced from renewable energy sources would be maintained
unchanged (except for upward adjustments to reflect inflation) for a specified
period of time, regardless of market conditions or regulatory judgments.

In turn, this provided investors and lenders with the security that was otherwise
absent in the renewable energy sector.*
24. In response to Prof. Born’s explanations, Spain asserts that Prof. Born’s subjective intentions
are irrelevant to the resolution of the present challenge, which must be determined objectively.
It also points out that Spain has not challenged Prof. Born because he sits as an arbitrator in
other cases involving Spain or has decided against another State, but because he has prejudged

issues relevant to the present case.>

25. Spain also argues that Prof. Born’s interventions in the two cases mentioned above
demonstrate that he is unable or otherwise unwilling to consider alternative viewpoints.° In
the Masdar case, Prof. Born pressed Spain’s counsel to concede the existence of what he
considers a “guaranteed” electricity tariff;’ in this case, on the other hand, Prof. Born went as
far as to interrupt Mr. Montoya’s cross-examination to convey his own views, requesting that
Mr. Montoya refrain from providing explanations regarding the legal context of regulatory
measures and address a single legal provision in isolation. He then made a disdainful comment

to Mr. Montoya,® which shows a worrisome lack of respect if not outright bias against Spain.

3 Disqualification Proposal, paras. 5-14.
4 Disqualification Proposal, para. 6 (Spain’s own empha
dissent, it reads “... was based on the commitment ...”

 

see also ibid., para 46. In the original of para. 47 of the
instead of “... was based in the commitment ...”.

 

 

 

5 Respondent’s Additional Observations, paras. 3-9.

© Ibid., paras. 42-50.

7 Disqualification Proposal, para. 35.

* See Hearing Transcript, Day 3, 25 October 2017, p. 206: “PROFESSOR BORN: I’m sorry, if you could just focus

on my question. Isolate things. Mr. MONTOYA Here in the text, no, it doesn’t show, I cannot find it. I haven't learnt
it by heart. PROFESSOR BORN: Another couple of months!”

26.

27.

° Burlington Resoure
Disqualification of Professor

For a similar attitude of an arbitrator, although directed to counsel, the Chairman of the ICSID
Administrative Council upheld a challenge in the Burlington v. Ecuador case.° None of this

can be considered proper, let alone routine, questioning.

Spain contends that the cases cited by the Claimants to seek the dismissal of the challenge are
of no avail because they are all inapposite. None of such cases involve statements made by an
arbitrator about laws applicable in the relevant proceeding in which the challenge is brought.
Here, by contrast, Prof. Born’s dissent in the JSW Solar case concern laws that are applicable
to the present dispute (e.g. EU law) and facts that are also very similar to those underlying

this arbitration.

As for the applicable standard, Spain argues that the key question is whether the statements
and attitude of Prof. Born give rise to an appearance that he has prejudged the issue from a
reasonable third person’s point of view. Any party to arbitration proceedings has a right to
have its case heard by an impartial tribunal composed of open-minded arbitrators. That right
is not complied with where a tribunal member has preconceived views on key questions of
law or fact as a result of exposure to another case’s file, as rightly noted by the two

unchallenged arbitrators in the Caratube v. Kazakhstan case.!°

 

, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Decision on the Proposal for
Francisco Orrego Vicuiia, dated December 13, 2013, (“Burlington”), para. 65 and n. 77

 

(Disqualification Proposal, Annex 12).

© Caratube International Oil Company LLP & Mr. Devincci Salah Hourani v. Republic of Kazakhstan (ICSID Case
No. ARB/13/13), Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of Mr. Bruno Boesch, rendered by the Unchallenged
Arbitrators, dated March 20, 2014, (“Caratube”), paras. 90 and 91 (Disqualification Proposal, Annex 3).

28.

29.

30.

31.

CLAIMANTS’ RESPONSE AND FURTHER OBSERVATIONS

According to the Claimants, Spain has not demonstrated any fact that calls into question the

impartiality or independence of Prof. Born, much less that it does so “manifestly”.!!

Spain’s key argument is that Prof. Born has prejudged certain issues of this case by issuing a
dissenting opinion in another case. However, Prof. Born’s dissent in the JSW Solar case does
not demonstrate anything even close to prejudgment. Nor do the two sets of questions that
Professor Born posed to Spain’s counsel and Mr. Montoya, Spain’s sole fact witness in the
present case, demonstrate any manifest lack of independence, prejudgment of any issues, or
a refusal to consider Spain’s arguments. Prof. Born simply asked Spain’s counsel in the
Masdar case to confirm whether he had understood Spain’s position correctly, whereas in the
present case he asked Mr. Montoya to answer the specific question he had made instead of

advocating his side’s position.'? That is all.

In any event, Spain’s challenge must necessarily fail because the factual and legal issues
addressed in Prof. Born’s dissent are not the same as those at issue in this arbitration. The
relevant treaties and evidentiary record are different; so are the disputed measures and

presumably the parties’ arguments.

On the issue of the applicable disqualification standard, Claimants stress that Spain must
prove that Prof. Born “manifestly” lacks independence, a “heavy burden” that cannot be
satisfied by mere speculation.'? Arbitrator challenges based on alleged prejudgment of
pending issues have been routinely rejected in treaty practice. Arbitrators have also uniformly
rejected arbitrator challenges based solely on prior awards deciding legal issues presented in
a subsequent case. It is not even clear whether a proven “prejudgment” of certain legal issues
may constitute the basis for a finding that an arbitrator lacks independence (much less

“manifestly” lacks independence, as required by ICSID’s rules).'* Evidence that an arbitrator

'! Claimants’ Additional Comments, para. 2.

2 Claimants’ Reply Submi
3 Claimants’ Reply Submi
4 Claimants’ Reply Submi

  

n, paras. 9-11; Claimants’ Additional Comments, para. 2.

 

n, para. 13.

32.

33.

34.

35.

holds genuine, good faith views regarding the legal consequences of a particular fact pattern

is not demonstrative of an arbitrator being subject to improper influences or biased.

The only decision in the public domain on which Spain relies that reached a different result is
Caratube.'> Yet apart from being misguided, this authority is also inapposite in respect of
Spain’s challenge. Spain is not relying upon special knowledge only available to Prof. Born
and not to the other arbitrators as a result of his service in the JSW Solar case. Rather, Spain
argues that Prof. Born’s dissent constitutes evidence that he has prejudged issues in this

arbitration. Nothing further from reality.

The Claimants also note that Spain challenged Professor Born on precisely the same grounds
as in the ICSID case of Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain, a challenge that was
rejected by the two other arbitrators, Professors Vaughan Lowe QC and Zachary Douglas
ac.'6

PROF. BORN’S EXPLANATIONS

In his explanations, Prof. Born reiterates his continuous commitment to be both independent
and impartial, and to examine the issues in this arbitration with an open mind based on the
evidentiary record and submissions on file. He also disagrees with the stated grounds upon

which Spain has sought to disqualify him.

Prof. Born considers that his dissenting opinion in the JSW Solar case does not reflect bias or
indicate any inability to sit as an independent and impartial arbitrator in this case. Nothing in
that opinion expresses any view about issues in the present case, which concerns a different
treaty, different legislative measures and a different evidentiary record. Nor has the Czech
Republic alleged that his dissenting opinion indicates a lack of independence or impartiality

in the other cases involving that State in which he is sitting.

'5 See Caratube.

'6 See Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify Mr. Gary B. Born,

March 16, 2018, (“Mathias Kruck’

 

) para. 54 (Claimants’ Additional Comments Annex 20).

10

36. Paragraph 47 of his dissent, referred to in the Disqualification Proposal, simply contains

37.

v

=

38.

39.

40.

Al.

general observations based on evidence submitted in the JSW Solar case. It does not resolve
any of the claims or issues in that case. His generic reference to “other states” in that paragraph
was not intended to make, and in fact did not make, any reference to Spain, much less prejudge
any issue involving Spain in this case concerning the application of EU law or the positions
adopted by the European Commission in relation to Spain or this arbitration. Prof. Born’s
discussion of the European Commission’s stand in that case involved only a discrete issue of

interpretation of Czech Constitutional law.

Similarly, the question that he put to Spain’s counsel at the Masdar hearing was a typical
question intended to clarify and understand the parties’ respective cases, by no means unusual
in arbitration proceedings. Spain did not object to the question then nor thereafter. His
question to Spain’s witness at the Hearing in the present case was likewise a typical question
intended to understand and clarify the evidence and issues put forward. Also, no objections

or concerns were raised then or thereafter.

ANALYSIS

The Unchallenged Arbitrators have considered all submissions of the Parties, but refer to them
only inasmuch as they are relevant for the present Decision.

LEGAL STANDARD

The Disqualification Proposal is made on the basis of Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and
Rule 9 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

The relevant first sentence of Article 57 of the ICSID Convention reads as follows:

A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the disqualification of any of its
members on account of any fact indicating a manifest lack of the qualities required
by paragraph (1) of Article 14.

Paragraph | of Article 14 of the ICSID Convention reads as follows:

Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high moral character
and recognized competence in the fields of law, commerce, industry or finance,

ll

42.

43.

44.

4S.

who may be relied upon to exercise independent judgment. Competence in the field
of law shall be of particular importance in the case of persons on the Panel of
Arbitrators.

It is generally accepted,'’ and both Parties are in agreement,'* that pursuant to Article 14 of

the ICSID Convention arbitrators must be both impartial and independent.

The Parties have made various submissions concerning the precise meaning to be given to the
concepts of impartiality and independence in the context of the present arbitration and what
standard of proof should be applied in this regard. Having considered these arguments, the
Unchallenged Arbitrators are satisfied that they are not of material relevance to the Decision

in the present case.

Furthermore, it is generally accepted, '? as well as agreed upon by both Parties,” that the legal
standard to be applied is an “objective standard based on a reasonable evaluation of the
evidence by a third party”.?! Accordingly, neither is “the subjective belief of the party
requesting the disqualification ... enough to satisfy the requirements of the Convention”” nor

are the personal views of the challenged arbitrator decisive in this regard.

Hence, the legal standard to be applied for deciding on the disqualification of an arbitrator is,

as has been stated in the Mathias Kruck Decision:

whether it has been shown that there are any circumstances that would cause a
reasonable third party to conclude that Mr Born cannot be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment. Those circumstances could include, for example, evidence

"” See the references in Mathias Kruck, para. 47 and n. 3 (Claimants’ Additional Comments Annex 20).

'8 Disqualification Proposal, paras. 63 et seq. ; Claimants’ Reply Submission, para. 13.

° Burlington, para. 66 (“Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID Convention do not require proof of actual dependence or
bias; rather it is sufficient to establish the appearance of dependence or bias.”), with further references in n. 80
(Disqualification Proposal Annex 12).

2 Disqualification Proposal, paras. 67 et seq; Claimants’ Reply Submission, para. 10; Respondent’s Additional
Observations, para. 7.

2! Disqualification Proposal, para. 68; see also Claimants’ Reply Submission, para. 10: “The Parties agree that the
standard is objective and not subjective. Thus, one must analyze the evidence from the point of view of a reasonable
third party, with knowledge of all the facts.”

% Burlington, para. 67, with further references in n. 82 (Disqualification Proposal, Annex 12).

23 Respondent’s Additional Observations, para. 7.

of partiality, or of a lack of independence from a party or some other interested
person, or of a personal interest in some aspect of the subject-matter of the
proceedings, or of an unwillingness on the part of the arbitrator ‘to consider views
that oppose his preconceptions, and remain open to persuasion’ .”+

B. APPLICATION OF THE STANDARD

46. In the Disqualification Proposal, the Respondent contends that Prof. Born’s dissenting opinion
in the JSW Solar case as well as his questioning of counsel in a hearing in the Masdar case
and of a fact witness in the Hearing in the present case would indicate to a reasonable third
party a degree of partiality implying that Prof. Born cannot be relied upon to exercise

independent judgment.

47. As noted by the Claimants,” the Respondent challenged Prof. Born in contemporaneous,
parallel proceedings on precisely the same grounds in the ICSID case of Mathias Kruck. The
Decision in that case is before the Unchallenged Arbitrators in the present proceedings. The
challenge to Prof. Born was rejected by the unchallenged arbitrators, Professors Vaughan

Lowe QC and Zachary Douglas QC, in Mathias Kruck, inter alia on the following grounds:”°

54. The Two Members have considered Mr Born’s dissenting opinion in Wirtgen
[i-e. JSW Solar] carefully, in general and with particular attention to the passages
identified by Respondent as indicating Mr Born’s lack of partiality. The dissenting
opinion is tightly focused upon the specific detail of the situation in the Czech
Republic and the specific content of Czech legislation and conduct of the Czech
Government. It is a long and detailed dissent, with many references to the
documentary record in the case and extensive quotations from that record. The
dissenting opinion contains a very close and precise analysis, based firmly on the
specific facts of the case before the Wirtgen tribunal. The Two Members do not
consider that it lends any support to the suggestion that Mr Born would not be an
impartial arbitrator in the present case.

 

55. The Two Members have considered Mr Born’s questioning of counsel and
witnesses in the Masdar and KS Invest cases. Again, they have considered the
transcripts from those case [sic] generally and with particular attention to the
passages identified by Respondent as indicating Mr Born’s lack of partiality and
his disdain for Respondent’s witnesses. Mr Born’s questioning appears to them to

 

24 Mathias Kruck, para. 52 (Claimants’ Additional Comments Annex 20), citing from US Supreme Court, Republican
Party of Minnesota v. White, 536 U.S. 765, 778 (2002) (Claimants’ Reply Submission Annex 9).

25 Claimants’ Additional Comments, para. 7; see above paragraph 33.

2® See Mathias Kruck (Claimants’ Additional Comments Annex 20).

13

be in each case an entirely reasonable attempt to clarify the points being presented
to the tribunal concerned. It is commonly — perhaps invariably — the case that
members of tribunals have in mind some legal or factual issues that they consider
are likely to be important for the decision in the case, and which may have been left
unclear in the written submissions on the record. In the Two Members’ view, far
from being objectionable, it is desirable that members of a tribunal put such issues
as precisely as they can to counsel and witnesses and give them the opportunity to
have a clear answer put on the record. The Two Members see nothing in Mr Born’s
questioning that goes beyond that perfectly proper process.

 

56. In sum, and taking the submissions of the two Parties as a whole, the Two
Members are clearly of the view that there is no basis for the suggestion that
Mr Born cannot be relied upon to exercise independent judgment, or is not
impartial, or does not have a mind open to the arguments to be presented in this
case, or has any bias against Respondent in this case. That finding disposes of the
matter, whether the precise formulations of the standard and the burden of proof
advanced by Respondent or by Claimants are preferred.?”

48. The Unchallenged Arbitrators are content to adopt the reasoning in the Mathias Kruck case,
which addresses circumstances that correspond in every material respect to those engaged by
the present case. As in the Mathias Kruck case, the Unchallenged Arbitrators in the present
case consider that Prof. Born, both in his dissenting opinion in the JSW Solar case and in his
questioning of counsel in the Masdar case and in the Hearing in the present case, acted entirely
properly, within the bounds of independence and impartiality required of an arbitrator. There
is no basis to the suggestion that Prof. Born has either overstepped the boundaries of
impartiality and independence in these proceedings to this point or that there are grounds for
concluding that he cannot be relied upon to exercise fair and independent judgment going

forward. The Unchallenged Arbitrators accordingly reject the Respondent’s proposal to

disqualify Prof. Born in the present proceedings.

VII. COSTS

49. The Claimants have requested to order the Respondent to bear all costs that arise of or in
connection with its Disqualification Proposal (and the related potential vacation of the June

2018 hearing dates).”* The Unchallenged Arbitrators determine that a decision on costs arising

27 Mathias Kruck, paras. 54-56.

28 Claimants’ Reply Submission, para. 38; Claimants’ Additional Comments, para. 17.

14

from this Proposal will be taken in due course. The Parties are invited to address this issue at

the time they make their more general submissions on costs.

VIII. DECISION

50. For the reasons set forth above, the Unchallenged Arbitrators decide as follows:

(1) The Proposal to Disqualify Prof. Gary B. Born is rejected.

(2) A decision on the costs arising from the Proposal will be taken at a later stage.

 

 

Bruno Simma Daniel Bethlehem

