International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

 

KT Asia Investment Group B.V.

Claimant

Republic of Kazakhstan
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/8

 

AWARD

 

Arbitral Tribunal:

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, President
lan Glick, Q.C., Arbitrator
Christopher Thomas, Q.C., Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Martina Polasek

Assistant to the Tribunal:
Eva Kalnina

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 17 October 2013

TABLE OF CONTENT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 1
INTRODUCTION 2
A. THE CLAIMANT 2
B. THE RESPONDENT 2
THE FACTS 2
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 13
A. _ INITIAL PHASE 13
B. — WRITTEN PHASE ON JURISDICTION .......s-ssscssssssesssssessssesssosseeatacsssasseensonseeasseensanees 15
C. HEARING ON JURISDICTION 16
D. POST- HEARING PHASE 17
POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES 18
A. THE RESPONDENT'S POSITION AND REQUEST FOR RELIEF........s:ssssssssesssesseeesseeesesee 18
1. No “Investor”. 19

2. No “Investment” 19

3. Abuse of the ICSID Convention and the BIT............ccccccsceseeeeseseeeseeeseeeseen 20

B. THE CLAIMANT’S POSITION AND REQUEST FOR RELIEF........ssssssecsssssesssseessssesesseees 21
ANALYSIS 23
A. PRELIMINARY MATTERS 23
1. Scope of this Award 23

2. The Relevance of Previous Decisions or AWards ............:cccccseeeeeseseseeeseen 23

3. Law Applicable to the Jurisdiction of the TriDUMAl ............ccccceseeeeeeeeseeeseen 23

4. Undisputed Facts 25

5. Test for Establishing Jurisdiction .............cccccsccsscesssesteseteseseseseseeseseeeseseeeee 25

B. OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY.......+:-sssssssesseesssssesesseesseesesnsseees 26
1. Objections Ratione Personae: No INVe@StOl ..........:csccseeseeeseeesteesteeeteneneeeeee 26

1.1. The R 's 27

1.2. The Claimant’s position... eeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeenensenees 28

1.3. ysi 30

 

Vi.

Vil.

1.3.1.
1.3.2.

2. Objections Ratione Materiae: No Investment

Is the Claimant's Dutch nationality opposable to the Respondent?...

Is the claim inadmissible in light of Mr. Ablyazov's alleged
beneficial ownership?..

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

30

 

 

 

 

2.1. The 39
2.2. The Claimant’s 40
2.3. y 4
2.3.1. Elements of investment.......
2.3.2. Does the Claimant's investment meet the objective test? .. 1 45
2.3.2.1. Key facts 46
2.3.2.2. Contribution 49
2.3.2.3. Duration 54
2.3.2.4. Risk 56
2.4. Ci 57
COSTS 57
DECISION 59

 

ABBREVIATIONS

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

 

BIT

Bilateral Investment Treaty, specifically the Agreement on
encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments between the
Republic of Kazakhstan and the Kingdom of the Netherlands of 1

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

August 2007

BTA BTA Bank

CMoM KT Asia’s Memorial on the Merits of 13 December 2010

CMoJ KT Asia’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction of 20 June 2011

C- Claimant [KT Asia]’s Exhibits

CL- Claimant [KT Asia]’s Legal Exhibits

Duma Duma Corporate Services B.V.

FSA Agency of the Republic of Kazakhstan on Regulation and Supervision of
Financial Market and Financial Institutions

ICSID International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

 

(ICSID) Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States
and Nationals of Other States

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

KT Asia KT Asia Investment Group B.V.

KASE Kazakhstan Stock Exchange

MoJ Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction of 18 March 2011
R- Respondent [Kazakhstan]’s Exhibits

Refgen Refgen Technologies Inc.

Request KT Asia’s Request for Arbitration of 24 April 2009
Rejoinder KT Asia’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction of 12 December 2011
Reply Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction of 16 September 2011
RL- Respondent [Kazakhstan]’s Legal Exhibits

 

Samruk-Kazyna

National Welfare Fund Samruk-Kazyna

 

Torland

Torland Productions Inc.

 

Tr. day/page/line

Transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction of 1-3 February 2012

 

VCLT/Vienna
Convention

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

 

 

Ws

 

Witness Statement

 

 

INTRODUCTION

A. THE CLAIMANT

The Claimant, KT Asia Investment Group B.V. ("KT Asia"), is a company incorporated
in the Netherlands with its registered office at De Boelelaan 7, 1083 HJ, Amsterdam,
Netherlands.

Since 23 May 2012, the Claimant has been represented in these proceedings by
ADDLESHAW GODDARD LLP, Millon Gate, 60 Chiswell Street, London EC1Y 4AG. Until
24 February 2012, the Claimant was represented by STEPHENSON HARWOOD and Mr.
Zachary Douglas and Ms. Michelle Butler of MATRIX CHAMBERS. At the beginning of
these proceedings, the Claimant was also briefly represented by CLYDE & Co until it
retained STEPHENSON HARWOOD on 17 March 2010.

B. THE RESPONDENT
The Respondent is the Republic of Kazakhstan (Kazakhstan” or the “Respondent’).

The Respondent is represented in this arbitration by REED SMITH LLP, the Broadgate
Tower, 20 Primrose Street, London EC2A 2RS, and Messrs. Ali Malek QC and
Christopher Harris of 3 VERULAM BUILDINGS.

THE FACTS

This Section summarizes the facts of this dispute insofar as they bear relevance to
ruling on the Respondent's objections to jurisdiction.

The core of the present dispute concerns the Claimant’s allegations of a forced
nationalization by the Respondent of its minority interest in the BTA Bank (“BTA”). BTA
has its origins in two Soviet-era banks, Prombank (founded in 1925) and
Vnesheconombank (established in 1990), and it is the result of a series of
consolidations, mergers, and privatisations (CMoM, § 38 ff.; Ablyazov 1 WS, § 104 ff.).
BTA is one of the four systemic banks of Kazakhstan (the others being Halyk Bank,
Kazkommertzbank and Alliance Bank) and it is listed on the Kazakhstan Stock
Exchange (“KASE”; R-3).

As will be discussed in further detail below, it is undisputed that the ultimate beneficial
owner of the Claimant is Mr. Mukhtar Ablyazov (“Mr. Ablyazov’), a private businessman
and Kazakh national.

By way of background, it is noted that Mr. Ablyazov began his career in business in
1991 and soon became a prominent private investor and businessman with interests in
a variety of sectors and commercial projects, primarily in Kazakhstan (CMoJ, § 116).
He had significant interests in the banking and media sectors, as well as in the sugar
industry, among others. Between 1997 and 1998, Mr. Ablyazov was the head of the
Kazakhstan State Power Grid Operator and, between 1998 and 1999, he was the
Minister of Energy, Industry and Trade of Kazakhstan (Ablyazov 1 WS, § 27). Whilst in
this last office, he drafted Kazakhstan's New Industrial Policy, which he describes as “a
programme for the improvement and diversification of the country’s economy”
(Ablyazov 1 WS, § 28).

According to Mr. Ablyazov, he, together with a consortium of investors, purchased BTA
(at that time called Bank TuranAlem) for US$72 million in 1998, which was “a record for
the privatisation of a state company at the time” (Ablyazov 1 WS, §§ 106-107). Mr.
Ablyazov has also stated that, despite the Kazakh Government's injections of capital
and debt write-off, Bank TuranAlem remained a “distressed asset”, which “was not of
interest to the President or his circle” (Ablyazov 1 WS, § 106).

In November 2001, Mr. Ablyazov co-founded a political opposition party, the
Democratic Choice of Kazakhstan, and became increasingly involved in Kazakh politics
(Ablyazov 1 WS, § 35). In the Claimant's submission, it was due to Mr. Ablyazov’s
engagement in politics that his relationship with the Kazakh political elite, and
particularly with President Nursultan Nazarbayev (“President Nazarbayev’), began to
deteriorate and eventually resulted in his arrest at the end of March 2002.

Mr. Ablyazov considers that the charges brought against him were fabricated (Ablyazov
1 WS, § 43) and observes that a number of Western governments and human rights
organizations condemned his trial and conviction as politically motivated and conducted
in gross violation of due process.’ He also argues that it was only as a result of the
pressure exercised on the Kazakh government by Amnesty International, the European

* Human Rights Watch, “Political Freedoms in Kazakhstan”, April 2004, Vol. 16, No. 3 (“International

and local observers at Ablyazov’s June-July 2002 trial told Human Rights Watch that numerous
procedural violations, a lack of credible evidence, and inconsistent witness testimony reflected a
political motivation behind the case.”; C-23). Amnesty International (Report on “Concerns in Europe”,
1 September 2002; C-4) and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (“OSCE”; C-
28) came to similar conclusions.

rn

oane

Parliament, various Western Governments, the OSCE and human rights NGOs that he
was released from prison after 14 months, even though he had been sentenced to six
years (Ablyazov 1 WS, § 72).

In his witness statement, Mr. Ablyazov provides a detailed account on physical and
mental abuse that he says he suffered while in prison (Ablyazov 1 WS, § 51). He
explains that after his release from prison, he was forced to move to Moscow in May
2003 “in order to escape constant intimidation through close surveillance, and the
monitoring of all my activities and those of my friends and family” by the Kazakh secret
services. He stayed in Moscow until May 2005 but remained politically active during
that time (Ablyazov 1 WS, § 81, § 89).

Upon his return to Kazakhstan in May 2005, Mr. Ablyazov became the Chairman of the
Board of Directors of BTA, following the death in a hunting accident of Mr. Yerzhan
Tatishev (“Mr. Tatishev’), then Chairman of BTA, which left the Bank without a leader
(Ablyazov 1 WS, § 111 ff.). In this context, it is pertinent to note that the extent and
structure of Mr. Ablyazov's ownership of the shares in BTA varied over time. It seems
undisputed that Mr. Ablyazov considered that it was not in his interest to disclose his
ownership of BTA to the general public and to the Kazakh banking authorities
(Ablyazov 1 WS, § 69; § 123 “[...] if | had publicly disclosed the way in which my
interest was held, this would have increased the risk of Nazarbayev taking my shares
from me”). In this regard, the documentary evidence also indicates that his ultimate
beneficial ownership of 75.18% was not disclosed in BTA’s written communications
with Western banks such as ING and Deutsche Bank.”

The evidence is that Mr. Ablyazov ultimately controlled 75.18% of BTA (acquired in
stages, as will be further described below)* through a series of separate companies
incorporated in different jurisdictions under the direction of trusted associates.* Given
the position of trust between Mr. Ablyazov and his associates, the latter would
implement any decision of the former by way of instructions to the nominee director of
the relevant company.® Each of the companies ultimately beneficially owned by Mr.
Ablyazov held less than 10% of the shares of BTA Bank.°

Tr. D1/187 ff. Mr. Ablyazov testified that he communicated his ultimate beneficial shareholding in

the Bank to Western financial institutions orally, but not in writing.

See § 15, § 22, fn. 15, fn. 16 of this Award.

Tr. D1/111.

Tr. D1/106-108.

Tr. D1/139-140. For example, KT Asia owned 9.96% of the voting shares of BTA Bank.

4

15.

8

In the same vein, Mr. Ablyazov testified that, at the time of his arrest in March 2002, he
and his colleague Mr. Tatishev held about 75% of the shares in BTA. They had agreed
that 60% of those shares belonged to Mr. Ablyazov and 40% to Mr. Tatishev. Once he
was sent to prison, they agreed that Mr. Tatishev would hold Mr. Ablyazov's shares on
the latter's behalf, to prevent a seizure by President Nazarbayev. For this reason, Mr.
Tatishev allegedly made a public announcement that Mr. Ablyazov no longer had any
shares in BTA (Ablyazov 1 WS, § 69).

It is also undisputed that the Kazakh authorities, and in particular the Agency of the
Republic of Kazakhstan on Regulation and Supervision of Financial Market and
Financial Institutions (the “FSA”), which is the competent authority in matters of
regulation and supervision of the Kazakh financial sector, sought to obtain information
about the ultimate beneficial owners of BTA. The Kazakh authorities considered the
holding of shares in BTA by separate companies under the same ownership or control,
each owning less than 10%, to be of significance because ownership in excess of 10%
was subject to the FSA’s approval.” For his part, Mr. Ablyazov testified that he wished
to protect his 75% interest in BTA from expropriation by President Nazarbayev by
holding it through different companies situated outside of Kazakhstan.®

The FSA made requests for information about the ultimate owners in particular in a
letter of 14 June 2007 to BTA’s management (R-18). In a response of 10 July 2007,
BTA disclosed to the FSA the names of corporate and individual shareholders who
were the legal owners of the companies that held the shares in BTA. BTA’s
management did not, however, disclose the ultimate beneficial owners of those
companies (R-19). Further exchanges of letters between the FSA and BTA followed, in
which the FSA continued to seek information on the beneficial owners of BTA (R-20).
On 10 September 2007, BTA replied that additional information about affiliated persons
could not be demanded from minority shareholders and that therefore this information
would not be provided (R-21). The FSA never reacted to this letter.

On 1 August 2007, the Agreement on encouragement and reciprocal protection of
investments between the Republic of Kazakhstan and the Kingdom of the
Netherlands (the “BIT” or the “Treaty”; C-1) entered into force.

Tr. D3/95-96.
Tr. D1/169-170.

20.

21.

22.

é

1"

aes

The Claimant was incorporated in Rotterdam on 12 December 2007°. On
14 December 2007, it purchased 808,321 shares in BTA from two BVI companies,
Refgen Technologies Inc. (“Refgen”) and Torland Productions Inc. (“Torland”). These
shares represented a 9.96% interest in BTA (C-39; R-34; R-35). As clarified by Mr.
Ablyazov at the hearing"®, the Claimant was a shell company set up to hold Mr.
Ablyazov’s shares in BTA pending a private placement with third party investors.

Pursuant to the agreements providing for the management of KT Asia (the
"Management Agreements", R-29 and R-30), the management of KT Asia was in the
hands of a nominee director which was bound to act in accordance with Mr. Ablyazov's
instructions. The first such nominee director, Equity Trust, was paid slightly under
€4000 annually for its services." Duma Corporate Services B.V. (“Duma”), a
Netherlands corporate services company, which succeeded Equity Trust, charged an
annual fixed fee of €2100" (R-30, Schedule 1). Mr. Ablyazov could not personally
recall whether the fees to these companies were ever actually paid but argued that the
people in charge of the operational activities would have made all the payments

necessary to ensure that the companies “could continue carrying on business”. '*

It is undisputed that as the ultimate beneficial owner of KT Asia, Mr. Ablyazov is
funding the present arbitration and that KT Asia has never had any assets other than
the shares in BTA and a bank account with a balance of approximately €18,000."

It also emerged during the course of this arbitration that Torland and Refgen, the
companies from which the Claimant acquired its shares in BTA, were initially controlled
by Mrs. Anara Tatisheva, the widow of Mr. Tatishev, the late Chairman of BTA’s
Management Board."® However, Mr. Ablyazov testified that he gradually acquired
control over these companies as well." According to him, the transfer of control over

KT Asia Deed of Incorporation, 12 December 2007 (C-36).

Mr. Ablyazov testified on this issue as follows: “[...] there was a special structure — i.e. KT Asia --
that was being put in place and it was anticipated that it would be sold on to the investors in case
the private placement was a success. Now, whether it was put in place on a temporary or not on a
temporary basis was really dependent on how successful we would be within the framework of that
private placement. At the end of the day it became a fixture really” (Tr. D1/163).

Tr. D1/150/10 ff.

R-30, Schedule 1. The Agreement also indicated that the total yearly charges (legal, accounting,
fiscal, management and domiciliation) would range from €6500-€8000).

Tr. D1/150/17-24.

Tr. D1/117/3-5; Tr. D1/141/2-8.

In the words of the Claimant, following Mr. Tatishev’s sudden death, “virtually all the shares Mr.
Tatishev had been controlling, including those held as nominee for Mr. Ablyazov, passed into the
control of his wife, Anara Tatisheva” (CMoM, § 42).

Mr. Ablyazov describes the acquisition of the companies Refgen and Torland in the following terms:
“When | returned to Kazakhstan from Moscow in 2005 as BTA’s Chairman, | started to control

6

23.

24.

25.

26.

the shares from Mrs. Tatisheva to him was completed by April 2008 and from then he
was “in overall control of the Bank” (Ablyazov 1 WS, § 242).

The evidence thus is that by the time of the transfer of the shares from Refgen and
Torland to KT Asia, the former were also indirectly owned and controlled by Mr.
Ablyazov. At the hearing, Mr. Ablyazov acknowledged that “at the end of the day
Torland and Refgen were my companies and KT Asia was also my company” (Tr.
D1/159/8-12). When asked about the exact timing of his acquisition of beneficial
ownership of Torland and Refgen, Mr. Ablyazov responded as follows:

“Ablyazov: At the beginning, when we were just launching this
process and when we were discussing, holding discussions with
JP Morgan, | believe that Mrs Tatisheva was the beneficial owner.

Now, afterwards, when it was all restructured by using KT Asia, at
the end of the day | became the owner and Torland and Refgen
were wound up because there was no use for those. So instead of
those two owners, KT Asia stepped in. | just need to confirm the
dates.

Q: [...] So if | formulate my question: at this stage, before the
shares were transferred to -- acquired by KT Asia, i.e. from the
BVI companies, you were the beneficial owner of those
companies; that's right, isn't it?

Ablyazov: By the time of the transfer from Torland to KT Asia |
was owner of those shares, yes.” (Tr. D1/159-160)

It is thus undisputed that the ultimate beneficial ownership of the BTA shares did not
change as a result of the transfer from Torland and Refgen to KT Asia (Tr. D1/160/15-
17). Or, in the Claimant's words, “the ultimate seller (behind Torland and Refgen) and
the ultimate buyer (behind the Claimant) were the same individual” (Rejoinder, § 280).

Mr. Ablyazov described the purpose of the incorporation of the Claimant as follows:
“The Claimant is a special purpose vehicle and was conceived by my financial and
legal advisors [...] as an optimal structure to hold some of the shares in BTA until the
interest in them could be sold on to unrelated third parties in a private placement of
shares” (Ablyazov 2 WS, § 6).

The Claimant has characterised KT Asia’s incorporation and its subsequent acquisition
of BTA’s shares as part of an “internal corporate restructuring”, the so-called Project

 

BTA’s activities, including its development strategy. Tatisheva moved to Austria in the spring of
2005. She was unwilling for me to resume control of my shares without also selling me her own
shares. Accordingly, we also agreed that we would negotiate the sale of her interest to me on a
gradual basis. From that point onwards, the shares were progressively brought under my control by
various methods, including by transfer between nominees, and by individuals formerly acting on
Tatisheva's instructions being told to act henceforth in accordance with my instructions. The
transfer of overall control of BTA to me pursuant to our agreement took some time, and | cannot
remember the detailed timings of the process” (Ablyazov 1 WS, § 112).

7

27.

28.

29.

Aquila (C-382), conceived by Mr. Ablyazov’s advisors in order to achieve two
objectives: first, to facilitate the private placement of a portion of BTA’s shares
beneficially owned by Mr. Ablyazov and, second, to achieve optimal tax efficiency
across the group of holding companies for the Bank’s shares. Mr. Ablyazov testified
that he preferred a private placement of shares as opposed to an IPO on the basis that
it would allow him to sell the shares at minimal risk of confiscation by President
Nazarbayev, given that the pre-sale negotiations could be conducted on short notice
and in private.” The Claimant adds that the restructuring was planned and
implemented by leading firms of consultants and lawyers in various jurisdictions (CMoJ,
§ 22 ff.; C-383 to C-392, and particularly C-383; C-388; C-390).

In the Respondent's view, the transfer of shares to the Claimant was undertaken in an
unnecessarily complex manner and constituted a mere “internal rearrangement of the
holding of his shares by Mr. Ablyazov” (Mod, § 96). The Respondent describes in
detail the series of transfers of the BTA shares between different companies and the
split between the legal and the beneficial ownership of the Claimant (Mou, § 98 ff.; App.
1). It underlines that despite these numerous transfers of the BTA shares between
different companies, in reality “nothing changed at all, as Mr. Ablyazov continued to
own and control the BTA Shares that were nominally [...] held by the Claimant” (Mou, §
100).

The Respondent further submits that the overriding objective of the transaction was (i)
to transfer the nominal holding of the BTA shares from BVI companies which did not
benefit from investment treaty protection, to a Dutch company which did benefit from
the BIT which had entered into force only four months earlier, and (ii) to conceal the
identity of the real owner of these shares in BTA from the Kazakh authorities in breach
of Kazakh law (Mod, §§ 89-108; App. 1-5 to Mou).

As to the specifics of the transaction by which KT Asia acquired the BTA shares, the
Tribunal notes that while KT Asia acquired 808,321 shares in BTA for approximately
US$66,803,388, no cash was transferred as consideration for the shares (R-61; MoJ,
§§ 121-123. Instead, Project Aquila envisaged that (as occurred) KT Asia would be
granted two unsecured loans by Torland and Refgen (R-37; R-38), and that it would
repay the loans, together with interest, with the proceeds of the private placement (i.e.,
the sale of the BTA shares to third party investors; C-382, step 17). In the Claimant’s

 Ablyazov 2 WS, §§ 11-16 (“It was crucial to me to bring international investors on board without
President Nazarbayev finding out before the transaction was completed. An influx of investors in
this way would have significantly eased the pressure that | was under at that time from the
President.”)

30.

31.

32.

33.

words, “[t]here was no need to provide security for these loans because the ultimate
beneficial owner of the related companies was Mr. Ablyazov and it had always been
envisaged in the Project Aquila Steps Plan that once the private placement had been
undertaken these loans would be repaid in full with the proceeds of the sale”
(Rejoinder, § 281).

The Claimant did not pay interest on the loans when it became due, and the loans
themselves were never repaid. Instead, they were written off and Torland and Refgen
were liquidated in 2009, as, in Mr. Ablyazov’s words, “there was no use for [them]” (Tr.
D1/160/1); Rejoinder, § 282). Mr. Ablyazov testified on these facts as follows:

“Q: Refgen and Torland did not receive anything from KT Asia for
the shares or the loans; in fact, those companies were wound up.
ls that something that you know?

Ablyazov: Yes, | know that those companies were wound up.

Q: And it's also right that KT Asia did not make any payments of
interest in relation to the loans?

Ablyazov: Well, it was the same owner. So at the end of the day
Torland and Refgen were my companies and KT Asia was also
my company, so on a technical basis no payments were made,
most probably, but it does not change the nature of the ownership
in any way.” (Tr. D1/159)

Several months after KT Asia’s acquisition of BTA’s shares, a meeting was held
between the FSA and BTA Bank’s management in order to discuss the development
strategy of BTA. During that meeting, Mr. Ablyazov stated that BTA had made all the
necessary disclosures and that he personally was planning to acquire only up to 8.5%
of the capital of BTA (R-22).

During the world financial crisis commencing in 2008, Kazakhstan's banking sector was
negatively affected by the worldwide shortage of credit and BTA experienced difficulties
in obtaining financing on the international markets (Ablyazov 1 WS, §§ 163-167).

On 16 January 2009, the FSA asked Mr. Ablyazov to state whether he indirectly owned
ten percent or more of the outstanding shares in BTA and whether he had voting rights
for ten percent or more, or was in a position to exert influence on the decisions made
by the Bank by virtue of an agreement or in any other way. The letter did not refer to
any applicable disclosure requirements under Kazakh law (R-23). On 19 January
2009, Mr. Ablyazov replied to the FSA’s letter in the negative and stated: “I do not own,
either directly or indirectly, ten or more percent of the outstanding shares [...] and | do
not have the ability to vote directly or indirectly using ten or more percent of the voting
shares of the bank” (R-24).

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

It is the Claimant's submission that during January and February of 2009, the FSA and
the Kazakh government adopted a series of measures aimed at removing control over
BTA from its shareholders, which eventually culminated in the forced nationalization of
the Bank. For instance, the Claimant notes that on 29 January 2009 the FSA required
BTA’s management to double BTA’s loan reserves within two days (C-187).

The Respondent denies that any forced nationalization has taken place. In its
submission, on 2 February 2009, the Government acquired 75.1% of the shares of BTA
through the National Welfare Fund Samruk-Kazyna (“Samruk-Kazyna’) in return for an
injection of approximately US$1.4 billion and a compulsory share issue (C-206). On 1
September 2010, Samruk-Kazyna's shareholding was increased to 81.48% (R-2). The
Respondent also notes that following its acquisition of shares in BTA in February 2009,
Samruk-Kazyna discovered financial irregularities on a large scale in the Bank's
management and in particular a large deficit of assets versus liabilities (MoJ, § 44).

In the Claimant's view, this alleged “acquisition” by way of a compulsory issue of
shares amounted to an expropriation of its shareholding in BTA. The Respondent
contends that this was a prudential measure taken to protect the interests of deposit
holders following the “looting” of the Bank by Mr. Ablyazov.

Mr. Ablyazov has noted that prior to the “forced nationalization” of BTA in February
2009, he owned or controlled some 75.18% of the shares in BTA. According to Mr.
Ablyazov, his interest has been “massively and deliberately diluted (to almost nothing,
since Samruk-Kazyna and the Bank’s creditors together now hold 99.98% of its
shares)” (Ablyazov 1 WS, § 113). Mr. Ablyazov was no longer residing in Kazakhstan
at the time of the alleged nationalization (Ablyazov 1 WS, § 583). He eventually sought
and obtained political asylum in the United Kingdom (Rejoinder, §§ 15-16).

On 24 April 2009, KT Asia filed a Request for Arbitration (the “Request”) with the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes ("ICSID") pursuant to Article
36 of the ICSID Convention and the BIT.

On 31 August 2010, BTA completed the restructuring of its debt. As a result, the
former minority shareholders were left with only 0.02% of the Bank’s capital, of which
KT Asia held 0.00182% (C-329; Ablyazov 1 WS, § 610).

It is also important to note that this arbitration was not the only set of proceedings
initiated following the Respondent's acquisition of a majority stake in BTA. In August
2009, BTA commenced litigation against Mr. Ablyazov in the High Court in England,

10

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

where he was then residing. During the course of this arbitration, both Parties have,
from time to time, referred to these English proceedings. Although the English
proceedings and their outcome are not relevant to the decision of this jurisdictional
challenge, aspects of the English proceedings have delayed the progress of this
arbitration. Accordingly the Tribunal will briefly mention these proceedings here.

The English proceedings ultimately consisted of eleven actions against Mr. Ablyazov
(and others) alleging that he had defrauded BTA of up to US$6 billion, allegations that
Mr. Ablyazov denied.

At the outset of the English litigation, the bank obtained a freezing order against Mr.
Ablyazov and his business associates which, as confirmed in November 2009 and
amended from time to time thereafter, restricted his right to dispose of, deal with, or
diminish the value of his assets, up to the value of £451,130,000. Mr. Ablyazov was
ordered not to dispose of, deal with or diminish the value of the shares in 637
companies listed in Schedules B, C and D to the freezing order. Most of these
companies were incorporated in Cyprus, the BVI, the Seychelles and Luxembourg.
The order, however, permitted Mr. Ablyazov to spend a reasonable amount on legal
advice and representation, but required him to give advance notice of such expenditure
to the bank’s legal representatives.

Mr. Ablyazov was also ordered to provide certain information about his assets. As a
result, he made disclosure about his assets in writing and was subsequently cross-
examined in front of a judge. In May 2011, BTA applied to the court to commit Mr.
Ablyazov for contempt for, in particular, allegedly failing to disclose assets, lying during
his cross-examination, and dealing with assets in breach of the freezing order.

On 16 February 2012 (shortly after the hearing on jurisdiction in this arbitration), Mr.
Justice Teare found those three allegations proved and, amongst other things,
sentenced Mr. Ablyazov to 22 months in custody. However, before the judgment was
handed down, Mr. Ablyazov evidently fled the jurisdiction.

On 6 November 2012, the English Court of Appeal rejected Mr. Ablyazov’s appeal
against Justice Teare’s decision. ®

During the course of the English proceedings, questions arose whether Mr. Ablyazov
was in breach of the freezing order by borrowing sums from third parties to fund the
litigation and whether the persons from whom he borrowed were independent third

‘8 [2012] EWCA Civ. 1411.

47.

48.

49.

50.

party lenders or were really Mr. Ablyazov himself in another guise. The lenders in
question were initially Wintop Services Limited ("Wintop") and Fitcherly Holdings
Limited ("Fitcherly") and subsequently Green Life International SA.

In April 2012, the English court was asked to decide whether (on the assumption that
the agreements in question were not shams) the rights under the loan agreements
between Mr. Ablyazov and Wintop, and Mr. Ablyazov and Fitcherly, to borrow large
sums of money and direct that they be paid by the lender to third parties (in particular,
Mr. Ablyazov's lawyers) constituted assets of Mr. Ablyazov for the purposes of the
freezing order. In a judgment given on 4 July 2012, Mr. Justice Christopher Clarke held
that such rights were not assets for these purposes, and that exercising them did not
constitute disposing of or dealing with an asset.'®

On 23 March and 23 April 2012, before that judgment was given and some weeks after
the hearing on jurisdiction in this arbitration, in response to a request from ICSID for
further advance payments the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal to indicate its concern
that the Claimant was funding the arbitration and making advance payments in breach
of the freezing order.

The Tribunal was naturally concerned that the funding of the arbitration should not be in
breach of a court order and accordingly made enquiries of the Claimant. Between May
and September 2012, there was correspondence on this topic between the Tribunal
and the Parties. In this context, the Claimant stated that it had been funded (originally
by Wintop and Fitcherly and subsequently by Green Life) in the same way that Mr.
Ablyazov had been funded in the English proceedings. The Claimant, however, drew
attention to the decision of Mr. Justice Christopher Clarke of 4 July 2012 that rights
under loan agreements with third party funders were not assets within the meaning of
the freezing order and thus that it was not a breach of the order to fund the arbitration
in this way. In addition, Addleshaw Goddard represented that, after complying with
their own “know your client” procedure, they had no reason to believe that the funds
advanced by Green Life were not independent of Mr. Ablyazov.

After considering the correspondence, on 21 September 2012 the Tribunal wrote to the
Parties indicating that it would take no action in respect of the provenance of the funds
used to finance the arbitration, but invited the Parties to update it on any relevant
developments in the English proceedings.

'9 [2012] EWCA Civ. 1411.

51.

52.

53.

54.

A.

On 5 April 2013, the Respondent notified the Tribunal that Mr. Justice Christopher
Clarke’s judgment was to be appealed, and that this “may impact on Mr. Ablyazov’s
ability to fund these proceedings and the propriety of the funding he has utilised to
date”.

On 22 April 2013, the Claimant replied that Mr. Justice Clarke’s judgment was still in
effect and that there was thus no need for the Tribunal to reconsider the conclusions
set out in its letter of 21 September 2012. The Claimant also emphasised that BTA’s
appeal did not “relate to the funding of the proceedings brought by the Bank against Mr.
Ablyazov by his current funder, but by two companies that ceased funding Mr.
Ablyazov in May 2011”.

It is a matter of public record that, in July 2013, the English Court of Appeal upheld Mr.
Justice Christopher Clarke’s decision that Mr. Ablyazov’s rights under the loan
agreements with Wintop and Fitcherly were not assets for the purposes of the freezing
order.”°

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

INITIAL PHASE
In the Request, the Claimant set forth the following prayers for relief:

“7.3 Compensation for breach of the BIT and/or relevant
obligations under national and international law. The Claimant
will particularise the valuation of its claim for compensation in
due course, and if necessary will adduce expert evidence in
this regard.

For indicative purposes only, losses suffered by the Claimant
during the relevant period and occasioned by the
Respondent's unlawful actions, by way of diminution of value
and share dilution, are in the range of US $500 million (United
States Dollars five hundred million) - US $1.5 billion (United
States Dollars one and one-half billion.)

The Claimant's claims for compensation include, inter alia:

7.3.1 Compensation for reduction in value of the Claimant's
shareholding in BTA, including loss of dividends and other
rights/financial benefits and opportunities accorded to
shareholders.

7.3.2 Consequential damages arising out of the Respondent's
breaches and its ongoing mismanagement of the investment,

29 [2013] EWCA Civ. 928.

55.

56.

including inter alia, administrative costs and damage to
(BTA's) reputation.

7.3.3 Compound interest on all sums found due from the
relevant due dates up until the date of payment.

7.3.4 An order requiring the Respondent to reimburse all costs
and/or expenses incurred by the Claimant in these
proceedings including, inter alia, the fees of the Arbitrators,
ICSID, legal counsel, experts, consultants and the costs of the
time expended by the Claimant's own employees.

7.3.5 Declarations as to breaches of the BIT and Kazakhstan
law by the Respondent.

7.3.6 Any other relief the Tribunal may consider appropriate.

7.3.7 This request for relief will be amplified and further
particularised in due course.” (Request, Section 7)

On 20 July 2009, the Claimant requested that the Arbitral Tribunal be constituted in
accordance with Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. Mr. lan Glick QC, a British
national, and Mr. Christopher Thomas QC, a Canadian national, were appointed as
arbitrators by the Claimant and the Respondent respectively. Both arbitrators accepted
their appointments. In accordance with Article 37(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention, the
Parties subsequently agreed that the party-appointed arbitrators would appoint the
President of the Tribunal by 17 March 2010. Accordingly, Messrs. Glick and Thomas
appointed Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler as President of the Tribunal, and she
accepted her appointment on 17 March 2010. The Centre designated Ms. Martina
Polasek as Secretary of the Tribunal. Ms. Eva Kalnina was subsequently appointed as
the Assistant to the Tribunal with the consent of the Parties. The Arbitral Tribunal was
constituted and the proceedings commenced on 18 March 2010.

On 7 May 2010, the Tribunal and the Parties held a first procedural session at the
IDRC in London, during which the Parties and the Tribunal discussed and agreed a
number of procedural issues. The Parties in particular confirmed their agreement with
the constitution and composition of the Tribunal. On 18 June 2010, the Tribunal issued
the final minutes of the first session (the “Minutes”), including a timetable for the
proceedings, which was subsequently extended on numerous occasions upon the
Parties' request.

B. WRITTEN PHASE ON JURISDICTION

57. In the course of this arbitration, the Parties filed a number of written pleadings and
requests and the Tribunal provided directions on such requests. Some of the Parties’
submissions and of the Tribunal’s orders are noted below:

e On 15 July 2010, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, deciding the
Parties’ initial requests for document production, which were submitted in
accordance with the timetable provided in the Minutes;

e On 24 August 2010, the Tribunal gave instructions on the confidentiality of
certain documents, as briefed in the Parties’ letters of 16, 17 and 20 August
2010. On 7 October 2010, the Tribunal provided further instructions on this
issue;

e On 17 November 2010, the Tribunal decided, among others, the Claimant's
request to inspect the originals of certain documents disclosed by the
Respondent as well as the Respondent's request for the production of the
unredacted versions of certain documents;

e On 13 December 2010, the Claimant filed its Memorial on the Merits,
including exhibits, witness statements and expert reports;

e On 10 January 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 regarding
the production of certain redacted information. The Tribunal provided further
directions on this issue in its letters of 15 January and 1 and 23 February
2011;

e On 18 March 2011, the Respondent filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction,
including exhibits and expert reports;

e On 26 May 2011, the President of the Tribunal made a disclosure concerning
the involvement of Prof. Douglas in the University of Geneva’s LLM program
in international dispute settlement (MIDS) of which she is the Director. She
then gave more detailed information on 15 June to respond to questions from
the Respondent. On 1 December 2011, she followed up with some further
information on the same topic;

e On 20 June 2011, the Claimant filed its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction,
including exhibits, witness statements and expert reports;

e On 7 July 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 deciding to
bifurcate the proceedings and thus limiting the present phase of this
arbitration to the issue of jurisdiction;

e On 12 September 2011, the Respondent filed its Reply on Jurisdiction,
including exhibits, witness statements and expert reports;

58.

e On 12 December 2011, the Claimant filed its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction,
including exhibits, witness statements and expert reports;

e On 20 December 2011, the Tribunal and the Parties held a pre-hearing
telephone conference. On 23 December 2011, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 4, which contained directions on the organization of the
hearing on jurisdiction.

C. HEARING ON JURISDICTION

From 1 to 3 February 2012, the Arbitral Tribunal held a hearing on jurisdiction in
London. In attendance at the hearing were the members of the Arbitral Tribunal, the
Secretary and the Assistant, as well as the following party representatives, witnesses
and experts:

(i) On behalf of the Claimant:
e Prof. Zachary Douglas, Ms. Michelle Butler (Matrix Chambers)

e Mr. Louis Flannery, Ms. Tatiana Minaeva, Mr. Benjamin Garel
(Stephenson Harwood LLP, London)

Claimant's Fact Witnesses:
e Mr. Ablyazov

e Mr. Roman Solodchenko
Claimant's Experts:

e Prof. Peter Maggs

e Prof. A. J. A. Stevens

e Prof. J.B. Huizink

(ii) On behalf of the Respondent:
e Mr. Ali Malek, Q.C., Dr. Christopher Harris (3 Verlum Buildings)

e Ms. Belinda Paisley, Ms. Chloe Carswell, Ms. Suzie Savage, Ms. Dina
Nazargalina, Ms. Dinara Jarmukhanova, Ms. Caroline Ovink, Mr. Jorge
Klein (Reed Smith LLP, London)

Respondent's Fact Witness:
e Mr. Kuat Kozakhmetov
Respondent's Experts:

e Prof. Maidan Suleimenov
e Mr. Marnix Leijten

e Dr. Veijo Heiskanen

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

Prof. Zachary Douglas presented oral arguments on behalf of the Claimant; Mr. Ali
Malek, Q.C. and Dr. Christopher Harris presented oral arguments on behalf of the
Respondent. The Tribunal heard the witnesses and experts just listed.

The hearing was sound recorded. A verbatim transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction
was produced and distributed to the Parties.

D. POSsT- HEARING PHASE

As noted above, on 21 February 2012, the Respondent's Counsel informed the
Tribunal that, in its judgment of 16 February 2012, Justice Teare of the English High
Court had found Mr. Ablyazov guilty of contempt of Court for lying under oath and
failing to disclose some of his assets. The Respondent’s Counsel also suggested that
Mr. Ablyazov may have fled the United Kingdom to avoid his prison sentence and, in
light of these developments, requested the Claimant's Counsel to confirm that the
present arbitration was to be pursued.

On 24 February 2012, the Claimant's Counsel, Stephenson Harwood, announced that
they no longer represented the Claimant in this matter. It was subsequently clarified
that the termination of the retainer applied also to Prof. Douglas and Ms. Butler of
Matrix Chambers.

On 16 March 2012, the Tribunal received a letter from the Claimant's managing
director, Duma, stating that KPMG LLP had recently informed it that KT Asia fell within
the scope of a receivership order. Duma made clear that it was thus not in a position to
act upon instructions of or enter into any dealings with KT Asia.

On 16 March 2012, the Respondent submitted its Statement of Costs. The Claimant's
Statement of Costs was submitted by Duma on 13 April 2012. On 24 April 2012, Duma
informed ICSID that it had resigned with immediate effect as the managing director of
KT Asia.

On 23 May 2012, Addleshaw Goddard confirmed that they had been authorized to
represent the Claimant in the present proceedings.

On 10 April 2013, the Respondent wrote to ICSID in order to draw the Tribunal's
attention to certain passages from the recent ICSID award in Caratube International Oil

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

at

22

Company LLP v. Republic of Kazakhstan.*' The Respondent filed a copy of the award,
explaining that it was “relevant to the analysis which the Tribunal must undertake in
relation to jurisdiction in this case”.

On 7 May 2013, the Claimant provided its comments on the Respondent's letter of 10
April, arguing that Caratube was irrelevant to the present case and that it did not
represent a trend in the jurisprudence. In support of its argument, the Claimant
referred to a number of other recent awards.”

To the extent necessary for reaching its decision on jurisdiction, the Tribunal has
considered in its analysis the arguments and legal authorities invoked by the Parties in
the most recent correspondence of April and May 2013.

The proceedings were closed on the date of dispatch of this Award.

The Tribunal, having deliberated and considered the evidence and arguments
presented by the Parties in their written and oral submissions, will first briefly
summarize the positions of the Parties (IV), then analyze the evidence and arguments
in support of these positions (V), and finally render a decision (VII).

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

A. THE RESPONDENT'S POSITION AND REQUEST FOR RELIEF

In its written and oral submissions, the Respondent has presented numerous
jurisdictional objections which it has grouped in the following three categories: (i) lack of
an “investor”; (ii) lack of an “investment”; and (iii) abuses of the Treaty (Reply, §§ 17 -
19).

Caratube International Oil Company LLP v. Republic of Kazakhstan (ICSID Case ARB/08/12),
Award, 5 June 2012 (hereinafter “Caratube’).

E.g., Deutsche Bank AG v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/2),

Award, 31 October 2012 (hereinafter “Deutsche Bank”); Vannessa Ventures Ltd. v. Bolivarian

Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/04/6), Award, 16 January 2013; Quiborax S.A.
and Non-Metallic Minerals S.A. v. Plurinational State of Bolivia (\CSID Case No. ARB/06/2),
Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 September 2012 (hereinafter “Quiborax’).

18

72.

73.

74.

1. No “Investor”

The Respondent argues that the Claimant cannot be considered an “investor” if the BIT
and the ICSID Convention are interpreted in accordance with Article 31(1) of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (the “VCLT” or “Vienna Convention”), which
requires the Tribunal to take into account the treaty’s object and purpose. In the
Respondent's view, it is manifest that the Claimant falls outside the intended scope of
both the BIT and the ICSID Convention, since it is merely “an ephemeral corporation of
convenience, wholly owned and controlled by a single Kazakh national, Mr. Ablyazov,
and established as part of a strategy to deceive the host State regulatory authorities as
to serious violations of important legal requirements in the Kazakh banking sector”
(Reply, § 17.1).

In addition, the Respondent points out that the term “investor” must be interpreted in
accordance with Article 31(3)(c) of the Vienna Convention, which requires one to take
into account general principles of law applicable in the relations between the parties,
such as the principle of “real and effective nationality” as between a claimant and a
respondent (host) State. The Respondent emphasizes that “[i]t is beyond question that
the Claimant's real and effective nationality is Kazakh, such that its nominal Dutch
nationality is not opposable to the Respondent” (Reply, § 17.2).

2. No “Investment”

The Respondent further observes that the Claimant is unable to satisfy the
requirements of the BIT and the ICSID Convention in relation to its alleged “investment”
for the following four main reasons:

e First, the Claimant’s alleged investment was unlawful and is thus not protected by
the BIT or the ICSID Convention. The Respondent adds that this objection can be
viewed both as a matter of jurisdiction and of admissibility of the claim.

e Second, the Claimant's alleged investment does not satisfy any of the criteria for
investments under the ICSID Convention because it had an extremely limited
duration with no anticipated regularity of profit and return. Moreover, “the
gratuitous transfer of the shares does not amount to a contribution”, let alone to the
development or prosperity of Kazakhstan; nor did this “one-way bet” involve any
risk to the Claimant (Reply, § 18.2).

75.

76.

77.

e Third, the Claimant never transferred ownership or control of the shares, nor
intended to do so, as it never had any control over the shares. It was a mere shell
with the sole purpose of holding Mr. Ablyazov’s shares pending their sale.

e Fourth, the Respondent argues that the Claimant has made no investment in the
territory of Kazakhstan, which is an important requirement limiting the
Respondent's consent to arbitrate disputes pursuant to Article 9 of the BIT (Reply,
§ 18.4).

3. Abuse of the ICSID Convention and the BIT

Finally, the Respondent contends that, even if the Claimant was able to satisfy the
requirements of an “investor” and an “investment”, the Tribunal does not have (or
should not exercise) jurisdiction because of the Claimant’s abuses of the BIT and the
ICSID Convention. It argues that the nature of the Claimant and the circumstances in
which it received “the gratuitous transfer of the Shares justifies the Tribunal lifting the
Claimant’s corporate veil to reveal Mr. Ablyazov as the real party in interest” (Reply, §
19.1), particularly considering that the Claimant has no separate existence from Mr.
Ablyazov. According to the Respondent, the Claimant “has no business, no premises,
no employees and no power to direct its own affairs, but instead is bound by the
Management Agreement to follow Mr. Ablyazov's instructions” (Reply, § 19.1).

The Respondent adds that the Claimant is being used as an instrument for abusive
treaty shopping and that “the creation of the Claimant was directed at securing treaty
jurisdiction over a dispute which Mr. Ablyazov specifically foresaw, not to obtain treaty
protection in relation to unascertained disputes” (Reply, § 19.2, emphasis in the
original).

For all of these reasons, the Respondent requests the following relief:

“361.1 an order declaring that the Tribunal and the Centre
lack jurisdiction in respect of this dispute; or

361.2 if the Tribunal finds that it does have jurisdiction, an
order declaring that the claims are inadmissible and
that the Tribunal lacks competence to determine
them;

and in any event:

361.3 an order that the Claimant (and/or Mr. Ablyazov) pay
all costs incurred in connection with these arbitration
proceedings including their own costs, the costs of
the arbitrators and ICSID, as well as the legal and

20

78.

other expenses incurred by the Respondent
including the fees of its legal counsel, experts and
consultants, as well as the Respondent's own
officials and employees on a full indemnity basis,
plus interest thereon at a reasonable rate and

361.4 such other relief as the Tribunal, in its discretion,
considers appropriate.” (Reply, § 361)

B. THE CLAIMANT’S POSITION AND REQUEST FOR RELIEF

In its written and oral submissions, the Claimant has replied to the Respondent's
objections with the following eight arguments:

First, KT Asia is an “investor” under the BIT and the ICSID Convention and the
Respondent’s approach to treaty interpretation is impermissible (Rejoinder, § 32
ff.).

Second, the Respondent must recognize KT Asia’s undisputed Dutch nationality
under Article 1 of the BIT. Apart from the fact that no less than nineteen tribunals
have denied that the nationality of claims rule governing in diplomatic protection
applies to investment treaty arbitration, the Respondent has specifically accepted
in the BIT that the nationality of Dutch corporate entities be determined by the
place of incorporation (Rejoinder, § 47 ff.).

Third, the illegality of the investment alleged by the Respondent cannot provide the
foundation for a jurisdictional objection, as the BIT contains no requirement with
respect to the legality of the investment. Moreover, the alleged illegality does not
engage any international public policy and hence the leading cases on illegality in
investment arbitration are easily distinguishable. Finally, as a matter of Kazakh
law, the alleged illegality does not void the acquisition of shares ab initio
(Rejoinder, § 128 ff.).

Fourth, Article 1 of the BIT supplies the test for an investment and the lack of
definition of an investment in the ICSID Convention cannot supplant it. The Salini”®
criteria should not be applied as rigid jurisdictional preconditions. In any event, the

Claimant's investment meets the Salini test (CMod, § 288 ff.).

Fifth, the Respondent’s objection based on the alleged lack of intention to transfer
the Bank’s shares to the Claimant seeks to challenge the relevance of KT Asia’s

°3 Salini Construttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4),

Decision on Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001 (hereinafter “Salini’).

21

79.

undisputed legal title over the shares in BTA. The Respondent has not cited a
single authority for the proposition that legal title over an asset is not a sufficient
interest in that asset to constitute an investment. There is certainly no support for
such a revolutionary doctrine in the text of the BIT itself (CMouJ, § 279).

Sixth, the Respondent's argument that the ownership of shares in a commercial
bank incorporated in Kazakhstan is not an investment in the territory of Kazakhstan
is nonsensical (CMou, § 306).

Seventh, the Respondent has not been able to point to a single case where an
international tribunal has pierced the corporate veil of a corporate claimant and
declined jurisdiction on that basis. It has also failed to produce any positive
evidence whatsoever to show that KT Asia was established to perpetrate some
kind of fraud (Rejoinder, § 225 ff.).

Finally, as to the Respondent’s allegations of abusive treaty shopping, the
Claimant stresses that there is nothing wrong in law with planning or restructuring
an investment to benefit from an applicable investment treaty or the ICSID
Convention. It is only inadmissible to restructure an investment after a dispute has
arisen in order to vest an international tribunal with jurisdiction, which is not the
case here (Rejoinder, § 245 ff.).

For all the reasons just summarized, the Claimant requests the following relief:

“(a) an order declaring that the Tribunal has jurisdiction
over the dispute and that the Claimant's claims are
admissible;

(b) an order that the Respondent pay all costs incurred
in connection with this preliminary phase of the
arbitration proceedings including its own costs, the costs
of the arbitrators and ICSID, as well as the legal and
other expenses incurred by the Claimant including the
fees of its legal counsel, experts and consultants, on a
full indemnity basis, plus interest thereon at a
reasonable rate; and,

(c) such other relief as the Tribunal, in its discretion,
considers appropriate.” (C’s Rejoinder, § 313)

22

Vv.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

ANALYSIS

A. PRELIMINARY MATTERS

Prior to considering the merits of the Parties’ positions, the Tribunal will address the
following matters: the scope of this award (1); the relevance of previous decisions or
awards (2); the law applicable to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal (3); the undisputed facts
(4) and the test for establishing jurisdiction (5).

1. Scope of this Award

The present proceedings were bifurcated between jurisdiction and merits in PO3. In
the course of this jurisdictional phase, the Respondent has also raised objections to
admissibility, which the Parties have debated without the Claimant objecting that
matters of admissibility fall outside the scope of this initial phase of the proceedings as
defined by PO3. The Tribunal will thus address both types of preliminary objections to
the extent necessary and appropriate.

2. The Relevance of Previous Decisions or Awards

Both Parties have relied on previous decisions or awards in support of their positions,
either to conclude that the same solution should be adopted in the present case, or in
an effort to explain why this Tribunal should depart from that solution.

The Tribunal considers that it is not bound by previous decisions. At the same time, in
its judgement it must pay due consideration to earlier decisions of international
tribunals. Specifically, it believes that, subject to compelling contrary grounds, it has a
duty to adopt principles established in a series of consistent cases. It further believes
that, subject always to the specific text of the Treaty and to the Convention, and with
due regard to the circumstances of each particular case, it has a duty to contribute to
the harmonious development of investment law, with a view to meeting the legitimate
expectations of the community of States and investors towards the certainty of the rule
of law.

3. Law Applicable to the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal

It is not in dispute that the Tribunal's jurisdiction is governed by the ICSID Convention
and the BIT (C-1).

Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention expressly grants the Tribunal authority to decide
on its own jurisdiction. It is common ground, and rightly so, that Article 42(1) of the

23

ICSID Convention only applies to the merits of the dispute and does not govern the
tribunal's jurisdiction under Article 25.4 Thus the law the Tribunal must apply in
deciding whether jurisdiction has been conferred upon it by the ICSID Convention and
the BIT is international law.

86. Similarly, it is also common ground that the interpretation of the ICSID Convention and
the Treaty is governed by customary international law as codified in the Vienna

Convention.

87. Jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention is governed by Article 25(1), which reads as

follows:

"The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment between a Contracting State (or any
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated
to the Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting
State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to
the Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may
withdraw its consent unilaterally.”

88. In accordance with the terms of Article 9 of the BIT, if a dispute arises between a
Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party, the following dispute
settlement mechanism shall apply:

“Each Contracting Party hereby consents to submit any legal dispute
arising between that Contracting Party and a national of the other
Contracting Party concerning an investment of that national in the
territory of the former Contracting Party to the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes for settlement by conciliation or
arbitration under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, opened for
signature at Washington on 18 March 1965. A legal person which is a
national of one Contracting Party and which before such a dispute
arises is controlled by nationals of the other Contracting Party shall, in
accordance with Article 25 (2) (b) of the Convention, for the purpose of
the Convention be treated as a national of the other Contracting
Party.”

89. The terms "investment" and "national" used in Article 9 are defined in Article 1 as

follows:

"For purposes of this Agreement:

(a) the term “investments” means every kind of asset and more
particularly, though not exclusively:

LJ

(i) movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem
in respect of every kind of asset;

24 MoJ, § 170; Tr. D3/185/14 ff.
24

(ii) rights derived from shares, bonds and other kinds of interests in
companies and joint ventures;

(iii) claims to money, to other assets or to any performance having an
economic value;

(iv) rights in the field of intellectual property, technical processes,
goodwill and know-how;

(v) rights granted under public law or under contract, including rights to
prospect, explore, extract and win natural resources.

(b) the term "nationals" shall comprise with regard to either
Contracting Party:

(i) natural persons having the nationality of that Contracting Party;
(ii) legal persons constituted under the law of that Contracting Party;

(iii) legal persons not constituted under the law of that Contracting
Party but controlled, directly or indirectly, by natural persons as
defined in (i) or by legal persons as defined in (ii).

Lr

4. Undisputed Facts

The following facts are undisputed: (i) the Claimant was incorporated in Rotterdam on
12 December 2007*; (ii) the Claimant has no assets of its own and is a shell company
set up to hold Mr. Ablyazov’s shareholding in BTA for the purposes of a private
placement”; (iii) it purchased, by means of two unsecured loans from the vendors,
808,321 shares in BTA from two BVI registered companies, Torland and Refgen,
representing a 9.96% interest in BTA”; (iv) the ultimate beneficial owner of Torland
and Refgen and KT Asia is Mr. Ablyazov’®; (v) the Claimant did not repay the principal
nor pay interest on the loans owed to Torland and Refgen; (vi) Torland and Refgen
were wound up in 2009; and (vii) Mr. Ablyazov is funding the present arbitration’.

5. Test for Establishing Jurisdiction

At the jurisdictional stage, the Claimant must establish (i) that the jurisdictional
requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and of the Treaty are met, which
includes proving the facts necessary to meet these requirements, and (ii) that it has a
prima facie cause of action under the Treaty, that is that the facts which it alleges are
susceptible of constituting a treaty breach if they are ultimately proved to be true.*°

KT Asia Deed on Incorporation, 12 December 2007 (C-36).
Tr. D1/163-164.
Extract from KT Asia's securities account, 24 January 2008 (C-39).
CMoM, § 47.
Tr. D1/117/3-5.
On the prima facie test of treaty breach for purposes of jurisdiction, see among others United
Parcel Services (UPS) Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Award on Jurisdiction,
22 November 2002, §§ 33-37; Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8),

8

BBS

25

92.

93.

94.

95.

B. OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY

As was set forth above, the Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the
following grounds:

(i) The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae because
the Claimant is not an investor;

(ii) The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae because
the Claimant has no investment;

(iii) In the alternative, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because
the Claimant has abused the Convention and/or the BIT.
Alternatively, the Respondent argues that the claims are inadmissible as a result of KT
Asia's real and effective nationality and the beneficial ownership of the claims.

There is no dispute between the Parties regarding the other requirements for
jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention and the BIT. Specifically, it is not disputed that
there is a legal dispute, that Kazakhstan was an ICSID Contracting State at the
relevant time and that the Claimant was incorporated in the Netherlands, another ICSID
Contracting State. Likewise, there is no dispute that Kazakhstan consented to submit
to arbitration disputes falling within the scope of the BIT. The Tribunal agrees that
these requirements are met, and will now examine those requirements which are
disputed.

1. Objections Ratione Personae: No Investor

The Respondent submits that on a proper interpretation of Articles 1(b)(ii) of the BIT
and 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, the Claimant is not an “investor”. First, the
Respondent contends that the Claimant's real and effective nationality is Kazakh, with
the effect that its nominal Dutch nationality is not opposable to the Respondent in this
arbitration (MoJ, § 240 ff.). Second, it submits that the claim is not admissible by
reason of the Claimant's real and effective nationality and the beneficial ownership of

 

Decision on Jurisdiction, 3 August 2004, § 180; Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24), Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 February 2005 (hereinafter “Plama”), §§
118-120, 132; Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/29), §§ 185-200, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005; E/ Paso Energy
International Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15), Decision on

Jurisdiction, 27 April 2006, §§ 40-45, 109; Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab

Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/13), Decision on Jurisdiction, 16 June 2006
(hereinafter “Jan de Nul’), §§ 69-71; Telenor Mobile Communications AS v. Republic of Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/04/15), Award, 13 September 2006, §§ 34, 53, 68, 80; Phoenix Action Ltd v.
Czech Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/06/5), Award, 15 April 2009 (hereinafter “Phoenix’), §§ 60-
64.

26

96.

97.

98.

99.

=

its claim (Mod, § 331). Third, in its Reply, the Respondent further argues that KT Asia
cannot be considered an investor under the BIT or the Convention in light of the object
and purpose of the BIT and the ICSID Convention (Reply, § 39 ff.). Finally, it submits
that the Claimant's corporate veil should be lifted to reveal the real party in interest, Mr.
Ablyazov, who is not entitled to bring a claim under the BIT (Mod, § 183 ff.).°" The
Claimant argues that all of these objections are ill-founded (Rejoinder, § 47 ff.).

The Tribunal begins by recalling that the nationality of the Claimant must be
established under both the ICSID Convention and the BIT. More specifically, Article
25(1) of the ICSID Convention requires that disputes submitted to arbitration be
between a Contracting State and a national of another Contracting State. The BIT
uses the same language. It defines “nationals” of a Contracting Party inter alia as
“legal persons constituted under the law of that Contracting Party”. The Respondent
does not dispute that KT Asia is a legal person constituted under the laws of the
Netherlands. Rather, it argues that the Claimant is not a genuine entity of the
Netherlands and that it should be considered to be a national of Kazakhstan.

-1. The Respondent's position

The first line of the Respondent's argument is based on the allegation that the
Claimant’s nominal Dutch nationality is not opposable to it as a result of the principle of
real and effective nationality, which permits a tribunal to determine whether diversity of
nationality exists between a claimant and a respondent State. In the Respondent's
view, this principle applies in investment arbitration in the same way as it applies in the
field of diplomatic protection (Mou, §§ 240-311; Reply, §§ 58-127).

More specifically, the Respondent says that principle must be taken into account when
interpreting Article 1(b)(ii) of the BIT and requires the consideration of the Claimant’s
links with Kazakhstan. The Respondent disputes the Claimant's assertion that there is
a jurisprudence constante in investment arbitration according to which the real and
effective nationality principle does not apply to investment treaty disputes.

Besides its place of incorporation, the Claimant has no connection with the
Netherlands. It has no genuine business, no employees, no place of business there;
no decisions are taken in relation to its business in the Netherlands; it has no

31 In the Reply, the Respondent had addressed this argument in the context of its allegation that the
Claimant has abused the BIT and the Convention, and not in the context of objections ratione
personae. The Tribunal will thus follow the Respondent's structure on this point and address the
argument about the piercing of the corporate veil at the end of the analysis.

27

100.

101.

102.

1

103.

substantial funds in the Netherlands, nor any means of generating funds (Reply, § 104
ff.).

It is undisputed that KT Asia’s nominee director has no decision-making power. Under
the terms of the Management Agreement (R-29), such power rests exclusively with Mr.
Ablyazov, a Kazakh national. That agreement provides that the director, and therefore
the Claimant itself, must act at all times in accordance with Mr. Ablyazov’s instructions.
By contrast, the Claimant’s connections with Kazakhstan are manifest.

The second line of the Respondent’s argument concentrates on the lack of
“foreignness” of the investment and is linked to the object and purpose of the ICSID
Convention and the BIT, which is to encourage and protect foreign investments (Reply,
§§ 39-57; §§ 103-127). Both the BIT and the Convention are concerned with
international flows of capital or technology and are based on the fundamental
presumption of diversity of nationality. The Respondent argues that “domestically
owned investments structured through a shell company in the other State would not
lead to an international flow of capital or technology, [nor] advance the economic
development of the host State” (Reply, § 48). The situation is analogous as regards
the ICSID Convention, the purpose of which is to facilitate the settlement of disputes
between States and foreign investors. The ICSID Convention is not meant to offer a
forum for the resolution of a politicised dispute between a State and one of its own
nationals (Reply, § 51).

In the present case, the Claimant is a shell company with no business, no premises, no
employees and no genuine separate existence from its ultimate beneficial owner, Mr.
Ablyazov, who is a Kazakh national (Reply, § 54). The Respondent thus concludes
that “[i]t is simply untenable to contend that either of the State parties to the BIT
intended that their own nationals should be able to (ab)use the treaty in order to bring
international claims against them simply by the device of incorporating a shell company
in the other State” (Reply, § 56).

.2. The Claimant’s position

In the Claimant’s submission, the Respondent's reliance upon the principle of real and
effective nationality in diplomatic protection is misplaced. Article 1(b)(ii) of the BIT
supplies the test for corporate nationality of investors to which both State parties to the
BIT have consented. The BIT confers no residual power upon Kazakhstan to deny the

2 The Respondent phrased this argument as a free-standing objection to jurisdiction for the first time
in the Reply (Reply, § 39 ff.).

28

benefits of treaty protection to investors who qualify as nationals of the Netherlands
under the treaty's test.

104. Consequently, the Respondent attempts in vain to add what is a controversial

requirement for the invocation of diplomatic protection in customary international law to
the express test for nationality of corporations set out in the Treaty and the ICSID
Convention. The Claimant points out that this is the twentieth known instance in which
a respondent State has sought to undermine the test of nationality in an investment
treaty by reference to the rules of diplomatic protection, a strategy which has failed in
all but one instance (CMod, § 123).

105. The Claimant also points out that, besides the reference to Loewen®’, the Respondent

has cited no precedent from any international tribunal that has applied the principle of
real and effective nationality in respect of a corporation beneficially owned by a national
of the respondent State. Indeed, it would be “plainly wrong to transplant such a
principle to investment treaty arbitration” (Rejoinder, § 51). Similarly, none of the cases
cited by the Respondent or its expert Dr. Heiskanen support the assertion that there is
a special rule of real and effective nationality that comes into play when the beneficial
owner of the claimant has special ties to the respondent host State.

106. The Claimant adds that, given that all the links between Mr. Ablyazov and Kazakhstan

have been severed, as the UK authorities recognized when they granted Mr. Ablyazov
asylum, it would be “extraordinary for an international tribunal to conclude that
Kazakhstan is the real and effective nationality of a company incorporated in The
Netherlands but beneficially owned by a refugee who is resident in the United
Kingdom’ (Rejoinder, § 55).

107. The Claimant also submits that the Respondent’s argument about the object and

purpose of the BIT and the ICSID Convention cannot replace the plain meaning of the
treaty provisions. The fact that some commentators have described the purpose of
BITs as the promotion of “foreign" investment does not change this fact (Rejoinder, §
32 ff).

108. The distinction between foreign and domestic investment is not mentioned in any

33

investment treaty. Therefore, the only way to differentiate between foreign and
domestic investments would be to trace the origin of the capital, which would be at
odds with the policy of economic liberalisation that underlies investment treaties. In the

The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of America (ICSID Case No.

ARB(AF)/98/3), Award, 26 June 2003 (hereinafter “Loewen’).

29

109.

=

110.

111.

112.

globalized economic system of today, “capital has no nationality” (Rejoinder, §§ 37-
41).

According to the Claimant, the Respondent makes no attempt at defining “foreign”
investment. It is evident that the degree of “foreignness” can only be answered by
reference to the treaty text. The Claimant concludes that whether or not it is possible to
conceive of an investment that has a higher degree of “foreignness” than the
investment of KT Asia is besides the point (Rejoinder, §§ 43-45).

-3. Analysis

To substantiate its first objection, the Respondent relies on two main arguments. While
these arguments have been rephrased several times, the Tribunal understands that in
essence the first one deals with the lack of foreignness of the investor (“opposability of
nationality”) and the second one with the lack of foreignness of the investment, even if
the Respondent's conclusion in both scenarios is that the Claimant does not qualify as
an investor. The second argument became a free-standing objection for the first time
in the Respondent's Reply. Since the two arguments overlap, the Tribunal will merge
them in the analysis (1.3.1). Thereafter, following the structure of the Respondent's
submissions, the Tribunal will address the third argument about admissibility (1.3.2).

1.3.1. Is the Claimant's Dutch nationality opposable to the Respondent?

The Tribunal must determine whether KT Asia is an “investor” within the meaning of the
ICSID Convention and the BIT. To make this determination, the Tribunal must
ascertain whether KT Asia should be held to be of Dutch nationality, as assessed by
the Claimant, or of Kazakh nationality, as argued by the Respondent.

Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention provides the following definition of the term
“national of another Contracting State”:

“(i) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting
State other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which
the parties consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or
arbitration, and,

(ii) any juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting
State party to the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign
control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a national of
another Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention.”

113. It is common ground that the ICSID Convention does not impose any particular test for

the nationality of juridical persons not having the nationality of the host State, be it the

30

place of incorporation, or the effective seat, or control.“ This leaves broad discretion
to Contracting States to define nationality, and particularly corporate nationality, under
the relevant BIT. Kazakhstan and the Netherlands have used that discretion by
agreeing on the following definition of a “national” in Article 1 of the BIT:

"For purposes of this Agreement:
LJ

(b) the term ‘nationals shall comprise with regard to either
Contracting Party:

(i) natural persons having the nationality of that Contracting Party;

(ii) legal persons constituted under the law of that Contracting Party;
(iii) legal persons not constituted under the law of that Contracting
Party but controlled, directly or indirectly, by natural persons as
defined in (i) or by legal persons as defined in (ii).”

114. Accordingly, simply reading this provision, a legal entity incorporated in a Contracting
State is deemed a national of that State. Faced with this definition, the Respondent
argues that the principle of real and effective nationality sets requirements that go
beyond this definition. The Tribunal cannot follow this argument for the following
reasons.

115. Pursuant to Article 31(1) of the VCLT, a treaty must be interpreted "in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose".

116. In the present case, the ordinary meaning of the words is clear. In conformity with the
general method for determining corporate nationality in international law in Article
1(b)(ii) of the Treaty, the Contracting Parties agreed that the place of incorporation
would establish the nationality of legal persons. Hence, a legal person constituted
under the law of a Contracting Party is a national of that State. KT Asia is a legal
person constituted under the law of the Netherlands. As a result, it is a Dutch national
under the nationality test of the BIT.

117. The Saluka tribunal, for instance, held similarly that it could not add requirements for
nationality which the Contracting States had not provided:

34 Mobil Corporation, Venezuela Holdings, B.V., Mobil Cerro Negro Holding, Ltd., Mobil Venezolana
de Petrdleos Holdings, Inc., Mobil Cerro Negro, Ltd., and Mobil Venezolana de Petrdleos, Inc. v.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (\CSID Case No. ARB/07/27), Decision on Jurisdiction, 10 June
2010 (hereinafter “Mobil’), §§ 155-157; The Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania (ICSID Case
No. ARB/06/3), Decision on Respondent's Preliminary Objections on Jurisdiction and Admissibility,
18 April 2008 (hereinafter “Rompetrol’), §§ 81-83; § 93.

31

118.

119.

120.

121.

“The parties had complete freedom of choice in this matter, and they
chose to limit entitled ‘investors’ to those satisfying the definition set out
in Article 1 of the Treaty. The Tribunal cannot in effect impose upon the
parties a definition of ‘investor’ other than that which they themselves
agreed. That agreed definition required only that the claimant-investor
should be constituted under the laws of (in the present case) The
Netherlands, and it is not open to the Tribunal to add other requirements
which, the parties could themselves have added but which they omitted to

The context of the provision defining nationality reinforces the Tribunal's understanding.
In Article 1(b)(iii), the Contracting Parties expressly agreed to extend treaty protection
to legal entities "not constituted under the law of that Contracting party but controlled"
by individuals who are nationals of that Contracting State or legal entities incorporated
in that Contracting State. By providing for this extension, the provision confirms the
rule pursuant to which incorporation is a sufficient test of nationality under the treaty.

The object and purpose of the treaty which the Tribunal must also take into account by
virtue of Article 31 of the VCLT does not change the Tribunal's conclusion as to the
meaning of Article 1(b)(iii) of the BIT.

The crux of the Respondent's argument in this connection is that the fundamental
object and purpose of the BIT and the ICSID Convention is to encourage and protect
foreign investment. Although the BIT does not expressly state so, its Preamble
stresses the Contracting Parties’ desire to “extend and intensify the economic relations
between them, particularly with respect to investments by the nationals of one
Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party” and their recognition
that “agreement on the treatment to be accorded to such investments will stimulate the
flow of capital and technology and the economic development of the Contracting
Parties...”. The BIT is thus premised on the making of investments by the nationals of
one Party in the territory of the other with the consequent stimulation of the flow of
capital and technology.** Yet, this says nothing about the definition of nationals, which
is precisely the subject of Article 1(b).

In connection with the object and purpose of the ICSID Convention, the dissenting
opinion of Prosper Weil in Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine comes to mind. Based on the
ICSID Convention’s Preamble and on the Report of the Executive Directors, Professor
Weil expressed the opinion that the ICSID mechanism only applies to the settlement of
disputes arising out of an international investment, that is an investment "implying a

8 Saluka Investments B.V. v. Czech Republic, Partial Award, 17 March 2006, UNCITRAL/PCA
(hereinafter “Saluka’), § 241.
The Tribunals view is confirmed by the tribunal in Bayview Irrigation District et al v. United Mexican
States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/05/1), Award, 19 June 2007, § 96 ff.

32

transborder flux of capital"; it does not apply to the resolution of disputes between a
State and its national.°” Professor Weil then goes on to consider that the ICSID
Convention thereby sets limitations which the States cannot alter by agreeing a
definition of investor or nationality in a BIT that ignores the control or ownership of a
legal entity incorporated in a given State. Like the majority in Tokios Tokelés, this is a
leap that this Tribunal is not prepared to take. Indeed, while the ICSID Convention sets
objective outer limits to jurisdiction by requiring nationality, it does not specify the test
for nationality (except in respect of Article 25(2)(b) second part, which is of no
relevance here). Hence, the Contracting States are free to set the parameters of
nationality within these outer limits.*®

122. Pursuant to Article 32 of the VCLT, supplementary means of interpretation can be used
in particular to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of Article 31. These
include treaties which one of the Contracting States entered into with third states if they
deal with the same subject matter.*°

123. In this vein, the Tribunal's reading of the treaty language is further strengthened if one
bears in mind that in twenty-four Kazakh BITs the Respondent has agreed to the same
test as in the present one, the place of incorporation, while in ten other BITs it has
added a requirement that the siége social or place of business be placed or “real
economic activities” be conducted there (CMou, §§ 142-143; Appendix 2 to CMoJ).
When negotiating this BIT, Kazakhstan could have insisted on a more demanding
wording of Article 1(b)(ii) of the BIT. For example, it could have required additional
links to the State of incorporation or insisted on the inclusion of a “denial of benefits”
clause. It did not. Kazakhstan has therefore accepted that the nationality of Dutch
legal persons be determined by their place of incorporation.

124. The Tribunal accordingly agrees with the Claimant's observation that if it were for
instance to require KT Asia to conduct its activities in the Netherlands, it would erode

%” Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18), Dissenting Opinion (Attached to the
Decision on Jurisdiction), 29 April 2004 (hereinafter “Tokios Tokelés Dissent’), § 19.

Prof. Weil's dissent has not had much influence on later decisions and scholarly writings in light of
the clear wording of the BITs and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. For example, in Prof.
Schreuer's view, while the dissent “reflects a particular appreciation of the ICSID Convention's
object and purpose, [...] it is not supported by the text of Article 25” (Schreuer, C.H., The ICSID
Convention: A Commentary, 2009 (2ed), page 290 (CL-119)). As also acknowledged by
McLachlan, Shore and Weiniger (McLachlan, C., Shore, |., and Weiniger, M., International
Investment Arbitration (2008), p. 148 (CL-121)), on whose treatise the Respondent has relied in
other contexts, Prof. Weil's dissent “has become emblematic of a minority position that, although
forcibly and in many respects persuasively presented, shows no signs of becoming the foundation
of an emerging majority”.

% See e.g. A. Aust, Modern Treaty Law and Practice (2007), page 248.

33

3

the difference between the various corporate nationality tests in BITs concluded by the
Respondent. Further, by suggesting that KT Asia must demonstrate further
connections with the Netherlands, the Respondent is effectively asking the Tribunal to
apply a different nationality test to the one embodied in this BIT, a test that it has
included in some of its BITs, but not in the present one.

125. The Respondent seeks to rely on Article 31(3)(c) of the VCLT, arguing that the principle
of real and effective nationality forms part of the "relevant rules of international law
applicable in the relations between the parties" (MoJ, § 268). The Tribunal cannot
share this view.

126. The fundamental question is whether this Tribunal should disregard the Dutch
nationality of KT Asia dictated by a plain reading of the Treaty and focus instead on the
Kazakh nationality of Mr. Ablyazov, its ultimate beneficial owner. Cases have
addressed issues such as the present one under different labels or principles, including
real and effective nationality, piercing the corporate veil, or reliance on the object and
purpose of the ICSID Convention and investment treaties.

127. The principle of real and effective nationality is applied in the context of diplomatic
protection of claimants who hold dual nationality. It enables a determination to be
made as to the State with which the claimant has the most real and tangible connection
and which can therefore espouse the claimant’s claim under international law against
another State.“°

128. This Tribunal sees no basis for applying a rule of diplomatic protection that would trump
the specific regime created by the Treaty. In this respect, the Tribunal agrees with the
Claimant that the nationality of a corporation is a legal construct and that in the
absence of any obligatory test for the nationality of corporations in international law, it
falls to the Contracting States of the relevant investment treaty to define the nationality
of a corporation as they see fit (CMou, § 126).

129. This observation is confirmed by a review of relevant decisions. Indeed, attempts by
respondents to substitute or supplement the test of nationality in a BIT with rules of
diplomatic protection have failed in an overwhelming number of cases.“ The Tribunal

4° Nottebohm Case (Liechtenstein v. Guatemala) (Second Phase), Judgment of 6 April 1955, 1955 ICJ
Reports, page 4.
See, among others, Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/3), Award, 30 April 2004, § 85; RosinvestCo UK Ltd. v. The Russian Federation, SCC
Case No. Arb. V079/2005, Final Award, 12 September 2010, §§ 322-333; Rompetrol, § 83; ADC
Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited v. Republic of Hungary (ICSID Case No.

34

concurs with the wide consensus that emerges from case law according to which rules
of customary international law applicable in the context of diplomatic protection do not
apply where they have been varied by the /ex specialis of an investment treaty.

130. To substantiate its argument that the real and effective nationality test should in

131.

particular prevail when the nationality at issue is that of the host State and not that of a
third country, the Respondent stresses that five awards (i.e., Tokios Tokelés®,
Rompetrol, Yukos**, Loewen and TSA Spectrum“*) have addressed the issue and two
of them have resorted to the real and effective nationality (MoJ, §§ 283 — 302;
Heiskanen, 2 ER, § 13 ff.). These are TSA Spectrum and Loewen.

The Tribunal in Rompetrol rejected the application of the real and effective nationality
principle to jurisdiction under a BIT and the ICSID Convention in clear terms:

“[T]he Tribunal cannot find any trace of justification for an argument that
international law deprives the States concluding a particular treaty —
whether a multilateral Convention like ICSID or a bilateral arrangement
like a BIT — of the power to allow, or indeed to prescribe, the place and
law of incorporation as the definitive element in determining corporate
nationality for the purposes of their treaty.

In the light of these conclusions, the Tribunal is clear in its mind that
there is simply no room for an argument that a supposed rule of ‘real and
effective nationality’ should override either the permissive terms of Article
25 of the ICSID Convention or the prescriptive definitions incorporated in
the BIT.”*°

132. TSA Spectrum dealt with foreign control under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

It considered that the requirement of foreign control in the ICSID Convention was an
objective limit to the Centre's jurisdiction that could not be altered by the BIT
language.*° It also emphasized that "the question as to whether, or to what extent, the
corporate veil should be pierced or lifted in application of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention presents itself in a different light and can lead to different solutions,

 

ARB/03/16), Award, 2 October 2006 (hereinafter “ADC’), §§ 357-359; Saluka, §§ 240-241, Tokios

Tokelés v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. 02/18), Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004 (hereinafter

“Tokios Tokelés Majority’), §§ 77, 81-82 and 86, Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil

Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16), Award,

29 July 2008 (hereinafter “Rumeli’), § 326; Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s. v. Slovak

Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/97/4), Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999, § 32; Saba Fakes v.
Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/20), Award, 14 July 2010 (hereinafter “Saba Fakes’),

§ 69.
* Tokios Tokelés Majority, §§ 77, 81-82 and 86.
‘8 Yukos Universal Limited (Isle of Man) v. The Russian Federation, Interim Award on Jurisdiction and

Admissibility, 30 November 2009, PCA Case No. AA 227, UNCITRAL (hereinafter “Yukos’).

“4 TSA Spectrum de Argentina, S.A. v. Argentine Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/05/5), Award, 19

December 2008 (hereinafter “TSA Spectrum’).

© Rompetrol, §§ 92-93; See also CMou, § 163.
“© TSA Spectrum, § 156.

35

depending on whether the case falls under the first or the second clause of this
provision".*” The present case falls under the first limb of Article 25(2)(b) which merely
speaks of nationality, without defining it and without referring to control. Under these
circumstances, TSA Spectrum is of little assistance for present purposes.

133. By contrast, Loewen, which was a NAFTA/ICSID Additional Facility case, not a
BIT/ICSID Convention case, seemed to pierce the corporate veil (although the tribunal
disclaimed any need to do so“) in the course of finding that NAFTA had not varied the
continuous nationality requirement of customary law.** Given this treaty-specific
analysis and in the presence of a majority of cases reaching contrary conclusions,
Loewen is of no assistance for the purposes of this case.

134. Relying primarily on Barcelona Traction, certain cases, including ADC, Rumeli and
Tokios Tokelés, have indeed acknowledged the possibility of piercing the corporate veil

"5° or where the "real

to "prevent the misuse of the privileges of legal personality
beneficiary of the business misused corporate formalities in order to disguise its true
identity and to avoid liability".°' Assuming for the sake of argument that one were to
follow that line, it would require a showing of abuse of the corporate form, which is not

present here.

135. In Tokios Tokelés, the tribunal was faced with the question whether jurisdiction ratione
personae existed under the ICSID Convention when the claimant corporation was
owned and predominantly controlled by citizens of the host State. Professor Weil
dissented from what he called “the philosophy of the Decision” largely on the basis of
an overall interpretation of the ICSID Convention and its object and purpose.”

136. On the other hand, the majority found that Article 25 of the ICSID Convention left the

task of defining the nationality of juridical entities to “the reasonable discretion of the
Contracting Parties’.®* Accordingly, the majority went on to examine the BIT and
concluded that the only requirement set forth in the BIT was that the entity must be

“established in the territory of the Republic of Lithuania in conformity with its laws and
regulations”, which requirement was met. While not ruling out the possibility of

piercing the corporate veil in principle, the majority nonetheless refused to apply the

* id, § 143.

“© 1 oewen, § 237.

49 id, § 220 ff.

5° Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company Limited, Judgment, |.C.J. Reports 1970, § 56.
51 ADC, § 359. See also Rumeli, § 206, and Tokios Tokelés Majority, §§ 54-56.

® Tokios Tokeles Dissent, §§ 1, 19 -20 (VH-51).

58 Tokios Tokelés Majority, § 24.

54 Id, § 28.

36

137.

138.

139.

140.

14

principle of real and effective nationality, even though it was not disputed that the
claimant company was owned and controlled by nationals of the respondent State.

While it has not been entirely uncontroversial, the majority decision in Tokios Tokeles
has been cited with approval by subsequent cases, including the Yukos joint cases
and RompetroF*.

Finally, in carrying out its task of assessing all the specific facts before it, the Tribunal
has asked itself whether there may be reasons to adopt a different approach in this
case. It finds no such reasons. The Respondent has sought to distinguish the present
facts from the factual matrix in Tokios Tokelés (MoJ, §§ 287-288), but none of these
differences undermine the rationale of the Tribunal's reasoning.

In conclusion, KT Asia must be deemed a Dutch national for the purposes of
jurisdiction and its Dutch nationality is opposable to Kazakhstan.

1.3.2. Is the claim inadmissible in light of Mr. Ablyazov’s alleged beneficial
ownership?
In the context of its objections ratione personae, the Respondent has also argued that
even if the Tribunal were to deny the objection to jurisdiction brought on the basis of the
principle of real and effective nationality, it should nonetheless declare the claim
inadmissible as a result of the beneficial ownership of the claim itself (MoJ, §§ 331 —
345).°”

. The Respondent submits that the authorities addressed in the context of the Claimant's

real and effective nationality equally apply to the nationality of the claim. The
Respondent's legal expert has sought to clarify the distinction between the two as
follows:

“[...] the legal limitations governing the function of international courts and
tribunals in matters concerning nationality may be stated both in terms of
the nationality of the claimant and in terms of the nationality of the claim.
While legal scholarship and arbitral jurisprudence has not consistently
distinguished between these two approaches, they are conceptually
distinct and lead to a different legal characterization of the problem: while
the former approach states the issue in terms of jurisdiction, the latter
states it in terms of admissibility.” (Heiskanen, 1 ER § 66)

5° Veteran Petroleum Limited (Cyprus) v. The Russian Federation, PCA Case No. AA 228, UNCITRAL;
Yukos, §§ 415-416.

5° Rompetrol, § 85.

” This argument was made in the Mod, §§ 331-345, was not elaborated upon in the Reply (fn. 84),
and then reintroduced again in the closing statement.

37

142.

143.

144,

The Claimant replies that if the Respondent's rule of admissibility of claims were
adopted, it would necessitate the investigation of the ultimate beneficial ownership of
every corporate entity asserting a claim as an investor. It stresses that no investment
tribunal has embarked upon such an exercise (CMoJ, § 211). More generally, it
submits that there is simply no basis for the Respondent's contention that the rule on
the nationality of claims existing in diplomatic protection might be transplanted to the
investment treaty context as a rule of admissibility. In diplomatic protection there is a
triangular relationship between the State of the foreign national (the claimant State), the
foreign national who has suffered an injury, and the host State allegedly responsible for
the injury (the respondent State). Therefore, “the bond of nationality that provides the
foundation of the nationality of claims rule supplies the link between the claimant State
and the injured foreign national” (CMoJ, § 205). Conversely, there is no triangular
relationship in investment treaty arbitration, where the claimant investor asserts its own
claim against the respondent State. As a result, there is no basis to introduce a rule of
admissibility to require a bond of nationality between the claimant and its claim (CMoJ,
§§ 202-206).

There is no doubt that it is the investor which asserts its claim in investment arbitration,
which distinguishes the latter from diplomatic protection. Yet, that does not mean that
there is no bond of nationality in investor-state arbitration. There is a bond defined by
the investment treaty. But for that bond, the investor would have no right to bring a
claim against the other state. In that sense, there is a triangular relationship in
investment treaty arbitration that is different from the one which exists in matters of
diplomatic protection under customary international law. The existence of a triangular
relationship where the bond of nationality is defined by the treaty is another reason why
the treaty rule should prevail. The Tribunal also notes that the Respondent has not
referred to any convincing legal authority in support of a rule of admissibility of the
claim based on nationality in investment arbitration. Indeed, the authorities on which
the Respondent relies are those invoked in respect of the nationality of the Claimant
(Mod, § 333).

As a consequence, the Tribunal concludes that the objection based on the
inadmissibility of the claim must fail.

38

145.

146.

147.

148.

149.

2. Objections Ratione Materiae: No Investment
2.1. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent begins by observing that, in order for the Tribunal to have jurisdiction,
the Claimant must establish that it has made an investment that is protected by both
the BIT and the ICSID Convention. If the Claimant's interests constitute an
“investment” under one treaty but not under the other, then the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction.

The definitions in the BIT and the Convention can be construed as complementary.
Article 1(a) of the BIT emphasises the fruits and assets resulting from the investment,
which must be protected, whereas the definitions generally used in relation to Article 25
of the ICSID Convention lay stress on the contributions that have produced such fruits
and assets. It can be inferred that assets cannot be protected unless they result from
contributions, and contributions cannot be protected unless they have produced the
assets of which the investor claims to have been deprived.

The Respondent underlines that the Claimant has not even alleged that it has made
any active economic contribution (Reply, § 133). It argues that the extent of the
Claimant's involvement is that it received a transfer of nominal title to the shares,
without giving any consideration, in order to hold the shares for and in accordance with
the instructions of Mr. Ablyazov. This is not an investment for the purposes of the
ICSID Convention or the BIT.

The Respondent further argues that the Claimant’s investment does not meet the so-
called Salinitest, which test requires: (i) a contribution; (ii) an expectation and regularity
of profit and return; (iii) a duration; (iv) a risk; and (v) a contribution to the Respondent's
development or prosperity (Mod, §§ 470-519; Reply, §§ 207-236).

First, the Claimant's nominal acquisition of the BTA shares for no consideration cannot
represent a “contribution”, as the Claimant acquired the shares in BTA ‘via a series of
sham transactions for which no contribution (substantial or otherwise) was given”
(Reply, § 218).

. Second, the temporary nominal holding of shares prior to their sale to third parties does

not reflect or create an expectation of any regularity of return. It does not create an
expectation of return from the investment into Kazakhstan either; the only return
contemplated is the one from the sale of the shares themselves (Reply, §§ 224-225).

39

151.

152.

153.

154.

155.

Third, the requirement for a certain duration is not met either. The Claimant's alleged
“investment” was made on 13 December 2007. Its request for arbitration was issued
less than sixteen months thereafter. More importantly, the Claimant itself admits that
its ownership of the shares was to last only as long as it took for the shares to be sold
to third parties. In the Respondent's view, the meaning of an “investment” under the
Convention does not envision this kind of duration (Reply, §§ 226-227). In its view, no
matter how long the duration is in practice, it must exist with the expectation of some
long-term relationship. This Claimant had no such intention.

Fourth, the only "risk" that the Claimant assumed was that the value of the BTA shares
might fall. In view of the fact that the Claimant acquired the shares for nothing, it is a
one-way bet not involving any risk at all. In other words, in the absence of a
contribution of any economic value, there can be no assumption of risk (Reply, § 228
ff.).

Fifth and last, the Claimant’s acquisition of the BTA shares for the sole purpose of
bringing international arbitration against the Respondent cannot amount to a
contribution to the development of the Respondent or to its economic prosperity.

2.2. The Claimant’s position

First of all, the Claimant contests the Respondent's reliance upon the Salini criteria as if
these were “jurisdictional requirements engraved onto the text of Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention or Article 1 of the BIT” (Rejoinder, § 210). Instead, the Salini criteria are
mere indicia; a “judicial invention in a system without a principle of stare decisis" where
"the merits of each criterion must be established before being adopted by any tribunal”
(Rejoinder, § 210).

Turning first to the requirement of contribution under the Salini test as argued by the
Respondent, the Claimant disputes the Respondent’s suggestion that no new injection
of capital into Kazakhstan emanated from the Claimant when it acquired the Bank’s
shares as part of what it describes as an internal corporate restructuring. The Claimant
can only partially agree with the Respondent’s statement that “[w]hilst investment
treaties are not preoccupied with the question of the origin of capital invested in the
host State, there must nonetheless be some such capital (or thing of value) invested”
(CMou, § 299 referring to Mou, § 498). The Claimant accepts that the origin of capital
is irrelevant, but emphasizes that so is the timing of the injection of capital since
“otherwise an internal corporate restructuring would never result in the acquisition of
investment treaty protection” (CMou, § 300).

40

156. Second, in connection with the requirement of regularity of returns, the Claimant insists
that KT Asia was incorporated to facilitate a private placement of the BTA shares along
the road to an IPO, namely “a sale of the interests in the Claimant (in an optimally
designed corporate structure) which held shares in BTA for a profit to a pool of
international investors” (CMoJ, § 301). Depending on the investment strategy of each
individual investor, the investor would either receive a capital gain upon the sale of its
interest in the future or continue to hold its interest and receive dividends from BTA.
These facts dispose of the Respondent's objection on the ground of an alleged lack of
regularity of returns.

157. Third, according to the Claimant, the Respondent's argument on the duration of the
investment is also ill-founded. The Claimant emphasizes that an investment cannot
lose investment protection only because the host State expropriates it soon after the
investor has acquired it. This would create a rather “perverse incentive” for host States
(CMou, § 302). Fourth, the Respondent's allegation about the lack of risk is equally
unfounded (CMoj, § 303).

158. Finally, the Claimant notes that, out of all Salini criteria, the requirement for a
contribution to the host State's economy is “the one that has been rejected most
emphatically by the recent cases” (CMoJ, § 304). In any event, it is evident that a
stake in Kazakhstan's largest commercial bank, which was responsible for supplying
credit to significant businesses across many sectors of the Kazakh economy,
contributed to the economic development of Kazakhstan.

159. The Claimant concludes that, while it does not endorse the Salini criteria, there can be
no doubt that the Claimant's shares in BTA constitute an investment under Article 1 of
the BIT and within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

2.3. Analysis

160. In order for the Tribunal to have jurisdiction over this dispute, the Claimant must
establish that it has made an investment which is protected under the BIT and the
ICSID Convention. The Tribunal will first identify the elements of an investment

5° As noted in Malicorp Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/18), Award, 7
February 2011 (hereinafter “Malicorp’), § 107: “[...] in order for a proceeding based on breach of
the treaty to be admissible, the investment to which the dispute relates must pass a double test
(aka the ‘double keyhole approach’ or ‘double-barreled test’.” See also, Jan de Nul, § 90, Toto
Costruzioni Generali S.p.A. v. Republic of Lebanon (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/12), Decision on
Jurisdiction, 11 September 2009, §§ 66-68, E/ Paso Energy International Company v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15), Award, 31 October 2011, § 142.

41

(2.3.1). It will then assess whether the Claimant's alleged investment meets such test

3.2).

2.3.1. Elements of investment

161.

It is common ground that while Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention limits the disputes
which can be referred to ICSID arbitration to those arising directly “out of an
investment”, it does not define the term “investment”.

162. By contrast, Article 1(1) of the BIT defines the term investment as follows:

“For purposes of this Agreement:

(a) the term “investments” means every kind of asset and more
particularly, though not exclusively:

LJ

(ii) rights derived from shares, bonds and other kinds of interests in
companies and joint ventures;

(iii) claims to money, to other assets or to any performance having an
economic value;

Lr

163. The Respondent has observed that the term “investment” as it is used in Article 1 of the
BIT has an inherent meaning which cannot be ignored when construing that provision
(Mou, § 485). In considering that meaning in the context of both the BIT and the ICSID
Convention, the Respondent turns to the Salini criteria. In other words, although
disputing that the Claimant has made an "investment" within the meaning of Article 1(1)
of the BIT and under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, the Respondent places
most emphasis on the Salini criteria.

164. The Claimant, too, has concentrated its analysis on the Salini criteria (CMou, § 288 ff.;
Rejoinder, § 210 ff.). Nonetheless, the Claimant adds, with reference to the annulment
decision in Malaysia Historical Salvors v Malaysia®, that it is “controversial as to
whether it is permissible to refer to the so-called Salini criteria at all in cases where the
instrument of consent to arbitration is a BIT because a BIT typically (as in this case)
supplies a definition of an investment” (Rejoinder, § 211). However, it has not argued
that the mere fact of holding an asset which falls within the scope of Article 1(1)(a) of
the BIT is sufficient to conclude that a person has made an investment under the BIT.
Nor has it challenged the Respondent's argument that it is inherent in the ICSID
Convention that there is an objective definition of investment.

88 Malaysian Historical Salvors, SDN, BHD v. Malaysia (\CSID Case No. ARB/05/10), Decision on the

Application for Annulment, 16 April 2009.

42

165. In the Tribunal's view, the Claimant was right not to raise these counter-arguments. The
absence of a definition of "investment" under the ICSID Convention implies that the
Contracting States intended to give to the term its ordinary meaning under Article 31(1)
of the VCLT as opposed to a special meaning under Article 31(4) of the same treaty.
This ordinary meaning is an objective one, as was confirmed inter alia in Saba Fakes®
and Quiborax™. It is inherent to the word "investment", irrespective of the application of
the ICSID Convention. This understanding is in particular supported by the tribunal in
Romak,® an arbitration conducted under the UNCITRAL Rules:

"The term 'investment' has a meaning in itself that cannot be ignored
when considering the list contained in Article 1(2) of the BIT... .. The
Arbitral Tribunal therefore considers that the term ‘investments’ under
the BIT has an inherent meaning (irrespective of whether the investor
resorts to ICSID or UNCITRAL arbitral proceedings) entailing a
contribution that extends over a certain period of time and that
involves some risk [...]. By their nature, asset types enumerated in the
BIT’s non-exhaustive list may exhibit these hallmarks. But if an asset
does not correspond to the inherent definition of ‘investment’, the fact
that it falls within one of the categories listed in Article 1 does not
transform it into an ‘investment.

166. As stated by the Romak tribunal, the inherent meaning of investment is also present in
the BIT. The assets listed in Article 1(1)(a) of the BIT are the result of the act of
investing. They presuppose an investment in the sense of a commitment of resources.
Without such a commitment of resources, the asset belonging to the claimant cannot
constitute an investment within the meaning of the ICSID Convention and the BIT.
Since the BIT does not add further requirements to the inherent meaning of investment
as it arises from the objective definition, the decisive test for the existence of an
investment is the same under the BIT and the ICSID Convention. In fact, the Parties

have not argued otherwise.

167. This said, it is true that the focus of the two treaties is different as was well emphasized
in Malicorp. The tribunal in that case commented that the BIT’s definition of investment
“does not so much stress the contributions made by the party acting, as the rights and

assets that such contributions have generated for it’.®© Having then adverted to the

"A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so intended."

The Saba Fakes tribunal reached the following conclusion: "The Tribunal believes that an objective
definition of the notion of investment was contemplated within the framework of the ICSID
Convention [...]" (emphasis added), Saba Fakes, § 108.

Quiborax, § 212.

Romak S.A. (Switzerland) v. The Republic of Uzbekistan, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. AA280
(hereinafter “Romak’).

Romak, § 207.

Malicorp, § 108.

43

various tests that ICSID tribunals have applied, including the Salini test, the tribunal
stated:

“At first blush, the two definitions [the BIT and the Convention's
objective meaning definition] do not overlap, since they come from
different perspectives. In the opinion of the Arbitral Tribunal these two
aspects are in reality complementary.

LJ

Clearly Article 1(a) of the Agreement emphasises the fruits and assets
resulting from the investment, which must be protected, whereas the
definitions generally used in relation to Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention lay stress on the contributions that have created such
fruits and assets. It can be inferred from this that assets cannot be
protected unless they result from contributions, and contributions will
not be protected unless they have actually produced the assets of
which the investor claims to have been deprived”.

168. Consequently, the Claimant must show that it has made an "investment" under the

objective definition developed in the framework of the ICSID Convention in order to
establish that the Tribunal has ratione materiae jurisdiction over the present dispute.
The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that these elements are found in ICSID
cases interpreting Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

169. In the Respondent’s view, an investment (i) involves a contribution; (ii) a certain

duration; (iii) a risk assumed by the investor; (iv) a contribution to the host State’s
economic development; and (v) regularity of profit and return. According to the
Claimant, the Salini criteria on which the Respondent relies are not jurisdictional
requirements but mere indicia (Rejoinder, § 210).

170. The Tribunal agrees with the Parties that a contribution of money or assets (that is, a

171.

66

commitment of resources), duration and risk form part of the objective definition of the
term “investment”. The expectation of a commercial return is sometimes viewed as a
separate component. This Tribunal is rather of the opinion that such expectation is part
of the risk element. Be this as it may, an investor commits resources with a view to
generating profits, which necessarily implies a risk.

The Respondent also cites the contribution to the host State’s development or
prosperity as a requirement for an investment. In the Tribunal's opinion, such a
contribution may well be the consequence of a successful investment. However, if the
investment fails, and thus makes no contribution at all to the host State's economy, that

Id, § 110, subsequently cited for this point by the majority in Abaclat and others v. Argentine

Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/07/5), Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 4 August 2011, §
349, fn 139.

44

cannot mean that there has been no investment. As the Claimant points out, this is the
one criteria that has been “rejected most emphatically by the recent cases” (CMou, §
304). For example, the tribunal in Phoenix highlighted the difficulties stemming from
the subjectivity of this requirement:

"[T]he contribution of an international investment to the development
of the host State is impossible to ascertain [...]. A less ambitious
approach should therefore be adopted, centered on the contribution of
an international investment to the economy of the host State, which is
indeed normally inherent in the mere concept of investment as shaped
by elements of contribution/duration/risk, and should therefore in
principle be presumed".°” (emphasis in original)

172. The tribunal in Saba Fakes also held that the element of contribution to the economic
development of the host State was not part of the definition of investment pursuant to
the ICSID Convention:

"[T]he present Tribunal considers that the criteria of (i) a contribution,
(ii) a certain duration, and (iii) an element of risk, are both [sic]
necessary and sufficient to define an investment within the framework
of the ICSID Convention [...]. The Tribunal is not convinced, on the
other _hand, that_a_ contribution to the host State's economic
development constitutes _a_ criterion of an_investment_within_the
framework _of the ICSID Convention [...] [W]hile the economic
development of a host State is one of the proclaimed objectives of the
ICSID Convention, this objective is not in and of itself an independent
criterion for the definition of an investment”.®® (emphasis added)

 

173. The Tribunal thus concludes that the objective definition of investment under the ICSID
Convention and the BIT comprises the elements of a contribution or allocation of
resources, duration, and risk, which includes the expectation (albeit not necessarily
fulfilled) of a commercial return.®°

2.3.2. Does the Claimant’s investment meet the objective test?

174. The next question is whether the Claimant meets the definition of investment just set
out. The Claimant asserts that it meets all five elements of this definition as put forward
by the Respondent. The Respondent denies that the Claimant meets any of them.
The Tribunal will address in turn each of the three elements — contribution (2.3.2.2),
duration (2.3.2.3), risk (2.3.2.4) — which it has found to constitute part of the objective
definition of investment and which applies equally under the BIT and the ICSID

°7 Phoenix, § 85. To the same effect, Quiborax, § 223.

8° Saba Fakes, §§110-111. To the same effect, Quiborax § 224.

°° After the Tribunal had deliberated and agreed on the content of this section 2.3.1, on 13 September
2013, the Institut de droit international issued a Resolution on the definition of investment that
appears to call for more weight being given to the contribution to the host State's development.
Because the Parties have not expressed themselves on this text, the Tribunal merely notes its
existence here for the sake of completeness, without revisiting its opinion.

45

175.

176.

177.

Convention. Beforehand, it will set forth the key facts relevant for the existence of an
investment (2.3.2.1).

2.3.

 

1. Key facts

Given that the factual matrix of the present case will be relevant for the assessment of
all three elements, the Tribunal finds it appropriate to begin its analysis by reviewing
certain key facts in order to gain a better understanding of the nature and intricacies of
the transactions that the Claimant calls an “internal corporate restructuring” and as a
result of which it acquired its alleged investment (CMoJ, § 290).

First, it is undisputed that the ultimate beneficial owner of the Claimant is
Mr. Ablyazov.”? In accordance with the Management Agreements (R-29; R-30), the
managing director of KT Asia”' and therefore KT Asia itself must follow Mr. Ablyazov’s
instructions at all times. The Claimant's alleged investment has always been and
continues to be fully controlled by Mr. Ablyazov. There is overwhelming evidence on
record in support of these facts, which were also admitted by Mr. Ablyazov himself in
his oral and written witness testimony (see paragraph 22 above). At the hearing Mr.
Ablyazov accepted that he was the "true owner" of the shares:

“Q: So it was your understanding that you had a beneficial interest
in the shares; that's right, isn't it?

Ablyazov: Yes.

Q: And by "beneficial interest", what you had in mind is that you
were the true owner, the person who had the economic interest in
the shares, and that you could vote and exercise the rights of an
owner in relation to those shares; that's right, isn't it?

Ablyazov: Yes, that's correct.” (Tr. D1/114/4-12)

Mr. Ablyazov, whom the Tribunal found to be an open and straightforward witness, also
testified that he was financing this arbitration:

“Q: And would | be right in saying that it is you that finances this
arbitration?

Ablyazov: Yes, | do.

Q: And it's right to say that the objective of these proceedings is to
recover damages for your personal benefit?

Ablyazov: Ultimately, yes. Well, first it's the company who gets the
damages, and then me as the owner of the company.

Q. Does anyone else have any financial interest in KT Asia apart
from you?

Ablyazov: No, none.” (Tr. D1/117/3-13)

Tr. D1/159/8-12.
7" Its managing director, Duma, resigned from this position in April 2012.

46

178. Second, the Claimant was a shell company set up to temporarily hold Mr. Ablyazov's
shares in BTA for the purposes of a private placement which, according to the
Claimant, was to precede the eventual IPO of BTA’s shares (Ablyazov 2 WS, §§ 27-
28). As already noted above, Mr. Ablyazov had acquired a majority share in BTA,
together with a consortium of investors, for US$ 72 million in 1998 (Ablyazov 1 WS, §
107).

179. The Claimant itself never had funds of any significance. As was established through
the disclosure process in these proceedings, the Claimant only ever had €18,000 in its
bank account, which sum was used to pay the administration fees of its corporate
managing director and various corporate services expenses. As of 20 April 2010, only
the sum of €5,252.39 remained in the account (Respondent's letter of 23 March 2012).
In its letter of 13 April 2012, Duma, the managing director of KT Asia, admitted that
“[flollowing our information, KT Asia Investment Group B.V. never had any significant
funds”. As noted above, KT Asia is currently in receivership.

180. The only purpose for the incorporation of the Claimant was to hold some of the shares
in BTA. It had no activity before it acquired the shares nor has it undertaken any
activity since the time it acquired the BTA shares, with the exception of commencing
the present arbitration.

181.

Third, the Claimant acquired the shares in BTA from Refgen and Torland, which were
also owned and controlled by Mr. Ablyazov (“Torland and Refgen were my companies
and KT Asia was also my company”, Tr. D1/159/8-12). As explained in detail by the
Respondent and not rebutted by the Claimant, the arrangements for KT Asia’s legal
and beneficial ownership of the shares also involved a series of complex transactions
relating to the ownership of KT Asia itself,”* which the Claimant argues were necessary
to avoid Kazakh tax consequences on the transfer of the shares (Rejoinder, § 279).

” ‘According to the Respondent, the transfer of shares to the Claimant involved the following
transactions: “The nominal ownership of the Claimant was tinkered with at this time and the legal
and beneficial ownership split. [...] the beneficial or ‘economic’ interest in the Claimant's shares
passed to a newly formed Dutch limited partnership, KT Asia C.V., and the partnership interest in
KT Asia C.V. passed through various nominee companies, which are ultimately beneficially owned
and controlled by Mr. Ablyazov, and ended with Tollo Holdings S.a.r.l. (‘Tollo’) as to 0.01% and
Tanna Holding S.a.r.l. (‘Tanna’) as to 99.9%.116 Both Tollo and Tanna are Luxembourg entities.
Tollo is also the General Partner in KT Asia C.V. The legal ownership of the 180 shares in the
Claimant was transferred by Kalistone to Tollo and on 29 April 2009 Tollo transferred one share to
Talego Holding B.V. (‘Talego’). So, by 13 December 2007, the legal interest in the 180 shares in
the Claimant was with Tollo, and the beneficial interest in the shares, held by KT Asia C.V., was
with Tollo (0.01%) and Tanna (99.9%). [...] In reality, however, nothing changed at all, as Mr.
Ablyazov continued to own and control the BTA Shares that were nominally now held by the
Claimant” (Mou, §§ 98-100; footnotes omitted).

47

182. Fourth, the price that the Claimant paid for the BTA shares was significantly less than

the market value of the shares. The Respondent alleged, and the Claimant did not
dispute, that KT Asia acquired 808,321 shares in BTA for a consideration of
approximately US$66,803,388, while, according to the KASE index (R-61), the
minimum value of those shares at the time was US$480,510,410, i.e., almost eight
times as much (Mod, §§ 121-123). Thus the Claimant did not pay an arms’ length price
for the shares. The shares were sold by Torland and Refgen to the Claimant at cost,
so that the sellers would not realize a gain taxable under Kazakh law (C-387 and
Ablyazov 2 WS, § 31).

183. Fifth, KT Asia never actually paid even this price for the BTA shares. It bought the

shares on credit. When questioned at the hearing, Mr. Ablyazov did not recall whether
KT Asia had made any payment at all for the shares it acquired:

“Q. We've got all the documents that you've given and | can tell you
that KT Asia did not make any payment for the shares it acquired.
Does that surprise you?

Ablyazov: | do not recollect how the shares were transferred from
Torland and Refgen to KT Asia.” (Tr. D1/162/3-7)

184. In fact, by the Claimant's own admission, the payment of the BTA shares was financed

through loans made by Refgen and Torland, the vendors, to KT Asia, the purchaser.
The Claimant explains that

“in light of the fact that the ultimate seller (behind Torland and Refgen)
and the ultimate buyer (behind the Claimant) were the same
individual, it would not make commercial sense to transfer cash
between related vendor and purchaser companies. The more
advantageous commercial solution was to provide this consideration
by way of loans between the corporate vendors and the corporate
purchaser” (Rejoinder, § 280).

185. No security was provided for the loans. The Claimant suggests that there was no need

73

to provide security for the loans because “the ultimate beneficial owner of the related
companies was Mr. Ablyazov” (Rejoinder, § 281). In the Claimant's own words, “to a
large extent the transfer to KT Asia was an accounting exercise” (Tr. D3/153/21-23).
Nor did the Claimant pay any interest on the loans, even though the loan agreements
provided for interest at LIBOR plus two percent and at an increased rate in case of late
payment.”* Mr. Ablyazov confirmed the absence of interest payments in the following
terms:

Clause 3 of the two loan agreements (R-37, R-38) provided as follows:

48

187.

188.

189.

“Q: And it's also right that KT Asia did not make any payments of
interest in relation to the loans?

Ablyazov: Well, it was the same owner. So at the end of the day
Torland and Refgen were my companies and KT Asia was also my
company, so on a technical basis no payments were made, most
probably, but it does not change the nature of the ownership in any
way.” (Tr. D1/159/6-12)

. Moreover, the Claimant never repaid the loans to Torland and Refgen, although the

Project Aquila Step Plan provided that “KT Asia repays its debt due to Torland and
Refgen” (C-382, Step 17). Instead, the loans were written off and Torland and Refgen
were liquidated. In the words of Mr. Ablyazov:

“Ablyazov: [...] Now, afterwards, when it was all restructured by using

KT Asia, at the end of the day | became the owner and Torland and

Refgen were wound up because there was no use for those.” (Tr.

D1/159-160; Rejoinder, § 281)
With these key facts in mind, the Tribunal will now analyze whether the requirements
for an investment as specified above are fulfilled.

2.3.2.2. Contribution

According to the Respondent, the Claimant has made no contribution because its
involvement was limited to receiving a transfer of nominal title to the shares, for no
consideration, in order to hold the shares for a few weeks in accordance with Mr.
Ablyazov’'s instructions before their placement with private investors.

The Claimant has not refuted this argument in any detail. It has only devoted a few
paragraphs to the contribution aspect of the Salini test (CMoJ, §§ 299-300; § 291). The
Claimant sees the contribution element through the prism of the origin of capital, which,
it claims, is irrelevant. It goes on to argue that, just like the origin of capital, “the timing
of the injection of capital” is also irrelevant since “otherwise an internal corporate
restructuring would never result in the acquisition of investment treaty protection”
(CMod, § 300).

. The Tribunal will first assess the nature of the claimed corporate restructuring based on

the facts of the present case, which have been outlined in the previous section. In light

 

“3.1 Interest shall accrue for each Interest Period and be calculated on the principal amount
of the Loan from day to day, on the basis of the number of days elapsed and a year of 365
days, at a rate equal to LIBOR plus two percent (2%).

3.2 The Borrower shall pay interest accrued on the loan in arrear not later than 11.00 a.m.
London time on each anniversary of the date of Completion throughout the subsistance of
the loan.

3.3 If the Borrower fails to pay any sum due under this Agreement on the due date, interest
shall accrue on that sum (both before and after judgment) at the rate specified in, and
calculated in accordance with, Clause 3.1, plus one (1) percent per annum.”

49

191.

192.

193.

194.

of these facts, the first question is whether the Claimant has made any injection of
capital or any other original or subsequent contribution during or after the acquisition of
the BTA shares.

As to the original contribution, it is undisputed that Mr. Ablyazov was the one who made
the first contribution at the time when through nominees he acquired the BTA shares
with the consortium of investors (Ablyazov 1 WS, § 24, § 107, § 111; 2 WS, § 6, § 15).
However, there exists no paper trail of this acquisition, nor has the Tribunal been
presented with any evidence establishing the original contribution made by Mr.
Ablyazov. The Claimant's position on this point is that a party cannot be requested to
“lay before any Tribunal precisely how much was originally paid for a particular asset”
in order to be permitted to pursue its claim, and that this cannot constitute a
jurisdictional requirement (Tr. D3/160/15-20).

Irrespective of the necessity for proof of the original acquisition, the real issue is
whether KT Asia can at all rely on Mr. Ablyazov’s original contribution in support of the
argument that it itself made an investment. In other words, the question is whether the
Claimant must itself have made a contribution or whether it can benefit from a
contribution made by someone else, here its ultimate beneficial owner. On this point,
the Respondent insists that the contribution behind the BTA shares was made long ago
by entities other than and unrelated to the Claimant, which did not contribute anything
upon acquiring or while holding these shares.

The Claimant does not dispute that it made no injection of fresh capital, but
emphasizes that an internal group restructuring by definition does not result in a new

injection of capital for the acquisition of an asset in the host State. It relies on Mobil’*

75

and Saluka in support of this argument.’> That argument contains the implied assertion

that Torland, Refgen and KT Asia were all part of a group of companies.

Assuming for the sake of discussion that no new contribution is required when an
investment is transferred from one group affiliate to another, the obvious question is
whether in the present case there exists a corporate group as this concept is generally

4 CMod, § 292.

8 For completeness, the Tribunal notes that the Claimant has also referred to Autopista
Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/5), Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 September 2001 and Aguas del Tunari S.A. v Republic of
Bolivia (I\CSID Case No. ARB/02/3), Decision on Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction, 21
October 2005 (hereinafter "Aguas del Tunari’) in a footnote, without however discussing how these
cases would provide support for the Claimant's case. The Tribunal finds that they do not,
particularly in light of the factual differences concerning the respective corporate restructurings.

50

understood in corporate and tax law as well as under accounting and financial reporting
standards.

195. It is common knowledge that a group of companies — such as Exxon Mobil in the first

case invoked by the Claimant or Nomura in the second — exists when two or more
corporations are under common corporate ownership or control. Ordinarily, companies
owned or controlled by one individual do not qualify as a corporate group though
sometimes national legislation may so treat them. Although composed of separate
legal entities, which must comply with the legal and regulatory requirements applicable
to them, groups generally operate as a single economic entity with a common objective
and strategy and a group management. In such a case, the group may report its
financial results on a consolidated basis; its group status may be taken into account for
tax purposes (subject to dealing at arms' length); and national law may impose certain
liabilities to sanction any misuse of the group structure.

196. In the present case, Mr. Ablyazov beneficially owned and controlled many companies

through nominees and individuals whom he trusted and who (directly or indirectly)
owned or controlled the shares. These nominees and other individuals acted on
Mr. Ablyazov's instructions and were required not to disclose that they held or
controlled the shares for his benefit. Mr. Ablyazov was never himself a shareholder in
any of the companies. Indeed, it is the Tribunal’s understanding that there was no
single person (whether corporate or individual) who had legal title to the shares in the
companies held for the ultimate benefit of Mr. Ablyazov.

197. Consequently, there was no holding company and no single individual shareholder

directly or indirectly connecting all the companies of which Mr. Ablyzov was the
beneficial owner.”° Neither was there a single economic unity, not to speak of
consolidation for financial reporting or tax purposes. This aggregation of assets in the
form of a myriad of companies is in reality the antithesis of a group. To treat Mr.
Ablyazov’s ultimate beneficial ownership of all the various companies via nominees and
trusted agents as a sufficient connecting factor to create a group would be nonsensical.
Indeed, the whole purpose of the structure was to conceal Mr. Ablyazov's interest and
make it look as if the different entities that held blocks of shares in BTA were

’8 | ooking only at Torland, Refgen and KT Asia, the shares in these companies were never legally
owned, directly or indirectly, by the same person. When BTA shares were acquired, KT Asia’s
shares were owned by a Cypriot company named Kalistone (R-26; R-51). Similarly, the shares in
Torland and Refgen were directly or indirectly owned by persons whom Mr. Ablyazov trusted to
obey his instructions (R-19).

51

independent of him and of each other. Mr. Ablyazov confirmed this in his letters to the
FSA (R-24).

. These observations would suffice to show that the factual matrix of this case cannot be
compared with the ones in Mobil or Saluka. In addition, the Tribunal notes that the
Mobil affiliates to which the assets in Venezuela had been transferred not only
benefitted from their predecessor's contributions but made substantial subsequent

contributions after acquiring the investment.”

Similarly, although Sa/uka does not
permit us to draw any significant parallels with the present case as there is insufficient
information about the facts of the internal restructuring, it appears that the claimant’s
obligation to repay the debt and honour the promissory notes in that case was kept in

place.”

. Furthermore, the facts in Aguas del Tunari, to which the Claimant has briefly referred”,
must also be distinguished as the case dealt with the issue of foreign control under
Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention in the context of nationality planning. The
tribunal, by a majority, held that the BIT's nationality requirements were met as, inter
alia, the controlling Dutch companies were not mere corporate shells established in
order to obtain jurisdiction over the dispute.®

. In this context, the Tribunal also finds that Torland and Refgen sold the shares to KT
Asia at far less than their true value, i.e., at about one-eighth of their value on the
KASE, to ensure that the sellers did not realize a gain which would have been taxable
under Kazakh law.®' Several arbitral tribunals have recently questioned the existence
of an investment where the asset was acquired merely for a nominal price. For
example, the Phoenix tribunal made the following observation:

“The Tribunal considers that the existence of a nominal price for the
acquisition of an investment raises necessarily some doubts about the

existence of an “investment” and requires an in depth inquiry into the
circumstances of the transaction at stake.”**

. The Saba Fakes tribunal, while noting that the ICSID Convention and the BIT did not
exclude bare legal title from their scope of protection®*, went on to hold that the

Mobil, §§ 193-197.

Saluka, §§ 71-72.

See fn. 75 above.

Aquas del Tunari, §§ 72 and 208 and fn 220, recounting the respondent's submissions that two
Dutch companies were "mere shells" that did not "control” the claimant and §§ 320-323, where the
tribunal, by a majority, rejected that submission.

C-387 and Ablyazov 2 WS, § 31.

Phoenix, § 119; Reply, § 222.

Saba Fakes, § 134, Claimant's letter of 7 May 2013.

8

2

8

8

52

payment of a mere nominal price could not be reconciled with the significance of the
underlying business as expressed in the claimant’s valuation of the alleged
investment.

202. In Caratube, the tribunal made a similar statement:

“payment of only a nominal price and lack of any other contribution by
the purported investor must be seen as an indication that the
investment was not an economic arrangement, is not covered by the
term ‘investment’ as used in the BIT, and thus is an arrangement not
protected by the BIT.”

203. The Tribunal has noted the Claimant’s argument® that the factual circumstances in

Caratube were different from the present ones. Indeed, a payment of a nominal price
for a shareholding is but one aspect out of a number of factors that may assist in
ascertaining the existence of an investment. However, in the factual reality of this
case, the Claimant agreed to pay a fraction of their value to buy the BTA shares and
ultimately paid nothing at all for their acquisition: the consideration was covered by a
loan of which neither the capital nor the interest was ever paid.°”

204. On this basis, the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that KT Asia agreed to buy the BTA

shares at an undervalue, and in the event paid nothing for those shares and that the
lack of payment cannot be explained — assuming this may be a sufficient explanation,
an issue which the Tribunal leaves open — by the fact that it acquired BTA's share in a
group restructuring. Indeed, no group of companies existed, as this structure is
generally understood. Here, there was a number of entities all owned by nominees of
Mr. Ablyazov, who disposed of the companies and their assets as of his own without
regard to their separate legal personalities. The freezing order in the English
proceedings which listed hundreds of companies gives an idea of the scale of such
practice. In fact, Mr. Ablyazov used the companies as his “pockets” shifting assets
from one to the other solely to suit his own purposes. This is well illustrated by the way
Mr. Ablyazov liquidated Torland and Refgen to do away with the debt arising out of the
loan to KT Asia.

205. The Tribunal’s purpose is not to pass judgment on the legality of these practices.

There may be nothing unlawful in Mr. Ablyazov treating the assets of companies

Saba Fakes, § 121, 147.

Caratube, § 435. In the context of its analysis of the existence of a contribution, the tribunal also
made reference to the BIT’s preamble, §§ 350-352.

Claimant's letter of 7 May 2013.

The Tribunal's assessment finds further confirmation in Quiborax, where the tribunal also denied

jurisdiction over one of the claimants who was found not to have made any original or subsequent
contribution of money or assets (§§ 232-233).

53

formally owned by other persons as his personal property. However, he cannot do so
and at the same time argue that the companies should be treated as a conventional
commercial group when it comes to claiming treaty protection. In a sense, by seeking
credit for Mr. Ablyazov's initial contribution, the Claimant disavows the separate
personality which it invoked previously for purposes of nationality

206. In conclusion, the Tribunal considers that KT Asia has made no contribution with
respect to its alleged investment, nor is there any evidence on record that it had the
intention or the ability to do so in the future. As a consequence, the Claimant has not
demonstrated the existence of an investment under Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention and under the BIT. This suffices to rule out jurisdiction over the present
dispute. For the sake of completeness and because the Parties have briefed these
matters, the Tribunal will now briefly examine the other elements of an investment, i.e.
duration and risk.

2.3.2.3. Duration

207. An allocation of resources cannot be deemed an investment unless it is made for a
certain duration. The element of duration is inherent in the meaning of an investment.
It is also evident from the object and purpose of investment treaties generally and of
the Treaty in particular. As noted above, the BIT’s preamble speaks about intensifying
the economic relations and stimulating the flow of capital and technology between the
Contracting States.

208. Neither the ICSID Convention nor the BIT specify the duration required for an allocation
of resources to qualify as an investment. While during the elaboration of the ICSID
Convention, a period of five years was suggested, the matter was eventually left to the
decision of tribunals.%° Cases have held that projects with a minimum duration
between two and five years satisfied the duration element.® Like other tribunals, this
one considers that “[dJuration is to be analysed in light of all the circumstances, and of
the investor's overall commitment”.°°

209. When assessing the duration in light of the circumstances, the question arises about
the weight to be given to the investor's intentions or expectations in terms of duration.
Like the tribunals in Deutsche Bank and in L.E.S./, this one is of the opinion that “it is

8 History of the Convention, Volume |, Z 12 (September 11, 1964), Draft Convention: Working Paper
for the Legal Committee, Article 30; see also the letters from the Republic of Vietnam and the
United States of America, Volume II, pp. 668 and 837, respectively.

89 Schreuer, A Commentary, at p. 130, § 162.

°° Romak, § 225; Deutsche Bank, § 303.

54

the intended duration period that should be considered to determine whether the
criterion is satisfied”.°' As Prof. Schreuer writes “[despite] some break down at an
early stage, the expectation of a long-term relationship is clearly there”. The contrary
could produce nonsensical results. It is indeed obvious that a long term project does
not cease to meet the definition of investment solely because it is expropriated two
months after its establishment.

210. In the present case, the investment was supposed to last a very short period of time. In
accordance with the Project Aquila Step Plan, KT Asia was to hold the shares of BTA
for a period of weeks ("at least 3/4") before they were sold on to investors in a private
placement. Step 15 of that plan reads as follows: “In order to strengthen the Dutch tax
position re the applicability of the participation exemption, the shares will be held for at
least a 3/ 4 week period prior to Step 16” (C-382).

211. Mr. Ablyazov confirmed the intent of a very short duration and explained that the
Claimant was created as a vehicle “to hold some of the shares in BTA until the interest
in them could be sold on to unrelated third parties” (Ablyazov 2 WS, § 6, § 27). At the
hearing, he further specified that the duration would depend on the success of the
private placement:

“Q: [...] The point | am asking you to accept is that the
receipt of shares by KT Asia was intended to be
temporary, as you indicate here in paragraph 6 of your
second statement.

Ablyazov: Well, what it means here is that there was a
special structure — i.e. KT Asia -- that was being put in
place and it was anticipated that it would be sold on to
the investors in case the private placement was a
success.

Now, whether it was put in place on a temporary or not
on a temporary basis was really dependent on how
successful we would be within the framework of that
private placement. At the end of the day it became a
fixture really.” (Tr. D1/-163)

212. Thus, on its own case, the Claimant’s "investment" was meant to have a limited
duration. It was a mere vehicle for the sale of the shares. The financial crisis then hit
and hindered the placement. As a result, a duration that was planned to be very short
became somewhat longer. Yet, this does not change the fact that the transaction at

Deutsche Bank, § 304, with reference to LESI v. Algeria (“the fact that the contract was suspended
and then terminated prematurely changes nothing; in order to judge the importance of the
contribution, it is necessary to focus on the duration that was agreed in the contract, which
determines the nature of the contribution”; LES/ S.p.A. and Astaldi S.p.A. v. People’s Democratic
Republic of Algeria (\CSID Case No. ARB/05/3), Decision on Jurisdiction, 12 July 2006, § 73 (ii)).

% Schreuer, A Commentary, at p. 128, § 153.

55

213.

214.

215.

216.

217.

218.

issue was never intended to involve a longer term allocation of resources, as required
to fall within the scope of the definition of investment.

On the unusual facts of the present case, therefore, in the Tribunal’s view the transfer
of the ownership of shares in a company to KT Asia on an intended short-term basis in
order to then sell it on to a third party does not support the finding that KT Asia had any
intention to hold an investment in BTA Bank for any material time. KT Asia, it seems to
the Tribunal, was simply a convenient staging point in the movement of shares on for
ultimate sale. A planned short term project does not suddenly meet the duration
element in the definition of investment because onward sale does not materialize within
the intended time frame due to external forces unrelated to the project author's intent or
expectations.

Even if for the sake of discussion one were to assume that the intended short duration
is irrelevant quod non, the time from the acquisition of the BTA shares on 14 December
2007 until the date of the Request for Arbitration on 24 April 2009 (which appears the
relevant time to assess the facts relevant for jurisdiction), would only be 16 months,
which is a very short time if one remembers the five years tentatively put forward in the
course of the elaboration of the ICSID Convention.

Tellingly, the Claimant has not attempted to demonstrate that its investment meets the
duration requirement of the Salini test and addresses this issue in just one paragraph in
its written pleadings (CMoJ, § 302). Nor has the Claimant rebutted the Respondent's
argument, which the Tribunal finds convincing, that no matter how long the duration is
in practice, the investment must be held with the expectation of some long-term
relationship (Reply, § 226).

The Tribunal has thus no hesitation to conclude that the Claimant’s alleged investment
did not involve the kind of duration envisaged within the meaning of an “investment”
under the ICSID Convention and the BIT.

2.3.2.4. Risk
To qualify as an investment, an allocation of resources must finally involve a level of

risk, a requirement to which the Tribunal turns now out of an abundance of caution.

As a general matter, an investment through the acquisition of equity in a corporation
entails the risk that the value of the equity decreases or is even completely lost. Such a
risk certainly qualifies as an investment risk for purposes of the definition of investment
under the ICSID Convention and the BIT.

56

219.

220.

221.

222.

223.

Vi.

224.

The difficulty here is that KT Asia has made no contribution and, having made no
contribution, incurred no risk of losing such (inexistent) contribution. As was discussed
above, KT Asia was not capitalized; had no resources; financed the acquisition through
a loan; and had no means of repaying such loan unless it received the proceeds of the
resale of the shares. The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent's argument that in the
absence of any contribution of some economic value it is difficult to identify an
investment risk (Reply, § 228 ff.).

Moreover, not only did the Claimant not make any contribution, nor was it meant to
absorb any financial losses. It indeed appears from the record that, in the absence of a
successful sale of the BTA shares to private investors, KT Asia - or rather its beneficial
owner - never intended to discharge its reimbursement obligations vis-a-vis Torland
and Refgen. In the Tribunal's assessment, it seems clear that Mr. Ablyazov used the
corporate structures involved in the transaction so as to shield the Claimant from any
investment risk. In fact, that is precisely what happened after Refgen and Torland were
wound up.

In light of these factual circumstances, the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the
risk element of an investment is lacking as well.

2.4. Conclusion

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the Claimant did
not hold an investment that meets the definition of the term investment under Article
25(1) of the ICSID Convention and Article 1(a) of the BIT. As a consequence, the
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae.

In view of this conclusion, the Tribunal can dispense with addressing the Respondent's
remaining objections to jurisdiction, concerning the alleged lack of an intention of the
Claimant to transfer ownership and control; the alleged lack of an investment in the
territory of Kazakhstan; the alleged unlawfulness of the investment, as well as alleged
abuses of the BIT and the ICSID Convention due to an alleged tax fraud and treaty
shopping.

COSTS

Each Party has requested an order that the other pay all costs and fees of this
arbitration. In particular, the Respondent notes that despite the financial situation of the
Claimant, if the Tribunal finds it has no jurisdiction to hear this Arbitration, it is

57

225.

226.

227.

228.

appropriate that an order for costs be made in the Respondent's favour against the
Claimant, given that this claim “should never have been brought” (Respondent's letter
of 26 March 2012).

In its cost submission of 13 April 2012, the Claimant states that its legal costs amount
to US$2,184,456.31. The Claimant has not included the amount of ICSID fees in this
calculation, noting that these would be “claimed when appropriate”. In its cost
submission of 16 March 2012, the Respondent claims that it has incurred costs in the
total amount of US$5,902,042.39, which amount includes ICSID fees of US$300,000
as of that date.

The Tribunal must accordingly allocate the ICSID arbitration costs, including the fees
and expenses of the Tribunal, and the Parties' legal costs. Article 61(2) of the ICSID
Convention provides that the determination and allocation of costs is within the
discretion of the arbitral tribunal, unless the parties expressly agree otherwise:

“In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the

parties agree otherwise, assess the expenses incurred by the parties

in connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by

whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the

Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall
be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.”

Two approaches may be distinguished in awarding costs in ICSID arbitrations. Some
tribunals apportion ICSID costs equally and rule that each party should bear its own
costs. Others apply the principle “costs follow the event”, making the losing party bear
all or part of the costs of the proceedings, including those of the prevailing party.**

In the exercise of its discretion, the Tribunal finds it appropriate that each Party bear
one half of the ICSID costs and bear its own legal and other costs. Such approach
seems fair and reasonable considering all the circumstances of the case, including the
Parties’ conduct in pursuing their claims and defenses. Specifically, while the
Respondent has prevailed on jurisdiction, the issues involved were complex and the
Claimant’s case was certainly not brought lightly. The complexity of the issues is clear
in relation to the objections concerning “investor” and “investment”, which the Tribunal
has analyzed above. Moreover, although the Tribunal has dispensed with reviewing
the merits of the other objections referred to in paragraph 223 above in light of its
conclusions on the previous defenses, the Tribunal has considered them for costs
purposes and has found them to be equally complex.

°° See for instance, Plama, § 307 ff.

58

Vil. DECISION

229. For the reasons set forth above, the Arbitral Tribunal makes the following decisions:

(i) The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the present dispute;

(ii) Each Party shall bear 50% of the Tribunal’s fees and expenses (including
ICSID's fees) as notified by ICSID;

(iii) Each Party shall bear its own costs.

[Signed] [Signed]

 

lan Glick, Q.C. Christopher Thomas, Q.C.
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: [11 October 2013] Date: [9 October 2013]
[Signed]

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler
President of the Tribunal

Date: [14 October 2013]

60

