INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
1818 H STREET, NW | WASHINGTON, DC 20433 | USA
TELEPHONE (202) 458 1534 | FACSIMILE (202) 522 2615

WWW.WORLDBANK.ORG/ICSID

3 April 2017

By email

Lao Holdings N.V.

c/o Mr. David W. Rivkin
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
919 Third Avenue

New York, NY 10022
United States of America

Mr. Christopher K. Tahbaz
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
21/F AIA Central

1 Connaught Road Central

Hong Kong

Mr. Todd Weiler

Lao People’s Democratic Republic
c/o Mr. David J. Branson

Dr. Jane Willems

Tsinghua University Law School
Beijing PRC

Mr. Kurt E. Lindquist II

Mr. John D. Branson

One Wells Fargo Center

Womble Carlyle Sandridge & Rice, LLP
301 South College Street

Suite 3500

Charlotte, NC 28202

United States of America

Barrister & Solicitor

#19 — 2014 Valleyrun Blvd.
London, Ontario N6G 5N8
Canada

Re: Lao Holdings N.V. v. Lao People’s Democratic Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/6)

Dear Sirs and Mesdames,
The Tribunal has asked me to convey the following communication to the parties:

“The Tribunal is in receipt of the application of Lao Holdings N.V. (LNHV) dated 6 March
2017 for further production of documents in support of its Second Material Breach Application,
together with the Respondent's Reply dated 17 March 2017, and LHNV's Rejoinder dated 31 March
2017.

The Tribunal notes that there is no provision in its Procedural Order No 8, which established
the ground rules for the hearing in Singapore of the Second Material Breach Application from 3 to 7
July 2017, for additional oral or documentary discovery. The omission was predicated on the
agreement of counsel at the hearing in Brussels on 18 October 2017 to forgo further discovery on the
basis that use could nevertheless be made in this ICSID proceeding of “whatever evidence is
available from the SIAC (Singapore International Arbitation Centre) proceeding.” As noted in
Procedural Order No 8, the Claimant LHNV and the Respondent were (and are) engaged in parallel
proceedings before SIAC on related issues. While the ICSID issues are not the same as the SIAC
issues, the issues were sufficiently close to enable counsel to agree to forgo further discovery in the
ICSID case in order to accelerate a hearing on the merits, as confirmed by counsel for LHNV at the
Brussels hearing (and set out for ease of reference in the Respondent's letter of reply herein) as
follows:

“we agreed there would not be any discovery in this proceeding but that the
Parties can use whatever evidence is available from the SIAC proceeding.”

Counsel for the Claimant LHNV does not take any issue in its letter of 31 March 2017 with
this consent arrangement. While the Tribunal nevertheless retains jurisdiction under the Rules to
make a further order for production of documents if compelling circumstances were shown to exist,
no such compelling circumstances have been shown to exist.

As the Claimant itself acknowledges, the production requests set out in its 6 March 2017
application have ALL been the subject of applications and related proceedings before SIAC, with
mixed results. If the documents currently sought by the Claimant become “available through the
SIAC proceedings” they can be used in the ICSID hearing of the Second Material Breach
Application. To the extent the Claimant has been unable to obtain satisfaction from SIAC, this
Tribunal declines to relieve the Claimant of the arrangement agreed to in Brussels.

In the result, the Claimant LHNV's application of 6 March 2017 for further production of
documents is dismissed.”

Yours sincerely,

[Signed]

Anneliese Fleckenstein
Secretary of the Tribunal

cc (by email): Members of the Tribunal

