©ICSID

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

1818 H STREET, NW | WASHINGTON, DC 20433 | USA
TELEPHONE (202) 458 1534 | FACSIMILE (202) 522 2615
WWW.WORLDBANK.ORG/ICSID

By email

Lao Holdings N.V.

c/o Mr. David W. Rivkin
Ms. Catherine M. Amirfar
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
919 Third Avenue

New York, NY 10022
United States of America
and

Christopher K. Tahbaz
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
21/F AIA Central

1 Connaught Road Central
Hong Kong

and

Mr. Todd Weiler

Barrister & Solicitor

#19 — 2014 Valleyrun Blvd.
London, Ontario N6G 5N8
Canada

April 16, 2014

Lao People’s Democratic Republic
c/o Mr. David Branson

3 Metro Center

Suite 700

Bethesda, Maryland 20814

United States of America

and

Werner Tsu c/o LS Horizon (Laos)
Unit 4/1.1, 4th Floor

Simoung Commercial Centre

Fa Ngum Road, Phiavat Village
Sistanak District, Vientiane, Lao PDR
and

Professor Jane Willems

3 Metro Center

Suite 700

Bethesda, Maryland 20814

United States of America

and

Professor Don Wallace Jr., Professor of Law
Georgetown University Law Center
Chairman, International Law Institute
1055 Thomas Jefferson St. N.W.
Suite M-100

Washington, D.C. 20007

United States of America

Re: Lao Holdings N.V. v. Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Dear Mesdames and Sirs,

(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/6)

I write to you as instructed by the President of the Tribunal. The Tribunal has now had
an opportunity to confer respecting the matters raised by the Claimant by letter dated 29 March,
2014, and the subsequent correspondence ending with the Respondent’s letter of 14 April, 2014,
in which the Claimant seeks certain interim relief additional to the Provisional Measures Order
(PMO) dated 17 September, 2013, and the Tribunal rules as follows:

1. The Respondent acknowledges that Order 04/PM apparently dated 14 January, 2014, which
purported to rescind the Prime Minister’s earlier order 30/PM dated 4 November, 2013
commanding compliance with the PMO, was issued in error. The government has
apologized for its mistake but we are now advised that due to the Prime Minister’s state visit
to China no formal rectification of the situation is possible until the week of 21 April, 2014,
and even then issuance of a rectifying order is promised simply “as soon as possible”
(Werner Tsu e-mail dated 8 April, 2014). Considering that the 04/PM problem was drawn to
the attention of counsel for the Respondent on 29 March, 2014, and that in the meantime the

2

“erroneous” order 04/PM remains in effect, the delay in rescinding Order 04/PM is in clear
and continuing violation of the PMO. Even if for logistical reasons it is not practicable to
rescind in a formal way 04/PM until the Prime Minister’s return, it is within the
Respondent’s power to communicate the fact 04/PM was issued in “error” to the relevant
government officials, and in particular to the “government officials who deal with the
Claimant’s investments” listed by the Claimant in its letter of 22 January, 2014 and referred
to by the Claimant at page 2 of its 29 March, 2014 letter, immediately. Accordingly the
Respondent is required to undertake such notification forthwith and to advise the Tribunal
when this has been done. The Respondent has undertaken to arrange for the formal
rescission of 04/PM as soon as “possible” after the Prime Minister’s return from China.
Counsel for the Respondent is to advise the Tribunal and the other parties as soon as this
“formal” rescission has been completed.

With respect to the disputed tax collection under Notice 0443 dated 28 March, 2014, the
Tribunal considers paragraph 30(1) of the PMO to be perfectly clear when it states that the
Respondent government is enjoined from “demanding that Claimant pay any amounts
allegedly due pursuant to the New Tax Law” following expiry of the Flat Tax Agreement on
31 December, 2013, conditional upon the Claimant complying with the escrow arrangement
referred to in paragraph 30 (4) of the PMO. In other words the focus of the PMO is not
limited to the modified 80% rate imposed on casino revenue by the New Tax Law. The
PMO covers all taxes “allegedly due” pursuant to the New Tax Law in its entirety. There is
no exemption for tax on “non-casino gaming revenues”, despite the apparent
misunderstanding of Mr Nammavong in his statement of 8 April, 2014. The Tribunal is
advised by the Claimant, and it has not been disputed by the Respondent, that the taxes that
are referred to in Notice 0443, are covered by articles 12, 13, 14, 15, 26 et seq and 43 et seq
of the New Tax Law. Accordingly the Respondent is required forthwith to reimburse Savan
Vegas by government cheque the amount of taxes collected pursuant to Notice 0443, and to
refrain from further tax collection under the new Tax Law as required by the PMO until
these proceedings are resolved.

With regard to Madame Sengkeo, the Respondent acknowledges that “the conduct alleged
would, if true, be in violation of the Decision for Provisional Measures of 17 September,
2013 (PMO)”. To the extent cross-allegations are made against the Claimant, the Claimant
acknowledges that “coercion of a witness is a serious matter”, as would, the Tribunal adds,
be suborning false evidence in any fashion. Indeed, Mr Branson states in his letter of 14
April 2014 at pp 2-3 that “such conduct would be in violation of the parties’ duties to the
Tribunal even absent the provisional measures”. The Tribunal agrees. To the extent the
situation of Madame Sengkeo is bound up with the Respondent’s request to vary the PMO to
permit an investigation of allegations of corruption in relation to the Claimant’ s investments,
the relationship between the arbitral proceedings and the proposed criminal investigation
will be the subject of an oral hearing in London on 12 May, 2014. To the extent the situation
of Madame Sengkeo is limited to issues of proof at the 12 May hearing, and is unrelated to
the proposed criminal investigations, the prohibition against witness tampering is still
absolute. Although the Claimant refers to at least one recent unwelcome contact between
Madame Sengkeo and government officials, the Claimant does not identify any of the
officials in question. Mr Branson advises that he discussed “the Sengkeo evidence with the
senior Committee members on April 2, 2014. They had not had any contact at any time with
Ms Sengkeo”, and Mr Branson’s letter continues, “They are certain that no person in the
Government who has any authority or responsibility for this case has had any contact with
Ms Sengkeo in connection with this case, and they are not aware that any unauthorized
Government person has met with her, much less threated her.” (Mr Branson letter, ibid, p 2)
In the absence of any particulars from the Claimant regarding the identities of the offending
government officials who seek to “coerce false testimony from her”, or the individual(s) at

ST who seek to “coerce her cooperation”, an exceptionally serious set of allegations, the
Tribunal does not think it necessary to add further language to the PMO with respect to the
situation of Madame Sengkeo at this time. The parties agree on the absolute duty to refrain
from witness tampering of any description, both under the PMO and otherwise, and if in
future particulars of any such conduct are established, whether conduct by government
officials directly or (as also alleged by the Claimant) indirectly using ST “as an
intermediary”, or by or on behalf of the Claimant, the consequences will be severe.

4. There is some discussion in the material as to whether certain allegations made by the
parties for the purpose of the 12 May hearing will be considered by the Tribunal to be
“presumptively” established. This is not so. In the next phase of these hearings, as in the
jurisdictional challenge heard by the Tribunal in January 2014, the party alleging facts will
be expected to prove them on a balance of probabilities.

Sincerely yours,

[Signed]

Anneliese Fleckenstein
Secretary of the Tribunal

Members of the Tribunal

