INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES (ICSID)
Washington, D.C.

Case No. ARB/02/1

IN THE PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN

LG&E ENERGY CORP.
LG&E CAPITAL CORP.
LG&E INTERNATIONAL, INC.
(Claimants)
and

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC.
(Respondent)

 

DECISION ON CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR
SUPPLEMENTARY DECISION

 

Members of the Tribunal:

Tatiana B. de Maekelt, President
Francisco Rezek, Arbitrator
Albert Jan van den Berg, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Date of dispatch to the parties: 8 July 2008

INTRODUCTION

On 3 October 2006, the Tribunal rendered a Decision on Liability (the “Decision on
Liability”) in which it found the Respondent to be in breach of its obligations under the
Treaty.' It retained jurisdiction to determine damages in a subsequent phase of the

arbitration.

On 3 November 2006, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6 (the “P.O. No. 6”)
proposing a methodology for the calculation of damages. In this Order, the Tribunal
stated that Claimants’ claim for future damages in the form of lost profits was too
uncertain and, for this reason, it ruled to “/imit the damages to be awarded to the period
between 18 August 2000 and 28 February 2005, with the exception of the period of State
of Necessity, and without prejudice to Claimants’ rights to claim damages from
Respondent in the present or other proceedings in the event that Respondent continues to

breach its obligations after 28 February 2005.” (Footnotes omitted)

On 5 December 2006, the Secretary of the Tribunal circulated the parties’ comments
regarding P.O. No. 6. In their comments, Claimants contested the cut-off date for the
calculation of damages and submitted the witness statement of Mr. Flaiban, LG&E’s
Country Manager — Argentine Business, offering new evidence on the Respondent’s

continuous breaches of the Treaty.

The final decision on damages was embodied in the Award issued on 25 July 2007 (the
“Award”). In the Award, the Tribunal, after consideration of the whole spectrum of the
parties’ arguments on damages, including their comments on P.O. No. 6, ordered the
Respondent to pay US$57,400,000 plus interest for damages suffered by the Claimants
between 18 August 2000 and 28 February 2005.

Capitalized terms not defined in this Decision have the meaning provided for in the Decision on Liability
and the Award.

PROCEDURE

On 23 August 2007, Claimants submitted a Request for a Supplementary Decision (the
“Request”), in accordance with Article 49 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 49 of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules. Respondent filed its Observations on the Request (the
“Observations”), on 26 October 2007.

On 12 November 2007, Claimants filed their Reply to the Observations (the “Reply”) and
Respondent submitted its Rejoinder to the Request (the “Rejoinder”), on 26 November
2007.

By letter dated 29 February 2008, the Tribunal informed the parties that no further
submissions were required and that no hearing would be held. The proceeding was

declared closed on 7 July 2008.

PARTIES’ POSITIONS

Claimants note that the Tribunal chose not to consider their evidence of continuing
breach and continuing damages, submitted with their comments to P.O. No. 6, on the
grounds that the Respondent had not had the opportunity to respond to this evidence.
Claimants allege that, in doing so, the Tribunal left unresolved the issue of post-28
February 2005 damages. Consequently, Claimants request that “in the interest of justice
and efficiency” the Tribunal update the quantum of compensation owed by Respondent
for damages sustained from 1 March 2005 to 31 July 2007 and avoid the delays and costs
of new proceedings. For this purpose, Claimants submit a supplemental declaration by
Mr. Flaiban as further evidence of the Respondent’s continuous breach, alleging that the
Respondent has not restored any of the guarantees of the Regulatory Framework and has
not paid due compensation. Claimants further submit an approximate calculation of such

compensation.

In its Observations, Respondent asserts that the recourse provided for in Article 49(2) of

the ICSID Convention is designed to correct inadvertent and non-substantial omissions

occurring in an Award. The Claimants’ Request, therefore, exceeds the limits of a
supplementary decision because: (a) it does not refer to an “inadvertent” omission but to
a deliberate decision adopted by the Tribunal; (b) it does not attempt to amend a minor
error but to address substantial issues such as the extension of the damages period and the
duplication of the Award’s quantum; (c) it purports to treat a question that has already
been resolved, while the purpose of Article 49(2) is not to reopen proceedings; (d) it does
not address the Award itself but the preliminary acts, in particular P.O. No. 6; and (e) it

introduces new alleged facts and evidence for the Tribunal’s consideration.

Finally, Respondent draws attention to the controversial nature of the evidence submitted
by the Claimants and brings to light other relevant facts that would need to be taken into
account in the determination of additional damages, in particular, the agreement signed
with the Licensee in the renegotiation process, the retroactive increase of tariffs, new
legislation concerning the emergency and LG&E’s disposal of its investment. It contends
that granting the Request would result in the Tribunal’s exceeding its powers and a
violation of the Respondent’s right to due process and defense since it would not be
permitted to contest such evidence; recourse to a supplementary decision not being the
appropriate means. Consequently, the Respondent asks for the Request to be dismissed

and for costs to be covered by Claimants.

In their Reply, Claimants allege that, although Respondent had been given the
opportunity to challenge their arguments and rebut the evidence, it had chosen to remain
silent and to raise unfounded procedural objections as well as vague and speculative
allegations regarding tangential facts that are irrelevant to the question of damages. In the
Claimants’ view, the Respondent’s objections are unfounded because they
mischaracterize the purpose of recourse to a supplementary decision, as set out in Article
49(2) of the ICSID Convention, or are inapplicable to this case. Moreover, Claimants
allege that, since the absence of restoration of the guarantees and the amount of dividends
received by Claimants in the relevant period are uncontroversial, the Tribunal should

proceed to apply the methodology adopted in the Award to supplement it with an

additional calculation of compensation. Claimants note, however, that the Respondent
should be given full opportunity to defend its interests.

In its Rejoinder, the Respondent sustains its arguments concerning the nature and scope
of recourse to a supplementary decision and denies the Claimants’ allegation that it
consented to the facts and evidence submitted by them. The Respondent underlines that
submitting new facts and evidence is strange to such remedy and that, therefore, the
Respondent’s Observations to the Request are not the appropriate means by which to
respond to them. Accordingly, Respondent reiterates its demand for the dismissal of the

Request and the allocation of costs to Claimants.

TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

It is undisputed that the purpose of recourse to a supplementary decision, as set out in
Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention, is to provide a remedy to questions that the
Tribunal has omitted to decide in an award. Claimants’ Request, however, does not

concern a question that the Tribunal has omitted to decide in the Award.

In its Award, the Tribunal dealt at length with the Claimants’ arguments concerning the
cut-off date for calculating accrued losses. Its third consideration in determining the
appropriate method for the quantification of compensation, at paragraphs 92 to 95, reads

as follows:

92. Thirdly, as to the date for calculating accrued losses, Claimants contend that the
cut-off date should be December 2006, the date of submission of their comments
on Procedural Order No. 6. According to Claimants, there is “no justification” for
using 28 February 2005 as the cut-off date once evidence is produced that “the
breach has continued and is continuing”. Claimants claim to have produced this
evidence by submitting the witness statement of Mr. Enrique Flaiban who
testified on the status of the Licensees’ tariff levels.

93. The Tribunal agrees with Claimants that, if evidence is produced, damages
should be awarded. However, Claimants forget that, for evidence to be
considered by this Tribunal, Argentina must be given the opportunity to react to
such evidence. The Respondent did not have this opportunity with regard to Mr.
Flaiban’s witness statement.

94. The Tribunal decided during the Hearing that no further submissions or evidence
would be presented after 28 February 2005,*’ the date of the PHB in which

conclusive remarks concerning each parties’ case were to be exposed. The
Claimants themselves opposed the introduction of new evidence by Argentina
after this date.**

95. Respect for due process obliges this Tribunal to only consider evidence that the
other side has been able to test. On the basis of this evidence, the Tribunal
assesses Argentina’s continuous breach of its obligations between 18 August
2000 and 28 February 2005. Any event occurring after 28 February 2005 that
could be seen to remedy the Respondent’s breaches and affect the calculation of
damages (like the progress on the renegotiation process) is not considered in the
present procedure, as indicated in Procedural Order No. 6.

37. See Hearing in the merits, January 29, 2005, Hearing Transcripts, vol. 7, at 1616-24.
38. Argentina attempted on three occasions to introduce evidence regarding the alleged progress in the
renegotiation process (Letters of 2 September 2005, 12 January 2006 and 11 April 2006). The Claimants
opposed to the Tribunal’s acceptance of such evidence (Letters of 14 September 2005, 24 January 2006
and 27 April 2006). The Tribunal, based in its previous decision that no further submissions be filed,
rejected the introduction of the evidence (Letters of 5 October 2005, 30 January 2006 and 9 May 2007).
With respect to due process, the Tribunal decided that it would not consider further
evidence on the breach of the Respondent’s obligations after 28 February 2005. It
appears, therefore, that Claimants are attempting to reopen the discussion of a question

that has been dealt with and disposed of by the Tribunal.

In addition, the Claimants misconceive the function of the recourse to a supplementary
decision by asserting that it allows Argentina to respond to their new arguments and
evidence. The supplementation process is not a mechanism by which parties can continue
proceedings on the merits or seek a remedy that calls into question the validity of the
Tribunal’s decision. Referring to Professor Schreuer, the ad hoc Committee in the

Vivendi case noted:

[...] it is important to state that that procedure [by which ICSID awards and decisions
may be supplemented and rectified], and any supplementary decision or rectification
as may result, in no way consist of a means of appealing or otherwise revising the
merits of the decision subject to supplementation or rectification.”

 

Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3), Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Request for Supplementation and Rectification of its
Decision Concerning Annulment of the Award, {]11 (28 May 2003).

The Tribunal is aware of the Claimants’ concern about their available means to claim
post-28 February 2005 damages. It cannot, however, disregard the principle of due
process nor the purpose of the supplementation process, as provided for in Article 49(2)
of the ICSID Convention, to address this concern. Claimants are not, however, deprived
of their right to claim additional damages. The possibility of starting new proceedings

under the ICSID Convention still remains.

With regard to costs of the present proceedings concerning a supplementary decision, the
fees and expenses of the Tribunal are determined at US$74,954.74, which shall be bore
by the Claimants. In view of the circumstances of the case, each party shall bear its own

legal and other expenses.

TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal renders the following decisions:

(a) Claimants’ Request is denied;

(b) The fees and expenses of the Tribunal are determined at US$74,954.74, which
shall be borne by the Claimants; and

(c) Each party shall bear its own legal and other expenses.

Made in Washington, D.C., in English and Spanish, both versions equally authentic.

/signed/ /signed/
Professor Albert Jan van den Berg Judge Francisco Rezek
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: 11 June 2008 Date: 14 June 2008
/signed/

Dr. Tatiana B. de Maekelt

President

Date: 19 June 2008

