INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN
LG&E ENERGY CORP.
LG&E CAPITAL CORP.

LG&E INTERNATIONAL, INC.
(CLAIMANTS)

AND

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
(RESPONDENT)

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal:
Doctor Tatiana B. de Maekelt, President
Judge Francisco Rezek, Arbitrator

Professor Albert Jan van den Berg, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:

Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Date of dispatch to the parties: July 25, 2007

Representing the Claimants Representing the Respondent

Mr. Eugene D. Gulland HE. Osvaldo César Guglielmino
Mr. Oscar M. Garibaldi Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Eric D. Brown Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ms. Karin L. Kizer Buenos Aires

Mr. Miguel Lopez Forastier Argentina

Covington & Burling
Washington, D.C.

United States of America

Ms. Dorothy O’Brien
Deputy General Counsel
E. ON U.S. LLC

and

Dr. Horacio J. Ruiz Moreno

Dr. Leonardo Orlanski

Rosso Alba, Francia & Ruiz Moreno
Buenos Aires

Argentina

L
I.

Il.

Iv.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

INTRODUCTION. 1
DAMAGES, 2
A. THE PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE ASSESSMENT OF DAMAGES.... 3

 

(1) Parties’ General Positions on Damages
(2) Tribunal’s Anal
(a) The Applicable Standard for

(b) The Measure of Compensation...

 

(i) The Inapplicability of Fair Market Value as the Measure of
CG sat

 

(ii) The “Actual Loss” Incurred “As a Result” of the Wrongful Acts as
the Appropriate Measure of Compensation.....

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(c) Interest
(3) Tribunal’s Conclusi 16
B. THE TRIBUNAL’S METHOD FOR THE QUANTIFICATION OF COMPENSATION...
(1) _ Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 6...
(2) Parties’ Position on the Tribunal’s Method ..
(3) — Tribunal’s Analysis. 2»
(a) The Principles Underlying the Tribunal’s Method...
(b) The Alleged Methodological Shortcomings
(c) Interest 2
(4) Tribunal’s Conclusi 29
C. QUANTIFICATION OF COMPENSATION...
COSTS ‘0
A. THE PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE ALLOCATION OF COSTS...
qd) Parties’ Positions 0
(2) Tribunal’s Analysis 1
(3) Tribunal’s Conclusi 1
DECISION 1

 

INTRODUCTION

On 3 October 2006, the Tribunal issued a Decision on Liability (the “Decision on
Liability”), in which the Tribunal found the Argentine Republic (“Respondent” or
“Argentina”) to be in breach of its obligations under the Bilateral Treaty between
the United States of America and the Argentine Republic concerning the
Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment (“BIT”, the “Bilateral
Treaty” or the “Treaty”) with respect to (i) the standard of fair and equitable
treatment and the prohibition to accord treatment less favorable than that required
by international law under Article II(2)(a); (ii) the prohibition of discriminatory
measures under Article II(2)(b); and (iii) the obligations covered by the “umbrella

clause” under Article II(2)(c).

However, the Tribunal found that the Respondent’s conduct was justified under
the State of Necessity as contemplated by Article XI of the Treaty and general
international law. The Respondent was therefore exempted from responsibility

while this situation lasted, i.e., from 1 December 2001 until 26 April 2003.

The Tribunal consequently determined that Argentina was liable for damages to
LG&E Energy Corp. LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. (the
“Claimants” or “LG&E”) for breaches of the Treaty, except during the period of
the State of Necessity, and retained jurisdiction to determine such damages in a

subsequent phase of the arbitration.

On 3 November 2006, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6 in which it
invited the parties to comment on the method proposed by the Tribunal to
establish the amount of damages suffered by the Claimants. The Secretary of the
Tribunal circulated the parties’ comments on 5 December 2006. On 12 April
2007, the Tribunal declared the proceedings closed under Rule 38(1) of the ICSID

Arbitration Rules.

This Award deals exclusively with the determination of damages including

interest (Section II) and costs (Section III). The Decision on Liability, dated

3 October 2006 and the Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, dated 30 April

2004, rendered by this Tribunal, form an integral part of this Award.

In determining the damages suffered by the Claimants, the Tribunal has
considered, together with allegations and evidence submitted by the parties and
their experts, the financial and economic expertise provided at its request and with
the parties’ consent mainly by Geoffrey Senogles of LBC _ International
Investigative Accounting, Switzerland, and by Oxford Economic Forecasting.'
The Tribunal wishes to express its gratitude to the experts for their valuable
collaboration as well as to the parties and their experts for their thorough

allegations.
DAMAGES

Prior to the issuance of the Decision on Liability, the parties explained at length
their position with respect to damages in their submissions and in the expert
reports that accompanied them. The arguments on damages were discussed during
the Hearing held in Washington D.C. from 23 to 29 January 2005, in which the
parties’ experts were also examined. The Post-Hearing Briefs (“PHB”) of both

parties likewise contained allegations on damages.

Subsequently, the parties presented their positions with regard to the Tribunal’s
method for establishing the amount of damages suffered by the Claimants,

contained in Procedural Order No. 6 (the “Tribunal’s method”).

Accordingly, the Tribunal’s analysis for the determination of damages will follow
this sequence: it will first present and examine the parties’ general positions on
damages that have lead the Tribunal to establish the principles concerning the
assessment of compensation that underlie the Tribunal’s method, included in
Procedural Order No. 6 (Section A). The Tribunal will then present and examine
the parties’ positions concerning the proposed method (Section B), and will

finally quantify the amount of compensation (Section C).

 
  

' With
and also Dougla

tance from Vanessa Rossi and Simon Knapp of Oxford Economic Forecasting
Glassford.

A. The Principles Concerning the Assessment of Damages
(dd) Parties’ General Positions on Damages

The Claimants argue that Argentina’s treaty violations substantially eliminated the
value of their investment in Distribuidora de Gas del Centro (“Centro”),
Distribuidora de Gas Cuyana S.A. (“Cuyana”) and Gas Natural BAN S.A.
(“GasBan”’) (together the “Licensees”). Consequently, Claimants are entitled to
full compensation for the damages sustained, including (i) the full market value of
their loss; (ii) pre- and post-Award compound interest at a reasonable commercial
rate; and (iii) the costs and expenses associated with the arbitration proceedings

(Claimants’ Memorial, (1184).

In respect to the value of their loss, Claimants allege that the general principle
governing compensation for breaches of international law was set out by the
Permanent Court of Justice in the Chorzéw Factory Case. In accordance with this
principle, the Claimants are entitled to compensation that fully eliminates the
effects of the Respondent’s breach of its obligations (Claimants’ Memorial at

qs[183-185).

The Claimants explain that full compensation in international law is measured by
the fair market value (“FMV”) of the loss to the investor. In the case of
expropriation, the appropriate measure of the Claimants’ loss is the FMV of the
investment at the time of expropriation. In the case of the other claims, such
measure is the same FMV of the investment minus the residual value (Claimants’

Memorial at (188).

LG&E alleges that the preferred method to establish the FMV of a publicly-traded
corporation is to determine the market value of its shares. The price paid by an
investor for a share in an arms-length transaction shortly before the government’s
interference with the investment is likewise reliable evidence of the FMV of the

asset.

Based upon the opinions of their experts, Professor Eduardo Schwartz and Carlos
Lapuerta, Claimants calculate the FMV of their investments in Cuyana and

GasBan by using the sale price for their publicly-traded shares. The value of their

investment in Centro, which is not publicly traded, was estimated from the stock
price information of the three publicly-traded gas distribution companies
(GasBan, Cuyana and MetroGAS). The market values were allegedly confirmed

by analysis of several large block sales of shares of gas-distribution companies.

The Claimants’ experts estimated the value of LG&E’s investments at US$268
million on 18 August 2000, when the Respondent first breached the Treaty by
suspending the PPI adjustment, and US$20 million in October 2002, once trading
activity on the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange had adjusted to the enactment of the
Emergency Law. Consequently, the Claimants allege that compensation for their
expropriation claim is in the order of US$268 million and US$248 million
(US$268 million minus US$20 million) on their remaining claims (excluding

interest and costs) (Claimants’ Memorial, 193-194).

Claimants defend that August 2000 and October 2002 are the dates that best
reflect the difference in value of LG&E’s investment with and without legal
protections. In their opinion, it is pertinent to begin measuring damages from
August 2000 because it was at that time that the Argentine Government began to
dismantle the legal protections provided by the regulatory framework for the gas-
distribution companies. Accordingly, Claimants reject the Respondent’s
preference for taking November 2001 as the beginning period because, by that
time, stock prices were already depressed by Respondent’s breaches of the Treaty,
and thus LG&E’s damages would not reflect the previous decline in the value of
its stock resulting from Respondent’s breaches and the consequent market
uncertainty over the Government’s commitment to the legal protections of the

tariff regime (Reply, 260).

Claimants defend October 2002 as the period by which time the market had
accepted that legal protections of the tariffs were no longer to be upheld and that
the Government would no longer implement tariff relief or provide compensation.
Claimants reject the Respondent’s suggestion to use recent stock prices in order to
establish the end value of LG&E’s investment. Stock prices subsequent to
October 2002 reflect the market speculation over uncertain tariff relief for an

industry no longer protected by a stable regulatory framework. In addition, using

20.

recent stock prices would allow the Respondent to unfairly benefit from its failure
to remedy its breaches and to manipulate stock values in order to reduce damages

(Claimants’ Reply, {[257-262).

At a later stage, and in response to Argentina’s arguments, the Claimants’ experts
also performed an abbreviated DCF analysis based on the forecast of the
dividends that LG&E would have likely received from its companies up until the
end of the Licenses. The net present value of lost dividends was estimated at
US$271 million (without pre-Award interest), allegedly confirming the experts’
calculations based on the stock market value (Claimants’ PHB, {{[79-80; Schwartz

& Lapuerta second rebuttal report p. 17)?

Claimants emphasize that the destruction of the value of their investment was
caused by the Argentine Government’s breach of its legal commitments rather
than by economic factors (Claimants’ Reply, (266-267). LG&E points out that,
while the legal protections offered by the tariff regime were still in effect, gas-
distribution company stocks remained stable and retained their value despite the
recession. In fact, the gas industry suffered no major losses linked to the drop in
demand during the economic recession, since it is relatively insensitive to price
fluctuations and customers do not readily switch to alternatives. Thus, but for the
elimination of the requirement that tariffs be calculated in U.S. dollars
(pesificacién), the value of LG&E’s investment would have weathered a

devaluation of the peso (Claimants’ Memorial, 198).

Finally, Claimants deny that the country risk premium allegedly included in the
gas distribution tariffs provided compensation for the dismantling of the tariff
regime. In particular, Claimants note that (i) this premium was not included in the
initial tariffs and that, when introduced by ENARGAS in the first tariff review, it
applied only to a reduced portion of the tariff; (ii) LG&E’s actual returns were
much lower than the cost of equity that ENARGAS calculated for the tariff
reviews; and (iii) exonerating the Respondent because investment returns included

such a premium would be tantamount to saying that high-risk borrowers may

The value used by the Claimants in their PHB was corrected to reflect the use of 2027 as
the date for termination of the Conces

 

21.

22.

23.

24.

violate their legal obligations without consequence because their lenders may

have charged them higher rates (Claimants’ PHB, {{[85-88).

With regard to interest, Claimants allege that they are entitled to pre-Award
interest measured by the one-month interest rate earned on U.S. Treasury Bills,
compounded monthly as from August 2000. As to post-Award interest, Claimants
will seek appropriate market-based rates when and if required for the enforcement

of an unpaid award (Claimants’ Memorial, 206).

The Respondent invokes the following grounds to oppose the claim for
compensation: (i) the inadequacy of the methods used by the Claimants’ experts
to value LG&E’s investment; (ii) the arbitrariness in the choice of valuation dates
for LG&E’s investment; (iii) the unjust enrichment of the Claimants; and (iv) the

effect of the country risk premium in excluding compensation for the Claimants.

Firstly, in respect to the inadequacy of methods used by the Claimants’ experts to
value LG&E’s investment the Respondent argues that: (i) stock prices for GasBan
and Cuyana are unreliable due to the illiquidity and volatility of the Argentine
market (Rejoinder {§377-385); (ii) information on MetroGAS and GasBas is not
appropriate to estimate the value of Centro given the significant differences
between the companies’ business structures, in particular their leverage
(Rejoinder, 391-393); and (iii) of the six arms-length transactions examined by
the Claimants’ experts, only three can be referenced to the stock prices current at
the time of the transaction and, in all three cases, the difference between the
transaction price and the stock prices is considerable (Rejoinder {{[386-388).
Alternatively, the Respondent’s expert, Mr. Fabian Bello, proposes the use of
DCF as a more appropriate and rigorous method to value the investments (Bello’s

Report of September 2004, {{[35-36).

Secondly, as to the dates chosen by the Claimants to perform the valuation of their
investment, the Respondent argues that they are arbitrary and chosen to maximize
their loss since they compare the best possible trading values with the worst
historical trading values (Counter-Memorial, (366). In particular, the Respondent

asserts that (i) the suspension of the PPI did not cause any damage to the

25.

26.

27.

28.

Claimants’ investments since the decrease in their value during 2000 and 2001
was the result of the economic recession that affected all assets during that period;
the use of August 2000 avoids reflecting such deterioration in value (Counter-
Memorial 9367); and (ii) after October 2002 the value of LG&E’s investment
increased considerably: by January 2004 the values for Cuyana and Centro
exceeded their November 2001 values by 42% and 26% respectively. The 13%
decreased in value experienced by GasBan cannot be blame on the Respondent

but on the financial policy of the company, notably on it excessive leverage.

Consequently, the Respondent alleges that LG&E’s claims for damages are
inadmissible, since no damage has been inflicted, and premature, since the value
of the Licensees is exposed to strong fluctuations and is dependant on the result of

the renegotiation process (Counter-Memorial, {{[394-395; Rejoinder, 417).

Thirdly, the Respondent argues that compensating the Claimants would result in
unjust enrichment because: (i) if compensation for expropriation were conceded,
LG&E’s return for the period 1997-2002 would be considerably higher (in excess
of 16% per annum) (Rejoinder, {{[449-458); and (ii) if compensation for the
violation of other Treaty protections is granted, LG&E would be in the “absurd”
situation in which it would receive an amount higher than that invested and, in
addition, would retain its stake in the Licensees (that have increased its overall
value since October 2002), being entitled to future dividends (Rejoinder, {{J459-
466).

It is the Respondent’s opinion that the country risk premium calculated by
ENARGAS and included in the tariffs has already compensated LG&E for the
risk of investing in a country like Argentina (Rejoinder. {J405-407).

Finally, the Respondent objects to LG&E’s claims concerning interest. In the
event that the Tribunal decides to grant the Claimants’ request for interest, they
should be simple and not compounded (Counter-Memorial, §357). In addition,
since Claimants received profits during 2000 and 2001, awarding interest from

August 2000 would result in double recovery (Rejoinder, 474).

29.

30.

31.

(2) Tribunal’s Analysis

It is well established in international law that the most important consequence of
the committing of a wrongful act is the obligation for the State to make reparation
for the injury caused by that act? The questions arise as to the applicable

standard and measure of compensation and the method to quantify it.

These questions are particularly thorny when it comes to defining the standard and
measure of compensation applicable for treaty breaches other than expropriation.
There are no express provisions in the Treaty addressing these issues and pre-
existing guidance in arbitral jurisprudence is very limited. In establishing the
standard of reparation; the measure of compensation; and the method to quantify
it applicable in this case, the Tribunal takes recourse to the principles governing
reparation under international law and the few precedents in investment treaty
arbitration. In the same manner the Tribunal includes the claim for interest as part

of the Claimants’ compensation.

(a) The Applicable Standard for Reparation

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that the appropriate standard for
reparation under international law is “full” reparation as set out by the Permanent
Court of International Justice in the Factory at Chorzéw case and codified in
Article 31 of the International Law Commission Draft Articles on Responsibility
of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts (the Draft Articles or DARS).* In

accordance with the PCIJ, reparation:

“[...] must, so far as possible wipe out all the consequences of
the illegal act and re-establish the situation which would, in all
probability have existed if that act had not been committed.
Restitution in kind, or, if this is not possible, payment of a
sum corresponding to the value which a restitution in kind
would bear [...J

3 Case Concerning Certain German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia (Germany v. Poland)

(‘Factory at Chorz6w”), Permanent Court of International Justice Proceeding, Merits 1928, P.C.LJ.
Series A. No. 17, p.21.

4 For an explanation as to the origin of the Draft Articles see the Decision on Liability, [245
footnote 62.

5 Factory at Chérzow, p. 47.

32.

33.

34.

35.

Reparation can thus take the form of restitution or compensation.® Claimants
have requested compensation measured by the fair market value of their loss.’
The Tribunal, however, does not follow Claimants’ request for the measure of

compensation for the reasons set out below.

(b) The Measure of Compensation

(i) | The Inapplicability of Fair Market Value as the Measure
of Compensation
At the heart of the Claimants’ argument lies the valuation of their loss by
reference to the fair market value of that loss. Respondent do not oppose the use

of the FMV, but rather, the method for its estimation.

To determine the FMV of their loss, the Claimants establish the value of the gas
distribution companies (and of LG&E’s investment using the percentage of shares
owned) based on stock price and large share purchase values. The only difference
in the valuation for the expropriation claim and the other claims is in the
subtraction of the residual value in the later case. Argentina proposes DCF as the

method to calculate such value but does not conduct a calculation.

In the Tribunal’s view, this type of valuation is appropriate in cases of
expropriation in which the claimants have lost the title to their investment or when
interference with property rights has led to a loss equivalent to the total loss of
investment. However, this is not the case. The Tribunal rejected the claim for
indirect expropriation put forward by the Claimants on the basis that Argentina’s

measures:

“[...] did not deprive the investors of the right to enjoy their
investment [...] the true interests at stake here are the
investments’ asset base, the value of which has rebounded
since the economic crisis of December 2001 and 2002 [...] the
effect of the Argentine State’s actions has not been permanent

Article 34 of the DARS also includ
is, however, irrelevant for the purposes of thi
7

atisfaction third form of reparation. Satisfaction
case and will not be considered by the Tribunal.

    

However, Claimants, in their comments to Procedural Order No. 6, include a request that
resembles restitution and that will be analyzed in the context of the method for the quantification
of compensation in section II.B.(2) below.

36.

37.

38.

39.

on the value of the Claimants’ shares, and Claimants’
investment has not ceased to exist.”*

For the Tribunal, compensation in this case cannot be determined by the impact
on the asset value; it does not reflect the actual damage incurred by Claimants.

The measure of compensation has to be different.

It may be added that FMV is referred to in Article IV of the Treaty as the measure
of compensation in cases of expropriation. The Tribunal considers that its
application does not extend similarly to other treaty standards. As noted by the
tribunal in SD Myers when analysing the analogous situation under NAFTA, the
treaty does not state that it applies to all breaches of its provisions but “expressly

attached it to expropriations.”?

Furthermore, there may be a difference between “compensation” as_ the
consequence of a legal act and “damages” as the consequence of the committing
of a wrongful act.'° This distinction has been noticed by various tribunals.'' If
FMV is not the proper measure of compensation for unlawful expropriation, it is a

fortiori not appropriate for breaches of other Treaty standards.

The Tribunal notes, however, that when addressing the question of the absence of

applicable treaty compensation standards for breaches other than expropriation,

® LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1), Decision on Liability of October 3, 2006, 198-200.

2 $.D. Myers, Ine v. Government of Canada (“SD Myers I”), UNCITRAL Rules, First Partial
Award of November 13, 2000, 9307.

10 Marboe, Irmgard, Compensation and Damages in International Law. The Limits of “Fair

Market Value”, The Journal of World Investment and Trade, October 2006, Vol. 7 No. 5, p. 726.
The Tribunal wishes to highlight the general lack of consistency in the use of the terms
“compensation” and “damages” noted by Marboe. In spite of their different connotations, they are
used interchangeably and normally not linked to a specific legal subject matter. The result is that
the different legal concepts behind the terms are mixed, creating confusion. This lack of clarity
seems to have been aggravated by the fact that the ILC in its DARS chose the term
“compensation” for the consequence of an illegal act of the State. See Marboe, pp. 723-726.

" See e.g. AGIP S.p.A. v. People’s Republic of the Congo, (ICSID Case No. ARB/77/1),
Award of November 30. 1979, 1 ICSID Reports 95 (1993); Southern Pacific Properties (Middle
East) Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/3), Award of May 20, 1992, 3
ICSID Reports, 183 (1995) 189; Amoco International Finance Corp. v. Islamic Republic of Iran
(Partial Award), 15 Iran -US CTR 189 (1987-ID), 27 ILM 1314 4265 (1987); ADC Affiliate
Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited v. The Republic of Hungary, (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/16), Award of October 2, 2006, 1481.

  

 

40.

Al.

recent tribunals have opted to apply FMV. Yet, their decisions were grounded on
the correspondence between the situation under analysis and expropriation. In
Azurix v. Argentina the tribunal decided that “compensation based on the fair
market value of the Concession would be appropriate, particularly since the
Province has taken it over.”'? The tribunal in CMS v. Argentina noted that “While
this standard [FMV] figures prominently in respect to expropriation, it is not
excluded that it might also be appropriate for breaches different from
expropriation if their effect results in important long-term losses.” 'S The Tribunal
considers that the situation in Azurix is different from that of LG&E because the
Licenses, the main asset of the Licensees, are still in force. With respect to CMS,
the Tribunal is of the view that “important long-term losses” in the circumstances

of this case are too uncertain and have not been adequately proven.

Apart from Article IV, no other provision of the Treaty deals with issues of
compensation. The silence of a treaty in this respect has been interpreted as an
indication of the intention of the parties “to leave it open to tribunals to determine
a measure of compensation appropriate to the specific circumstances of the case,
taking into account the principles of both international law and the provisions of
the NAFTA.”'* On the basis of this discretion, the Tribunal now turns to the

determination of the applicable measure of compensation in this case.

(ii) The “Actual Loss” Incurred “As a Result” of the Wrongful
Acts as the Appropriate Measure of Compensation

Pursuant to Article 36 of the DARS “[t]he State is under an obligation to
compensate for the damage caused thereby” and compensation “shall cover all
financially assessable damage including loss of profits in so far as it is

established.” The determination of compensation depends on the identification of

 Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (“Azurix”), (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Award of

July 14, 2006, 9424.

8 CMS Gas Transmissions Company v Argentine Republic (“CMS”), (ICSID Case No.

ARB/O1/8), Award of May 12, 2005, 1410.

a See S.D. Myers, Inc v. Government of Canada (“SD Myers II”), UNCITRAL Rules, Second

Partial Award of October 21, 2002, {309 ; Marvin Roy Feldman y. United Mexican States
(“Feldman”), (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1), Award of December 16, 2002, 195.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

the damage caused by Respondent’s wrongful acts and the establishment of lost

profits.

As to the damage caused, it is useful to recall the definition of this concept made

in the Lusitania case:

“The fundamental concept of ‘damage’ is [...] reparation for a
loss suffered; a judicially ascertained compensation for wrong.
The remedy should be commensurate with the loss, so that the
injured party may be made whole.”*

After considering this definition and again the dictum of the Factory at Chorz6w
case,'° the ILC Commentary concludes that the function of compensation is “to

address the actual loss
v7

 

incurred as _a result of the internationally wrongful

act.

Following this approach and to establish compensation for discriminatory

treatment, the tribunal in Feldman v. Mexico noted that

“[...] in case of discrimination [...] what is owed by the
responding Party is the amount of loss or damage that is
adequately connected to the breach [...] if loss or damage is
the requirement for the submission of a claim, it arguably
follows that the Tribunal may direct compensation in the
amount of the loss or damage actually incurred.” '®

Accordingly, the issue that the Tribunal has to address is that of the identification
of the “actual loss” suffered by the investor “as a result” of Argentina’s conduct.
The question is one of “causation”: what did the investor lose by reason of the

unlawful acts?

1s

  

See Opinion in the Lusitania Cases, UNRIAA, vol. VII, p. 39 (emphasis in original). Draft
Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts with Commentaries, United
Nations (2005) (LC Commentary), Article 36(3), p. 245.

6 Factory at Chorz6w, p. 47.

" ILC Commentary Article 36(4) p. 245. (Emphasis added).

S Feldman, 4194. (Emphasis added). See also SD Myers, 1100, 1074; and Petrobart Limited

v. Kyrgyz Republic, Arb. No. 126/2003, Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of
Commerce, (Energy Charter Treaty), pp. 77-78 (29 March 2005).

46.

47.

48.

The starting point of this analysis is to recall what the unlawful acts were. In its
Decision on Liability, the Tribunal identified the abrogation of the specific
guarantees provided by Argentina in the gas regulatory framework as the
fundamental act giving rise to the breach of the Treaty obligations. In particular,
the Tribunal considered that (i) the abolition of the right to calculate tariffs in
dollars before conversion to pesos; (ii) the abandonment of the PPI adjustments;
(iii) the suspension of the tariff reviews; and (iv) the forced renegotiation of the
licenses violated the standard of the fair and equitable treatment and the umbrella
clause and resulted in discriminatory treatment against the gas distribution

companies.

What was the loss suffered by LG&E as a result of these measures? The
Claimants argue that they resulted in the “destruction” of their investment, with a
reduction in value of 93% between August 2000 and October 2002. As noted
above, the Tribunal found that the value of LG&E’s investment has “rebounded”
since the economic crisis and that the effect of the measures has not been
permanent on the value of the Claimants’ shares. In fact, the loss of the capital
value has not crystallized. Had LG&E sold its investment, as did other foreign
investors, for a depressed value resulting from the measures, capital value would
become a practicable basis for determining compensation. The Tribunal believes
that the claim for the loss in capital value is, as noted by Respondent, premature

and therefore rejects it as basis for compensation. 9

In the Tribunal’s view, the measures — in particular, the abolition of calculation of
tariffs in dollars before conversion into pesos, and the abolition of the PPI and
five-year adjustments — have resulted in a significant decrease in the Licensees’
revenues that, in turn, has produced a decrease of dividends distributed to
shareholders. Had the basic guarantees of the gas regulatory framework been
maintained, the level of dividends received by the Claimants would have been

higher. In that manner, the Tribunal determines that the actual damage inflicted by

9 Similarly, in Feldman, the tribunal discards the claim for capital value, stating that

“CEMSA’s ‘going concern value’ is to be dismissed because this item requires a finding of
expropriation, which is not the present case”. See Feldman, 4198.

49.

50.

51.

the measures is the amount of dividends that could have been received but for the

adoption of the measures.

The Tribunal considers damages to begin with the adoption of the first of these
measures, being the injunction to suspend the PPI adjustments on 18 August 2000.
Damages have continued throughout the period in which Argentina’s conduct
remained not in conformity with the Treaty. Whether Argentina has restored the
tariff regime or has provided for an alternative solution that would put an end to
the wrongful act, remains to be established on the basis of the evidence submitted.
As will be explained below, the Tribunal has found that, as of 28 February 2005,

Argentina’s breach had continued.

Argentina argues that the loss in value of Claimants’ investments was due to the
economic collapse that affected all assets in the country and not to the alleged
breaches of the tariff regime. In the Tribunal’s view, it appears evident that the
value of assets such as those owned by LG&E would have been negatively
impacted by the economic situation. However, the Tribunal considers that the loss
incurred by Claimants is the dividends they could have earned had the tariff
regime not been abrogated. Respondent’s conduct is the proximate cause of this

loss.

The Claimants raise the claim for loss of profits, in response to the method
proposed by the Tribunal in Procedural Order No. 6. This claim will be addressed
in the context of the analysis of the Tribunal’s method. However, as a matter of
principle, it is necessary to outline at this point the distinction between accrued
losses and lost future profits. Whereas the former have commonly been awarded
by tribunals, the latter have only been awarded when “an anticipated income
stream has attained sufficient attributes to be considered legally protected

9920

interests of sufficient certainty to be compensable. Or, in the words of the

Draft Articles, “in so far as it is established”. The question is one of “certainty”.

ILC Commentary Article 36(27) pp. 259-260.

52.

53.

54.

55.

“Tribunals have been reluctant to provide compensation for claims with
21

inherently speculative elements.
The Tribunal makes a final remark with respect to the allegations on the impact of
the country risk premium on compensation. Although this premium was included
in the calculation of tariffs, it does not excuse Argentina for the abrogation of the
tariff regime. The tariff regime was an essential feature for enticing foreign
investors to invest in the gas industry and an express commitment of the
Argentine Government. The tariff regime offered additional conditions than those
covered by the country risk premium. In addition, acknowledging Respondent’s
arguments, as noted by the Claimants, would result in the absurd situation that

high-risk borrowers would be excused from their international responsibility.

In view of the foregoing, the Tribunal has decided to adopt a method of
calculation that accounts for the principles stated by the Tribunal and at the same
time assures that the Claimants are “fully” compensated for the damage incurred
as a result of Argentina’s wrongful acts. This method is described and discussed at

Section IIB below.

(c) Interest
Claimants seek compound interest from 18 August 2000 through the date of the
Award at a rate equal to the one-month interest rate earned on U.S. Treasury bills.
Respondent rejects this claim for interest and argues that, were the Tribunal to
award it, simple interest should be applied. Respondent also defends that interest
be calculated from August 2000. In its view, during 2000 and 2001, LG&E

received dividends and awarding interest would result in double recovery.

In the Tribunal’s view, interest is part of the “full” reparation to which the
Claimants are entitled to assure that they are made whole. In fact, interest
recognizes the fact that, between the date of the illegal act and the date of actual

payment, the injured party cannot use or invest the amounts of money due. It is

21 ILC Commentary Article 36(27) pp. 259-260.

56.

57.

58.

therefore decisive to identify the available investment alternatives to the investor

in order to establish “full” reparation.”

It has been acknowledged that in “modern economic conditions”, funds would be
invested to earn compound interest. For instance, the tribunal in Azurix notes that
“[...] compound interest reflects the reality of financial transactions, and best
approximates the value lost by an investor.” Likewise, the tribunal in MTD v.
Chile considers that “compound interest is more in accordance with the reality of
financial transactions and a closer approximation to the actual value lost by an

investor.”**

Based on these considerations, the Tribunal will decide in the section on
quantification and after assessing the parties’ position on the Tribunal’s method,

the type of interest due, the applicable rate and the period covered.

(3) Tribunal’s Conclusions

After careful consideration of the parties’ arguments and their expert reports, the
extensive evidence submitted and the particular circumstances of this case, the
Tribunal concludes that Claimants are entitled to “full” reparation in the form of
compensation that wipes out the consequences of Argentina’s breach of the Treaty
protections. Compensation is to be measured by the actual loss incurred by the
Claimants as a result of Argentina’s wrongful acts. This loss corresponds to the
amount of dividends that Claimants would have received but for Argentina’s
breaches. The method to quantify compensation should account for the principles
stated by the Tribunal and at the same time assures that the Claimants are “fully”
compensated for the damage incurred as a result of Argentina’s breaches. Finally,
interest that best identifies the investment alternatives for the Claimants will be

added until the date of payment in full.

2 See Marboe, op. cit., supra at 10, p. 754.

See Azurix, 1440.

4 See MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (“MTD”), (Caso
CIADI No. ARB/OI/7), Award of May 25, 2004, 251.

2B

59.

60.

61.

B. The Tribunal’s Method for the Quantification of Compensation
(dd) Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 6

In light of the Tribunal’s finding that the loss incurred by Claimants is the amount
of dividends that they would have earned but for the abrogation of the basic
guarantees, the methods for quantifying the loss initially discussed by the parties
in their submissions are inadequate. Neither the stock market price of shares nor
the DCF would properly account for the accrued loss as noted in Procedural Order
No. 6. Consequently, the Tribunal has decided to adopt the method described in

that Procedural Order and summarized as follows:

“A calculation will be made of the dividends that would or
could have been generated without any change in the tariff
system. Dividends received by the Claimants will be
subtracted from this figure, after which the damages suffered
during the State of Necessity will be subtracted from this
amount.”

The method is based on the premise that, had Argentina maintained the tariff
regime, the dividends received by Claimants between 18 August 2000 and 28
February 2005 would have been in effect greater than those actually paid out. As a
result, the “but for” dividend calculation includes the restoration of the basic
guarantees of the tariff regime, i.e. the elimination of the measures that the
Tribunal found to have caused the loss, at [46 above. The purpose is to put the
Claimants into the position they would have been in had the measures not been

adopted.
The calculation takes into account the following assumptions:

e The maintenance of the tariff regime which included the PPI adjustment,
the five-year adjustments and the calculation of the tariff in dollars before

its conversion into pesos (pesification).

e The point of departure for the analysis of each company is the annual

average dividend during the period preceding the State of Necessity.”°

e Payment of annual dividends is made every six months maintaining the

previous company practice.

Effective PPI adjustments in January and July of each year are based on

the U.S. Bureau of Statistics.

e The five-year review that may have been made during the second half of
2002 would have repeated factor “X” of the adjustment made in 1997 for

each company.

e Dividends would have been affected by fluctuations in the peso in relation

to the dollar.

e Dividends actually paid by the companies are considered on the dates and
in the amounts established in the public records and in the financial by-

laws.

e The percentage of LG&E’s shares in gas companies has remained

constant.

35 The pertinence of focussing on past performance was noted by the Governing Council of

the United Nations Compensation Commission when analyzing claims for
producing properties for a given time period (arising from the 1990/91 invasion and occupation of
Kuwait by Iraq). The Governing Council noted:

    

“In principle, the economic value of a business may include loss of future earnings
and profits where they can be ascertained with reasonable certainty. In the case of
the loss of businesses and their earning capacity resulting from the invasion and
occupation of Kuwait, it can be expected that a number of such busine: can be or
could have been rebuilt and resumed. The method of a valuation should therefore be
one that focuses on past performance rather than on forecasts and projections into
the future. Compensation should be provided if the loss can be ascertained with
reasonable certainty based on prior earnings or profits. For example, the loss of any
earnings or profits during the relevant time period could be calculated by a multiple
of past earnings and profits corresponding to that time period.”

 

 

 

 

United Nations Compensation Commission, Governing Council decision 9. Proposition and
Conclusions on Compensation for Business Losses: Types of Damages and Their Valuation.
S/AC/.26/1992/9 (March 1992). The United Nations Compensation Commission is a subsidiary
organ of the United Nations Security Council. It was established by the Security Council in 1991
claims and pay compensation for losses resulting from Iraq’s invasion and occupation

 

 

62.

63.

64.

65.

e Each company continued to apply the same dividend policy as before

August 2000.

e Losses incurred during the State of Necessity (1 December 2001 —

26 April 2003) are to be subtracted.

Procedural Order No. 6 finally noted that interest will be due on the amount of

loss dividends up until the date of payment in full.

(2) Parties’ Position on the Tribunal’s Method

Claimants’ comments on the Tribunal’s method set forth in Procedural Order No.
6 were submitted on 4 December 2006, together with the comments from their
experts and the witness statement of Mr. Enrique Jorge Flaiban, LG&E’s Country

Manager — Argentine Business.

Although Claimants acknowledge that the Tribunal’s method eliminates many
uncertainties, they argue that it is unfair to them since it results in damages that
are far lower than damages calculated according to other techniques used in such
circumstances. However, they consider that a prompt award of damages using an
adjusted version of the Tribunal’s method would be preferable to further delays
that would result from “perpetuated debates over how to calculate damages.”
(q2).° Accordingly, Claimants (i) set out their disagreement with the Tribunal’s
method; (ii) elaborate on its shortcomings; and (iii) propose a revised method and

calculation of damages relying upon it.

The Claimants’ disagreement with the Tribunal’s method lies on their perception
that the “damages-in-arrears” approach is unwarranted and improper. Firstly, the
Claimants believe the approach to be inconsistent with their right to full
compensation under international law (28). In the Claimants’ view, the breach of
Argentina’s obligations has continued well after the Tribunal’s cut-off date for
damages (28 February 2005) and there is no indication that Argentina is willing to
restore the tariff regime (29). The Award should therefore include damages for

26

References to paragraphs or pages in this section correspond to the parties’ respective
comments to the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 6.

66.

67.

68.

the continuing injury expected to occur (i.e. lost future profits), as long as such
damages can be calculated on the basis of reasonable criteria. The Claimants’
propose a revised method that would seek to include a calculation of projected
lost dividends and permits the inclusion of these damages with a “reasonable

degree of certainty” ({]33).

Secondly, the Claimants allege that the approach is unfair and burdensome
because it would force them to seek periodic additional relief at great cost and
expense. This would place on them the whole burden of the risk and uncertainty
resulting from Argentina’s conduct and would reward it for persisting in its illegal
conduct ({]28). Further, it would perpetuate the investment dispute and, therefore,
maintain the adversary relationship between the Claimants and the Licensees, on

the one hand, and the Argentine Government, on the other (38).

The Claimants contend that the chief shortcoming of the Tribunal’s method is its
failure to give fair and consistent consideration to the past and future growth of
the business. In fact, the methodology assumes no inherent business growth in the
dividends that the Claimants would receive in the absence of breach and subtracts
the actual dividends being received by the companies to calculate the lost
dividends. Yet the subtracted actual dividends reflect the growth of the Licensees’
business. This inconsistency depresses the calculation of lost dividends with every

passing year (25).

In addition, the Claimants argue that the damage-in-arrears approach creates a
“time lag” in the recovery of damages resulting from the interaction of the
Tribunal’s cut-off date of 28 February 2005 and the assumption that dividends
would be paid following previous company practice i.e., dividends are paid and
declared after termination of the year in which they were generated. In that
manner, the methodology would prevent the Claimants from receiving, as of 28
February 2005, dividends that should have earned during the course of 2004
because the hypothetical dividends for that calendar year would not have been
formally declared and paid until April 2005. The impact of this methodological

feature could be substantial for the calculation of damages ({I]3, 9).

20

69.

70.

71.

72.

723.

74.

Consequently, the Claimants propose that a fair solution would be to apply the
proposed method including a calculation that takes account of projected lost
dividends. In addition, the Tribunal should invite the Respondent to give formal
assurances that it will fully restore the basic guarantees of the gas regulatory
framework by a date certain. The Claimants would be able to accurately calculate
their loss based upon the Respondent’s reaction. The Claimants’ proposal will be

described in more detail in Section II.B.(3)(a) below.

The values resulting from the calculations performed in accordance with
Claimants’ proposal and accounting for the correction of the “time lag” are as
follows: (i) damages through 28 February 2005: US$40.7 million; (ii) damages
from March 2005 to December 2006: US$29.8 million; (iii) additional damages
from 1 December to 31 December 2007 (should Argentina not restore tariff
regime guarantees): US$20.7 million; and (iv) damages measuring the currently
impaired value of the investment (from | January 2008 until the end of the term of

the Licenses in 2027): US$174 million.

Although Claimants’ calculations incorporate pre-judgement interest at a yield
available on one-month United States treasury bills, the Claimants’ experts
suggest that interest should be calculated at a rate equal to Argentina’s borrowing
rate, that is, substantially higher, to prevent Argentina from benefiting financially

from the difference in rates by delaying payment of damages.

Finally, the Claimants allege that, should the Tribunal decide to defer
consideration of damages to future periods, it should afford the parties notice of

its intention to allow them to comment on the form of the Award ({(54).

The Respondent submitted its comments as to the Tribunal’s method on
1 December 2006. It did not present any expert opinion or witness statement.
These comments refer to (i) the average historical and paid dividends; (ii) the PPI;

and (iii) the interest rate.

Firstly, the Respondent notes that, according to the Licensees’ financial
statements, the average annual dividends for the 1993-2001 period were lower

than those used in Procedural Order No. 6 (page 1). In addition, average annual

21

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

dividends between 18 August 2000 and 28 February 2005 for GasBan and Centro
were underestimated, and those for Cuyana were overestimated (page 2). The

Respondent provides revised calculations for these amounts.

Secondly, the Respondent argues that the Tribunal’s method should consider the
agreements of January and July 2000, signed by the Licensees, to temporarily
suspend the PPI adjustment. To be consistent with regulation, the January and
July adjustments envisaged in Procedural Order No. 6 should be calculated on the

basis of the PPI values of April and October.

Finally, the Respondent proposes the adoption of a pre-judgement interest rate

based on short-term U.S. Treasury bills.

(3) Tribunal’s Analysis

The Claimants raise a number of concerns relating to (a) the principles underlying
the Tribunal’s method, and (b) certain methodological shortcomings. These
concerns will be considered in detail below. The Tribunal will also consider the

parties’ comments on interest (c).

As to the comments made by Argentina, the Tribunal has checked the figures for
average historical and paid dividends; considered the dates for the PPI values;
decided that the contention to the starting date for the calculation of damages was
inadmissible in view of the actual date in which the dismantling of the tariff
regime began; and noted the Respondent’s acceptance of the interest rate initially

proposed by Claimants.

(a) The Principles Underlying the Tribunal’s Method

For the Claimants, the method proposed does not provide “full” compensation
because it disregards the continuous breach of Argentina’s obligations and does
not account for the damages resulting from this continuous breach. It also imposes
upon the Claimants the risk and uncertainty created by Argentina’s conduct and

the burden to seek periodic additional relief at great cost and expense.

22

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

Accordingly, LG&E argues that a fair solution would be to apply the Tribunal’s
method while incorporating a calculation that includes projected lost dividends

and proposes:

Firstly, that the Tribunal “invite” the Respondent to give formal assurances that it
will fully restore the basic guarantees of the gas regulatory framework by a given

date.

Secondly, if Respondent gives such assurances, the Tribunal should enter a final
award comprising (i) historical lost dividends, from 18 August 2000 through 30
November 2006, with the exception of lost dividends attributable to the State of
Necessity period; (ii) projected lost dividends, from 1 December 2006 up until the
date at which the Respondent has committed to restore the basic guarantees in
accordance with per diem calculations; and (iii) an order directing Respondent to

comply with that commitment {[[42-44; 54).

Thirdly, if the Respondent declines to make formal commitments to restore the
basic guarantees, the Tribunal should enter a final award comprising: (i) historical
lost dividends, from 18 August 2000 through 30 November 2006 with the
exception of lost dividends attributable to the State of Necessity period; (ii)
damages from 2006 up until the date of the Award using per diem calculations;
and (iii) the present value of lost dividends up until the final date of the respective
Licenses. Lost dividends would be calculated using the Tribunal’s method

corrected to overcome its shortcomings {{[42-44; 54).

The Tribunal does not agree with the Claimants’ proposition. Firstly, the Tribunal
notes that what Claimants finally label as an “invitation” is in fact a requirement
that the Tribunal “direct” that “by 15 March 2007, the Respondent may formally
commit itself to restoring the full tariff regime on or before 31 December 2007”
(16, 11). Such restoration would actually result in the re-establishment of the

situation that existed prior to the wrongful act.?” This is the effect of restitution.

2 ILC Commentary, Article 35(1), p. 237.

23

85.

86.

87.

Furthermore, the Tribunal notes that it agrees with Claimants that the abrogation
of the basic guarantees of the gas tariff regime constitutes a continuous breach
that extends to the entire period during which such abrogation continues and
remains not in conformity with the Treaty (except during the State of Necessity

period that justifies such breach).”*

During this period and provided that the
obligation is still in force, the State is under a duty to perform the obligation
breached.” It is also obliged to cease the wrongful act.*° Ceasing the wrongful
act would imply restoration of the basic guarantees of the tariff regime. The result

of cessation in this case would be indistinguishable from restitution.*!

If approached as cessation, the Claimants’ request is in no way different from a
demand for the reiteration of Argentina’s obligations under international law. The
Tribunal clearly states in its Decision on Liability that upon termination of the
State of Necessity period, Argentina’s obligations were once again effective; it
should therefore have re-established the tariff scheme offered to LG&E or
compensated the Claimants for the loss incurred.” As Argentina has chosen not
to restore its tariff obligations, the Tribunal sees no point in repeating its order and

would consequently order and quantify the payment of compensation.

Likewise, if approached as restitution, the Tribunal cannot go beyond its fiat in
the Decision on Liability. The judicial restitution required in this case would
imply modification of the current legal situation by annulling or enacting
legislative and administrative measures that make over the effect of the legislation
in breach. The Tribunal cannot compel Argentina to do so without a sentiment of
undue interference with its sovereignty. Consequently, the Tribunal arrives at the

same conclusion: the need to order and quantify compensation.

*8 The ILC Commentary notes that examples of continuing wrongful act include ‘the

maintenance in effect of legislative provisions incompatible with treaty obligations of the enacting
State’. ILC Commentary, Article 14(3), p. 139.

* Article 29 of the DARS.

*© Article 30 of the DARS.

This eventuality was noted by the JLC Commentary at Article 30(7), p. 218.
Decision on Liability, {265.

24

88.

89.

90.

91.

Secondly, the Tribunal has noted that it agrees with the Claimants’ observation as
to the continuing nature of Argentina’s breach. However, it can only award
compensation for loss that is certain. The Tribunal is not convinced of the

certainty of the lost future dividends and therefore rejects this claim.

As noted before, lost future profits have only been awarded when “an anticipated
income stream has attained sufficient attributes to be considered legally protected
interests of sufficient certainty to be compensable.” Prospective gains which are
highly conjectural, “too remote or speculative” are disallowed by arbitral

tribunals.“

In this case, the Tribunal judges that future loss to the Claimants is uncertain and
any attempt to calculate it is speculative. The uncertainty concerning lost future
profits in the form of lost dividends results from the fact, noted above, that
Claimants have retained title to their investments and are therefore entitled to any
profit that the investment generates and could generate in the future. Any attempt
to calculate the amount of the lost dividends in both the actual and “but for”
scenarios is a highly speculative exercise. If the Tribunal were to compensate
LG&E for lost future dividends while it continues to receive dividends distributed
by the Licensees at a hypothetical low amount, a situation of double recovery

would arise, unduly enriching the Claimants.

To support its claim for lost future profits, the Claimants invoke a number of
cases in which such profits have been awarded by tribunals. However, these
cases differ from LG&E’s on one essential point: in each case the investors had
lost title to their property or the relevant contracts or licenses had been put to an
end. In such circumstances, it is certain that the claimants would have lost the

opportunity to earn any future profit.*°

3

ILC Commentary, Article 36(27), pp. 259-260.

“4 ‘Jiménez de Aréchaga, E, International Responsibility, in M. Sorensen (ed.), Manual of

Public International Law p. 570 (1968).

*5 See Claimants’ comments to Procedural Order No. 6, dated 4 December 2006, at (20.

*6 In Amco II, the claimants’ hotel is seized and the investment license cancelled (Amco Asia

Corporation v. The Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Award in Resubmitted
Case (5 June 1990) 89 LL.R 580 (1992); in LETCO the government deprives claimant of its

25

92.

93.

94.

Thirdly, as to the date for calculating accrued losses, Claimants contend that the
cut-off date should be December 2006, the date of submission of their comments
on Procedural Order No. 6. According to Claimants, there is “no justification” for
using 28 February 2005 as the cut-off date once evidence is produced that “the
breach has continued and is continuing”. Claimants claim to have produced this
evidence by submitting the witness statement of Mr. Enrique Flaiban who testified

on the status of the Licensees’ tariff levels.

The Tribunal agrees with Claimants that, if evidence is produced, damages should
be awarded. However, Claimants forget that, for evidence to be considered by this
Tribunal, Argentina must be given the opportunity to react to such evidence. The
Respondent did not have this opportunity with regard to Mr. Flaiban’s witness

statement.

The Tribunal decided during the Hearing that no further submissions or evidence
would be presented after 28 February 2005,°7 the date of the PHB in which
conclusive remarks concerning each parties’ case were to be exposed. The
Claimants themselves opposed the introduction of new evidence by Argentina

after this date.**

 

concession (Liberian Eastern Timber Corporation (LETCO) v. Republic of Liberia, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/83/2, Award (31 March 1986); in Sapphire the allegation is for termination of a contract
as a result of breaches by the defendant (Sapphire International v. NIOC, Award (15 March 1963),
35 International Law Reports p. 136) (1967); in Lena Goldfields, the Soviet government puts the
claimant's concession to an end and takes over the plants and secret technical processes (Lena
Goldfields Company Ltd. v. Soviet Union, 36 Cornell L.Q. 42 (1951-1952); in Shufeldt the
i for chicl ion is i d by the G le (United
States of America (on behalf of P.W. Shufeldt) v. Republic of Guatemala, 24 Am. J. Int’| L. 799
(24 July 1930). With respect to Robert May, although it referred to the termination of a contract to
manage an operate a railroad, the JLC Commentary notes that in that case lost profits were not
awarded beyond the date of adjudication. See, ILC Commentary, Article 36(31) footnote 608.
Finally, the tribunal in SD Myers does not award lost future profits, but rather, the net income
streams lost, the abridgment of the time available to the claimant and the value of income delayed
as a result of the Canadian closure. “[Canada] is not responsible for more.” SD Myers, at {228.
37

 

 

See Hearing in the merits, January 29, 2005, Hearing Transcripts, vol. 7, at 1616-24.

8 Argentina attempted on three occasions to introduce evidence regarding the alleged

progress in the renegotiation process (Letters of 2 September 2005, 12 January 2006 and 11 April
2006). The Claimants opposed to the Tribunal’s acceptance of such evidence (Letters of 14
September 2005, 24 January 2006 and 27 April 2006). The Tribunal, based in its previous decision
that no further submissions be filed, rejected the introduction of the evidence (Letters of 5 October
2005, 30 January 2006 and 9 May 2007).

26

95.

96.

97.

98.

Respect for due process obliges this Tribunal to only consider evidence that the
other side has been able to test. On the basis of this evidence, the Tribunal
assesses Argentina’s continuous breach of its obligations between 18 August 2000
and 28 February 2005. Any event occurring after 28 February 2005 that could be
seen to remedy the Respondent’s breaches and affect the calculation of damages
(like the progress on the renegotiation process) is not considered in the present

procedure, as indicated in Procedural Order No. 6.

Fourthly, Claimants’ arguments that they would have to bear the risk and
uncertainty resulting from Argentina’s conduct and the burden to seek periodic
additional relief at great cost and expense are not entirely without merit.
However, the Claimants have chosen to maintain their investments in Argentina
regardless of its reluctance to re-establish the gas regulatory framework following
the end of the State of Necessity period. The decision to maintain their
investments in Argentina has its consequences: (i) the impact of Argentina’s
conduct on the value of investments has not crystallized and is subject to the
changing regulatory environment and fluctuations of the stock market; (ii) lost
future profits are uncertain and their calculation is speculative; and (iii)
compensation could only be awarded for damages actually suffered and

sufficiently proven.

This is in no way a reward to Argentina for its continued wrongdoing. This
Tribunal has established that the abrogation of the basic guarantees of the gas
tariff regime has breached Argentina’s obligations under the Treaty. This breach
makes Argentina liable for the payment of compensation as long as Argentina
fails to restore such regime after 28 February 2005. The recognition of this
responsibility is, on the contrary, an incentive to Argentina to restore the tariff
regime or a least to engage in genuine arms-length negotiations to avoid future

condemnatory decisions.

Finally, the Tribunal does not agree with Claimants that it has to request the
parties’ views as to the form of this Award. The parties have had the opportunity
to comment on the Tribunal’s method, including the eventuality of future

proceedings.

27

99.

100.

101.

102.

(b) The Alleged Methodological Shortcomings

Claimants make two contentions in this respect: (i) that the Tribunal’s method
does not allow consistent consideration of the business growth; and (ii) the
existence of a rolling “time lag” in the recovery of damages resulting from the

difference in time between declaration and payment of dividends.

The Tribunal considers that Claimants’ arguments as to the impact of business
growth on the dividends that would have been generated by the distribution
companies between 2000 and 2005 but for abrogation of the basic guarantees of
the gas tariff regime, are reasonable. In fact, the underlying growth (other than
PPI and X-factor adjustments) would lead to increased dividend payouts.
Consequently, damages have been calculated to account for this fact. The
calculation considers available information as to the levels of business activity of
the distribution companies during the relevant period. It takes the appropriate

measure of actual growth to be the average annual growth rate of gas volumes.

The contention as to the “time lag” is similar to the choice of accounting
frameworks, between cash accounting or accruals accounting. Cash accounting
recognizes revenue and expenditure transactions only on the date that cash or
bank movements take place whereas, by contrast, accruals accounting recognizes
the benefit or liability incurred based on the timing of the underlying event.
Accruals accounting is more widely used than cash accounting since it reflects
more fully and accurately the financial position of an entity. Accordingly, the
Tribunal has included in its calculations those dividends paid and payable in April
2005 but, on the same basis, has excluded any dividends found to have been paid

to shareholders during the early months of the loss period.

(c) Interest
The Tribunal disallows the Claimants’ expert proposal to use Argentina’s
borrowing rate as speculative and extemporaneous. The Tribunal notes further

that Argentina has supported the use of a pre-judgement interest rate based on

short-term U.S. Treasury bills. This is therefore the rate of interest to be applied.

28

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

In addition, the Tribunal is of the opinion that compound interest would better
compensate the Claimants for the actual damages suffered since it better reflects

contemporary financial practice.

As far as the period is concerned, interest should be paid from the period 18
August 2000 until the date of this Award. The Tribunal disagrees with Argentina
that payment of interest from 2000 would result in double recovery. Interest is due
on the amount of dividends that Claimants would have received but for abrogation
of the tariff regime minus the dividends actually received and is distinct from the
dividends actually received. Lost dividends compensate Claimants for Argentina’s
breach and interest compensates Claimants for the impossibility to invest the

amounts due.

Finally, in case the amount awarded is not paid in full by 30 days after the
dispatch of this Award, the Respondent shall pay compound interest at a rate of

six-month U.S. Treasury bills until the date of payment in full of this Award.

(4) Tribunal’s Conclusions

The Tribunal’s method to quantify compensation calculates the dividends that
Claimants would have received but for Argentina’s breaches and subtracts from
such dividends those that were actually received by Claimants. Losses during the
State of Necessity period are subsequently subtracted. The method was adjusted to
account for the Claimants’ comments on the methodological shortcomings and the
verification of the dividend figures and the PPI data. Compound interest at the

rate of six-month U.S. Treasury bills will be added.

C. Quantification of Compensation

Based on the foregoing considerations, the Tribunal has used the following figures

for the quantification of compensation:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CUYANA (CENTRO GASBAN
Total PPI @ $1.5m $ 14m $3.2m
Total oe) $ -0.6m $ -0.6m $-1.2m
“But for’ dividends
Aug. 2000- Feb. 2005 $117.6m $112.3m. $ 247.0m

 

29

108.

109.

Ill.

110.

 

CUYANA (CENTRO GaASBAN

 

[including a and b
above]
‘Actual dividends paid
‘Aug. 2000-Feb 2005 $41.9m $38.1 m $ 69.6 m
‘Average annual

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

growth rate of gas 421% 3.32% 4.22%
volumes [2000-2005]
LG&E st Idi 14.4% 45.9% 19.6%

 

 

 

Consequently, the Tribunal establishes that the actual loss incurred by Claimants

is quantified as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cuyana Centro GasBan Total
(million US$) (million US$) (million US$) (million US$)
| LG&E 109 34.0 34.8 79.7
loss
Minus; Loss
suffered during the 43 -12.6 -11.9 -28.8
period of emergency
Subtotal 6.6 21.4 22.9 50.9
Interest” +0.9 42.7 42.9 +6.5
Total 75 24.1 25.8 57.4

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In the light of all of the above, the Tribunal awards Claimants US$57.4 million as
compensation for the damages suffered as a result of Respondent’s continuing
breach of its Treaty obligations between 18 August 2000 and 28 February 2005,

including interest up until the date of the Award.
COSTS

A. The Principles Concerning the Allocation of Costs

(dd) Parties’ Positions
LG&E requests that the Tribunal award it all costs and expenses for the
arbitration, including reasonable attorneys’ fees in consideration of Respondent’s
breaches of its obligations under the Treaty and its denial to accept responsibility

(Claimants’ Memorial, 207).

* Calculated up to 11 July 2007.

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

The sole reference to costs made by the Respondent is found in the Rejoinder of
its Request for Relief, in which it asks the Tribunal for the “costas” meaning the

costs of the proceedings.”

(2) Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal notes that Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 28 of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules grant discretion to ICSID tribunals with regard to the
award of costs. The Tribunal further notes that there is no uniform practice in
treaty arbitration with regard to this matter. However, recently, tribunals have
made recourse to the basic principle “costs follow the event” or “loser-pays-rule”
according to which the cost of the arbitration should be borne by the unsuccessful
party.*! The outcome of the case becomes the most significant factor in

determining the allocation of costs.

In the present case, not all Claimants’ claims are successful; likewise, some of the
Respondent’s defences prevail. This result would call for an equitable allocation
of costs. The Tribunal decides therefore that each party should bear its own costs,

expenses and attorney’s fees.

(3) Tribunal’s Conclusion

The Tribunal decides that each party should bear its own costs, expenses and

attorney’s fees.
DECISION
For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal renders its decision as follows:

a. Within 30 days of the date of dispatch of this Award, Argentina shall
pay to LG&E, the sum of US$57,400,000.00, as well as compound

40 In fact, Article 77 of the Argentine Procedural Code provides that “La condena en costas

comprenderé todos los gastos causados u ocasionados por la sustanciacién del proceso {...].”
41 International Thunderbird Gaming v. United Mexican States, UNCITRAL (NAFTA)
Award of January 23, 2006; Methanex v. United States of America, UNCITRAL (NAFTA) Award
of August 3, 2005; Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka v. Slovakia, (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4),
Award of December 14, 2004.

interest on that amount at a rate of six-month U.S. Treasury bills until

the date of payment in full of this Award.

Made in Washington, D.C., in English and Spanish,

[Signed]

Professor Albert Jan van den Berg
Arbitrator

Date: June 27, 2007

both versions equally authentic.

[Signed]

Judge Francisco Rezek
Arbitrator

Date: June 29, 2007

[Signed]
Dr. Tatiana B. de Maekelt

President

Date: July 9, 2007

