INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN

LG&E ENERGY CORP.
LG&E CAPITAL CORP.
LG&E INTERNATIONAL INC.

(CLAIMANTS)

AND

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

(RESPONDENT)

ICSID Case N° ARB/02/1

DECISION ON LIABILITY

Members of the Tribunal:
Dr. Tatiana B. de Maekelt, President
Judge Francisco Rezek, Arbitrator

Professor Albert Jan van den Berg, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:

Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Date: 3 October 2006

Representing the Claimants
Mr. Eugene D. Gulland
Mr. Oscar M. Garibaldi
Mr. Eric D. Brown

Ms. Karin L. Kizer

Mr. Miguel Lopez Forastier
Covington & Burling
Washington, D.C.

United States of America

Ms. Dorothy O’Brien
LG&E Energy LLC.

and

Dr. Horacio J. Ruiz Moreno
Dr. Gustavo Cedrone

Dr. Leonardo Orlanski
Hope, Duggan & Silva
Buenos Aires

Argentina

Representing the Respondent

HE. Osvaldo César Guglielmino
Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Buenos Aires

Argentina

L THE PARTIES

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I. THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL 2
Ill. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND 3
IV. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 10
A. LATE 1980s AND 1990s.
B. ECONOMIC CRISIS AND THE EMERGENCE OF THE DISPUTE — 1999-2001
C. THE EMERGENCY LAW — 6 JANUARY 2002...
D. RENEGOTIATION OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE CONTRACTS
E. REQUEST FOR RELIEF.
V. PRELIMINARY MATTERS 22
A. JUS STANDI 22
B. LAW APPLICABLE 23
1. Parties’ Positions 23
2. Tribunal’s Analysis. 24
3. Tribunal’s Conclusi 29
VI. LIABILITY 29

 

A. ARTICLE II(2)(A): FAIR AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT..
1 's’ Pos

   

 

 

 

 

 

. Part sitions

2. Tribunal’s Conclusion C ing Argentina’s G to Investors 35
3. Tribunal’s Analysis 5
4. Tribunal’s Conclusi 40

 

B. ARTICLE II(2)(B): DISCRIMINATORY AND ARBITRARY TREATMENT
1. Discriminatory Treatment

(i) Parties’ Positions

(ii) Tribunal’s Analysis

(iii) Tribunal’s Ce

2. Arbitrary Treatment
(i) Parties’ Positions
(i) Tribunal’s Analy:

(iii) Tribunal’s Ce

C. ARTICLE II(2)(C): THE UMBRELLA CLAUS!
1. Parties’ Positions
2. Tribunal’s Analysis

3. Tribunal’s Ce

D. CONSIDERATIONS ON INDIRECT EXPROPRIATION....
1. Parties’ Positions
2. Tribunal’s Analysis

3. Tribunal’s Ce

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

E. STATE OF NECESSITY

Vil.

 

1. Parties’ Positions
2. General Comments on Article XI..
(i) Preliminary C ra
(ii) The Question of Whether Article XI is Self-Judging....
(iii) Necessary Nature of the Measures Adopted.

a. Parties’ Positions

b. Tribunal’s Analy:

(iv) Consequences of the State of Necessi
(v) Conclusions of the Tribunal

 

 

 
 
 
  

 

 

 

 

 

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON LIABILITY ..

 

L

THE PARTIES

Claimants, LG&E Energy Corp. and LG&E Capital Corp. are corporations
created and existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, in
the United States of America, with domestic and foreign operations.' LG&E
International Inc. is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of
the State of Delaware, United States of America. Claimants hereinafter will

be referred to collectively as “LG&E” or “Claimants.”

LG&E has a shareholding interest in three local, gas distributing companies
in Argentina created and existing under the laws of Argentina by
commandment of the Argentine Government: Distribuidora de Gas del
Centro (“Centro”), Distribuidora de Gas Cuyana S.A. (“Cuyana”) and Gas
Natural BAN S.A. (“GasBan’), hereinafter collectively referred to as “the
licensees”. LG&E owns a controlling equity interest in Centro and minority

equity interests in GasBan and Cuyana.

Respondent is the Argentine Republic, which along with the United States of
America, is a party to the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (“ICSID Convention”
or “Convention”), ratified by the Argentine Republic in 1994 and by the
United States of America in 1966. The Bilateral Investment Treaty between
the United States of America and the Argentine Republic Concerning the
Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investments was signed on 14
November 1991 (“BIT”, “the Bilateral Treaty” or the “Treaty”) (and entered
into force on 20 October 1994).

' Until 1 December 2005, Claimants were LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E
International Inc. However, on 26 January 2006, Claimants informed the Tribunal that the name of two
of the companies had been modified: LG&E Energy Corp.
Corp. is now E.ON.US. Capital Corp. LG&E International Inc. kept its name. Upon request by the
Tribunal, LG&E submitted documents that, in the T1
but not its effects. Respondent remained silent on this

 

s now E.ON.US LLC and LG&E Capital

   

unal’s opinion, only prove the change of name

IL.

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

4.

On 31 January 2002 the Centre’s Secretary-General registered Claimants’
Request for Arbitration in accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID
Convention. In accordance with Rule 7 of the Rules of Procedure for the
Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (“the Institution
Rules”), the Secretary-General gave notice to the parties of the registration
of Claimants’ Request and invited them to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as

soon as possible.

Forthwith, the parties agreed that the Arbitral Tribunal should be formed by
three arbitrators, one appointed by the Claimants, another by the Argentine
Republic and the third one, called to preside over the Tribunal, would be
appointed by the Centre’s Secretary-General in accordance with the method

agreed upon by the parties.

On 20 June 2002, the Claimants appointed Professor Albert Jan van den
Berg, a national of the Netherlands, as an arbitrator for this case. Said
appointment was ratified by the Claimants by letters to the Centre dated 15
and 28 August 2002. The Argentine Republic, by letter dated 26 August
2002, appointed Judge Francisco Rezek, a Brazilian citizen, as an arbitrator.
On 7 November 2002, the Centre’s Secretary-General, with the parties’
agreement, appointed Dr. Tatiana B. de Maekelt, a citizen of Venezuela, as

the Arbitral Tribunal’s President.

On 13 November 2002, the ICSID’s Secretariat, in accordance with Rule
6(1) of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration
Rules”), notified the parties that all the arbitrators had accepted their
appointments and that the Tribunal was deemed to be constituted and the
proceeding deemed to begun as from that date. On this same day, in
accordance with Rule 25 of the ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulations, the parties were informed that Dr. Claudia Frutos-Peterson

would act as the Tribunal’s Secretary.

Il.

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

8.

On 28 December 2001, ICSID received from LG&E a request for arbitration
dated 21 December 2001 against the Argentine Republic.

By letter dated 24 January 2002 the Claimants filed with ICSID a
supplement to their request for arbitration. Claimants asserted that
Respondent had committed further violations of the BIT as a result of the
enactment by the Government of the Public Emergency and Currency
Exchange Law (“Emergency Law”), which allegedly adversely affected

Claimants’ investment in Argentina.

In accordance with Arbitration Rule 13, the Tribunal held its first session
with the parties at the seat of the Centre in Washington D.C. on 19
December 2002. The parties agreed to set the following schedule for the
written proceedure: Claimants were to file a Memorial on 31 March 2003.
Upon receipt of Claimants’ Memorial, Respondent could choose to file an
answer within either 60 or 90 days. In its answer, Respondent was entitled to
file exceptions on jurisdiction, and to the extent it deemed necessary, could
respond to Claimants’ arguments on the merits. In the event that the
Respondent filed a Memorial on Jurisdiction, the Claimants were to file their
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction within 30 days from their receipt of the
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, followed by Respondent’s Reply on
Jurisdiction within 20 days following receipt of Claimants’ Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction, and Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction to be

filed 20 days from receipt of the Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction.

With respect to oral proceedure, it was also agreed during the first session to
set the following schedule based on the written submissions. In the event that
Respondent filed its answer within 60 days and if the Tribunal decided so,
there was to be a hearing on jurisdiction between 22 and 23 September 2003.
In the event that Respondent filed its answer within 90 days, the hearing on

jurisdiction, if the Tribunal were in agreement, was to be held on 20 and 21

October 2003. The hearing on the merits was scheduled for 8 through 12
March 2004.

The Claimants filed their Memorial on 31 March 2003.

Subsequently, under covenant, the parties decided to amend the schedule of
proceedings concerning the objections to jurisdiction. Respondent and
Claimants informed the ICSID Secretariat of this amendment on | and 2 July
2003, respectively. Under the new schedule, Respondent’s Memorial on
Jurisdiction was to be filed on 21 July 2003; Claimants’ Counter-Memorial
on Jurisdiction, on 29 August 2003; Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, on
22 September 2003, and Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, on 13
October 2003. It was also agreed that the hearing on jurisdiction was to be
held on 20 and 21 October 2003, but subsequently, the Tribunal, in joint
agreement with the parties, decided that the hearing on jurisdiction should be

held between 20 and 21 November 2003, at The Hague, Netherlands.

In accordance with the terms set, on 21 July 2003, Respondent formally filed
objections to ICSID’s jurisdiction. In its Memorial on Jurisdiction,
Respondent presented the grounds upon which it based said objections and
attached documents in support of its arguments. On 29 August 2003,
Claimants filed their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction. On 22 September
2003, the Argentine Republic filed its Reply on Jurisdiction, and on 14

October 2003, Claimants filed their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction.

On 30 October 2003, Respondent filed a motion to suspend the proceedings
and requested, as an alternative measure, a stay of the hearing on
jurisdiction. On 31 October 2003, the President of the Tribunal asked
Claimants to submit their comments on said motion by 3 November 2003.
On 3 November 2003, the Claimants filed an objection to the stay motion.
On 5 November 2003, the members of the Arbitral Tribunal deliberated on
the Argentine Republic’s motion and denied Respondent’s motions to

suspend these proceedings and stay the hearing on jurisdiction scheduled for

4

20 and 21 November 2003.

The hearing on jurisdiction was held on the date set, at the seat of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague, the Netherlands. Messrs.
Eugene D. Gulland and Oscar M. Garibaldi of the law firm of Covington &
Burling from Washington, D.C. acted as counsel for the Claimants. Also
present at the hearing were Ms. Dorothy O’Brien, Deputy General Counsel
for LG&E Energy Corp. and Mr. S. Bradford Rives, Chief Financial Officer
of LG&E Energy Corp.

Messrs. Carlos Ignacio Sudrez Anzorena and Ignacio Pérez Cortés, on behalf
of Dr. Horacio Daniel Rosatti, the then-Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién

Argentina, atended the hearing on behalf of the Respondent.

During the hearing, the parties presented their arguments on the
jurisdictional issues. The Tribunal posed questions to the parties in

accordance with Rule 32(3) of the Arbitration Rules.

On 30 April 2004, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Objections to
Jurisdiction, holding that the present dispute is within the jurisdiction of the
Centre and the competence of the Tribunal. In so holding, the Tribunal

considered the following criteria:

a. That the dispute should be between a Contracting State and a national of
another Contracting State and that Claimants should have jus standi to

act in these proceedings;

b. That the issue should be a dispute of a legal nature arising directly from

an investment;

c. That the parties should have given their consent, in writing, to submit to

arbitration and, specifically to the ICSID arbitration; and

d. That all the other requirements of both the ICSID Convention and the

Bilateral Treaty should be met in order to submit a dispute to arbitration.

20.

21.

22.

23.

With respect to criteria (a), regarding jus standi, the Tribunal was of the
opinion that, for purposes of the ICSID Convention and the Bilateral Treaty,
Claimants should be considered foreign investors, even though they did not
directly operate the investment in the Argentine Republic, but acted through
companies constituted for that purpose in its territory (Decision on

Jurisdiction, {| 63).

With respect to criteria (b), which requires that the issues before the Tribunal
be a dispute of a legal nature arising directly from an investment, the
Tribunal concluded that, at the jurisdictional phase, it was to be presumed
that Claimants’ claims were based on alleged breaches of the Bilateral
Treaty affecting Claimants’ investments within the meaning of the ICSID

Convention and the Bilateral Treaty (Decision on Jurisdiction, { 66).

With respect to criteria (c), requiring the consent of the parties to submit the
dispute to ICSID arbitration, the Tribunal was of the opinion that the
Argentine Republic’s consent was given through Article VII(4) of the
Bilateral Treaty. In turn, when Claimants resorted to ICSID, they decided to
submit their investment disputes to the Centre’s jurisdiction. It is
noteworthy, in this case, that Claimants did not submit the dispute to the
Argentine courts or to any other dispute settlement mechanism mentioned in
Article VII of the Bilateral Treaty. For this reason, no question regarding the
“fork in the road” provision arises in the present case (Decision on

Jurisdiction, {| 69 et. seq.).

Finally, with respect to criteria (d), concerning verification of the other
requirements of the ICSID Convention and the Bilateral Treaty, the Tribunal
concluded that the claims are not time barred, and that the claims asserted in
the additional request filed by Claimants are sufficiently sequential to the
originally stated claims as to permit their review by this Tribunal for the sake
of efficiency. The fact that the license holders may have begun negotiations
with Respondent is outside this arbitral proceeding, inasmuch as the license
holders, which are different legal entities, are pursuing that process from

6

24.

25.

26.

27.

b. Dismissed all of the Respondent’s objections as to the admissi

their own (corporate) perspective. Thus, in view of the fact that more than
six months elapsed from the date on which the dispute arose, i.e. 24 January
2002, there is no bar in initiating the arbitral proceedings (Decision on

Jurisdiction, {[ 80 et. seq.).

Based on these considerations, the Tribunal:

a. Held that the present dispute is within the jurisdiction of the Centre and

the competence of the Tribunal;

 

ility of
the dispute and all of the Respondent’s objections to the jurisdiction of

ICSID and the competence of this Tribunal;

c. Ordered, pursuant to Rule 41(4) of the Arbitration Rules, the

continuation of the proceeding;

d. Reserved all questions concerning the costs and expenses of the

Tribunal and the parties for future determination.

In accordance with Procedural Order No. 1 dated 4 May 2004, Respondent
filed its Counter-Memorial on the merits on 18 June 2004, seeking dismissal

of LG&E’s claims. On 6 August 2004, Claimants filed their Reply.

Respondent filed its Rejoinder on the merits on 27 September 2004, in which
it asked the Tribunal, among other legal and factual arguments, to exclude
Claimants’ witness, Mr. Patricio Perkins, from the hearing on the merits on
grounds of an alleged conflict of interest. Claimants objected to

Respondent’s motion to exclude the witness on 1 November 2004.

By means of Procedural Order No. 3, dated 23 November 2004, the Arbitral
Tribunal decided (i) to admit the witness depositions offered by Respondent;
(ii) to grant Claimants the opportunity to offer additional evidence regarding
the witness depositions produced by Respondent in its Rejoinder, at the
latest on 20 December 2004 and to cross-examine said witnesses during the

hearing on the merits; (iii) to admit the testimony of Mr. Patricio Perkins,

7

28.

subject to cross-examination by Respondent.

In accordance with Procedural Orders Nos. 4 and 5, dated 13 and 18 January
2005, respectively, the hearing on the merits was held between 23 and 29
January 2005, at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. The following

persons were present at that hearing:

Arbitral Tribunal:
Tatiana B. de Maekelt, President
Francisco Rezek, Arbitrator

Albert Jan van den Berg, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:

Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Counsel for Claimants:

Oscar M. Garibaldi (Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C.)

Eugene D. Gulland (Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C.)

Eric D. Brown (Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C.)

Miguel Lépez Forastier (Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C)

Karin Kizer (Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C.)

Warda Henning (Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C.)

Harris Bor (Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C.)

Matthew Chester (Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C.)

Jadranka Poljak (Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C.)

Alma Ramirez (Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C.)

Karin Lui (Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C.)

Horacio Ruiz Moreno (Rosso Alba, Francia & Ruiz Moreno Abogados,
Buenos Aires, Argentina)

Leonardo Orlanski (Rosso Alba, Francia & Ruiz Moreno Abogados, Buenos
Aires, Argentina)

Also present on behalf of Claimants:
Dorothy O’Brien (LG&E Energy LLC)
Chris Hermann

Leonardo Massimino

Donaldo Sloog

Gabriel Wilkinson

Counsel for Respondent:

Osvaldo Guglielmino (Procurador del Tesoro de la Naci6n Argentina, Buenos
Aires, Argentina)

Gustavo Adolfo Scrinzi (Subprocurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina,

Buenos
Aires, Argentina)

Ana Badillos (Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, Buenos Aires,
Argentina)

Luz Moglia (Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, Buenos Aires,
Argentina)

Gabriel Bottini (Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, Buenos
Aires, Argentina)

Ignacio Pérez Cortés (Procuracion del Tesoro de la Naci6n Argentina,
Buenos Aires, Argentina)

Gastén Rosenberg (Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, Buenos

Aires, Argentina)

Also present on behalf of Respondent:

Carlos Garber (Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, Comercio Internacional
y Culto, Buenos Aires, Argentina)

Alicia Federico (Ente Nacional Regulador del Gas (ENARGAS), Buenos

Aires, Argentina)

Charles Joseph Masano (Secretaria de Energia, Buenos Aires, Argentina)

Marcelo Masonni: (Embassy of the Argentine Republic, Washington, D.C.)

Court Reporters:

David A. Kasdan
Dante Rinaldi

29. The hearing commenced, as scheduled on Sunday, 23 January 2005 at 8:45
a.m. After a brief introduction by the Tribunal’s President, Claimants’
counsel, Messrs. Eugene Gulland and Oscar Garibaldi, made their oral
presentation to the Tribunal, referring to the arguments indicated in their
briefs. They also presented their witnesses for oral examination: Messrs. S.
Bradford Rives, Eduardo A. Hurtado, Patricio Carlos Perkins, Rudolf
Dolzer, Eduardo Schwartz, Carlos Lapuerta, Antoni Peris Mingot, and Jose

E. Alvarez.

30. Thereafter, Messrs. Osvaldo César Guglielmino, Ignacio Pérez Cortés and
Gabriel Bottini made their submissions on behalf of the Argentine Republic.
The following witnesses testified on behalf of Respondent: Ms. Anne-Marie
Slaughter and Messrs. Eduardo A. Ratti, Jorge G. Simeonoff, Cristian
Folgar, Nouriel Roubini and Fabian Bello.

31. On 28 February 2005, the parties submitted Post-Hearing Briefs.

32. By letter dated 18 May 2005, the Tribunal informed the parties of its
decision to appoint an independent expert to assist the Tribunal in evaluating
the expert financial evidence. By letter of 14 September 2005, the ICSID
Secretariat transmitted the report on the findings of the independent expert to
the parties and invited them to comment on the report by 5 October 2005.

The parties filed their observations with the Tribunal on that date.

Iv. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
33. Before considering the merits of the dispute, the Tribunal deems it necessary

to set forth the facts that it considered relevant for its decision.
A. LATE 1980s AND 1990s
34. The present claims are to be viewed against the historic background and

10

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

especially the economic upheaval in Argentina and the Government’s
reaction to the several economic crises suffered by the country in the late

1980s and 1990s.

In the late 1980s, Argentina underwent an economic crisis characterized by
deep recession and hyperinflation. As part of its economic recovery plan, the
Government began an ambitious privatization program with the enactment of
the State Reform Law in August 1989. Within this framework, large
Government-owned businesses and entities were privatized or granted on

concession (Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, (121).

One March 27, 1991, Argentina enacted Law No. 23,928, referred to as the
Convertibility Law, which ordered the implementation of a fixed exchange
rate, pegging the austral (the then-Argentine currency) to the United States

dollar.” The Convertibility Law also banned price or value indexation.

One of the primary goals of the Government’s plan was the privatization of
Gas del Estado S.E., the national natural-gas transport and distribution
monopoly. Pursuant to the Government’s privatization plan, investors could
purchase shares in newly-formed, licensed private corporations that would
offer gas transport and distribution services. Such shares were available to

domestic and foreign investors.

To implement its plan, the Government enacted in June 1992, the Ley del
Gas (“Gas Law’’), which established a comprehensive regulatory structure
for the provision of natural-gas transport and distribution services, and
created a public agency, called Ente Nacional Regulador del Gas
(ENARGAS) to oversee the industry.

The Gas Law adopted a tariff structure under which ENARGAS would

collect tariffs on the price of gas paid by consumers. Under the provisions of

the Gas Law, ENARGAS was required to set the transport and distribution
tariffs at fair and reasonable levels that would allow licensed utility
providers to recoup a “reasonable rate of return,” after accounting for costs,
defined as a rate similar to that applied to activities of similar risk and
adequately related to the level of efficiency and satisfactory performance of
the transport or distribution service. Profitability was to be measured against

other activities of comparable risk.

40. ENARGAS was to set maximum tariffs for a period of five years. At the end
of the five-year period, the tariffs were to be reviewed and adjusted based on
international market indicators that reflected changes in the value of the

goods and services representative of the activities of service providers.

Al. The Gas Law was implemented by regulations adopted on 28 September
1992 by Decree No. 1738/92. Pursuant to these regulations, transport and
distribution tariffs were to be calculated in U.S. dollars and then expressed in
Argentine pesos, and the Government could not rescind or modify the

licenses without the consent of the licensees.

42. On 7 December 1992, the Government adopted Decree No. 2255/92, called
Reglas Bdsicas de la Licencia (Basic Rules of the License), which
supplemented the Gas Law and the above-mentioned regulation and
approved prototype licenses for natural-gas transport and distribution. The
prototype licenses included a schedule of the maximum tariffs for the first
five-year period (1993-1997) of service. The Basic Rules of the License
obligated the Government to compensate the licensees fully for any losses
resulting from changes to the guaranteed tariff system. The Basic Rules of
the License also implemented the semi-annual tariff review based on the
U.S. Producer Price Index (“PPI”), to be conducted in January and June of

each year (“PPI adjustment”).

 

? The austral later was replaced by the peso at the rate of 1,000 australs to 1 peso.

12

43.

44.

4S.

46.

47.

Under this framework comprised of the Gas Law, its regulations and Basic
Rules of the License, the five-year review was to be a comprehensive review

of the method used to calculate tariffs.

By Decree No. 1189/92, published on 17 July 1992, Argentina approved the
procedure for the privatization of Gas del Estado S.E. It was restructured
into two distinct transport business units and eight separate distribution
business units, each responsible for a geographic region of the country. Each
of the ten business units were transferred to the newly-created companies,

which were to operate with a license under the legal framework in force.

An international bidding process was set in place by Resolution No. 874/92
issued by the Ministry of Public Works and Services and conducted pursuant
to the Pliego de Bases y Condiciones para la Licitacién (“Bidding Rules”).
Under these Bidding Rules, both foreign and domestic investors were free to
bid on the shares. The purpose of the Bidding Process was the purchase and
sale of the majority interest in each of the licensed companies created by
Decree No. 1189/92. Three of those majority interests were sold during that
bidding process: 60% of Cuyana’s shares, 70% of GasBan’s shares, and 90%

of Centro’s shares.

In December 1992, the Argentine Government awarded the contracts for the
purchase of the majority of shares in the ten newly-formed licensees into
which Gas del Estado S.E. had been restructured. The licenses relevant to
this dispute were approved by Decrees Nos. 2454/92 for Centro, 2460/92 for
GasBan and 2453/92 for Cuyana, and became effective on 22 December
1992.

The blocks of shares of Centro, GasBan and Cuyana that were subject to
privatization were awarded to private investors: 90% of the shares of Centro
were awarded to a consortium formed by Societa Italiana Per Il Gas S.p.A.
(“Italgas”), an Italian company, and Sideco Americana S.A., an Argentine

company (“Sideco”); 70% of the shares of GasBan were awarded to a

13

48.

49.

50.

consortium formed by Gas Natural SdG S.A., a Spanish company, Compaiiia
General de Combustibles S.A. and Manra S.A., both Argentine companies;
and 60% of the shares of Cuyana were awarded to a consortium formed by

Italgas and Sideco.

Three Argentine investment companies were created as vehicles for the
acquisitions: (i) Jnversora de Gas del Centro S.A. to acquire the privatized
shares of Centro; (ii) Invergas S.A. to acquire the privatized shares of
GasBan; and (iii) Inversora de Gas Cuyana S.A. to acquire the privatized
shares of Cuyana. The successful bidders or their affiliates became
shareholders of the respective investment companies, which then entered
into Transfer Agreements with the Respondent concerning the shares subject

to this arbitration.

The privatization scheme created by Respondent targeted foreign investors
because foreign capital was deemed essential for the successful operation of
the Government’s economic recovery plan. Foreign investors were
encouraged to purchase shares with guarantees, such as tariffs calculated in
USS. dollars, automatic and periodic adjustments to the tariffs based on the
PPI, a clear legal framework that could not be unilaterally modified, and the
granting of “licenses” instead of “concessions” with a view to offering the

highest degree of protection to prospective investors.

As part of its marketing efforts, Argentina distributed an Information
Memorandum in foreign markets, including the United States and Europe.
The Information Memorandum summarized the legal framework governing
the privatization, the terms and conditions for the bidding, the bidding
process and the legal and the regulatory framework that would apply to the
new industry after privatization. The information in the memorandum
concerning the privatization, prepared and distributed by investment banks,
contained descriptive information and included disclaimers to discourage

investors from relying solely on the information therein.

14

51. During this period, Argentina undertook to provide enhanced legal
protection to investors so as to attract foreign investment in support of its
privatization scheme. The Respondent ratified several treaties relating to
international investment obligations, such as the ICSID Convention and a
great number of bilateral investment treaties, including the Argentina-U.S.
Bilateral Investment Treaty at issue in this dispute. As mentioned above, the
Convertibility Law, which pegged the peso to the U.S. dollar, was also

enacted at this time.

52. In reliance on the legal guarantees offered by the Argentine Government for
the privatized energy industry, and based on its positive prior experience
investing in the privatized Argentine gas market in 1992, Claimants chose to
purchase shares of three licensed companies in the gas-distribution market.
In February 1997, LG&E purchased a 45.9% interest in Centro and a 14.4%
interest in Cuyana. In March 1999, LG&E purchased a 19.6% interest in
GasBan.

53. From 1993 until the end of 1999, Claimants agree that the gas-distribution
licensees and Respondent abided by their respective obligations under the
licenses and law governing the privatization scheme. According to
Claimants, the licensees invested heavily in Argentina’s natural-gas-
distribution infrastructure. GasBan invested about US$372 million in a new
plant and equipment, even though originally required to invest US$90.9
million; Centro invested US$92 million, although originally required to
invest US$10 million; and Cuyana invested more than US$120 million,
although originally required to invest US$10 million. In return, Argentina
honored the provisions of the licenses and other legal obligations, including
the semi-annual tariff adjustment under the PPI indicator, and calculation of

the tariffs in U.S. dollars.

B. ECONOMIC CRISIS AND THE EMERGENCE OF THE DISPUTE — 1999-2001
54. A new economic crisis developed in Argentina in the late 1990s. In the third

15

55.

56.

57.

quarter of 1998, the Argentine economy plunged into a period of recession
that was to last four years and triggered, in Respondent’s opinion, the worst
economic crisis since Argentina’s inception in 1810 (Respondent’s Counter-

Memorial, {| 782).

In 1999, Argentina’s Gross Domestic Product (“GDP”) decreased causing a
dramatic fall in domestic prices. Private consumption and investments began
falling in August 1998 and Argentina entered a deflationary period. The
period was marked by widespread decline in the value of assets located in
Argentina. By the end of the 1990s, many economists considered the peso as
overvalued, and predicted that the currency board would have to be
abandoned, which would inevitably devalue the peso. Argentina’s country
tisk premium increased, gradually excluding the country from the
international credit market. These economic indicators were accompanied by
social problems —unemployment, poverty and indigence levels began to
increase. On 10 December 1999, Mr. Fernando de la Rtia took office as the
President of Argentina. His administration tried to maintain the peg of the

Argentine peso to the U.S. dollar as mandated by the Convertibility Law.

Against this background, public services rates, as specified in the contracts,
were due to be adjusted in January 2000 based on the PPI. At the time, the
United States was experiencing a high inflationary period, while Argentina
was experiencing a significant deflationary period. As established in the Gas
Law, the tariffs were to be adjusted to reflect changes in the cost structure of
utility providers (Gas Law, Article 41). Argentina considered that the
pending tariff adjustments based on the U.S. rate were unreasonable because
they would result in a significant increase in utility rates within a

recessionary and deflationary context.

Argentina met with the gas-distribution licensees to discuss a temporary
suspension of the semi-annual tariff adjustments. Two agreements that the
Government and the licensees entered in 2000 formed part of Claimaints’
original claim submitted to this arbitration.

16

58.

59.

60.

61.

On 6 January 2000, the Government and the licensees entered an agreement
(Acta Acuerdo) whereby the licensees agreed to a one-time, six-month
postponement of the tariff adjustment due in January 2000. Pursuant to the
agreement, the tariffs would be recovered with interest from 1 July 2000 to
30 April 2001. Therefore, through resolutions published on 10 January 2000,
ENARGAS approved the tariff effective as from 1 January 2000 without the
PPI adjustment. The ENARGAS resolutions provided that the legal regime

governing the tariffs would remain intact.

During the first six months of 2000, the situation in the Argentine economy
continued to deteriorate. The semi-annual PPI adjustment would have forced
a second tariff increase in a continued deflationary period. Although the
licensees had agreed to only one-time tariff adjustment postponement, the
Government urged the gas-distribution licensees to accept a second
postponement of the tariff adjustments; including the previously postponed
adjustments that were scheduled to be recovered beginning on | July 2000 in

accordance with the Acta Acuerdo of 6 January 2000.

On 17 July 2000, by Decree No. 669/00, effective 4 August 2000, the
licensees and the Government agreed to a second postponement of the tariff
adjustments until 30 June 2002. Pursuant to the agreement, a stabilization
fund would be created to recover the postponed amounts, subject to certain
ceilings and floors, with interest. As with the previous agreement, this
agreement reaffirmed the Government’s commitments and guarantees
provided to the licensees and their investors under the legal structure created
for the privatization of the gas industry, specifically recognizing the
enforcement of Argentina’s bilateral investment treaties and the semi-annual

PPI adjustments as an integral component of the tariff system.

On 3 August 2000, the Argentine National Ombudsman filed a lawsuit in an
Argentine Federal Court, seeking an injunction against the operation of
Decree No. 669/00. On 18 August 2000, the Court issued an order
provisionally enjoining the application of Decree No. 669/00 and of the

17

62.

agreement of 17 July 2000. On 5 October 2001, the Court of Appeal ratified
the order and the case is presently pending before the Supreme Court

(Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, { 255).

ENARGAS declared in November 2001 that no further adjustments to the
tariffs would be approved until final judgment in the lawsuit. No further

adjustments to the tariffs have occurred to date.

C. THE EMERGENCY LAW - 6 JANUARY 2002

63.

64.

Argentina’s crisis deepened at the end of 2001. The Government
experienced increased difficulties in repaying its foreign debt. As poverty
and unemployment soared, Argentines feared that the Government would
default on its debt and immobilize bank deposits. Therefore, savings were
massively withdrawn from the banks. In response, the Government issued
Decree No. 1570/01, known as “Corralito,” on 1 December 2001, restricting
bank withdrawals and prohibiting any transfer of currency abroad. Amid
widespread discontent and public demonstrations, including violence that
claimed tens of lives, President De la Rtia and his Cabinet resigned on 20
December 2001. A succession of presidents took office and quickly

resigned.

Finally, President Eduardo Duhalde took office and implemented a new
economic plan, which contained measures that form the additional claim
submitted by Claimants. On 6 January 2002, Congress enacted Law No.
25,561, the Public Emergency and Foreign Exchange System Reform Law
(known as “the Emergency Law”). The Emergency Law abrogated the
Convertibility Law so that the one-to-one peg of the Argentine peso to the
United States dollar no longer existed. The Emergency Law provided for the
switch into Argentine pesos of debts owed to the banking system, debts
arising from management contracts governed by public law, and debts under
private agreements. The law further provided for the renegotiation of private

and public agreements to adapt them to the new exchange system.

18

65.

66.

67.

The Emergency Law adopted measures modifying public-service contracts,
such as establishing that tariffs and prices for public services were to be
calculated in pesos, instead of U.S. dollars; abolishing all clauses calling for
tariff adjustments in U.S. dollars or other foreign currencies; eliminating all
indexing mechanisms; and directing the Executive Branch to renegotiate all

public-service contracts.

By Presidential Decree No. 214 of 3 February 2002, the Government
adopted a currency conversion scheme under which all obligations payable
in dollars existing on the date of enactment of the Emergency Law would be

converted into pesos at the fixed one-to-one exchange rate.

The switch into Argentine pesos, also called “pesification,” which affected
the entire Argentine economy, was characterized by Respondent as a

necessary process to return the country to the path of economic stability.

D. RENEGOTIATION OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE CONTRACTS

68.

69.

On 12 February 2002, Argentina announced the renegotiation of all public
service contracts. By Decree No. 293/02, licenses for transport and
distribution of natural gas were subject to mandatory renegotiation by a
Renegotiation Committee within the Ministry of Economy. Under the
Decree, the Government could either sign a renegotiated agreement or
rescind the contract. By Resolution No. 38/02, issued on 9 March 2002,
ENARGAS was ordered to discontinue all tariff reviews and to refrain from

adjusting tariffs or prices in any way.

After enactment of the Emergency Law, the licensees and the Argentine
Executive launched three initiatives to implement an emergency increase in
the natural gas and electricity tariffs. Each of these initiatives was
successfully challenged by consumer organizations and ombudspersons in
the Argentine judiciary and consequently did not become effective. The

Argentine Government attempted twice more in 2003 to obtain tariff

19

70.

71.

increases through Presidential Decrees but both these efforts were also

quashed by the judiciary.

On 25 May 2003, a new Argentine President, Dr. Néstor Kirchner, took
office after a popular election was held on 26 April 2003, replacing the
transition authorities that had been appointed by the Argentine Congress.
Respondent states that with the new administration, a period of institutional
stabilization at the federal level began (Respondent’s Counter-Memorial,

317).

By Presidential Decree No. 311/03, published on 4 July 2003, and Law No.
25,790, passed on 22 October 2003, the Argentine Government extended the
renegotiation process. Centro, Cuyana and GasBan have been involved in
the renegotiation process under threat of rescission of contract. During the
renegotiation process, the Government has not offered to restore the legal
guarantees that were eliminated by the Emergency Law, or compensate

Claimants for any losses incurred.

E. REQUEST FOR RELIEF

72.

Bearing in mind the background already described, Claimants request the
following relief (Request for Arbitration, { 111 as revised in Claimants’

Memorial at {| 208):

(i) Declaring that the Respondent has breached its obligations
under Article II(2)(c) of the Bilateral Treaty by failing to
observe obligations that it entered into with regard to the
Claimants’ investment;

(ii) Declaring that the Respondent has breached its obligations
under Article II(2)(a) of the Bilateral Treaty by failing to
accord to the Claimants’ investment fair and equitable
treatment and by according treatment less than that required
by international law;

(iii) | Declaring that the Respondent has breached its obligations
under Article II(2)(b) of the Bilateral Treaty by taking

20

arbitrary and discriminatory measures that impair the use
and enjoyment of the Claimants’ investment;

(iv) Declaring that the Respondent has breached Article TV(1) of
the Bilateral Treaty by indirectly expropriating the
Claimants’ investment without complying with the
requirements of the Bilateral Treaty, including observance
of due process of law and payment of prompt, adequate, and
effective compensation;

(v) Ordering the Respondent to pay the Claimants full
compensation in the amounts set forth in the Memorial, plus
pre- and post-award compound interest;

(vi) | Ordering the Respondent to pay all costs and expenses of
this arbitration proceeding, including the fees and expenses
of the Tribunal and the cost of the Claimants’ legal
representation, plus interest thereon in accordance with the
Bilateral Treaty; and

(vii) | Such other or additional relief as may be appropriate under
the Bilateral Treaty or may otherwise be just and proper.
According to Claimants’ Reply ({| 287), the relief they seek is stated as

follows:

1. Finding the Argentine Republic to be in breach of its
obligations under the Treaty;

2. Ordering the Argentine Republic to pay LG&E: (i)
compensation in the amounts specified in Part VI of [the]
Reply; (ii) all costs and fees of the arbitration, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees; and (iii) compound interest on
the monetary award from the date of the award until the date
of actual payment; and

3. Ordering such additional relief as may be appropriate under
the applicable law or otherwise just and proper.

The monetary relief sought by Claimants is US$ 248 million or, if the
Tribunal concludes that there was expropriation, US$ 268 million, plus

compound pre-award and post-award interest and costs.

Respondent denies that it has violated the Treaty and seeks an order from

21

this Tribunal dismissing LG&E’s claims and holding LG&E liable for costs.
In asserting its defense, Respondent contends in the alternative that the
circumstances warrant application of the state of necessity defense, thus

exempting it from liability for any Treaty violations.

Vv. PRELIMINARY MATTERS

76.

In the analysis below, the Tribunal has not only considered the positions of
the parties as summarized in the various sections above, but also their
numerous detailed arguments in support of those positions as well as the
arguments made at the hearing. To the extent that these arguments are not
referred to expressly, they must be deemed to be subsumed in the analysis

below.

A. JUS STANDI

77.

78.

79.

With respect to jus standi, the Tribunal re-affirms its conclusions adopted in
the Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of 30 April 2004. As determined
in the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Centre has jurisdiction over LG&E’s

claims and this Tribunal is competent to decide on Claimants’ claims.

Argentina continues to argue that this Tribunal shall only have jurisdiction if
Argentina’s non-compliance with an international obligation is verified
(Respondent’s Rejoinder, {| 521(a)). Pursuant to the Tribunal’s Decision on
Jurisdiction issued on 30 April, 2004, the Tribunal deems that all the
obligations in discussion are international because they relate to the Treaty.
Thus, LG&E’s minority-shareholder status has no bearing on its standing to

bring these claims or on the Tribunal’s competence to rule upon them.

It should be pointed out that, as this Tribunal stated in the Decision on

Jurisdiction, the subject matter of this arbitration focuses on the investments

made by LG&E in the Argentine licensees. Accordingly, the Tribunal has

insisted on the independent treatment of LG&E regarding the licensees, both

from the point of view of the legal personality of each entity and from the
22

actions of each. This does not mean, however, that certain actions of the
licensees, by the fact that they are the investment’s beneficiaries, may have,
in some cases, effects on the investment itself. For such reasons, on
occasion, the Tribunal shall be bound to refer to the licensees and their
actions without implying a reference to LG&E. One should bear in mind that
the recognition of the independence among these entities was the basis on
which the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal were

supported.

B. LAW APPLICABLE

80.

81.

Parties’ Positions

The Claimants argue that their claims asserted arise under the Treaty. The
law that applies to the dispute is therefore the Treaty and general
international law. Claimants contend that this approach comports with the
first part of Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention. In Claimants’ view,
Argentine law merely establishes a factual predicate for the claims under the

Treaty and general international law (Claimants’ Memorial, {| 155-56).

Respondent does not deny the application of the Bilateral Treaty to this
dispute, but argues that in the absence of an agreement on the applicable law,
the relationship between LG&E and the Argentine Government should be
subject to the second part of Article 42(1) of the ICSD Convention, which
establishes the precedence of sources of law; therefore, the Argentine law
should be applied first. Respondent asserts that “where an investor makes an
investment in a State it is subject —as are local investors— to the laws of the
country where the investment is made” (Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, {
25). Argentina stresses the insufficiency of the Treaty to govern the dispute
at issue, particularly in light of the substantive framework regarding the

foreign investment’s treatment under Argentine law.

23

2.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

Tribunal’s Analysis

In accordance with Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention:

“(1) The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules
of law as may be agreed by the parties. In the absence of such
agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State
party to the dispute (including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such
rules of International Law as may be applicable.”
This rule grants the parties’ autonomy in choosing the law applicable to the
substance of the dispute in an arbitration administered by ICSID. If no
applicable law is chosen, the Tribunal must resort to the second sentence of

Article 42(1).

It is evident that the parties hereto had not agreed on the applicable law in
this dispute. This is usually found in the investment agreement, though this
does not hold in this case. Nor is there any express reference to the
applicable law in other documents related to the investment by LG&E, a fact

that would result in the application of the second part of Article 42(1).

It is to be noted that the Argentine Republic is a signatory party to the
Bilateral Investment Treaty, which may be regarded as a tacit submission to
its provisions in the event of a dispute related to foreign investments. In turn,
LG&E grounds its claim on the provisions of the Treaty, thus presumably
choosing the Treaty and the general international law as the applicable law
for this dispute. Nevertheless, these elements do not suffice to say that there
is an implicit agreement by the Parties as to the applicable law, a decision
requiring more decisive actions. Consequently, the dispute shall be settled in

accordance with the second part of Article 42(1)3

In addition to the indication of the applicable law, there are two other

* Schreuer, Christoph, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, Cambridge University Press, 2001, p.

24

concepts embedded in the second part of Article 42(1) which deserve
comment —the references to private international law and to the rules of

international law “as may be applicable”.

87. As to the reference to the private international law, the Tribunal has not
found in the ICSID records any case in which the Arbitral Tribunal has
resorted to the rules of conflict of law of the State party to the dispute. It has
been so observed in the Amco v. Indonesia case, in which the Arbitral
Tribunal, presided by Berthold Goldman, affirmed that it did not deem it
necessary to enter into a discussion on the rules of conflict, inasmuch as the
parties make constant references to the law of the State party in the dispute
and, moreover in “the dispute before the Tribunal relating to an investment
in Indonesia, there is no doubt that the substantive municipal rules of law to
be applied by the Tribunal are to drawn from Indonesian Law.”* The

Tribunal in this case shares the same criterion.

88. With reference to the rules of international law and, particularly, to the
language “as may be applicable,” found in Article 42(1) of the ICSID
Convention, the Tribunal holds the view that it should not be understood as
if it were in some way conditioning application of international law. Rather,
it should be understood as making reference, within international law, to the
competent rules to govern the dispute at issue.> This interpretation could find
support in the ICSID Convention’s French version that refers to the rules of

international law “en la matiére.”°

* Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia, Award of 20 November 1984, 1 ICSID
Rep. 413 (1993).

> “It simply means that the relevant rules of international law are to be applied.” Schreuer, Cristoph,
The ICSID Convention...op.cit., p. 622.

© Convention CIRDI, Art. 42: “(1) (1) Le Tribunal statue sur le différend conformément aux régles de
droit adoptées par les parties. Faute d'accord entre les parties, le Tribunal applique le droit de I'Etat
contractant partie au différend—y compris les régles relatives aux conflits de lois—ainsi que les
principes de droit international en la _matiére” ~~ (emphasis _—_— added). —_—‘In:
http:/ww.worldbank.org/icsid/basicdoc-fra/partA-chap04.him#s03.

    

25

89. Likewise, applying the rules of international law is to be understood as
comprising the general international law, including customary international
law, to be used as an instrument for the interpretation of the Treaty. For
example, where a term is ambiguous, or where further interpretation of a
Treaty provision is required, the Tribunal will turn to its obligations under
Articles 3land 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, signed

in 1969.

90. Having made this part clear, the Tribunal proceeds to analyze the extension
of the remission to the domestic law contained in the second part of Article
42(1), whereby the Tribunal shall apply “the law of the Contracting State
Party to the dispute...” The Argentine doctrine contributes to gaining insight
into the remission’s scope: “the situation is much clearer by virtue of the
incorporation of the international law to the Argentine law and the
hierarchical relation conferred by the 1994 constitutional reform to
international treaties in Article 75, paragraph 22,’ of the National

Constitution.”*

91. The Tribunal notes that as part of the Argentine legal system, the Bilateral
Treaty prevails over domestic law, “especially, inasmuch as in most of the
Bilateral Treaty’s assumptions there is an express mention of international
law, be it when referring to the treatment to be given to investments, or to
the compensation in the event of expropriation or any other like measure,

etc.”

92. This interpretation has been accepted in Argentina “as long as the litigation
is linked to the violation of the BIT [bilateral investment treaty] and of

international law and not to the mere pretensions of infringement of a local

7 | the treaties and concordats are hierarchically superior than law:

8 Tawil, Guido Santiago, Los conflictos en materia de inversién, ‘la jurisdiccién del CIADI y el
Derecho aplicable: a propésito de las recientes decisiones en los casos “Vivendi”, “Wena” y
“Maffezini”, in RAP, October 2002 Year XXV, N° 239, pp. 241 er seq., especially pp. 256-257.

   

26

93.

94.

95.

contract and as the parties should have not provided expressly the law
applicable to the first of said disputes, the decision shall be governed by the
ICSID Convention, by the BIT and applicable international law. Thus, the
BIT becomes the /ex specialis regarding disputes appearing in matters of

investment between the foreign investor and the Host State.”!

It is this Tribunal’s opinion that obviating application of international law,
specifically of the ICSID Convention and the Bilateral Treaty, would entail
ignoring the fact that “international treaties move away from the principle
according to which foreign investment is subject to the law and jurisdiction
of the host state and seek international solution of conflicts.”!! This thesis,
held by part of the Argentine doctrine, indicates that when submitting the
settlement of a dispute to an Arbitral Tribunal acting within the framework
of an international agreement, like ICSID, the dispute falls under public
international law; thus its rules are to be applied.'” However, the problem is
more complex as has been admitted by several scholars, who are of the
opinion that it is necessary to “balance the weight that domestic law and

13

international law should have upon the settlement of the dispute”’”, this is, to

establish an order of precedence of the sources.

International law overrides domestic law when there is a contradiction since
a State cannot justify non-compliance of its international obligations by

asserting the provisions of its domestic law.

If this contradiction does not exist, it is not an easy task to establish the
relationship between international law and domestic law. In the original draft

of the ICSID Convention, the conjunction “and” was not present in the rule,

 

° Idem, p. 256. The author bases his opinion on the Vivendi case.

° Ihidem.

"See Investment for foreigners in Argentina: www.enplenitud.com/

?Grigera Na6n, Horacio, Choice of Law Problems in International Commercial Arbitration, J.C.B.
Mohr (Paul Siebeck) Tiibingen, Germany, 1992, p. 115.

'3 Vives Chillida, Julio, El Centro Internacional de Arreglos de Diferencias Relativas a Inversiones

footnote cont’d

27

96.

97.

but rather the conjunction “or” was in its place, so that it read, “The Arbitral
Tribunal shall decide the dispute submitted to it in accordance with such
rules of law, whether national or international as it shall determine to be
applicable.” The intention in the language of the original draft was not to
establish an order of preference, but rather to establish the possibility of
alternatives. Initially, scholarly authorities and some ICSID Tribunals
admitted that the conjunction “and” meant that “and in case of lacunae, or
should the law of the Contracting State be inconsistent with international
law.” However, any limitation to the role of international law under these
terms would imply accepting that international law may be subordinate to
domestic law and would obviate the fact that there are a growing number of
arbitrations initiated on the basis of bilateral or multilateral investment

treaties.

It is this Tribunal’s opinion that “and” means “and,” so that the rules of
international law, especially those included in the ICSID Convention and in
the Bilateral Treaty as well as those of domestic law are to be applied. In the
Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt case, the Tribunal affirmed

that “‘and means and”, but accepted the supremacy of international law.'®

The Tribunal concludes, as the tribunal concluded in the Asian Agricultural
Products, Ltd, (AAPL) v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, Award
of June 27, 1990, that the Treaty “is not a self-contained closed legal system
limited to provide for substantive material rules of direct applicability, but it
has to be envisaged within a wider juridical context in which rules from

other sources are integrated through implied incorporation methods, or by

 

(CIADI), Madrid, McGraw Hill, 1998, p. 195.
'4 Schreuer, Christoph, The ICSID Convention... op. cit., p. 623.

'S Gaillard, Emmanuel and Banifetami, Yz

The Meaning of “and” in Article 42(1), second sentence,

 

of the Washington Convention: The Role of International Law in the ICSID choice of the law process,
ICSID Review, Foreign Investment Law Journal, 2003, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 375 et seq., especially pp.
381-382. See also: Schreuer, Christoph, op. cit, p. 263.

'© Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case N° ARB/98/4, Decision on Application

footnote cont’d

28

direct reference to certain supplementary rules, whether of international law

character or of domestic law nature.”!”

98. In short, one must also recall that between Argentina and LG&E there is no
binding contractual agreement. The existence of such relationship would
have allowed the parties to agree on stabilization clauses in the event of
changes in certain circumstances. But, in the absence of such agreement, one
is bound to resort to a legal system regulating those events. The fact that
there is no contract between the Argentine Republic and LG&E favors in the
first place, the application of international law, inasmuch as we are dealing
with a genuine dispute in matters of investment which is especially subject

to the provisions of the Bilateral Treaty complemented by the domestic law.

3. Tribunal’s Conclusion

99. In order to settle this controversy, the present Tribunal shall apply first the
Bilateral Treaty; second and in the absence of explicit provisions therein,
general international law, and, third, the Argentine domestic law, particularly
the Gas Law that governs the natural gas sector. The latter is applicable in
view of its relevance for determining the Argentine Republic’s liability and
the defenses to which it may resort vis-a-vis the allegations made by

Claimants.

VI. LIABILITY

A. ARTICLE II(2)(a): FAIR AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT

1. Parties’ Positions

100. Based on the circumstances of this case as described in Section IV above,

 

for Annulment, Feb. 5, 2002, 41 ILM 933 (2002).
"” Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. (AAPL) v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/87/3, Final Award, June 27, 1990, 6 ICSID Review 533 (1991).

29

101.

102.

103.

LG&E claims that the Argentine Republic breached Article II(2)(a) of the
Bilateral Treaty, which guarantees that LG&E’s investment in Argentina

will at all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment.

In Claimants’ view, by committing itself to the Treaty, Argentina made
promises to the United States as to how it would treat the investments of
USS. nationals in Argentina. In Article II, Argentina agreed to maintain an
investment environment that is even-handed towards all investors, foreign
and domestic alike, free of arbitrary and discriminatory laws and regulations,
and ultimately fair and equitable, offering full protection and security to the

investments of U.S. nationals.

Claimants explain that fair and equitable treatment in the context of this
Treaty, requires a stable and predictable legal framework for the investment.
Claimants support their interpretation of the standard on the basis of the
Preamble of the Treaty, which sets forth the object and purpose of the Treaty
and specifically the provision on fair and equitable treatment, as well as
three recent opinions of arbitral tribunals considering the question in a
similar context.'® Claimants contend that, under this standard, a State cannot
grant treatment that affects the basic expectations that were taken into
account by the foreign investor to make the investment. Considering that the
Treaty’s objective was to promote foreign investment, Claimants argue that
the stability and predictability of the legal framework that laid the
foundations for their investment and granted protection to its value are

particularly important.

With respect to Respondent’s reliance on the Genin case, Claimants argue

'S Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. The United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB
(AF)/00/02 Award {| 154 (29 May 2003); MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of
Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7 Award { 113 (25 May 2004); Occidental Exploration and
Production Company v. The Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN 3467 Final Award (1 July

2004).

30

that as the Genin’? case is merely a standard for evaluating the fairness and
equity of State procedures, such a standard should be evaluated in light of

more recent cases.

104. Claimants also contend that the extent to which the fair and equitable
standard relates to the minimum standard of treatment under customary
international law makes no difference in this case because that standard has
evolved since the Mondev”’ case to include the reasonable expectations of

the investor.

105. Under this articulation of the standard, Claimants state that Argentina treated
LG&E’s investment in an unfair and inequitable manner. First, Argentina
repudiated the guarantees that it had offered to the foreign investors at the
time it induced them to invest in Argentina. Second, Argentina singled out
the gas-distribution industry and other public utility industries, for treatment
that was less favorable than the treatment granted to all other sectors of the
economy. Third, Argentina publicized unfounded charges against the foreign
investors and coerced the gas-distribution companies to waive their rights
under the licenses and renegotiate the licenses. Fourth, Argentina held the
licensees responsible for strict compliance with the terms of the licenses
while the Government froze the gas-distribution tariffs. Finally, Claimants
allege that Argentina foreclosed the licensees from pursuing judicial or

arbitral remedies (Claimants’ Memorial, {| 171).

106. Argentina had attracted Claimants with the guarantees derived from the
Treaty and the legal framework for privatization, under which its laws and
regulations guaranteed how Argentina would treat LG&E’s investment. In

making their decision to invest in Argentina, Claimants relied on Argentine

' Alex Genin, Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v. The Republic of Estonia, \CSID Case
No. ARB/99/2 Award, {{ 367 (25 June 2001).

°° Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)99/2, Award, {
116 (October 11, 2002).

31

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

laws that granted protection against currency fluctuation and inflation, while
providing for adjustment of utility rates, thus ensuring reasonable rates of
return and that the Argentine Government would not freeze utility rates, but

rather maintain a dynamic tariff system, regulated by an expert agency.

Claimants did not expect their investment to be free of risk, or that Article II
of the Bilateral Treaty should protect them from all risks associated with
their investment. But they insist that the gas regulatory framework that
Argentina put in place made their investment free from risk of regulatory
alterations or changes in the rules in which they had invested. LG&E
understood that it would bear what it calls “commercial risks,” such as
industry demand, recession and substitution of natural gas by alternative
fuels (Hearing on the Merits, Perkins, 24 January, 2005, Spanish Transcript,
p. 369; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {| 8).

Claimants allege that, during the economic crisis, Argentina abandoned the
guarantees that it made to investors in the gas-distribution sector. In January
2002, the Emergency Law swept away the protection against inflation.
Argentina forced licensees to enter into two agreements postponing the PPI
adjustments, after which an Argentine court issued an order that ENARGAS
interpreted as an injunction against the PPI adjustment. The Emergency Law

permanently abolished the PPI adjustment.

The Emergency Law also abandoned the protection against currency
fluctuations. The Gas Law had guaranteed that the tariffs would be
calculated in dollars and converted into pesos. In reliance on this protection
against any sharp devaluation of the peso, Claimants decided to invest in the

licensees.

In light of these prior measures, Claimants argue that Argentina repudiated
its guarantee that generally prohibited the freezing or control of tariffs

(Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {{[ 15-31).

While Claimants acknowledge that the material used by Respondent in order
32

to make the offer was not binding, the laws and promises referenced therein
were (Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {[ 9). Claimants add that if establishing

the tariffs had been left to the State, investors would have never invested.

112. Respondent objects to the definition given to fair and equitable treatment. In
Respondent’s view, the standard should be defined by impartial and
objective rather than personal and arbitrary criteria. They conclude that
Claimants’ interpretation of the standard is so vague as to ignore the parties’

obligations and rights (Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, {[ 603-604).

113. Citing Alex Genin, Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v. The
Republic of Estonia’! and Robert Azinian, Kenning Davitian & Ellen Baca v.
The United Mexican States”, Respondent concludes that the fair and
equitable treatment principle refers to the international minimum standard of
treatment owed to an investor, and as such, constitutes a minimum pattern
for substantive justice (Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, {| 620). Respondent
also contends, citing $.D. Myers Inc. v. The Government of Canada* that a
violation of the fair and equitable standard “occurs only when it is shown
that an investor has been treated in such an unjust or arbitrary manner that
the treatment rises to the level that is unacceptable from the international

perspective” (Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, {{[ 621-622).

114. Regarding the list of guarantees cited by Claimants, Respondent contends
that the Gas Law does not provide for what Claimants call “exchange
protection” (Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 74a). Respondent points out
that, in fact, when Claimants’ witnesses were examined, they were not able
to identify where any such “protection” had been established. Respondent

also asserts that the tariff calculation in U.S. dollars was linked to the

2! See Genin, footnote No. 19 supra.

” Robert Azinian and others v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2, Award, {| 83
and 87, (1 November 1999).

°3 $.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, NAFTA Arbitration under UNCITRAL Rules, Partial

footnote cont’d

33

existing fixed rate of exchange between the peso and the U.S. dollar as
established by the Convertibility Law. None of Claimants’ witnesses was
able to prove the opposite. Respondent adds that maintaining tariffs linked to
the U.S. dollar after the convertibility system was abandoned lacks any
economic logic. Respondent points out that none of the Government’s

guarantees address the abandonment of convertibility.

115. With respect to the tariff guarantee, Respondent argues that it is possible that
the Argentine authorities had considered guaranteeing the calculation of the
tariffs in U.S. dollars regardless of the Convertibility Law, but such plan was
rejected due to the fact that the Government concluded that the
Convertibility Law provided sufficient protection to the investment

(Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, { 26).

116. With respect to the PPI adjustments, Respondent argues that from mid-1998,
application of the PPI as the rate adjustment index became unreasonable and
failed to fulfill the goal it was conceived for — namely, reflecting the changes
in the value of the goods and services involved in the activity of service
providers (Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, { 44). Additionally,
Respondent states that the measure did not cause loss to the licensees. Citing
the opinions of Schwartz and Lapuerta, Respondent contends that suspension
of the PPI adjustment would have affected tariffs only by approximately 2%
between August 2000 and October 2002 (Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief,
46).

117. Respondent agrees that the tariffs must be fair and sufficient, yet not
abusive, something that would occur if the Claimants’ position were

sustained (Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {[ 74c).

118. Regarding the claim that the Claimants were “induced” to invest in the

Argentine Republic, Respondent argues that there is no proof of such

 

Award, {| 263, (13 November 2000).

34

inducement (Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, {| 647). Respondent points
out that the Claimants rely on non-binding documents, such as reports and
minutes without any legal relevance. According to Respondent, these
documents were irrelevant to the laws that should have been considered in
deciding whether or not to invest in the Argentine gas-distribution market

(Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, { 17).

2. Tribunal’s Conclusion Concerning Argentina’s Guarantees to
Investors

119. The Tribunal concludes that the Gas Law and its implementing regulations
made four guarantees to investors in the gas transport and distribution

centers:

1. Article 41.1 of Decree No. 1738/92,4 and Section 9.2 of the Basic
Rules of the License** mandated that the tariffs would be calculated in

USS. dollars before conversion into pesos.

2. Section 9.4.1.1 of the Basic Rules of the License guaranteed that the
tariffs would be subject to semi-annual adjustments according to the

PPI.”°

3. Article 38 of Law No. 24,076 provided that tariffs were to provide an

income sufficient to cover all costs and a reasonable rate of return.””

*4 Article 41.1 provides: “Transportation and Distribution rates shall be calculated in United States
dollars. The resulting Rate Schedule shall be stated in Argentine pesos and shall be convertible as
stated in Law No. 23,928, using for the retranslation into Argentine pesos the parity set forth in Article
3 of Argentine Presidential Decree No. 2,128/91.”

°5 Section 9.2 provides: “The tariff has been calculated in U.S. dollars. The adjustments referred to in
point 9.3 will be calculated in U.S. dollars.”

*6 Section 9.4.1.1 provides: “Distribution tariffs will be adjusted semiannually according to the
variation operated in the PPI.”

*” Article 38 provides: “The services rendered by distributors will be offered at tariffs in line with the
following principle:
a)To provide distributors who operate economically and prudently the opportunity to obtain sufficient
income to meet all reasonable operating costs applicable to the service, taxes, amortization, and a

 

 

 

 

 
    

footnote cont’d

35

4. Section 9.8 of the Basic Rules of the License guaranteed that the tariff
system would not be subject to freezing or price controls without

compensation.”*

120. The Tribunal also finds that as a matter of fact, the Emergency Law, passed
on 6 January 2002, declared that the tariffs would no longer be calculated in
USS. dollars but directly in pesos (Article 8), and that there would be no
further semi-annual tariff adjustments according to the PPI (Article 8). The
Tribunal notes that since July 1999, there have not been any PPI adjustments
in the tariffs relating to the licensees and the five-year review due in 2002
was not conducted — both affecting the level of the tariffs in the gas-
distribution sector and, as a consequence, Claimants’ rate of return on their
investment. Argentina took these steps without compensating Claimants and
forcing Claimants to renegotiate (a process in which an Argentine official
recommended that investors waive their claims against the Government
relating to the licenses) or face rescission of the licenses. (Decree No.

293/02, Article 2 and Claimants’ Memorial {If 120 et seq).

3. Tribunal’s Analysis
121. The question before the Tribunal is whether the measures implemented by
Argentina violated Argentina’s obligation under Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty

to give fair and equitable treatment to LG&E’s investment.

122. The Treaty does not define what is meant by fair and equitable treatment. In
these circumstances, the Tribunal must interpret this provision in good faith,
in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms in their

context, and in light of its object and purpose, as required by Article 31(1) of

 

reasonable rate of return, as determined in the following article.”

8 Section 9.8 provid censee’s tariff system will not be subject to freezing, administration and/or
price control. If, in spite of this stipulation, Licensee is forced to adapt to a price control system
establishing a lower level than that arising from the Tariff, Licensee will have the right to be
compensated by the Government in an equivalent amount.”

 

   
 

  

 

36

the Vienna Convention.

123. The Treaty, following the general trend with investment treaties, provides
for treatment applicable to investors in the host State through the
establishment of a series of internationally recognized standards.” Due to
the fact that such international standards have a generic nature and that their
interpretation varies with the course of time and with the circumstances of
each case, it becomes difficult to establish an unequivocal and static concept

of these notions.

124. In considering the context within which Argentina and the United States
included the fair and equitable treatment standard, and its object and
purpose, the Tribunal observes in the Preamble of the Treaty that the two
countries agreed that “fair and equitable treatment of investment is desirable
in order to maintain a stable framework for investment and maximum
effective use of economic resources.” In entering the Bilateral Treaty as a
whole, the parties desired to “promote greater economic cooperation” and
“stimulate the flow of private capital and the economic development of the
parties”. In light of these stated objectives, this Tribunal must conclude that
stability of the legal and business framework is an essential element of fair
and equitable treatment in this case, provided that they do not pose any

danger for the existence of the host State itself.

125. Several tribunals in recent years have interpreted the fair and equitable

treatment standard in various investment treaties in light of the same or

°° The notion of a standard appeared for the first time in a 1948 treaty, the Havana Charter for an

i Trade O1 ization, and it we i da ion against state actions violating
internationally-accepted rules. In the 1960s it was related to the protection given to foreign properties.
In international case law, the standard existed pursuant to the interpretation provided in the 1920s in
the emblematic Neer case, which required that State conduct be deemed outrageous, wrongful, open
injustice, an atrocity, bad faith or voluntary negligence of duty for a violation to be found. That
interpretation is not the same that is given today. What was considered an “atrocity” in 1926 might not
be so today, and what may be considered “violent” now, may not have been at that time. See “Fair and
Equitable Treatment Standard in International Investment Law”, OECD, Working Paper on

 

footnote cont’d

37

similar language as the Preamble of the Argentina — U.S. BIT.” These
tribunals have repeatedly concluded based on the specific language
concerning fair and equitable treatment, and in the context of the stated
objectives of the various treaties, that the stability of the legal and business
framework in the State party is an essential element in the standard of what
is fair and equitable treatment! As such, the Tribunal considers this
interpretation to be an emerging standard of fair and equitable treatment in

international law.

126. Although the Chile - Malaysia BIT does not include express reference in its
Preamble with respect to fair and equitable treatment, the tribunal in MTD
Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile referred to the
objectives of the Treaty set forth in the Preamble, and concluded that in light
of these objectives, fair and equitable treatment meant treatment in an “even-
handed and just manner, conducive to fostering the promotion of foreign

. 932
investment.

127. In addition to the State’s obligation to provide a stable legal and business
environment, the fair and equitable treatment analysis involves consideration
of the investor’s expectations when making its investment in reliance on the
protections to be granted by the host State. Indeed, this view is reflected in

the Tecmed decision, that has been adopted by a succession of tribunals:

 

International Investment, November 2003/4.

* See, e.g., CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/O1/8
Award (12 May 2005) (Argentina-U.S. BIT); Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The
Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN 3467 Final Award (1 July 2004) (U.S.-Ecuador BIT — almost
identical language); MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile, \CSID Case No.
ARB/O1/7 Award {113 (25 May 2004) (Malaysia-Chile BIT); Meralclad Corporation v. United
Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1 Award {| 75 (30 August 2000). (An underlying
objective of Article 102(1) of NAFTA is “to promote and increase cross-border investment
opportunities and ensure the succesful implementation of investment initiatives”).

5! CMS, 274; Occidental, 183. See also Metalclad, | 99 (“Mexico failed to ensure a transparent and
predictable framework for Metalclad’s business planning and investment”).

* MTD, { 113.

 

  

 

38

128.

129.

“The Arbitral Tribunal considers that this provision of the
[BIT], in light of the good faith principle established by
international law, requires the Contracting Parties to provide to
international investments treatment that does not affect the
basic expectations that were taken into account by the foreign
investor to make the investment. The foreign investor expects
the host State to act in a consistent manner, free from
ambiguity and totally transparently in its relations with the
foreign investor, so that it may know beforehand any and all
tules and regulations that will govern its investments, as well
as the goals of the relevant policies and administrative
practices or directives, to be able to plan its investment and
comply with such regulations.**”

Similarly, the tribunal in Waste Management, Inc. v. The United Mexican
States, interpreting the fair and equitable treatment standard under NAFTA
Article 1105(1) concluded that in applying the fair and equitable treatment
standard, “it is relevant that the treatment is in breach of representations
made by the host State which were reasonably relied on by the claimant.”*4
This means that violations of the fair and equitable treatment standard may
arise from a State’s failure to act with transparency —that is, all relevant legal
requirements for the purpose of initiating, completing and successfully
operating investments made, or intended to be made under an investment

treaty should be capable of being readily known to all affected investors.*>

The Tribunal is not convinced that bad faith or something comparable would
ever be necessary to find a violation of fair and equitable treatment. The
tribunal in Alex Genin, Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v. The
Republic of Estonia,® did not reach this conclusion either. The tribunal

merely stated: “Acts that would violate this minimum standard would

* Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. The United Mexican States, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/02, Award J 154 (29 May 2003); cited in e.g., MTD, | 114; Occidental, J 185; CMS, {

279.

“Waste Management, Inc. v. The United Mexican States, (CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award { 98
(30 April 2004).

* See e.g., Tecmed, | 154; CMS, {ff 278-79 and Occidental, 185 (citing the Tecmed and Metalclad
passages referring to transparency).

39

130.

131.

132.

133.

include acts showing a willful neglect of duty . . . or even subjective bad
faith” (emphasis added).°” The tribunal concluded that bad faith was not a

requirement for a finding of a violation of fair and equitable treatment.**

It can be said that the investor’s fair expectations have the following
characteristics: they are based on the conditions offered by the host State at
the time of the investment; they may not be established unilaterally by one of
the parties; they must exist and be enforceable by law; in the event of
infringement by the host State, a duty to compensate the investor for
damages arises except for those caused in the event of state of necessity;
however, the investor’s fair expectations cannot fail to consider parameters

such as business risk or industry’s regular patterns.

Thus, this Tribunal, having considered, as previously stated, the sources of
international law, understands that the fair and equitable standard consists of
the host State’s consistent and transparent behavior, free of ambiguity that
involves the obligation to grant and maintain a stable and predictable legal
framework necessary to fulfill the justified expectations of the foreign

investor.

Tribunal’s Conclusion

In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that Argentina violated the
fair and equitable treatment provision in the Bilateral Treaty for the

following reasons.

Emerging from the economic crisis of the late 1980s, Argentina created an

 

* Genin, { 367.

*” Thidem.

* See, e.g., Mondev, | 116 October 11, 2002 (“To the modern eye, what is unfair or inequitable need
not equate with the outrageous or the egregious. In particular, a State may treat foreign investment

unfairly and inequitably without necessarily acting in bad faith.

 

; see also Occidental, | 63 (“*t

 

objective requirement that does not depend on whether the Respondent has proceeded in good faith or
not.”); see also Tecmed, { 153 (relying on Mondev); Waste Management, { 93 (rejecting the standard
set forth in the Neer case involving willful neglect of duty and bad faith).

40

134.

135.

economic recovery plan mainly dependent upon foreign capital. Argentina
prepared with the investment banks an attractive framework of laws and
regulations that addressed the specific concerns of foreign investors with
respect to the country risks involved in Argentina. In light of these risks,
Claimants relied upon certain key guarantees in the Gas Law and
implementing regulations, such as calculation of the tariffs in U.S. dollars
before their conversion into pesos, the semi-annual PPI adjustments, tariffs
set to provide sufficient revenues to cover all the costs and a reasonable rate
of return, and compensation in the event that the Government altered the
tariff scheme. Having created specific expectations among investors,

Argentina was bound by its obligations concerning the investment

 

guarantees vis-

 

vis public utility licensees, and in particular, the gas-
distribution licensees. The abrogation of these specific guarantees violates
the stability and predictability underlying the standard of fair and equitable

treatment.

Specifically, it was unfair and inequitable to pass a law discarding the
guarantee in Decree No. 1738/92 that the tariffs would be calculated in U.S.
dollars and then converted into pesos. As pointed out by Claimants, this was
not merely an economic and monetary policy of the Argentine Government
which materialized through the Convertibility Law. Rather, it was a
guarantee laid down in the tariff system. This guarantee was very important
to investors to protect their investment, which was made in dollars, from a

subsequent devaluation of the peso.

Argentina also acted unfairly and inequitably in the manner in which it
abrogated the guarantees of the Gas Law and its implementing regulations,
adversely affecting the gas-distribution sector but not affecting other sectors
of the economy. For example, certain contracts, such as those in the export
industry, were excluded from the forced conversion to pesos regulation, or
the conversion was performed at a more favorable rate to the individual or

company.

41

136.

137.

138.

139.

Argentina acted unfairly and inequitably when it prematurely abandoned the
PPI tariff adjustments and essentially froze tariffs prior to the onset of the
public disorder and threats to its essential security in December 2001, and
when it refused to resume adjustments when conditions had normalized in
April 2003, forcing instead the licensees to renegotiate.” History has shown
that the PPI adjustments that initially were supposed to be postponed have

been abandoned completely and are now being “negotiated” away.

Argentina also has acted unfairly and inequitably in forcing the licensees to
renegotiate public service contracts, and waive the right to pursue claims
against the Government, or risk rescission of the contracts. Even though the
Gas Law provided for the renegotiation of public service contracts, in
practice there was no real renegotiation, but rather the imposition of a

process.

Likewise, the Government’s Resolution No. 38/02 issued on 9 March 2002,
which ordered ENARGAS to discontinue all tariff reviews and to refrain
from adjusting tariffs or prices in any way, also breaches the fair and

equitable treatment standard.

The Tribunal nevertheless recognizes the economic hardships that occurred
during this period, and certain political and social realities that at the time
may have influenced the Government’s response to the growing economic
difficulties. Certainly, LG&E was aware of the risks inherent in investing in
a foreign State. But here, the Tribunal is of the opinion that Argentina went
too far by completely dismantling the very legal framework constructed to

attract investors.

* As described more fully below, Argentina is excused from liability for the measures taken during the
extreme circumstances of December 2001 until April 2003 in order to maintain Public order and

protect its essential interests

. It was fair that during this p

     

guarantees of the Gas Law and postponed the PPI tariff adjustments until such time as the Government
could manage to resume its obligations.

42

B. ARTICLE II(2)(b): DISCRIMINATORY AND ARBITRARY TREATMENT

1.

140.

141.

142.

Discriminatory Treatment

(i) Parties’ Positions

Claimants contend that the Argentine Government adopted measures that
discriminated against the downstream gas sector (transport and distribution)
compared to upstream businesses (production), large industrial customers,
and other sectors not dominated by foreign investors, such as alternative
energy and the public. In their view, such discrimination violates Article
II(2)(b) of the Bilateral Treaty, which provides that “[n]Jeither Party shall in
any way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory measures the management,
operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion, or disposal

of investments.”

Claimants state that, from the time of the first PPI adjustment until the
enactment of the Emergency Law of 6 January 2002, the gas industry
received treatment different from that accorded to similarly situated public
utilities, including electricity and water distribution companies. These other
public utilities continued to enjoy the PPI adjustment until the enactment of

the Emergency Law.

Claimants also support their contention by pointing out that, following
enactment of the Emergency Law on 6 January 2002, the Government
subjected most of the privatized public-utility sector, including the gas-
distribution industry, to the least favorable of several regimes devised for the
conversion of dollar obligation into pesos. Within the public-utility sector,
Claimants also allege that the Government discriminated against the gas-
distribution industry by excluding other public-service companies from the
conversion of tariffs into pesos. The Government imposed upon the
privatized gas-distribution companies what was considered the worst

exchange and tariff system during the Argentine crisis.

4B

143. Claimants stress that if one compares the measures that affected sectors such
as gas production, alternative energy sources or even those of the public
sector, with those affecting gas transportation or distribution, the Tribunal
can only conclude that the Argentine Government discriminated against the
gas distribution and transportation sectors. The alleged discrimination is
particularly obvious in Claimants’ view by the fact that most of the investors

in the gas-distribution sector are foreigners.

144. Respondent argues that the measures it adopted were not discriminatory
because they were general measures without any unreasonable distinction.
Respondent questions whether Argentina’s measures can be considered
discriminatory, if one acknowledges, as Claimants have, that other industries
related to public services were affected by the measures adopted regarding

the PPI (Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, {{ 700).

145. Respondent explains that each public service is regulated by its own set of
tariff rules, and for that reason, the effect may not have been exactly the
same for all sectors, including the field of public services. Respondent
alleges that “[iJt is irrational and illegitimate to compare one utility to a
different one, subject to different rules, different agreements and different
characteristics, and then hold that it is discriminatory to treat differently the
different utilities at stake” (Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, {| 703,

emphasis omitted).

(ii) Tribunal’s Analysis

146. In the context of investment treaties, and the obligation thereunder not to
discriminate against foreign investors, a measure is considered
discriminatory if the intent of the measure is to discriminate or if the

measure has a discriminatory effect.” As stated in the ELSI Elettronica

4 See Vandevelde, Kenneth J., United States Investment Treaties: Policy and Practice, Kluwer Law

footnote cont’d

44

Sicula SpA case (United States of America v. Italy), ICJ Report 1989 RLA 56
at 61-62 (20 July 1989), in order to establish when a measure is
discriminatory, there must be (i) an intentional treatment (ii) in favor of a
national (iii) against a foreign investor, and (iv) that is not taken under

similar circumstances against another national.

(iii) Tribunal’s Conclusion

147. While the Tribunal concludes that based on the evidence presented,
Respondent treated the gas-distribution companies in a discriminatory
manner, imposing stricter measures on the gas-distribution companies than
other public-utility sectors, Claimants have however not proven that these
measures targeted Claimants’ investments specifically as foreign

investments.

148. Certainly, all the gas-distribution companies were affected by the economic
crisis and by the Government’s measures like all other companies within the
public-utility sector. However, Argentina suspended PPI adjustments for the
gas industry two years before enacting the Emergency Law. It did not take
the same action with respect to the public-utility companies such as the
electricity and water distribution companies, in which case it continued to
adjust their tariffs until enactment of the Emergency Law. Instead, the gas-
distribution companies were subjected to unfavorable regimes devised for
the conversion of dollar obligations and tariffs into pesos. Even though it
was not proved that these measures had been adopted with the purpose of
causing Claimants’ foreign investments damage, discrimination against gas
distribution companies vis-a-vis other companies, such as water supply and

electricity companies, is evident.

 

and Taxation, 1992, p. 77.

45

149.

150.

151.

Arbitrary Treatment

(i) Parties’ Positions

Claimants characterize Argentine Government’s course of conduct towards
the gas-distribution licensees as arbitrary in violation of Article II(2)(b) of
the Bilateral Treaty. Claimants articulate the standard for what constitutes an
“arbitrary” act as “disregard for the rule of law” (Claimants’ Memorial, {

176).

Claimants argue that, in taking measures against the gas-distribution
licensees and other public utilities, the Argentine Government acted in
disregard for the rule of law. According to Claimants, the Government acted
under the trappings of laws, decrees, resolution, regulations and court
decisions, but by willfully repudiating the commitments it made to the gas-
distribution licensees and their shareholders, the Government followed “the
tule of power, not the rule of law” (Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {| 44). In
Claimants’ view, the Government’s wholesale repudiation of the tariff
system was unnecessary to achieve the stated aims of the PPI suspension or
those of the Emergency Law, since the the tariff system was sufficiently
flexible to allow Respondent to reduce tariffs unilaterally, for any reason, as
long as it paid compensation to the licensees. Instead, the Government chose
to dismantle the whole tariff system without granting due compensation

(Claimants’ Memorial, {| 176).

Claimants argue that when Respondent’s Bilateral Treaty obligations and the
promises made to the foreign investors became politically and economically
inconvenient, Respondent ignored its obligations and repudiated the Gas
Law’s key provisions. These measures, they assert, not only surprise but also
contradict any sense of Respondent’s ownership of its legal obligations, and
accordingly they are arbitrary in nature. Claimants refute as without
evidence any assertion by Respondent that if the guarantees had not been

abolished, tariffs would have tripled or quadrupled in price (Claimants’ Post-

46

152.

153.

154.

155.

Hearing Brief, { 44).

In its defense, Respondent contends that the measures were not arbitrary; on
the contrary, they were reasonable and proportionate to the end pursued. In
Argentina’s view, the tariff system was not dismantled. Rather, it was
modified by the measures that the Government was forced to put in place
during the economic crisis. Respondent suggests that under the
circumstances, the deferment of the PPI adjustment in the year 2000 was a
reasonable measure. This position, as Respondent views it, is supported by
both a decision of a court of first instance and by the Federal Court of
Appeal (Camara Federal de Apelaciones), which concluded that the
adjustment at issue was unreasonable within the recessive economic context
endured by the Argentine Republic. The stability that Claimants argue
should characterize the legal system does not mean that the system will exist
in perpetuity, immutability or immobility. Any requirement of “freezing the
law” without considering the social and economic circumstances under
which the laws were enacted, is transforming the Argentine legal system into

a “frivolous rite” (Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, {| 638-639).

Respondent contends that linking the tariff adjustments to the peso
(pesificaci6n) is not arbitrary or discriminatory. Had there been no link to the
peso, many customers could not have had access to the gas service, which
would have resulted in the collapse of the distribution industries themselves,

and tariffs would have been no longer fair but abusive.

In Respondent’s view, none of the measures adopted by the Argentine
Government may be qualified as arbitrary or discriminatory. On the
contrary, they were proportionate and reasonable under the circumstances
and accordingly, not a violation of Article II(2)(b) of the Bilateral Treaty

(Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, { 112).

(ii) Tribunal’s Analysis

Article II(2)(b) of the Bilateral Treaty provides that “[n]Jeither Party shall in
47

156.

157.

158.

159.

any way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory measures the management,
operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion, or disposal

of investments.”

The term “arbitrary” is left undefined by the Bilateral Treaty. Thus, the
Tribunal looks to its plain meaning for international law to determine

whether the measures adopted by Argentina could be classified as arbitrary.

According to international law, arbitrariness has been described as “a willful
disregard of due process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises, a
sense of juridical propriety.”"! The tribunal in Ronald S. Lauder v. The
Czech Republic, referring to the Black’s Law Dictionary, defined the term as
“depending on individual discretion; (...) founded on prejudice or preference

rather than on reason or fact.”

It is apparent from the Bilateral Treaty that Argentina and the United States
wanted to prohibit themselves from implementing measures that affect the
investments of nationals of the other Party without engaging in a rational
decision-making process. Such process would include a consideration of the
effect of a measure on foreign investments and a balance of the interests of
the State with any burden imposed on such investments. Certainly a State
that fails to base its actions on reasoned judgment, and uses abusive

arguments instead, would not “stimulate the flow of private capital."

The Genin case quoted by Respondent provides a good example of a State
measure upholding a guarantee similar to the prohibition in the Estonia —
US. BIT against arbitrary treatment. There, the tribunal concluded that the

Bank of Estonia’s annulment of a license occurred in the course of

*! Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States of America v. Italy), 1989 1.C.J. 15, 76 (Judgment of

20 July).

® Ronald S. Lauder v. The Czech Republic, Final Award {{ 221 (3 September 2001) (citing Black's
Law Dictionary 100 (7"ed. 1999)).
+ Preamble, Argentina — U.S. BIT (1994).

48

160.

161.

162.

“ Genin,
° Tbidem.
* Lauder.

exercising its statutory obligations to regulate the Estonian banking sector,
and therefore was not arbitrary." In so concluding, the tribunal accepted
Estonia’s explanation that the circumstances of political and economic
transition prevailing in Estonia at the time justified heightened scrutiny of
the banking sector, and that such regulation by a State reflects “a clear and
legitimate public purpose.”

In contrast, the Lauder tribunal determined that the acts of the Czech
Republic’s Media Council were arbitrary. Such acts consisted in forcing a
private investor in the newly-privatized company that held the state
television license to exchange a direct participation in the company for a
contractual relationship."° The tribunal reasoned that the act was motivated
by fear of the political implications of having a foreigner influencing Czech

television broadcasts.”

(iii) | Tribunal’s Conclusion

This case lands between the two cases mentioned above, but ultimately the
Tribunal concludes that the acts of Argentina were not arbitrary, and

therefore did not violate Article II(2)(b) for the following reasons.

While Claimants have alleged Argentina’s political motivation to use foreign

 

investors in the public utility sector as an excuse to justify the economic
mistakes committed in the country, Argentina has explained that the
Government’s motivation was its desire to avoid its full economic collapse.
To this end, it entered into agreements with the licensees in 2001, in addition
to other actions taken. Bearing in mind the Tribunal’s analysis,
characterizing the measures as not arbitrary does not mean that such

measures are characterized as fair and equitable or regarded as not having

4370.

, | 222-32.

49

affected the stability of the legal framework under which gas transportation
companies in Argentina operated. On the contrary, this means that Argentina
faced severe economic and social hardships from 2001 onwards and had to
react to the circumstances prevailing at the time. Even though the measures
adopted by Argentina may not have been the best, they were not taken
lightly, without due consideration. This is particularly reflected in the PPI
adjustments which, before deciding on their postponement, Argentina
negotiated with the investors. The Tribunal concludes that the charges
imposed by Argentina to Claimants’ investment, though unfair and
inequitable, were the result of reasoned judgment rather than simple

disregard of the rule of law.

163. Likewise, it was not arbitrary, though unfair and inequitable, not to restore
the Gas Law or the other guarantees related to the gas distribution sector and

to implement the contract renegotiation policy.

C. ARTICLE II(2)(c): THE UMBRELLA CLAUSE

1. Parties’ Positions

164. LG&E claims that Argentina violated Article II(2)(c) of the BIT when it
assumed certain fundamental obligations with regard to investments in its
gas-distribution sector and the foreign investors and then repudiated each of

these legal commitments without compensating Claimants for their loss.

165. As LG&E explains it, Argentina used foreign capital investment as the
cornerstone of its economic recovery plan in the early 1990s. Respondent
designed the privatization of Gas del Estado S.E. as an international bidding
process, in which the conditions for bidding on local enterprises could be
met only by a consortium involving foreign investors. Argentina wooed

foreign investors with promises of return on investment that would always

 

* Lauder, Uf 229, 232.

50

166.

167.

168.

169.

170.

be reasonable, protections against currency exchange and _ inflation,
adjustment of rates pursuant to international indexes, no unilateral changes
and no price controls without indemnification. Argentina bound itself to

these promises in the form of legal obligations.

According to Claimants, these are the promises that the umbrella clause is
meant to address. The Tribunal need not decide that every commitment
regarding investments embodied in general legislation or regulations gives
rise to obligations that must be observed under that clause. Rather, liability
derives from this article of the Treaty when in the particular circumstances

of this case, Respondent failed to observe its obligations.

The problem with LG&E’s claim, according to Respondent, is that it
assumes that general legislation relating to the natural gas distribution and
transportation industry falls within Article II(2)(c)’s parameter. Respondent
suggests that such promises do not qualify as specific representations that

make the umbrella clause effective.

Respondent also asserts that LG&E’s claims are nothing more than claims of
contractual breaches, which are to be considered under the specific
jurisdictional clauses of the contract and not adjudicated in an international

forum under application of the umbrella clause.

Tribunal’s Analysis

Article II(2)(c) of the Treaty provides that “[e]ach party shall observe any

obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments.”

Such clause, referred to as an “umbrella clause,” is a general provision
included in a fairly large number of bilateral treaties that creates a
requirement for the host State to meet its obligations towards foreign
investors, including those that derive from a contract. Hence such
obligations receive extra protection by virtue of their consideration under the

bilateral treaty.

Sl

171. In many cases it has been considered that the umbrella clause is activated not
by obligations set forth in municipal law, but in contracts between the State
and the investor.“* Several of those tribunals have concluded that the breach
of a contractual obligation in a contract between the State and the investor

gives rise to a claim under the umbrella clause.”

172. The issue for the Tribunal’s consideration is whether the provisions of the
Gas Law and its implementing regulations constitute (i) “obligations” (ii)
“with regard to” LG&E’s capacity as a foreign investor (iii) with respect to
its “investment,” such that abrogation of the guarantees set forth in the Gas

Law and its implementing regulations give rise to a violation of the Treaty.

173. In this case, it will be necessary to establish whether LG&E’s claims fall

under the umbrella clause’s protection.

174. In order to determine the applicability of the umbrella clause, the Tribunal
should establish if by virtue of the provisions of the Gas Law and its
regulations, the Argentine State has assumed international obligations with
respect to LG&E and its investment. To this end, it is necessary to remember
that the provisions of the Gas Law and its regulation fixed and regulated the
tariff scheme ensuring the value of Claimants’ investment; that the purpose
of Claimants’ investment was to increase the value of its shares in the
Licensees through a fragile balanced management of profits and costs,
represented by the tariffs fixed by Argentina in light of the already
mentioned Gas Law and its regulation. In view of the statements above, the
Tribunal concludes that these provisions were not legal obligations of a

general nature.” On the contrary, they were very specific in relation to

48 See e.g., CMS, 1300 (citing cases).

* CMS, | 303; SGS v. Republic of the Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/6 (29 January 2004), {¥f 127-28.

*° SGS v. Philippines, { 121 (“For [the umbrella clause] to be applicable, the host State must have
assumed a legal obligation, and it must have been assumed vi is the specific investment — not as a
matter of the application of some legal obligation of a general character.”).

 

    

52

LG&E’s investment in Argentina, so that their abrogation would be a

violation of the umbrella clause.

3. Tribunal’s Conclusion

175. As such, Argentina’s abrogation of the guarantees under the statutory
framework — calculation of the tariffs in dollars before conversion to pesos,
semi-annual tariff adjustments by the PPI and no price controls without
indemnification — violated its obligations to Claimants’ investments.
Argentina made these specific obligations to foreign investors, such as
LG&E, by enacting the Gas Law and other regulations, and then advertising
these guarantees in the Offering Memorandum to induce the entry of foreign
capital to fund the privatization program in its public service sector. These
laws and regulations became obligations within the meaning of Article
II(2)(c), by virtue of targeting foreign investors and applying specifically to

their investments, that gave rise to liability under the umbrella clause.

D. CONSIDERATIONS ON INDIRECT EXPROPRIATION

1. Parties’ Positions

176. LG&E seeks a declaration from this Tribunal that Argentina expropriated
LG&E’s investment in the Argentine gas-distribution sector without
compensation in violation of Article TV of the Treaty, which provides, in
part:

“T. Investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized
either directly or indirectly through measures tantamount to
expropriation or nationalization (“expropriation”) except for a
public purpose; in a non-discriminatory manner; upon payment
of prompt, adequate and effective compensation; and in
accordance with due process of law and the general principles
of treatment provided for in Article II(2).”

177. LG&E articulates its expropriation claim as one of indirect expropriation. In
other words, LG&E argues that the Argentine Government’s treatment of
Claimants’ investment in the Licensees constitutes an indirect expropriation

53

178.

179.

180.

of the investments because the value of LG&E’s holdings in the Licenses
has been reduced by more than 90% as a result of Respondent’s abrogation

of the principal guarantees of the tariff system (Claimants’ Memorial, {| 180).

LG&E contends that, pursuant to Article IV of the Bilateral Treaty, it is
entitled to compensation equivalent to the fair market value of the
expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation was
committed. Claimants pinpoint the date of expropriation in this case as the
date on which Respondent’s course of conduct finally resulted in the virtual
destruction of the value of the investment —not later than August 2000, when
the Argentine court enjoined implementation of the 17 July 2000 agreement

and any further PPI adjustments (Claimants’ Memorial, { 181).

Under Claimants’ theory, indirect expropriation occurs when government
action substantially impairs the value of an investment (Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, {| 53 citing Dolzer Reb., {| 56). In this case, the Claimants
consider that the Argentine Government’s actions had a substantial effect on
LG&E’s shares in the Licensees, which are an investment protected under
Article I(1)(a) of the Treaty. The value of LG&E’s investment was based on
a tariff system and depended on the Respondent respecting the system. The
value of LG&E’s shares in the Licensees now fluctuates according to general
speculation around the future tariff relief that Argentina may or may not

grant (Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {[ 53).

Claimants add that when it comes to establishing whether there was
effectively an indirect expropriation, there is no relevance to the fact that the
Licensees continue to operate or control their gas-distribution business, or as
to whether Claimants hold title to the shares. In the case of indirect
expropriation, it does not matter whether title to the licenses has been
transferred to the State. It is enough to show that their investment has been
impaired as a result of government action, which they claim is the case here
as there allegedly has been a substantial appropriation of value by the State
and transfer of wealth from the gas industry to gas consumers, especially

54

181.

182.

183.

184.

large industrial consumers (Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {| 53-54).

The Respondent denies that any expropriation under Article IV of the
Bilateral Treaty has occurred. Respondent contends that, in order for the
Argentine Government to have either directly or indirectly expropriated
Claimants’ investment, the measures at issue would have had to have been
designed to transfer title to the investment to the State. The sole difference
between direct and indirect expropriation in this case, according to
Respondent, is that with indirect expropriation, no formal transfer of title is
required, since its purpose is that of “masking, disguising the expropriating
event and of eluding the resulting liability” (Respondent’s Post-Hearing

Brief, { 103).

Respondent argues that Claimants have not proven that the PPI’s suspension
constitutes an expropriating event. Respondent contends that the suspension
of the PPI adjustments would have affected tariffs by approximately 2%, and
states that under no circumstance could a tribunal conclude that such a small

loss qualifies as an expropriation subject to compensation.

Argentina argues that in any event there could not have been any
expropriation during the economic crisis. The fact that the licensees may
have been affected by the crisis, along with everyone else, does not lead to
the conclusion that their investment was expropriated. Respondent denies
any causal link between the measures adopted by the Argentine State during
this time and the fluctuations in the value of LG&E’s shares in the licensees.
In its opinion, the fluctuation in the value of LG&E’s investment is
attributable to the “macroeconomic conditions affecting the Argentine
Republic”, rather than the measures adopted by the Argentine State
(Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, { 109). Argentina points out that between
1997 and 2000, LG&E earned higher income than expected through its

investments in the licensees.

Finally, after objecting the expropriation claim because the company

55

2.

185.

186.

187.

remains de facto and by law the owner of the investment, Respondent alleges
that, in fact, the share prices of Claimants’ investment have increased in
value from the period immediately preceding the suspension of the PPI
adjustments. As such, Respondent argues that where property is worth more
today than it was prior to the measures’ adoption, the property may not be

deemed expropriated (Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {J 110-111).

Tribunal’s Analysis

In order to establish the sustainability of an indirect expropriation, the
Tribunal must define the concept. Generally, bilateral treaties do not define
what constitutes an expropriation -they just make an express reference to
“expropriation” and add the language “any other action that has equivalent
effects.” Likewise, Article IV of the Bilateral Treaty does not define the term
“expropriation” and does not establish which measures, actions or conduct
would constitute acts “tantamount to expropriation.” Therefore, the Tribunal
shall look to international law in determining the relevant criteria for

evaluating this claim.

A State may, at its discretion, under Article IV of the Bilateral Treaty and in
accordance with general principles of international law, make use of its
sovereign power to expropriate private property with the purpose of
satisfying a public interest. However, expropriation in any of its modalities

requires due process and compensation under international law.

Although in scholarly authority two kinds of expropriation are known, we
will obviously skip the direct one, understood as the forcible appropriation
by the State of the tangible or intangible property of individuals by means of
administrative or legislative action. The parties admit that the claim at issue
does not involve a direct expropriation. In the case of the Argentine
Republic, one could not say that it appropriated Claimants’ investment,
which is the indispensable requirement if one is to talk of direct

expropriation. Instead, we shall limit ourselves to the assumption of the

56

indirect expropriation, one qualified by the Bilateral Treaty itself as

“measures tantamount to expropriation.”

188. Generally, the expression “equivalent to expropriation” or “tantamount to
expropriation” found in most bilateral treaties, may refer both, to the so-
called “creeping expropriation” and to the de facto expropriation. Their
common point rests in the fact that the host State’s actions or conduct do not
involve “overt taking” but the taking occurs when governmental measures
have “effectively neutralize[d] the benefit of property of the foreign
owner.”*! Ownership or enjoyment can be said to be “neutralized” where a
party no longer is in control of the investment, or where it cannot direct the
day-to-day operations of the investment.” As to the differences, it is usual to
say that indirect expropriation may show itself in a gradual or growing form
—creeping expropriation— or through a sole and unique action, or through

actions being quite close in time or simultaneous —de facto expropriation.

189. In order to establish whether State measures constitute expropriation under
Article ITV(1) of the Bilateral Treaty, the Tribunal must balance two
competing interests: the degree of the measure’s interference with the right

of ownership and the power of the State to adopt its policies.

190. In evaluating the degree of the measure’s interference with the investor’s
right of ownership, one must analyze the measure’s economic impact — its
interference with the investor’s reasonable expectations — and the measure’s

duration.

191. In considering the severity of the economic impact, the analysis focuses on
whether the economic impact unleashed by the measure adopted by the host
State was sufficiently severe as to generate the need for compensation due to

expropriation. In many arbitral decisions, the compensation has been denied

5! CME Czech Republic v. Czech Republic, Partial Award, 4 604 (13 September 2001).

S7

192.

193.

194.

when it has not affected all or almost all the investment’s economic value.
Interference with the investment’s ability to carry on its business is not
satisfied where the investment continues to operate, even if profits are
diminished.** The impact must be substantial in order that compensation

may be claimed for the expropriation.

The tribunal in Tecmed required a finding that Claimant had been “radically
deprived of the economical use and enjoyment of its investments, as if the
rights related thereto -such as the income or benefits related to the
[investment...]— had ceased to exist.” In other words, if due to the actions
of the Respondent, the assets involved have lost their value or economic use

for the Claimants and the extent of the loss.

Similarly, one must consider the duration of the measure as it relates to the
degree of interference with the investor’s ownership rights. Generally, the
expropriation must be permanent, that is to say, it cannot have a temporary
nature, unless the investment’s successful development depends on the
realization of certain activities at specific moments that may not endure

variations.

There is no doubt that the facts relating to the severity of the changes on the
legal status and the practical impact endured by the investors in this case, as
well as the possibility of enjoying the right of ownership and use of the
investment are decisive in establishing whether an indirect expropriation is
said to have occurred. The question remains as to whether one should only
take into account the effects produced by the measure or if one should
consider also the context within which a measure was adopted and the host

State’s purpose. It is this Tribunal’s opinion that there must be a balance in

 

» Pope &
% Pope &

Talbot Inc. v. Canada, Interim Award, { 100 (26 June 2000).
Talbot, (101-02.

* Tecmed, { 115.

* Ibidem.

58

the analysis both of the causes and the effects of a measure in order that one
may qualify a measure as being of an expropriatory nature. It is important
not to confound the State’s right to adopt policies with its power to take an
expropriatory measure. “This determination is important because it is one of
the main elements to distinguish, from the perspective of an international
tribunal between a regulatory measure, which is an ordinary expression of
the exercise of the state’s police power that entails a decrease in assets or
rights, and a de facto expropriation that deprives those assets and rights of

95
any real substance. 6

195. With respect to the power of the State to adopt its policies, it can generally
be said that the State has the right to adopt measures having a social or
general welfare purpose. In such a case, the measure must be accepted
without any imposition of liability, except in cases where the State’s action
is obviously disproportionate to the need being addressed. The
proportionality to be used when making use of this right was recognized in
Tecmed, which observed that “whether such actions or measures are
proportional to the public interest presumably protected thereby and the
protection legally granted to investments, taking into account that the
significance of such impact, has a key role upon deciding the

proportionality.” 7

196. As is observed by The American Law Institute’s Restatement (Third) of the
Foreign Relations Law of the United States, “‘a state is not responsible for
loss of property or for other economic disadvantage resulting from bona fide
general taxation, regulation, forfeiture for crime, or other action of the kind
that is commonly accepted as within the police power of the states, if it is not

discriminatory...”**. This criterion was used by the Tribunal of Iran-United

*° Ibidem.
*! Tecmed, (122.
°8 Restatement (Third) of the Foreign Relations Law of the United States, American Law Institute,

footnote cont’d

59

States of America claims in the Too v. Greater Modesto Insurance

Associates.”

197. As was stated in the Oscar Chinn affair of 1934, adopted by the Permanent

Court of International Justice:

“No enterprise... can escape from the chances and hazards
resulting from general economic conditions. Some industries may
be able to make large profits during a period of general
prosperity, or else by taking advantages of a treaty of commerce
or of an alteration in customs duties; but they are also exposed to
the danger of ruin or extinction if circumstances change. Where
this is the case, no vested rights are violated by the State.”

3. Tribunal’s Conclusion

198. In the circumstances of this case, although the State adopted severe measures
that had a certain impact on Claimants’ investment, especially regarding the
earnings that the Claimants expected, such measures did not deprive the
investors of the right to enjoy their investment. As in Pope & Talbot, the true
interests at stake here are the investment’s asset base, the value of which has

rebounded since the economic crisis of December 2001 and 2002.

199. Further, it cannot be said that Claimants lost control over their shares in the
licensees, even though the value of the shares may have fluctuated during the
economic crisis, or that they were unable to direct the day-to-day operations
of the licensees in a manner different than before the measures were

implemented.

200. Thus, the effect of the Argentine State’s actions has not been permanent on
the value of the Claimants’ shares’, and Claimants’ investment has not

ceased to exist. Without a permanent, severe deprivation of LG&E’s rights

 

Volume 1, 1987, Section 712, Comment g.

* Too v. Greater Modesto Insurance Associates, 23 Iran-United States Cl. Trib. Rep. 378, Award of 29
December 1989.

© Oscar Chinn affair, P.C.1.J, 1934, Ser A/B, Case No. 63.

60

with regard to its investment, or almost complete deprivation of the value of
LG&E’s investment, the Tribunal concludes that these circumstances do not

constitute expropriation.

E. STATE OF NECESSITY

1.

201.

202.

203.

204.

Parties’ Positions

Respondent contends in the alternative that, if Argentina would have
breached its Treaty obligations, the state of political, economic and social
crisis that befell Argentina allowed it to take action contrary to the
obligations it had assumed with respect to the gas-distribution licensees.
Thus, even if the measures adopted by the State in order to overcome the
economic crisis suffered during the years 1998 through 2003, resulted in a
violation of the rights guaranteed under the Treaty to foreign investments,
such measures were implemented under a state of necessity and therefore,

Argentina is excused from liability during this period.

Respondent pleads its defense as a “state of necessity” defense, available
under Argentine law, Treaty in Articles XI and IV(3), as well as customary

international law.

Claimants reject Respondent’s contentions regarding the alleged state of
necessity defense. Claimants contend that Article XI is not applicable in the
case of an economic crisis because the public order and essential security
interests elements are intentionally narrow in scope, limited to security

threats of a physical nature.

General Comments on Article XI

(@) Preliminary Considerations
Article XI of the Bilateral Treaty provides:

“This Treaty shall not preclude the application by either Party
of measures necessary for the maintenance of public order, the

61

fulfillment of its obligations with respect to the maintenance or
restoration of international peace or security, or the protection
of its own essential security interests.”

205. The Tribunal’s analysis to determine the applicability of Article XI of the
Bilateral Treaty is twofold. First, the Tribunal must decide whether the
conditions that existed in Argentina during the relevant period were such that
the State was entitled to invoke the protections included in Article XI of the
Treaty. Second, the Tribunal must determine whether the measures
implemented by Argentina were necessary to maintain public order or to

protect its essential security interests, albeit in violation of the Treaty.°!

206. The Tribunal reiterates that to carry out the two-fold analysis already
mentioned, it shall apply first, the Treaty, second, the general international
law to the extent that is necessary and third, the Argentine domestic law. The
Tribunal underscores that the claims and defenses mentioned derive from the
Treaty and that, to the extent required for the interpretation and application
of its provisions, the general international law shall be applied (See section

V.B supra).

(ii) The Question of Whether Article XI is Self-Judging

207. Before turning to its substantive analysis of Article XI, the Tribunal must

determine whether Article XI is self-judging.

208. Respondent has argued that because Article XI is a self-judging provision, it
is for the State to make a good faith determination as to what measures are
necessary for the maintenance of public order, or the protection of its
essential security interests. According to Respondent, under this self-judging
exception, the Tribunal must decide only whether Argentina acted in good

faith or not.

°' Respondent has not relied upon the third element of Article XI, “the fulfillment of its obligations
with respect to the maintenance or restoration of international peace or security.”

62

209.

210.

211.

212.

Respondent considers Article XI is ambiguous and characterizes such
ambiguity as a “strategic ambiguity” on the part of the United States, since it
does not clearly define who should determine if the measures to maintain
public order or protect essential security interests are necessary. Respondent
recognizes that the United States’ 1987 Model BIT, upon which the
Argentina—U.S. BIT was based, does not clarify the United States’ position,
nor does any of the documentation related to the negotiation or ratification of
the Argentina-U.S. BIT. However, Respondent contends that subsequent to
the conclusion of the Argentina-U.S. BIT, the United States shifted its
position permanently with regard to essential security clauses, stating in
1992 that the United States considered such clauses to be self-judging,

presently and retroactively (Slaughter Witness Statement, {[{{ 12-31).

Claimants disagree that Article XI is self-judging, and argue instead that its
application requires that the Tribunal conduct its own analysis of whether the
conditions necessitated measures to maintain public order or protect

Argentina’s essential security interests within the meaning of Article XI.

Claimants contend that neither the plain meaning of Article XI, nor the
context or purpose of the Treaty suggest that Article XI is self-judging, and
that the position of the United States at the time the parties signed the Treaty
was that such clauses were not self-judging (Hearing on the Merits, 28
January 2005, Alvarez, Spanish Transcript, p. 925 et seq.). Claimants argue
that Respondent has not proven that the parties to the Treaty intended Article
XI to be self-judging, which they characterize as “an exceptional thing.”
(Hearing on the Merits, 28 January 2005, Alvarez, Spanish Transcript, p.
932 et seq.). Claimants contend that the United States did not consider
essential security clauses as self-judging until the Russia-U.S. BIT of 1992
and the 1992 U.S. Model BIT, both of which post-date the Argentina-U.S.
BIT, and both of which noted explicitly the change in the United States’

policy that these provisions were to be self-judging.

Certainly, the language of the BIT does not specify who should decide what
63

213.

214.

215.

216.

constitutes essential security measures —either Argentina itself, subject to a
review under a good faith standard, or the Tribunal. Based on the evidence
before the Tribunal regarding the understanding of the Parties in 1991 at the
time the Treaty was signed, the Tribunal decides and concludes that the

provision is not self-judging.

The provisions included in the international treaty are to be interpreted in
conformity with the interpretation given and agreed upon by both parties at
the time of its signature, unless both parties agreed to its modification. In
that case, the date to be considered is November 1991. It is not until 1992,
with the ratification of the Russia — US BIT, that the United States begins to
consider that the application of the essential security measures are self
judging; both instruments post-date the bilateral treaty between the United
States and the Argentine Republic and, in both cases, this change was

explicitly clarified.

Were the Tribunal to conclude that the provision is self-judging, Argentina’s
determination would be subject to a good faith review anyway, which does

not significantly differ from the substantive analysis presented here.

(iii) Necessary Nature of the Measures Adopted
a. Parties’ Positions

Argentina defends the measures it implemented as necessary to maintain
public order and protect its essential security interests. It contends that under
any interpretation, the financial crisis, riots and chaos of the years 2000
through 2002 in Argentina constitute a national emergency sufficient to

invoke the protections of Article XI (Slaughter Witness Statement, {| 45).

Concerning “public order’, Respondent reinforces its arguments on the
necessary nature of the measures it had implemented by pointing to
numerous reports of waves of sudden economic catastrophe, massive strikes

involving millions of workers, fatal shootings, the shut down of schools,

64

217.

218.

219.

businesses, transportation, energy, banking and_ health — services,
demonstrations across the country, and a plummeting stock market,
culminating in a “final massive social explosion” in which five presidential
administrations resigned within a month (Slaughter Witness Statement, {1
46-49). Under these circumstances, Argentina argues that price controls by
the Argentine Government would have been fully justifiable under the public
order provisions of Article XI. Additionally, Respondent argues that actions
to freeze price increases in the gas-distribution sector were justifiable to
maintain the country’s basic infrastructure, which was dependent on natural

gas energy.

Argentina also defends its measures as necessary to protect its essential
security interests. Argentina asserts that Article XI’s “essential security
interests” element encompasses economic and political interests, as well as
national military defense interests. Respondent cites several United States’
officials who have propounded a broad interpretation of “essential security

interests” (Slaughter Witness Statement, J 38).

Respondent attacks Claimants’ basis for asserting that the clause is narrow,
reserved only for military actions. Furthermore, in all of the cases cited by
Claimants, the point was whether the use of military force was justifiable
under international law — a narrow reading of essential security clauses in

these cases would be expected.

Because economic stability, in Respondent’s view, falls within a State’s
essential security interests, Respondent defends the measures it took as
necessary to protect its economic interests. Respondent argues that during
the crisis period, the health, safety and security of the Argentine State and its
people were threatened, and that the economic melt-down had the potential
to cause catastrophic state failure. Thus, the public emergency that Argentina
declared and the Emergency Law the Government passed altering its
financial arrangements were necessary to protect the State’s essential
security interests.

65

220.

221.

222.

223.

224.

Claimants identify the four measures at issue here —suspension and
abolishment of the PPI adjustment, freezing the gas-distribution tariffs, and
abandonment of the calculation of the tariffs in dollars, all taken
unilaterally— and contend that Respondent must prove that each measure was
necessary in order to maintain public order and protect Argentina’s essential
security interests (Reply, {| 209). By the term “necessary,” Claimants
contend that these measures must have been the only option available to

Argentina in order to invoke protection under Article XI.

Claimants define public order measures as “actions taken pursuant to a
state’s police powers, particularly in respect of public health and safety”.
Based on this definition, Claimants state that the measures in dispute in this
case were not aimed at bringing calmness to the collapse that was
threatening the country. Consequently, such measures cannot be deemed

necessary to maintain public order.

With respect to “essential security interests,” Claimants reiterate that such
interests do not include economic interests —only defense or military
concerns. They compare a State’s interest in essential security to a national
security threat, while a “national emergency,” the alleged circumstance in
which Respondent invokes the protection, has an entirely different meaning.
In Claimants’ view, economic crises should not be elevated to an essential
security interest, and that doing so would disregard the object and purpose of
the Treaty. They argue that an economic crisis is precisely when investors

need the protections offered by a BIT.

Claimants argue that in any event, Article XI does not relieve Argentina of
its obligations to compensate Claimants for damages suffered as a result of

breaches of the Treaty.

Claimants also reject the possibility of applying the rule provided by Article
IV(3) of the Treaty. They are of the opinion that this provision does not

apply to economic crises, and it does not authorize the host State to revoke

66

225.

226.

227.

228.

or suspend the protections given to foreign investors (Reply, {| 229).

Claimants invoke Article 27 of the International Law Commission’s Draft
Articles on State Responsibility. Claimants contend that even if the state of
necessity defense is available to Argentina under the circumstances of this
case, Article 27 of the Draft Articles makes clear that Argentina’s
obligations to Claimants are not extinguished and Argentina must
compensate Claimants for losses incurred as a result of the Government’s
actions. Article 27 provides that “invocation of a circumstance precluding
wrongfulness in accordance with this chapter is without prejudice to (a)
compliance with the obligation in question... (b) the question of
compensation for any material loss caused by the act in question” (Reply, 1]

226-228).

b. Tribunal’s Analysis
In the judgment of the Tribunal, from 1 December 2001 until 26 April 2003,
Argentina was in a period of crisis during which it was necessary to enact

measures to maintain public order and protect its essential security interests.

The Tribunal does not consider that the initial date for the state of necessity
is the effective date of the Emergency Law, 6 January 2002, because, in the
first place, the emergency had already started when the law was enacted.
Second, should the Tribunal take as the initial date the day when the
Emergency Law became effective, it might be reasonable to take as its
closing date the day when the state of emergency is lifted by the Argentine
State, a fact that has not yet taken place since the law has been extended

several times.

It is to be pointed out that there is a factual emergency that began on 1

December 2001 and ended on 26 April 2003, on account of the reasons

detailed below, as well as a legislative emergency, that begins and ends with

the enactment and abrogation of the Emergency Law, respectively. It should

be borne in mind that Argentina declared its state of necessity and has
67

229.

230.

231.

232.

extended such state until the present. Indeed, the country has issued a record
number of decrees since 1901, accounting for the fact that the emergency
periods in Argentina have been longer than the non-emergency periods.
Emergency periods should be only strictly exceptional and should be applied
exclusively when faced with extraordinary circumstances. Hence, in order to
allege state of necessity as a State defense, it will be necessary to prove the
existence of serious public disorders. Based on the evidence available, the
Tribunal has determined that the situation ended at the time President

Kirchner was elected.

Thus, Argentina is excused under Article XI from liability for any breaches
of the Treaty between 1 December 2001 and 26 April 2003. The reasons are

the following:

These dates coincide, on the one hand, with the Government’s
announcement of the measure freezing funds, which prohibited bank account
owners from withdrawing more than one thousand pesos monthly and, on
the other hand, with the election of President Kirchner. The Tribunal marks
these dates as the beginning and end of the period of extreme crisis in view

of the notorious events that occurred during this period.

Evidence has been put before the Tribunal that the conditions as of
December 2001 constituted the highest degree of public disorder and
threatened Argentina’s essential security interests. This was not merely a
period of “economic problems” or “business cycle fluctuation” as Claimants
described (Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {| 14). Extremely severe crises in
the economic, political and social sectors reached their apex and converged
in December 2001, threatening total collapse of the Government and the

Argentine State.

All of the major economic indicators reached catastrophic proportions in
December 2001. An accelerated deterioration of Argentina’s Gross Domestic

Product (GDP) began in December 2001, falling 10 to 15 percent faster than

68

233.

234.

the previous year. Private consumption dramatically dropped in the fourth
quarter of 2001, accompanied by a severe drop in domestic prices. Argentina
experienced at this time widespread decline in the prices and in the value of
assets located in Argentina. The Merval Index, which measures the share
value of the main companies of Argentina listed on the Buenos Aires Stock
Exchange, experienced a dramatic decline of 60% by the end of December
2001. By mid-2001, Argentina’s country risk premium was the highest
premium worldwide, rendering Argentina unable to borrow on the

international markets, and reflecting the severity of the economic crisis.

At this time, capital outflow was a critical problem for the Government. In
the fourth quarter of 2001, the Central Bank of Argentina lost US$ 11 billion
in liquid reserves, amounting to 40%. The banking system lost 25% of its

total deposits.

While unemployment, poverty and indigency rates gradually increased from
the beginning of 1998, they reached intolerable levels by December 2001.
Unemployment reached almost 25%, and almost half of the Argentine
population was living below poverty. The entire healthcare system teetered
on the brink of collapse. Prices of pharmaceuticals soared as the country
plunged deeper into the deflationary period, becoming unavailable for low-
income people. Hospitals suffered a severe shortage of basic supplies.
Investments in infrastructure and equipment for public hospitals declined as
never before. These conditions prompted the Government to declare the
nationwide health emergency to ensure the population’s access to basic
health care goods and services. At the time, one quarter of the population
could not afford the minimum amount of food required to ensure their
subsistence. Given the level of poverty and lack of access to healthcare and
proper nutrition, disease followed. Facing increased pressure to provide
social services and security to the masses of indigent and poor people, the
Government was forced to decrease its per capita spending on social services

by 74%.

69

235.

236.

237.

238.

239.

By December 2001, there was widespread fear among the population that the
Government would default on its debt and seize bank deposits to prevent the
bankruptcy of the banking system. Faced with a possible run on banks, the
Government issued on 1 December 2001 Decree of Necessity and
Emergency No. 1570/01. The law triggered widespread social discontent.
Widespread violent demonstrations and protests brought the economy to a
halt, including effectively shutting down transportation systems. Looting and
rioting followed in which tens of people were killed as the conditions in the

country approached anarchy. A curfew was imposed to curb lootings.

By 20 December 2001, President De la Rtia resigned. His presidency was
followed by a succession of presidents over the next days, until Mr. Eduardo
Duhalde took office on 1 January 2002, charged with the mandate to bring

the country back to normal conditions.

All of these devastating conditions —economic, political, social— in the
aggregate triggered the protections afforded under Article XI of the Treaty to

maintain order and control the civil unrest.

The Tribunal rejects the notion that Article XI is only applicable in
circumstances amounting to military action and war. Certainly, the
conditions in Argentina in December 2001 called for immediate, decisive
action to restore civil order and stop the economic decline. To conclude that
such a severe economic crisis could not constitute an essential security
interest is to diminish the havoc that the economy can wreak on the lives of
an entire population and the ability of the Government to lead. When a
State’s economic foundation is under siege, the severity of the problem can

equal that of any military invasion.

Claimants contend that the necessity defense should not be applied here
because the measures implemented by Argentina were not the only means
available to respond to the crisis. The Tribunal rejects this assertion. Article

XI refers to situations in which a State has no choice but to act. A State may

70

240.

241.

242.

have several responses at its disposal to maintain public order or protect its
essential security interests. In this sense, it is recognized that Argentina’s
suspension of the calculation of tariffs in U.S. dollars and the PPI adjustment

of tariffs was a legitimate way of protecting its social and economic system.

The Tribunal has determined that Argentina’s enactment of the Emergency
Law was a necessary and legitimate measure on the part of the Argentine
Government. Under the conditions the Government faced in December 2001,
time was of the essence in crafting a response. Drafted in just six days, the
Emergency Law took the swift, unilateral action against the economic crisis
that was necessary at the time (Hearing on the Merits, 25 January 2005,

Ratti, Spanish Transcript, pp. 415-419).

In drafting the Emergency Law, the Government considered the interests of
the foreign investors, and concluded that it “could not leave sectors of the
economy operating with the brutally dollarized economy —[the] system was
in crisis, so we had to cut off that process, and we had to establish a new set
of rules for everybody.” (Hearing on the Merits, 25 January 2005, Ratti,
Spanish Transcript, p. 417). Argentina’s strategy to deal with the thousands
of public utility contracts that could not be individually assessed during the
period of crisis was to implement “across-the-board solutions” and then
renegotiate the contracts (Hearing on the Merits, 26 January 2005, Roubini,
Spanish Transcript, p. 635). The Tribunal accepts the necessity of
approaching enactment of a stop-gap measure in this manner and therefore
rejects Claimants’ objection that Argentina’s unilateral response was not

necessary.

The Tribunal accepts that the provisions of the Emergency Law that
abrogated calculation of the tariffs in U.S. dollars and PPI adjustments, as
well as freezing tariffs were necessary measures to deal with the extremely
serious economic crisis. Indeed, it would be unreasonable to conclude that
during this period the Government should have implemented a tariff increase
pursuant to an index pegged to an economy experiencing a high inflationary

71

243.

244.

245.

period (the United States). The severe devaluation of the peso against the
dollar renders the Government’s decision to abandon the calculation of
tariffs in dollars reasonable. Similarly, the Government deemed that freezing
gas tariffs altogether during the crisis period was necessary, and Claimants
have not provided any reason as to why such measure would not provide

immediate relief from the crisis.

The Tribunal will now turn to Article IV(3) of the Treaty, which provides:

“Nationals or companies of either Party whose investments

suffer losses in the territory of the other Party owing to war or

other armed conflict, revolution, state of national emergency,

insurrection, civil disturbance or other similar events shall be

accorded treatment by such other Party no less favorable than

that accorded to its own nationals or companies or to nationals

or companies of any third country, whichever is the more

favorable treatment, as regards any measures it adopts in

relation to such losses.” (Emphasis added)
Article TV(3) of the Treaty confirms that the States Party to the Bilateral
Treaty contemplated the state of national emergency as a separate category
of exceptional circumstances. That is in line with the Tribunal’s
interpretation of Article XI of the Treaty. Furthermore, the Tribunal has
determined, as a factual matter that the grave crisis in Argentina lasted from
1 December 2001 until 26 April 2003. It has not been shown convincingly to
the Tribunal that during that period the provisions of Article TV(3) of the
Treaty have been violated by Argentina. On the contrary, during that period,

the measures taken by Argentina were “‘across the board.”

In the previous analysis, the Tribunal has determined that the conditions in
Argentina from 1 December 2001 until 26 April 2003 were such that
Argentina is excused from liability for the alleged violation of its Treaty
obligations due to the responsive measures it enacted. The concept of
excusing a State for the responsibility for violation of its international
obligations during what is called a “state of necessity” or “state of

emergency” also exists in international law. While the Tribunal considers

72

that the protections afforded by Article XI have been triggered in this case,
and are sufficient to excuse Argentina’s liability, the Tribunal recognizes
that satisfaction of the state of necessity standard as it exists in international
law (reflected in Article 25 of the ILC’s Draft Articles on State

Responsibility) supports the Tribunal’s conclusion.”

246. In international law, a state of necessity is marked by certain characteristics
that must be present in order for a State to invoke this defense. As articulated
by Roberto Ago, one of the mentors of the Draft Articles on State
Responsibility, a state of necessity is identified by those conditions in which
a State is threatened by a serious danger to its existence, to its political or
economic survival, to the possibility of maintaining its essential services in
operation, to the preservation of its internal peace, or to the survival of part
of its territory. In other words, the State must be dealing with interests that

are essential or particularly important.™

“Article 25 of the Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts
provides:
1. “Necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for precluding the wrongfulness of an
act not in conformity with an international obligation of that State unless the act:
a) Is the only way for the State to safeguard an essential interest against a grave and imminent
peril; and
b) Does not seriously impair an ntial interest of the State or States towards which the
. or of the international community as a whole.
necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for precluding

   

 

a) The international obligation in question excludes the possibility of invoking necessity; or
b) The State has contributed to the situation of necessi
The ILC’s Draft Articles, after some debate regarding the original prepared under the auspices of the
Society of Nations in 1930, was abandoned and then resumed by the General Assembly in 1963. Its
definitive version, due mainly to the works of Mssrs. Roberto Ago, Willem Riphagen and Gaetano
Arangio-Ruiz, was approved in 1981 and subject to a revision in 1998, which was approved in 2001,
during the 85" plenary session of the United Nations’ General Assembly. (Session dated 12
December 2001, during the fifty-sixth session, Agenda item 162 of the Program, A/RES/56/83).
® United Nations, Report A/CN.4/318/ADD.5, p. 3.
Strupp. K., Les régles générales du Droit de la paix, RECUEIL DES Cours, 1934 I, T. 47, pp. 259-
595, especially p. 568. Similarly, the ILC has defined the state of necessity as that situation where the
only means of safeguarding an essential interest of the State ag: a grave and imminent peril is an
act that is not in conformity with an international obligation binding that State with another State. In
shaping the concept of state of necessity, one must make a compulsory reference to the Russian seal
furs case. There, the Russian government banned the hunting of seals near the Russian shorelines,

 

 

 

  

     

 

footnote cont’d

73

247. The United Nations Organization has understood that the invocation of a
state of necessity depends on the concurrent existence of three
circumstances, namely: a danger to the survival of the State, and not for its
interests, is necessary; that danger must not have been created by the acting
State; finally, the danger should be serious and imminent, so that there are no

other means of avoiding it.

248. The concept of state of necessity and the requirements for its admissibility
lead to the idea of prevention: the State covers itself against the risk of
suffering certain damages. Hence, the possibility of alleging the state of
necessity is closely bound by the requirement that there should be a serious
and imminent threat and no means to avoid it. Such circumstances, in
principle, have been left to the State’s subjective appreciation, a conclusion
accepted by the International Law Commission. Nevertheless, the
Commission was well aware of the fact that this exception, requiring
admissibility, has been frequently abused by States, thus opening up a very
easy opportunity to violate the international law with impunity. The
Commission has set in its Draft Articles on State Responsibility very
restrictive conditions to account for its admissibility, reducing such

subjectivity.

249. James Crawford, who was rapporteur of the Draft Articles approved in 2001,
noted that when a State invokes the state of necessity, it has full knowledge

of the fact that it deliberately chooses a procedure that does not abide an

 

including international waters and founded such decision on the absolute need to adopt immediate
provisional measures. In a communication addressed, on the occasion of this incident, by the Russian
foreign Minister, Chickline, to the British Amb: lor, Morier, the main elements of the state of
necessity were established: the absolutely exceptional nature of the alleged situation; the imminent
character of the threat against an important State interest; the impossibility of avoiding the risk with
other means, and the nece: ly temporary nature of tl ication, linked to the due danger’s
persistence. See United Nations, Report of the International Law Commission on the work performed
during its 32" session, p. 87.

°5 United Nations, Report A/CN.4/315, p. 78.

 

a

   

    
   

 

74

international obligation.” This deliberate action on the part of the State is
therefore subject to the requirements of Article 25 of the Draft Articles,
which must concur jointly and without which it is not possible to exclude
under international law the wrongfulness of a State’s act that violates an

international obligation.

250. Taking each element in turn, Article 25 requires first that the act must be the
only means available to the State in order to protect an interest. According to
S.P. Jagota, a member of the Commission, such requirement implies that it
has not been possible for the State to “avoid by any other means, even a
much more onerous one that could have been adopted and maintained the
respect of international obligations. The State must have exhausted all
possible legal means before being forced to act as it does.” Any act that
goes beyond the limits of what is strictly necessary “may not be considered
as no longer being, as such, a wrongful act, even if justification of the

necessity may have been admitted.”

251. The interest subject to protection also must be essential for the State. What
qualifies as an “essential” interest is not limited to those interests referring to
the State’s existence. As evidence demonstrates, economic, financial or
those interests related to the protection of the State against any danger
seriously compromising its internal or external situation, are also considered
essential interests. Roberto Ago has stated that essential interests include
those related to “different matters such as the economy, ecology or other.”

Julio Barboza affirmed that the threat to an essential interest would be

identified by considering, among other things, “a serious threat against the

existence of the State, against its political or economic survival, against the

° Crawford, James, Second Report on State Responsibility, UN General Assembly, International Law
Commission, 51° Session, Geneva, 23 July 1999, A/CN.4/498/Add 2, p. 27-28.

°7 United Nations, Report A/CN.4/SER.A/1980, pp. 155 and 175.

° Thidem.

© United Nations, Report A/CN.4/SER.A/1980, p.174.

   

75

252.

253.

254.

255.

” Ibidem.

maintenance of its essential services and operational possibilities, or against

the conservation of internal peace or its territory’s ecology.””°

James Crawford has stated that no opinion may be offered a priori of
“essential interest,” but one should understand that it is not the case of the
State’s “existence”, since the “purpose of the positive law of self-defense is
to safeguard that existence.””! Thus, an interest’s greater or lesser essential,
must be determined as a function of the set of conditions in which the State
finds itself under specific situations. The requirement is to appreciate the
conditions of each specific case where an interest is in play, since what is

essential cannot be predetermined in the abstract.”

The interest must be threatened by a serious and imminent danger. The
threat, according to Roberto Ago, “must be ‘extremely grave’ and
‘imminent.’””* In this respect, James Crawford has opined that the danger
must be established objectively and not only deemed possible.” It must be

imminent in the sense that it will soon occur.

The action taken by the State may not seriously impair another State’s
interest. In this respect, the Commission has observed that the interest
sacrificed for the sake of necessity must be, evidently, less important than
the interest sought to be preserved through the action.” The idea is to
prevent against the possibility of invoking the state of necessity only for the

safeguard of a non-essential interest.

The international obligation at issue must allow invocation of the state of

™ Crawford, James, Second Report on State Responsibility, op. cit., p. 30.

" Ibidem.

™ United Nations, Report A/CN.4/318/ADD.5-7. p. 20.
™ Crawford, James, Second Report on State Responsibility op. cit., p. 31. In fact, this is so reflected in
Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, adopted by the United Nations’
Conference on Environment and Development in 1992.
™ United Nations, Report A/CN.4/318/ADD.5-7. p. 20.

76

256.

257.

258.

necessity. The inclusion of an article authorizing the state of necessity in a
Bilateral Investment Treaty constitutes the acceptance, in the relations
between States, of the possibility that one of them may invoke the state of

necessity.

The State must not have contributed to the production of the state of
necessity. It seems logical that if the State has contributed to cause the
emergency, it should be prevented from invoking the state of necessity. If
there is fault by the State, the exception disappears, since in such case the
causal relationship between the State’s act and the damage caused is
produced. The Tribunal considers that, in the first place, Claimants have not
proved that Argentina has contributed to cause the severe crisis faced by the
country; secondly, the attitude adopted by the Argentine Government has
shown a desire to slow down by all the means available the severity of the

crisis.

The essential interests of the Argentine State were threatened in December
2001. It faced an extremely serious threat to its existence, its political and
economic survival, to the possibility of maintaining its essential services in
operation, and to the preservation of its internal peace. There is no serious
evidence in the record that Argentina contributed to the crisis resulting in the
state of necessity. In this circumstances, an economic recovery package was
the only means to respond to the crisis. Although there may have been a
number of ways to draft the economic recovery plan, the evidence before the
Tribunal demonstrates that an across-the-board response was necessary, and
the tariffs on public utilities had to be addressed. It cannot be said that any
other State’s rights were seriously impaired by the measures taken by
Argentina during the crisis. Finally, as addressed above, Article XI of the
Treaty exempts Argentina of responsibility for measures enacted during the

state of necessity.

While this analysis concerning Article 25 of the Draft Articles on State
Responsibility alone does not establish Argentina’s defense, it supports the

77

Tribunal’s analysis with regard to the meaning of Article XI’s requirement
that the measures implemented by Argentina had to have been necessary
either for the maintenance of public order or the protection of its own

essential security interests.

259. Having found that the requirements for invoking the state of necessity were
satisfied, the Tribunal considers that it is the factor excluding the State from
its liability vis-a-vis the damage caused as a result of the measures adopted

by Argentina in response to the severe crisis suffered by the country.

260. With regard to Article 27 of the United Nations’ Draft Articles alleged by
Claimants, the Tribunal opines that the article at issue does not specifically
refer to the compensation for one or all the losses incurred by an investor as
a result of the measures adopted by a State during a state of necessity. The
commentary introduced by the Special Rapporteur establishes that Article 27
“does not attempt to specify in what circumstances compensation would be
payable”.”° The rule does not specify if compensation is payable during the
state of necessity or whether the State should reassume its obligations. In this
case, this Tribunal’s interpretation of Article XI of the Treaty provides the

answer.

261. Following this interpretation the Tribunal considers that Article XI
establishes the state of necessity as a ground for exclusion from
wrongfulness of an act of the State, and therefore, the State is exempted from
liability. This exception is appropriate only in emergency situations; and
once the situation has been overcome, i.e. certain degree of stability has been
recovered; the State is no longer exempted from responsibility for any
violation of its obligations under the international law and shall reassume

them immediately.

Crawford, James, The International Law Commission's Articles on State Responsibility, Cambridge
University Press, 2002, p. 178 et seq.

 

78

(iv) Consequences of the State of Necessity
262. Three relevant issues arise with respect to the Tribunal’s finding Argentina is
entitled to invoke the state of necessity as contemplated by Article XI, and

general international law.

263. The first issue deals with the determination of the period during which the
state of necessity occurred. As previously indicated, in the view of the
Tribunal, the state of necessity in this case began on 1 December 2001 and
ended on 26 April 2003, when President Kirchner was elected (see the
Tribunal’s Analysis). All measures adopted by Argentina in breach of the
Treaty before” and after the period during which the state of necessity
prevailed, shall have all their effects and shall be taken into account by the

Tribunal to estimate the damages.

264. The second issue related to the effects of the state of necessity is to
determine the subject upon which the consequences of the measures adopted
by the host State during the state of necessity shall fall. As established in the
Tribunal’s Analysis, Article 27 of ILC’s Draft Articles, as well as Article XT
of the Treaty, does not specify if any compensation is payable to the party
affected by losses during the state of necessity. Nevertheless, and in
accordance with that expressed under paragraphs 260 and 261 supra, this
Tribunal has decided that the damages suffered during the state of necessity

should be borne by the investor.

265. The third issue is related to what Argentina should have done, once the state
of necessity was over on 26 April 2003. The very following day (27 April),
Argentina’s obligations were once again effective. Therefore, Respondent
should have reestablished the tariff scheme offered to LG&E or, at least, it

should have compensated Claimants for the losses incurred on account of the

7” The period before the state of necessity initiates with the injunction issued by the Argentine Court on
18 August 2000.

79

measures adopted before and after the state of necessity.

(v) Conclusions of the Tribunal

266. Based on the analysis of the state of necessity, the Tribunal concludes that,
first, said state started on 1 December 2001 and ended on 26 April 2003;
second, during that period Argentina is exempt of responsibility, and
accordingly, the Claimants should bear the consequences of the measures
taken by the host State; and finally, the Respondent should have restored the
tariff regime on 27 April 2003, or should have compensated the Claimants,
which did not occur. As a result, Argentina is liable as from that date to

Claimants for damages.

VII. DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON LIABILITY

267. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal renders its decision, partially granting

LG&E’s claims, as follows:
a. The claim for expropriation of the investment is hereby dismissed.

b. Argentina breached the standard of fair and equitable treatment, no less
favorable treatment than that to be accorded under the international law,
and adopted discriminatory measures, causing damage to LG&E.
Argentina’s abrogation of the guarantees under the statutory framework,
as indicated under paragraph 175 supra, violated its obligations to
Claimants’ investments, giving rise to liability under the umbrella

clause.

c. The standard prohibiting the adoption of arbitrary measures is not

deemed to have been violated.

d. Between 1 December 2001 and 26 April 2003, Argentina was in a state
of necessity, for which reason it shall be exempted from the payment of

compensation for damages incurred during that period.

80

The Argentine Republic is liable for damages to Claimants for the
aforementioned violations, except during the period of the state of
necessity, which damages, including interest, as well as specification of
the periods during which Respondent has incurred in violation of its
international obligations, shall be determined in a next phase of the

arbitration and in respect of which the Tribunal retains jurisdiction.

Any decision on the costs of the arbitration is reserved.

81

Made in Washington, D.C., in English and Spanish,

(signed)

Professor Albert Jan van den Berg

Arbitrator

Date: 19 September 2006

both versions equally authentic.

(signed)

Judge Francisco Rezek

Arbitrator

Date: 21 September 2006

(signed)
Dr. Tatiana B. de Maekelt

President

Date: 26 September 2006

82

