INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

LIBANANCO HOLDINGS Co. LIMITED
(CLAIMANT)

AND

REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
(RESPONDENT)

ICSID CAsE No. ARB/06/8)

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal:
Mr Michael Hwang S.C., President
Mr Henri C. Alvarez Q.C., Arbitrator
Sir Franklin Berman Q.C., Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Ms Martina Polasek

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 2 September 2011

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Claimant:
Mr Stuart H. Newberger

1001 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Crowell & Moring LLP
Washington, D.C., 2004-2595
U.S.A.

and

Mr Achilleas L. Demetriades
The Chanteclaire House

2 Sophoulis Street, 9" Floor
P.O Box 21646, CY 1811
Nicosia,

Cyprus

Representing the Respondent:

Ms Lucy Reed,

Mr D. Brian King,

Mr Noah Rubins

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
601 Lexington Avenue, 31st floor
New York, NY,

U.S.A.

and

Mr Jan Paulsson

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
2/4 rue Paul Cézanne

75375 Paris Cédex 08

France

and

Mr Aydin Cogar

Ms Arzu Cosar and

Ms Utku Cosar

Cogar Avukatlik Biirosu

Inénii Caddesi No: 18/2 34427
Taksim, istanbul

Turkey

GLOSSARY AND TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

The following terms and abbreviations are used in the Award.

Arbitration Rules
Aysegiil Uzan

C.CM

CEAS

Cem Uzan

Claimant / Libananco

CM

Concession Agreements

Continued Hearing

C.PHM
CRej.

Cyprus

Danistay

Depository Bank

Depository Bank Report

ECL

ECT

ECtHR.

Electricity Market Law

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
Aysegiil Akay Uzan

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Preliminary Jurisdictional
Objections of 3 May 2009

Cukurova Elektrik Anonim Sirketi
Cem Cengiz Uzan
Libananco Holdings Co. Limited

The Claimant’s Memorial on Jurisdiction and Merits of 12 October
2007

Concession Agreements signed by CEAS and Kepez with the
Turkish Government in 1998

The second tranche of the hearing on Preliminary Jurisdictional
Objections which took place in Paris over the period 23 March to 25
March 2010

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Memorial of 1 July 2010

Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections of
3 August 2009

Republic of Cyprus

Turkey’s highest administrative body, also known as the Council of
State

istanbul Stock Exchange Settlement and Custody Bank, Inc.

Report prepared by the istanbul Stock Exchange Settlement and
Custody Bank, Inc. and filed on 3 March 2009 by the Respondent

Cypriot Exchange Control Law, Chapter 199 of the Laws of the
Republic of Cyprus, 1952

Energy Charter Treaty
European Court of Human Rights

Law No. 4628, Official Gazette No. 24335, 3 March 2001

Jordan
Hakan Uzan
IBC

ICSID

ICSID Convention

Immediate Family

Kepez
Latimer
Ministry

Preliminary
Jurisdictional Objections

Preliminary Objections
Hearing

Prontoservus
Respondent / Turkey

R.CM

R.PHM

RPO /
Objections

Preliminary

R.Rep.Supp

R.Supp

Rumeli Elektrik

RWL

SDIF

Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan

Murat Hakan Uzan

International Business Company

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between

States and Nationals of Other States

The following members of the Cem Uzan’s immediate family:
Hakan Uzan, Kemal Uzan and Aysegiil Uzan

Kepez Elektrik Turk Anonim Sirketi
Latimer (Management Services) Ltd
Turkish Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources

Certain issues selected by the Tribunal to be heard as preliminary
questions pursuant to Rule 41(4) of the Arbitration Rules

The first tranche of the hearing on the Preliminary Jurisdictional
Objections which was held in Washington, D.C. over the period 4
November to 7 November 2009

Prontoservus Ltd

Republic of Turkey

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits of 26 September
2008

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Memorial of 1 July 2010

Respondent’s Preliminary Objections of 23 June 2008

Respondent’s Reply on Issues Contained in the Republic’s 3 March
Supplement to the Counter-Memorial of 14 August 2009

Respondent’s Supplement to Counter-Memorial of 3 March 2009
Rumeli Elektrik Yatirim A.S.
Riley Welch LaPorte & Associates

Savings Deposit Insurance Fund

STA(s)

Tr

Utilities

VCLT

Share Transfer Agreement(s)

Transcript — references to the transcript are made in the following
manner “page number: line number”

CEAS and Kepez

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

iii

&

A.

Cc.

2.

7.

1,

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION 1
Il. THE PARTIES 1
Ill. THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS ......
IV. THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND...
Vv. THEISSUES 17
VI. RELIEFS REQUESTED BY THE PARTIES
VI. THE APPLICABLE LAW

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

VIII. BURDEN AND STANDARD OF PROOF. 4
The Claimant’s position 24
The Respondent’s position 27
Analysis 28

IX. HAS THE CLAIMANT PROVED THAT IT OWNED CEAS AND KEPEZ
SHARES BEFORE 12 JUNE 2003? .......

 

The Claimant’s case 31

Background to Libananco’s creation

   

Libananco’s alleged investment in CEAS and Kepez

The CEAS and Kepez share certificates were delivered to Libananco no later than
15 May 2003 33

   

 

 

Libananco’s production of the CEAS and Kepez share certific in Vienna in
2009 confirmed that it was most likely in possession of those shares before 12
June 2003 34

The Respondent’s case 35

 

 

The Claimant’s changing and conflicting stories...

 

The Claimant’s key jurisdictional documents were backdated.

 

Mr Tiirkkan’s account of acquiring Libananco in April 2002 was flawed and
contradicted by other evidence on the record

The May 2003 dividend records for CEAS and Kepez showed that members of the
Uzan family and not Libananco owned the shares . 38

 

 

The Claimant failed to prove tes/im (i.e. the legal transfer of po:
to the share certificates allegedly acquired by Libananco

ion) in relation

 

  
  

The Claimant failed to produce documents that would have existed if i
true

 

 

The Claimant’s witnesses are not credible.

 

The factual witness evidence...........

 

First Witness Statement of Cem Cengiz Uzan dated 20 September 2007......

 

a= mo

ee AN aAwr YN

10.

12.
13.
14.
1S.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

2.

Second Witness Statement of Cem Cengiz Uzan dated 24 April 2009

 

 

Cross-examination of Cem Uzan....

 

Cross-Examination of Hakan Uzan ....
First Witness Statement of Ali Cenk Tiirkkan dated 23 April 2009
Second Witness Statement of Ali Cenk Tiirkkan dated 8 October 2009

 
 

 

 

Cross-examination of Mr Tiirkkan.
First Witness Statement of Antonis Partellas dated 24 April 2009
Second Witness Statement of Antonis Partellas dated 8 October 2009

 

 

Cross-examination of Mr Partella:
Witness Statement of Polakis Sarris dated 22 April 2009
Cross-examination of Mr Sarris

Witness Statement of Saylan Ciggin dated 24 April 2009

 
 

 

 

 

Cross-examination of Mr Ciggin.....
Witness Statement of Aysegiil Akay Uzan dated 28 April 2009...
Witness Statements of Faruk Ulusoy dated 24 June 2009 and 8 January 2010....112
Witness Statement of Enis Giiglu Sirin dated 25 August 2009 ote 113
Cross-examination of Mr Sirin 113
Witness Statement of Deniz Bozkurt dated 25 August 2009

 

 

   
 
 
 

Cross-examination of Mr Bozkurt

Witness Statement of Orhan Seyfi

Cross-examination of Mr Giinet 116
Forensic analysis of the documents produced by the Claimant

Forensic analysis of the floppy disks produced by Mr Tiirkkan........c ee 121
Audio evidence: admissibility of Exhibits R-113 and R-771 .....cceeeeseeeeeees 126
Requirements for a valid transfer of ownership under Turkish law «0.00.00... 133

 

The Claimant’s position on teslim

 

The Respondent’s position on teslim

 

The Tribunal’s analysis on the requirement of fes/im...

The Tribunal’s analysis on whether Libananco acquired timely ownership of the
shares in CEAS and Kepez

The reasons given by Cem Uzan and Hakan Uzan for their choice of Mr
to acquire Libanane:

  
  

Mr Tiirkkan’s alleged visit to Cyprus in early April 2002 to undertake work in
connection with Libananco

 

a) The Parties’

 

142

 

b) The Tribunal’s analysis..

3. The other circumstances surrounding Mr Tiirkkan’s alleged purchase of Libananco
in April 2002 144

4. The alleged trust arrangement in respect of Libananco
5. Instrument of Transfer dated 1 April 2002

6. The failure of the Claimant and its witn ‘o comply with the nec
requirements under Cypriot law in connection with the transfer and operation of
i c 146

7. Was Libananco acquired by Mr Tiirkkan on 1 April 2002? .0......cceceeeeeeeeneees 148
8. Exhibit R-821 and the issue of dividends

    
   

 

 

 

9. The alleged “family divorce”

 

10. The Share Transfer Agreements .....

 

 

 

a) The earlier version of the Claimant’s case was that the share transfer
agreements were effective to transfer ownership of shares in CEAS and Kepez
156

b) The Claimant’s subsequent change of position ..
c) The share transfer agreements reflected that “cash” was paid by Libananco for

the purchase of the shares ....

d) The Tribunal’s conclusion on the share transfer agreements.............0...0000+ 158
11. Libananco’s board and minutes 160

 

 

12. Was legal ownership of the share certificates of CEAS and Kepez in istanbul
validly transferred to Libananco by 12 June 20037...... 161

 

a) Were the share certificates located in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings
wrapped in brown paper and labelled “Libananco”? .

 

b) Mr Ciggin’s alleged inspection of the share certificates in the Rumeli and
Dofus Buildings in istanbul .. te we

 

 

c) Hakan Uzan’s alleged inspection of the share certificates in the garage in
ikitelli, istanbul 166
d) Conclusion on the issue of whether fes/im in relation to the share certificates

located in istanbul was accomplished. 167

 

 

13. Were the share certificates in Switzerland properly delivered to Libananco so as to
effect a transfer of ownership before 12 June 2003?. 168

 

14. The share certificates produced by the Claimant for inspection in Vienna in 2009
169

 

15. Conclusion on whether Libananco acquired ownership of shares in CEAS and
Kepez before 12 June 2003 171

X. WAS LIBANANCO AN “INVESTOR” WITHIN THE MEANING OF
THE ICSID CONVENTION AND THE ECT?... 173

XI. DO LIBANANCO’S CLAIMS SATISFY EXPRESS CONDITIONS OF
TURKEY’S CONSENT TO ARBITRATE?...

 

 

 

vi

XII. IS LIBANANCO ENTITLED TO THE BENEFITS OF ARTICLE 17 OF
THE ECT?

XIII. COSTS 182
XIV. OPERATIVE SECTION

 

 

I, INTRODUCTION

This arbitration concerns a claim brought by the Claimant, Libananco
Holdings Co. Limited (“Claimant” or “Libananco”), a Cypriot company,
against the Republic of Turkey (“Respondent” or “Turkey”), in respect of a
number of alleged breaches of the Energy Charter Treaty (“ECT”), to which
both the Republic of Cyprus (“Cyprus”) and Turkey are Contracting Parties.
The dispute concerns the seizure of two Turkish utility companies, Cukurova
Elektrik Anonim Sirketi (“CEAS”) and Kepez Elektrik Turk Anonim Sirketi
(“Kepez”), in respect of which Libananco holds shares and the cancellation of
concession agreements between the latter two entities and the Respondent on
12 June 2003. The Claimant invoked the dispute resolution provisions
contained in Article 26 of the ECT and submitted the dispute to the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”),
pursuant to the provisions of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (“ICSID Convention”).

This Award deals with certain preliminary objections to jurisdiction raised by
the Respondent. The jurisdictional phase has involved extensive submissions
by the Parties accompanied by a significant number of exhibits and legal
authorities. While the Tribunal does not discuss all exhibits and legal
authorities, it has carefully considered all the evidence and legal authorities in
this case.

Il. THE PARTIES

Til.

The Claimant in this arbitration is Libananco Holdings Co. Limited, a limited
liability company domiciled and organised under the laws of Cyprus.

The Claimant is represented in this arbitration by its duly authorised attorneys,
Crowell & Moring LLP and Mr Achilleas L Demetriades.

The names of the Claimant’s attorneys and their office addresses are listed on
the inside cover of the present Award.

The Respondent in this arbitration is Turkey.

The Respondent is represented in this arbitration by its duly authorised
attorneys, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP and Cosar Avukatlik Biirosu.

The names of the Respondent’s attorneys and their office addresses are listed
on the inside cover of the present Award.

THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS

On 23 February 2006, ICSID received a Request for the institution of
arbitration proceedings under the ICSID Convention filed by the Claimant
against the Respondent (“Request for Arbitration”). The Request for

Arbitration was registered by the Secretary-General of ICSID on 19 March
2006, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention.

The notice of registration invited the Parties to communicate to ICSID any
provisions agreed by them regarding the number of arbitrators and the method
of their appointment. By letter of 30 May 2006, the Parties informed ICSID
that they had reached agreement on the method, according to which the
Tribunal was to consist of three arbitrators, one appointed by each party within
a certain time limit and the presiding arbitrator (the President of the Tribunal)
to be appointed by agreement of the Parties by 17 August 2006, failing which
the appointment would be made by the Chairman of the Administrative
Council of ICSID.

Within the agreed time limits, the Claimant appointed Mr Henri Alvarez (later
Mr Henri Alvarez Q.C.), a national of Canada, and the Respondent appointed
Sir Franklin Berman Q.C., a national of the United Kingdom. The Parties
having failed to reach agreement on the presiding arbitrator, the Claimant, by
letter dated 21 August 2006, requested that the Chairman of the
Administrative Council of ICSID appoint the presiding arbitrator. On 11
December 2006, after consulting the Parties, the Chairman appointed Mr
Michael Hwang S.C., a national of the Republic of Singapore, as the presiding
arbitrator and hence the President of the Tribunal. The Tribunal was thus
constituted and the proceedings began on 18 December 2006, pursuant to Rule
6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
(“Arbitration Rules”). Mr Ucheora Onwuamaegbu, Senior Counsel, ICSID,
was designated as the Tribunal’s Secretary. He was later replaced by Ms
Martina Polasek, Senior Counsel, ICSID.

Pursuant to Rule 13(1) of the Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal held its first
sion with the Parties in New York on 12 February 2007 at the offices of the
Respondent’s Counsel. Among other things, it was agreed that the Arbitration
Rules in effect as of 1 January 2003 would govern the proceedings; that the
place of proceedings would be Washington, D.C.; and that the procedural
language would be English. As the Parties did not agree on the procedural
calendar, the Tribunal decided that the Claimant would file a Memorial on
jurisdiction and merits, but not on quantum, by 13 August 2007, and that the
Respondent would file a Counter-Memorial on jurisdiction and the merits
within six months of receipt of the Claimant’s Memorial. Upon receipt of both
submissions, the Tribunal would decide whether to bifurcate jurisdiction from
the merits.

se

 

  

 

On | August 2007, the Claimant filed a request for extension of time to file its
Memorial. By agreement of the Parties, the Tribunal granted the request and
allowed the Respondent the same amount of additional time to file its Counter-
Memorial.

Concurrently with its request for extension, the Claimant’s First Request for
Production of Documents, concerning an alleged surveillance by the
Respondent of the Claimant’s potential witnesses and counsel, was filed. On
17 September 2007, at the invitation of the Tribunal, the Respondent filed a

 

20.

response to the Claimant’s latter request, advising that enquiries had been
made with the relevant government departments and that they had affirmed
that no surveillance of the Claimant’s Counsel had been or was being carried
out; consequently there were no documents to produce.

The Claimant filed a reply on 19 November 2007, questioning the
Respondent’s affirmation that no surveillance was being carried out and
reserving its right to reinstate its First Request for Production of Documents.
By letter of 3 December 2007, the Tribunal acknowledged that the Claimant
had withdrawn its request for the production of documents.

The Claimant filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction and Merits on 12 October
2007 (“C.M”). The C.M was accompanied by exhibits and legal authorities,
as well as four Witness Statements of Mr Cem Cengiz Uzan, Mr Reha Ferhun
Gulu, Ms Emel Ersen Gunaydin and Ms Hulya Ozveren, and three expert
reports of Dr Michael B Rosenzweig, Prof Dr Christian Rumpf and Prof Dr
Rudolf Dolzer.

On 18 December 2007, the Respondent’s First Request for Production of
Documents, relating to the Claimant’s business activities and its acquisition
and ownership of CEAS and Kepez shares, was filed. Concurrently, the
Respondent applied for provisional measures concerning security for costs
(“Application for Security for Costs”), requesting an order that the Claimant
post security adequate to guarantee payment of any award of legal fees and
other costs in the Respondent’s favour, namely the amount of US$5 million, or
such other amount as the Tribunal might deem appropriate.

After comments by the Parties on the Respondent’s two requests, filed
respectively on 11 February 2008 (the Claimant’s objections to the requests)
and 25 February 2008 (the Respondent’s further arguments in support of its
Application for Security for Costs), the Claimant submitted an application
requesting for summary relief (“Claimant’s Application for Summary Relief”)
on 29 February 2008. The application was based on information indicating
that the Respondent had conducted intercepts of emails and MSN messages
sent by and to the Claimant, persons associated with the Claimant and the
Claimant’s Counsel in this case.

By its submission of 19 March 2008, the Respondent requested that the
Tribunal deny the Claimant’s Application for Summary Relief. In addition, it
applied for an order that the Claimant deposit the original share certificates in
CEAS and Kepez for safekeeping, as a safeguard against an illegitimate course
of action that the Respondent alleged could be undertaken by the Claimant. On
25 March 2008, the Claimant filed its comments on the Respondent’s
observations of 19 March 2008, including new evidence concerning the
alleged surveillance, and objected to the request for physical deposit of the
relevant share certificates. The Respondent filed a rejoinder on 7 April 2008.

The Tribunal suspended the time limit for the filing of the Respondent’s
Counter-Memorial and fixed a hearing on the Parties’ respective applications.

21.

22.

23.

24,

25.

It also requested and received, on 11 April 2008, the Parties’ summaries of
their respective positions concerning the various requests.

The hearing on the Parties’ applications was held on 28 April and 29 April
2008 at the World Bank in Washington, D.C. The Tribunal deliberated
immediately following the hearing and, on 1 May 2008, issued orders on each
of the applications, pending the issuance of a more detailed decision
containing the reasoning. That decision was issued on 23 June 2008 (the
“Decision on Preliminary Issues”).

The Tribunal dismissed the Claimant’s Application for Summary Relief and
addressed the Claimant’s concerns concerning intercepts and surveillance
through certain protective orders made pursuant to Article 22 of the ICSID
Convention, while recognising the Respondent’s sovereign powers to conduct
criminal investigations. With respect to the Respondent’s First Request for
Production of Documents, the Tribunal ordered, among other things, that the
Claimant deliver originals of share certificates in CEAS and Kepez to an
escrow agent, who would hold the certificates to the order of the Tribunal and
would take instructions only from the Tribunal. During the escrow agent’s
custody of the share certificates, the certificates would be subject to forensic
examination by the Parties’ respective experts. The Tribunal declined to
recommend any measures in respect of the Respondent’s Application for
Security for Costs. Finally, the Tribunal instructed the Respondent to file its
Counter-Memorial on the merits and jurisdiction by 1 July 2008.

On 23 June 2008, the Respondent filed Preliminary Objections on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility (“Preliminary Objections” or “R.PO”). The Respondent
referred to Rule 41(1) and 41(3) of the Arbitration Rules and requested for the
Tribunal to suspend the proceedings on the merits to deal with the Preliminary
Objections as a preliminary question.

On 1 July 2008, the Claimant informed the Tribunal that it had, pursuant to the
Tribunal’s orders, deposited all the bearer share certificates in CEAS and
Kepez that it owned and that were in its physical possession to a proposed
escrow agent in Vienna, Austria. The Claimant subsequently submitted the
details of the proposed escrow agent to the Tribunal. The Parties consulted
with a view to reaching an agreement on the issues relating to the deposit of
the share certificates and other original documents, their inspection, the
proposed agent and bifurcation of jurisdiction from the merits. As they were
unable to reach agreement, by letters of 17 July and 23 July 2008 respectively,
the Parties sought orders from the Tribunal. The Claimant opposed a
bifurcation of jurisdiction from the merits on liability and requested the
Tribunal to direct the Respondent to submit its Counter-Memorial on the
merits forthwith.

 

In its Procedural Order of 11 August 2008, the Tribunal recalled its previous
orders and directions. It stated that its decisions recorded in the Minutes of the
first session remained in effect, and that the Respondent must accordingly file
its arguments on the merits, after which the Tribunal would consider the

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

question of bifurcation. The Tribunal granted the Respondent until 21
September 2008 to complete its Counter-Memorial on the merits.

Also in its Order of 11 August 2008, the Tribunal recalled its order on
document production of 1 May 2008 and directed the Claimant to comply with
that order. It set out a procedure and fixed time limits in respect of the
appointment of an escrow agent, the determination of the place of custody of
the share certificates and the Parties’ agreement on the terms of a protocol of
inspection. The Tribunal also repeated its protective orders concerning persons
on the Claimant’s team of agents and representatives made pursuant to Article
22 of the ICSID Convention.

 

On 19 August 2008, the Claimant informed the Tribunal that it nominated Mr
Stephan Meusburger of the law firm of Benesch & Meusburger in Vienna,
Austria, as the escrow agent, and requested for the Tribunal’s approval of that
appointment. The Respondent did not object to the appointment, but reserved
its position as to certain arrangements concerning the proposed place of
custody, a facility called “Das Safe” in Vienna, Austria.

By order of 16 September 2008, the Tribunal approved Mr Meusburger as the
escrow agent and directed him to provide further details concerning the place
of custody for the Parties’ consideration. Consequently, the escrow agent and
the Claimant concluded an Escrow Agent Agreement. Following several
letters from the escrow agent and the Respondent concerning Das Safe, the
Respondent agreed to that facility as the place of custody.

On 26 September 2008, the Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial on
the Merits (“R.CM”). The R.CM was accompanied by two witness statements
of Mr Mustafa Cetin and Mr Adem Ektirir, a legal opinion of Prof Dr
Zehreddin Aslan and an expert report of Messrs Manuel A Abdala and Pablo
T Spiller of LECG. It also contained four volumes of exhibits and four
volumes of legal authorities.

By letter of 9 October 2008, referring to the Tribunal’s Order of 11 August
2008, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal order bifurcation of
jurisdiction from the merits. It also renewed its request for production of
documents under its First Request for the Production of Documents, namely in
respect of certain original documents other than the share certificates. By letter
of 14 October 2008, the Claimant objected to the request for bifurcation of the
proceedings, but agreed to the production of the requested documents. On 20
October 2008, the Respondent agreed to the inspection of the new documents
at Das Safe. However, it maintained its request for bifurcation and proposed a
briefing schedule on jurisdiction. The Claimant submitted further observations
on bifurcation on 21 October 2008 and the Respondent did likewise on 24
October 2008.

On 3 November 2008, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order approving Das
Safe as the place of custody and directing that the inspection of the share
certificates be completed within three months of the latter Procedural Order. It
further directed the Claimant to produce a copy of the rental agreement for

32.

33.

34,

Das Safe and to produce, within three weeks, the documents requested in the
Respondent’s letter of 9 October 2008, for an inspection of those documents to
take place in Washington, D.C.

Pursuant to the Tribunal’s Procedural Order, the Claimant provided the
Tribunal and the Respondent with a copy of the rental agreement for Das Safe.
The Parties then consulted with a view to reaching an agreement on an
inspection protocol. On 10 November and 11 November 2008, they submitted,
for the Tribunal’s consideration, their respective draft protocols concerning the
inspection at Das Safe, with points of disagreement highlighted. On 19
November 2008, the Parties submitted an agreed protocol concerning the
documents to be inspected in Washington, D.C. at the offices of Crowell &
Moring LLP over the period 24 November to 19 December 2008. Having
considered the Parties’ proposals concerning Das Safe, on 21 November 2008,
the Tribunal issued a final inspection protocol for immediate use.

On 17 December 2008, the Tribunal issued an Order concerning the
bifurcation of jurisdiction from the merits. It selected certain issues to be heard
as preliminary questions pursuant to Rule 41(4) of the Arbitration Rules
(“Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections”). The Order stated in relevant part
that:

 

“2. The issues which have been selected by the Tribunal for
preliminary hearing ... from the Respondent’s Preliminary

Objections (R.PO) are:

a. Issue V.B (Libananco is not an Investor within the
meaning of the ICSID Convention and the ECT);

b. Issue V.E (Libananco’s Claims do not satisfy express
conditions on Turkey’s Consent to Arbitration);

c Issue VI.A (Libananco is not entitled to the benefits

under Art. 17 of the ECT).

3. These issues have been selected on the basis that they are:
a. genuinely preliminary;
b. discrete; and
c capable of bringing the proceedings to an end;

and can be properly disposed of in summary proceedings
without causing undue delay to the substantive disposal of the
case if none of the objections was upheld”.

Also in its Order of 17 December 2008, the Tribunal instructed the
Respondent to finalise an amended or supplemented Counter-Memorial after
the inspection of documents, by 3 March 2009, and fixed time limits for the
Parties’ submissions on the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections. Following
consultations with the Parties, the Tribunal reserved dates for a hearing on the
Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections (“Preliminary Objections Hearing”), to
be held in Washington, D.C. over the period 2 November to 4 November 2009.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

On 20 February 2009, the escrow agent reported that the Respondent had
completed its inspection at Das Safe. Following an invitation from the
Tribunal, the Parties commented on whether or not documents should be
released from the place of custody. The Respondent’s position was that the
bearer share certificates should remain at Das Safe, subject to the control and
direction of the Tribunal for the remainder of the proceeding. The Claimant
did not oppose the Respondent’s request that the bearer share certificates
continue to be held at the place of custody. The Tribunal therefore directed the
escrow agent to continue to hold the share certificates to the order of the
Tribunal and take instructions only from the Tribunal until further notice.

On 25 February 2009, the Claimant submitted its Second Request for the
Production of Documents, which concerned categories of documents relating
to the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections, including certain seized shares.
The Parties filed several rounds of comments on the Claimant’s Second
Request for the Production of Documents in a Redfern Schedule (the
Respondent on 9 March and 21 April 2009, and the Claimant on 20 March and
16 April and 29 April 2009).

On 3 March 2009, the Respondent submitted a Supplement to its Counter-
Memorial (“R.Supp”), including a forensic expert report of Riley, Welch,
LaPorte & Associates (“RWL”) and an expert report of the istanbul Stock
Exchange Settlement & Custody Bank. The Supplement was also
accompanied by seven volumes of supporting materials and an external hard
drive containing photomicrographs.

In addition, on 3 March 2009, the Respondent filed a Request for Modification
of the Tribunal’s Procedural Order of 17 December 2008 (“Request for
Modification”), accompanied by a legal opinion of Sir Elihu Lauterpacht. The
Respondent alleged that it had, a result of the inspection process in
Washington, D.C. and Vienna, discovered evidence that the Claimant had
relied on fraudulently manufactured documents to support its jurisdictional
case. Accordingly, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal add to the
Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections the further objection that Libananco had
failed to prove timely ownership of an investment.

 

On 6 March 2009, the Claimant submitted its comments on the Respondent’s
Request for Modification proposing that, by 3 July 2009, the Claimant file a
response to the “timing” allegations of the Respondent, including the
submissions made in the Supplement. The Respondent filed further comments
by letter of 13 March 2009. On 17 March 2009, the Tribunal directed the
Claimant to provide further justification as to the time it sought for the
preparation of a response, which it did by letter of 20 March 2009. The
Respondent was granted the opportunity to reply (by 27 March 2009) and the
Claimant to file a rejoinder (by 3 April 2009).

On 27 March 2009, the Claimant filed its Third Request for the Production of
Documents, supported by affidavits of three forensic experts: Messrs Peter
Tytell, Lloyd Cunningham and Valery Aginsky. The Parties filed comments

41.

42.

43.

44,

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

on the Claimant’s Third Request in a Redfern Schedule (the Respondent on 3
April and 16 April 2009, and the Claimant on 10 April 2009).

On 23 April 2009, the Tribunal directed the Claimant to file a response to the
Respondent’s Request for Modification and to the Respondent’s Supplement
by 3 June 2009. The Tribunal further directed the Respondent to file a
response by 3 August 2009 and the Claimant to file a rejoinder by 5 October
2009.

On 27 April 2009, the Tribunal ruled on the Claimant’s Third Request for the
Production of Documents, directing the Parties’ forensic experts to meet with
a view to producing a list of supporting materials used by each party’s experts.

On 3 May 2009, the Claimant submitted its Counter-Memorial on the
Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections (“C.CM”), including six witness
statements of Mr Cem Cengiz Uzan, Mr Ali Cenk Tiirkkan, Mr Saylan Ciggin,
Mr Antonis Partellas, Mr Polakis K Sarris and Ms Aysegiil Akay Uzan, an
expert report of Mr Christos Mavrellis, one volume of fact exhibits and a hard
drive containing images of the approximately 49,000 bearer shares held in Das
Safe.

On 12 May 2009, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order concerning the
Claimant’s Second Request for the Production of Documents, granting some
requests and denying others.

By letter of 12 May 2009, as a result of a meeting between the forensic experts,
the Claimant filed a request for the production of certain supporting materials
used by the Respondent’s experts, to which the Respondent replied on 14 May
2009. On 18 May 2009, the Tribunal issued directions concerning the type of
materials that should be exchanged between the Parties’ forensic experts.

By letter of 21 May 2009, the Respondent requested a four-week extension
until 1 July 2009 to file its Reply on the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections.
After giving the Claimant an opportunity to comment, the Tribunal, by its
Order of 26 May 2009, granted the extension until 19 June 2009.

On 3 June 2009, Claimant filed its Response to the Respondent’s Request for
Modification and Supplement (“C.Res.Supp”). The C.Res.Supp was
accompanied by five expert reports of (i) Stroz Friedberg; (ii) Mr Peter Tytell;
(iii) Dr Valery Aginsky; (iv) Mr Lloyd Cunningham; and (v) Messrs Brian
Lindblom and Marc Gaudreau, a declaration of Mr Howard Rile, and one
binder of exhibits.

On 19 June 2009, the Respondent filed its Reply Memorial on the Preliminary
Objections to Jurisdiction, which was accompanied by eight volumes of
exhibits and two volumes of legal authorities.

On 8 July 2009, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order on the Respondent’s
Request for Modification. It amended its Order of 17 December 2008 to
include the following issue to be argued at the Preliminary Objections Hearing:

 

50.

SL.

52.

53.

54.

55.

“15.4 Issue IV of the R.PO (Libananco has failed to prove that it
owned CEAS and Kepez shares on or before June 2003)”.

The Order of 8 July 2009 also dealt with certain case management issues,
including directions concerning the procedural timetable and the Preliminary
Objections Hearing. Among other things, the Tribunal directed the Parties
that it intended to implement witness conferencing and hear the Parties’
forensic and computer experts in appropriate “conferencing groups” according
to their respective discipline, and that each “conferencing group” prepare a
joint report for the Tribunal by 16 October 2009.

On 10 July 2009, the Respondent submitted its Second Request for the
Production of Documents, concerning the Claimant’s latest submissions of 3
May and 3 June 2009. The Parties filed several rounds of comments on the
Respondent’s Second Request for the Production of Documents in a Redfern
Schedule (the Claimant on 15 July, 23 July, 31 August and 25 September 2009,
and the Respondent on 27 July, 6 August and 1 October 2009).

On 13 July 2009, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order addressing a request
from the Respondent that the Tribunal write to a criminal court in Turkey to
gain access to a recording which had previously been produced in the form of
a transcript (Exhibit R-113), the authenticity of which was disputed by the
Claimant. The Tribunal stated that it was prepared to write to the Turkish court
upon the Claimant’s confirmation that it wished to have access to the
recording. Having subsequently received that confirmation and the Parties’
comments on a draft letter, the Tribunal wrote to the Turkish court accordingly
on 29 July 2009.

By letter of 17 July 2009, the Claimant requested a two-week extension until 4
August 2009 to file its Rejoinder on the Preliminary Objections. The
Respondent did not oppose the extension and also requested an extension until
14 August 2009 to file its Reply to the Claimant’s Response. The Tribunal
approved the new time limits.

On 3 August 2009, the Claimant submitted its Rejoinder on the Preliminary
Jurisdictional Objections (“C.Rej”), accompanied by two Witness Statements
Craig Bamberger and Faruk Ulusoy, as well as one binder of fact
, one binder of annexes and electronic copies of legal authorities.

  

On the same date, the Claimant filed a Request for Modification of the
Tribunal’s Procedural Orders of 6 April 2007 and 17 December 2008
(“Claimant’s Request for Modification”). It requested that the issue of
quantum, which had previously been bifurcated by the Tribunal in 2007, be
added to the remaining Preliminary Objections and the merits to be briefed in
the event the Tribunal dismissed the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections.
The Tribunal subsequently invited the Parties to make submissions on the
Claimant’s Request for Modification after the Preliminary Objections Hearing
in November 2009.

 

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

6l.

62.

63.

Also on 3 August 2009, the Claimant submitted a Request to Examine
Witnesses Under the Control of Respondent (“Request to Examine
Witnesses”), seeking to cross-examine certain present and former Turkish
Government officials and employees whom the Respondent had not put
forward as witnesses. The Respondent objected to the Request to Examine
Witnesses by letter of 14 August 2009, and sought leave to file responsive
evidence to the Witness Statement of Mr Faruk Ulusoy. The Tribunal granted
the latter request on 19 August 2009.

On 14 August 2009, the Respondent submitted its Reply Memorial on Issues
Contained in its Supplement to the Counter-Memorial (“R.Rep.Supp”),
accompanied by three expert reports of (i) Riley Welch LaPorte & Associates
Forensic Laboratories; (ii) Curtis W. Rose & Associates and Mandiant
Corporation; and (iii) Dr. Durand R. Begault; and a Witness Statement of Mr
Serkan Gergel. The R.Rep.Supp was also accompanied by four volumes of
exhibits.

On 25 August 2009, pursuant to the Tribunal’s directions of 19 August 2009,
the Respondent filed three Witness Statements of Mr Enis Gii¢lii Sirin, Mr
Orhan Seyfi Giiner and Mr Deniz Bozkurt and nine exhibits, as a response to
certain allegations made in the C.Rej. The Claimant responded that it wished
to cross-examine the three new witnesses at the Preliminary Objections
Hearing and, as a result, withdrew two of the proposed witnesses from its
Request to Examine Witnesses.

On 31 August 2009, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order concerning the
remainder of the persons in the Claimant’s Request to Examine Witnesses,
denying the request. The Tribunal noted that the Preliminary Objections
Hearing would be devoted to the issues previously identified by the Tribunal
and that the examination of the proposed witnesses was not relevant to these
issues.

On 2 September 2009, representatives of the Parties listened to the audio
recordings underlying Exhibit R-113 (a transcript of those recordings) at a
court in istanbul.

On 28 September 2009, the Respondent submitted new evidence (Exhibits R-
851 to R-855) in support of its R.PM and to refute the testimony of one of the
Claimant’s witnesses, Mr Ali Cenk Tiirkkan.

On 7 October 2009, the Claimant filed a Motion to Strike Evidence from the
Record (“Motion to Strike”). The motion concerned certain CD recordings and
transcripts made of the recordings, as well as allegations and statements
concerning alleged fraud and criminality directed at the Claimant, its
shareholders and advisors. The Motion to Strike was accompanied by an
expert report of BekTek LLC. The Respondent filed a response on 16 October
2009.

Having been granted a short extension, the Claimant filed its Rejoinder to the
R.Supp on 12 October 2009. The Claimant had previously, on 9 October 2009,

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

filed the supporting documents for the Rejoinder to the R.Supp, consisting of
four Witness Statements of Mr Ali Cenk Tiirkkan, Mr Antonis Partellas, Mr
Murat Hakan Uzan and Mr Bret A Padres; three expert reports of (i) Stroz
Friedberg; (ii) Mr Eoghan Casey (cmdLabs); and (iii) combined report of
Messrs Tytell, Aginsky, Cunningham, Rile, Lindblom and Gaudreau; and a
volume of exhibits.

On 12 October 2009, the Claimant informed the Tribunal that its owner, Mr
Cem Cengiz Uzan (“Cem Uzan”), had applied for, and received, political
asylum from France, where he was currently residing. The Claimant stated
that Cem Uzan was available to testify at the World Bank’s premises in Paris
or by video-conference from Paris. On the same date, the Respondent
submitted a list of witnesses that it wished to cross-examine at the Preliminary
Objections Hearing. However, it noted that a serious issue arose as to the
legality and propriety of testimony by one of the witnesses that it had
provisionally called, Mr Murat Hakan Uzan (“Hakan Uzan”), owing to an
Interpol Red Notice and an arrest warrant issued by a US Federal Court in
New York.

Ina letter of 13 October 2009, the Respondent submitted its views on the issue
of hearing four of the Claimant’s witnesses; namely Hakan Uzan, Mr Ali Cenk
Tiirkkan, Cem Uzan and Ms Aysegiil Akay Uzan (“Aysegiil Uzan”). It stated
that: (i) Mr Tiirkkan’s situation was similar to that of Hakan Uzan in that he
was also subject to an Interpol Red Notice; (ii) Cem Uzan had absconded from
Turkey because of a conviction of embezzlement which was currently pending
appeal in Turkey; and (iii) Ms Aysegiil Uzan might also have absconded from
Turkey in violation of judicial and administrative orders. The Respondent
submitted that, in these circumstances, it would be wrong as a matter of law
and judicial propriety to permit the four witnesses to testify, and requested that
their statements be stricken or disregarded. It reserved its position on the
question of cross-examination should the witnesses be allowed to testify.

 

On 14 October 2009, the President of the Tribunal held a pre-hearing
conference with the Parties by telephone conference. Among other things, the
Claimant requested that the Tribunal allow Cem Uzan, Hakan Uzan and Mr
Tiirkkan to testify by video-conference from the World Bank offices in Paris,
Amman and a third undisclosed location. The Claimant also informed the
Tribunal that Ms Aysegiil Uzan would be unable to testify due to illness. The
Claimant subsequently filed a medical certificate to that effect.

 

On 16 October 2009, the Claimant submitted its comments concerning the
testimony of the four witnesses and observations on proposals concerning the
order of witnesses and experts at the Preliminary Objections Hearing. On the
same day, the Respondent submitted its comments on the Claimant’s Motion
to Strike. The Claimant filed a reply on 20 October 2009.

On 21 October 2009, the Claimant informed the Tribunal that it had received
from the Respondent a new expert report of RWL, which dealt with an entirely
new set of documents. The Claimant requested for the Tribunal decide that the
report was inadmissible if the Respondent sought to introduce it into the

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

record. The Respondent replied on the same day, arguing, among other things,
that the report was short and related to two discrete forensic issues. The
Respondent further requested that the Tribunal order the production of a first
generation photocopy of an exhibit previously produced by the Claimant for
forensic testing, after which the Respondent would decide on its position
whether or not to seek leave to introduce the report into the record. The
Claimant submitted further comments on the latter report by letter of 23
October 2009.

On 22 October 2009, the Tribunal issued its decision on the Respondent’s
Amended Second Request for the Production of Documents. It also issued a
Procedural Order on the Claimant’s Motion to Strike and the Respondent’s
request to exclude witness testimony. The Tribunal declined to strike any
evidence from the record for the time being, and stated that it would rule on
the Claimant’s Motion to Strike during the Preliminary Objections Hearing.
The Tribunal further declined to strike the written statements of Cem Uzan,
Hakan Uzan, Ms Aysegiil Uzan and Mr Tiirkkan from the record, but stated
that their testimony would not be heard during the November 2009 hearing
se of concerns raised by ICSID concerning certain legal implications
arising from the latter. By letter of 23 October 2009, ICSID clarified its
concerns.

 

By letter of 26 October 2009, the Tribunal instructed the Respondent to file
the supplementary report of RWL by 27 October 2009, without prejudice to
the Tribunal’s decision on its admissibility. Pursuant to the Tribunal’s
directions, the Respondent filed the supplementary report, dated 20 October
2009 on 27 October 2009 (“RWL Supplementary Report”).

Also on 26 October 2009, pursuant to the Parties’ agreement during the pre-
hearing conference, the Parties filed rebuttal exhibits.

On 28 October 2009, the Parties filed two joint reports of the audio forensics
experts and the computer forensics experts. An additional joint report by the
document forensics experts was filed on 31 October 2009.

Also on 28 October 2009, following the Claimant’s notification that Mr
Ulusoy would not testify at the hearing, the Respondent requested an urgent
decision by the Tribunal to disqualify Mr Ulusoy’s Witness Statement and
excuse the Respondent’s three rebuttal witnesses from appearing for cross-
examination. By its Order of 30 October 2009, the Tribunal declined to strike
Mr Ulusoy’s Witness Statement for the time being, and stated that it wished to
hear the oral testimony of the Respondent’s three rebuttal witnesses, Messrs
Sirin, Giiner and Bozkurt.

The Preliminary Objections Hearing was held in Washington, D.C. over the
period 4 November to 7 November 2009. In addition to Freshfileds Bruckhaus
Deringer LLP and Cosar Avukatlik Biirosu, the Respondent was represented
by Mr Mark Howard, Q.C. The Claimant was represented by Crowell &
Moring LLP. The Parties made opening presentations followed by the
examination of fact witnesses — Messrs Giiner, Sirin, Bozkurt, Ciggin, Sarris

 
 
 

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

and Partellas, followed by the conferencing of the Parties’ forensic experts,
and then subsequently by closing statements.

At the Preliminary Objections Hearing, the Tribunal informed the Parties that
it would not rule on the Parties’ requests to exclude evidence, but decide what
weight, if any it would give to the disputed evidence. It also indicated that it
was premature to decide on the Claimant’s Request for Modification of the
Tribunal’s Procedural Orders of 6 April 2007 and 17 December 2008. In
addition, the Tribunal and the Parties discussed the possibility of hearing the
oral testimony of Cem Uzan, Hakan Uzan and Mr Tiirkkan. The Tribunal
requested for the Parties to revert with their views. The Respondent and the
Claimant did so by letters of 25 November and 30 November 2009
respectively.

On 30 November 2009, the Tribunal informed the Parties that its intention was
to hold a three-day hearing in Paris for the examination of Cem Uzan, Hakan
Uzan and Mr Tiirkkan, subject to the Parties’ definitive position on the calling
and cross-examination of the witnesses. The Tribunal attached a letter from
ICSID outlining a procedure to follow for ICSID to facilitate a hearing of the
witnesses, to the effect that relevant authorities be notified of the details of a
video-conference or in-person hearing. The Parties subsequently confirmed
that they wished to examine the witnesses and that they were prepared to
accept the procedure proposed by ICSID. The Claimant requested that the
Respondent take certain measures to confirm the immunity of the witnesses.
The Respondent objected to this request.

 

In a Procedural Order of 18 December 2009, the Tribunal confirmed that it
would hear Cem Uzan and Hakan Uzan in person in Paris and Mr Tiirkkan by
video-conference from Amman, in a hearing during the period 23 March to 25
March 2010 (“Continued Hearing”). It rejected the Claimant’s request
concerning the immunity of the three witnesses, noting that the provisions of
the ICSID Convention were sufficient in this regard, and directed the Parties
to follow the procedure as outlined by ICSID. The Tribunal decided to
disregard Ms Aysegiil Uzan’s witness statement, taking into account Article
4.8 of the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Commercial
Arbitration. Finally, it decided to maintain Mr Ulusoy’s Witness Statement on
the record, indicating that it would decide in due course what weight (if any)
to attach to it.

On 22 December 2009, the Claimant submitted further comments on the
admissibility of the RWL Supplementary Report, arguing that it should be
stricken from the record. The Respondent replied on 6 January 2010. By its
Procedural Order of 7 January 2010, the Tribunal admitted the RWL
Supplementary Report and allowed a responsive report by the Claimant’s
experts by 8 February 2010. The Claimant proceeded accordingly, filing a
responsive report signed by Dr Aginsky and Mr Tytell dated 8 February 2010.

On 27 January 2010, owing to a disagreement between the Parties, the
Tribunal issued a Procedural Order concerning the conduct of the cr
examination of Mr Tiirkkan by video-conference. The Tribunal confirmed its

   

S-

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

previous Order of 22 December 2009, and gave directions as to possible
logistical solutions to certain technical difficulties.

Following a request made by the Claimant, on 12 February 2010, the Tribunal
issued a Procedural Order confirming that the ICSID Convention’s provisions
on immunity (i.e. Articles 21 and 22) applied to Hakan Uzan’s travel, over the
period 22 March to 26 March 2010, to attend the hearing in Paris

 

On 20 January and 24 February 2010, respectively, the Claimant submitted a
second and third Witness Statement of Mr Faruk Ulusoy, requesting that the
Tribunal take the latter into account when determining the weight to be given
to Mr Ulusoy’s first Witness Statement.

 

On 10 March 2010, the Respondent proposed that it file a short reply report to
the Claimant’s response of 8 February 2010 to the RWL Supplementary
Report, and stated that it would in any event address these issues in its post-
hearing brief. The Respondent also attached certain new documents. The
Claimant objected to the additional reply and the accompanying exhibits.

The Continued Hearing (with Cem Uzan and Hakan Uzan attending in person
in Paris, and Mr Tiirkkan attending by way of video-conference from Amman)
was held over the period 23 March to 25 March 2010 as stated above. The
Parties had teams of legal counsel both in Paris and in Amman, with the main
team, the Tribunal and the Secretary sitting in Paris. Counsel for the
Respondent, Mr Mark Howard Q.C., cross-examined the three witnesses.
Telepresence, an advanced video-conference system, was used for the
purposes of Mr Tiirkkan’s examination.

Following the hearing, as the Parties were unable to agree on a time limit for
the filing of their respective Post-Hearing Briefs, the Tribunal fixed the date
for those briefs to be exchanged on 1 July 2010. It directed the Parties to
include in their Post-Hearing Briefs a list of issues to be addressed, a list of
principal cases relied upon, as well as a submission on costs.

On 20 May 2010, the Respondent submitted 16 new rebuttal exhibits
concerning assertions made by Hakan Uzan and Mr Tiirkkan at the Continued
Hearing.

Pursuant to the Tribunal’s directions, the Parties filed their Post-Hearing
Briefs, including their respective petitions for costs, on 1 July 2010 (“R.PHM”
and “C.PHM”). The R.PHM was accompanied by additional legal authorities
and one exhibit (R-1035). The C.PHM was accompanied by its Fourth
Request for Production of Documents, relating to the merits and quantum.

On 24 August 2010, the Respondent filed further new exhibits concerning Mr
Tiirkkan’s testimony. The Claimant filed a response on 2 September 2010,
requesting that the Tribunal disregard those exhibits. On 20 September 2010,
the Tribunal, having regard to all the other evidence available on the record
and also to the belated arrival of the new exhibits (i.e. after the completion of

Iv.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

the evidentiary hearing and final submissions), issued a Procedural Order
declining to admit the new exhibits.

THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The Uzan family has been portrayed by the Claimant as coming from humble
beginnings as emigrant farmers from Bosnia to Turkey in 1910. By 2001, they
were recognised as among the wealthiest families in the world. According to
the Claimant, the Uzans’ net worth has been estimated at US$ 1.6 billion. Cem
Uzan and his father Kemal Uzan, mother Melahat Uzan, brother Hakan Uzan
and sister Aysegiil Uzan owned some 130 business operations, spanning the
globe and in a broad range of industries, including construction, media and
telecommunications, sports and entertainment, and banking and finance.

In the early 1990s, having already purchased a prominent Turkish daily
newspaper (Yeni istanbul, 1964), and having established a strong foothold in
the construction (Yapi ve Ticaret AS, 1965), banking (imar Bank, 1984;
Ababank, 1985), and telecommunication sectors (Interstar, 1990), the Uzan
family decided to invest in the Turkish electricity sector. The Uzan family’s
opportunity to enter the energy sector presented itself in 1993, when the
Turkish Government decided to divest itself of its share ownerships in CEAS
and Kepez.

 

By way of background, CEAS and Kepez were founded in 1952 and 1955
respectively, both as vertically integrated (i.e. performing production,
transmission, distribution and marketing functions) electrical utilities
companies. From the 1950s to the 1990s, the Turkish Government
progressively divested itself of a significant percentage of its equity in both
CEAS and Kepez. Over that period, they operated as privately owned entities,
and were among the most successful electric utility companies in Turkey,
carrying out the generation, distribution, transmission and marketing of
electricity across four regions in the southern part of Turkey.

 

 

In 1992, the Turkish Government announced the block sale offering of its
remaining shares in CEAS and Kepez in separate public tenders. The
privatisation tenders for the block sale of the Government’s remaining
holdings in CEAS and Kepez took place in early 1993. The winner of both
tenders was Rumeli Elektrik Yatirim A.S. (“Rumeli Elektrik”), a company
owned by Cem Uzan and his family. Following Rumeli Elektrik’s purchase of
the Turkish Government’s shares, the Uzan family continued to increase their
equity stake in the CEAS and Kepez, eventually coming to own a majority of
the shares in each company by the mid-1990s. Their ownership of a majority
interest in CEAS and Kepez was at all material times publicly known.

In 1998, as a result of a law requiring them to replace their existing concession
contracts with new ones, CEAS and Kepez signed new concession agreements
with the Turkish Government (“Concession Agreements”). These Conc
Agreements gave CEAS and Kepez the right to continue to operate the utilities
for another 60 years, until 2058.

 

93.

94,

95.

96.

97.

The Respondent has alleged the following breaches of the Concession
Agreements. Among other things, CEAS and Kepez: (i) used a construction
project known as the Berke Dam as a vehicle for improper fund transfers, by
replacing the incumbent foreign contractor with one controlled by the Uzan
family; (ii) improperly financed other companies outside of the electricity
sector, which were controlled by the Uzan family; (iii) refused to take the
necessary steps to provide full distribution services (low voltage lines) and
non-discriminatory transmission services (high voltage lines) in their
concession areas; (iv) violated the competition laws by frustrating the
connection to the network of “autoproducer” companies that were legally
generating their own electricity; (v) realised only a small fraction of the
infrastructure investments the companies themselves included in the
investment plans submitted to the Turkish Ministry of Energy and Natural
Resources (“Ministry”); (vi) failed to provide reliable and uninterrupted
electricity supply to their customers, including electricity-critical facilities
such as schools and factories and so risked public safety and welfare; and (vii)
refused to comply with the key provisions of Law No. 4628, Official Gazette
No. 24335, 3 March 2001 (“Electricity Market Law”), notwithstanding their
legal and contractual obligation to do so, thereby frustrating key elements of
Turkey’s regulatory reform of its electricity sector.

     

The Claimant alleges that, in April 2002, Libananco was acquired by Ali Cenk
Tiirkkan, a close busin ciate of the Uzan family, on behalf of members
of that family. The Claimant’s case is that Libananco subsequently acquired
shares in CEAS and Kepez owned by members of the Uzan family, and that
this process was completed by May 2003 (see paragraphs 136 to 139 below).

 

On 12 June 2003, five years after the Concession Agreements had been
entered into, representatives from the Ministry assembled armed members of
the Turkish military and police outside the headquarters of CEAS. A similar
force gathered outside Kepez the same day. These forces raided CEAS’ and
Kepez’s facilities. Company personnel were removed from the respective
premises, and movable and immovable properties were seized. At the same
time, the Ministry served notices of cancellation of the Concession
Agreements on CEAS and Kepez.

On 8 September 2003, CEAS and Kepez filed lawsuits in the Danistay
(Turkey’s highest administrative body, also known as the Council of State),
hallenging tl Hation of the Cc ion A . On 31 May 2005,
the 13" Panel of the Danistay issued a decision affirming the Ministry’s
grounds for cancellation of the Concession Agreements. It held that “/njo
illegality has been established in deciding to terminate under Article 19
setting out the termination of the Agreement due to the fault of the
compan[ies]”. CEAS and Kepez appealed the decision to the appellate body
of the Danistay, which dismissed the appeal.

 

On 23 February 2006, some three years after the seizure of the assets of CEAS
and Kepez by the Turkish Government, the Claimant filed its Request for
Arbitration against Turkey in the present proceedings.

V. THE ISSUES

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

The Claimant’s case is that, owing to the instability of the Turkish economy in
2000 and 2001 and Cem Uzan’s decision to enter Turkish politics (which,
according to Cem Uzan, left his and his family’s business holdings potentially
vulnerable to politically-motivated reprisals), the Uzans decided to acquire or
establish an international holding company in a stable and reputable
jurisdiction known for providing advantages to international investment
companies.

Libananco was thus acquired for and on behalf of Cem Uzan and his
immediate family members, excluding his mother Melahat Uzan (i.e. his
father Kemal Uzan, his brother Hakan Uzan and his sister Aysegiil Uzan)
(“Immediate Family”) in April 2002.

The Claimant’s case in relation to its acquisition of CEAS$ and Kepez shares
has, however, not remained constant.

100.1 In its Request for Arbitration filed in February 2006 and the C.M filed
in October 2007, the Claimant submitted that it acquired its first shares in
Kepez in October 2002 and its first shares in CEAS in November 2002. It
then continued to acquire shares in CEAS and Kepez over the following
months, with its last acquisitions taking place in May 2003, one month
before the Concession Agreements held by CEAS and Kepez were
cancelled by the Turkish Government. The Claimant submitted that this
process was carried out by way of 32 separate transactions, each
documented by a share transfer agreement (“STA”). The Claimant
supported its case with additional documentary evidence in the form of,
among other things: (i) a Share Acquisition Report allegedly dated 20 May
2003 (Exhibit H-61), which showed a number of transactions as having
occurred between 30 October 2002 and 15 May 2003; (ii) Libananco’s
board minutes allegedly dating from 2002 and 2003, recording the alleged
transactions in the same range of dates.

 

 

100.2 In the C.CM in May 2009, the Claimant advanced a different position.
It argued instead that the 32 STAs were merely expressions of intent to
transfer and that the actual acquisition of the CEAS and Kepez shares by
Libananco was achieved by two acts of delivery or teslim (a legal concept
under Turkish law) in April 2003 and on 15 May 2003 respectively. Many
of the documents tendered by the Claimant (see paragraph 100.1 above)
were therefore no longer helpful (or relevant) to its case.

In any case, the Claimant claims that it was the owner of a majority of shares
in each company by the end of May 2003, specifically owning 65.2 per cent of
CEAS’ issued shares and 60 per cent of Kepez’s issued shares.

The Claimant alleges that CEAS’ and Kepez’s Concession Agreements have
been cancelled outright and that its facilities have been seized and
permanently taken over by the Respondent. Consequently, and based on these

103.

104.

alleged facts, the Claimant has sought determinations from the Tribunal as
follows.

(a) The Respondent has expropriated the Claimant’s investment in
violation of Article 13 of the ECT.

The Respondent has treated the Claimant’s investment unfairly and
inequitably in violation of Article 10(1) of the ECT.

(c) The Respondent has failed to meet the obligations it entered into
with regard to the Claimant’s investment in violation of Article 10(1)

of the ECT.

(d

The Respondent has failed to provide the Claimant’s investment
with the most constant protection and security in violation of Article
10(1) of the ECT.

(e) The Respondent has impaired the Claimant’s investment by
unreasonable measures in violation of Article 10(1) of the ECT.

The thrust of the Respondent’s case on the merits, which is not set out in any
great detail (since, as explained below, this Award decides only certain
Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections raised by the Respondent) is as follows.

103.1 Although CEAS and Kepez had indeed been successful electricity
concessionaires for several decades, their performance deteriorated sharply
once the Uzan family acquired majority shareholding and control. In
particular, CEAS and Kepez breached their obligations under the
respective Concession Agreements on many occasions and refused to co-
operate with the Turkish authorities.

103.2. CEAS and Kepez did not comply with the Electricity Market Law and
its implementing regulations — including, in particular, the requirement
that CEAS and Kepez and other entities transfer State-owned transmission
facilities in their territories to a new independent entity that would ensure
non-discriminatory access to an integrated single Turkish transmission
network. This refusal to comply on the part of CEAS and Kepez
undermined a pillar of Turkey’s reform of its electricity sector.

 

103.3 In the face of this refusal to comply, and other longstanding breaches
of CEAS’ and Kepez’s obligations under the Concession Agreements, the
Respondent had ample reason to terminate the respective Concession
Agreements, which it validly did in June 2003.

The Respondent has raised certain jurisdictional objections to the Claimant’s
claim, and has submitted that, for the reasons set out below, the Claimant’s
action should be dismissed for want of jurisdiction. These are as follows.

(a) Libananco has failed to prove that it owned CEAS and Kepez shares
before 12 June 2003, the date of the alleged expropriation.

105.

(b) Libananco was not an “Investor” within the meaning of the ICSID

(c

(d

(e

)

Convention and the ECT because it is the alter ego of various
Turkish nationals. The facts in the present case accordingly call for
the corporate veil to be pierced.

There was no “Investment” under Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention because Libananco’s alleged ownership of CEAS and
Kepez fails each branch of the five-factor jurisdictional test under
the ICSID Convention as established by case law and commentary
(i.e. the “Investment” must: (i) have a certain duration; (ii) provide
regular profit and return; (iii) entail risk; (iv) entail a substantial
commitment by the investor; and (v) contribute significantly to the
host State’s development).

   

Libananco’s alleged acquisition of CEAS and Kepez shares was
invalid and/or illegal under Turkish and Cypriot law, and is therefore
not an “Investment” protected by the ECT or the ICSID Convention.
The illegality of the alleged transactions deprives the Tribunal of
jurisdiction.

Libananco’s claims do not satisfy express conditions of the
Respondent’s consent to arbitration becau: i) pursuant to ECT
Annex ID, Turkey has withheld consent to arbitrate issues that have
already been litigated before its national courts; and (ii) pursuant to
Article 25(4) of the ICSID Convention, Turkey filed a notification
upon acceding to the ICSID Convention to the effect that only
disputes arising directly out of investment activities which have
obtained necessary permission in accordance with Turkish laws on
foreign capital would be subject to the jurisdiction of ICSID.

 

 

 

(f) The Tribunal has no jurisdiction over claims arising before 4 July

(g

2001, the date the ECT entered into force with respect to Turkey, e.g.
claims brought by Libananco in relation to the Electricity Market
Law.

Additionally, the Claimant’s claim is inadmissible for the following
reasons: (i) Libananco is not entitled to the benefits of the ECT
pursuant to Article 17(1) of the ECT because it is owned by non-
Cypriots and conducts no business in Cyprus; (ii) Turkey is entitled
to deny the benefits of the ECT to Libananco pursuant to Article
17(2) of the ECT because Libananco is a national of a state with
which it has no diplomatic relations; (iii) all of the Claimant’s claims
other than for expropriation are inadmissible pursuant to Article
24(3)(c) of the ECT because Turkey considered the measures in
question “necessary... for the maintenance of public order”; and (iv)
the present proceedings are an abuse of process.

The present Award addresses the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections (i.e.
certain of the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections which the Tribunal

determined were appropriate for preliminary determination). These are set out
below.

105.1 First, whether Libananco in fact owned CEAS and Kepez shares before
12 June 2003 (the date of the alleged expropriation). This is the key issue
in the present case. It is common ground between the Parties that
Libananco would have no standing to prosecute the present arbitration if it
did not own shares in CEAS and Kepez on or before 12 June 2003. The
Claimant’s position is that Libananco owned the shares in question before
12 June 2003. The Respondent’s position is that Libananco did not acquire
the shares in question on or before 12 June 2003, and that the Claimant has
failed to prove the facts which it asserts to be true.

 

105.2 Second, whether Libananco is an “Investor” within the meaning of the
ICSID Convention and the ECT. The difference between the Parties here is
whether Libananco has any real corporate existence of its own, or if it is
merely an alter ego of the Uzan family, and therefore does not qualify as a
foreign investor entitled to maintain claims under the ICSID Convention
and the ECT. The Respondent submits that Libananco’s corporate veil
should be pierced for the reason given above. The Claimant’s position, on
the other hand, is that Libananco is plainly an “Investor” within the
meaning of the ECT and the ICSID Convention by virtue of its place of
incorporation and hence its nationality. The Claimant argues, among other
things, that the Respondent has not shown the existence of any rule of
corporate nationality that would override the plain definition of “Investor”
for the purposes of the ECT and ICSID Convention, or that there is any
international law doctrine of “veil-piercing” that would take precedence in
the present circumstances.

105.3. Third, whether Libananco’s claims satisfy express conditions of
Turkey’s consent to arbitration. Here, the Respondent relies principally on
Article 26(3)(b)(i) of the ECT which states that:

 

 

“Contracting Parties listed in Annex ID do not give ... unconditional
consent [to international arbitration] where the Investor has
previously submitted the dispute [to the courts or admistrative
tribunals of the Contracting Party to the dispute] ”.

Turkey is a Contracting Party listed in Annex ID to the ECT. The
Respondent’s position is that the subject matter of the present dispute has
already been submitted to the Turkish courts by the Uzan family and
related entities, and that the latter were unsuccessful in their litigation. For
that reason, the Respondent has not consented to arbitrate the present
dispute. The Claimant’s response is that Libananco itself has never
submitted itself to the jurisdiction of the Turkish courts, and therefore has
never been a party in any Turkish litigation; further, the disputes before the
Turkish courts referred to by the Respondent are not the same as the
present dispute before this Tribunal.

20

105.4 Fourth, whether Libananco is entitled to the benefits of the ECT under
its Article 17. The Respondent relies on Articles 17(1) and 17(2) of the
ECT to argue that Libananco is not entitled to the benefits of the ECT. In
broad terms, these provisions deny the benefits of the ECT to: (i) a legal
entity which has “no substantial business activities” in the country in
which it is organised, and is owned by citizens or nationals of a “third
state” (Article 17(1) of the ECT); and (ii) an investment which is one
belonging to an “Investor of a third state” in respect of which the denying
Contracting Party does not maintain a diplomatic relationship (Article
17(2)(a) of the ECT). The Respondent has accordingly submitted that: (i)
Libananco has never had any substantial business activities in Cyprus; (ii)
Libananco is owned or controlled by citizens or nationals of a “third state”;
and (iii) that Turkey and Cyprus do not maintain diplomatic relations. The
crux of the Claimant’s position is simply that both Cyprus and Turkey are
Contracting Parties to the ECT, and consequently neither is a “third state”.

VI. RELIEFS REQUESTED BY THE PARTIES

 

106. On the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections set out above, the Claimant has
sought the following orders from the Tribunal:

(a) a denial of the Respondent’s jurisdictional objection based on the
timing of the Claimant’s acquisition of CEAS and Kepez bearer

share certificates;

a declaration that the Respondent’s allegations of fraud and forgery
regarding this dispute are unsubstantiated, and that the Claimant did
in fact acquire a substantial and controlling interest in CEAS and
Kepez prior to 12 June 2003;

(c) a dismissal of the Respondent’s other Preliminary Jurisdictional
Objections;

(d

the advancement of this arbitration forward as expeditiously as
possible to the remaining jurisdictional objections, and the merits
and quantum phase; and

(e) an order for the Respondent to bear all the Claimant’s costs and
expenses relating to the present phase of the arbitration (i.e. the
determination of the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections).

107. The Claimant has additionally requested for the following reliefs:

(a) damages in an amount to be quantified in the damages phase of the
arbitration;

all costs associated with this arbitration;

(c

all attorney’s fees and expenses;

21

108.

Vil.

109.

110.

(d) pre-award and post-award interest, as appropriate in light of the
other items of relief requested, at the highest rate; and

(e) such other relief as the Tribunal may deem appropriate.
The Respondent, on the other hand, requests that the Tribunal issue an Award:

(a)

dismissing the Claimant’s claims in their entirety;

declaring that Libananco has asserted its claims in bad faith and on
the basis of fraudulent documents; and

(c

awarding the Respondent all the expenses and costs associated with
these proceedings, including interest.

THE APPLICABLE LAW

As agreed by the Parties, the Tribunal must analyse its jurisdiction under
Article 26 of the ECT and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

The relevant provisions of Article 26 of the ECT state:

“(1) Disputes between a Contracting Party and an Investor of
another Contracting Party relating to an Investment of the
latter in the Area of the former, which concern an alleged
breach of an obligation of the former under Part III shall, if
possible, be settled amicably.

(2) — If such disputes can not be settled according to the
provisions of paragraph (1) within a period of three months
Jrom the date on which either party to the dispute requested
amicable settlement, the Investor party to the dispute may
choose to submit it for resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Contracting
Party party to the dispute;

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed
dispute settlement procedure; or

(o) in accordance with the following paragraphs of this
Article.

(3) (a) Subject only to subparagraphs (b) and (c), each
Contracting Party hereby gives its unconditional consent to
the submission of a dispute to international arbitration or
conciliation in accordance with the provisions of this
Article.

22

111.

(b) (i) The Contracting Parties listed in Annex ID do not give such

(ii)

4

mw

S(a)

@

(ii)

©

unconditional consent where the Investor has previously
submitted the dispute under subparagraph (2) (a) or (b).

For the sake of transparency, each Contracting Party that
is listed in Annex ID shall provide a written statement of its
policies, practices and conditions in this regard to the
Secretariat no later than the date of the deposit of its
instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval in
accordance with Article 39 or the deposit of its instrument
of accession in accordance with Article 41.

In the event that an Investor chooses to submit the dispute
for resolution under subparagraph 2(c), the Investor shall
further provide its consent in writing for the dispute to be
submitted to:

The International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes established pursuant to the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States opened for signature at
Washington, 18 March 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the
“ICSID Convention”), if the Contracting Party of the
Investor and the Contracting Party party to the dispute are
both parties to the ICSID Convention; or

The consent given in paragraph (3) together with the
written consent of the Investor given pursuant to paragraph
(4) shall be considered to satisfy the requirement for:

written consent of the parties to a dispute for purposes of
Chapter II of the ICSID Convention and for purposes of the
Additional Facility Rules.

an “agreement in writing” for purposes of article II of the
United Nations Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New
York, 10 June 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the “New
York Convention”) ...

A tribunal established under paragraph (4) shall decide the
issues in dispute in accordance with this Treaty and
applicable rules and principles of international law”.

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention states:

23

112.

113.

Vu.

114.

115.

“The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State
(or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State
designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in
writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their
consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally”.

Additionally, it is common ground between the Parties that Turkish law
applies to the issue of whether (and when) Libananco acquired the shares in
question and thus had an “Investment” under Article 26(1) of the ECT and
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. In interpreting the provisions of the
ECT and the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal has considered previous ICSID
decisions and awards relied on by the Parties.

Accordingly, in this Award, the Tribunal will apply the provisions of the ECT
and the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal will also apply Turkish law
(evidence of which has been given by both Parties) to determine whether there
has been a valid transfer of the shares in question to Libananco as this is a
question of domestic law.

 

BURDEN AND STANDARD OF PROOF

The Tribunal now turns to consider the issue of which Party bears the burden
of proof in relation to the facts and assertions advanced by each of them. It is
necessary to set the stage at the outset since the Parties differ fundamentally as
to the issue of burden of proof.

A, The Claimant’s position

The Claimant, in the C.M, made the argument initially that the Tribunal
should, at the jurisdictional phase, accept pro tem the facts alleged by the
Claimant as substantiation for its claims of breach. In support of this
proposition, the Claimant cited the case of Kardassopoulos v Georgia, ICSID
Case No. ARB/05/18 (Decision on Jurisdiction of 6 July 2007) (quoting
Siemens v Argentina, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/8, (Decision on Jurisdiction, 4
August 2004, at paragraph 180), at paragraph 103:

 

“At this stage of the proceedings, the Tribunal is not required to
consider whether the claims under the Treaty made by [Claimant] are
correct. This is a matter for the merits. The Tribunal simply has to be
satisfied that, if Claimant’s allegations would be proven correct, then
the Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider them”.

However, in the C.Rej, the Claimant recognised and admitted that the latter
submission had been made at a time when the Respondent had not yet raised
any objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. The Claimant has since expressly
recognised that it bears the burden of demonstrating its timely ownership of the
bearer share certificates in question, and has indeed put forward substantial

24

documentary, testimonial and forensic evidence in that regard in the course of
these proceedings.

116. However, in relation to the remaining three Preliminary Jurisdictional
Objections, the Claimant has pleaded the principle of actori incumbit probatio
(i.e. he who asserts must prove). Specifically, the Claimant has submitted that
the Respondent bears the burden of proving the legal theories on which it
relies and that the latter are applicable to the facts in the present case. The
Claimant’s argument is this.

116.1 With respect to the Respondent’s assertion that Libananco’s legal
personality has been “misused” for purposes of perpetrating a “fraud” (i.e.
the second Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection set out in paragraph 105.2
above), it is a general principle of law that “good faith is to be presumed,
whilst an abuse of right is not”.' Thus, “It rests with the party who states

that there has been such a misuse to prove his statement”.

116.2 With respect to the Respondent’s contention that it has limited its
consent to arbitration of the present dispute (i.e. the third Preliminary
Jurisdictional Objection set out in paragraph 105.3 above), general
principles of law dictate that:

 

“whoever will derive to himself any advantage by the exception to a
general rule, or by interference with the generally acknowledged rights
of another, is bound to prove that his case is completely within the
exception”.

Accordingly, it is for the Respondent to prove that it has limited its consent
to arbitration.

116.3 In relation to the Respondent’s argument that it is entitled to invoke
Article 17 of the ECT to deny Libananco the benefits of Part III of the
treaty (ie. the fourth Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection set out in
paragraph 105.4 above), this constitutes an affirmative defence on the
merits. In Generation Ukraine v Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9
(Award dated 16 September 2003), it was held by the tribunal that (at
paragraph 15.7):

“In the absence of any competing considerations advanced by the
Respondent, the Tribunal is satisfied that “third country control” over
Generation Ukraine is a prerequisite for any purported invocation of
Article I(2) by the Respondent. Furthermore, the burden of proof to
establish the factual basis of the “third country control”, together with

' Citing Bin Cheng, General Principles of Law as Applies by International Courts and Tribunals
(Cambridge 2006) at 305.

> Citing Bin Cheng, General Principles of Law as Applies by International Courts and Tribunals
(Cambridge 2006) at 305 (quoting Certain German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia (F.R.G. v. Pol.),
1926 P.C.LJ. (ser. A) No. 7, at 30 (1926)).

> Citing Bin Cheng, General Principles of Law as Applies by International Courts and Tribunals
(Cambridge 2006) at 306 (quoting Jay Treaty (Art. VII) Arb (1794) 4 INT. ADJ. M.S. 372 at 407).

 

25

117.

the other conditions, falls upon the State as the party invoking the
“right to deny” conferred by Article 1(2)”.

(emphasis added by Claimant)

The Claimant also cited the case of AMTO LLC v Ukraine, Arbitration
Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Arbitration No.
080/2005, Final Award (2008), which it argued reached a similar
conclusion (at paragraphs 64 to 65):

“[W]hen a respondent alleges that the claimant is of the class of
Investors only entitled to defeasible protection, so that the respondent
can exercise its power to deny, then the burden passes to the
respondent to prove the factual prerequisites of Article 17 on which it
relies”.

Further, with respect to the Respondent’s submission that the equitable
doctrine of veil-piercing applies in the present case such that Libananco does
not qualify as an “Investor” for the purposes of the ICSID Convention and the
ECT (i.e. the second Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection set out in 105.2
above), the Claimant has contended that since the Respondent’s arguments
here are premised upon the existence of “fraud or other serious wrongdoing”,
a heightened standard of proof should apply. The Claimant has cited, among
other things, the following authorities in support of this proposition:

  

(a) the Case Concerning Oil Platforms (Iran v. U.S.), 1996 1.C.J. Rep.
856, (Separate Opinion of Judge Rosalyn Higgins) (“Oil Platforms
case”) where it was observed that: “the graver the charge, the more
confidence there must be in the evidence relied on”; and

(b) the decision in Siag and Vecchi v. Egypt, ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/15 (Award dated 11 May 2009), where the tribunal
reasoned as follows (at paragraphs 325 to 326):

“For reasons summarised above, the Claimants have submitted
that Egypt must prove its Lebanese nationality objection to a
heightened standard of proof. Chief among the reasons cited by
Claimants is that Egypt’s Lebanese nationality application
rests upon allegations of fraud, and that claims of such nature
are typically held to a heavy standard of proof. The standard
suggested by the Claimants was the American standard of
“clear and convincing evidence,” that being somewhere
between the traditional civil standard of “preponderance of the
evidence” (otherwise known as the “balance of probabilities”),
and the criminal standard of “beyond reasonable doubt.”

The Tribunal accepts the Claimants’ submission. It is common
in most legal systems for serious allegations such as fraud to
be held to a high standard of proof. The same is the case in
international proceedings, as can be seen in the cases cited by

26

118.

119.

Claimants, among them the Award of the ICSID Tribunal in
Wena Hotels. Egypt's principal submission was that the burden
of proof was on Mr Siag, a submission which the Tribunal has
rejected so far as the proof of fraud or other serious
misconduct is concerned. Egypt did not submit that, if it were
required to prove fraud, it should be held to a lesser standard
than that argued by the Claimants. The Tribunal accepts that
the applicable standard of proof is greater than the balance of
probabilities but less than beyond reasonable doubt. The term
favoured by Claimants is “clear and convincing evidence.”
The Tribunal agrees with that test”.

(emphasis added by Claimant, citations omitted)
B. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent’s position is simply that the Claimant bears the burden of
proof with respect to all elements required to establish the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal (including, among other things, that Libananco was an “Investor”
under the ECT and the ICSID Convention and that it owned a qualifying
“Investment” under those instruments at all material times).

The Respondent has taken the position that, during an initial jurisdictional
phase, a prima facie case on the merits may suffice to overcome an objection
that a claimant has failed to state a cognisable claim, since a tribunal will wish
to avoid pre-judging disputed factual issues on the merits in adjudicating such
an objection. However, with respect to jurisdictional facts (such as the
existence or lawful ownership of an investment), mere allegations are
insufficient. These facts must be proven, and the burden to do so rests squarely
on a claimant. In support of this proposition, the Respondent has cited, among
other things, the Oil Platforms case (Separate Opinion of Judge Higgins, at
paragraphs 32 to 34):

 

 

“The only way in which, in the present case, it can be determined
whether the claims of Iran are sufficiently plausible based upon the
1955 Treaty is to accept pro tem the facts as alleged by Iran to be true
and in that light to interpret Articles I, IV and X for jurisdictional
purposes — that is to say, to see if on the basis of Iran’s claims of fact
there could occur a violation of one or more of them.

.. The Court should thus see if, on the facts as alleged by Iran, the
United States actions complained of might violate the Treaty articles.

Nothing in this approach puts at risk the obligation of the Court to
keep separate the jurisdictional and merits phases....What is for the
merits...is to determine what exactly the facts are, whether as finally
determined they do sustain a violation of, for example, Article X; and if
so, whether there is a defence to that violation, lying in Article XX or
elsewhere. In short, it is at the merits that one sees “whether there
really has been a breach.”

 

27

120.

121.

122.

(citations omitted)

In response to the Claimant’s argument that the standard of proof with respect
to the determination of the second Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection (set
out in paragraph 105.2 above) should be heightened, the Respondent has
submitted, among other things, that the Claimant’s contention that a
heightened standard “is common practice in municipal legal systems” is not
correct. In civil law systems, there is no special standard of proof applicable in
cases involving fraud. The Respondent has submitted that, under English law,
the standard of proof does not change simply because fraud has been alleged.
It says the decision of the English House of Lords in Jn re Doherty [2008]
UKHL 33 is instructive (at paragraphs 25 and 28):

“Fraud is usually less likely than negligence ... [T]his does not mean
that where a serious allegation is in issue the standard of proof
required is higher ...

[I]n some contexts a court or tribunal has to look at the facts more
critically or more anxiously than in others before it can be satisfied to
the requisite standard. The standard itself is, however, finite and
unvarying. Situations which make such heightened examination
necessary may be the inherent unlikelihood of the occurrence taking
place ..., the seriousness of the allegation to be proved or, in some
cases, the consequences which could follow from acceptance of proof
of the relevant fact”.

(citations omitted, underline added by Claimant)
C. Analysis

The Tribunal notes that, in relation to the issue of whether Libananco acquired
timely ownership of the share certificates in question (i.e. the first Preliminary
Jurisdictional Objection set out in paragraph 105.1 above), it is now common
ground between the Parties that the Claimant has the burden of proof.
However, for the avoidance of doubt, the Tribunal confirms its view that it is
not required to make a pro tem assumption of the truth of a fact if the evidence
of that fact has been fully presented, and sufficient evidence exists for the
Tribunal to make an informed and dispositive finding at this stage.

 

The Tribunal is assisted by the following remarks of the tribunal in Phoenix
Action, Ltd. v Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5 (Award dated 15
April 2009) (“Phoenix Action”) (at paragraphs 60 to 61):
“In the Tribunal’s view, it cannot take all the facts alleged by the
Claimant as granted facts ... but must look into the role these facts

play either at the jurisdictional level or at the merits level.

If the alleged facts are facts that, if proven, would constitute a
violation of the relevant BIT, they have indeed to be accepted as such

28

123.

124.

125.

at the jurisdictional stage, until their existence is ascertained or not at
the merits level. On the contrary, if jurisdiction rests on the existence
of certain facts, they have to be proven at the jurisdictional stage. For
example, in the present case, all findings of the Tribunal to the effect
that there exists a protected investment must be proven, unless the
question could not be ascertained at that stage, in which case it should
be joined to the merits”.

(emphasis added)

In PSEG Global Inc and Konya Ilgin Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret Limited
Sirketi v Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5 (Decision on
Jurisdiction of 4 June 2004) (“PSEG”), the parties made similar arguments
concerning the prima facie test for jurisdictional challenges. The tribunal
stated that (at paragraph 64):

“The Tribunal is aware that the prima facie test has been applied in a
number of cases, including ICSID cases...and that as a general
approach to jurisdictional decisions it is a reasonable one. However,
this is a test that is always case-specific. If, as in the present case, the
parties have views which are so different about the facts and the
meaning of the dispute, it would not be appropriate for the Tribunal
to rely on the assumption that the facts as presented by the Claimants
are correct.”

(emphasis added)

The Tribunal agrees with the tribunal in PSEG that whether or not the prima
facie test should be applied when deciding a jurisdictional challenge is case-
specific. In this case, the Tribunal made the decision for a bifurcation of
proceedings to hear the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections first, on the basis
that any of these objections, if successful, would be dispositive of the case.
Full evidence and argument on all factual and legal issues relating to the
Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections has been received and heard by the
Tribunal. It would wholly defeat the purpose of bifurcation if the Tribunal
were to now assess only whether the Claimant has provided prima facie
evidence of ownership of the share certificates, and allow the proceedings to
move to the merits on that basis, leaving the question of the substantive
ownership of the shares still to be determined.

 

In relation to the Claimant’s contention that there should be a heightened
standard of proof for allegations of “fraud or other serious wrongdoing”, the
Tribunal accepts that fraud is a serious allegation, but it does not consider that
this (without more) requires it to apply a heightened standard of proof. While
agreeing with the general proposition that “the graver the charge, the more
confidence there must be in the evidence relied on” (see paragraph 117(a)
above), this does not necessarily entail a higher standard of proof. It may
simply require more persuasive evidence, in the case of a fact that is inherently
improbable, in order for the Tribunal to be satisfied that the burden of proof
has been discharged.

29

126.

Ix.

In any event, the question of the applicable standard of proof for allegations of
“fraud or other serious wrongdoing” and the other disputed issues set out in
paragraph 116 above (as to which Party should bear the burden of proof in
relation to the second, third and fourth Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections)
are of academic interest only. As will be apparent from the Tribunal’s
observations and findings below, the second, third and fourth Preliminary
Objections (set out in paragraphs 105.2, 105.3 and 105.4 above respectively)
are not dispositive in these proceedings. Accordingly, the question of burden
of proof and/or the applicable standard of proof in respect of these Preliminary
Jurisdictional Objections does not arise for consideration. Although the Parties
have raised interesting and novel points, the Tribunal does not consider that it
is necessary to say more than it already has at this stage. For the avoidance of
doubt, the respective submissions of the Parties not analysed by the Tribunal
here are neither accepted nor rejected in the circumstances.

HAS THE CLAIMANT PROVED THAT IT OWNED CEAS

AND KEPEZ SHARES BEFORE 12 JUNE 2003?

127.

128.

129.

130.

It is common ground between the Parties that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over
the merits depends on whether Libananco owned CEAS and Kepez shares at
the time of the alleged expropriation (i.e. 12 June 2003).

In order to establish jurisdiction, the Claimant must prove that it owned CEAS
and Kepez shares during the time at which it claims the acts constituting a
violation of the ECT were committed by the Respondent. In Aram Sabet et al
v. Islamic Republic of Iran — Bonyad-E-Mostazafan, Iran-US Claims Tribunal
Case No. 815-816-817, Award No. 593-815/816/817-2, 29 June 1999, the
tribunal held (at paragraph 55 of the award) that: “/n order to succeed in their
claims, the Claimants must prove, as a preliminary matter, that, during the
relevant period, they owned the shares that they claim the Respondents
expropriated”.

The point is further underscored by the award in Saluka Investment BV (the
Netherlands) v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award, 17 March 2006,
where the tribunal similarly held that its jurisdiction would be limited to
claims arising after Saluka acquired the shares from its parent, Nomura. It was
accordingly held that the tribunal did not have jurisdiction in respect of
damage suffered by Nomura before October 1998 when the bulk of the shares
became vested in the claimant, Saluka.

A similar conclusion follows from the jurisdictional provisions of investment
treaties, including the ECT and the ICSID Convention. Article 1(6) of the ECT
defines “Investment” as “every kind of asset, owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by an Investor”. Although, the ECT speaks of ownership and
control (both direct and indirect), this case has been argued by the Parties on
the sole basis of ownership (i.e. it is not part of the Claimant’s case that it had
control but not ownership of the share certificates in question). Accordingly,
unless Libananco “owned” CEAS and Kepez share certificates at the time of
the events giving rise to the present dispute, there can be no jurisdiction under

30

131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

Article 26 of the ECT, which provides for arbitration of “/dJisputes between a
Contracting Party and an Investor of another Contracting Party relating to an
Investment of the latter in the Area of the former”.

In short, in order to establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, the Claimant must
show that it owned the shares in question on or before 12 June 2003 (i.e. the
date of the Respondent’s alleged expropriation of the Claimant’s ownership
interests in CEAS and Kepez).

As this issue turns largely on the facts, this section will be organized
differently from the rest of the Award. The Tribunal will first set out the
Parties’ respective positions before discussing the factual evidence (i.e. the
Witness Statements and oral testimony), followed by an analysis of and/or
observations on the expert evidence (i.e. forensic analysis of the documentary,
computer and audio evidence). The Tribunal will then discuss the law on the
transfer of bearer shares, setting out the Parties’ positions where relevant. As
the factual and expert evidence is voluminous, the Tribunal will only set out
the salient parts of the various witnesses’ (both factual and expert) evidence.

A, The Claimant’s case

1. Background to Libananco’s creation

The Claimant’s case is that the instability of the Turkish economy during the
economic crisis of 2000 and 2001 prompted the Uzan family to refocus their
business strategies by reducing their domestic operations and concentrating on
foreign expansion. It was said that the Uzan family was deeply concerned that
the business environment in Turkey would continue to deteriorate, and
therefore made a decision to internationalise their business holdings.

The Tribunal was also told that, around the same time, Cem Uzan had decided
to enter Turkish politics. Cem Uzan was the founder and leader of the Geng
Parti, a national political party in Turkey that sought to challenge the ruling
party. It was said that, owing to the “rough and tumble” nature of the Turkish
political arena, Cem Uzan’s and his family’s business holdings were
potentially vulnerable to politically-motivated reprisals.

For those main reasons, the Uzan family established Libananco as an
investment vehicle. On | April 2002, Libananco, a limited liability company
domiciled in Nicosia and organised in accordance with applicable Cypriot
laws, was acquired by Ali Cenk Tiirkkan, a close business associate of the
Uzan family on behalf of members of the Uzan family. On that same date,
Libananco’s current Board of Directors was also established, comprising two
directors in addition to Mr Tiirkkan himself: Antonia Kyriakou and Andreas
Partellas, both of whom were Cypriot citizens residing in Nicosia. The
Claimant’s case is that Mr Tiirkkan purchased Libananco in April 2002 and
that this supports its case that Libananco went on to acquire a majority of the
shares in CEAS and Kepez before June 2003.

 

 
 

31

136.

137.

138.

2. Libananco’s alleged investment in CEAS and Kepez

At that time of its acquisition by Mr Tiirkkan in April 2002, Libananco did not
have substantial capitalisation or assets. It was therefore intended that
Libananco would be capitalised through its acquisition of CEAS and Kepez
shares owned by members of the Uzan family.

The current version of the Claimant’s case is that Libananco acquired legal
ownership of those shares in April and May 2003. Its last acquisitions took
place in May 2003, one month before the companies’ respective concession
rights were cancelled by the Turkish Government.

According to the Claimant, the events leading up to Libananco’s acquisitions
were as follows.

138.1 In October 2002, Hakan Uzan and Mr Tiirkkan began executing
written STAs to evidence the transfer of Hakan Uzan’s shares to
Libananco.

138.2 In or around January 2003, the Uzan family agreed to sever their
ownership interests in each other’s businesses — essentially to enter into a
family business “divorce”. Accordingly, it was decided, among other
things, that Kemal Uzan, Hakan Uzan and Aysegiil Uzan would transfer
their respective ownership interests in CEAS and Kepez to Cem Uzan.

  

 

138.3 It was further agreed that the severance of the ownership interests
would be accomplished by capitalising Libananco with CEAS and Kepez
shares, with members of the Uzan family signing STAs to memorialise
their intent to make those transfers to Libananco. In addition, the Claimant
explained that, as part of the family “divorce”, certain intra-family
agreements were entered into pursuant to which (among other things):

(a) Kemal Uzan transferred shares in both CEAS and Kepez to Hakan
Uzan;
(b) Cem Uzan transferred shares in Kepez to Hakan Uzan; and

(c) Cem Uzan transferred shares in CEAS to Aysegul Uzan

— these transfers “provided the predicate for moving forward with the
share transfers to Libananco” (C.PHM, paragraph 43).

138.4 Although the STAs were not necessary for a legally effective transfer
under Turkish law (under Turkish law, a transfer of ownership of bearer
share certificates is evidenced by, among other things, a transfer of
possession to the buyer, i.e. tes/im), Cem Uzan insisted on the STAs being
executed as he believed that, since Libananco was no longer collectively
owned by the family, it would be best for his father and siblings to create a
record of the transfer to prevent potential disputes within the family in the
future.

32

139.

140.

141.

142.

138.5 Consequently, from February 2003 onwards, Kemal Uzan, Hakan
Uzan and Aysegiil Uzan (along with Mr Tiirkkan, on behalf of Libananco),
commenced the process of executing various STAs, thereby evidencing
their intent to transfer their shares in CEAS and Kepez to Libananco,
which was by then beneficially owned by Cem Uzan. In total, 32 STAs
were signed. All 32 STAs were exhibited by the Claimant.

The Claimant’s ultimate position is therefore that Libananco was the owner of
a majority of the shares in each company by 15 May 2003, specifically owning
65.2 per cent of CEAS’s issued shares and 60 per cent of Kepez’s issued
shares.

3. The CEAS and Kepez share certificates were delivered to
Libananco no later than 15 May 2003

Throughout the time the STAs were being executed, the share certificates that
were to be acquired by Libananco were located in the Rumeli and Dogus
buildings (both of which were leased to Uzan group companies) in
Mecidiyekéy, istanbul and in the Uzan family’s holiday home in Switzerland.

The Claimant accepted that a legal transfer of possession to Libananco or
teslim in respect of the share certificates is a prerequisite to Libananco’s
ownership of the latter (see paragraph 392 below). The Claimant submitted
that teslim was accomplished in relation to all the share certificates that it
presently claims to own.

The Claimant’s arguments on tes/im were as follows.

142.1 With respect to the bearer shares located in Switzerland that were to be
transferred to Libananco, these particular shares were owned by Hakan
Uzan and Aysegiil Uzan, and held in custody by Hakan Uzan. The
Claimant’s case was that, in April 2003, Hakan Uzan called Mr Tiirkkan in
Jordan to inform him that ownership of those shares was being transferred
to Libananco, and that he would maintain custody of those shares in
Switzerland until such time as they could be delivered to Libananco. It was
alleged that Mr Tiirkkan accepted the shares on behalf of Libananco, and
agreed with Hakan Uzan that they would remain in Switzerland until
alternative arrangements could be made.

142.2 With respect to the bearer share certificates located in istanbul, it is
alleged that they were wrapped in brown paper and labelled with the name
“Libananco”, and that this was sufficient to signify the transferors’ intent
to have those shares transferred to Libananco. In this connection, the
Claimant alleges that, on 15 May 2003, Saylan Ciggin (then the head of
Cem Uzan’s Star Media Group’s legal department) went to the Rumeli and
Dofus buildings in istanbul and inspected the shares, thereby accepting
them on behalf of Libananco (and thus fulfilling the element of transfer of
possession or fes/im required under Turkish law).

33

142.3. Additionally, Hakan Uzan’s evidence was that Kemal Uzan telephoned
him and told him to go to the garage in an office building in Ikitelli,
istanbul to receive delivery of the large denomination GEAS and Kepez
share certificates on 15 May 2003.

143. The Claimant’s position is therefore that, by no later than 15 May 2003,
Libananco had become the owner of all of Hakan Uzan’s and Aysegiil Uzan’s
share certificates in Switzerland and all of Hakan Uzan’s, Aysegiil Uzan’s and
Kemal Uzan’s share certificates in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings.

4. Libananco’s production of the CEAS and Kepez share
certificates in Vienna in 2009 confirmed that it was most likely in
possession of those shares before 12 June 2003

144. Although the Claimant accepted that fes/im is required for the transfer of
ownership under Turkish law, its position (notwithstanding that its witnesses
have given substantial evidence in relation to the issue of whether fes/im was
accomplished in respect of the share certificates it claims to have owned
before 12 June 2003) was that there is no requirement at this stage (ie. the
jurisdictional stage) to demonstrate the occurrence of fes/im. It submitted that
it was required only to show that Libananco acquired possession of the shares
in question before 12 June 2003, and not how such acquisition occurred.

 

145. In that regard, the Claimant, in response to the Respondent’s request for
production of documents, delivered to the Das Safe facility in Vienna
approximately 50,000 original share certificates of CEAS and Kepez for
forensic examination by the Parties’ respective experts. On 20 February 2009,
the Respondent completed its inspection of the share certificates at Das Safe.
The Respondent did not dispute the authenticity of those share certificates,
although it questioned, at an earlier stage, whether Libananco had possession
of them in the first place, and, if so, whether such share certificates were
authentic (see the Respondent’s First Request for the Production of
Documents filed on 18 December 2007).

146. The Claimant argued that the fact that it was able to produce the share
certificates for inspection made it likely that it was in possession of those
share certificates before 12 June 2003 for the reasons set out below.

146.1 Historically, shares belonging to the Uzan family were kept in the
Rumeli and Dogus Buildings.

146.2 As early as 3 July 2003, when the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund
(“SDIF”)‘ seized mar Bank and began attachment proceedings against
Uzan family companies, access to the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings was
under very tight security given the presence of imar Group Companies in
those buildings.

+ According to the Respondent, the SDIF was authorised to locate and attach assets belonging to
members of the Uzan family to satisfy the Uzan family’s multi-billion-dollar debt to Turkey
stemming from a fraud allegedly perpetrated through imar Bank (a large Turkish financial institution),
which was said to have been owned and controlled by the Uzan family from 1984 onwards.

34

147.

148.

146.3. The SDIF took complete control over the entire Rumeli and Dogus
Buildings on 14 February 2004, including the posting of security at the
entrance and exit of the buildings and on each floor.

146.4 Accordingly, no property, especially a large quantity of bearer share
certificates worth millions of dollars, could have been removed from the
Rumeli and Dogus Buildings after 14 February 2004 without the express
authority of the SDIF.

146.5 While low value and bulky share certificates were discovered in the
Rumeli and Dogus Buildings and confiscated, the high denomination share
certificates that were produced for inspection in Vienna were not (since
they were not in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings from the time the SDIF
assumed control over the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings).

146.6 It could therefore be concluded from the facts set out above that the
high denomination share certificates which were produced in Vienna were
most likely to have been removed from the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings
before July 2003. This (together with the other evidence on the record) in
turn supports the conclusion that Libananco took possession (and hence
acquired ownership) of those share certificates before 12 June 2003.

B. The Respondent’s case

The Respondent’s case is essentially that the Claimant has failed to show that
Libananco owned the share certificates in question before 12 June 2003. Its
main arguments are set out below under their respective headings.

1. The Claimant’s changing and conflicting stories

The Respondent submitted that the Claimant’s changing and conflicting
stories, the shifting testimony of its witnesses and the documents that it has
produced (which contradict certain portions of the Claimant’s own case)
suggest that the case brought by the Claimant is fraudulent. According to the
Respondent, the Claimant has presented four different (and sometimes
contradictory) versions of its case. The key elements of each of these are set
out in brief below.

148.1 In the first version (as set out in the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration
filed in February 2006), the Claimant portrayed itself as an independent
and innocent Cypriot investor that had been caught in a domestic Turkish
political crossfire. However, the Claimant subsequently abandoned that
position, and now acknowledged that the real party in interest in the
present dispute was Cem Uzan himself. In relation to the issue of
Libananco’s acquisition of CEAS and Kepez share certificates, it was
argued that these were progressively completed between October 2002 and
May 2003.

35

148.2 In the second version (as first set out in the C.M filed in October 2007),
the Claimant dropped its earlier argument that it was an innocent investor
unrelated to the Uzan family. Instead, it admitted that Libananco had been
beneficially owned by Cem Uzan and his Immediate Family since 2002.
Libananco was set up to be a conduit for the Uzan family’s overseas
investments. The Claimant also, at that stage, produced certain documents
which were alleged to be contemporaneous, including the 32 STAs
allegedly reflecting Libananco’s purchase of CEAS and Kepez share
certificates from Kemal Uzan, Hakan Uzan and Aysegiil Uzan in the form
of 32 separate transactions occurring between 30 October 2002 and 15
May 2003.

148.3 In the third version (as set out in the C.CM filed in May 2009), the
Claimant sought to introduce a new fact, i.e. pursuant to an alleged “family
divorce” which was consummated in January 2003, the Uzan family
divided its assets among Kemal Uzan, Hakan Uzan and Cem Uzan, and
agreed, in particular, that Cem Uzan would receive the family’s stake in
CEAS and Kepez and therefore would become the sole beneficial owner of
Libananco, thus contradicting its earlier submission that Libananco was
acquired by Mr Tiirkkan for Cem Uzan and his Immediate Family. The
Claimant also abandoned its earlier case where it argued that it acquired its
interests in CEAS and Kepez pursuant to 32 separate transactions as
represented by the STAs previously produced. Instead, it argued that it
only actually acquired the share certificates much later, in April and May
2003. The Claimant explained that the STAs were no more than mere
“expressions of intent” to transfer; the actual acquisitions having taken
place through two acts of feslim: (i) a telephone call in April 2003 with
respect to share certificates in Switzerland and (ii) Mr Ciggin’s inspection
of share certificates in istanbul. This third version of the Claimant’s case
contradicted the STAs themselves as well as the other documents produced
by the Claimant.

 

 

    

148.4 The fourth version (which was introduced in the Claimant’s oral
arguments in November 2009 and fleshed out by witness testimony in
March 2010) was that the Uzan family had consummated a series of intra-
family transfers of CEAS and Kepez share certificates on 3 April and 4
April 2003 pursuant to the alleged “family divorce”. The Claimant
introduced these intra-family transfers to explain why the percentage of
CEAS’ and Kepez’s share capital that Libananco allegedly received from
Hakan Uzan and Aysegiil Uzan exceeded (and therefore did not match) the
amounts owned by those individuals (according to records of dividends
received by them). It was said that, pursuant to these intra-family transfers,
Cem Uzan transferred shares to his siblings, who then transferred them to
Libananco. The Respondent submitted that these intra-family transfers
appeared late in the day, only some three years after the Claimant filed its
Request for Arbitration; and further, that they were circular and
roundabout in nature since Cem Uzan was by then the sole beneficial
owner of Libananco. The Respondent also noted that the Claimant’s
witness Hakan Uzan introduced a third (undocumented and previously
unmentioned) act of tes/im — Hakan Uzan claimed that his father Kemal

36

149.

150.

Uzan telephoned him on 15 May 2003 and instructed him to go to the
garage in an office building in ikitelli (that same day) to receive delivery
of CEAS and Kepez share certificates.

The Respondent submitted that the changing stories were a clear sign of
falsehoods on the part of the Claimant. In particular, the Respondent submitted
that the changes in the Claimant’s case were telling in relation to the manner
in which the shares were allegedly transferred to Libananco.

2. The Claimant’s key jurisdictional documents were backdated

The Respondent submitted that the key jurisdictional documents relied on by
the Claimant were backdated and created no earlier than 2005. It is argued by
the Respondent that key documents represented by the Claimant to be
“originals” dating from 2002 to 2003 were actually backdated reproductions
created only after November 2005. In that regard, the Respondent advanced,
among others, the following arguments.

150.1 The 32 STAs which bore various dates between 30 October 2002 and
15 May 2003 that were relied on by the Claimant could not, based on the
evidence given by its forensic experts, have been signed in the sequence
that their dates implied.

150.2 The forensic evidence showed, among other things, that the signatures
of Kemal Uzan and Aysegiil Uzan on the STA were forgeries, and that at
least seven of the STAs had been stamped no earlier than 2005.

150.3 In any event, all the STAs that were produced were not original
documents (although the Claimant initially represented them as such) as
they were printed and signed by Mr Tiirkkan in 2005.

150.4 Board minutes tendered by the Claimant purporting to record
Libananco’s acquisition of shares in CEAS and Kepez had been printed
with ink that was not commercially available before August 2005.

150.5 In any event, Mr Tiirkkan admitted that many of the minutes were
printed in 2005, so the documents tendered were not in fact original
(although the Claimant initially represented them as such).

150.6 In relation to the Instrument of Transfer allegedly dated 1 April 2002
tendered by the Claimant (which documents the transfer of ownership of
Libananco to Mr Tiirkkan), the Respondent’s forensic experts detected an
anti-counterfeiting code on one of the pages, proving that it could not have
been printed before 2007.

150.7. Mr Tiirkkan likewise admitted that the Instrument of Transfer was only

printed and signed in 2007, so the version tendered was not an original
document (although the Claimant initially represented it as such).

37

151.

152.

153.

3. Mr Tiirkkan’s account of acquiring Libananco in April 2002
was flawed and contradicted by other evidence on the record

The Respondent submitted that Mr Tiirkkan’s account of acquiring Libananco
in April 2002 was contradicted by other available evidence. Mr Tiirkkan’s
evidence was that, on 1 April 2002, Prontoservus Ltd (“Prontoservus”), a
company associated with the law firm Polakis Sarris & Co (of which the
Claimant’s witness Polakis Sarris is a partner), transferred 100 per cent of
Libananco’s shares to him. This transfer was memorialised in an Instrument of
Transfer dated 1 April 2002 and resignation letters from the directors of
Prontoservus. It was submitted that, if Mr Tiirkkan did not in fact purchase
Libananco on | April 2002 as alleged by the Claimant, then the Claimant’s
entire case would collapse. This is because the alleged purchase of Libananco
was central to its account of how, when and why it came to acquire shares in
CEAS and Kepez. The Respondent submitted that parts of Mr Tiirkkan’s
Witness Statements explaining his acquisition of Libananco were false,
including the following assertions made by him.

 

151.1 Mr Tiirkkan deposed in his First Witness Statement that he was
looking for a Cypriot firm to help him acquire an investment vehicle, and
he chose Partellas & Kiliaris “after identifying [the] firm based on its
website”. The Respondent submitted that this was not possible since the
firm did not have a website in March 2002.

 

151.2 On the day that Libananco was allegedly purchased by Mr Tiirkkan (i.e.
1 April 2002), Mr Tiirkkan “participated, by telephone” in a meeting of
the new Board of Directors. The Respondent submitted, based on the
evidence given by the Claimant’s witnesses, that no Board meeting was in
fact held on 1 April 2002, and that the minutes of that meeting were
created for tactical purposes.

151.3 Shortly after the alleged telephone conference, Mr Tiirkkan travelled to
Nicosia, Cyprus “on a non-stop Royal Jordanian flight from Amman and
stayed two nights at the Nicosia Hilton”, where he allegedly met Mr
Antonis Partellas (a Cypriot accountant) for the first time. The Respondent
pointed out that the Nicosia Hilton had no record of Mr Tiirkkan’s alleged
stay in April 2002 and that Royal Jordanian did not operate a non-stop
flight from Amman, Jordan to Larnaca, Cyprus on | April 2002.

4. The May 2003 dividend records for CEAS and Kepez showed
that members of the Uzan family and not Libananco owned the
shares

The Respondent argued that records of the CEAS and Kepez dividend
payments in May 2003 showed that the Uzans owned the shares that are
alleged to have been owned by Libananco at that time.

Specifically, the Respondent contended that the evidence demonstrated that

Libananco received none of the dividends of CEAS and Kepez which were
paid beginning on 20 May 2003. Instead, all of the dividends that were

38

154.

155.

supposed to have been received by Libananco went to members of the Uzan
family or to Turkish companies which they controlled.

153.1 The istanbul Stock Exchange Settlement and Custody Bank, Inc.
(“Depository Bank”) prepared a report (“Depository Bank Report”),
submitted by the Respondent together with its Supplement to Counter-
Memorial (filed on 3 March 2009), which confirmed that Libananco did
not collect any dividends from either CEAS or Kepez on 20 May 2003 (or
thereafter) even though approximately 99 per cent of CEAS’ and Kepez’s
shareholders collected those dividends. Instead, the dividends were
collected by members of the Uzan family.

153.2 The Depository Bank Report showed that members of the Uzan family
collected the dividends on all of the CEAS and Kepez share certificates
that Libananco produced in Vienna.

153.3. The owners of the shares in CEAS and Kepez were the members of the
Uzan family who collected the May 2003 dividends and not Libananco.

Accordingly, the Respondent submitted that Libananco owned no shares in
CEAS and Kepez as at 20 May 2003.

5. The Claimant failed to prove fes/im (i.e. the legal transfer of
possession) in relation to the share certificates allegedly acquired
by Libananco

The Respondent emphasised that the Claimant failed to demonstrate a legal
transfer of possession in favour of Libananco in relation to the share
certificates in question. This concept is known as fes/im, and is one of the
requirements for a legally effective transfer of ownership.

155.1 The alleged delivery of share certificates in Switzerland in April 2003
was put forward based only on the testimony of Hakan Uzan and Mr
Tiirkkan, who claimed to have effected delivery over the telephone, with
Hakan Uzan in istanbul and Mr Tiirkkan in Jordan. None of this was
recorded in writing. Notably, at the hearing, Mr Tiirkkan conceded that no
teslim actually occurred with respect to the share certificates located in
Switzerland.

155.2 The only witness who allegedly had personal knowledge of the 15 May
2003 delivery-by-inspection at the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings in
istanbul was Saylan Ciggin, who supposedly carried out the inspection. Mr
Ciggin testified that he deliberately destroyed the only document that he
ever claimed to possess in relation to the supposed inspection at the
Rumeli and Dogus Buildings, i.e. the share inventory list that Mr Tiirkkan
had allegedly sent him.

  

 

 

155.3. The tes/im that was alleged to have taken place in a garage in ikitelli
was attested to only by Hakan Uzan, who was unable to recall any

39

156.

157.

158.

inventory or other document identifying the share certificates that were
supposedly delivered.

The Respondent further submitted that the documents produced by the
Claimant contradicted the evidence of the occurrence of tes/im given by its
witnesses.

156.1 Mr Ciggin testified that the text of the STAs (in particular the range of
dates indicated on the STAs representing the dates on which the individual
transactions were supposed to have been executed) contradicted his
evidence that ‘es/im in relation to the share certificates in istanbul only
took place on one day in May 2003 (i.e. 15 May 2003).

156.2 There was no language in the STAs stating that tes/im took place, or
even that it was to occur in the future.

156.3. Libananco’s board and management minutes failed to mention any of
the three acts of teslim alleged by the Claimant.

156.4 Libananco’s Share Acquisition Report dated 20 May 2003 (Exhibit H-
61) did not mention any of the alleged deliveries or acts of tes/im, and in
any event also reflected acquisition dates earlier than April and May 2003.

156.5 Libananco’s audited 2002 and 2003 financial statements contradicted
the evidence of the Claimant’s witnesses that tes/im took place in April
and May 2003 since both statements showed that Libananco already
owned millions of dollars’ worth of CEAS and Kepez share certificates on
31 December 2002 (well before the alleged occurrence of the first act of
teslim in April 2003).

6. The Claimant failed to produce documents that would have
existed if its story was true

The Respondent further submitted that the Claimant failed to produce
documents that would exist if its version of events were true. The
Respondent’s case here was that, if the events alleged by the Claimant had in
fact happened in 2002 and 2003, they would have generated a substantial
paper trail, not only in Turkey, but also in Cyprus, Jordan, Switzerland,
Lebanon and elsewhere. The Respondent submitted that the Claimant failed to
produce any such record.

These documents would have included the following:
(a) records of communications between Mr Tiirkkan and Cem Uzan or
Hakan Uzan regarding the supposed acquisition of Libananco in

2002;

(b) documents relating to the operation of a company (i.e. Libananco)
such as tax returns, bank account statements, registration of

40

159.

160.

161.

corporate formalities, records of routine administrative costs, and so
on;

(c

documents evidencing the alleged Uzan “family divorce” in January
2003, e.g. written advice from professional advisors when dividing
up their business empire;

(d) documents that would have been created in connection with (or
otherwise evidencing) the alleged deliveries (i.e. legal transfers of
possession) of share certificates to Libananco in April and May 2003;
and

(e

regulatory filings and approvals required by both Turkish and
Cypriot law.

7. The Claimant’s witnesses are not credible

Finally, the Respondent submitted that the testimony and conduct of the
Claimant’s witnesses showed that they were not credible and could not be
relied upon. According to the Respondent, the credibility of the Claimant’s
case rests on its witnesses since the Claimant has not produced any paper trail
or other independent corroboration of its case.

C. The factual witness evidence

1. First Witness Statement of Cem Cengiz Uzan dated 20
September 2007

Cem Uzan’s First Witness Statement deals with the following areas of
evidence:

(a) the reasons that Cem Uzan’s family decided to establish an
international holding company (i.e. Libananco) in Cyprus;

(b) the reasons Mr Tiirkkan was chosen to begin the process of
establishing this international holding company; and

(c) the time frame in which Libananco allegedly acquired ownership of
CEAS and Kepez share certificates.

(a) Why Cem Uzan’s family decided to blish Lib in Cyprus

In early 2002, Cem Uzan’s Immediate Family decided to consider their future
investment strategy with the aim of hedging against risks then prevalent in the
Turkish economy. They had concerns that the business environment within
Turkey could further deteriorate after the twin economic crises and thus
negatively affect any new investments they might make domestically. They
decided that they would “diversify” their business interests by making most of
their future investments in business and operations outside of the country.

41

162.

163.

164.

165.

166.

167.

They decided to establish a new international holding company to facilitate
their “diversification strategy”, and “to capitalize the company with some of
[their] most valuable and highest income-generating businesses. The latter
was critical in order to facilitate the company’s access to investment capital
and debt and thereby support our international diversification plans”.

Around the same time (i.e. early 2002), Cem Uzan also made the decision to
enter Turkish politics. For that reason, “protecting against politically-
motivated actions against these business interests which might arise before or
after the elections also became an important component of the business
planning”. At paragraph 21 of his First Witness Statement, Cem Uzan
deposed that he entered Turkish politics “in the summer of 2002” by assuming
leadership of a party called the Geng Parti. He also deposed that the elections
were scheduled for November that year.

In implementing this diversification plan, Cem Uzan and his Immediate
Family were advised to set up a new company outside of Turkey and in a
country within the European Union in order for them to benefit from: (i)
political stability; (ii) a transparent legal and judicial system; (iii) ease of
corporate administration; (iv) comprehensive rules on business confidentiality;
and (v) favourable tax treatment. Cyprus was chosen because it was not
politically recognised by Turkey and accordingly, the Uzans’ “advisors
believed that it would provide an extra layer of protection to these business
interests that was not offered by any of the other jurisdictions that were under
consideration”.

(b) Why Mr Tiirkkan was chosen _to begin the process of blishii
Libananco

Cem Uzan deposed that he instructed Mr Tiirkkan, whom he described as a
“trusted business associate” to begin the process of setting up a new company
in Cyprus.

He deposed that he had instructed Mr Tiirkkan to set up the new company in
Cyprus firstly because he was a permanent resident of Amman, Jordan who
had long served as an officer and employee in several of his businesses,
especially those located outside of Turkey. Second, Mr Tiirkkan was “a
sophisticated, multi-lingual businessman”, who held a university degree in
economics and was familiar with their businesses. Third, because he lived
permanently in Jordan, he was able to travel easily to Cyprus to conduct the
company’s business and otherwise handle the business, legal and
administrative affairs of the Cypriot company.

 

Thus, “after consultation with Turkish and Cypriot legal/accounting advisors,
in 2002 Mr Tiirkkan purchased 100% of the outstanding shares of a Cypriot
company called Libananco”.

42

Hooedh

(c) The time frame in which Lib acquired ownership of CEAS

and Kepez share certificates
168. Cem Uzan deposed that:

“When Libananco was purchased by Mr Tiirkkan, it was a shell
company without assets. To serve our business purposes, it needed a
sufficient capital base for two primary reasons. First, such a base
would enable it to access capital markets to facilitate its future
investments. Second, a strongly capitalized company would be
attractive to future business partners, and was usually a pre-requisite
for participation in various asset and project tenders around the world.

It was decided that in order to capitalize the company, Libananco
would purchase my Immediate Family’s shares in the Utilities”.

The acquisition of shares in the Utilities made sense for Libananco as
its very first investment. The Utilities had benefited from several years
of major investment and growth and by 2002 were providing excellent
returns. Accordingly, the acquisition of substantial ownership interests
in those Utilities, it was felt, would establish Libananco’s commercial
credibility and facilitate its expansion into international markets...

 

I was not involved in the administrative details of the acquisition of
shares in the Utilities by Libananco, although I was generally kept
informed of its progress. From approximately October 2002 until
May 2003, Libananco acquired most of my Immediate Family’s
ownership interests in the Utilities

At all times, Mr Tiirkkan was the managing director and owner of
Libananco as described in its public filings. At the same time, it was
understood and agreed between Mr Tiirkkan and me that he would
own Libananco on our behalf ... it would have been politically
improvident under these circumstances to have disclosed my business
relationship with Libananco on account of the sensitivities of the
Turkey/Cyprus issue...

  

By May 2003, nearly 18 months after the decision was made to
ish an international i 1p Lib had

completed its acquisition of a substantial number of shares in the

Utilities from my Immediate Family, with more to be purchased.”

 

43

169.

170.

(emphasis added)

2. Second Witness Statement of Cem Cengiz Uzan dated 24 April
2009

Cem Uzan’s Second Witness Statement covers the following areas of evidence:

(a)

(c)

(d

(e)

@

the circumstances surrounding the alleged “family divorce” that
took place from the middle of 2002 to early 2003;

the significance of the STAs allegedly entered into between
individual members of the Uzan family (except for Cem Uzan) and
Libananco;

the physical process by which the CEAS and Kepez share
certificates were allegedly delivered to Libananco;

why Libananco did not attend the General Assemblies of CEAS and
Kepez held on 31 March 2003;

why he and members of his Immediate Family (and not Libananco)
redeemed the dividends payable to shareholders of CEAS and Kepez
on 20 May 2003 (even though Libananco was alleged to have
acquired their shares in CEAS and Kepez by that time); and

why there was no public disclosure of the transfer of shares in
CEAS and Kepez to Libananco even though, under Turkish law,
Libananco would have been required to make various legal and
regulatory filings if it had actually acquired majority interests in
CEAS and Kepez in 2002 and 2003.

(a) The circumstances surrounding the alleged “family divorce”

Cem Uzan began by explaining the manner in which the various businesses
were organised within his family.

170.1 He deposed that:

“my father was responsible for running banking, cement and
construction businesses, as well as heavy industries such as
steel and aluminium manufacturing. On the other hand, my
brother, Hakan, took responsibility for telecommunication
operations (e.g. Telsim) and I was responsible for managing
the media group (e.g. Star Media) and electricity enterprises
(i.e. the Utilities). While there was some overlap here and there
(such as ... my father’s advisory involvement in the Utilities),
the primary responsibility for running these major businesses
was divided between us fairly clearly”.

 

44

171.

172.

173.

174.

170.2 He elaborated as follows:

“while for many years, I personally had primary control over
the management and direction of the Utilities, as well as
physical control of many of the bearer shares, as a practical
matter my family collectively owned most of the shares in the
Utilities until 2003”.

He explained that part of the rationale for the alleged “family divorce” was as
follows:

“my efforts to lead the Geng Party in 2002 and 2003, including
running a national campaign in 2002, essentially consumed my life. At
the same time, my father was entirely focused on running his own
businesses, and I frankly did not know much about them or what was
happening in those companies, including Imar Bank (which my father
managed with his brother, Yavuz Uzan). With Hakan being engaged
with the various telecom matters and lawsuits, and my father
consumed with his own affairs, it was becoming more and more
difficult to continue our collective ownership of certain businesses.
Moreover, it also interfered with my ability to focus on running those
businesses that were my responsibility — namely, the Star Media Group
and the Utilities. To be honest, I also viewed our failure to clearly
divide our ownership interests as presenting a significant hindrance to
my political career because of the potential for me to be associated
publicly with companies I did not manage or control”.

 

He explained that, by January 2003, his father, brother and he had decided to
accomplish a full division in ownership of their various businesses:

“along the lines of how we had managed them in the past. As part of
this decision, it was thus agreed that my father, brother and sister
would transfer to me their ownership interests in Star Media and the
Utilities; that my father would be the sole owner of the family’s
remaining banking, manufacturing and construction companies; and
my brother would be the sole owner of Telsim”.

Cem Uzan deposed that the beneficial ownership of Libananco consequently
changed in January 2003. At that time, the trust arrangement between Mr
Tiirkkan (who was at the time holding Libananco on trust for the benefit of
Cem Uzan and his Immediate Family) and Cem Uzan’s Immediate Family
ended. As a result, from that point on, Cem Uzan remained the sole beneficial
owner of Libananco, with Mr Tiirkkan as his trustee.

(b) The significance of the STAs in the context of the alleged “family divorce”

According to Cem Uzan’s Second Witness Statement:

“ijn October and November 2002, Hakan and Cenk Tiirkkan (for
Libananco) had used Mr Ciggin’s draft to begin preparing share

45

175.

176.

177.

178.

transfer agreements recording Hakan’s intent to transfer his shares in
the Utilities to Libananco”.

However, after preparing three such agreements (two for Kepez and one for
CEAS) “we did not take any more action on the matter”. Cem Uzan deposed
that “recording such a transfer did not seem to ... be of any great
importance” since his Immediate Family would still own Libananco
beneficially. However, in January 2003, the STAs “took on a whole new
importance”. Cem Uzan explained: “Therefore, at my request, my Immediate
Family, along with Mr Tiirkkan, once again commenced the process of
executing various share transfer agreements in February 2003”.

Relations by that time between Kemal Uzan, Hakan Uzan and Cem Uzan had
become increasingly strained and Cem Uzan “very much believed that it was
important that [his] Immediate Family memorialize their intention to
irrevocably surrender their ownership interests in the Utilities to Libananco,
in order to prevent this from becoming an issue in any potential future
disputes within the family”.

He explained:

“Since Libananco (a) was already in existence in Cyprus; (b) was
owned by Mr Tiirkkan in trust for my family and (c) was already in the
process of acquiring our bearer shares in the Utilities, we decided that
the severance of the Utilities’ ownership to me alone could be best and
most efficiently accomplished by (a) inuil to capitali:
Libananco with the Utilities’ bearer shares, as and for the reason
previously agreed; but also (b) agreeing that Libananco would be held
by Mr Tiirkkan in trust for me alone ... it made no sense to stop a
process that was still relevant and already underway.

Thus at my instruction, my brother informed Mr Tiirkkan that my
Immediate Family would continue to transfer our bearer shares in the
Utilities to Libananco but that thereafier, Mr Tiirkkan would hold
Libananco in trust for me alone. Mr Tiirkkan agreed to this. Thus, from
that time [i.e. April 2003, according to Mr Tiirkkan’s First Witness
Statement], Libananco was owned by me, through my trustee, Mr
Tiirkkan and would itself later acquire the bearer shares in the
Utilities”.

Cem Uzan also described the legal advice he had received in connection with
the share transfer process:

“\.. we were advised by our Turkish legal counsel that transfer of the
bearer shares to Libananco — just like our prior ownership of the
shares — did not have to be in writing at all. Rather, the share
agreements were executed simply to memorialize my Immediate

Family’s intent to transfer shares in the Utilities to Libananco”.

46

179.

180.

181.

Cem Uzan explained that he did not personally sign any of the STAs as seller.
He deposed that:

“fa]s I was to be the sole owner of Libananco, there was no reason for
me to demonstrate my intent to transfer my interest in the Utilities to a
company which I beneficially owned. Moreover, as the General
Manager of the company, it was naturally Mr Tiirkkan who signed
each of the transfer agreements on behalf of Libananco”.

(c) The process by which_the CEAS and Kepez share certificates were
allegedly delivered to Libananco

 

Cem Uzan deposed that “/t/hroughout the early months of 2003, the majority
of the physical bearer shares in the Utilities were being held in” the Rumeli
and Dogus buildings and in his “family’s holiday home in Switzerland.” He
stated that:

“Obviously, for Libananco to take possession of these shares and
transport them to a secure location was going to be a major
undertaking and one which I did not want to accomplish without
serious safeguards being put into place”.

Cem Uzan described the share delivery process as follows.

“Therefore, with regard to the shares in Turkey, in April 2003, I
instructed my brother to have the shares repackaged in the name of
“Libananco”. Then, on 15 May 2003 Libananco sent Mr. Ciggin, who
had been appointed as the company’s legal representative, to go to the
secure storage areas where the shares were being held in Istanbul, to
inspect them on behalf of Libananco; and to ensure that they were
being held for Libananco’s benefit. After Mr. Ciggin’s inspection, I
arranged to have the largest denomination (i.e. most valuable) shares
removed and taken to a secure location for Libananco. The remainder
of the shares, all smaller denominations (and hence bulky) remained
mostly in the Rumeli building pursuant to written share custody
agreements between Libananco, and CEAS and Kepez. The originals
of these share custody agreements were delivered to my offices in
Ikitelli, Istanbul where I placed them in one of my safes. Those offices
were subsequently raided on 14 February 2004 by the SDIF and all
papers including those agreements, were seized.

With regard to the shares in Switzerland, my brother Hakan, informed
me in April 2003 that he had spoken to Mr Tiirkkan a few days earlier
and had informed him that he was transferring those shares to
Libananco. He also agreed with Mr Tiirkkan that those shares would
continue to be kept by him in Switzerland, although now in custody
for Libananco”.

47

182.

183.

184.

(emphasis added)

(d) Why Lib did not attend the General A. blies of CEAS and Kepez
held on 31 March 2003

Cem Uzan deposed that Libananco, “in view of how and when the ownership
of the bearer shares was actually transferred ... was not actually the legal
owner of any shares in the Utilities on 31 March 2003, the date of the General
Assemblies”. It therefore did not attend the General Assemblies. He further
deposed:

“Although at that time my Immediate Family had undoubtedly
undertaken to transfer their shares in the Utilities to Libananco, that
company did not actually become the legal owner of any shares until
April 2003 with regard to the bearer shares in Switzerland and May
2003 with regard to the bearer shares in Istanbul”.

 

(e) Why Libananco did not redeem the dividends payable to shareholders of
CEAS and Kepez on 20 May 2003 even though it had allegedly acquired a
majority of the shares in CEAS and Kepez by that time

Cem Uzan deposed that the share certificates and dividend coupons were
separate bearer instruments and that:

“most of the coupons for the Utilities’ 2002 dividends had already
been removed from the share certificates being transferred to
Libananco (i.e. those in the Rumeli and Dogus buildings in Istanbul
and those in our family home in Switzerland) by the time of the
General Assemblies of 31 March 2003. In other words, when
Libananco took ownership of the share certificates in April and May
2003 respectively, it did not take ownership of virtually any of the
coupons for the Utilities’ 2002 dividends. This remained with me and
my family and we therefore redeemed the dividends on 20 May 2003”.

 

()_Why there was no public disclosure of Lib 's alleged isition of
shares in CEA§ and Kepez even though this was required under Turkish law

Cem Uzan deposed that: “/t is true that there was no public disclosure of the
transfer of the Utilities’ bearer shares to Libananco to Turkish or Cypriot
authorities until 2005”. This significant transaction was “undertaken
confidentially” and:

“Although it was generally and publicly known we held a large interest

in the two companies, it was not disclosed to the Turkish regulatory
authorities how we allocated ownership of the bearer shares among

48

185.

186.

187.

188.

189.

ourselves (and among other entities we owned or controlled) at any
given time”.

Cem Uzan stated that the confidentiality “continued before during and after
the 2002-2003 process of transferring ownership of bearer shares in the two
Utilities to Libananco” and “[at] the same time, [he] obtained legal advice
from his Turkish counsel, Mr. Saylan Ciggin, to ensure that not making these
disclosures did not negatively impact the legitimacy of the share transfers”.

Cem Uzan believed at that time “that public disclosures of the transfer to a
Cypriot company ... might attract negative political attention”.

As a result:
“Until 2005, Libananco, through Mr Tiirkkan, also maintained this
same confidentiality. Indeed, public disclosure even of Mr Tiirkkan’s
ownership of Libananco would have revealed, at the very least, a

connection between Libananco and my [i.e. Cem Uzan’s] family”.

3. Cross-examination of Cem Uzan

Cem Uzan was cross-examined on the following matters:

(a) the time frame in which Libananco allegedly acquired ownership of
the CEAS and Kepez share certificates; and

(b

why he did not file financial disclosures in respect of material
changes in his assets which were mandatory under Turkish law for
leaders of political parties, even though he allegedly transferred
significant interests in CEAS and Kepez to Aysegul Uzan and
Hakan Uzan respectively pursuant to the “family divorce” (see
paragraph 138.3 above).

(a) The time frame in which Libananco allegedly acquired ownership of the
CEAS and Kepez share certificates

On this topic, Cem Uzan gave the following evidence.

189.1 In his First Witness Statement, he deposed that Libananco acquired
ownership interests in CEAS and Kepez from October 2002 until May
2003. It was put to Cem Uzan that his evidence (as appears from paragraph
33 of his Second Witness Statement) was to the contrary, i.e. that no
acquisitions took place until April and May 2003, when fes/im in relation
to the share certificates in Switzerland and istanbul respectively were
alleged to have been accomplished.

189.2 He admitted that until tes/im takes place, it is the seller of the share
certificates that owns the latter (Tr 2780:21-2781:1) — in his own words,
“the acquisition is not complete until you have teslim” (Tr 2784:11-
2784:12).

49

190.

189.3 He agreed that fes/im (with regard to the share certificates in istanbul)
only took place on 15 May 2003. When pressed as to whether Libananco
could have acquired those share certificates (i.e. the share certificates that
were allegedly delivered on 15 May 2003 in istanbul) before 15 May 2003,
Cem Uzan was evasive and did not give a direct or helpful answer. He
likened the acquisition to:

 

“an ongoing process... It is like buying a car. You go into a car
dealership. You sign a contract... But until you have taken over the car,
you're in the car and drive away, you haven’t bought the car. You have
a contract to buy the car, and the same thing with bearer shares, okay?
Until teslim takes place, the acquisition is not completed” (Tr 2780:6-
2780:19).

189.4 Although there are apparent inconsistencies in the evidence
summarised above, the Tribunal considers that the totality of Cem Uzan’s
evidence here appears to be that Libananco only acquired ownership of the
bearer share certificates in Switzerland and istanbul in April 2003 and on
15 May 2003 respectively.

(b) Cem Uzan’s failure to file ial disclosures required under Turkish

law for a leader of a political party

Cem Uzan was also cross-examined on the requirements under Turkish law
for him (as a leader of a political party) to file mandatory financial disclosures
in respect of material changes in his assets. The underlying premise of this line
of cross-examination was that if the alleged transfers of his shares in CEAS
and Kepez to Aysegiil Uzan and Hakan Uzan respectively (pursuant to the
alleged “family divorce’) in fact occurred, this would have required disclosure.
Accordingly, the Tribunal considers that this portion of the cross-examination
impacts upon the credibility of the “family divorce” theory which is now
central to the Claimant’s case.

190.1 Cem Uzan was referred to his Financial Disclosure of 17 April 2003
(Exhibit H-169), and was asked why there was no reference to his alleged
divestment of his shares in CEAS and Kepez pursuant to the alleged
“family divorce”. His response was: “because the teslim had not taken
place” (Tr 2813:21-2813:22). It is noteworthy that he did not elaborate as
to when fes/im in relation to the alleged intra-family transfers did occur.

 

 

190.2 Cem Uzan was referred to his Financial Disclosure of 12 June 2003
(Exhibit H-186), where it was disclosed that Kepez and CEAS had paid its
shareholder (i.e. Cem Uzan himself) the dividends set out. Annexed to
Cem Uzan’s Financial Disclosure of 12 June 2003 were two letters from
CEAS and Kepez (both dated 29 May 2003) stating that dividends had
been paid to Cem Uzan. The letter from Kepez was specifically addressed:
“To our Company’s Shareholder Mr Cem Cengiz Uzan”. Cem Uzan was
asked whether he declared, in his Financial Disclosure of 12 June 2003,
that he received the dividends as a shareholder of CEAS and Kepez

50

191.

respectively. His reply was that the dividends were paid to him “as the
coupon holder of the dividends. Dividends are paid to coupons, sir” (Tr
2816:18-2816:19).

190.3 When probed further as to why there was no disclosure (pursuant to the
alleged “family divorce”) of his alleged divestment of shares in CEAS and
Kepez, Cem Uzan did not give a relevant answer (Tr 2817:8-2817:14).

190.4 Cem Uzan admitted that it would warrant disclosure under Turkish law
if he had disposed of his shareholding (Tr 2820:2-2820:5). He then
explained: “What the lawyers and accountants advised me I filed [sic] up”
(Tr 2820:10-2820:11).

190.5 He was referred to his Financial Disclosure of 31 July 2003 (Exhibit
H-201), and was asked why there was no disclosure of his alleged 100 per
cent beneficial ownership of Libananco, which had by that time allegedly
acquired substantial interests in CEAS and Kepez. Cem Uzan was unable
to give any explanation other than that: “you have to ask Mrs. Rakrimra
(ph.), I guess, that, because she was one of the lawyers who advised me on
that filing” (Tr 2808:5-2808:7).

4, Witness Statement of Murat Hakan Uzan dated 9 October 2009

Hakan Uzan’s Witness Statement takes the form of questions and answers (i.e.
not in the form of a conventional witness deposition), with him giving his
answers to questions posed to him by the Claimant’s Counsel. Hakan Uzan’s
Witness Statement covered the following areas:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e

the setting up of Libananco and its acquisition of shares in CEAS
and Kepez;

the circumstances surrounding the alleged “family divorce” — in
particular, how he came to acquire a large quantity of CEAS and
Kepez share certificates as a result of a number of intra-family
transfers;

why no cash actually changed hands even though the STAs entered
into between him and other individual members of his family on the
one hand and Libananco on the other hand indicate that “cash” was
given as consideration for the share certificates;

the ownership structure in CEAS and Kepez amongst his family
members; and

how delivery (to Libananco) or teslim took place with respect to the
share certificates located in Switzerland;

51

192.

193.

194,

195.

196.

197.

198.

199.

200.

‘a) The setting up of Libananco and its acqui
Kepez

 

Hakan Uzan deposed that, at the beginning of 2002, he and his brother Cem
Uzan decided that their family should acquire an international investment
company outside of Turkey. They decided that the company would be owned
by someone other than themselves, for and on behalf of Cem Uzan, Hakan
Uzan, his father Kemal Uzan and his sister Aysegiil Uzan.

He deposed that: “Given my brother’s [i.e. Cem Uzan’s] decision in early
2002 to devote his time to a campaign for public office, it fell to me to oversee
purchase of the foreign investment company”.

In or around March 2002, he asked Mr Tiirkkan, “a trusted senior executive in
Jordan who had worked for [him] personally for around five years”, to
research various jurisdictions around the world where such a company could
either easily be founded or purchased.

later, Mr Tiirkkan emailed him a Strength-Weaknes:
Threats (“SWOT”) analysis of various jurisdic!
recommending the Cyprus as the most suitable choice.

    

Hakan Uzan deposed that he settled on Cyprus, which had the added benefit of
being a location where the Turkish Government would be cautious to tread.
Given Cem Uzan’s political aspirations, all of “ws” (i.e. the Uzan family) had
begun to think of potential retaliation from the Turkish Government as a factor
to be taken into account in business planning.

 

According to Hakan Uzan, after “we” had reached “our” decision (i.e. the
Uzan brothers or the Uzan family), Hakan Uzan told Mr Tiirkkan that he
should proceed to establish or purchase a company in Cyprus in his name to be
held on behalf of Kemal Uzan, Cem Uzan, Aysegiil Uzan and himself.

In April 2002, Mr Tiirkkan informed him that he had purchased a Cypriot
company by the name of Libananco and Hakan Uzan “told him to await
further instructions”.

In the early fall of 2002, Hakan Uzan called Mr Tiirkkan again and informed
him that Libananco was to acquire a majority of the shares in CEAS and
Kepez. Hakan Uzan deposed as follows:

“I did not tell him [i.e. Mr Tiirkkan] the purpose of this transaction;
only that it was a family decision and that he would receive (i) a
template share transfer agreement that he could employ for recording
the transaction, and (ii) information from Shareholder Services
Department in Istanbul, which would provide him with the information
he would require for inputting information into the template”.

Hakan Uzan deposed that, from late October 2002 to early June 2003, Kemal
Uzan, Aysegiil Uzan and Hakan Uzan executed a total of 32 STAs (with

52

201.

202.

203.

204.

205.

206.

207.

208.

Libananco as the counterparty). By agreement among family members, the
STAs transferred 100 per cent of Hakan Uzan’s shares, 100 per cent of
Aysegiil Uzan’s shares and the majority of Kemal Uzan’s shares in CEAS and
Kepez to Libananco.

It was Hakan Uzan who decided what quantity of CEAS and Kepez shares
would be transferred to Libananco at any particular time and by whom, in
order to ultimately reach a particular threshold (approximately 67 per cent)
ownership by Libananco, which had specific significance in relation to the
control of CEAS and Kepez.*

He provided the information to a trusted employee of his (“probably Sadrettin
Balaban”), who would convert the percentages into numbers and forward that
information to Mr Tiirkkan. The Shareholder Services Department at CEAS
and Kepez would closely monitor and track each transaction for their records.

There was no particular legal or business reason why he requested the
transfers to be done in tranches over a period of time; this was simply a
business practice that the Uzan companies routinely followed for decades in
Turkey.

He also confirmed that he would receive two versions of the STAs (one signed
by Mr Tiirkkan and one unsigned) which would arrive on his desk “via the
Legal Department”.

He would sign them or arrange for the relevant seller to sign them. He
confirmed that he personally signed each of the STAs on which his signature
appears, and provided the exact pen used for those signatures to the
Claimant’s Counsel.

He confirmed that Aysegiil Uzan signed each of the STAs on which her
signature appears in his presence.

In relation to his father Kemal Uzan, he deposed that:

“although my father did not usually sign his Agreements [i.e. the STAs]
in my presence, and many of his business documents and letters had
been signed by his two brothers (my two uncles) on his behalf for a
number of years, I can confirm that (i) he told me, at that time, that he
had personally signed the Agreements, (ii) at that time, I recognized
his signature, and (iii) I still do so now upon being shown again the
Agreements in question”.

He stated that “it is virtually certain that I provided many of the Agreements
for signature in a group or stack after I had collected a sufficient number for it
to be worth my time to seek a signature or execute my own”.

* cf. Exhibit C-155, Libananco Minutes of Directors Meeting dated 15 November 2002: “It is agreed
to continue to purchase shares until a threshold of 45% in both companies”.

53

209.

210.

211.

212.

213.

(b) The cir surrounding the alleged “family divorce” and how
Hakan Uzan came to acquire a large quantity of shares in CEAS and Kepez

 

Hakan Uzan elaborated on the alleged “family divorce” as follows:

“As background, I would note that (i) my brother Cem became the sole
beneficial owner of Libananco on account of this split (ii) we
relinquished certain shares in various companies to each other to
concretize — or more accurately, begin to concretize — the split (e.g. my
brother’s shares in Telsim to me or my shares in my father’s various
industrial companies to him, etc); (iii) as part of the consideration for
my father relinquishing his interest in companies to be owned by my
brother and me, my father received the largest Utilities’ dividends in

(emphasis added)

He deposed that the “family divorce” occurred “between October 2002 (when
[his] family commenced the process of transferring some of the shares [they]
did then own personally) to May and June 2003 (when [he] transferred the
remaining shares [he] had come to own in the interim to Libananco)”.
However, he said during direct examination that the “family divorce” took
place in “March, April, May 2003” (Tr 1842:3-1842:4) instead.

He deposed that the 16 intra-family agreements (recovered as deleted
electronic files on Mr Tiirkkan’s floppy disks) reflected a quid pro quo as
between family members for the respective transfers. He subsequently agreed
during direct examination that these intra-family agreements were signed “in
approximately early April, April 3 or 4, 2003” (Tr 1845:18-1845:20).

He was asked by the Claimant’s Counsel in direct examination to elaborate on
these agreements. He said that they were signed in circumstances where:

“the General Assembly [of CEAS and Kepez that was held in 2003]
had taken place [on] the 31" of March, and it was an ongoing
discussion before and after between my father, my brother, and I, and
my brother was pushing me to get these signed. I had asked to pass by
my father’s house where he worked several times, and I passed by his
office there. I visited him. I discussed the things again, and he signed
them in front of me there” (Tr 1848:7-1848:15).

He confirmed that he saw Kemal Uzan and Aysegiil Uzan sign these
agreements (Tr 1848:16-1849:1).

At the time “Shareholder Services” undertook their calculations for Hakan
Uzan in 2002 and 2003, he “was not the majority shareholder in CEAS and
Kepez”. This was qualified by his evidence that:

“By May 2003, however, I was [the majority shareholder in CEAS and
Kepez], thus explaining how I ended up as a seller of the largest

54

214.

215.

216.

amount of Utilities’ shares to Libananco. The reason for this
“intermediate” movement of shares between October 2002 (when my
family commenced the process of transferring some of the shares we
did then own personally) to May and June 2003 (when I transferred
the remaining shares he had come to own in the interim to Libananco),
lies in the decision made around that time by my brother, father and
myself to go our separate ways in business”.

(emphasis added)
He stated:

“There would always be claims and counterclaims in what is inevitably
a messy process. But that is precisely the reason my brother insisted on
my family documenting our intent in the share transfer agreements:
while there might be room for bickering, there would ultimately be no
doubt about the actual ownership”.

 

 

c) Why no “cash” changed hands as a result of the STAs entered into with

Libananco

He also confirmed that no cash changed hands as a result of the individual
STAs entered into between him and other members of his family on the one
hand and Libananco on the other hand. He deposed:

“The reason why there is “cash” shown as paid on the face of the
Agreements when, in fact, no “cash” changed hands is because this
was a template agreement used by the Uzan Companies for all its
intra-group transactions... Even though there was no “cash” changing
hands per se, there was no reason not to use this same template again
because Libananco was in fact taking a debt on its books equivalent to
the cash considered paid and received by each of the three sellers. Had
Turkey not cancelled CEAS’ and Kepez’s concession agreements in
June 2003, our Legal and Tax Departments would have worked with
Mr. Tiirkkan and Libananco’s Board to ensure that Libananco’s debt
would eventually have been repaid in the most tax-efficient manner
through the income it would have received from CEAS and Kepez in
fitture years and any further investment it planned to make”.

(underlined portions emphasised as italics in original text)

(d) The ar as _to ownership of CEAS and Kepez within the Uzan
family and the relationship between dividends and shareholdii

In relation to the issue of why the dividends paid out by CEAS and Kepez in
2003 were not collected by Libananco, but rather by members of the Uzan
family, Hakan Uzan deposed that the:

“actual ownership [of shares in CEAS and Kepez] is in no way related
to who claimed dividends in 2003. The dividend collection was agreed

55

by and between my brother, father and I as part of the initial stages of
concretizing our asset and business separation (what my brother has
referred to as a “family divorce,”. Ownership and dividend
collections are, therefore, completely distinct”.

 

(emphasis added, underlined text italicised in original text)
217. Hakan Uzan further deposed that:

“Actual ownership in CEAS and Kepez amongst my family was, in fact,
very complicated ... which Uzan family member owned (directly or
through another company) the entity which owned the Utilities’ shares
also changed over time, again for tax or other reasons. In other words,
individual ownership in (EAS and Kepez between my father, brother,
sister and I (and other family-owned companies) fluctuated over time.
We knew, of course, that as a family, we owned the majority of the
shares. We also used a certain percentage of the shares to hold
General Assemblies of the Utilities. But none of that required an
accurate tally of each individual owner’s share percentage, whether
direct or indirect. The only way such an individual tally could have
been calculated would have been as I described above: to first receive
accurate shareholder information from the Shareholders Services at
CEAS and Kepez and then to take that information to the Shareholders
Services Departments at other Uzan companies to see which entity was
held by which other entity and eventually up the chain, which

individual family member held how many shares”.

 

 

(emphasis added)

218. He deposed that Exhibit R-821, allegedly an e-mail message from his
secretary “attaching a fax with [his] entire family’s holdings in each and every
company” was not legitimate. He deposed:

“TI can state without hesitation that this document cannot be legitimate
for various reasons. First, my secretary sat across from me. There is
simply no reason for her to be emailing me a fax rather than just
giving it to me. Second, she has not written anything in the text of the
email. Again, this was not standard practice for my secretary... Third
there is no fax header to the document... Finally ... the actual
information contained in the attachment (i) was very difficult to obtain,
requiring access to shareholder service departments of all the various
companies and all levels across Turkey, requiring the permission of
each family member listed in the document (ii) was information that we
purposely kept highly confidential... (iii) would never have been
collated by anyone in a single document that would have been faxed or
scanned or emailed loosely around the group and (iv) contains
information that I know is false. Specifically, the amounts of CEAS and
Kepez shares listed as being “owned” by my family appear to
correlate to the dividend pay out in 2003. As I stated, this was never
indicative of ownership. Rather, ownership was evolving between

 
 

56

(e) Delivery to Libananco or tesl

2002 and 2003 ... and culminated in the transfer of the majority of
the Utilities’ bearer shares to Libananco in 2003. The fact that R-821
attempts to match ownership to dividend payment, when they are
unrelated, tells me one thing: this is a fraudulently manufactured
document”.

(emphasis added)

in respect of the share certificates located

 

in Switzerland

219. He also deposed that he sold the CEAS and Kepez share certificates which
were located and Switzerland and owned by him. This transaction was
recorded on paper (i.e. in the STAs). He deposed that:

“Adding up the number of shares transferred to Libananco as recorded
in the Agreements [i.e. the STAs], and comparing that number to the
number of shares I understand are currently in Vienna, Austria and
those that were seized in Turkey, it is clear that I did sell all my shares,
including those in Switzerland. Otherwise, the numbers would not
make sense”.

220. In respect of the sale of the share certificates in Switzerland, he deposed that:

“What is not recorded is the actual delivery of shares to Libananco,
which was undertaken by a phone call I made to Mr. Tiirkkan in April
2002, in which I informed him that I was holding bearer shares in
Switzerland, which I had transferred (or was going to transfer) in the
Agreements [i.e. the STAs], on behalf of Libananco”.

5. Cross-Examination of Hakan Uzan

221. The cross-examination of Hakan Uzan covered the following areas:

(a) his involvement in the formation of Libananco and the

(b

circumstances surrounding how he came to choose Mr Tiirkkan to
set up Libananco and manage its affairs;

the terms (and other details) of the alleged trust arrangement
pursuant to which Mr Tiirkkan allegedly held his shares in
Libananco on trust for the benefit of members of the Uzan family;

(c) why “cash” was declared on the face of the STAs (suggesting that

(d

cash was paid to the seller of the shares as consideration for the
transfer to Libananco), even though no cash in fact changed hands
as a result of the execution of the STAs;

the circumstances surrounding the alleged “family divorce”, in
particular the subsequent events and the intra-family transactions;

57

222.

223.

224.

(e

the alleged third act of tes/im in relation to share certificates located
in istanbul, which had not been mentioned anywhere previously;
and

(f) the particulars surrounding the fes/im that allegedly took place in
relation to the share certificates which were kept in Switzerland.

(a) Hakan Uzan’s involvement in the formation of Libananco and his choice of
Mr Tiirkkan to manage Libananco’s affairs

Hakan Uzan began by confirming that he “played a central role in matters
relating to the formation of Libananco and the acquisition by Libananco of the
shares in CEAS and Kepez” (Tr 1860:9-1860:15).

His evidence was that he had a prior working relationship with Mr Tiirkkan,
and that, as between him and his brother Cem Uzan, he was the one who had
dealings with Mr Tiirkkan (Tr 2048:19-2049:9).

223.1 He confirmed that he asked Mr Tiirkkan to set up Libananco and to
hold it on trust — initially for all members of his immediate family
(including him), and then later only for Cem Uzan (presumably once the
alleged “family divorce” had taken place) (Tr 2049:10-2049:18).

223.2 In relation to this alleged trust arrangement, his evidence is that Cem
Uzan had complete trust in Mr Tiirkkan (as his trustee), even though
nothing was recorded in writing in relation to the trust arrangement (Tr
2050:20-2051:4).

In relation to Mr Tiirkkan himself, Hakan Uzan gave the following evidence.

224.1. Mr Tiirkkan was the “Turkish representative in the Jordanian [Uzan]
companies” (Tr 1989:18-1989:19) — “there was JPP, Alpha, there were a
couple of other ones, but I wouldn’t know if he was registered as an
employee in all of them” (Tr 1990:3-1990:5).

224.2 Hakan Uzan said that, within those companies, Mr Tiirkkan “was
responsible for finance and financial matters, shareholder matters and
such for companies that operated in Jordan and were established in
Jordan” (Tr 1990:8-1990:11).

224.3 Hakan Uzan was referred to Exhibit H-152, which contained an e-mail
message from one Haciahmet Bas (who appeared to be Mr Tiirkkan’s
supervisor at Rumeli Telekom) to him. In that e-mail message, Mr Bas was
very critical of Mr Tiirkkan’s abilities and proposed that Mr Tiirkkan’s
salary be reduced if Hakan Uzan wished to keep him as an employee.
Hakan Uzan agreed that Mr Bas had a critical view of Mr Tiirkkan (Tr
1993:16-1993:18).

58

224.4 Hakan Uzan also confirmed that he “/m/Jost possibly” decided to cut
Mr Tiirkkan’s salary by half at the time the e-mail messages in Exhibit H-
152 were sent (i.e. February 2003) (Tr 1996:6-1996:9).

224.5 When asked why Mr Tiirkkan was nevertheless still chosen to conduct
a SWOT analysis, Hakan Uzan replied as follows:

“First, Cenk [i.e. Mr Ttirkkan] was not the only person whose salary
was cut in half. Over the 2000 year period, at least hundreds of people
in Istanbul and in other countries as well as all the other employees in
Jordan had their salaries cut because it was a serious economic crisis
and the companies were facing challenges, so it wasn’t unique to Cenk.
I had met Cenk on many occasions, and I knew him personally, and
I knew his preparation of reports, and his diligence to the work I
assigned to him. That was sufficient for me to decide on him” (Tr
1998:17-1999:5).

(emphasis added)

(b) The terms of the alleged trust arrangement between Mr Tiirkkan_and
members of the Uzan family in relation to Libananco

As to the terms of this unwritten trust arrangement, Hakan Uzan testified that
Mr Tiirkkan: “holds it for us, and whenever I or we tell him to transfer it to
whoever we designate, he transfers it” (Tr 2042:8-2042:10).

225.1 When asked who the beneficiaries of the trust were, Hakan Uzan
answered that, when Libananco was first acquired: “My understanding
would be me and my brother” (Tr 2042:16-2042:17). He then elaborated
that there was:

“always this question in my mind, you know, my sister was there, my
father was there, but I was trying—at one point, everything I
established I would start making just me and my brother, but I think at
this stage I would say that at that time it was still probably for
everybody” (Tr 2042:19-2043:2).

225.2 When asked to clarify whether Libananco was initially being held on
trust for just Hakan Uzan and his brother Cem Uzan, or all four members
of Cem Uzan’s Immediate Family, Hakan was unable to give a clear
answer:

“As I said, there was always discussion of divorce, always. And at the
time when this [i.e. Libananco] was being bought, and generally with
all the other companies, it was always this question, are we together,
are we not, shall I start with the things that I’m doing now being
separate, being divorced or not? So, I may have told him like that, but
it’s difficult for me to know because always there was the issue of
divorce” (Tr 2046:7-2046:15).

59

(emphasis added)

225.3 He was then asked how Mr Tiirkkan could be sure who the
beneficiaries were, if even he was not certain at the time. His response was
that: “He [i.e. Mr Tiirkkan] doesn’t need to know that... He’s holding it
under my instructions” (Tr 2043:5-2043:7). When probed further, he
agreed with Counsel for the Respondent that: “He’s [i.e. Mr Tiirkkan]
holding it on your instructions for members of your family, but he doesn’t
know which members”. Accordingly: “He [i.e. Mr Tiirkkan] would need to
ask me or get instructions from me in that regard” (Tr 2043:9-2043:16).
He elaborated that: “the terms were that when I told him, he would do
what I tell him” (Tr 2054:2-2054:3). Specifically, Hakan Uzan agreed that
“the terms of the unwritten trusts [were] never, in fact, expressly
communicated to [Mr Tiirkkan] ” (Tr 2054:13-2054:17).

225.4 Hakan Uzan was asked whether Mr Tiirkkan was, for a period of three
months, “proceeding under a completely false apprehension as to who
[was] actually interested in Libananco”, since the change in the
arrangement pertaining to the holding of Libananco occurred between
Cem Uzan and Hakan Uzan in January 2003, but that information was not
communicated to Mr Tiirkkan until April 2003 (Tr 2055:6-2055:15).
Hakan Uzan responded as follows: “J guess maybe that wasn’t a top
priority in those months, so it took me a little longer, yes” (Tr 2055:16-
2055:18). Interestingly, Hakan Uzan’s evidence was that, even after April
2003 (when Mr Tiirkkan was informed by Hakan Uzan that Cem Uzan
would henceforth be the sole beneficial owner of Libananco), he continued
to communicate with Mr Tiirkkan in relation to “the day-to-day daily work
and day-to-day and operation of the companies, including the
liaise [sic] with Mr. Tiirkkan” (Tr 2056:11-2056:21). Hakan Uzan’s

explanation for this was that his brother Cem Uzan “was in politics” (Tr

2056:16).

 

 
 

225.5 Hakan Uzan was asked how he communicated the change in beneficial
ownership of Libananco to Mr Tiirkkan. His response was this was done
“[b]y telephone”, but that he had no record of that telephone call:

“T never kept separate notes of or, like you said, remarks of making
phone calls to anybody, any executive or outside party, and unless it
was required, I never did a follow-up e-mail. But I’m sure the
telephone company should have all the records of all the telephone
calls” (Tr 2051:14-2052:7).

225.6 The Respondent’s Counsel put to Hakan Uzan the scenario where Mr
Tiirkkan met with an unfortunate accident, and asked whether there would
be any proof to show that Libananco was not owned by Mr Tiirkkan for
himself, but rather it was being held for members of the Uzan family, and
later Cem Uzan himself (Tr 2208:9-2208-14). Hakan Uzan first replied
that “that was the case for a multitude of shareholdings that were placed
on other people in Turkish companies, or outside of Turkey” (Tr 2208:15-
2208:17), but later agreed that it was “/t/rue” that here was absolutely

60

226.

nothing that he or Cem Uzan could do to establish that, in fact, the shares
in Libananco were not owned by Mr Tiirkkan beneficially for himself (Tr
2209:10-2209:16).

(c) Why “cash” was declared on the face of the STAs even though no cash in

fact changed hands as a result of the execution of the STAs

 

Hakan Uzan was referred to paragraph 17 of his Witness Statement where he
deposed that “cash” was declared on the face of the STAs even though no
cash changed hands, and that these were meant to represent a book debt in
favour of the sellers which would eventually have been repaid if the
Concession Agreements held by CEAS and Kepez had not been cancelled in
June 2003.

226.1 He confirmed in cross-examination that “the Share Transfer
Agreements, on their face, purport to show money being paid” (Tr
2083:12-2083:15).

226.2 He also confirmed that no money was in fact paid to the sellers
pursuant to the STAs (Tr 2083:21-2084:1), but that Libananco’s debt (i.e.
what is referred to as “cash” on the STAs) would have been repaid to the
sellers of the shares if the Concession Agreements had not been cancelled
(Tr 2085:13-2085:20).

226.3 When confronted by the Respondent’s Counsel that: “in fact, there
was no arrangement at all, as far as you were concerned, in place for any
future payment, although you say there must have been some”, Hakan
Uzan initially did not offer any helpful clarification other than to say that:
“the payments as such were part of the divorce. And, for example, my
father got the largest dividends out of the divorce; that was part of the
compensation” (Tr 2088:7-2088:14).

226.4 But when asked whether there was an agreement as to how his father
Kemal Uzan would be paid by Libananco, he said that: “My father would
not get paid directly through Libananco. It was part of the family divorce
how everything was split up” (Tr 2086:22-2087:2). When asked to confirm
whether, in his father’s case, it was indeed the case that no money was
ever going to be paid as set out in the STAs, he explained: “that’s why he
received a very large portion of the dividends” (Tr 2087:8-2087:9).

226.5 Hakan Uzan explained that the large dividend received by his father
Kemal Uzan was given to him as consideration for, among other things,
his father’s transfer of his shares in CEAS and Kepez. He was asked by the
Respondent’s Counsel:

“So, as I understand it, in particular your father, he supposedly got an
especially large dividend in 2003, and his, as it were, consideration for
transferring shares in CEAS and Kepez was the especially large
dividend and the fact that he was getting other parts of the Uzan
empire, the bank and the industrial holdings; correct?”,

61

227.

to which his response was: “Yes, more or less yes”.

226.6 On this basis, he confirmed that, after his father Kemal Uzan received
the large dividend, there would be no further monies due to him from
Libananco for the supposed sale of the CEAS and Kepez shares (Tr
2212:3-2212:6).

226.7 Hakan Uzan was also questioned as to why the 2003 financial
statements of Libananco recorded a debt of US$ 234 million that was
owed to Mr Tiirkkan, notwithstanding the fact that Libananco allegedly
acquired a book debt in favour of the sellers of the shares. He said that he
was unable to explain why this was the case, and said that: “7 have never
seen the Libananco balance sheets. I never had the opportunity to go
through them or structure them in any way” (Tr 2213:18-2213:20). He
even went so far as to say that that “would be incorrect. It would need to
be corrected” (Tr 2214:10-2214:11).

(d) The circumstances surrounding the alleged “family divorce” and the series

 

intra-family transactions which purportedly took place pursuant _to_the

“family divorce”

In relation to the alleged “family divorce”, Hakan Uzan gave the following
evidence.

227.1 When asked whether he had effected a reconciliation with his father
Kemal Uzan, he said that: “To have a reconciliation, you must have a
falling out first” (Tr 2214:20-2214:21). When asked whether he in fact had
a falling out with his father, Hakan Uzan said: “No. J mean as always, I
mean, over the years we always had our disagreements, but—so, no, I
didn’t have a fallout with him” (Tr 2215:2-2215:4).

227.2 Hakan Uzan was asked whether it was Kemal Uzan who ran CEAS
and Kepez, even after the alleged “family divorce” where it was agreed
that there would be a “full division”® of ownership of the various
businesses, with ownership of CEAS and Kepez going to Cem Uzan. His
initial response was that this was not so: “J would say for major issues my
brother [i.e. Cem Uzan] was responsible” (Tr 2109:11-2109:12). However,
he later said that his father Kemal Uzan was in charge of CEAS “/ojn
certain daily issues” (Tr 2111:15). Significantly, he admitted that his
father Kemal Uzan was in charge of dealing with the important issue of the
cancellation of the Concession Agreements then held by CEAS and Kepez
(Tr 2111:20-2112:2).

227.3. Hakan Uzan was referred to Exhibit H-418, which was an excerpt from
the istanbul Trade Registry Gazette, No 5824, 20 June 2003. This shows
that Cem Uzan and his Immediate Family incorporated a new company
even after the alleged “family divorce”. It was put to Hakan Uzan that this

© Cem Uzan’s Second Witness Statement, paragraph 17.

62

228.

was not consistent with a “family divorce” having taken place earlier. His
response was that:

“a divorce, especially family divorce, with—of this magnitude nor of
this size never happens in one day. We were pushing for the divorce,
and the first steps which was the CEAS and Kepez separation and the
Telsim separation had started. Obviously, it hadn’t gone through all
the companies and/or all the systems” (Tr 2136:5-2136:11).

He went on to say that: “Jr /i.e. the alleged “family divorce”] began in
2003. We are actually never able to completely make a divorce. Now if we
would have been able to, a lot of other things would not have happened”
(Tr 2137:10-2137:13).

227.4 Hakan Uzan was asked whether it was indeed the case that the alleged
“family divorce” happened without the involvement of external lawyers,
bankers or accountants. He confirmed that this was true and that there was
no documentary evidence other than the intra-family agreements (deleted
files recovered from Mr Tiirkkan’s floppy disks) and the 32 STAs:

“Yes. There would be no way that my father, me, or my brother would
bring in a third party, may be whatever the position, into our
negotiations and into our discussions of what was going to happen
garage [sic] and how the divorce was going to happen. It was just not
the way it was going to be” (Tr 2138:19-2139:15).

In relation to the intra-family transactions carried out pursuant to the alleged
“family divorce”, Hakan Uzan gave the following evidence.

228.1 Hakan Uzan was asked how, notwithstanding that the record of
dividends showed that he received payouts corresponding to 0.43 per cent
of the total shareholding of Kepez, he transferred shares corresponding to a
total of 44.08 per cent of the shareholding of Kepez. He disagreed that his
total shareholding in Kepez amounted to 0.43 per cent, saying: “No. It
only means that within the family distribution of dividends, I only received
that percentage from the dividends” (Tr 2099:1-2099:3).

228.2 Hakan Uzan was also asked, in relation to CEAS, how he managed to
transfer shares amounting to 35.53 per cent of the shareholding in CEAS
to Libananco, even though, according to the record of dividends paid out,
he only received dividends corresponding to 6.04 per cent of the
shareholding of CEAS. The Respondent’s Counsel put to him that the total
shareholding in CEAS allegedly transferred to him via the intra-family
transfers was 29.04 per cent, and that when this figure was added to the
earlier figure of 6.04 per cent, this gave a total of approximately 35 per
cent which he alleged he transferred to Libananco. It was put to him that:

“the intra-family faxes, which appeared so mysteriously on the Floppy
Disks, are intended to fill the gap between the 6.04 percent that you

63

229.

started with and the 35-odd percent that you transferred” (Tr 2100:14-
2100:18).

Hakan Uzan’s reply in that regard was merely that: “The intra-family
transactions and the sale to Libananco are two different things” (Tr
2100:19-2100:20).

228.3. Hakan Uzan was asked what purpose would be served in having
Aysegiil Uzan transfer shares to him, only for him to then transfer them on
to Libananco. His reply was that: “As part of the divorce, my brother
wanted all things to be documented, all the intra-family share sales to be
documented, so that there is no misunderstanding or dispute later” (Tr
2103:9-2103:12). When pressed to explain the complex nature of the
transactions, he repeated his earlier answer and said: “Again, my brother
wanted to have everything documented; and, as part of the family divorce,
this is the way things got structured” (Tr 2106:18-2106:20).

228.4 Hakan Uzan denied that the purpose of these roundabout transactions
was to “supply the missing shares for [him] to transfer, pursuant to the
Share Transfer Agreements, to Libananco” (Tr 2107:7-2107:9). He
explained that:

“If you look starting in 1992 with the acquisition of the privatization of
CEAS and Kepez shares until including these, 2002 and 2003, you will
see hundreds of these sort of transactions between family members,
between companies, either done for accounting purposes, either done
for dividend purposes, for whatever purposes they may have been at
the time. It was a complex structure between family members and
between companies, and that’s the way they were done” (Tr 2107:14-
2108:1).

 

The Tribunal notes that no evidence has been tendered of any such similar
transactions.

On the related issue of the authenticity of Exhibit R-821, which purported to
be a fax document detailing the breakdown of his family’s shareholdings in
various companies, including CEAS and Kepez (see paragraph 218 above),
Hakan Uzan gave the following evidence.

229.1 He confirmed that one of the reasons he disputed the authenticity of
Exhibit R-821 was the fact that his secretary sat across from him, so there
would be no need to send him a document via e-mail (Tr 2156:11-
2156:20).

229.2 He was asked whether the contents of Exhibit R-821 (i.e. the table
representing shareholding structure within his immediate family) were
being looked at closely at the time (i.e. 14 July 2003) because a freezing
order had been made by a Turkish court on 4 July 2003 in relation to the
assets of Kemal Uzan, Cem Uzan, Hakan Uzan and Aysegiil Uzan and
other Uzan group companies. He initially denied that he was looking

64

230.

closely at the shareholding structure within his immediate family at that
time (Tr 2166:1-2166:6). But he gave a different answer upon further
questioning and agreed that, in the face of the freezing order, he would
have been looking carefully at the shareholding structure within his family:
“Well, if you assumed that these are correct, then that would be right, but
it’s not” (Tr 2166:19-2167:2).

229.3 However, he said that the contents of Exhibit R-821 did indeed
correctly represent the factual position in relation to his family’s
shareholdings in CEAS and Kepez at some earlier point in time: “/et's say,
from roughly six months earlier or nine months earlier or one year earlier,
then it would be a correct document” (Tr 2150:19-2150:22).

(e) The requirement of teslim_and the third act of teslim (not previously

mentioned) which allegedly took place in Istanbul

Hakan Uzan was then cross-examined on the requirement of delivery or teslim,
which was necessary to effect a valid transfer of ownership under Turkish law.

230.1 Hakan Uzan’s evidence was that “as far as I know, then and today,
bearer share certificates only need to be—can be agreed in any form and
need to be delivered to be valid” (Tr 2058:21-2059:2). Hakan Uzan
therefore agreed that the STAs themselves could not effect a valid transfer
of ownership because actual delivery of the share certificates was
necessary — “the Share Transfer Agreements are or were not even
necessary” (Tr 2059:10-2059:21).

230.2 Hakan Uzan was later asked to confirm that tes/im took place, firstly,
over a telephone call to Switzerland in April 2003, and secondly, when Mr
Ciggin inspected the share certificates in istanbul on 15 May 2003. His
response sought to introduce a third act of tes/im not previously mentioned
or referred to in his Witness Statement (or in any of the other witness
statements tendered by the Claimant): “No. J mean, on the Vienna shares,
they were sent by my father to our offices, to me. And, as I said, he actually
called me and told me to go to the garage, which I did when the large
denomination shares arrived at Ikitelli offices” (Tr 2067:4-2067:8). Hakan
Uzan testified that, sometime in May 2003, he took delivery of the large
denomination “Vienna shares” (i.e. the CEAS and Kepez share certificates
that were produced in Vienna by the Claimant for inspection in these
proceedings): “When they were sent from my father’s offices to the Ikitelli
offices” (Tr 2068:11-2068:16).

 

230.3. When asked why this was not captured in his Witness Statement,
Hakan Uzan said:

“It’s the information I have. I mean, I told the lawyers when we were
preparing my Witness Statement a lot of information, a lot of—
regarding a lot of different subjects, and this is the draft that came out.
Something not being in here doesn’t mean there is something missing
in the story or anything like that” (Tr 2067:22-2068:7).

65

231.

He was unable to give any other explanation for this significant omission
from his witness statement.

Hakan Uzan was subsequently cross-examined on the alleged tes/im that took
place in ikitelli (see paragraph 230.2 above).

231.1 He gave evidence as follows:

“The shares were sent by my father to our Ikitelli offices. He
telephoned me, and I went downstairs to the garage where the car
came into and I guess that’s where it took place... I believe it was the
day that Mr Ciggin went to his part of the transaction” (Tr 2198:17-
2199:1).

231.2 Hakan Uzan thus confirmed that the delivery of share certificates that
took place in ikitelli happened on the same day as Mr Ciggin purported to
take delivery of the CEAS and Kepez share certificates at the Rumeli and
Dogus Buildings (Tr 2199:3-2199:7). He said that he received a telephone
call from his father Kemal Uzan in the “early afternoon” (Tr 2240:16-
2240:19). His evidence was that this phone call was made by his father
Kemal Uzan from his (i.e. Kemal Uzan’s) office, which was: “Either in
the Dogus and the Adabank Building or from the house” (Tr 2264:7-
2264:13).

231.3. Hakan Uzan said that the share certificates in question were moved
from a safe in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings to the garage in the ikitelli
Building, where they were then delivered to him and subsequently moved
to the safe of Cem Uzan (Tr 2199:15-2200:6) on the fifth floor of the
Iketeli Building (Tr 2204:2-2204:10). At that point in time, those share
certificates were being held on behalf of Libananco (presumably by Cem
Uzan, since those share certificates were kept in his safe) (Tr 2204:11-
2204:15).

231.4 He agreed that the sequence of events was that the share certificates
were moved from the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings (after Mr Ciggin
allegedly inspected the share certificates and took delivery of the latter on
behalf of Libananco) to the fkitelli Building (Tr 2200:4-2200:22). His
evidence was that:

“My father’s office was on the same floor of the Dogus Building, so
the safes were in the other bank building in Ikitelli. So, they were
visited there by Mr. Ciggin and then later put in cars to be sent to me
in Ikitelli” (Tt 2242:16-2242:20).

231.5 He said that the share certificates were wrapped in packages at the time
he received them in Iketli:

“The corners were ripped. They were some that had like packaging on
the side but not on the top... My father sent me (EAS and Kepez

66

232.

shares. From the ones that I saw on top, that was it. I mean, it wasn’t
going to be paper wrapped underneath” (Tr 2205:15-2206:11).

231.6 He was asked whether there was any list that accompanied delivery of
those share certificates which would identify the share certificates which
were allegedly delivered. His reply was that: “There may have been [such
a list]. I don’t recall... I don’t recall a document, so I don’t know what
happened to something that I don’t recall” (Tr 2206:12-2207:11).

231.7 Hakan Uzan was asked to clarify whether the share certificates that
were allegedly delivered to him in ikitelli were the same as those that Mr
Ciggin purported to accept (on behalf of Libananco) in the Rumeli and
Dogus Buildings. His response was in the affirmative: “/ believe they were
all located in the same place, so most likely they would be the same. He
[i.e. Mr Ciggin] would have seen these shares as well” (Tr 2242:7-
2242:10).

(f) The circumstances surrounding teslim that allegedly occurred in relation to

the share certificates located in Switzerland

In relation to the reamining act of delivery or tes/im alleged by the Claimant,
Hakan Uzan was referred to paragraph 26 of his Witness Statement, where he
deposed that share certificates located in Switzerland were delivered to Mr
Tiirkkan by means of a phone call in “April 2002”. He later clarified that this
was an error, and the month should have been April 2003 instead (Tr 2236:21-
2236:22). He gave the following evidence in relation to feslim that allegedly
occurred in relation to the share certificates located in Switzerland.

232.1 The share certificates in Switzerland were located on a property rented
by his uncle Yavuz Uzan (Tr 2183:12-2184:1).

232.2 No evidence was given by him as to how the share certificates were
moved to that property (Tr 2184:2-2184:5).

232.3 The alleged phone call was made by Hakan Uzan from istanbul, to Mr
Tiirkkan who was at the time most probably in Jordan (Tr 2189:11-2190:1).

232.4 Hakan Uzan took the share certificates to Switzerland in 1995. At the
time, these shares were owned by members of his family (Tr 2190:20-
2191:8).

232.5 Hakan Uzan was unable to identify which of the share certificates in
Switzerland were the subject of the alleged transfer referred to in
paragraph 26 of his Witness Statement.

232.6 When asked whether he knew that there were in fact no Kepez share
certificates found in Switzerland, he replied that he did not know (Tr
2192:17-2193:5). When asked: “So, it’s a very uncertain concept, your
delivery, that it’s delivery of something you don’t even know what it is
your [sic] delivering; is that right?”, he replied:

67

233.

“Yes. But had the events in June and July [2003] not taken place,
sooner or later they would have been relocated, just like the high
volume shares were relocated by my father from the safe to me” (Tr
2194:10-2194:17).

232.7 When asked whether he knew which share certificates or what he was
allegedly delivering, Hakan Uzan replied: “7 knew—as far as I knew, it
was CEAS and Kepez shares” (Tr 2195:8-2195:9). He said, however, that
he did not know which shares specifically he purported to deliver (Tr
2195:10-2195:11). He also agreed that he took no steps to evidence which
of the share certificates in Switzerland had allegedly been delivered: “Well,
at the time when I talked to Cenk, I didn’t; and, later on, if events hadn't
occurred as they did, I would have” (Tr 2196:1-2196:3).

 

232.8 Hakan Uzan agreed that:

“At the time there was absolutely no way anybody going into this
apartment in Switzerland would be able to identify which Share
Certificates were supposedly owned by Libananco and which were
supposedly owned by other people” (Tr 2196:16-2196:21).

6. First Witness Statement of Ali Cenk Tiirkkan dated 23 April
2009

Mr Tiirkkan’s First Witness Statement discussed the instructions he received
from Hakan Uzan to establish a company in Cyprus, and the events that
followed. Of particular interest and relevance is Mr Tiirkkan’s role in the
preparation of the STAs and the corporate documents of Libananco (including
its board and management minutes) which Mr Tiirkkan allegedly prepared. Mr
Tiirkkan’s First Witness Statement may, in broad terms, be broken down into
the following areas or topics:

 

(a) the circumstances surrounding his purchase of a holding company in
Cyprus at the instruction of Hakan Uzan;

(b) why it was necessary for him to reprint and re-sign the Instrument of
Transfer dated 1 April 2002;

(c) Libananco’s corporate affairs, including its meetings conducted by
Mr Tiirkkan and the numerous STAs purportedly recording its
acquisition of shares in CEAS and Kepez;

(d

the circumstances surrounding the alleged delivery or tes/im that
occurred in relation to the share certificates located in Switzerland
and Istanbul; and

(e

the alleged trust arrangement between Mr Tiirkkan and Cem Uzan,
which was brought to an end at the end of 2008.

68

234,

235.

236.

237.

238.

239.

(a) The cir surrounding Mr Tiirkkan’s isition of Lib
and his travel to Cyprus in April 2002

In early 2002, Mr Tiirkkan was asked by Hakan Uzan to purchase or establish
a company in Cyprus on trust for Hakan Uzan’s family.

Following this request, he researched professional service firms in Cyprus
through the Internet to identify a firm that could assist him in this project:

 

  

“After identifying a firm based on its website, in March 2002, I
telephoned Mr Antonios Partellas of the firm Partellas & Kiliaris, in
Nicosia, Republic of Cyprus, and requested that his firm assist me in
arranging the acquisition of a Cypriot company”.

(emphasis added)
Mr Tiirkkan deposed that:

“Afier Mr. Partellas had arranged such an acquisition, namely of
Libananco, I travelled to Nicosia, Republic of Cyprus in early April
2002. This was my first trip to the Republic of Cyprus, although I had
spent time in the northern part of the island previously for business. I
flew there on a non-stop Royal Jordanian flight from Amman and
stayed two nights at Nicosia Hilton”.

April 2002 was also Mr Tiirkkan’s first meeting in person with Mr Partellas,
and he discussed the general rules and organisation of Libananco, including
the requirement that a majority of the board of directors had to be Cypriot
nationals.

Mr Tiirkkan stated that:

“My acquisition of Libananco was recorded on an instrument of
transfer dated 1 April 2002... I had never met or communicated with
Mr. Sarris or anyone at Prontoservus prior to 1 April 2002, when I
participated by telephone, in a meeting arranged for the appointment
of a new Board of Directors for Libananco”.

On 1 April 2002:

“the two original directors of the company, as well as the corporate
secretary — Mr. Polakis Sarris — resigned their positions and a new
Board of Directors and corporate secretary — namely, Latimer
Management Services, Ltd. — were appointed”.

Thereafter, Libananco’s Board of Directors consisted of Mr Tiirkkan, as well

as Andreas Partellas and Antonia Kyriakou (both of whom were citizens of
and resident in Cyprus).

69

240.

(b) The _Instrument_of Transfer _dated_1 April 2002 memorialising Mr
Tiirkkan’s acquisition of Libananco

In relation to the Instrument of Transfer dated 1 April 2002, Mr Tiirkkan’s
First Witness Statement was as follows.

 

240.1 “When I arrived in Cyprus shortly thereafter, Mr. Antonios Partellas
had only some of the relevant paperwork ready for me to sign during my
visit. Indeed, it was only after I returned to Amman that I received from Mr.
Partellas a copy of the instrument of transfer signed by Mr. Sarris and a
witness, along with an unsigned counterpart of the same document. I
signed the unsigned counterpart of the instrument of transfer, along with a
witness (Mr. Ali Betar, an attorney in Jordan) and returned the signed
original to Mr. Partellas for placement in Libananco’s files. In other
words, in April 2002, the four signatures were not on the same original
page, but on two separate and identical counterparts”.

240.2 “Sometime in 2007, Crowell & Moring ... asked me if I had with me in
Jordan the original or a copy of the instrument of transfer which I had
signed in April 2002, and which they informed me was missing from the
company files in the Republic of Cyprus”.

240.3 Mr Tiirkkan deposed that he had not kept a copy, and had checked with
Mr Partellas and Mr Betar (who had witnessed his signature of the
document in April 2002), all of whom said they had not kept a copy. He
deposed that Mr Betar, as his business lawyer, asked him why he was
concerned with this document as ownership of Libananco had been
transferred in 2002 and publicly registered in his name in 2005. According
to Mr Tiirkkan, Mr Betar suggested that he:

“simply re-sign another copy of the document in order to put
Libananco’s files in complete and good order and that, in his opinion
as a business lawyer, this would have no legal effect on my [i.e. Mr
Tiirkkan’s] ownership of the company. I therefore went to his [i.e. Mr
Betar’s] Amman law office with a printed copy of the April 2002
version signed by Mr. Sarris and his witness. Mr. Betar and I then re-
signed that version and I sent it to Mr. Partellas in Nicosia to put
Libananco’s files in good order”.

240.4 Mr Tiirkkan deposed that:

“When I sent the re-signed document back to the company files, it was
my intention to simply put them in good order. Had I known at that
time that any question would be raised in this case regarding the date
of this document, I would have notified Crowell & Moring that I had
re-printed and re-signed the document in 2007”.

70

241.

242.

243.

(c) Lib ’s_ corporate affairs including its i di d by Mr

Tiirkkan_and_the_ numerous STAs purportedly recording its acquisition of

shares in CEAS and Kepez

On 10 July 2002, Libananco held its first Board of Directors meeting under Mr
Tiirkkan’s direction. In that meeting, he was appointed as Libananco’s General
Manager by the Board of Directors. Mr Tiirkkan deposed that, although the
beneficial and legal ownership of Libananco had undergone changes between
2002 and the present, the same directors (Antonia Kyriakou, Andreas Partellas
and Mr Tiirkkan himself), secretary (Latimer Management Services Ltd.
(“Latimer”)) and auditor (Alliot Partellas Kilaris Ltd.) remained in their
positions up to the date that Mr Tiirkkan made his First Witness Statement (i.e.
23 April 2009).

 

Mr Tiirkkan deposed that Libananco’s management and board meetings took
place in the following manner.

242.1 All Management Committee and Board of Directors meetings took
place by telephone: “Board meetings were conducted in Nicosia, Republic
of Cyprus (although I always attended the meetings telephonically)”.

242.2 Minutes were then prepared by him on a computer and hard copies
were printed and circulated by fax for signature, “and then replaced by
hard-copy originals which were kept in Libananco’s corporate files in the
Republic of Cyprus”.

242.3. Mr Tiirkkan stated that: “J printed out in hard copy and personally
signed each and every one of the Management Committee and Board of
Directors minutes, within a few days or weeks of the meeting held”.

242.4 Mr Tiirkkan further stated that:

“whenever I created a set of minutes on the computer... I also saved
these minutes electronically on a floppy disk... to maintain copies of
these files, separate from the official and signed hard-copy records in
the Republic of Cyprus, so that I could retrieve them and refer to them
as needed for purposes of conducting company business as General
Manager. I have provided all of these floppy disks to Crowell &
Moring” .

  

Mr Tiirkkan gave evidence in relation to the process by which Libananco
allegedly acquired ownership of shares in CEAS and Kepez. Contrary to Cem
Uzan’s testimony in his First Witness Statement that the share transfer process
began in October 2002 (see paragraph 168 above), Mr Tiirkkan testified that:

“.. by the end of Summer or early Fall 2002, Hakan Uzan told me that
the company would begin acquiring bearer shares in the two Utilities
from members of the Uzan family, so that it would have, in the future, a
sufficient capital base to begin investment activities outside of Turkey.

71

244,

245.

In September 2002, therefore, Libananco began the process to acquire
these shares”.

(emphasis added)

As to the mechanics of the share acquisition process, Mr Tiirkkan deposed as
follows:

“As recorded in the 23 September 2002 Management Committee
minutes, Mr. Saylan Ciggin (Libananco’s internal legal advisor)
prepared the template share transfer agreement text that was later
used in the acquisition by Libananco of CEAS and Kepez shares from
Kemal, Hakan and Aysegiil Uzan.

However, the process by which these share transfer documents were
completed and signed were as follows: (a) first, I would receive a fax
from Istanbul to prepare a share transfer agreement (per Mr. Ciggin’s
template) on a particular date, for a specified amount of shares; (b) I
would prepare the document in duplicate, print both copies, and send
one with my signature and one without my signature to Turkey, (c) the
relevant transferor (either Kemal Hakan or Aysegiil Uzan would
receive and review both of the documents and sign the unsigned
version; (d) I would receive their signed version back in Amman,
though often I would receive several of these signed documents at the
same time in bundles; (e) sometimes, I would not receive a particular
document back at all, and I would then have to create another one
and go through the same process again; (f) I would then sign the
documents I had received from Turkey (either individually or in
stacks or bundles, depending on how I received them; and (g) after
all the agreements had been executed, I personally took all of them to
Oyprus in a single package and told Mr. Antonios Partellas, the
corporate secretary to place them in Libananco’s corporate files”.

(emphasis added)

(d)_The circumstances surrounding the_alleged delivery _of the share
certificates located in Switzerland and Istanbul

Mr Tiirkkan had the following to say in his First Witness Statement about the
alleged delivery or teslim in respect of the share certificates located in
Switzerland and istanbul:

“During this process, sometime in April 2003, I was contacted by
Hakan Uzan, who informed me that some of the bearer shares in the
Utilities that he intended to transfer to Libananco (and that were
contained in the percentage of shares listed in the share transfer
agreements) were being held for the company in custody in
Switzerland. As Libananco’s General Manager, I acknowledged my
agreement to this arrangement. Shortly thereafier, Hakan Uzan also

72

246.

247.

248.

told me that from now on I would own Libananco in trust solely for
Cem Uzan.

On 18 April 2003, the Management Committee decided to instruct Mr.
Saylan Ciggin to visit the offices in Istanbul where the bearer shares
located in Turkey were stored and physically re-check the storage of
the shares and their labelling under Libananco’s name. I telephoned
Mr. Ciggin (who was in Istanbul) and told him to inspect those bearer
shares and conduct an inventory at the Istanbul storage facilities to
accept delivery on behalf of Libananco. Around the same time, Mr.
Cem Uzan made arrangements to transport the most valuable of
those shares to a separate secure location for Libananco. Also, Mr.
Ciggin sent me, by fax, two share custody agreements, dated [16]’ May
2003, according to which the less valuable bearer shares were to
continue to be held at the same location for Libananco, under the
custody of CEAS and Kepez respectively”.

(emphasis added)

(e) Change in legal ownership of Libi and transfer of the y to
Cem Uzan

Last, Mr Tiirkkan deposed that the legal ownership of Libananco changed in
January 2009 when he transferred the company to Cem Uzan:

“At the end of 2008, Cem Uzan informed me that he wanted to bring
our trust arrangement to an end and acquire outright legal ownership
of Libananco. Thus, on 12 January 2009, I signed an instrument of
transfer in which Cem Uzan acquired 100 percent of Libananco’s
shares directly from me, thereby becoming the sole legal owner of the
company”.

7. Second Witness Statement of Ali Cenk Tiirkkan dated 8
October 2009

Mr Tiirkkan’s Second Witness Statement was given essentially in response to
an allegation made by the Respondent in the R.Rep.Supp filed on 14 August
2009 (see paragraph 6 and paragraphs 81 to 85 of the R.Rep.Supp), described
in summary below.

On 15 July 2009, the Claimant provided for the first time the hand stamp
purportedly used to place Libananco’s common seal on (at least some of) the
STAs bearing dates from the period October 2002 to May 2003. The
Respondent submitted in its R.Rep.Supp that it obtained evidence to show that
the hand stamp produced was of a “Shiny” brand model, and could not have
been purchased in Cyprus before February 2005.

7 Mr Tiirkkan clarified during direct examination that the date on which he received the two share
custody agreements was 16 May 2003 and not 15 May 2003 as printed at paragraph 25 of his First
Witness Statement (Tr 2295:7-2295:12).

73

249.

250.

251.

The Respondent accordingly argued that the STAs (or at the very least some
of them) were backdated, since the “Shiny” stamp used to apply the Libananco
seal was only commercially available long after the STAs were alleged to have
been executed.

Mr Tiirkkan’s answer to this allegation was that the hand stamp which was
produced (i.e. the “Shiny” brand model) was not in fact the one which was
originally used to stamp the STAs executed between October 2002 and May
2003. His evidence was that the stamp machine first used was a different one,
and that the second stamp machine (i.e. the “Shiny brand model) was
purchased because the first stamp machine broke in 2005 when he was in
transit to Cyprus.

His evidence in his Second Witness Statement was as follows.

251.1 “Sometime in the late summer or early fall of 2002, I had a Libananco
corporate stamp made at a local firm in Amman so that I could use it to
stamp company-related documents. This stamp was installed on a small,
plastic stamp machine. I have no clear recollection but believe that the
type of stamp machine may have been a Trodat. The body of the stamp is
a small manufactured device. The imprint of the stamp, the medallion, has
to be custom made and I had one made that bore the name Libananco”
(emphasis added).

251.2 He would use the stamp machine described above (i.e. the first stamp
machine) to apply the stamp to the signature page of the agreement after
he signed the STA containing the seller’s signature, sometimes
individually and sometimes in a group with other agreements.

251.3 In early November 2005, he travelled again to Nicosia, Cyprus “to
meet lawyers from the United States who were coming to inspect
Libananco corporate documents in order to evaluate a possible legal
claim for the company”.

251.4 “/Bjefore meeting with the lawyers, I met with Mr. Antonis
Partellas... I brought with me to that meeting all of the original share
transfer agreements, which I had kept such originals in my offices in
Amman since before the June 2003 seizure of the assets. The purpose of
the meeting was to make sure Mr. Partellas could make the corporate file
available to the visiting lawyers, and to place the original share transfer
agreements in that file”.

251.5 “I also brought with me the Libananco corporate stamp I had
purchased back in 2002 and had used to stamp the agreements. When I
arrived in Nicosia, I noticed the stamp machine had a broken plastic leg
piece and was no longer functioning. I showed the stamp machine to Mr.
Partellas, whose office was able to obtain another stamp machine very
similar to the broken one. I do not know if his office bought a new one or
had an extra one in their office. I recall taking the Libananco medallion off

74

the old stamp machine and placed it onto the new machine provided by Mr.
Partellas’ office. I left the stamp machine with Mr. Partellas’ office
because I did not want to break it again, and because it was my practice to

leave all Libananco-related files and paperwork in Cyprus”.

251.6

“T believe that I applied the stamp to the share transfer agreements in

2002 and 2003 sometime around the time I signed them for the company
as the buyer. I am told that it is possible some of the STAs may have been
stamped in Cyprus when I visited in November 2005. Frankly, it is possible

that
any

I may have done that on a few of the STAs but I simply do not have
specific memory of doing so”.

8. Cross-examination of Mr Tiirkkan

252. The cross-examination of Mr Tiirkkan covered the following areas:

(a)

(c)
(d)
(e)

@

the circumstances surrounding the formation of Libananco;

the alleged trust arrangement between him and members of the Uzan
family;

the minutes of the board and management meetings of Libananco;
the omission of significant facts or events from Libananco’s minutes;

the circumstances surrounding the alleged “family divorce”,
specifically how faxes purportedly evidencing intra-family share
transfers came to be found on his floppy disks even though he was
not responsible for, and did not assist with, any of these transfers;
and

 

the circumstances surrounding the alleged delivery or teslim in
relation to the share certificates located in both Switzerland and
Istanbul.

(a) Mr Tiirkka olvement in the creation of Libananco

253. Mr Tiirkkan was referred to paragraph 12 of his First Witness Statement:

“T researched professional service firms in the Republic of Cyprus
through the internet to identify a firm that could assist me in this
project. After identifying a firm based on its website, in March 2002, I

telephoned Mr. Partellas...”.

(emphasis added)

253.1 It was put to Mr Tiirkkan that Mr Partellas did not have a website until

late

2002. Mr Tiirkkan’s response was that it was not actually Mr

Partellas’ (or that of his firm’s) website that he found: “what I finded [sic]

on the internet, it was a Web site containing all the accountant or law

75

254.

firms of the Cypriot. It is like a directory or yellow pages, and I finded
their information from there” (Tr 2373:21-2374:3).

253.2 Mr Tiirkkan agreed that he knew absolutely nothing about Mr
Partellas’ firm other than that his firm was on a list of lawyers and
accountants in Cyprus that was located as a result of an Internet search (Tr
2374:22-2375:5).

253.3. When asked by the Tribunal why he chose Mr Partellas’ firm over
other firms listed on the Internet, his response was:

“As I remember when I finded this list, I start to call, and I believe his
name was on the top, maybe because his name is starting with A. And I
remember I called several companies, but they were not speaking in
English, or I didn’t reach them. This was the first company where I
reached them, and they said they can help me” (Tr 2745:10-2745:17).

Mr Tiirkkan was asked whether he had met Mr Partellas before, and whether
he had any prior business dealings with him. His response to both questions
was negative (Tr 2381:12-2381:17). He agreed that a fee would be payable to
Mr Partellas (or his firm) for the acquisition or incorporation of a company in
Cyprus. He said that the fee quoted was 1,500 Cypriot pounds, and that it was
paid over to Mr Partellas on 1 April 2002 when he (i.e. Mr Tiirkkan) was in
Cyprus (Tr 2382:6-2382:11).

254.1 Mr Tiirkkan was asked: “So, Mr. Partellas and Mr. Sarris, who never
met you before, are apparently taking entirely on trust that you will pay
them the money, is that right?”, to which his response was: “Yes, sir” (Tr
2381:21-2382:20).

254.2 Mr Tiirkkan also agreed that Mr Partellas would have given him an
invoice for the payment received, and that this invoice could be found in
either his files or Mr Partellas’ files. However, he said that he did not have
the invoice, and he did not know whether Mr Partellas had the invoice.
When asked by the Tribunal whether he in fact got a receipt for payment,
his answer was unhelpful: “What I remember, I getted [sic] some
document, sir” (Tr 2400:4-2401:4).

254.3 In any event, Mr Tiirkkan contradicted his earlier evidence because he
later admitted (when presented with the 2002 financial statements of
Libananco) that no money was in fact paid to Mr Partellas’ firm until
around the end of 2005 (Tr 2591:18-2592:5). Again, he was unable to
explain why Mr Partellas’ firm would be willing to provide services on
credit for a period of some three years (Tr 2592:11-2592:15). However,
this is consistent with Mr Tiirkkan’s evidence that Libananco only opened
a bank account “around 2005... In Cyprus” (Tr 2593:13-2593:22).

254.4 Mr Tiirkkan was referred to Exhibit H-22, which was Libananco’s

2002 financial statements. Page 12 of that document records the
“Administrative Expenses for the period ended 31 December 2002”. This

76

255.

256.

was further broken down into the following components: legal and
professional fees (US$ 25,500); secretarial fees (US$1,200); miscellaneous
(US$12,350); accountancy fees (US$5,000); and audit fees (US$15,000).
Mr Tiirkkan’s evidence was that:

“most of the expenses here are also not the expense which is paid.
These are just recorded for the accounting base... these amounts paid
later on by the Libananco to them [i.e. Mr Partellas’ firm and other
professionals who rendered services to Libananco]... Around like
Year 2005, and I have some monies for the Libananco, and I make it
these expenses for them” (Tr 2574:22-2576:10).

(emphasis added)

He confirmed again that expenses recorded in Libananco’s 2002 financial
statements were not in fact paid in 2002, but rather in 2005 — the reason for
their appearance in Libananco’s 2002 financial statements was that they
were “recording [sic] as a provision” (Tr 2576:11-2576:18).

Mr Tiirkkan was referred to paragraph 14 of his First Witness Statement (“J
had never met or communicated with Mr. Sarris or anyone at Prontoservus
prior to 1 April 2002, when I participated, by telephone, in a meeting
arranged for the appointment of a new Board of Directors for Libananco”).

255.1 When asked to explain why both Mr Partellas and Mr Sarris testified
that no such board meeting took place on 1 April 2002, Mr Tiirkkan
initially said that this was because the meeting took place over the
telephone, but later said that there was in fact no telephone call: “Sir, this
Board meeting done, and it was done through the telephonically... There
was nobody on the telephone call, sir... there is no direct telephone call
like this. It is a paper meeting” (Tr 2378:10-2379:3).

 

255.2 When asked to clarify the phrase “J participated, by telephone”
(paragraph 14 of Mr Tiirkkan’s First Witness Statement), he said that:

“It means that there is a meeting done, it is type [sic], it’s printed, and
everybody knows that there is a meeting done, but nobody was in the
same time... this is by telephone. This is not a direct one because it is a
paper meeting” (Tr 2379:9-2379:17).

Mr Tiirkkan was referred to paragraph 12 of his First Witness Statement,
where he deposed that he flew to Nicosia, Cyprus in early April 2002 on a
“non-stop Royal Jordanian flight”.

256.1 He said that he stayed two nights at the Nicosia Hilton. When
presented with correspondence from Hilton International that it had no
record of him staying there in 2002, he replied: “J stayed on the I“ of April,
2" of April, at the Hilton Hotel... it says it right on their letter that I was
staying or not staying”. When it was put to him that the correspondence
from Hilton International confirmed that it had no record of any person

 

77

257.

258.

259.

known as “Ali Tiirkkan” having stayed at the hotel then, he replied: “J’m
not Ali Tiirkkan, sir... I’m Ali Cenk Tiirkkan” (Tr 2397:19-2397:21).

256.2 The question was posed by the Respondent’s counsel to Mr Tiirkkan:
“Ts it your evidence that rather than having gone for a nonstop flight, as
appears in your Witness Statement, you, in fact, went on an indirect flight
via Beirut?”. He responded: “Sir, I fly there from Amman to Larnaca... it
was a direct flight... The planes stop in Beirut, but it was not via Beirut”.
Mr Tiirkkan explained that it was a “nonstop” flight because: “J didn’t get
out from the plane” (Tr 2398:10-2399:7).

  

Mr Tiirkkan was referred to paragraph 14 of his First Witness Statement (see
paragraph 240.1 above), where he deposed that Mr Partellas only had some of
the relevant paperwork ready for him to sign when he arrived in Cyprus in
April 2002, and that he only received the Instrument of Transfer from Mr
Partellas by mail once he returned to Amman, Jordan.

257.1 Mr Tiirkkan said that he was shown (but not given) the Instrument of
Transfer when he was in Cyprus: “He [i.e. Mr Partellas] showed me what
he didn’t give me [sic], sir” (Tr 2391:18-2391:19).

257.2 When asked why Mr Partellas did not give it to him, his response was
that: “Maybe I forgot to take it from him” (Tr 2392:1).

257.3. When asked to clarify why then it was said in his First Witness
Statement that some of the relevant paperwork was not ready for him to
sign, Mr Tiirkkan’s reply was contradictory: “No, sir. The documents was
ready for to sign [sic], but I didn’t signed [sic] it. My request is from him I
want to sign this document on [sic] front of my lawyer, and he is my
witnesses [sic] ” (Tr 2392:6-2392:9).

Mr Tiirkkan was again referred to paragraph 14 of his First Witness Statement
(see paragraph 240.1 above). He was asked why he did not sign the “original”
Instrument of Transfer which was signed by Mr Sarris and his witness. He
replied:

“Because they are the original documents, sir... Because, if I signed it,
the original document to Cyprus, I have no document in my hand...
The important signature of the third parties [sic] which they were
selling the company to us, that’s why it is the important one which I
keep it with [sic] on our side” (Tr 2407:4-2407:22).

Mr Tiirkkan was then referred to his First Witness Statement, in which he
deposed that he reprinted and re-signed the Instrument of Transfer in 2007.

259.1 He was asked how he was able to print a copy of the Instrument of
Transfer with only Mr Sarris’ and his (i.e. Mr Sarris’) witness’ signature
on it. He was asked whether it was saved on a computer as an electronic
file. His response was: “J don’t remember, sir” (Tr 2411:12).

78

260.

259.2 He was asked how else he would have been able to print it (i.e. the
Instrument of Transfer with only two signatures on it) unless it had been
saved as a PDF file on a computer. His response was: “Sir, I don’t
remember” (Tr 2411:15).

259.3 He was asked if he could explain how he was able to obtain a copy of
the Instrument of Transfer with only two signatures on it, assuming this
was done other than by printing it from a computer. His response was: “Sir,
I don’t remember how I did get this document” (Tr 2411:19-2411:20).

259.4 He was asked whether, if that document had been reprinted in 2007 as
he alleges, that would indicate that the document was indeed saved at
some earlier stage onto his computer. His reply was: “J don’t remember,
sir” (Tr 2412:5).

259.5 When asked directly how he was able to print or reprint that document,
his response was similar: “J don’t remember, sir” (Tr 2413:6).

259.6 Although Mr Tiirkkan deposed at paragraph 15 of his First Witness
Statement that:

“T had sent the original [Instrument of Transfer] back to Mr. Partellas
in April 2002, and had not kept a copy... [In 2007,] I therefore went to
his [i.e. Mr Betar’s] Amman law office with a printed copy of the April
2002 version signed by Mr. Sarris and his witness. Mr. Betar and I
then re-signed that version, and I sent it to Mr. Partellas in Nicosia to
put Libananco’s files in good order”,

he later appeared to give evidence to the contrary. When asked by the
Tribunal whether Mr Sarris signed a new copy of the Instrument of
Transfer, Mr Tiirkkan said that this was not the case as he (and Mr Betar)
simply signed the same copy of the Instrument of Transfer that was
originally signed by Mr Sarris in 2002 (Tr 2749:22-2750:10). Mr Tiirkkan
said: “We just signed the copy which was signed by Mr. Sarris and his
witness... [That] document was signed in the Year 2002” (Tr 2750:5-
2750:10). This is contrary to his evidence in paragraph 15 of his First
Witness Statement, which states that he had not kept a copy of the original
Instrument of Transfer signed by Mr Sarris and his (i.e. Mr Sarris’) witness.

 

(b) The alleged trust a between Mr Tiirkkan and members of the
Uzan family

In relation to the alleged trust arrangement in respect of Libananco, Mr
Tiirkkan was referred to paragraph 11 of his First Witness Statement (“... in
early 2002, I was asked by Hakan Uzan to purchase or establish a company in
the Republic of Cyprus in trust for his family”). He gave the following
evidence.

260.1 When asked: “Jf you are going to operate or manage property on
somebody else’s behalf, you’ve got to know who the somebody else is,

79

261.

262.

don’t you?”, Mr Tiirkkan replied that: “Jt depends on the laws of the
country... I’m not an expert on this matter; and, as I know, it depends on
the country’s law” (Tr 2355:16-2356:8).

260.2 Mr Tiirkkan was asked whether he knew which law was applicable to
the alleged trust arrangement. His reply was that: “The trust belong to
Cyprus, sir, Republic of Cyprus”. He agreed, however, that he did not take
any advice on the Cypriot law of trusts, and that he did not know anything
about the Cypriot law of trusts (Tr 2357:3-2357:16).

260.3 When asked if he knew what the terms of the alleged trust were, he
said that: “on the beginning, nobody told me about the term of the trusting
[sic] ” (Tr 2357:18-2357:19).

260.4 Mr Tiirkkan’s evidence was specifically that, when Hakan Uzan asked
him to establish a company in Cyprus to be held on trust for his family,
Hakan Uzan did not say for whose benefit that company would be held:
“when he [i.e. Hakan Uzan] told me this, he didn’t clarify exactly what is
the members of his family” (Tr 2357:20-2359:2).

 

(©) The minutes of Lib 's board and

Mr Tiirkkan was referred to paragraph 19 of his First Witness Statement
(“...Board ings were ducted in Nicosia, Republic of Cyprus (although
I always attended the meetings telephonically)”). He was asked by the
Tribunal to clarify what this meant. His response was:

 

“When I prepared the Minutes, I was sending the fax to Nicosia, to Mr.
Partellas’ office, and I was telling him he will receive these
documentations related to what it was [sic]. And I was requesting [sic]
him to get the signature of Directors and also file it on the corporate
files of Libananco in Cyprus on his office was keeping. That is the
practice. But I never called them and we were not in the same time
on the telephone. I explained then what was certain, it was writing on
the documentation, and later on Mr. Partellas receive [sic] it, and they
signed it on the document that I faxed to them” (Tr 2430:7-2430:19).

 

His evidence in respect of the following documents was similarly to the effect
these were all paper meetings which nobody attended, notwithstanding that it
was recorded on the face of these documents that the directors of Libananco
were present:

262.1 Exhibit H-14, which were the Minutes of Libananco’s Management
Committee Meeting of 23 September 2002;

262.2 Exhibit H-29, which were the Minutes of Libananco’s Management
Committee Meeting of 20 February 2003; and

80

263.

264.

262.3 Exhibit H-50, which were the Minutes of Libananco’s Board of
Directors’ Meeting of 18 April 2003.

Mr Tiirkkan was referred to Exhibit H-13, which were the Minutes of
Libananco’s Directors’ Meeting of 23 September 2002, a document allegedly
drafted by him.

263.1 Mr Tiirkkan was questioned whether he drafted the minutes personally.
His response was that he did (Tr 2324:20-2325:2).

263.2 He was asked to explain the meaning of the term “mercantile
transaction” (which appears in paragraph 7(b) of that document). He first
asked for a translation, but admitted that he did not know the meaning of
that term (Tr 2442:6-2442:15).

 

263.3 He was unable to explain how he was able to draft paragraph 7(b) of
that document, which referred to giving himself authority for monetary or
mercantile transactions (Tr 2442:17-2442:22).

263.4 When asked to explain the meaning of “debenture”, a term which
appears in paragraph 7(d) of that document, he replied: “J have to check on
[sic] the dictionary, sir” (Tr 2443:2).

263.5 When asked whether that document had in fact been prepared by an
English speaker rather than by a Turkish speaker, he said: “Jt could be,
sir... I was asking some several persons in my office to check my English
documents always”. When asked who these persons were, he said: “There
were lots, sir. I don’t remember their name” (Tr 2443:22-2444:13).

Mr Tiirkkan’s evidence was that, in November 2005 (Tr 2456:9), he reprinted
and signed “all the Minutes of the Directors and all the Minutes of the
Management... I printed it over [sic] again in Cyprus” (Tr 2455:14-2455:16).

264.1 He confirmed this during direct examination, where his evidence was
that, when he initially met with lawyers from Crowell & Moring LLP in
November 2005, he brought with him a laptop computer that had the
electronic versions of the STAs and the board and management minutes
stored on it (Tr 2298:13-2298:17). At that time, he “reprinted all the
documents again, and [he] completed the documents with the [sic]
resigning the documents” — the reason being that:

“there was [sic] some documents was [sic] missing and some
documents was not readably [sic] very well because they are the fax,
and because of it is [sic] fax, they were darker, and some were not
working because the fax—it was not coming correctly on the fax
machine mainly” (Tr 2298:13-2299:10).

264.2 However, he denied that those minutes were being printed for the very
first time in November 2005: “... in 2002, 2003, 2004, they were signed.

81

One copy was with me, and one copy was in the corporate files in Cyprus”
(Tr 2456:15-2456:17).

264.3 His evidence was that the documents (i.e. the board and management
minutes) produced in the arbitration were the ones printed in Cyprus in
2005, and that the versions that had existed prior to November 2005 no
longer existed (Tr 2456: 18-2457:4).

264.4 In relation to the previous version of the minutes which were not
produced in the arbitration, he said: “... afier I reprinted and re-signed, I
put them out... I don’t know where it’s gone, but it’s not in the file” (Tr
2457:5-2457:12).

 

265. In relation to certain of Libananco’s management and board minutes known as
the “Al” minutes,® Mr Tiirkkan went further to say that these were drafted,
printed and signed (Tr 2300:1-2300:4) in 2006: “Sir, these documents and
Minutes of the Directors [sic] meeting, and I prepared year [sic] 2006 to
complete my corporate records of Libananco” (Tr 2299:11-2299:22). His
explanation for creating these documents in 2006 was as follows:

“When I was checking my documents again, I found the Share Transfer
Agreements quantities are not mentioned with the Director of—the
Minutes [sic]. That’s why I completed my corporate files of Libananco.
I prepared this Directors [sic] meeting, and I make it corporate files
[sic] ” (Tr 2473:3-2473:8).

‘d) The o m_of significant facts or events from Libananco’s minutes

     

266. Mr Tiirkkan was cross-examined on two other aspects of Libananco’s minutes.

266.1 He was referred to Exhibit H-73, Minutes of the Libananco Board of
Directors’ Meeting dated 11 March 2004. The first page of that document
states, among other things: “AGENDA/MINUTES: Up Date on
Developments of International Legal Options; Danistay Developments;
European Court of Human Rights Developments”. He agreed that he
followed the proceedings in the European Court of Human Rights
(“ECtHR”) and the Danistay closely. The case before the ECtHR was
brought by Kemal Uzan, whose argued there was that he was the majority
shareholder of CEAS and Kepez. Mr Tiirkkan agreed this was wrong
because Libananco (and not Kemal Uzan) was the majority shareholder in
CEAS and Kepez (Tr 2698:21-2699:9). He was asked to explain why there
was no reference in Libananco’s minutes noting that Kemal Uzan’s case
before the ECtHR was inconsistent with Libananco’s position (i.e. that it
was the majority shareholder in CEAS and Kepez). Mr Tiirkkan’s response

* So named because “A1” is printed on the face of each of these documents as part of the document

reference numbers. The “Al” minutes were the following: Minutes of the Libananco Board of
Directors Meeting (Al), 15 November 2002 (Exhibit H-19); Minutes of the Libananco Board of
Directors Meeting (A1), 20 February 2003 (Exhibit H-28); Minutes of the Libananco Board of
Directors Meeting (Al), 18 April 2003 (Exhibit H-51); and Minutes of the Libananco Board of
Directors Meeting (A1), 20 May 2003 (Exhibit H-63).

 

82

267.

268.

was not on point: “Sir, on the report it is writing [sic] that there is a
Application on [sic] the European Union” (Tr 2701:16-2701:22).

266.2 Although the CEAS and Kepez share certificates located in the Rumeli
and Dogus Buildings in istanbul were seized in March 2004, Mr Tiirkkan
had no explanation why the Libananco’s minutes did not refer to the fact
that share certificatess allegedly owned by Libananco had been seized by
the Turkish Government (Tr 2702:14-2703:13).

In relation to dividend payments from CEAS and Kepez to its shareholders,
Mr Tiirkkan was referred to Exhibit H-50, which were the Minutes of the
Libananco Board of Directors’ Meeting dated 18 April 2003. He was unable to
explain why there was nothing recorded in those minutes about dividend
payments to Libananco (Tr 2626:5-2626:8). When asked in general about the
latter dividends: “And so, if I were to ask you what happened to these
dividends, what were the arrangements, the answer you have no
recollection and you have no evidence to give; is that fair?”, Mr Tiirkkan’s
response was: “Yes, sir” (Tr 2626:19-2627:1).

  
 

(@) The alleged “family divorce” and how the intra-family faxes came to be
discovered on Mr Tiirkkan’'s floppy disks

Mr Tiirkkan was asked about the faxes purportedly evidencing intra-family
share transfers, which were found as deleted files on his floppy disks and
subsequently recovered.

268.1 When asked whether he was aware of the alleged “family divorce”, his
response was: “Sir, this is their business. I have no idea what they were
doing on their level” (Tr 2415:14-2415:15).

268.2 When asked why he saved those documents onto his floppy disks, he
replied: “Because I understand that they are the important documents like
the Libananco documents, and I saved them” (Tr 2417:8-2417:10).

268.3 When asked why he thought these documents were important, his
response was: “Because there is a sales [sic] between the family
members” (Tr 2417:12-2417:13). His evidence therefore shows that he
was aware of the alleged intra-family share transfers between members of
the Uzan family, even if he did not know about the alleged “family
divorce” as such.

268.4 When asked why he saved those faxes on his floppy disks before
subsequently deleting them, he said: “They are the Sales Transfer
Agreements between the family members. That’s why I saved them to
Floppy Disks... I assumed that they informed me that these documents
came to me by mistakenly, so that’s why I delete [sic] them” (Tr 2418:19-
2419:4),

268.5 However, he was unable to explain the circumstances in which those
documents came to be saved on his floppy disks, and was likewise unable

83

269.

270.

to explain the specific circumstances in which he deleted them (Tr
2419:22-2420:4).

(f) The circumstances surrounding the alleged delivery of share certificates

located in Switzerland and Istanbul to Libananco

 

In relation to the issue of tes/im or delivery of the shares allegedly purchased
by Libananco, Mr Tiirkkan’s evidence was: “there are some shares that were
delivered in Switzerland at the beginning of April 2003” (Tr 2632:1-2632:3).

269.1 However, he was unable to confirm or identify which of the share
certificates in Switzerland were allegedly delivered to Libananco (Tr
2632:5-2632:7). He testified that he had no means of knowing which share
certificates in Switzerland were the subject of the alleged teslim, and that
he did not know whether anyone had any means of knowing the answer to
that question (Tr 2633:14-2633:21). His evidence is also that no one
provided him with any inventory or any other means by which he could
have identified the share certificates located in Switzerland that were
alleged to have been delivered to Libananco in early April 2003 (Tr
2635:8-2635:13).

269.2 When asked how feslim in respect of these unidentified or
unascertained shares could have been accomplished, his response was:

“Sir, it was informed to me by Mr. Hakan Uzan that he delivered the
shares to Mr. Cem Uzan by the name of Libananco; and after then, we
were planning to make it all the [sic] teslim documentation for this...
But later on what's [sic] happened for the (EAS and Kepez we were
not able to complete our teslim documentation” (Tr 2632:12-2633:6).

269.3 Mr Tiirkkan was also referred to Exhibit H-50, which were the Minutes
of the Libananco Board of Directors’ Meeting dated 18 April 2003, and
was asked why there was no reference in that document to the alleged
teslim that took place in relation to the share certificates located in
Switzerland. His response was that he did not know the answer to this
question (Tr 2637:14-2637:19).

269.4 Crucially, Mr Tiirkkan then gave evidence that contradicted his earlier
statement that the (unidentified) share certificates located in Switzerland
had been “delivered in Switzerland at the beginning of April 2003” (see
paragraph 269 above): “we were planning to make teslim later on” (Tr
2634:15-2634:16). He agreed that it was planned that tes/im would occur,
but did not in fact occur owing to the events of 12 June 2003 (i.e. the
termination of the Concession Agreements held by CEAS and Kepez) (Tr
2635:3-2635:6).

Still on the issue of tes/im, but in respect of the CEAS$ and Kepez share

certificates located in Istanbul, Mr Tiirkkan was referred to paragraph 25 of
his First Witness Statement (see paragraph 245 above).

84

271.

270.1 He confirmed that he did in fact make a telephone call to Mr Ciggin on
either 13 or 14 May 2003 (Tr 2569:10-2659:11), in which he told Mr
Ciggin to inspect the CEAS and Kepez share certificates and conduct an
inventory to accept delivery of the latter (Tr 2656:20-2657:2). He
confirmed that by this he meant that Mr Ciggin was to effect tes/im in
respect of the share certificates in Istanbul on behalf of Libananco (Tr
2657:7-2657:10).

270.2 At the time he instructed Mr Ciggin, tes/im in respect of the CEAS and
Kepez share certificates in istanbul had not previously occurred (Tr
2657:12-2657:15).

270.3 Delivery or teslim of those share certificates (i.e. those located in
istanbul) only occurred on 15 May 2003, and not before (Tr 2658:11-
2658:21).

270.4 Mr Tiirkkan was also referred to Exhibit H-52, which were the Minutes
of the Libananco Management Committee Meeting dated 18 April 2003.
The first page of that document states, among other things, that:

“Tt is Agreed that Saylan Ciggin, appoint a two lawyer team to go to
site of the storage facilities, and actually physically recheck the
storage of the shares, and the labeling of the storage under the name of
Libananco. And to do this on a routine basis (once a month)”.

Mr Tiirkkan was asked to explain the point of sending Mr Ciggin to
“recheck storage of the shares which had not yet been delivered to
Libananco”. His response was unhelpful: “Sir, later on doesn’t happen
something like this because teslim happened” (Tr 2660:5-2660:13).

 

On the related issue of the time of Libananco’s acquisition of the share
certificates in question, Mr Tiirkkan was cross-examined on the following
areas.

271.1 Mr Tiirkkan was referred to Exhibit H-61, which was Libananco’s
Share Acquisition Report as of 20 May 2003. He confirmed that it was his
evidence that Libananco could only acquire ownership of the share
certificates in question after tes/im had taken place (Tr 2681:18-2681:22).

271.2 However, he was unable to explain why the Share Acquisition Report
(i.e. Exhibit H-61) purported to show shares being acquired by Libananco
on various dates between November 2002 and April 2003 in the case of
CEAS, and November 2002 and May 2003 in the case of Kepez. His
response to this question was: “J don’t know the reason why they are in the
[sic] different dates, sir” (Tr 2682:6-2682:14).

271.3 Mr Tiirkkan was referred to Exhibit H-21, which were the Minutes of

the Libananco Management Committee Meeting dated 10 December 2002.
The first page of that document stated, among other things:

85

272.

273.

274.

“Tt is noted that the first share transaction has been completed; As
such; CEAS ... 33,000,000 shares at 500 TL/shares — Class C,
16,500,000,000 TL nominal value shares were purchased on 11
November 2002. Payment of 8,250,000 USD has been paid to the seller
Hakan Uzan; It is agreed that Cenk Tiirkkan take all necessary steps to
record the acquired shares in the companies [sic] records”.

Mr Tiirkkan confirmed his understanding that tes/im or delivery of those
shares to Libananco had not yet, at that time, taken place (Tr 2541:17-
2541:19). His evidence was that he recorded that information in
Libananco’s minutes because he was told by Hakan Uzan that that
transaction had been completed, and that Hakan Uzan was the person who
told him what to record in Libananco’s minutes (Tr 2542:1 1-2542:19).

9. First Witness Statement of Antonis Partellas dated 24 April
2009

Mr Partellas’ First Witness Statement was short, and described how he first
came into contact with Mr Tiirkkan in 2002, when Mr Tiirkkan asked for his
assistance to acquire a Cypriot company. He also gave evidence on the period
during which Libananco allegedly acquired shares in CEAS and Kepez.

Mr Partellas deposed as follows.

273.1 He was the director of Latimer, which had been the Corporate
Secretary of Libananco since 2002.

273.2 “In early 2002, Mr. Ali Cenk Tiirkkan contacted me and requested that
1 arrange to acquire a Cypriot company for him and his principal to use as
an international business holding company.”

273.3 “I proceeded to contact a Cypriot lawyer, Mr. Polakis K. Sarris, whom
I knew from previous experience to be competent in this area. On 1 April
2002, Mr. Sarris’ corporate organization and administration firm,
Prontoservus Ltd, transferred all the shares of an existing company,
Libananco, to Mr. Tiirkkan.”

 

273.4 “At the same time, the two original directors of Libananco and the
Secretary resigned and new Directors and Secretary were appointed.
Thereafier, Mr. Tiirkkan became the General Manager of Libananco and
Latimer served at Mr. Tiirkkan’s request as the Corporate Secretary of the
company, a capacity in which it remains today.”

273.5 “Pursuant to Libananco’s business records, Libananco took steps to
acquire 652,080,725 of stock in [CEAS] and 144,864,544 shares of stock
in [Kepez] between the period of 29 October 2002 and 16 May 2003.”

Mr Partellas also deposed that, as Libananco’s corporate secretary, Latimer

had custody of the minutes of Libananco’s Board of Directors and
Management Committee meetings.

86

275.

276.

277.

278.

10. Second Witness Statement of Antonis Partellas dated 8
October 2009

Mr Partellas’ Second Witness Statement was likewise short and given in
circumstances similar to Mr Tiirkkan’s Second Witness Statement; namely, in
response to an allegation made by the Respondent in relation to the hand
stamp that was used to apply Libananco’s common seal to the STAs (see
paragraphs 248 to 249 above).

Mr Partellas corroborated Mr Tiirkkan’s evidence that Mr Tiirkkan brought the
original hand stamp (i.e. not the “Shiny” brand model stamp that was
produced in this arbitration) along with “certain documents from Amman,
Jordan regarding Libananco’s business”.

In relation to the original hand stamp which allegedly broke in transit, Mr
Partellas deposed as follows.

277.1“... Mr. Tiirkkan produced a few dozen documents from his attache
and also removed a small stamp machine he had brought from Amman
which apparently contained the corporate seal. At that time, I recollect
that the stamp machine, which was a simple and small plastic device, had
broken and would no longer operate”.

277.2. “As Mr. Tiirkkan wanted to leave the stamp machine and the papers
with me as the corporate secretary, I instructed one of my staff to go to the
Stellos Key Service to purchase a new stamp machine of similar size and
utility...”.

277.3. “The new stamp machine was purchased for a small amount of cash.
We did not purchase or have made a new “Libananco” corporate rubber
medallion as that small piece from the machine brought from Jordan
apparently was still in working order. I believe Mr. Tiirkkan may have
removed the medallion from the old machine and applied it to the new
machine, although I cannot be certain”.

Mr Partellas also gave evidence on whether the new hand stamp machine that
was purchased by his firm was used by Mr Tiirkkan to stamp any documents.
He deposed that:

“At the time Mr Tiirkkan came to my office in November 2005, I
believe he may have used the new machine to stamp a few of the
documents. I do not recall which of the documents were stamped by
Mr. Tiirkkan at that time, or how many. However, I do recall that there
were signatures on all of the documents which he had brought with
him. Thereafter, we placed these documents in the existing Libananco
file and they were produced for the lawyers when they arrived for their
inspection”.

(emphasis added)

87

279.

280.

281.

11. Cross-examination of Mr Partellas

Mr Partellas was cross-examined mainly on his involvement in the setting up
of Libananco by Mr Tiirkkan and its corporate affairs subsequent to that. The
material evidence he gave during cross-examination may be broken down into
the following broad areas or topics:

(a) the time of his first contact and meeting with Mr Tiirkkan in
connection with the setting up of Libananco;

(b) the Instrument of Transfer dated 1 April 2002 — specifically, why Mr
Tiirkkan did not sign this document even though he was allegedly in
Cyprus on | April 2002;

(c) whether and how he was paid his professional fees for the assistance
that he allegedly rendered to Mr Tiirkkan in connection with the
setting up of Libananco;

(d) why the financial statements and tax returns of Libananco were filed
late;

(e) whether the necessary permission was sought from the Cyprus Central
Bank when Mr Tiirkkan approached him to set up an offshore holding
company in Cyprus; and

(f) the board minutes of Libananco.

(a) Mr Partellas’ first meeting with Mr Tiirkkan

In relation to his initial contact with Mr Tiirkkan, Mr Partellas confirmed that
this was made over the telephone (Tr 916:6-916:9), towards the end of March
2002 (Tr 921:12-921:13). He said: “J was very surprised, to be honest, but I
was also very curious to see why he needed the HAPS (ph.) company, and also
he was a Turkish national living in Jordan. He was not in Turkey at the time”
(Tr 913:4-913:7).

As to how Mr Tiirkkan managed to identify his firm, Mr Partellas gave
evidence as follows.

281.1 Mr Tiirkkan found him “/t/hrough directories over the Internet” (Tr
916:14).

281.2 It was put to Mr Partellas that his firm’s web site had only been
established late in 2002. On that basis, he was asked how Mr Tiirkkan
could have identified him in April 2002. His response was that: “we were
listed in various directories [on the Internet]... Accountants in Cyprus, for
example” (Tr 917:3-917:11).

88

282.

283.

281.3 Mr Partellas accordingly agreed that, in April 2002, it would have been
impossible for anyone to identify his firm via its website because one did
not exist at that time (Tr 918:17-918:18).

281.4 However, he said that: “Jt was possible to identify us from other
sources” (Tr 918:15-918:16).

Mr Partellas confirmed that he first met Mr Tiirkkan in person around the
period 1 April to 2 April 2002, but he could not remember the exact day (Tr
930:21-931:1).

282.1 He said it was possible that this meeting took place on | April 2002 (Tr
931:2-931:3). The location of the meeting was the lobby of the Hilton
Hotel in Cyprus (Tr 1016:16-1016:17).

282.2 When the Respondent’s Counsel put to Mr Partellas that Mr Tiirkkan
was not in fact in Cyprus at that time, Mr Partellas said: “J am saying that
he was there, and I saw him” (Tr 932:13-932:14).

(b) Why Mr Tiirkkan did not sign the Instrument of Transfer even though he
was allegedly in Cyprus on I April 2002

Mr Partellas gave the following evidence in relation to Exhibit H-4, the
Instrument of Transfer of shares in Libananco signed by Mr Sarris and Mr
Tiirkkan and dated 1 April 2002.

283.1 He was asked why Mr Tiirkkan did not sign the Instrument of Transfer
when he was in Cyprus on | April 2002 (see paragraph 240.1 above). His
response was:

“Maybe it was not ready at that day. I cannot remember exactly...
Maybe there was something missing or some mistake, and it was sent
to him later... Maybe there was some mistake on [sic] the document. I
cannot remember now” (Tr 936:6-937:1).

283.2 He was asked about the version of the Instrument of Transfer that was
actually signed by Mr Tiirkkan. His response was: “This is given always to
the beneficial owner, to the shareholder... We don’t keep anything here”
(Tr 938:2-938:3).

283.3. The Respondent’s Counsel pointed out to Mr Partellas that Mr
Tiirkkan’s evidence was that the signed original was in fact returned to Mr
Partellas for placement in Libananco’s files. Mr Partellas responded: “No,
I’m not sure if this is the case. Usually, one—that is one Instrument of
Transfer being prepared, and this is given to the owner” (Tr 938:9-
938:11).

89

284.

285.

286.

‘c) Whether and how Mr Tiirkkan paid Mr Partellas his fees for professional

services allegedly rendered in connection with the setting up of Libananco

Mr Partellas confirmed that whenever he conducted an audit, a professional
fee would be charged, that fee would be recorded in an invoice, and there
would “be a record of that fee... both within [his] firm’s records and within
the company’s records being audited [sic] ” (Tr 901:22-902:17).

In relation to the manner in which Mr Tiirkkan paid for his firm’s services, Mr
Partellas gave the following evidence.

285.1 “Mr. Tiirkkan paid us in cash when he came to Cyprus” (Tr 922:13-
922:14).

285.2 When asked whether it was recorded in his books that Mr Tiirkkan
paid cash for professional services rendered by Mr Partellas’ firm, he said:

“I’m just telling you what I remember... I’m not saying it was not
recorded. I’m saying it was probably the net amount was recorded in
our books after we paid Mr. Sarris as well. It is usually how it happens
in Cyprus... Sometimes we have cash payments” (Tr 924:8-924:22).

285.3. When questioned about the financial records which would show how
Mr Partellas (or his firm) had paid Mr Sarris or Prontoservus (a company
associated with Mr Sarris’ law firm) for the transfer of Libananco to Mr
Tiirkkan, Mr Partellas said: “J believe what happened is we paid cash to
Mr. Sarris as well, and the difference was recorded in our books as sundry
income” (Tr 922:20-922:22).

285.4 When asked why this was recorded as “sundry income” and the nature
of the income was not properly recorded, Mr Partellas responded:
“Because it was just a cash transaction, that’s why” (Tr 923:5-923:6).

285.5 Finally, when questioned by the Respondent’s Counsel: “Jots of people
have cash payments, but that doesn’t mean that you don’t record properly
in your books if you’re keeping honest books what it is that you’re being
paid, the amount, and what it relates to. Do you dispute that?”, Mr
Partellas responded: “No” (Tr 925:1-925:7).

Mr Partellas was referred to Exhibit H-22, which were Libananco’s 2002
Financial Statements dated on 14 January 2003.

286.1 It was pointed out to him that, on page 12, the administrative expenses
for the period ended 31 December 2002 were shown. He agreed that
Exhibit H-22 purported to show that Libananco had administrative
expenses of US$ 59,050 in 2002 (Tr 986:3-986:6).

286.2 He was asked whether these were actually incurred in 2002. He
responded without giving a direct answer to that question:

90

287.

“Yes, but you're allowed to make a provision in the accounts as well,
and that is an expense... The profit and loss, as I explained, also
includes provisions. It’s not just actual transactions that happened”
(Tr 985:21-987:13).

286.3 He explained that: “a provision is an expense which has been incurred
and will be paid” (Tr 988:9-988:10).

286.4 He later accepted that the fee due to his firm recorded in Exhibit H-22
was actually paid. His evidence was that “/p/art of this money” was paid
(Tr 995:14). He said that Mr Tiirkkan paid his firm in cash, but not the full
amount stated in Libananco’s accounts: “Not the amounts stated, no.
Less” (Tr 995:15-995:20).

(d) Why Lib ‘s tax returns, fi ial and notice of change of
directors was not filed on time

As a preliminary point, Mr Partellas confirmed that, during the material period
(i.e. after Libananco was allegedly acquired by Mr Tiirkkan on 1 April 2002),
it was mandatory for the tax returns and financial statements of a company to
be filed (Tr 902:18-902:21).

287.1 His evidence was the annual accounts had to be filed:

“[o]ne year after the end of the previous year”, and that “/t/he tax
return is filed together with the accounts up to 2002. After 2003, only
the tax return is being [sic] filed within a year from the previous
financial year” (Tr 909:9-909:19).

287.2 When asked about the late filing of Libananco’s accounts and tax
returns, Mr Partellas replied:

“Yes, we filed them late, and it is usual to file late accounts in Cyprus.
The only effect of late filing of accounts is if there is tax payable, there
is a penalty of 10 percent. If there are losses, there is no penalty” (Tr
910:17-911:1).

287.3 Specifically, Mr Partellas said that: “we filed [the accounts for] 2002,
‘3, and ‘4 in 2007... There was no actual reason. You can delay filing—”
(Tr 1001:17-1001:22).

287.4 He was asked by the Tribunal whether he was instructed by Mr
Tiirkkan not to file Libananco’s accounts on time, to which he responded:

“Probably yes, probably yes, but again in the cases of accounts where
there are no losses, no profit, there is no penalty incurred at the Tax
Office for late filing. It’s only if you have tax payable” (Tr 1002:1-
1002:7).

91

287.5 When asked if the 2002 accounts for Libananco should have been filed
in 2004 instead, he said: “Yes. If you follow the strict letter of the law,
yes”. Counsel for the Respondent then asked if it was indeed his business
to ensure that his clients follow the strict letter of the law, to which he
responded: “We try” (Tr 1007:2-1007:9).

287.6 The Tribunal questioned Mr Partellas as to the necessity of preparing
audited accounts for the years 2002, 2003 and 2004 if the intention was to
maintain confidentiality by not filing those accounts. He explained:

“Tt was a request by the shareholder [i.e. Mr Tiirkkan] at the time
secretly... It is true, we could have prepared a management account
[sic] for this, but he wanted privacy of account. I don’t know for what
reasons, but he wanted accounts, but he didn’t want them to be filed.
He told us to wait” (Tr 1008:14-1009:7).

287.7 Finally, in re-direct examination, Mr Partellas completed his evidence
on this topic by saying that it would not be unusual at all to receive
instructions from a managing director or a shareholder to hold off certain
filings with the Cypriot government. He said that this was done for other
clients as well (Tr 1014:7-1014:18). He also confirmed that it was
common practice in Cyprus for a company to delay the filing of its
accounts as there would be no tax penalties in the cases where the
company suffers losses. He said that this was done for other clients as well,
and that other accountants in Cyprus adopted the same practice (Tr
1015:1-1015:16).

287.8 Mr Partellas admitted (although his evidence here was not forthcoming
as can be observed from the exchange below) that Cypriot law would have
required notification in 2002 of Mr Tiirkkan’s acquisition of Libananco
and the accompanying change of directors, but that in fact no notification
was made until November 2005.

287.9 His initial evidence was that: “There is no time limit”; when Counsel
for the Respondent cited the relevant provision from the Cypriot
Companies Act which stipulated that such documents were required to be
filed within 14 days of execution, he then said: “Okay, but there is a small
penalty”. When asked why he denied that there was such an obligation in
the first place, he said: “J didn’t deny anything... This is the strict letter of
the law, but in practice you can file it later, any changes” (Tr 907:7-
908:18). When asked whether it was his responsibility as the Company
Secretary of Libananco to ensure that documents required to be filed were
filed in a timely fashion, he responded: “Yes, J agree. We do our best, but
sometimes things—sometimes things get delayed” (Tr 908:19-909:3).

287.10 Mr Partellas gave evidence to the effect that Mr Tiirkkan had asked
him not to register the transfer of shares to Libananco:

“Mr. Tiirkkan asked us for, afterwards when we met if it was possible
not to record the transfer of shares until sometime later on. So,

92

288.

289.

290.

291.

292.

because of this relaxation of the Exchange Controls [referring to the
relaxation of regulations in Cyprus following its entry into the
European Union], we decided not to ask for the permit at that time”
(Tr 920:11-920:15).

287.11 When asked what was the reason that Mr Tiirkkan gave for not
notifying the Registrar of Companies, in accordance with Cypriot law, that
there had been a change of directors of Libananco, he responded:

“Because he was also to be appointed as Director and of course as
shareholder, and for confidentiality, security reasons, he didn’t want
this transfer to be made at the time when the company was purchased.
So, as I explained before, we waited for his instructions, and we filed
this in November ‘05” (Tr 951:2-951:8).

(e) Whether the necessary permission was sought from the Cyprus Central
Bank to blish Lib as an offshore holding y

Mr Partellas was asked to confirm whether the offshore holding company in
respect of which Mr Tiirkkan had asked for his help to acquire was an “JBC”
(i.e. International Business Company). Mr Partellas agreed this was correct (Tr
919:14-919:18).

 

Mr Partellas was asked whether, in 2002, it was necessary for a foreigner to
obtain permission from the Cyprus Central Bank in order to hold shares in an
IBC. His response was that: “at that time... it was just... a couple of years
before we joined the E.U. ... it was a process of relaxation of the Exchange
controls in Cyprus” (Tr 919:19-920:9).

However, in re-direct examination, Mr Partellas clarified that the tax reforms
in Cyprus only came into effect on 1 January 2003, and “the relaxations
permits from the Central Bank also began in late 2003” (Tr 1019:18-1019:22).

(f) Libananco’s minutes and board meetings

Mr Partellas agreed that he was, as Corporate Secretary of Libananco,
responsible “for keeping a good record of Board meetings, management
meetings, and the meetings of the General Assembly” (Tr 910:9-910:13).

Mr Partellas was asked, in general terms, about Libananco’s meetings and the
accompanying minutes.

292.1 He was asked whether he in fact attended any of the board meetings
recorded in Libananco’s minutes. He confirmed that he did not do so: “No.
The Board Minutes were prepared by the Managing Director who was Mr.
Ali Cenk Tiirkkan... I reviewed the Minutes after they were sent” (Tr
959:18-960:3).

292.2 It was put to him that Mr Tiirkkan’s evidence was that the board
meetings actually took place. He was asked to clarify whether this position

93

293.

294.

was correct. His response was: “No, the Board meetings and minutes were
prepared by Mr. Tiirkkan. He was the Managing Director. He was
preparing the Minutes, and the two nominees were just signing” (Tr
960:19-960:22).

292.3 Mr Partellas confirmed again that the two nominee directors of
Libananco did not actually attend any board meetings: “they were just
nominee directors” (Tr 961:1-961:3). He confirmed that Libananco’s
corporate documents were sent to the nominee directors, who signed the
documents in that capacity (Tr 961:4-961:7).

With regard to Exhibit H-9, which was an extract from the Minutes of the
Libananco Board of Directors’ Meeting dated 1 April 2002, Mr Partellas gave
the following evidence.

293.1 When asked by the Respondent’s Counsel whether a Board meeting
(conducted over the telephone) actually occurred, Mr Partellas did not give
an immediate answer:

“Well, this is something that we discussed with him at the time, I
believe. And the practice was to put everything on paper using this
standard format... this Minute is prepared as a matter of routine
following transfers of shares and changing Directors” (Tr 927:7-
927:21).

293.2 He later admitted as follows:

“No. Again, I’m explaining that this is something we prepared
following changes in Directors and approving the transfer of shares,
and it’s prepared by the company Secretary. It doesn’t mean those
people were there at the time” (Tr 930:2-930:6).

He therefore agreed that no actual meeting took place over the telephone
on | April 2002 as recorded in the minutes (i.e. Exhibit H-9) (Tr 930:8-
930:16).

Mr Partellas was also referred to Exhibit H-11, which were the Minutes of
Libananco’s Board of Directors’ Meeting dated 10 July 2002.

294.1 He observed that, on the second page of Exhibit H-11, the external
auditing advisor of Libananco was recorded to be “PARTELLAS
KILLIARIS LTD”. When asked whether this was odd, he replied: “Maybe
the “limited.” Maybe it wasn’t there at the time” (Tr 969:18-969:19).

294.2 He testified that he only formed a limited company in 2005 (Tr 969:22).

294.3, When asked for an explanation as to this apparent inconsistency, he
replied: “OA, it’s a very simple mistake that anybody can make”.

94

295.

296.

297.

298.

299.

300.

12. Witness Statement of Polakis Sarris dated 22 April 2009

Despite his involvement in transferring legal ownership of Libananco from
Prontoservus (a company associated with Mr Sarris’ law firm) to Mr Tiirkkan,
Mr Sarris’ Witness Statement was reserved.

Mr Sarris’ Witness Statement stated:

“T have reviewed (i.) resignation letters signed by me, Mrs. E Petsa,
and Mrs E. Kyriacou in relation to [Libananco], each dated I April
2002; and (ii.) the instrument of transfer of shares in Libananco to Mr.
Ali Cenk Tiirkkan, signed by me on behalf of Prontoservus Limited on
I April 2002... I hereby confirm that the documents referred to
above... were in fact executed on I April 2002” .

(emphasis added)
However, he clarified in direct examination that he did not in fact sign the
Instrument of Transfer dated 1 April 2002. He said that it was signed instead
by his employee Mr Starvos Ktorides (Tr 740:3-740:8).

13. Cross-examination of Mr Sarris

By way of background, Mr Sarris began by explaining that Prontoservus was a
company owned by him, which was used to incorporate and then sell shelf
companies to both local and foreign clients (Tr 741:15-742:3).

The cross-examination of Mr Sarris covered the following areas:

(a) whether or not he signed the Instrument of Transfer dated 1 April
2002;

(b) whether or not his employees attended Libananco’s board meeting
on | April 2002;

(c) the manner in which Mr Partellas was billed (if at all) for the sale of
Libananco to Mr Tiirkkan through Mr Partellas; and

(d) the requirements under Cypriot law for a change of ownership
and/or a change of directors to be with the Registrar of Companies
within 14 days.

(a) Whether Mr Sarris signed the Instrument of Transfer dated 1 April 2002
Mr Sarris was asked to explain his testimony in his Witness Statement that he
signed the Instrument of Transfer dated 1 April 2002 even though he clarified

during direct examination that he did not in fact sign that document (see
paragraphs 296 to 297 above).

95

301.

302.

303.

He said that he simply did not know why this was the case: “J don’t know
really. I was surprised when I read it to come here, and I said, how did I sign
this thing? Maybe I didn’t notice it. I don’t know” (Tr 770:19-770:22).

He was then asked about whether he had any specific recollection,
independent of the Instrument of Transfer dated 1 April 2002, of when
Prontoservus transferred Libananco to Mr Tiirkkan (through Mr Partellas).

302.1 He said that he did not, and explained that he knew that the transfer
took place on 1 April 2002 only by looking at the Instrument of Transfer
which bore that date: “No, but it’s the dates which appear on the
documents” (Tr 771:18-771:19). He therefore confirmed that his evidence
was based entirely on the fact of the document (i.e. the Instrument of
Transfer) bearing that date (Tr 771:21-772:1).

302.2 When he was asked if he could otherwise recall the date on which the
Instrument of Transfer was executed, he said he was unable to: “No, not
the actual date, no, but I rely on the date of the document” (Tr 772:6-
72:7).

302.3 He explained that his evidence was based on a presumption that the
Instrument of Transfer was signed on the date that it bore:

“T have 7,000 companies. All the documents, they have certain dates.
Do you expect me to remember whether every day shown on every
document is the actual date signed? Of course we presume that this is
the date signed” (Tr 775:15-775:19).

302.4 Mr Sarris also said that he never received a copy of the Instrument of
Transfer dated 1 April 2002 that was signed by Mr Tiirkkan, the purchaser
of Libananco (Tr 780:16-780:20). He explained that:

“For this particular case, because I—it was selling the company to a

firm of accountants, who were supposed to take over to have it
executed by the transferee, and then keep it in their files, and then
submit it to the reserve companies or whatever they think proper. But
in our case when we set up companies and the client wants to keep
anonymity, we used to give him the Instrument of Transfer undated for
his own security...” (Tr 781:7-781:16).

(b) Whether Mr Sarris’ employees ded Lib 's board meeting on 1
April 2002

Mr Sarris was referred to Exhibit H-9, which was an extract of the Minutes of
the Libananco Board of Directors' Meeting dated 1 April 2002. This stated that
the following of his or his firm’s employees were “/p/resent” at that meeting:
Mrs Eleni Kyriakou, Mrs Iro Petsa, Mr Andreas Partellas and Ms Antonia
Kyriakou.

96

304.

303.1 Contrary to what appears to have been recorded in Exhibit H-9, he
confirmed that he and his employees did not attend any such meeting (Tr
777:19-777:20).

303.2 He explained:

“We never have actual Board meetings. We draft the Minute, and we
give it to the people, and they sign it. We don’t go in the actual meeting
having a coffee and meet, you know, for business. We just start it on
the computer” (Tr 777:22-778:5).

(c) The manner in which Mr Partellas’ firm was invoiced (if at all) for the sale
of Lib and the d evidencing such a tr ie

 

Mr Sarris’ said that Mr Partellas would have been the person to bill for his
services, and his firm therefore invoiced Mr Partellas for the services rendered
(Tr 760:14-760:17).

304.1 When asked whether his records would show an invoice to Mr
Partellas, he replied:

“Supposed to... I don’t know. I was never involved, and I’m never
involved in the accounting in this process, but with Mr. Partellas who
had ongoing relationship with his companies, we must have sold him
about 15 companies, but maybe he had a current account with the
office. I don’t know” (Tr 760:20-761:11).

304.2 It was put to Mr Partellas that if the matters alleged by the Claimant
were to be true (i.e. the transfer of Libananco on 1 April 2002 to Mr
Tiirkkan), then there would have been an invoice in 2002 reflecting this.
He answered: “There should be, yes” (Tr 761:13-761:17). He also
confirmed that the books of his firm would have recorded such a
transaction (Tr 763:21-764:2).

304.3 It was suggested to Mr Sarris that if one were interested in determining
whether or not the alleged transaction (i.e. the sale and purchase of
Libananco) in fact took place in 2002, then the easiest way to find out
would be to look at the records of his firm to see if such a transaction was
in fact recorded on its books. He replied: “Look, I have my own auditors
for my accounts, and they do the accounting and the audit, so all the books
are available because either way you're checking” (Tr 763:9-763:19).

  

304.4 Towards the end of his cross-examination, he appeared to change his
evidence to say that the invoice relating to the transaction in question (i.e.
the sale and purchase of Libananco) would not necessarily be in his firm’s
files:

“Not necessarily, and I will tell you why. Because with Mr. Partellas,

we had an ongoing cooperation... We never had an invoice until we
sell the company, and by selling the company to Mr. Partellas, maybe

97

305.

306.

307.

there was—I don’t know if there was an invoice. Maybe there is. I
don’t know. I don’t remember, but Mr. Partellas had a current account
with the office. I told you. He already start [sic] about 15 companies”
(Tr 783:4-783:16).

304.5 However, he clarified that, even if he did not have an invoice relating
to this particular transaction, he might still have had an invoice relating to
multiple sales which would reflect this particular transaction (Tr 783:17-
784:4).

Significantly, Mr Sarris said that he had not looked in his files prior to giving
evidence in this arbitration to find the relevant financial records establishing
when the sale and purchased of Libananco took place. He said: “Nobody
asked me about that” (Tr 784:5-784:9).

305.1 He was asked whether he knew that it was in issue in these
proceedings whether Mr Tiirkkan in fact purchased Libananco in April
2002. He said:

“Believe me, when they asked me to come here, I didn’t know anything
about what is a dispute or what is the subject matter. They told me
here in Washington that I asked few questions [sic], and they told me
what is the dispute [sic]. I didn’t know anything” (Tr 784:11-784:20).

305.2 Importantly, he confirmed that no one had asked him (prior to his
coming to give evidence in this arbitration) to produce the financial
records or to investigate the financial records of his firm to establish that
the sale and purchase of Libananco to Mr Tiirkkan had in fact taken place
in April 2002: “Nobody asked me to provide it.... You should have asked
me, and I could try to find it ” (Tr 784:22-786:15).

(d) The requirements under Cypriot law for_a change of ownership and/or
directors to be registered with the Registrar of C ies within 14 days

 

Mr Sarris confirmed that, under Cypriot law, a change of ownership would
have to be registered with the Registrar of Companies (Tr 748:12-748:18).
However, he clarified that:

“that doesn’t mean that according to the law we had to do it
immediately. It may wait months or years, unless we wanted [sic]
Certificate from the Registrar of Companies evidencing and showing
the actual shareholder, give the client the Shareholder Certificates. We
are waiting for some” (Tr 749:12-749:18).

He further confirmed that Cypriot law would require the registration, with the
Registrar of Companies, of a change of directors by means of form “HE-4”

which would have to be filed within “/4 days” (Tr 750:10-750:22).

307.1 However, he qualified his answer:

98

308.

“Let me explain. This is when the handling of the whole matter is made
by our office. I mean, if you come as a client and you want to buy a
company and you want your name to appear as a Director or the
shareholder and we continue to be the Secretary because it’s the
Secretary who is responsible to do all this, then, yes, it was our office.
But when we used to sell companies to auditors or accountants, and
they were taking over, we were just giving them our resignations, and
they were taking over all the formalities with the registered
companies” (Tr 751:3-751:14).

307.2 His evidence was therefore that, although form “HE-4” normally had
to be filed within 14 days of a change of the directors of the company, and
that his firm would usually take responsibility for this filing, this was not
so in the present case since Libananco was sold to a firm of accountants
(i.e. Mr Partellas’ firm, with the ultimate buyer being Mr Tiirkkan): “No,
in our office we never delay this. But as I told you, when we give it to an
accountant firm that we used to incorporate, it’s them who take over all
these formalities” (Tr 753:18-753:21).

 

307.3. He explained that, once responsibility for complying with these
formalities had been passed onto Mr Partellas’ firm, he did not follow up
further on the matter:

“I give them the resignations of my Directors, I give them the
Instrument of Transfer of these shares and to the name they tell me is
the new shareholder, and they take over. I don’t care. I don’t follow up
and check whether they filed any Applications to... because we trust
each other” (Tr 754:8-754:16).

307.4 He confirmed that he trusted Mr Partellas’ firm to follow up on the
necessary legal formalities:

“Well, they always do. We never had for 30 years doing this business
any incident that, you know, our Directors are still showing after five
years, for example, the company was, et cetera. We always had it... as
far as we are concerned, on the 1 of April of 2002, we, our Directors
have resigned” (Tr 754:20-755:14).

However, Mr Partellas’ evidence is that the relevant notifications or
registrations in this regard were only made in 2005 (Tr 957:3-957:6).

14. Witness Statement of Saylan Ciggin dated 24 April 2009

By way of background, Mr Ciggin deposed that he began working for Star
T.V. A.S. in 1993, and became the head of its legal department in 2000. Star
T.V. A.S. was part of the Star Media Group, a group of companies owned by
Cem Uzan. He explained that:

“In addition to my primary role within the Star Media Group, I also
advised Mr. Cem Uzan on certain other legal issues. Accordingly, I

99

309.

310.

311.

was familiar with at least some of the legal issues that arose in
connection with [CEAS and Kepez] which were Mr. Cem Uzan’s other
major businesses beyond the Star Media Group”.

 

He deposed that he provided legal advice to Cem Uzan on certain regulatory
issues regarding CEAS’ and Kepez’s dispute with the Ministry over the
proposed transfer of the companies’ transmission lines to the Turkish
Government.

Mr Ciggin explained how he came to be involved in the present case as
follows:

“in keeping with my role as his legal advisor on certain Utilities
issues, in September 2002, Mr. Cem Uzan informed me that members
of his immediate family would be transferring ownership of a
substantial number of their bearer shares in the Utilities to
Libananco...

At the time he informed me of the planned transfer, Mr. Cem Uzan also
informed me that Mr. Cenk Tiirkkan, a trusted business manager for
Mr. Cem Uzan, and the nominal owner and General Manager of
Libananco, would oversee the administrative details of the transfer.
Shortly thereafter, Mr. Tiirkkan asked me to become a legal advisor to
Libananco and I agreed to do so”.

The evidence in Mr Ciggin’s Witness Statement fell into the following broad
categories:

(a) how he was asked by Cem Uzan to prepare template STAs for use in
connection with Libananco’s acquisition of shares in CEAS and
Kepez; and

(b) his role in accepting delivery of share certificates on behalf of
Libananco in istanbul, Turkey.

(a) Mr Ciggin’s preparation of template STAs

He deposed that he was asked by Cem Uzan to prepare model or template
STAs for use in connection with Libananco’s acquisition of shares in CEAS
and Kepez:

“Mr. Cem Uzan had also requested that I prepare a model share
transfer agreement for use by Mr. Tiirkkan in connection with the
planned transfer of bearer shares to Libananco. I prepared a model of
such an agreement for use by Mr Tiirkkan. The model STA was sent to
Mr. Tiirkkan by electronic mail. I was not present at the signing of any
of the agreements. My role was simply to create the template for the
transactions and to advise Mr. Cem Uzan and Libananco on Turkish
legal issues surrounding the transfer”.

 

100

312.

313.

314.

He then elaborated as to his understanding of the legal significance (or lack of)
of the STAs under Turkish law:

“In particular, I advised Mr. Cem Uzan in or around September 2002
that under Turkish law, it is not necessary to create a written record of
a bearer share transfer. To the contrary, ownership of such bearer
shares is basically transferred via an intent to transfer and the
transfer of possession to the buyer or “teslim” — literally “handover”
in English. I also recall that around that same time, Mr. Cem Uzan
asked me about Turkish legal and regulatory requirements possibly
affecting the Utilities’ bearer share transfers. I advised him that, while
there would be certain regulatory reporting requirements, a failure to
report at the time of the transfer would not affect the legal validity of
the transfer under Turkish law, which was his primary concern at that
time.

In view of my advice to Mr. Cem Uzan on this matter, it was my
understanding that, as share transfer agreements were not strictly
necessary to accomplishthe planned transfer, the model agreement I
had prepared was only going to be used to provide written evidence of
each family member's intention and consent to transfer their bearer
shares to Libananco. Thus, I prepared the model agreement using
generic terms for a transfer, such as referring to cash being paid in
return for the shares”.

(emphasis added)

 

(b) Mr
Istanbul

The next area of Mr Ciggin’s evidence relates to the alleged delivery of the
shares certificates to Libananco or teslim — specifically, his alleged role in
accepting delivery of those share certificates on behalf of Libananco.

His evidence in relation to the alleged acts of teslim was as follows:

“Again, sometime in late April or early May 2003, Mr. Tiirkkan called
me and asked me to go, on behalf of Libananco, to the Rumeli and
Dogus buildings in Mecidiyekéy, Istanbul, where he informed me that
the bearer shares in the Utilities being transferred to Libananco by the
Uzan family were held in secure areas. Mr. Tiirkkan further
instructed me to physically examine those bearer shares and to
ensure that they were being stored for the benefit of Libananco. In
turn, I understood that my physical examination and acceptance of
the shares on behalf of Libananco would constitute “teslim” which,
as I already mentioned, was the necessary requirement for the transfer
of ownership of the bearer shares to Libananco to be perfected under
Turkish law.

101

.. I arrived at CEAS’ office on 15 May 2003 and proceeded to the
secure storage area in the Rumeli Building, opened the locked door
with a key provided to me by Mr. Bal [one of the directors of CEAS],
and conducted my inspection of the bearer share certificates.
Thereafier, I went to the Dogus building and conducted a similar
inspection of the bearer share certificates that were stored there.

In each building, the bearer share certificates were wrapped in
brown paper packaging and piled in stacks. Each of the individual
packages of certificates was hand-labeled with the word
“Libananco,” and most of them also had the number and nominal
value of the certificates that they contained noted thereon. Although I
did not count each share (which would have been impracticable given
their large number — there were many thousands of certificates), I did
open all of the packages to verify that they in fact contained CEAS and
Kepez bearer share certificates. At the same time, I also compared the
labeling on the brown paper packaging enclosing the certificates with
an inventory of share transfers, which indicated the type of shares
being transferred, their quantity, and their nominal value, to ensure
that the bearer shares intended to be transferred were indeed present
and accounted for. Unfortunately, as it was only a checklist sent to me
for my own use, I did not retain a copy of it once I had verified that the
share certificates were being properly and securely stored for
Libananco.

After I inspected Libananco’s bearer share certificates, I called Mr.
Tiirkkan on the phone to report that I had inspected the shares and
confirmed delivery to, and my acceptance of them on behalf of,
Libananco. I also reported this inspection and acceptance process to
Mr. Cem Uzan”.

(emphasis added)

315. He also gave evidence as to what happened to those share certificates after his
alleged inspection:

“Shortly after my inspection of the bearer share certificates, I
learned from Mr. Cem Uzan that a large number of the shares that I
had inspected had been moved from the premises where I inspected
them to other secure locations. However, I know that not all of the
share certificates were moved from the Rumeli and Dogus buildings at
that time. I know this because several days after I heard from Mr. Cem
Uzan that some of the shares had been moved, I received two share
custody invoices executed by CEAS and Kepez, respectively, which
indicated that share certificates representing approximately 14 to 16%
of the capital value of the Utilities continued to be stored at the
Utilities’ offices in Mecidiyekéy. As far as I can recall, Mr. Bal
brought the originals of these share custody invoices to me. After
reviewing them, I sent a copy of the share custody invoices to Mr.
Tiirkkan in Jordan, and I gave the originals to Mr. Cem Uzan’s office.

102

316.

317.

318.

I assume that these originals were delivered to Mr. Cem Uzan.
However, since his office was seized by the Turkish Government in
February of 2004, all documents, personal possessions and other
things were removed by Government agents.

In February 2004, the Turkish Government also seized the Rumeli and
Dogus buildings, including those areas where Utilities’ shares referred
to in the share custody invoices had been stored and held for
Libananco. The Government remains in possession of those buildings

up to today”.

(emphasis added)

15. Cross-examination of Mr Ciggin

Mr Ciggin gave evidence in relation to the following material topics or areas:

(a)

(c

(d

(e)

the circumstances surrounding his retainer by Libananco as its legal
advisor;

his role in the preparation of the template STA, in particular his
understanding of what legal role the STAs would come to play in
relation to Libananco’s alleged acquisition of shares;

his central role in allegedly achieving tes/im in respect of share
certificates representing approximately 50 per cent of the total share
capital of CEAS and Kepez respectively;

the non-disclosure by Libananco, CEAS and Kepez of Libananco’s
alleged acquisition of the majority interests in the latter two
companies, even though this was required by the Turkish Capital
Market Law No. 2499 (specifically, its subordinate legislation); and

his role in representing Cem Uzan before the Danistay in
proceedings brought by CEAS challenging the cancellation of its
Concession Agreement.

(a) Mr Ciggin’s role as Libananco’s legal adviser

Mr Ciggin testified that his involvement with Libananco ceased in May 2003:
“In May 2003, after the completion of the handover [of the bearer shares to
Libananco] and once I received the receipts and passed them on to Cem Uzan,
I took no legal steps” (Tr 532:17-532:21).

Mr Ciggin was referred to Exhibit H-13, which were Libananco’s Minutes of
Directors’ Meeting dated 23 September 2002. The first page of those minutes
recorded, among other things, that: “/- Jt is proposed and agreed to Appoint
Mr. Ali Betar, as company internal legal advisor; 2- It is proposed and agreed
to Appoint Mr. Saylan Ciggin, as company internal legal advisor”.

103

319.

320.

321.

318.1 However, Mr Ciggin said that he was not aware that he was required to
provide such a service, and that nobody had ever told him of such an
appointment: “No, J was never requested [sic] such a service” (Tr 560:18-
561:11).

318.2 Further, he also confirmed that he did not know Mr Betar (Tr 560:5-
560:6).

Mr Ciggin confirmed that he did not have any notes or records of any advice
that he gave to Libananco. He also agreed that he did not have any e-mail
messages or letters documenting his involvement with the present case (Tr
538:22-539:14).

(b) Mr Ciggin’s role in preparing the model agreement or template STA

Mr Ciggin confirmed that he prepared the template STA in September 2002
(see paragraph 311 above; Tr 579:4-579:7). He was asked by the Respondent’s
Counsel why the metadata associated with the STAs were dated from April
2002, when his evidence was that he first prepared the template STA around
September 2002. He was unable to explain why this was the case (Tr 580:7-
580:11) but added that he “had a previous draft, and it could have been used
by others” (Tr 581:7-581:13). However, Mr Ciggin’s own evidence was that
he provided Mr Tiirkkan with a template STA only in or after September 2002,
when he was first informed of Libananco’s intended acquisition of shares in
CEAS and Kepez.

Mr Ciggin was referred, as an example, to Exhibit H-16, which was an STA
relating to Kepez shares. It was stated on the STAs that:

“The Transferee, has sold, transferred and assigned all rights, benefits,
including the user fruct Rights of the below detailed shares, to the
Buyer and has received the sale and transfer proceeds in cash and in
advance” (emphasis added).

321.1 He was asked to confirm whether it was his understanding that
consideration for the transfer of the shares to the purchaser would be given
in the form of cash. He said: “No... J was not given any details about the
payments” (Tr 583:13-583:19).

321.2 When asked to explain why then he had drafted a template STA which
purported to show that cash had changed hands, he said:

“Because this was a general draft in the true sense of the word. It is a
kind of draft you would use in the general practices of the companies.
That's exactly why I prepared the draft in that manner. Anybody could
have easily changed this draft in any way they pleased, so anybody
could simply say delete the part about cash payment and put in
payment installments or whatever they please... this is a draft that was
used generally by the companies in their implementations. I prepared

104

322.

this for that purpose, and anyone would have been welcome to amend
it in any way they pleased” (Tr 584:6-585:17).

321.3 He elaborated further:

“Cem Uzan simply asked me to prepare a model that Tiirkkan can use
during these transactions. He asked me to prepare a model contract.
He did not—I wasn’t given any detailed information as you suggest.
Therefore, these agreements are mere drafts that contain very general
phrases” (Tr 586:18-586:22).

Mr Ciggin was asked about his understanding of what the STAs (which were
based on the model agreement drafted by him) were intended to achieve, i.e.
whether they were intended to achieve a share transfer and assignment, or
whether they were merely to evidence the intention to transfer shares.

322.1 He said:

“it was not mandatory to have written documents in order for the
transaction to be valid. If a document or rather if an agreement were
prepared, it would have constituted written evidence of the intent of the
Parties” (Tr 588:12-588:17).

322.2 However, he agreed that the model agreement that he allegedly drafted
purported on its face to be a document intended to be used as a “Share
Sale Transfer and Assignment of Rights Agreement” as such (as opposed
to merely a memorialisation of intent) (Tr 588:18-589:2).

322.3 Notwithstanding the above, he said that, when he drafted or prepared
the template STA in 2002, it was only intended to be used as a means to
memorialise an intent to transfer shares (and therefore would not be the
actual sale and purchase agreement as such). He further understood that he
would be involved in the process of achieving tes/im in respect of the share
certificates to be transferred to Libananco (Tr 727:7-727:14).

322.4 Mr Ciggin testified that, in September 2002, he specifically advised
Cem Uzan on “how to transfer shares according to the Turkish
Commercial Code” (Tr 801:13-801:20), and that Cem Uzan (at the time):

“asked [him] whether it’s really necessary to make such an agreement,
whether a written agreement is completely compulsory, and probably
[he] gave [his] advice to this effect when [Cem Uzan] asked [him]
those question [sic]” (Tr 802:15-802:20).

322.5 However, Mr Ciggin’s later evidence was to the effect that Cem Uzan
gave him no instructions either way (i.e. whether the template was to be
used as an instrument to execute the actual transfer of ownership of the
shares or whether its purpose was merely to memorialise the intent to
transfer shares): “Cem Uzan] only asked me to prepare a model Transfer

105

323.

324.

325.

326.

Agreement. He never said that he was going to use it for the transfer of
shares. I never heard him say that” (Tr 804:22-805:3).

In relation to the issue of the dividends payable to shareholders of CEAS and
Kepez, Mr Ciggin agreed that the STAs were drafted on the premise that the
shares were going to be transferred with all rights and benefits attached,
including the right to receive those dividends (Tr 593:11-593:18). He agreed
that Libananco as the transferee of the shares would be entitled to assume,
based on the manner in which the STAs were drafted, that it was going to
receive full title to the shares as well as the right to receive the corresponding
dividends (Tr 594:7-594:13).

lishi

(c) Mr Ciggin’s alleged role in ing delivery or teslim in

respect of CEAS and Kepez share certificates

Mr Ciggin said that he confirmed delivery of the CEAS and Kepez share
certificates amounting to approximately 50 per cent of the total share capital of
each of those companies (Tr 561:20-562:7) on 15 May 2003 (Tr 715:1-715:4).
Although Libananco claims ownership of approximately 65 per cent and 60
per cent of the total share capital of CEAS and Kepez respectively, Mr
Ciggin’s evidence was that he had no knowledge of how fes/im was achieved
in respect of the balance of the shares (Tr 716:3-716:6). His evidence was
therefore concerned only with the fes/im that was allegedly accomplished on
15 May 2003.

324.1 In that regard, he confirmed that in May 2003 he had no knowledge
that any STAs had been executed purporting to transfer shares to
Libananco (Tr 730:2-730:4).

324.2 His evidence was that the basis on which he was going to accomplish
teslim was by means of the:

“list Ali Cenk Tiirkkan sent me. In that list or in our conversations,
there were no details to the effect that the agreements had been
executed. I was simply told we will do a teslim, here are the documents,
go do it. There were no details about the agreements” (Tr 730:8-
730:13).

Mr Ciggin was referred to Exhibit H-61, which was Libananco’s Share
Acquisition Report as of 20 May 2003. He agreed that Exhibit H-61 showed
that all of the Kepez shares allegedly owned by Libananco had been purchased
before 15 May 2003 (Tr 717:3-717:11). He agreed that his evidence (i.e. that
teslim was accomplished in respect of approximately 50 per cent of Kepez
shares on 15 May 2003 itself) was inconsistent with what was shown on the
face of Exhibit H-61 (Tr 718:10-718:16).

In relation to the issue of the actual inspection of the share certificates, Mr
Ciggin gave the following evidence.

106

326.1 He was asked to explain his evidence in his Witness Statement in
which he deposed that he was asked by Mr Tiirkkan to ensure that the
share certificates located in istanbul were “being stored for the benefit of
Libananco”. He said that the share certificates were kept in the offices of
CEAS and Kepez in Mecidiyekéy, istanbul (Tr 809:21-809:22). However,
he did not know who was responsible for the storage of those share
certificates:

“I don’t know who was responsible because nobody gave me any
information about that. When I talked to Mr. Tiirkkan, he only told me
where these shares were, and he said I could go examine and see them
where they were... Mr. Tiirkkan or anybody else did not give me
information as to who was responsible for keeping those shares, where
they were kept” (Tr 810:5-810:13).

326.2 He was referred to Exhibit H-52, which were the Minutes of
Libananco’s Management Committee Meeting dated 18 April 2003. It was
recorded in that document that:

“Tt is agreed to continue the storage of the actual shares safely in the
storage facilities of the Seller until such time as Libananco and the
Management Committee decides [sic] to undertake other steps to
locate and store the actual shares in an other [sic] location. It is
agreed that Mr Ciggin, appoint a two lawyer team to go to site of the
storage facilities, and actually physically recheck the storage of the
shares, and the labeling [sic] of the storage under the name of
Libananco. And to do this on a routine basis (once a month)”.

(emphasis added)

Mr Ciggin confirmed that, in his telephone conversation with Mr Tiirkkan

in early 2003, Mr Tiirkkan: “also told me that the Share Certificates
needed [sic] be checked at least once a month as long as they were stored
in that facility” (Tr 812:18-812:21). When asked by the Tribunal whether
he specifically told Selahattin Bal that he was at the Rumeli Building to
take over the share certificates on behalf of Libananco, he replied: “No...
I can’t really recall whether I used that term specifically when I was
speaking to Mr. Bal” (Tr 883:5-883:7).

326.3 He confirmed that he did not keep any record of the share certificates
which he allegedly inspected in istanbul on 15 May 2003 (Tr 813:19-
813:22). He said he did not know (and did not otherwise have any record
of) the serial numbers of the share certificates which he allegedly
inspected (Tr 829:4-829:8). His evidence was that the process was: “not
documented other than what I spoke of” (Tr 833:21-833:22).

326.4 In his Witness Statement, Mr Ciggin deposed that he “arrived at
CEAS’ office on 15 May 2003 and proceeded to the secure storage area in
the Rumeli building”. He changed his evidence in cross-examination when
it was suggested to him that there were in fact no CEAS offices in the

 

107

Rumeli building: “Jn the Rumeli Building, I went to the secure area where
the Share Certificates were stored. I didn’t go to CEAS’s [sic] offices in
that building” (Tr 816:8-816:11).

326.5 Also in his Witness Statement, Mr Ciggin deposed that, when he
arrived at the Rumeli Building, he: “opened the locked door with a key
provided to me by Mr. Bal [one of the directors of CEAS]”. Again, when it
was suggested to him that the share certificates were being stored by
Adabank (and therefore not CEAS), he changed his evidence:

“Let me make a correction there, too. Selahattin Bal did not give me a
key. He didn’t give me a key, and he just set me free to go around in
the building... We opened the door with him, so I was with him at the
time” (Tr 817:5-817:20).

326.6 When asked to explain why he did not correct these errors in his
Witness Statement earlier, he said that he intended to make corrections to
his Witness Statement if he was asked a question about something which
required correction (Tr 818:5-818:12).

326.7 There were no representatives of Kemal Uzan or Aysegiil Uzan in their
capacity as the sellers of the shares (Tr 821:14-821:19): “Cenk Tiirkkan
had given me the information that the family had already completed the
teslim procedures to Libananco, so I did not really think that the sellers
had to be there” (Tr 822:2-822:5).

326.8 He accordingly explained that, since the representatives of the sellers
were absent (or that none were required in any event), the handover
process or teslim was achieved in the following manner:

“... in that area, the Certificates were already present and ready... for
Libananco. So, there were packages with Libananco labels on them,
and they were prepared, and I had received a list from Mr. Tiirkkan,
and everything corresponded to that list” (Tr 823:3-823:13).

326.9 When asked how many share certificates were present in the Rumeli
and Dogus Buildings, he said: “J didn’t count them. As I said, they were
in packages, and there were many of them. I can’t remember exactly how
many” (Tr 824:13-824:15).

 

326.10 When asked whether he knew who had labelled the individual
packages of share certificates with the word “Libananco”, he said: “J
don’t know, and I had already told you, that I don’t know who had done
this, who had prepared these” (Tr 828:8-828:10).

326.11 When asked how long the alleged inspection on 15 May 2003 lasted,
he replied: “Hours. I can tell you that I went there in the morning at
around 10:00 a.m., and I must have left in [sic] late afternoon, maybe
5:00, 6:00 p.m.” (Tr 827:19-827:21).

108

326.12 His evidence was that he did not retain a copy of the inventory of share
certificates (see paragraph 314 above). When questioned by the Tribunal
about this, he testified that he made a conscious decision to destroy the
latter:

“Cem Uzan didn’t want a lot of people to know about the Share
Certificate transfer procedures, as I didn’t want to keep them in my
office because I was preparing—I was working in a very crowded
office, and we didn’t have safes and lockers and all the shelves and the
cabinets were accessible to everyone, including the secretaries, and I
didn’t want anybody to see those documents, so ..._ I destroyed that
document” (Tr 864:19-865:6).

326.13 He was referred to Exhibit H-60, which were the share custody
invoices dated 16 May 2003, purportedly issued by CEAS and Kepez
respectively, which indicated that share certificates representing
approximately 15.82 per cent and 13.9 per cent of the total share capital of
CEAS and Kepez respectively continued to be stored in their offices in
Mecidiyekéy, Istanbul on behalf of Libananco. It was suggested to Mr
Ciggin that the place of storage of the share certificates Exhibit H-60
purported to show was wrong.’ He explained:

“As a lawyer, it wasn’t my responsibility to confirm the truthfulness of
this information. It was up to the person who prepared the document...
I didn’t feel the need to verify the contents of these documents, and
nobody asked me to do this. I wasn’t asked to do this. It wasn’t my
responsibility” (Tr 836:1-836:19).

326.14 Also on the subject of Exhibit H-60, Mr Ciggin was asked how it was
possible that, between his alleged inspection on 15 May 2003 and the time
the share custody invoices were allegedly prepared on 16 May 2003,
bearer share certificates adding up to more than 45 per cent of the total
share capital of CEAS and Kepez respectively (some 50,000 share
certificates) were moved out of the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings, with the
remaining share certificates being counted within that short space of time
(the share custody invoices were specific and stated that share certificates
adding up to 13.90904 per cent and 15.81972 per cent of the total share
capital of Kepez and CEAS respectively were being kept in the Rumeli
Building in istanbul on behalf of Libananco). His explanation for this
apparent feat was as follows:

“I can’t comment on what others may have done. However, I can tell
you that you don’t need to do a very thorough analysis in that although
the packages had information about the number of shares based on
nominal value. So, if you added these packages, you could easily

° The share custody invoices allegedly issued by CEAS and Kepez refer only to share certificates being
stored in the Rumeli Buidling, but not in the Dogus Building. Further, some of the share custody
invoices referred to share certificates being stored on the eighth floor of the Rumeli Building but the
Respondent alleged that neither GEAS nor Kepez had offices on that floor.

109

327.

328.

understand to what percentage of the capital the shares corresponded
to” (Tr 842:12-842:19).

(d) Non-disck ‘e of Lib ’s alleged acquisition of a majority interest in

both CEAS and Kepez

Mr Ciggin was referred to Exhibit H-343, which was an excerpt of the Capital
Markets Board Communique — Public Disclosure of Material Events, Serial
No. VIII No. 20, published in Official Gazette No. 21629 on 6 July 1993. This
was subordinate legislation under the Turkish Capital Market Law Number
2499,

327.1 His evidence was that he “must have looked at it” when he advised
Libananco (Tr 640:10-640:15).

327.2 He confirmed that the effect of the subordinate legislation was that, if
Libananco (or anyone else) were to acquire 10 per cent or more of the total
share capital of either CEAS or Kepez, that fact would have to be
disclosed (Tr 641:12-641:16).

327.3 When asked who was responsible for making public disclosure, he
referred to Exhibit H-327, which was an excerpt of Capital Markets Law
No. 2499, published in Official Gazette No. 17416 on 30 July 1981. He
answered: “It’s the members of the Board of Directors, General Manager,
Assistant General Managers, and the shareholders holding 10 percent or
more of the capital” (Tr 642:7-642:10). He further agreed that in the case
of a discrepancy or non-disclosure, a monetary fine would be imposed (Tr
642:17-642:22).

327.4 He agreed that, as far as he knew,: “no notification was made at any
stage to any of the Turkish authorities of Libananco’s alleged
shareholding” (Tr 672:10-672:13).

327.5 He also agreed that the directors of CEAS and Kepez (upon whom the
obligation of disclosure fell) would owe duties to act in the best interests
of the companies, and the interest of the companies and their shareholders
as a whole would have been different from the interests of the Uzans (Tr
644:3-644:11).

327.6 When asked whether there could have been any conceivable reason for
anybody to flout the law in that manner, he said: “Well, for all we know,
those people may have their own justification. I do not know... No, there
isn’t. I don’t know. No” (Tr 647:16-648:3).

 

 

Mr Ciggin was cross-examined on CEAS’ claim before the Danistay, where the
cancellation of the Concession Agreement held by CEAS was challenged.

110

329.

330.

331.

332.

328.1 He agreed that CEAS’ case before the Danistay was that it was entirely
a Turkish company (i.e. there were no foreign shareholders) (Tr 670:21-
671:2).

328.2 He confirmed that he acted on behalf of Cem Uzan in those
proceedings, who sought to be joined as an intervener (Tr 671:3-671:6).

328.3 Although by that time (i.e. by the time the challenge before the
Danistay was brought by CEAS), Libananco had allegedly completed its
acquisition of CEAS shares, Mr Ciggin said that he took no steps to
correct what was argued by CEAS before the Danistay (i.e. that it was
domestically owned) (Tr 671:7-671:11).

328.4 In that regard, he confirmed that the statements made by CEAS and
Kepez in the Turkish courts were inconsistent with any suggestion of
Libananco being the majority shareholder of the latter companies (Tr
672:15-672:22).

16. Witness Statement of Aysegiil Akay Uzan dated 28 April 2009

Ms Uzan was unable to testify in person at the hearing owing to an alleged
illness. On 4 December 2009, the Claimant submitted a letter from a psychiatrist
Dr M Ozhan Pektas dated 3 December 2009 (“Medical Report”), the subject of
which was the medical condition of Ms Uzan. According to the Medical Report,
Dr Pektas has known Ms Uzan since 12 September 2002.

Having considered the contents of the Medical Report, which the Tribunal
regards as being medical-in-confidence (and therefore neither necessary nor
desirable to recite or otherwise reproduce), the Tribunal concludes as follows.

(a) It was possible that Ms Uzan was under heavy medication and not in a
stable mental state at the time she allegedly signed the STAs.

(b) It is uncertain whether Ms Uzan signed her Witness Statement with full
knowledge of its contents.

In this regard, the Tribunal recalls paragraph 14 of its Procedural Order of 18
December 2009, where it decided as follows:

“Having considered the Parties’ positions and the medical certificate
provided by the Claimant, the Tribunal decides to disregard Mrs. [sic]
Uzan’s written statement from the Record pursuant to Article 4.8 of the
IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Commercial
Arbitration”.

Accordingly, the Tribunal affirms its decision to disregard Ms Uzan’s Witness
Statement; and also heavily discounts her signature on the STAs in the absence
of countervailing evidence that she was of sufficient mental capacity and/or in a
stable mental state at the respective material times.

111

17. Witness Statements of Faruk Ulusoy dated 24 June 2009 and 8
January 2010

333. Mr Ulusoy was the Claimant’s witness who did not testify at the hearing for fear
of reprisal. The evidence given in his Witness Statement is key in respect of the
teslim that was allegedly achieved on 15 May 2003 by Mr Ciggin’s alleged
inspection of CEAS and Kepez share certificates, which were said to have been
wrapped in brown paper and labelled “Libananco”.

334. Mr Ulusoy deposed, among other things, as follows.

334.1 On 23 March 2004 (whilst he was an employee of Adabank — the agent
bank responsible for the processing and payment of dividends to
shareholders of CEAS and Kepez), he was summoned by personnel from
the SDIF. As a result, he went to the basement of the Rumeli Building
with SDIF personnel and police officers.

334.2 At that time, he knew that this was where the CEAS and Kepez share
certificates were kept. This is because, since 1998, he was (as an
employee of Adabank) in charge of the distribution of dividends for share
certificates.

334.3. When (on 23 March 2004) he was in the basement of the Rumeli
Building, he saw “CEAS and Kepez stock certificates... wrapped in
brown packing paper and were in bundles”.

  

 

334.4 His evidence was that:

“We looked at the contents of the bundles by opening this packing
paper... Furthermore, I remember that there was a name of a foreigner
written on the brown packing paper that the bundles of stock
certificates were wrapped in”.

335. Taking Article 4(7)'° of the IBA Rules of Taking Evidence in International
Arbitration (2010 version) as a guideline, the Tribunal (in the absence of
exceptional circumstances) accords no weight to Mr Ulusoy’s statement as he
did not testify at the hearing. However, as three of the Respondent’s witnesses
(Enis Giiglii Sirin, Deniz Bozkurt and Orhan Seyfi Guner) appeared at the
hearing for the purpose of contradicting Mr Ulusoy’s evidence, Mr Ulusoy’s
statement is necessary to put the evidence given by those three witnesses in
context. Accordingly, the Tribunal maintains Mr Ulusoy’s Witness Statement on
the record.

1 Art 4(7) of the IBA Rules of Taking Evidence in International Arbitration (2010 version) states that:
“If a wits whose appearance has been requested pursuant to Article 8.1 fails without a valid
reason to appear for testimony at an Evidentiary Hearing, the Arbitral Tribunal shall disregard any
Witness Statement related to that Evidentiary Hearing by that witness unless, in exceptional
es, the Arbitral Tribunal decides otherwis

 

 

      

112

18. Witness Statement of Enis Giiglu Sirin dated 25 August 2009

336. Mr Sirin was an employee of the SDIF who had worked at its Collection
Department in 2004, and was working in its Auditing Department at the time he
gave his Witness Statement. He was (when working for the Collection
Department in 2004) tasked with carrying out enforcement and attachment
procedures. Within the scope of those duties, he participated in attachment
procedures carried out with respect to various companies owned by the Uzan
family.

337. He deposed, among other things, as follows.

337.1 On 29 March 2004, he went to the second floor of the Dogus Building
with some other SDIF officials and police officers to perform an
inspection, and to carry out attachment procedures if valuable property
was found.

337.2 His evidence was as follows:

“On the 2" floor, we found some safes in the office and lounge of
Kemal Uzan, in the Board of Directors room, in Yavuz Uzan’s office
and in the corridor. After the safes in the Board of Directors room
were opened, I saw that there were stacked share certificates in open
form in them (by “open form”, I mean the certificates were not
wrapped or packaged). I took out and checked some of the share
certificates and saw that they were CEAS and Kepez share
certificates”.

337.3 Although he and his team opened the safes in Kemal Uzan’s offices
and in the corridor (in which they found, amongst other items, documents
in packages), he saw no CEAS or Kepez share certificates packaged in
brown paper, nor did he see the name “Libananco” written anywhere.

19. Cross-examination of Mr Sirin
338. The material portions of Mr Sirin’s oral testimony are as follows.

338.1 He confirmed that he did not participate in any attachment procedures
in the Rumeli Building and therefore did not have any knowledge of the
existence of packaging (or otherwise) of the share certificates in the
Rumeli Building (Tr 435:7-435:13).

338.2 On 29 March 2004, the purpose of his visit to the Dogus Building was
to attach property belonging to a company called Rumeli Holding
Incorporated. However, his team “put down everything that [they] found
there in as much detail as possible in the Minutes [of Attachment]” (Tr
443:5-443:20). If any property marked “Libananco” was sighted, this
would have been recorded in the Minutes of Attachment as well (Tr
444:6-444:8).

113

339.

340.

341.

342.

343.

20. Witness Statement of Deniz Bozkurt dated 25 August 2009

Deniz Bozkurt stated that on 25 January 2005, he started working as Company
Manager in the Uzan Group companies. He explained during the hearing that
none of the members of the Uzan family were associated with the latter
companies once he became the manager because those companies were taken
over by the SDIF. It was therefore the Board of Directors of those companies
(who were in turn appointed by the SDIF) that appointed him as Company
Manager of the Uzan Group companies (Tr 453:7-453:20).

In March 2004, prior to the commencement of his duties, attachment
proceedings had been carried out on property found on the basement floor of the
Rumeli Building and on the second floor of the Dogus Building.

After assuming his duties, he went to the basement floor of the Rumeli Building
and the second floor of Dogus Building together with one Devrim Yiicel, the
custodian of these areas (then already sealed by the SDIF).

The crux of his evidence was as follows.

342.1 In the basement of the Rumeli Building, he saw about 90 steel cabinets
mostly containing share certificates in “open form ... not wrapped or
packaged”.

342.2 On the second floor of the Dogus Building, he saw share certificates in
the safes located in the Board of Directors meeting room and lounge,
stacked in “open form”.

342.3 Further, he participated in the inventory process of the share
certificates in the basement of the Rumeli Building from 7 March 2005 to
20 June 2005. 91 steel cabinets containing share certificates and coupons
were located there. Many of the share certificates found in the basement
of the Rumeli Building were CEAS share certificates, but none of the
cabinets were marked “Libananco”.

342.4 The share certificates on the second floor of the Dogus Building were
documented in a similar fashion from 7 July 2005 and 11 August 2005.
However, these were stored in safes and in a less ordered arrangement. If
there was a name written at the place where the inventoried share
certificates were located, that name would have been entered into the
inventory records. Again, the name “Libananco” was not recorded in any
of those entries.

Mr Bozkurt supplemented the evidence in his Witness Statement as follows
during direct examination.

343.1 He went to both the Rumeli (basement) and Dogus Buildings (second

floor) some time after he started work as Company Manager in the Uzan
Group companies (i.e. after January 2005) (Tr 450:6-451:1).

114

343.2 Although there were share certificates in both locations, he did not see
any packages with the name “Libananco” on them, nor had he heard of
“Libananco” at that time (Tr 451:12-451:22).

21. Cross-examination of Mr Bozkurt
344. The material portions of Mr Bozkurt’s oral testimony are as follows.

344.1 The attachment proceedings of which he was in charge were directed
only at the 118 companies in relation to which he had been appointed
Company Manager (Tr 458:4-458:9).

344.2 He confirmed that, although attachment proceedings had been carried
out on property found in the basement of the Rumeli Building and the
second floor of the Dogus Building in March 2004 (prior to his
appointment as Company Manager in January 2005), he himself did not
take part in those proceedings (Tr 454:15-455:1).

344.3 He only visited the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings “around 10 to 15
days” after his appointment in January 2005. Accordingly, he could not
confirm the state of the share certificates (i.e. wrapped or otherwise) in
March 2004. However, he testified that his colleagues who carried out the
inspection and attachment procedures in March 2004 had advised him that
the share certificates were not packaged (Tr 465:7-465:10).

344.4 There were one million and 250,000 CEAS and Kepez share
certificates respectively in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings at the time he
and his team conducted the inventory. He was asked whether he looked at
all 1,250,000 of these share certificates. His response was that:

“.. obviously the inventory process took a long time. Had they been in
packages, we would have been able to see them without necessarily
having to count the Share Certificates” (Tr 473:11-473:17).

22. Witness Statement of Orhan Seyfi Giiner dated 25 August 2009

345. Mr Giiner started working at the SDIF in 2001. In 2004, he was appointed as the
President of the Collection Department Group. He deposed that, on 3 July 2003,
imar Bank’s (a bank owned by the Uzan family) licence to carry out banking
operations and accept deposits was revoked by the Banking Regulation and
Supervision Agency. Thereafter, proceedings were initiated in order to collect
the debts resulting from the unlawful operations of imar Bank.

346. To this end, inspection and attachment procedures were carried out at the
Rumeli Building on 23 March 2004 and the Dogus Building on 29 and 30

March 2004. Mr Giiner’s evidence was, among other things, as follows.

346.1 He was present throughout the inspection and attachment procedures
on 23 March 2004 at the Rumeli Building and on 30 March 2004 (the

115

second day of the inspection and attachment procedures) at the Dogus
Building.

346.2 There was a room containing steel cabinets in the basement of the
Rumeli Building. The names “Metas” and “Simetri” were written on some
of those cabinets. Some of the cabinets had share certificates stacked on
the shelves inside them. However, these share certificates were not
wrapped.

346.3 He deposed that:

“Contrary to what Faruk Ulusoy says in his witness statement, the
CEAS and Kepez share certificates we saw were positioned on the
shelves in the steel cabinets in open form and were not packaged, in
brown paper or otherwise. Thus we did not open any packaging paper
as he suggests.

I was present in the basement area [of the Rumeli Building] for the
entire time that Faruk Ulusoy was present. I saw no wrapping around
the share certificates and no name writen on them. I do not understand
Faruk Ulusoy’s reference to the “foreign name.” I can say that I did
not see the name “Libananco” anywhere during the inspection”.

347. During direct examination, Mr Giiner was asked whether it would have been a
significant observation to him if the share certificates were wrapped or packaged
in brown paper. His response was:

“Of course, it would have been because when we go for attachments,

we see the ... Share Certificates there. If they had been bundled in

paper, we must have had unwrapped them before we saw the Share

Certificates... And if there had been a share [sic] with a name on it,

then I would have been reminded of the owner of that share [sic]. This

was important for us because ... I remember them in live form and [sic]
no wrapping and no name on them” (Tr 378:21-379:9).

23. Cross-examination of Mr Giiner
348. The material portions of Mr Giiner’s oral testimony are as follows.

348.1 Mr Giiner confirmed that he saw about a hundred steel cabinets in the
basement of the Rumeli Building. There were share certificates stacked on
the shelves inside the first one or two cabinets that were opened. These
share certificates, which had no wrapping on them, were those of CEAS,
METAS, Gaziantep Cement and Bartin Cement. In addition, there were
“many coupons of the Kepez company” (Tr 396:18-397:14).

348.2 Mr Giiner was asked whether he had the opportunity to look inside all

“100” of the cabinets in the Rumeli Building. His response was as
follows:

116

“T looked at most of them ... I don’t think there were too many that I
didn’t look at, but, of course, it’s not possible for me to know whether
they are wrapped or not ... in a few of the cabinets that I didn’t look at,
of course, I can’t say if there were Share Certificates or if they were
wrapped or not” (Tr 409:13-411:3).

348.3. The Minutes of Attachment corresponding to the procedures at the

Rumeli Building on 23 March 2004 (Exhibit H-209) showed that he and
his team arrived at the location at 11.30 am. He testified that he and his
team probably left at about 6.30 or 7.00 pm in the evening, and that he
was in the room where the steel cabinets where located throughout the
entire process, save for a toilet break (Tr 423:16-424:9).

348.4 The share certificates in the Dogus Building were positioned in the

same manner as those in the Rumeli Building and were likewise “not
packaged in any way” (Tr 402:19-402:21).

D. Forensic analysis of the documents produced by the Claimant

349. Pursuant to the Respondent’s document request, the Tribunal, on 1 May 2008,
ordered the Claimant to produce several categories of documents upon which
the Claimant’s claim was based for examination. On 2 June 2008, the Claimant
produced, among other things, the following photocopied documents:

(a)

(b

(c)

(d)

(e

(f)

the Instrument of Transfer purportedly reflecting the acquisition of
Libananco by Mr Tiirkkan on | April 2002;

the 32 STAs relating to the CEAS and Kepez share certificates allegedly
purchased by Libananco from Kemal Uzan, Hakan Uzan and Aysegiil
Uzan between 30 October 2002 and 15 May 2003;

a “Share Acquisition Report” dated 20 May 2003, which likewise
reflected that Libananco’s share acquisitions occurred between 30
October 2002 and 15 May 2003;

Libananco’s board minutes bearing dates from 2002 and 2003, recording
the purported transactions in the same range of dates (i.e. between 30
October 2002 and 15 May 2003);

an unsigned financial statement for the year ending 31 December 2002,
allegedly reflecting a shareholder loan by means of which Libananco had

paid for the share certificates in question; and

Libananco’s tax return for the year ending 31 December 2002.

350. By its letter of 9 October 2008, the Respondent subsequently sought production
of the originals of the documents produced by the Claimant on 2 June 2008. On
3 November 2008, the Tribunal ordered the Claimant to make the originals of
those documents available for forensic inspection in Washington, D.C. The
Claimant provided some (but not all) of the originals of the said documents for

117

351.

352.

353.

inspection by the Respondent’s forensic document experts RWL in November
and December 2008. These documents were marked and identified as LIB-1
through LIB-119.

The Respondent’s experts reported their findings on LIB-1 through LIB-119 ina
Laboratory Report dated 3 March 2009. The Claimant’s forensic document
experts in turn filed their respective reports on the same as follows: (i) report of
25 May 2009 by Aginsky Forensic Document Dating Laboratory, Inc.; (ii)
report of 22 May 2009 by Lloyd W Cunningham; (iii) reports of 26 May 2009, 1
June 2009, 27 July 2009 and 3 September 2009 by Document Examination
Consultants, Inc.; (iv) report of 1 June 2009 by Peter V Tytell; and (v)
Declaration of Howard Rile of 27 May 2009. In response to all the Claimant’s
expert reports on document forensics, the Respondent’s experts filed a Second
Laboratory Report of 14 August 2009. In further response to the latter, all the
Claimant’s experts collectively filed a Combined Report of Claimant’s Forensic
Document Examination Experts of 8 October 2009.

Finally, on 31 October 2009, the experts from both sides filed a Joint Report of
Forensic Document Experts relating (again) to the documents marked LIB-1
through LIB-119. This report identified general areas of agreement and
disagreement organised by category of documents. The categories of documents
were as follows:

(a) the minutes of directors’ meetings and minutes of management meetings
bearing dates between July 2002 and October 2002;

(b

the Instrument of Transfer bearing the date 1 April 2002;
(c) the three letters showing the individual resignations of Mrs Ero Petsa,
Mrs Eleni Kyriacou and Mr Polakis Sarris from Libananco’s Board of

Directors, each bearing the date 1 April 2002;

(d

the STAs which bore dates between 30 October 2002 and 15 May 2003;
and

(e) the share custody invoices (i.e. Exhibit H-60) bearing the date 16 May
2003.

It was acknowledged in the Joint Report of Forensic Document Experts that
neither side’s experts made any significant forensic findings in relation to
LIB-37 through LIB-43 (i.e. the Share Acquisition Report dated 20 May 2003)
and LIB-48 through LIB-111 (Libananco’s financial statements and tax
returns for the years 2002 to 2004), all of which were photocopies and
therefore not original documents.

Further, on 3 May 2009, Libananco produced (submitted together with the
C.CM) copies of purported board and management committee meeting minutes
which bore dates spanning from 12 August 2002 to 22 June 2005. In October
2009, the Respondent’s experts RWL examined what purported to be originals
of 28 such documents, comprising 34 pages in total and similarly marked and

118

354.

355.

356.

identified as LIB-128 through LIB-161. The Respondent’s experts presented
their findings on these documents in a supplementary report dated 20 October
2009. The Claimant’s experts Dr Valery Aginsky and Mr Peter V Tytell
responded to the latter by way of a Response dated 8 February 2010.

The principal purpose of the forensic examination was to determine whether the
documents in question (i.e. LIB-1 through LIB-119 and LIB-128 through LIB-
161) were created on the dates they bore. In addition, the STAs were also
examined by the Parties’ experts to determine whether or not the signatures on
them were genuine. The significance of the extensive forensic examination
undertaken by both Parties’ experts is that the Claimant’s case would be
weakened if it was proved that the documents in question (many of which were
key to establishing the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in these proceedings) were
backdated and/or not otherwise created before the critical date of 12 June 2003.

 

 

The documents in question were subject to a battery of tests by the experts from
both sides. However, after the Parties’ expert reports were submitted, the
Claimant’s witness Mr Tiirkkan gave evidence to the effect that many or all of
the documents originally supplied for forensic examination had in fact been
reprinted in the period 2005 to 2007.

The Tribunal therefore has to consider the forensic analysis of the categories of
documents listed in paragraphs 352(a) to (e) and 353 above in the light of this
significant admission by Mr Tiirkkan. It now does so.

356.1 The minutes of directors’ _metings and_minutes of.

meetings which bore dates between July 2002 and 22 June 2005. The
Tribunal considers that forensic analysis of these documents did not give
any meaningful or conclusive result since Mr Tiirkkan admitted that these
documents were reprinted in November 2005, and that these (ie. the
reprinted documents) were the very documents produced in the arbitration
by the Claimant. He further confirmed that the originals of the minutes
had either been misplaced or discarded (see paragraph 264 above).
Further, in relation to the “Al” minutes (which were likewise examined),
Mr Tiirkkan admitted that these were not only printed and signed but also
drafted in 2006 (see paragraph 265 above).

356.2 The Instrument_of Transfer dated _1 April 2002. Mr Tiirkkan, in his
First Witness Statement, likewise confirmed that this document was
reprinted and/or re-signed by him sometime in 2007 (see paragraphs
240.2 to 240.4 above). Further, both Parties’ experts agree that the
Instrument of Transfer could not have been produced until 2007, owing to
the presence of a counterfeit protection security code found in the colour
toner used to print this document.

356.3 The resignation letters of Mrs Ero Petsa, Mrs Eleni Kyriacou and Mr
Polakis Sarris from Libananco’s Board of Directors, each dated 1 April
2002. The Parties’ experts had relatively little to say about these
documents. The findings in respect of these documents were not
addressed or mentioned in the Joint Report of Forensic Document Experts.

   

119

The Tribunal does not consider that significant or helpful conclusions can
be drawn from the forensic evidence relating to these documents.

356.4 The STAs which bore dates between 30 October 2002 and 15 Ma
2003. Mr Tiirkkan likewise admitted that the STAs were reprinted in
November 2005 (see paragraphs 264 and 264.1 above). Although it is not
clear whether all of the STAs that were subject to forensic examination
were reprinted, Mr Tiirkkan’s evidence suggests that at least some of the
latter were printed (or reprinted) in 2005. Unsurprisingly, therefore, both
Parties’ experts were able to agree on, among other things, the following
matters (all of which are not inconsistent with the fact that a number of
the STAs were printed after the dates that appeared on the face of those
documents).

 

 

 

(i) Seven of the 32 STAs produced by the Claimant were all stamped
sometime after 14 February 2005, based on the presence of a
transitory defect in the stamp impressions, and letters from the
manufacturer and distributor of the stamp pad.

(ii) Ink transfer was present on the back page of 29 of the 32 STAs
(i.e. inked areas visibly similar in colour to the “Libananco”
stamps on the front page of the documents), indicating that these
STAs could have been in contact with each other shortly after the
“Libananco” ink stamps were applied.

(iii) Although impression evidence alone could not establish the
specific dates on which the STAs were signed (by either the seller
or the buyer) or otherwise prepared, it was capable of establishing
the order in which the documents were signed, and could
determine if the order was consistent with the dates which
appeared on the documents. The impression evidence in this case
was a basis for the following conclusions:

 

(1) thirteen of the STAs which bore dates earlier than 15 May
2003 were “probably” signed sometime afier the STA
dated 15 May 2003 was created;

(2) two of the STAs which bore dates earlier than 13 May 2003
were “probably” signed sometime afier the STA dated 13
May 2003 was created;

 

 

(3) three of the STAs which bore dates earlier than 6 May 2003
were “probably” signed sometime after the STA dated 6
May 2003 was created;

(4) two of the STAs which bore dates earlier than 17 April
2003 were “probably” signed sometime after the STA
dated 17 April 2003 was created; and

 

120

357.

358.

359.

360.

361.

(5) one STA which bore a date earlier than 17 April 2003 was
“probably” signed sometime after the STA dated 17 April
2003 was created.

356.5 The share custody invoices dated 16 May 2003. The Parties’ experts
had relatively little to say about these documents. In any event, the
Respondent’s experts RWL observed that these documents were
photocopies. The observation was not contradicted by the Claimant’s
experts. The Tribunal does not consider that significant or helpful
conclusions can be drawn from the forensic evidence on these documents.

The other documents provided to each Party’s document forensic experts (i.e.
the Share Acquisition Report dated 20 May 2003 and Libananco’s financial
statements and tax returns for the years 2002 to 2004) need not be considered by
the Tribunal for present purposes since these were also not original documents,
the consequence of which was that both Parties’ experts made no significant
forensic findings in respect of these documents.

Given these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that, despite the high
professional quality of the experts’ work, the forensic evidence provides little
assistance on the central issue of whether Libananco acquired shares in CEAS
and Kepez before 12 June 2003. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that it is
unnecessary to make any further determination in relation to the forensic
document evidence.

  

 

E. Forensic analysis of the floppy disks produced by Mr Tiirkkan

In the course of the hearing, in June 2009, the Claimant produced eight floppy
disks that Mr Tiirkkan allegedly used to backup the STAs and other corporate
documents. The Claimant sought to rely on the metadata associated with the
electronic versions of the documents stored on the floppy disks as proof that the
documents in question were created on or before the dates they bore on their
face (and hence were not backdated).

These floppy disks contained: (i) the STAs; (ii) the model agreement based on
which the actual STAs were drafted; (iii) Libananco’s corporate minutes as well
as (iv) a series of faxed documents which were intra-family agreements. The
Claimant submitted that the category of documents (i) to (iii) were backup files
which were stored on the floppy disks. The last category of documents
discovered on the floppy disks (i.e. the faxed documents) were deleted files
recovered in the course of forensic examination. The intra-family agreements
were those that, according to Hakan Uzan, were executed in order to accomplish
the internal transfers of shares within the Uzan family prior to any transfer of
shares to Libananco (see paragraphs 210 and 211 above).

 

 

The floppy disks were subject to examination by the Claimant’s forensic experts
Stroz Friedberg and Mr Eoghan Casey, and by the Respondent’s forensic
experts Curtis W Rose & Associates.

121

362. The Claimant made the following submissions, based on the forensic analysis of
the floppy disks.

362.1 Metadata associated with the electronic versions of the STAs and
Libananco’s minutes constituted proof that the STAs and minutes were
created on or before the date they were signed (hence the STAs were not
backdated). In other words, its experts found affirmative “evidence of
authenticity” on the files stored on the floppy disks, suggesting that the
STAs were created in 2002 and 2003, and that Li anco’s minutes were
created over the period 2002 to 2005 (i.e. the dates that appeared on the
face of the documents produced in the arbitration).

 
   

362.2 If the floppy disks contained fraudulently backdated documents, a
computer forensics expert would be able to identify significant traces of
backdating. The Claimant’s experts found no such evidence and, indeed,
their findings were to the contrary.

362.3 Additional evidence of the authenticity of the files on the floppy disks
came in the form of 16 deleted faxes that had been sent in April 2003,
saved to one of the floppy disks and then subsequently deleted. The
deleted faxes contained information in the fax headers showing the date
and time they had been sent, and these were consistent with the file
system metadata (and/or other data) relating to those files as well as the
dates which those documents bore. This was significant evidence of
authenticity of the deleted faxes since the date and time information came
from an independent source (i.e. the fax headers).

  

362.4 The Claimant’s experts found that many of the documents discovered
on the floppy disks revealed characteristics that were typical of what one
might expect to see in documents that were created, used and edited in
real time over an extended period (“Pattern of Use Evidence”). The
Pattern of Use Evidence showed the authenticity of those documents since
such changes had to be made manually by a person over time, and could
not have occurred as a result of some automatic process.

363. On the other hand, the Respondent argued that the floppy disks contained
anomalies consistent with backdating, and made the following submissions,
based on the forensic analysis of the floppy disks.

363.1 The only way to know for certain whether the documents on the floppy
disks were backdated was to examine the source computer which was
used to create, store, edit, print or produce the electronic files on the
floppy disks. However, since Mr Tiirkkan, by his own admission,
intentionally destroyed or abandoned his computers, the Tribunal should
infer that the electronic documents stored on the floppy disks were not
authentic.

363.2 There was an anomaly on Floppy Disk | which the Claimant’s experts

concede was consistent with intentional backdating. The disk contained
metadata which indicated that no file activity took place after 15 April

122

2002, but yet the disk contained a deleted file with associated metadata
which indicated that the file was saved to the disk six months later (on 24
October 2002).

363.3. There was an anomaly on Floppy Disk 7. This disk contained two
types of files: template STAs and the deleted fax files. The metadata
associated with the deleted faxes showed that they were saved to the disk
on 4 April 2003, whilst that of the template STAs showed that they were
saved to the disk on 7 April 2003. An analysis of the metadata and the
root directory structure of the disk showed that, consistent with normal
computer operations, the deleted fax files should have been overwritten
by the template STAs, which were saved later in time, but this was not the
case.

363.4 The Pattern of Use Evidence referred to by the Claimant could have
been easily manipulated to create a false impression of normal use.

363.5 The Claimant’s argument that the deleted faxes were authentic
documents on the basis that the fax headers independently confirm the
time at which they were faxed is flawed. This was because fax headers
can be backdated. The Respondent’s experts were able to create a
backdated fax for demonstration purposes, with header and metadata
information matching those found on Floppy Disk 7.

364. In addition, the Respondent raised the following issues in relation to the floppy
disks themselves.

364.1 The belated appearance of the floppy disks in these proceedings was
suspicious since they were only disclosed in 2009, although they should
have been disclosed in 2008 (assuming that the disks had existed at that
time).

364.2 The Claimant’s explanations regarding the provenance of the floppy
disks undermined their authenticity.

365. The experts on both sides produced a Joint Report of Computer Forensics
Experts dated 27 October 2009 pursuant to the Tribunal’s Procedural Order
dated 8 July 2008, setting out the areas of agreement and disagreement.

366. The Tribunal observes that the experts on both sides were able to agree on,
among other things, the following propositions.

366.1 Floppy disks represent only a snapshot in time of the lifecycle of
questioned documents. It would be preferable to have access to the
computers used to create, edit and/or store the documents because they
would provide access to external reference points and could reveal
important information concerning the lifecycles of the documents.

366.2 Although anomalies can be identified in the absence of the originating
computer system(s), the original systems could reveal additional

123

information that would indicate alteration or manipulation of the files in a
data set such as the floppy disks. (In addition, the Claimant’s experts
submitted that the originating computer system(s) would also be able to
reveal additional information indicating the authenticity of the files
examined.)

 

366.3 When a computer is available, validating the accuracy of the computer
clock is an important step in assessing the authenticity of electronic files
like Microsoft Word and Microsoft Excel documents because the
computer clock can be incorrect.

366.4 It is possible to fabricate a backdated floppy disk with no anomalies.
367. In addition, the Parties’ experts made the following observations.

367.1 The Claimant’s experts submitted that no evidence was found that
negated the authenticity of the files on the floppy disks or proved that the
files were backdated. The Respondent’s experts’ position was that Floppy
Disks 1 and 7 both had anomalies “that [could] be explained by
backdating”.

367.2 The Claimant’s experts submitted that the anomalies on Floppy Disk 1
could be the result of backdating, but they could also occur in the absence
of backdating. With the available evidence, it was not possible to
determine definitively whether the anomalies on Floppy Disk 1 were the
result of backdating or the result of normal user activity. The
Respondent’s experts’ position on this point was that without the
originating computer(s), “a significant amount of evidence that could
prove backdating was unavailable for forensic examination”.

367.3. The Claimant’s experts submitted that, for each of the sixteen deleted
fax files, the date and time information on the fax header and that of the
file system metadata were from independent sources, yet both reported
the same date. The Respondent’s experts’ reply was that the fax header
information “could easily be manipulated during a backdating process”.

367.4 The Claimant’s experts submitted that the Pattern of Use Evidence
referred to above is common when people are creating, editing and
formatting digital documents over time during the normal course of
business. In the case of the floppy disks, these showed clear and
compelling behavioral usage patterns typical of documents which were
created and modified over time during the normal course of business. The
Respondent’s experts’ position was that:

“Patterns of use such as small document changes may or may not be
normal characteristics for this data set. As such, they may or may not
support the authenticity of the dataset. In addition, such patterns could
be reproduced by an operator engaged in creating a backdated
dataset”.

124

368. However, the computer forensics experts on both sides had diametrically
opposed views in relation to the following statement posed to them: “Jt would
be difficult to fabricate a realistic set of backdated documents like those on the
Floppy Disks” (Joint Report of Computer Forensics Experts dated 27 October
2009, p 9).

368.1

368.2

The Claimant’s experts’ view was as follows:

“Agree. It would have been difficult to fabricate a realistic set of
backdated documents like those on the Floppy Disks. For example, it
would have been necessary to change the computer clock date alone
more than 30 times, in such a way to coincide with external events in
the past. In addition, to fabricate just the Share Transfer Agreement
spreadsheets, it would have been necessary to resize column widths,
reset margins, reset print areas, change certain cell colors, change
certain cell alignment [sic], change certain label names and change
certain descriptor labels. Furthermore, it would have been necessary
to independently configure a fax machine to send the documents to a
computer running the WinFax application. Finally, this was all
completed with a relatively small number of date discrepancies
compared with a large number of consistencies”.

The Respondent’s experts’ view was as follows:

“Disagree. Fabricating a realistic set of backdated documents like
those on the floppy disks would not be difficult, given proper planning
and resources. The dataset is not a replication of an actual dataset, so
there is no established baseline for comparison, making the
fabrication much easier, especially considering the fact that the
external reference points, e.g. the originating computer(s), are not
available. Finally, areas presented as complex, such as the referenced
“consistent date relationships” from the deleted carved files, are
actually the byproduct of the creation process. As the dataset grows
larger, it may become a more complex undertaking to backdate;
however, with only the external media (the floppy disks) for review, the
dataset actually becomes eight independent datasets that can
potentially be fabricated without difficulty. Combining the eight
datasets and corresponding relationships, with proper planning and
preparation, may potentially be accomplished without any particular
difficulty (especially considering that there is no baseline or reference
point)”.

(emphasis added)

369. Based on the expert reports submitted by both Parties, the Tribunal is able to
arrive at the following views.

369.1

Although the Respondent’s experts submitted that there were

anomalies on Floppy Disks 1 and 7, they were unable to provide any
concrete forensic evidence to substantiate the allegations of backdating.

125

370.

371.

37:

373.

N

The position of the Respondent’s experts was merely that the anomalies
identified could be the result of backdating, but may not necessarily have
been so. This is not an affirmative conclusion and the Tribunal is unable to
accept it as such.

369.2 In relation to the fax headers, the Respondent’s experts likewise
submitted that they could have been manipulated, but this may not
necessarily have been done as there was no forensic evidence either way.

369.3 In addition, the causal link or relationship between the existence of the
anomalies in question and the backdating of documents on the floppy disks
has not been clearly established by the experts on both sides. This is
especially so since both Parties’ experts agreed that it was possible to
create backdated documents on floppy disks with no anomalies.

369.4 Further, since both Parties’ experts agreed that: (i) the floppy disks
represented only a snapshot in time of the life cycle of the documents in
question and (ii) it was impossible to be certain of whether the documents
on the floppy disks were backdated without having had the chance to
examine the source computer(s) used to create, store, edit, print or
otherwise produce the electronic files, the Tribunal considers that it should
be slow, in the absence of objective forensic evidence either way, to
conclude (as the Respondent has suggested) that the documents on the
floppy disks had been backdated.

On this basis, the Tribunal finds that the computer forensic evidence is not
conclusive of the issue of when the documents stored on the floppy disks were
created or otherwise accessed.

 

Further, the Tribunal observes that the electronic versions of Libananco’s
minutes and the STAs stored on the floppy disks were unsigned soft copies. This
being the case, even if the files on the floppy disks were not backdated, they can
only, at best, be evidence of when the documents were electronically created or
otherwise accessed on the source computer(s), and are therefore not evidence of
when those documents were actually signed and/or executed.

For all the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal finds that, despite the high
professional quality of the experts’ work, the computer forensic evidence is of
limited assistance in determining whether the documents in question (i.e. those
set out in paragraph 360 above) were backdated. Consequently, the Tribunal
declines to give further consideration to the electronic files stored on the floppy
disks.

  

F. Audio evidence: admissibility of Exhibits R-113 and R-771

The Respondent tendered, and sought to admit as evidence, transcripts of
selected portions of audio recordings of telephone conversations between Hakan
Uzan and Cem Uzan. The first was Exhibit R-113 (the alleged transcript of a
telephone call on 16 August 2004) and the second was Exhibit R-771 (the
alleged transcript of a telephone call on 8 October 2004).

126

374.

375.

376.

377.

378.

The Respondent contended that these recordings of conversations which took
place between Cem Uzan and Hakan Uzan were legitimate as they were
authorised under Turkish law. The Respondent submitted that Cem Uzan and
Hakan Uzan were proper subjects of criminal investigation. The conversations at
issue formed part of an extensive set of recordings (551 in total) intercepted by
the Respondent over a period of months and contained on 21 CDs.

The contents of Exhibits R-113 and R-771 are prejudicial to the Claimant’s case.
In addition, the Tribunal accepts the Claimant’s submission that the transcripts
in question (i.e. Exhibits R-113 and R-771) appeared, on their face, to be an
incomplete account of the conversations they purported to transcribe and further
that they were transcribed by the Respondent’s agents. The Tribunal also
observes that the transcripts were in Eng! but the telephone conversations so
transcribed were (according to the transcripts themselves) conducted in three
languages (i.e. English, German and Turkish). The Respondent’s own witness
Ahmet Teke (of the Turkish National Police) admitted that the transcripts
included only portions of the conversations relevant to the investigations being
carried out. The Claimant therefore contended that the transcripts in question
violated the common law rule of completeness with respect to evidence (which
requires evidence to be considered in context and, in cases where only part of a
record is presented, for the whole of the record in question to be examined if
necessary). In any event, the Claimant’s witnesses Cem Uzan and Hakan Uzan
disputed the authenticity of the transcripts.

 

 

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal considers that Exhibits R-113 and R-771
may only be admitted as evidence in these proceedings if the Tribunal is
satisfied that they were accurate transcriptions of actual telephone recordings.

The Claimant’s forensic audio expert Bek Tek LLC (whose senior forensic
examiner Mr Bruce E Koenig testified ) examined a CD containing the audio
recording of the telephone conversation which allegedly related to Exhibit R-
113. The Respondent’s forensic audio expert Audio Forensic Center (whose
associate Dr Durand R Begault testified in these proceedings) had before it for
its analysis the complete set of 551 audio recordings spread over 21 CDs (as
described above).

 

It is necessary (for reasons which will soon become apparent), before delving
into the technical issues and expert evidence, to state the provenance of the
audio recordings in question. In this regard, the Witness Statement of the
Respondent’s witness Serkan Gergel dated 11 August 2009 stated as follows:

 

“\.. [have been working at the National Intelligence Organization of
the Republic of Turkey (NIO) since 1996.

"The Claimant relies on rules of evidence in Canada and the USA as legal authority for this
proposition, but acknowledges that the Tribunal is neither bound by nor required to consider domestic
rules of evidence.

127

The satellite interception system (Technical System) that was installed
at the NIO at that time automatically recorded the communications it
detected on the telephone numbers entered into the System. It
automatically recorded the called and calling numbers, the starting
and ending date and time of the calls, and other identifying
information. The Technical System did not allow any interference by
an operator in the recording process.

In this case, since the call recordings would be transmitted to a user
outside the organization, once the Technical System created the audio
files, I burned the files onto a CD or CDs using the computer on the
same network as the Technical System that I used. I assigned names to
the files contained in these CDs in a systematic manner. When I
burned the file of a conversation onto a CD, this audio file was
deleted from the Technical System... the CDs at issue were then

1 in a closed lope to the repres ive desis d by
the General Police Directorate (GPD).

(emphasis added)

379. The Claimant’s position was that the transcripts should not be admitted as
evidence because the underlying recorded conversations were not authenticated.
According to the Claimant, this was because the “original” file could no longer
be accessed. In this regard, the Claimant’s expert witness Mr Koenig deposed in
his Witness Statement of 18 June 2009 as follows:

“Tt is impossible to authenticate this conversation without access to the
recording(s) in their original, native system format. This is required
for a proper scientific analysis of the recording(s) in context with other
voice data and metadata that was written by the system just before,
during, and just after the designated conversation; such information
would not be retained when converted and written to a CD.

... The only way to authenticate this conversation would be to examine
the recording as stored in the system used by NIO [i.e. Turkey’s
National Intelligence Office], using the software NIO used to record
and store it. A CD copy of the conversation in isolation is incapable
of permitting authentication of the conversation, since a CD would
not contain the related data and metadata necessary to verify that the
recording has not been altered in any way”.

(emphasis added)

380. On the other hand, the Respondent’s position was (necessarily) that the audio
recordings underlying the transcripts in question were authentic. Its expert

128

Audio Forensic Centre stated in its report of 14 August 2009 that (at paragraph

“we conclude that it is highly likely that the 551 audio files of the Main
Set of Recordings — including the recordings of the calls made on 16
August and 8 October 2004 — are unaltered recordings of
contemporaneous events”.

The methodology of the Respondent’s expert was set out in its report (at
paragraph 2):

“Audio Forensic Center was asked to investigate forensically whether
the recordings of the conversations were consistent with an unaltered
record of contemporaneous events. To do this, we inspected sound file
metadata (complementary digital data associated with the sound
files), considered external corroborative information and records and
in some cases performed audio forensic analysis on the sound files
themselves. Our techniques included:

* Comparison between metadata and sound file duration;

+ Analysis of the consistency of indicated satellite telephone system
data;

* Comparison of external telephone records and metadata for dialed
telephone number;

+ Analysis of the consistency of the main features of the audio data
(e.g., sample rate, encoding, and number of channels);

+ Over selected files, waveform analysis and critical listening; and

+ Between files that should logically be identical, MD5 checksum
analysis”.

(emphasis added)

381. The principal difference of opinion between the experts from both sides was the
issue of whether the audio recordings in question could be examined
forensically, independent of the device used to create the recording, allowing
experts (as a result of that analysis) to draw conclusions on the integrity of those
audio recordings. The positions of the respective experts on this key issue as
stated in the Joint Report of Audio Experts (paragraph 19) are set out below:

“(a) Begault [Respondent's expert]: AGREE. First, the recordings can
be analyzed for signs of tampering or alteration. Begault Ist, § 4,
Begault 2nd, § 19. Second, they can be analyzed for consistency with
extrinsic evidence. Begault 2nd, J§ 51-53. Third, conclusions can be
drawn concerning whether or not the recordings are consistent with an
unaltered record of contemporaneous events. Begault 2nd, § 2. As a

129

result, an audio forensic expert can opine on the likelihood of
alteration based on a collection of observed facts and using scientific
procedures. Begault 2nd, § 20.

(b) Koenig/Lacey [Claimant’s expert]: Disagree. As already explained
in great detail above and below in this document and in the BEK TEK
LLC Laboratory Report of September 21, 2009, the converted copies
on the Main Set of CDs and the R-113 disc can never be scientifically
authenticated since they are not original. Concerning the recording
system used by the Turkish Intelligence Agency (which would only be
helpful if the original recordings were available): if at all possible, the
digital authenticity examinations of logging systems should be
conducted on the original or an identical recording system with the
same proprietary software, and the original audio and metadata re-
installed from a direct backup system. Logging systems almost always
use proprietary file formats, compress the audio information to save
space, record the digital data with small time segments of audio input
from different sources being recorded in a continually interleaved
process, and have one or more separate metadata files or tables
cataloguing the locations of all the audio input segments. Such systems
then use their proprietary software to locate the audio information for
a particular recording, such as a telephone conversation, from its
many small segments and then convert them to a continuous recording
in a more standard audio file format. This conversion does not
provide any of the system information regarding the segmented
recordings or any of the other audio data interspersed within the
pertinent conversation from other audio signals. Additionally, not all
of the descriptive metadata may be included in the new file format,
either due to the software instructions or limitations on the metadata
configuration in the new format. If an authenticity examiner does
not have access to the original recorded audio and metadata of such
systems, it is impossible to verify that the audio and metadata
information is accurate, complete, and unaltered.

While it is true that some individuals may “draw conclusions
regarding [the] integrity” of converted copies, this method of
examination and any conclusions drawn from such analyses have no
scientific support in peer-reviewed, published literature and “best
practices” documents, and is not an accepted practice among
properly-trained examiners in the field.

(emphasis added)
382. Both Parties’ experts were able to agree on a Joint Report of Audio Experts

dated 27 October 2009. Based on that joint report, the Tribunal observes that
both Parties’ experts were able to agree on the following facts and/or

130

propositions (with additional comments from the Claimant’s experts where
elaboration was necessary).

382.1 The original recordings (i.e. those produced directly by and onto the
recording system during the actual telephone conversations) no longer
existed. (However, the Tribunal notes that the definition of an “original”
recording was disputed).

382.2 The audio recording underlying Exhibit R-113 could not be
scientifically confirmed as being “bit-for-bit” copies or clones of the
original recordings. (The significance of this statement is as follows; the
Claimant’s experts accepted that, if the recording was found to a “bit-for-
bit” copy or clone of the original, then conclusive authenticity results
could still be obtained even though the original was not subject to forensic
examination.)

382.3. The embedded metadata and file names for the audio recording relating
to Exhibit R-113 could be altered without detection. In that regard, the
Claimant’s expert submitted that metadata and file names:

“can be altered independently or in concert, as appropriate, without
leaving traces of the alterations. These alterations include, but are not
limited to, modifying the metadata and file name to reflect a different
telephone number as the receiving or initiating party, and modifying
the metadata and file name to reflect a different date or time of the
conversation”.

382.4 Metadata produced by an operating system for a particular file could
be modified through common functions (moving or copying the file to
another place on the hard drive or copying the file to a CD), or through the
use of third-party software.

382.5 The dates and time assigned by the operating system to a particular file
may not have been the time during which the alleged conversations
actually took place. Furthermore, the accuracy of the assigned dates and
times were limited to software settings and the accuracy of the clock of the
computer which had assigned those dates and times.

382.6 The audio data for the recording underlying Exhibit R-113 could be
altered without detection. In addition, the Claimant’s experts had the
following comment:

“These alterations include, but are not limited to, removing portions of
the audio recording while maintaining the duration of the file by
muting select portions of one party to the other”.

382.7 The audio data for the recording underlying Exhibit R-113 contained

numerous portions of audio samples having zero amplitude, referred to as
digital “Os”. According to the Claimant’s experts, the presence and

131

significance of digital “Os” could be explained in the following way
(paragraph 2(c) of Bek Tek LLC’s report of 21 September 2009):

“To save storage space, these systems often do not record low-
amplitude audio information during the original recording process.
Then when the original recordings are exported as converted audio
files, the system adds digital “Os” to the unrecorded portions, which
are within and between segments of speech or other audio information.
These unrecorded portions in the converted audio copies can then be
used not only for easy editing, as noted above, but these dropout
areas can also be shortened or lengthened to cover up various editing
processes. For example, if four seconds of speech were removed
during an editing process, then digital “Os” could be added to a
number of locations within the file to make up for the four second loss”.

(emphasis added)

The Claimant’s experts therefore made the following comment (in
paragraph 17(a) of the Joint Report of Audio Experts):

“As demonstrated in the BEK TEK LLC report dated September 21,
2009, audio information can be removed through a muting process,
which would leave absolutely no artifacts and would be
indistinguishable from any of the digital “0” portions introduced by
the recording process. Other forms of alterations to the audio
information can be performed in a similar manner”.

382.8 Taken in their totality, 56.30 per cent of the audio samples contained in
the recording underlying Exhibit R-113 were digital “0s”.

383. The Tribunal makes the following findings in relation to the audio recordings
underlying Exhibits R-113 and R-771.

383.1 Neither of the Parties’ experts was able to confirm that the audio
recordings in question were authentic, since the original recordings or “bit-
for-bit” clones of the original recordings were not available for forensic
examination. In that regard, the Respondent’s experts were able to say no
more than that the audio recordings in question were “highly likely... [to
be] unaltered recordings of contemporaneous events”.

383.2 The method of forensic analysis adopted by the Respondent’s experts
was highly dependent on an examination of the file metadata and a
comparison between the file metadata and external records (e.g. telephone
records). This is significant because file metadata can be altered without
detection (both Parties’ experts agree that this is the case). The Tribunal
accepts the evidence of the Claimant’s experts that the file metadata could
be altered without detection to change the telephone number and the date
and time of the telephone call. Accordingly, the Tribunal considers that it
is unsafe to rely on the metadata associated with the audio files as
evidence of the authenticity of the recordings. To the extent that the

 

132

Respondent’s experts relied on such analysis to reach their conclusions,
such findings are discounted by the Tribunal.

383.3 Importantly, both Parties’ experts agreed that the audio data itself for
the recordings in question could be altered without detection.

383.4 Although the Tribunal considers that the combination of factors set
out above provides a sufficient basis for it to arrive at a conclusion as to
the non-admissibility of Exhibits R-113 and R-771, a further reason for the
rejection of Exhibit R-113 is that 56.30 per cent of the audio samples
contained in the recording underlying Exhibit R-113 were digital “Os” (that
recording was thus susceptible to alteration and modification). The
Tribunal considers that (in the absence of an examination of the original
underlying recording, which both Parties accepted no longer exists) this
significantly reduces the probability that the recording underlying Exhibit
R-113 was authentic.

   
 

384. Given the prejudicial nature of the contents of Exhibits R-113 and R-771, and in

38:

381

38)

5.

a

~

the light of the factors set out above, the Tribunal concludes that it would be
unsafe to admit those exhibits as evidence in these proceedings. Exhibits R-113
and R-771 are accordingly not admitted.

G. Requirements for a valid transfer of ownership under Turkish law

At the heart of this dispute is the issue of whether Libananco acquired
ownership of the share certificates in question before 12 June 2003. The issues
are therefore whether the following acts alleged by the Claimant were effective
(under Turkish law) to transfer ownership of the shares in question from
members of the Uzan family (specifically, Kemal Uzan, Hakan Uzan and
Aysegiil Uzan) to Libananco:

(a) Hakan Uzan’s telephone call to Mr Tiirkkan in April 2003, informing
the latter of (among other things) the transfer of ownership of the share
certificates located in Switzerland to Libananco;

(b) the inspection and/or acceptance of delivery of the share certificates
located in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings by Mr Ciggin on 15 May
2003; and

(c) the inspection and/or acceptance of delivery of the share certificates
located in ikitelli by Hakan Uzan on 15 May 2003.

Accordingly, the Tribunal will now examine the law in relation to transfer of
bearer share certificates to determine whether any or all of the acts alleged were
sufficient to transfer ownership of the share certificates to Libananco.

It is undisputed that the ownership of bearer share certificates under Turkish law
is collectively governed by the Turkish Commercial Code and the Civil Code.
The Parties’ position on the various requirements for a valid transfer of
ownership of the bearer shares (i.e. the share certificates) was as follows.

133

387.1 Agreement to transfer ownership: It was agreed that the parties to the
agreement must understand and agree that the purpose of the transfer of
possession is to transfer ownership from the transferor to the transferee.
However, the Respondent submitted that the Claimant had no written
proof that this requirement has been satisfied. The Claimant submitted that
this requirement had been fulfilled through the conclusion of the 32 STAs
which were presented to the Tribunal.

387.2 Right of the transferor: The Parties were agreed that the transferor
must have the right to dispose of the share certificates being transferred, i.
the right to transfer ownership. The Respondent alleged that this
requirement was not fulfilled because the Claimant had not shown that the
purported transferors of the shares to Libananco owned shares
corresponding to the quantity he or she allegedly transferred to Libananco.
The Claimant’s response was that: (i) the Respondent’s allegations were
wrongly based on CEAS and Kepez dividend payouts because of the
Respondent’s erroneous assumption that, within the Uzan family, such
dividends were received in proportion to each individual’s shareholding;
and (ii) there were, in any event, intra-family agreements discovered on
Mr Tiirkkan’s floppy disks (as deleted faxes) which showed how each
transferor obtained many of the shares in CEAS and Kepez that he or she
eventually transferred to Libananco.

 

387.3 Teslim
Parties were agreed that there must be transfer of possession before the
rights associated with ownership of the share certificates will accrue to the
transferee of such shares. The respective positions of the Parties on this

issue are set out in paragraphs 390 to 394 below.

 
 

   

387.4 Cause: The Respondent submitted that the Claimant is also required to
establish that there was a valid legal cause for the transfer, i.e. causa. The
Claimant did not accept that causa is a requirement for a valid transfer of
ownership under Turkish law. However, the Claimant submitted that, even
if such a requirement exists, it had been fulfilled on the facts since Cem
Uzan’s evidence (as appears from both his Witness Statements) is that the
purpose of the transfers of shares to Libananco was to provide it with a
viable asset base.

387.5 Documentation in writing: The Respondent further submitted, among
other things, that to establish its ownership, the Claimant would have to
show that the alleged deliveries of CEAS and Kepez share certificates to
Libananco in April and May 2003 respectively were proved by a written
instrument (since, under Turkish law, legal transactions with values
exceeding 40 million liras have to be proved by a written instrument). The
Claimant’s position was, among other things, that the Respondent’s
contention is incorrect, and that the Claimant’s possession of the share
certificates themselves is sufficient proof of both delivery and ownership.

134

388.

389.

390.

391.

392.

393.

The Respondent submitted that, under Turkish law, all the above requirements
had to be met in order to effect a valid transfer of ownership.

Although the Parties disagreed as to whether each of the above elements had
been fulfilled (or, in the case of causa and documentation in writing, needed to
be fulfilled in the first place), the central battleground in the present case was the
issue of transfer of possession or fes/im. In that regard, the Claimant did not
dispute that it would have failed to establish that the shares were validly
transferred to Libananco if this requirement was not met.

1. The Claimant’s position on teslim
Article 977 of the Turkish Civil Code states as follows:

“Possession must be transferred by delivery of the thing; or delivery of
the means of control over the thing to the transferee; or when the
transferee gains the right of control over the thing with the previous
owner's consent”.

Article 570 of the Turkish Commercial Code states as follows:

“All commercial paper will be accepted as bearer shares as long as it
is clear from the text or format of the paper that the possessor is the
one who is entitled to the rights relating to the share”.

The Claimant acknowledges that, only after delivery of the bearer share
certificates to the transferee, can the transferee claim rights vis-d-vis the
company or a third party. In this regard, it cites Article 415 of the Turkish
Commercial Code: “Transfer of bearer shares to the holder can have effects vis-
a-vis the company and third parties only after their delivery”. It further agrees
that the transferee lacks actual ownership (including the right to defend against
third parties who might claim ownership of the share certificates) until such time
as delivery occurs.

The Claimant’s position is that the possession of the share certificates
themselves is sufficient proof of delivery to Libananco and hence also proof of
Libananco’s ownership in respect of those share certificates. According to the
Claimant, this is because the question of whether delivery had been
accomplished under Turkish law is a question that was bifurcated to the merits
phase of this arbitration (on the basis that if it were to be unable to prove its
ownership of ail the share certificates it claimed to own, this would simply
reduce the amount of damages it would be entitled to recover). The Claimant
therefore submitted that the fact of Libananco’s possession of a substantial
number of bona fide share certificates (acquired before 12 June 2003) was
sufficient to demonstrate ownership for the purpose of establishing the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction — regardless of how they were acquired, including
whether there was a valid transfer of po: ion or tes/im under Turkish law. Its
position on this point is set out more fully in paragraphs 146 above.

 

 

135

394,

395.

396.

397.

2. The Respondent’s position on teslim

The Respondent’s position was follows.

394.1 Article 415 of the Turkish Commercial Code (which the Claimant
agreed was applicable) provides: “Transfer of bearer share certificates is
enforceable vis-a-vis the company and the third parties only upon delivery
thereof”.

 

394.2 Bearer share certificates are a type of negotiable instrument and are
therefore also subject to Article 599/I of the Turkish Commercial Code:
“For the transfer of a negotiable instrument for the purpose of creating
ownership or another real right, transfer of possession of the instrument is
compulsory in any event”.

394.3 A bearer share certificate is movable property and Article 763/I of the
Turkish Civil Code provides as follows: “Transfer of possession is
required for transfer of ownership of movables”.

394.4 In accordance with these provisions, the Claimant must prove that the
share certificates were delivered and that there was a transfer of possession.

394.5 Article 973/I of the Turkish Civil Code defines possession as follows:
“A person who has physical control over something is the possessor
thereof”. Accordingly, delivery or teslim may only be accomplished by
handing property from the transferor to the transferee physically.

3. The Tribunal’s analysis on the requirement of teslim

Article 763 of the Turkish Civil Code states provides as follows: “Transfer of
possession is required for transfer of ownership of movables”.

Articles 973/I of the Turkish Civil Code defines a possessor as the person who
has physical control over the property in question (see paragraph 394.5 above).
Article 977 of the Turkish Civil Code further state as follows:

“Possession will have been transferred upon delivery to the acquirer of
the property or the instruments that will confer control over the
property or when the acquirer becomes capable of exercising control
over the property with the consent of the former possessor”.

The Respondent cited a Turkish treatise, Poroy, Tekinalp and Camoglue, Law of
Companies and Cooperatives (Ninth Edition) (Exhibit H-448), which states as
follows:

“1113. For the purposes of transfer, possession must be passed with
the intention of transferring ownership. BSC is bearer negotiable
instrument in the real sense. “Transfer [...] is enforceable vis-a-vis the
company and third parties only upon delivery thereof” (Turkish
Commercial Code Art. 415). That is to say, for passing ownership,

136

possession of the certificate must be transferred with such intention.
We can set out the necessary conditions as follows: 1) Possession must
be transferred from the transferor to the transferee: For this, it is not
compulsory to become an immediate possessor, but acquisition
through an agent, constitutum possesorium, assignment of right to
possession and delivery by short hand is also possible; 2) Transfer of
possession must be made with the purpose of passing ‘ownership’ to
the transferor [sic] and the parties must have agreed thereon.
Although such agreement is not mentioned in Article 763 of Turkish
Civil Code, in the civil law doctrine, it is stated that the agreement is
essentially inherent in the transfer of possession. (Oguzman/Selici,
Esya Hukuku (Law of Properties, p. 645 and those cited therein). This
is because, unless a person acquires something with the intention of
becoming the owner thereof, he does not become the owner.
Moreover, Turkish Commercial Code expressly provides for this factor.
In Article 599/1 of [the] Turkish Commercial Code, it is stated as
“transfer of a negotiable instrument for the purpose of creating
ownership...” 3) The person passing the possession must be
authorized to transfer the ownership. This is the rule. In principle,
those lacking such authority cannot transfer ownership to others

 

 

 

 

(emphasis added)
398. Based on the above authorities, the Tribunal arrives at the following conclusions.

398.1 A transfer of possession is required for the transfer of ownership of the
bearer share certificates. Until such time as a transfer of possession occurs,
the purported transferee is not the owner of the property in question, and
consequently would not be entitled to claim against third parties in respect
of the property.

398.2 Since a transfer of possession is required for the transfer of ownership
of property, the bare fact of possession (without more) is insufficient to
establish ownership over the property in question.

 

398.3 Physical control is the crux of possession.

398.4 It follows that the person purporting to transfer ownership needs to
have physical control over the property in question in the first place. If the
transferor does not have physical control over the property at the purported
time of transfer, there cannot logically be a transfer of possession.

 

398.5 However, it is not necessary for either the transferor and/or the
transferee to be immediate possessors of the property sought to be
transferred. Each of the following is deemed to constitute a legal transfer
of possession:

 
  

(a) transfer of possession through an agent (i.e. where the agent
transfers or acquires possession on behalf of the transferor or
transferee, as the case may be);

137

399.

400.

(b) an assignment of the right to possession (i.e. in a situation where
immediate possession is exercised by a third party, the transferor,
as the indirect holder of the property, assigns his claim for return
or surrender of the property to the transferee; alternatively, the
transferor directs the third party to exercise possession for the
benefit of the transferee; the transferee thereby becoming the new
indirect holder of the property, even though immediate possession
has not changed);

 

 

 

(

S

constitutum possessorium (i.e. where the delivery of the property
proceeds on the b: that the transferor and transferee agree that
the transferor will continue to hold the property for and on behalf
of the transferee); and

 

(d) delivery by short hand (i.e. delivery by consent between the
transferor and transferee in the case where the transferee has prior
possession of the property).

398.6 In respect of the means of transfer of possession set out in paragraphs
398.5 (a) and (b) above, the Tribunal observes that, under Turkish law,
indirect possession (i.e. through an agent or third party) and therefore a
transfer of indirect possession would be recognised as valid. In other
words, it is possible for possession to change by a direction of the owner to
his agent or a third party (i.e. the immediate possessor of the property) to
exercise immediate possession of the property for the benefit of the
transferee (or the transferee’s agent).

 

  

398.7 However, in all cases, possession must be passed with the intention of
transferring ownership in order to effect a valid transfer of possession or
teslim.

398.8 For the reasons given above, the Tribunal rejects the Claimant’s
submission that the mere fact of physical possession of the bearer share
certificates (at the material time) was sufficient to demonstrate its
ownership. The burden is on the Claimant to prove that there was a
transfer of possession to Libananco before 12 June 2003 of the share
certificates it now claims to own.

   

   

In sum, the Claimant has to prove both when and how it came to acquire
posses ion and hence ownership of the CEAS and Kepez share certificates in
question. Contrary to the Claimant’s submission, this is properly an issue to be
addressed in the current phase (i.e. the jurisdictional phase) of this arbitration.

 

H. The Tribunal’s analysis on whether Libananco acquired timely
ownership of the shares in CEAS and Kepez

Having carefully considered all the relevant factual and expert evidence, the
Tribunal now delivers its findings in relation to the various issues relevant to the

138

401.

402.

403.

404.

405.

406.

question of whether Libananco acquired timely (i.e. before 12 June 2003)
ownership of shares in CEAS and Kepez.

1. The reasons given by Cem Uzan and Hakan Uzan for their
choice of Mr Tiirkkan to acquire Libananco

Cem Uzan explained at length the reasons for the creation of Libananco —
amongst other things, this was to consider his Immediate Family’s future
investment strategy in relation to concerns about the Turkish economy as well as
the possibility of political reprisal as a result of his decision to enter Turkish
politics in early 2002 with the intention of challenging the ruling party. Mr
Tiirkkan was chosen to set up Libananco because he was “a sophisticated,
multi-lingual businessman” and “a trusted business associate”.

Hakan Uzan added that Mr Tiirkkan was a trusted senior executive who had
personally worked for him for some five years prior to his acquisition of
Libananco.

On the Claimant’s case, Mr Tiirkkan played a central role in matters relating to
the acquisition of Libananco and its acquisition of interests in CEAS and Kepez.

However, the picture of Mr Tiirkkan that emerged was quite different. The
Respondent produced an e-mail message from Mr Tiirkkan’s supervisor, who
referred to him in less than flattering terms and recommended that his salary be
halved. Although the Claimant’s witnesses Cem Uzan and Hakan Uzan spoke
highly of Mr Tiirkkan in their Witness Statements, they were unable to rebut the
fact that Mr Tiirkkan’s salary was cut by half following a recommendation to
that effect from his supervisor.

Having observed Mr Tiirkkan in person, the Tribunal did not find him to be the
worldly, sophisticated business person that the Claimant’s witnesses Cem Uzan
and Hakan Uzan had represented him to be. For example, when the Tribunal
asked Mr Tiirkkan how he came to choose, on an internet directory, Mr
Partellas’ firm over other listed firms, his reason was that this was because Mr
Partellas’ firm was on the top of the list. The Tribunal also observes here that
Mr Tiirkkan changed his evidence; he deposed in his First Witness Statement
that he located Mr Partellas through his website. However, Mr Partellas did not
have a website until late in 2002. Mr Tiirkkan then changed his evidence to say
that he found Mr Partellas on an internet directory.

The evidence relating to Mr Tiirkkan’s experience, qualifications and abilities
(as well as his demeanour and evidence at the hearing) did not support Cem
Uzan’s and Hakan Uzan’s choice of him as a person capable of the duties
expected of someone entrusted with the establishment and management of a new
offshore company and the acquisition and transfer of investments of several
billion dollars. This casts some doubt on the plausibility of the Claimant’s
account of how Libananco was acquired or otherwise established and
subsequently came to acquire shares in CEAS and Kepez.

 

139

407.

408.

409.

410.

411.

2. Mr Tiirkkan’s alleged visit to Cyprus in early April 2002 to
undertake work in connection with Libananco

Mr Partellas testified that he first met Mr Tiirkkan sometime around | April
2002 in the lobby of the Cyprus Hilton in Nicosia. This meeting is significant as
it is central to Mr Tiirkkan’s alleged acquisition of Libananco in April 2002.
One of the pillars on which the foundation of the Claimant’s case rests is that
Libananco was acquired by Mr Tiirkkan by way of an Instrument of Transfer
dated 1 April 2002.

The Tribunal now turns to consider the issue of whether this alleged meeting in
fact took place.

By way of background, the Tribunal notes that it has been alleged by the
Claimant that Mr Tiirkkan’s passport for the relevant period was in the
possession of the Turkish authorities. However, this is denied by the Respondent.
In any event, the Tribunal did not have the benefit of Mr Tiirkkan’s passport as
evidence before it on this important issue. Accordingly, the Tribunal must base
its decision on all the other evidence available on the record.

The natural starting point is Mr Tiirkkan’s First Witness Statement where he
deposed that he first flew to Cyprus in early April 2002 “on a non-stop Royal
Jordanian flight from Amman and stayed two nights at the Nicosia Hilton”.

a) The Parties’ submissions

The Parties relied on numerous documents in relation to this issue. These are set
out and described below, together with the Tribunal’s and/or the Parties’
observations (where applicable) on each of them.

411.1 The Respondent submitted a letter from one Mr Stephen Humphreys,
Vice President and Senior Counsel of the Legal Department of Hilton
International Co. dated 2 September 2009 (Exhibit H-121). That letter
stated as follows:

“a person known as Ali Tiirkkan stayed at the [Hilton Nicosia
Archbishop Makarios III Avenue Nicosia 1516 Cyprus “Hilton
Nicosia”] on the following dates (all inclusive) 9" November 2005 to
11" November 2005; 25" November 2005 to 26" November 2005; and
29" March 2006 to I* April 2006. ... However, we have no record of
any person known as Ali Tiirkkan having stayed at the Hotel in April
2002”.

At the hearing in November 2009, the Claimant challenged this letter on
the basis that it did not specifically state that Mr Tiirkkan did not stay at
the Hilton Nicosia in April 2002. On 10 March 2010, the Respondent’s
Turkish counsel Mr Aydin Cosar wrote to Mr Humphreys to request
confirmation that the Hilton Nicosia possessed records of guests who
stayed at that hotel in April 2002, and that these did not include any record
of Mr Tiirkkan having stayed at the Hilton Nicosia in April 2002 (Exhibit

 

 

140

R-1015). On 16 March 2010, Mr Humphreys replied to Mr Cosar
confirming that his understanding was correct (Exhibit R-1016).

411.2 The Claimant submitted a letter (printed on Royal Jordanian letterhead)
from Mr Moh’d Hashem Murtada (whose designation was the Head of
Airport Services Department) dated 1 October 2009 (Exhibit C-242). That
letter purported to confirm that Mr Tiirkkan was a passenger on board a
Royal Jordanian flight from Amman, Jordan to Larnaca, Cyprus on | April
2002:

“We have consulted our records and can confirm that Mr Tiirkkan was
a passenger on a RJ flight from Amman to Larnaca Cyprus on I April
2002 and took a return flight back to Amman on 3 April 2002. For
security reasons, we cannot share with you the internal records
confirming this information”.

411.3. The Claimant submitted another letter (also printed on Royal Jordanian
letterhead) dated 22 October 2009 from the same Mr Murtada (Exhibit C-
269). Attached to that letter was a report which listed the travel records of
Mr Tiirkkan from 2002 to 2004. Those entries purported to show, among
other things, that he left Jordan for the Republic of Cyprus on 1 April 2002
at 9.10 a.m., and returned to Jordan on 3 April 2002 at 11.17 p.m.

411.4 The Respondent submitted a letter dated 4 November 2009 from Mr
Hani Kurdi, Legal Advisor at Royal Jordanian (Exhibit R-910). This letter
referred to Exhibits C-242 and C-269 above (see paragraphs 411.2 and
411.3 above). Mr Kurdi stated in his letter that: (i) both those documents
were neither issued nor authorised by Royal Jordanian; and (ii) contrary to
what was stated in Exhibit C-242, Royal Jordanian did not operate a flight
on | April 2002 to Larnaca, Cyprus. However, Mr Kurdi wrote again on
11 November 2009 to clarify that there was indeed a “Flight to Larnaca
via Beirut (RJ flight number 401) as a special (non-regular) flight” on 1
April 2002, and further that Exhibit R-910 (i.e. his earlier letter) should be
“disregarded” as the information there was based primarily on Royal
Jordanian’s table of scheduled operations, which did not show special (i.e.
unscheduled) flights (Exhibit C-271). Attachment 2 to this letter indicated
that Royal Jordanian Flight 401 departed Amman, Jordan at “/755”.

411.5 Following from Exhibit C-271 (which stated that the Royal Jordanian
flight on 1 April 2002 from Amman to Larnaca was via Beirut), the
Respondent requested information from the Rafic Hariri International
Airport (“Beirut Airport”) through a Lebanese judge on 11 March 2010
(Exhibit R-1017). On 16 March 2010, Mr Daniel El Haibi, the President of
the Beirut Airport replied as follows (Exhibit R-1018):

“We certify that the named Ali Cenk Tiirkkan or whatever similar
name does not appear in the list of passengers who were on board
flight 401 of the Royal Jordanian Airline from Amman to Beirut on the
1” of April 2002 which landed in the [Beirut Airport] at 18:50 GMT”.

141

412.

413.

414.

411.6 In October 2009, the Respondent submitted what purported to be
immigration records of Mr Tiirkkan’s various visits to Cyprus (Exhibit R-
893). This letter was signed off: “ANDREAS LEONIDOU...
LIEUTENANT”. The earliest entry indicated that Mr Tiirkkan visited
Cyprus from 11 November 2004 to 17 November 2004. The Claimant
submitted a letter dated 31 October 2009 written by the same Mr Leonidou
(whose designation appeared as the Inspector at the Aliens & Immigration
Office of the Republic of Cyprus) stating that Exhibit R-893 (i.e. the
earlier document signed by him): “/did] not constitute an official document
of the Republic of Cyprus. ... The entries into computers which relate to
arrivals and departures of aliens in the Republic are of a confidential
nature” (Exhibit C-270).

411.7 The Claimant submitted a letter dated 11 November 2009 from one Mr
Mohammad Qutashat, Director, Queen Ali Airport Border Control, Airport
Police Management Office, Jordan which purported to confirm that one
“Ali Cenk Tiirkkan ... Turkish Nationality ... passport number 991491”
departed from Queen Ali Airport (“Amman Airport”) on | April 2002 for
Larnaca, Cyprus and returned to Amman Airport from Larnaca on 3 April
2002 (Exhibit C-272). According to Mr Qutashat’s letter, Mr Tiirkkan
“departed through us [i.e. Queen Ali Airport Border Control] on April 1"
2002 to Larnaca at 19:35:20 and on April 3" 2002 arrived from Larnaca
at 9:28:41”.

411.8 In the R.PHM, the Respondent submitted that the evidence in Exhibit
C-269 contradicted that in Exhibit C-271. Specifically, Exhibit C-269
stated that Mr Tiirkkan left Amman on 1 April 2002 at 9.10 a.m., but
Exhibit C-271 purported to show that Mr Tiirkkan’s departure from
Amman took place at 5.55 p.m. The Claimant’s response was that this
could have been a transcription mistake.

b) The Tribunal’s analysis

Based on the evidence considered at paragraphs 411.1 to 411.8 above, the
Tribunal finds that it has not been rebutted by either Party that Royal Jordanian
in fact operated a special (i.e. non-regular) flight from Amman to Larnaca via
Beirut on 1 April 2002 (“RJ Flight 401”).

The Tribunal considers that a significant portion of the documentary evidence
set out in paragraphs 411.1 to 411.8 above is conflicting. The Tribunal is thus
unable to make any finding, based solely on the documentary evidence above, as
to whether Mr Tiirkkan was on board RJ Flight 401 on 1 April 2002.

However, the Tribunal considers that the evidence set out below has probative
value in relation to the issue of whether Mr Tiirkkan travelled to Cyprus on 1
April 2002 to undertake work in connection with Libananco. These are as
follows. Where applicable, the Tribunal’s findings are also recorded below.

414.1 Exhibit H-9 purported to show that a meeting of Libananco’s Board of
Directors took place in Nicosia on 1 April 2002. Mr Tiirkkan, Mr Partellas

142

and Mr Sarris were all recorded as being present. Although Mr Tiirkkan
deposed in his First Witness Statement that he participated in this meeting
by telephone, he gave evidence to the contrary when he was cross-
examined. He testified that there was in fact no actual meeting (whether by
telephone or otherwise) and that it was a “paper meeting”. This about turn
in Mr Tiirkkan’s evidence was corroborated by Mr Partellas’ testimony
that no such meeting actually took place on a 1 April 2002. Mr Sarris
likewise confirmed that his employees did not attend any such meeting.
Whilst not offering any determinative conclusion, this contradiction of Mr
Tiirkkan’s evidence by himself and two of the Claimant’s other witnesses
brings into question the reliability of his evidence that he was in fact in
Cyprus on 1 April 2002.

414.2 Mr Tiirkkan testified that he stayed at the Hilton Nicosia on 1 April
and 2 April 2002. When he was shown correspondence from Hilton
International which stated that it had no record of a person known as “Ali
Tiirkkan” staying at the Hilton Nicosia on those dates, his response was:
“I’m not Ali Tiirkkan, I’m Ali Cenk Tiirkkan”. The Tribunal did not
find this explanation pi ive and is thus unable to accept Mr Tiirkkan’s
testimony that he stayed at the Hilton Nicosia in April 2002.

  
 

414.3. Only two of the Claimant’s witnesses were able to testify that Mr
Tiirkkan was in Cyprus on | April 2002. These were Mr Tiirkkan himself
and Mr Partellas.

414.4 Mr Tiirkkan deposed in his First Witness Statement that he flew on a
Royal Jordanian flight “non-stop” from Amman, Jordan to Cyprus on 1
April 2002. However, the evidence before the Tribunal is that Royal
Jordanian operated only one flight from Amman to Cyprus on | April
2002, and that flight had a stopover in Beirut, Lebanon. When confronted
with this fact, Mr Tiirkkan testified that it was a “non-stop” flight because
he “didn’t get out from the plane” when it landed in Beirut. The Tribunal
does not find this explanation persuasive and is likewise unable to accept
Mr Tiirkkan’s evidence on this point. The Tribunal further observes that
the President of the Beirut Airport authority did not find Mr Tiirkkan’s
name on the list of passengers on board RJ Flight 401, which flew from
Amman to Beirut on | April 2002 (see paragraph 411.5 above).

 

415. For the reasons given in paragraph 414 above, the Tribunal has doubts as to
whether Mr Tiirkkan travelled to Cyprus on | April 2002 to undertake work in
connection with Libananco (and its alleged acquisition of the shares in question).
On the other hand, certain aspects of the evidence presented by the Claimant
indicate that Mr Tiirkkan travelled to Cyprus in April 2002. Therefore, the
Tribunal will determine this issue based on a consideration of the other evidence
on the record.

143

3. The other circumstances surrounding Mr Tiirkkan’s alleged
purchase of Libananco in April 2002

416. The other aspects of Mr Tiirkkan’s involvement in the purchase of Libananco in
April 2002 are naturally also key pillars of the Claimant’s case. In that regard,
the Tribunal found the following pieces of evidence probative. Where applicable,
the Tribunal’s observations are also set out below.

416.1 Mr Tiirkkan deposed in his First Witness Statement that he was able to
locate Mr Partellas’ firm through its website in March 2002. However,
when he was cross-examined, Mr Tiirkkan changed his evidence to say it
was not actually Mr Partellas’ firm’s website that he found, but rather a
website containing a directory or list of accountants and law firms in
Cyprus. He explained that he chose Mr Partellas’ firm because its name or
Mr Partellas’ name was at the top of that list. The Tribunal cannot accept
the account given by Mr Tiirkkan of how Mr Partellas’ firm came to be
selected.

416.2. Mr Tiirkkan said that Mr Partellas’ firm provided their services to him
on credit and on trust before Mr Partellas received payment from him
(after some three years) at the end of 2005. This seems unlikely, given that:
(i) accountants normally ask for a payment on account from new clients
before undertaking work on their behalf; (ii) Mr Tiirkkan himself said that
he had not met Mr Partellas prior to 1 April 2002; and (iii) Mr Partellas
also needed to involve a third party in the establishment of Libananco, i.e.
Mr Sarris. For these reasons, the Tribunal does not accept Mr Tiirkkan’s
testimony here.

416.3. Mr Sarris was unable, to produce the invoice or receipt relating to Mr
Tiirkkan’s alleged purchase of Libananco from Prontoservus (a company
associated with Mr Sarris’ law firm) in April 2002. Mr Sarris first testified
that there would have been an invoice, but upon further cross-examination,
he testified that there might not have been one because Mr Partellas had a
current account with his office. Mr Sarris ultimately said that he did not
produce the records evidencing the sale of Libananco because no one had
asked him to do so. He explained that he did not know the subject matter
of the present proceedings. Considering that Mr Sarris is a trained and
experienced attorney, the Tribunal does not find this explanation
satisfactory.

417. For the reasons given at paragraph 416 above, the Tribunal has doubts as to
whether Mr Tiirkkan in fact purchased Libananco in April 2002 and will return
to a conclusion on this issue based on a consideration of the other evidence on
the record.

144

418.

419.

420.

421.

422.

423.

a

424.

425.

426.

4. The alleged trust arrangement in respect of Libananco

The Claimant alleged that, although Libananco was acquired by Mr Tiirkkan on
behalf of the Uzan family in April 2002, it was beneficially owned by Cem
Uzan and his Immediate Family.

Hakan Uzan specifically confirmed that he had asked Mr Tiirkkan to set up
Libananco and to hold the company on trust for members of his family.
However, he admitted that there were no documents to record or otherwise
evidence the alleged trust arrangement.

Whilst giving oral testimony, Hakan Uzan also wavered when asked to list the
alleged beneficial owners of Libananco pursuant to this trust arrangement. He
did not give any concrete answer when asked whether Libananco was held on
trust for just him and his brother Cem Uzan, or also for Kemal Uzan and
Aysegiil Uzan. Instead, he clouded the issue by saying that there was no clear
answer to that question because of the “family divorce” in the background.

Hakan Uzan also said that the terms of the alleged trust arrangement were never
communicated to Mr Tiirkkan, so it was impossible for Mr Tiirkkan to know
who the beneficiaries of the alleged trust were. He even went so far as to admit
that it would be impossible to prove the existence of the trust if Mr Tiirkkan
were to meet with an unfortunate accident. His evidence was corroborated by
Mr Tiirkkan, who said that he was not told about the terms of the alleged trust.

The Tribunal was not persuaded by the evidence that there was a trust
arrangement in respect of Libananco in favour of Cem Uzan and his Immediate
Family, and subsequently in favour of Cem Uzan alone after the alleged “family
divorce” took place. In any event, the Tribunal does not consider that the
evidence presented by the Claimant to support the “family divorce” to be
persuasive for the reasons set out in paragraphs 460 to 465 below.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant has failed to prove the
existence of any trust in respect of Libananco.

5. Instrument of Transfer dated 1 April 2002

The burden of proof is on the Claimant to show that this document was created
and/or executed on 1 April 2002.

This aspect of the Claimant’s case was similarly riddled with inconsistencies,
and the Claimant’s witnesses gave conflicting evidence on this point.

First, even though Mr Tiirkkan claimed he was in Cyprus on 1 April 2002, he
said that he did not sign the Instrument of Transfer on that day. He swung from
saying (on the one hand) that the document was not ready for him to sign, to
suggesting (on the other hand) that the document was ready to sign but he did
not sign it then because he wanted to “preserve” the original document. Mr
Partellas agreed that the Instrument of Transfer was in fact not signed on 1 April
2002, but he was unable to give any convincing reason for this.

145

427.

428.

429.

430.

431.

432.

433.

Mr Tiirkkan himself admitted that the Instrument of Transfer produced in this
arbitration was reprinted and signed by him in 2007. However, he was unable to
give any explanation as to the provenance of the reprinted Instrument of
Transfer, which he said contained the signature of Mr Sarris and of the witness
for his (i.e. Mr Sarris’) signature.

Mr Sarris’ evidence is also relevant here, since his company (or a company
associated with his law firm) Prontoservus, which provided corporate secretarial
services, is alleged to have transferred all of the shares in Libananco to Mr
Tiirkkan. Although Mr Sarris deposed in his Witness Statement that he
personally signed the Instrument of Transfer on behalf of Prontoservus on 1
April 2002, he subsequently changed his evidence, and said (in direct
examination) that he did not in fact sign that document. Rather, it was signed by
his employee, Mr Starvos Ktorides. When questioned on this, he expressed
surprise at his own Witness Statement.

  

In any case, his evidence that the Instrument of Transfer was signed on 1 April
2002 has little or no weight since (by his own admission) Mr Sarris testified that
he had no independent recollection that the Instrument of Transfer was signed
on that date other than by looking at the date printed on the document itself. He
testified that he presumed the document was signed on that date.

 

Libananco was allegedly sold to Mr Tiirkkan through Mr Partellas’ firm, but Mr
Sarris did not produce an invoice written out to Mr Partellas’ firm or to any
other entity. He said that he did not produce this invoice because no one asked
him to look for it. His explanation was that he did not know anything about this
arbitration other than that he had to give evidence.

The Tribunal finds Mr Sarris’ evidence as presented unreliable. At the hearing,
he disavowed the gist of his Witness Statement, which was that he personally
signed the Instrument of Transfer on 1 April 2002. He could not explain why he
signed a Witness Statement that was inaccurate in several material aspects.

There is therefore no proof that the Instrument of Transfer (or any version of it)
was in fact signed in April 2002, and, indeed, that it was signed at any time
before 2007.

6. The failure of the Claimant and its witnesses to comply with
the necessary legal requirements under Cypriot law in connection
with the transfer and operation of Libananco

It is relevant to observe at this juncture that Cem Uzan deposed that there was
no public disclosure (to the Turkish or Cypriot authorities) of Libananco’s
acquisition of interests in CEAS and Kepez until 2005. He said that this was
done to maintain confidentiality, and that Mr Tiirkkan was so instructed. In that
regard, the Tribunal observes, for the reasons given below, that notifications,
filings and other legal procedures required under Cypriot law (in relation to the
transfer and operation of a company in Cyprus) were not complied with by the
Claimant and/or its witnesses.

146

434. First, Mr Partellas confirmed that Libananco’s accounts had to be filed annually,

435.

436.

within a year from the end of the previous financial year. According to him,
Libananco’s accounts for 2002, 2003 and 2004 were only filed in 2007.

434.1 He agreed that the accounts should have been filed earlier, but did not
give any convincing explanation why this was not done. The best evidence
he could give was that the filings were “probably” delayed because of his
instructions from Mr Tiirkkan to do so. He also said it was common
practice in Cyprus to delay such filings. Having regard to its overall
impression of Mr Partellas’ evidence, the Tribunal did not find this to be a
satisfactory explanation.

434.2 It is also uncertain whether audited accounts were prepared
contemporaneously for the years 2002, 2003 and 2004 when there was no
intention to file them promptly. As stated in paragraph 254.3 above, Mr
Partellas rendered no bills from 2002 to 2005, so no contemporaneous
documentary evidence exists of such work having been done in those years.

Second, on the issue of the legal requirement under Cypriot law for Libananco
to have filed a notification of change of its directors, Mr Sarris agreed that any
change would have to be registered in the Registry of Companies within
fourteen days.

435.1 In Libananco’s case, however, Mr Partellas admitted that this was only
done in 2005. His evidence in this regard was also inconsistent as he
initially denied that there was any time limit for filing that notification.

 

435.2 Mr Sarris said that the notification of change of directors was typically
not delayed in other cases, but he left the responsibility to do so to Mr
Partellas in this case since Libananco was sold through Mr Partellas’ firm.
Considering that Mr Sarris’ own employees would have remained on the
record as directors of Libananco (and would be potentially liable as such)
if this change was had not been registered, the Tribunal does not find Mr
Sarris’ explanation to be credible.

Third, the Respondent submitted that, in 2002 (the year in which Libananco was
allegedly acquired by Mr Tiirkkan), it was illegal under the Cypriot Exchange
Control Law (“ECL”) for a non-resident such as Mr Tiirkkan to acquire shares
in a Cypriot company without per ion from the Central Bank; nor could
shares in Libananco have been acquired on behalf of non-resident beneficial
owners, such as the Uzans, without such permission. The Respondent cited
Article 11(1) of the ECL as being the relevant legal provision.

 

436.1 The Respondent asserted that if the Cypriot Central Bank had granted
permission for Mr Tiirkkan to acquire Libananco (on behalf of the Uzan
family), then it would necessarily have done so by issuing a license
converting Libananco from an ordinary Cypriot company (which could
only be owned by residents of Cyprus) into an “international business
company” (“IBC”). However, the distinction between IBCs and domestic

147

companies, together with the attendant licensing requirements, were
eliminated from 2004 onwards by the introduction of legislative
amendments.

436.2 The Respondent submitted that there was no evidence on the record to
show that Mr Tiirkkan applied for permission from the Cyprus Central
Bank pursuant to Article 11(1) of the ECL, or that Libananco was
otherwise licensed as an IBC.

 

436.3 The Claimant’s witness Mr Partellas appeared to suggest that the
necessary licence and/or permission was not necessary since the regulatory
requirements pursuant to the ECL were relaxed prior to Cyprus’ accession
to the European Union. However, in re-direct examination, Mr Partellas
stated that the relaxation of regulatory requirements only began in “/ate
2003”. On that basis, the Tribunal does not accept Mr Partellas’ evidence
that the above permission and/or licenses were not required in connection
with the acquisition of Libananco by Mr Tiirkkan in April 2002.

437. All the significant omissions described above rendered Mr Partellas’ role as the

43

439.

*

So

corporate secretary of Libananco suspect. These discrepancies gave the
impression that work on Libananco began only in 2005 (or later). The Claimant
has not proved that Mr Partellas, or indeed any of the other individuals alleged
to have been involved in the acquisition and running of Libananco (including
Mr Tiirkkan), commenced work for and/or in relation to Libananco in 2002.

7. Was Libananco acquired by Mr Tiirkkan on 1 April 2002?

For all the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal is unable to reconcile the Claimant’s
case with the evidence given by its witnesses. The Claimant was also unable to
produce documents which would normally be expected to exist if its story were
true. As stated at paragraph 115 above, the Claimant bears the burden of proof
on the main issue of whether it acquired timely ownership of the shares in
question. Based on its combined observations and findings at paragraphs 412 to
415, 423, 432 and 437 above, the Tribunal finds the following to be improbable.

(a) That Mr Tiirkkan travelled to Cyprus on 1 April 2002 for the purpose
of undertaking work in connection with Libananco (and its alleged
acquisition of the shares in question).

(b) That Libananco was acquired by Mr Tiirkkan on 1 April 2002 or early
April 2002.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant has failed to prove the
occurrence of the facts it has alleged as stated in paragraphs 438 (a) and (b)
above. For the avoidance of doubt, the Tribunal observes that the Claimant’s
case is only that Libananco was pu ed in April 2002. The Claimant has not
submitted evidence as to the acquisition of Libananco by Mr Tiirkkan (or any
other individual) at any other time, nor does any such argument form part of its
case.

 
  

148

440.

441.

442.

443.

444.

8. Exhibit R-821 and the issue of dividends

According to the Respondent, Exhibit R-821 was a fax sent by Hakan Uzan’s
secretary to him on 14 July 2003 which sets out the family’s ownership interests
in CEAS and Kepez. The Respondent obtained this document as a result of
ongoing SDIF activity following from the imar Bank fraud, pursuant to which
the SDIF legally assumed supervision of Telsim, the Uzans’ mobile phone
company. As a result, the SDIF was able to gain access to Telsim’s computer
servers. Exhibit R-821 was found on those servers.

Exhibit R-821 appeared on its face to be a document that shows a breakdown of
the Uzan family’s shareholding in various companies. Hakan Uzan, in his
Witness Statement, vigorously disputed the authenticity of that document on
various grounds.

Exhibit R-821 appeared to comprise of two e-mail messages.'” The same two
documents were both attached to each of those e-mail messages. The first
attachment was entitled “History.tct”.'° Also attached (although it was not clear
from the hard copy of the tendered exhibit whether this was part of the file
“History.txt”) was an eleven page list in tabular form in English of each of the
Uzans’ shareholdings in various companies.

That tabular list in Exhibit R-821 showed the following:

443.1 Hakan Uzan owned 6.01 per cent of the shares in CEAS and 0.43 per
cent of the shares in Kepez;

443.2 Cem Uzan owned 8.56 per cent of the shares in CEAS and 9.89 per
cent of the shares in Kepez;

443.3. Aysegiil Uzan owned 4.69 per cent of the shares in CEAS and 5.32 per
cent of the shares in Kepez;

443.4 Kemal Uzan owned 47.62 per cent of the shares in CEAS and 42.52
per cent of the shares in Kepez; and

443.5 Yavuz Uzan (Hakan Uzan’s uncle) owned 0.19 per cent of the shares
in CEAS and 2.3 per cent of the shares in Kepez.

These figures were in most cases almost identical to the dividend percentages
that each Uzan family member received in May 2003. This was confirmed by
the Depository Bank Report, which was prepared by the Depository Bank in
response to a request by the General Directorate of Energy Affairs of the

2 The first e-mail message was from a sender named “Fax Server” to what appeared to be “Nilufer
Baser ~[illegible text] Telsim”’. The subject of the first e-mail message was: “A new 1 page fax has
arrived from <unknown>", dated 14 July 2003, 8.50 pm. Three minutes later, that e-mail message

(including both its attachments) was forwarded by the same “Nilufer Baser ~fillegible text] Tels:

 

to Hakan Uzan.
= This was a record of an automatic forward by “[ARSVCI]” upon receipt to “Nilufer_Baser” and
“Yuksel_Yucel”.

149

445.

446.

447.

448.

Ministry to analyse the CEAS and Kepez share certificates in Switzerland and
Vienna as well as those seized by the SDIF. The Depository Bank is a Turkish
institution that provides share certificate settlement and custody services.

Specifically, paragraph 42 of the Depository Bank Report was a table that
showed the members of the Uzan family whom were the recipients of the
dividends paid by CEAS and Kepez to their respective shareholders in May
2003. The table reported the individual shareholding of each member of the
Uzan family in CEAS and Kepez based on the nominal value of their
shareholding (which was in turn calculated by examining the share certificates
that were presented for the collection of dividends) calculated as a percentage of
the total share capital of the company.

The figures which represented the individual shareholding of each member of
the Uzan family in paragraph 42 of the Depository Bank Report (calculated
based on the May 2003 dividend) were identical to the tabular list in Exhibit R-
821.

However, the Claimant submitted that the dividends received by members of the
Uzan family did not bear any relationship to their actual respective
shareholdings in CEAS and Kepez.

447.1 Cem Uzan deposed that the share certificates and the dividend coupons
were separate bearer instruments and that the dividend coupons in respect
of the CEAS and Kepez share certificates had been detached prior to the
transfer of interests to Libananco.

447.2. Hakan Uzan also gave evidence to the effect that actual ownership of

shares in CEAS and Kepez was not in any way related to the dividends
med in 2003. Rather, it wi greed between members of the Uzan
family who would claim the dividends (and in what proportion). In that
regard, Hakan Uzan deposed that, as part of the alleged “family divorce”,
it was agreed that his father Kemal Uzan would receive the largest share of
the dividends of CEAS and Kepez in 2003 as part of the consideration for
relinquishing his interest in certain companies to be owned by Cem Uzan
and Hakan Uzan.

   

There is substantial evidence to the contrary.

448.1 It was not recorded in any of Libananco’s minutes who was supposed
to have received the dividends that would be paid to shareholders of CEAS
and Kepez. This was a significant and telling omission in view of the fact
that Libananco was alleged to have conducted no business other than the
acquisition of interests in CEAS and Kepez. Mr Tiirkkan was unable to
give any explanation for this omission.

448.2 Although Mr Ciggin was asked to draft the template STA which was
allegedly used by Libananco, he was not instructed that the dividend
coupons would be retained by the transferors (i.e. members of the Uzan
family). He agreed that the STAs on their face purported to show that the

 

150

transferee (i.e. Libananco) would receive the shares together with all rights
and benefits, including the right to receive the corresponding dividends.
There was similarly no explanation for this discrepancy.

448.3 Share certificates representing 83 per cent of the total share capital of
Kepez (Series 1 through 6) had no dividend coupons for the 2002 dividend
year. A letter from Kepez to Adabank employee Mr Ulusoy dated 16 May
2003 (Exhibit H-175) stated, among other things, that:

“There are no more dividend coupons for 2002 attached to 1., 2., 3., 4.,
5., and 6. Series share certificates... The main bodies of these
certificates will be stamped as “DIVIDEND FOR 2002 PAID” and the
payment will be made against the receipt enclosed herewith”.

Accordingly, with respect to certificates representing 83 per cent of
Kepez’s total share capital, there was nothing to detach and nothing that
could be exchanged for a dividend payment. To receive a dividend, the
owner of the share certificate would have had to present the certificate
itself for stamping. Even with respect to the limited number of Kepez
share certificates that had coupons for the dividend paid in May 2003 (the
Series 7 certificates), there was evidence that Kepez had a standing policy
that shareholders could not claim dividends by presenting a dividend
coupon alone, but rather were required to present the certificate along with
the coupon. A letter from Kepez to one Mazlum Ercan dated 21 January
2003 (Exhibit H-988) stated that: “Without the share certificates, no
action can be taken with regard to the share certificate dividend coupons
you have sent, and they are hereby returned to you”. According to the
Depository Bank Report, members of the Uzan family collected dividends
from Kepez corresponding to some 63.46 per cent of the total shareholding
in Kepez in total.

448.4 In respect of CEAS, dividends for the 2002 dividend year were paid
out in two instalments: the first on 20 May 2003 and the second on 19
September 2003.'* Since CEAS share certificates had only one 2002
dividend coupon, the first instalment was paid upon presentation of “rights
coupon no. (5)” and the second instalment upon presentation of the 2002
dividend coupon. '* Libananco produced a number of CEAS share
certificates in Vienna that still had “rights coupons no. (5)” attached —
these certificates represented approximately 35 per cent of the total share
capital of CEAS.'® All the CEAS share certificates located in Switzerland
(subsequently seized by the Swiss authorities) also had “rights coupons no.
(5)” attached — these certificates represented a further 25 per cent of the
total share capital of CEAS."” In total, share certificates representing some
60 per cent of the total share capital of CEAS were found to have had
“rights coupons no. (5)” attached. According to the Depository Bank

4 See paragraph 9 of the Depository Bank Report.

'S See Exhibit H-274, the istanbul Stock Exchange Daily Bulletin No. 90 of 14 May 2003.
'© See paragraph 68 of the Depository Bank Report.

"7 See paragraphs 24 to 25 of the Depository Bank Report.

151

449.

450.

So

451.

452.

453.

454.

Report, individual members of the Uzan family collected dividends
corresponding to some 67.07 per cent of the total shareholding of CEAS.

For the reasons set out at paragraphs 448.1 to 448.4 above, the Tribunal is
unable to accept the evidence of the Claimant’s witness Cem Uzan that
dividends in respect of CEAS and Kepez were paid to the holders of the
dividend coupons (which had allegedly been detached from the share certificates)
and not the holders of the share certificates themselves.

In the light of the persuasive evidence to the contrary, the Tribunal is unable to
accept the Claimant’s submission that the dividends paid by CEAS and Kepez to
members of the Uzan family had no correlation with their respective
shareholdings prior to Libananco’s alleged acquisition of shares in CEAS and
Kepez.

The figures in Exhibit R-821 are further supported by Cem Uzan’s
contemporaneous financial disclosures of 23 October 2002, 20 February 2003
and 6 March 2003, where he declared that he owned 8.56 per cent of CEAS
capital and 9.9 per cent of KEPEZ capital (see Exhibits H-138, H-151 and H-
154). In addition, according to Adabank’s records of dividend payments made in
prior years, the dividends that Cem Uzan received in the period 1999 to 2003
corresponded to practically identical shareholding percentages (see Exhibit H-
1135).

The Tribunal is cognisant that the table showing the breakdown of shareholding
in Exhibit R-821 is undated. However, the Tribunal considers that this does not
detract from the suggestion that Exhibit R-821 shows that individual members
of the Uzan family (and not Libananco) owned a majority interest in CEAS and
Kepez at some point in time.

Whilst Hakan Uzan disputed the accuracy of this document as at 14 July 2003,
he admitted it would have been accurate at an earlier date, thus accepting (by
necessary implication) that the 20 May 2003 dividend payment corresponded to
the Uzan family members’ individual ownership interests at some point in time.
This was in effect an admission that the payment of dividends to individual
members of the Uzan family was in fact proportionate to their respective
shareholdings in CEAS and Kepez at some point in time. Hakan Uzan therefore
contradicted his own evidence in his Witness Statement that the payment of
dividends was not linked to each family member’s shareholding in CEAS and
Kepez. Accordingly, the Tribunal does not find Hakan Uzan’s evidence in
relation to the authenticity of Exhibit R-821 to be credible.

The Tribunal is therefore not persuaded by Hakan Uzan’s evidence that Exhibit
R-821 was not an authentic document. It is pertinent to note the provenance of
Exhibit R-821 (which the Claimant has not rebutted). This was a document
recovered from the computer servers of a company controlled by the Uzans,
containing information that was either personal to the Uzan family or
confidential in nature; it was therefore likely to have been created by a person
closely connected to the Uzan family. In the light of the Tribunal’s observation
at paragraphs 443 and 444 above, and all the other evidence on the record, the

152

455.

456.

457.

458.

459.

460.

Tribunal finds that it is more probable than not that Exhibit R-821 evidences the
respective shareholdings of the individual members of the Uzan family in CEAS
and Kepez at or around 20 May 2003, including the period leading up to 12 June
2003 (it is relevant to note, in this regard, that on the Claimant’s own case, no
transfer of CEAS and Kepez share certificates was alleged to have taken place
after 20 May 2003).

The Tribunal accordingly finds that Exhibit R-821 is likely to be an authentic
document.

Based on Exhibit R-821, the Tribunal is of the view that members of the Uzan
family owned shares corresponding to 67.07 per cent of the total shareholding in
CEAS and 63.46 per cent of the total shareholding in Kepez during the period in
question (i.e. from 20 May to 12 June 2003). This is ultimately irreconcilable
with Libananco’s alleged ownership of 65.2 per cent of the total shareholding in
CEAS and 60 per cent of the total shareholding in Kepez before 12 June 2003.

9. The alleged “family divorce”

The Claimant’s case is that there was a “family divorce” which occurred over
the approximate period October 2002 to May or June 2003. It was said that,
pursuant to the “family divorce”, there was a consolidation in the various
shareholdings within the Uzan family and it was agreed that, among other things,
Cem Uzan would become the sole beneficial owner of Libananco.

The “family divorce” alleged by the Claimant is of more than peripheral
relevance. The Respondent argued that based on dividend records (on the
assumption that dividends received by each shareholder corresponded to their
respective individual shareholdings), Hakan Uzan owned far less of CEAS’ and
Kepez’s shares than that which he allegedly transferred to Libananco, and that
the same was true in relation to the CEAS shares which Aysegiil Uzan allegedly
transferred to Libananco. The Claimant’s response to this was that, as part of the
“family divorce”, intra-family agreements were entered into; as a result of which
Hakan Uzan and Aysegiil Uzan acquired significantly larger interests in CEAS
and Kepez'* than was the case before the “family divorce”. The Claimant’s case
is that these shares were then transferred to Libananco (by Hakan Uzan and
Aysegiil Uzan) in April and May 2003 (i.e. when the alleged acts of teslim were
said to have occurred).

 

If there was in fact no “family divorce” that occurred along the lines suggested
by the Claimant’s witnesses, this brings Libananco’s alleged acquisition of the
shares of CEAS and Kepez into question since the burden would then be on the
Claimant to demonstrate the source of the shares allegedly acquired by
Libananco (i.e. the identity of the sellers or transferors).

Considering also that the “family divorce” was said to have taken place between
October 2002 to May or June 2003, and that Cem Uzan gave evidence to the

'S But only Hakan Uzan (and not Aysegiil Uzan) acquired shares in Kepez as a result of these intra-
family agreements.

153

461.

effect that the “family divorce” was intended to achieve a split of both
ownership and control, Kemal Uzan’s continued involvement in certain day to
day issues relating to CEAS and Kepez remains unexplained by the Claimant.
Significantly, Kemal Uzan was involved in dealing with the central issue of the
cancellation of the Concessions Agreements. This is inconsistent with the
Claimant’s contention that Cem Uzan acquired ownership (through Libananco)
and control of CEAS and Kepez pursuant to the “family divorce”.

Further, as late as June 2003, Kemal Uzan, Hakan Uzan and Aysegiil Uzan even
incorporated a new company together. This does not appear to be consistent
with the occurrence of a “family divorce” earlier that year.

462. The purported intra-family transactions were also far from clear.

462.1 Hakan Uzan said that, although he was not the majority shareholder in
CEAS and Kepez in 2002, he sold the largest quantity of shares to
Libananco in 2003 because there was an “intermediate” movement of
shares within that period.

462.2 These transactions were conducted in a roundabout manner with no
tisfactory explanation for the manner in which the transactions were
structured. For example, shares were purportedly transferred to Hakan
Uzan by Kemal Uzan, Cem Uzan and Aysegiil Uzan, only for him to later
transfer those shares to Libananco.

 

462.3. The manner in which the transfers were carried out also did not make
sense considering that, on the Claimant’s own case, it had by that time
been decided that Cem Uzan would own all the family’s shares in CEAS
and Kepez. If the intra-family transactions are treated as genuine (i.e.
actually having occurred) then one has to believe that Cem Uzan
transferred shares to Hakan Uzan, who in turn transferred those shares to
Libananco (allegedly beneficially owned by Cem Uzan by that time) — a
full circle, so it seems.

462.4 Hakan Uzan’s evidence (in his Witness Statement) was that the
transactions were so structured because each had (or was intended to have)
a quid pro quo counterpart in another transaction involving another
company in which members of the Uzan family had shares in common.
However, there was no evidence of any such practice. Hakan Uzan also
deposed that the transactions were so structured for political reasons, i.e.
so that Cem Uzan would not be seen transferring shares to a Cypriot
company. The Tribunal likewise did not find this explanation persuasive.
No sensible reason has otherwise been put before the Tribunal to explain
the convoluted and roundabout nature of the intra-family transactions.

462.5 It is also telling that Cem Uzan admitted that (as a leader of a political
party) he would have had to file financial disclosures in respect of material
changes in his assets if and when the said intra-family transactions were
executed. But he was unable to give any satisfactory explanation why this
was not done.

   

154

463.

464.

465.

466.

In addition, the circumstances surrounding the alleged intra-family transactions
remain ambiguous. No evidence has been given to show how the alleged intra-
family transfers took place. In particular, the Claimant has maintained its silence
on the issue of how feslim was accomplished in respect of the transfer of the
underlying share certificates. Although the Claimant has produced the intra-
family agreements which were allegedly used, the Tribunal has found (at
paragraph 371 above) that the metadata in respect of the electronic versions of
those documents was not conclusive of the date on which they were created.
Further, the intra-family agreements would, on their own, have no legal effect,
since the other requirements for a valid transfer of ownership (e.g. tes/im) have
not been demonstrated.

Further, the intra-family agreements were of questionable provenance. They
appeared as deleted files on Mr Tiirkkan’s floppy disks (subsequently produced
in these proceedings). The appearance of those floppy disks remains a mystery.
Mr Tiirkkan was questioned on this in cross-examination but the Tribunal did
not find any of his explanations to be satisfactory. On the one hand, he said that
he saved these documents because he thought they were important; on the other
hand, he also said that he deleted them subsequently, as he assumed they were
sent to him by mistake. Curiously, he gave no explanation as to how those
documents came into his possession.

Significantly, the intra-family agreements were the only documents that the
Claimant produced to evidence the occurrence of the alleged “family divorce”.

For all the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal does not find the “family divorce” as
put forth by the Claimant to be persuasive. Accordingly, the Claimant has failed
to explain the following:

(a) how Hakan Uzan came to acquire a substantial interest in (EAS that
would have enabled him to transfer shares corresponding to 35.53 per cent
of its total share capital to Libananco when (according to dividend records
as of 20 May 2003) he only owned shares corresponding to 6.04 per cent
of its total share capital;

(b) how Hakan Uzan came to acquire a substantial interest in Kepez that
would have enabled him to transfer shares corresponding to 44.08 per cent
of its total share capital to Libananco when (according to dividend records
as of 20 May 2003) he only owned shares corresponding to 0.43 per cent
of its total share capital; and

(c) how Aysegiil Uzan came to acquire a substantial interest in CEAS that
would have enabled her to transfer shares corresponding to 17.48 per cent
of its total share capital to Libananco when (according to dividend records
as of 20 May 2003) she only owned shares corresponding to 4.69 per cent
of its total share capital.

 

For the above analysis, the Tribunal has calculated the percentage of the
shareholding in each company allegedly transferred to Libananco by individual

155

467.

468.

469.

470.

471.

472.

473.

members of the Uzan family by identifying the transferors or sellers in each of
the STAs and then adding up the percentages for each individual transferor or
seller (across the various STAs allegedly executed by him or her) in respect of
each company.

10. The Share Transfer Agreements
The STAs were a central feature of the Claimant’s case.

Early on in these proceedings, the Claimant submitted that the STAs were
effective to transfer ownership of the shares in CEAS and Kepez to Libananco
on various dates between October 2002 and May 2003 (i.e. the respective dates
on the face of the STAs). However, the Claimant subsequently admitted that the
STAs were, without more, insufficient to effect a transfer of ownership unless
teslim was also accomplished. Accordingly, its present position is that the STAs
were entered into merely to memorialise the intent of the individual transferors
to transfer their shares to Libananco.

a) The earlier version of the Claimant’s case was that the
share transfer agreements were effective to transfer
ownership of shares in CEAS and Kepez

Mr Ciggin deposed that Cem Uzan had asked him to prepare model agreements
or template STAs for Libananco for use in connection with its intended
acquisition of shares in CEAS and Kepez. This was consistent with Cem Uzan’s
evidence in his Witness Statement that Libananco acquired those shares over the
period October 2002 to May 2003. Mr Partellas had the same understanding
because he gave evidence to similar effect.

Hakan Uzan’s evidence that the transfers were to be completed in tranches as a
matter of business practice in the Uzan family suggests that the STAs were
intended to effect a legal transfer of the shares. In that regard, he was
responsible for deciding the quantity of shares in each company (i.e. CEAS and
Kepez) that would be transferred to Libananco at any particular time, and by
whom. Hakan Uzan went further to say that these individual transactions would
be closely monitored by the Shareholder Services Department of CEAS and
Kepez.

 

Mr Ciggin agreed that the STAs purported on their face to be documents
intended to be used instruments for an actual transfer of ownership of the shares.

The sum of the above evidence is that the STAs were intended to effect legal
transfers of the shares in question.

This is consistent with the initial version of the Claimant’s case, i.e. that
Libananco: (i) acquired ownership of interests in CEAS and Kepez over the
approximate period October 2002 to May 2003; (ii) acquired its first shares in
CEAS and Kepez in November 2002 and October 2002 respectively; and (iii)
made its last acquisitions in May 2003.

156

473.1 The underlying premise of the Claimant’s case was that Mr Tiirkkan
acquired Libananco on behalf of Cem Uzan and his Immediate Family in
April 2002, and that they remained the beneficial owners of Libananco.

473.2 In relation to the transactions described above, Mr Tiirkkan allegedly
prepared a Share Acquisition Report dated 20 May 2003 (Exhibit H-61),
which shows the breakdown of individual acquisitions as having occurred
between 30 October 2002 and 15 May 2003.

473.3, Libananco’s board minutes, purportedly dating from 2002 and 2003,
also recorded the transactions described above as having been executed in
the same range of dates.

 

473.4 These pieces of evidence are all consistent with the initial version of
the Claimant’s case that the STAs themselves were legally effective to
transfer ownership of the shares in CEAS and Kepez on various dates
between October 2002 and May 2003. However, as described earlier, the
Claimant has departed from its initial position. The evidence set out above
is therefore not only meaningless in the light of the Claimant’s
abandonment of its initial position, but is also contradictory to the
Claimant’s current position.

 

b) The Claimant’s subsequent change of position
474. The present version of the Claimant’s case may be outlined as follows.

474.1 In his Second Witness Statement, Cem Uzan deposed that, in
accordance with the alleged “family divorce”, the Uzan family divided its
assets among Kemal Uzan, Hakan Uzan and himself, and agreed, in
particular, that he would receive the family’s stake in CEAS and Kepez
and would therefore become the sole beneficial owner of Libananco.
Consequently, the beneficial ownership of Libananco changed in January
2003

474.2. Cem Uzan deposed that, as a result of the alleged “family divorce”, his
relations with his father Kemal Uzan and brother Hakan Uzan became
increasingly strained. For that reason, he considered it was important that
the members of his Immediate Family memorialise their intention to
irrevocably surrender their ownership interests in CEAS and Kepez to
Libananco to avoid potential disputes in the future.

 

474.3 Following January 2003 therefore, STAs continued to be executed to
memorialise the intent of the members of his Immediate Family to transfer
their shares in CEAS and Kepez to Libananco.

474.4 The necessary implication of this (which the Claimant accepted) was
that the STAs had no legal significance in the sense that they did not
effect any legal transfer of interests in CEAS and Kepez. The Claimant
has therefore shifted its case to say that the transfers of ownership in

 

 

157

475.

476.

477.

478.

479.

480.

respect of the shares took place only when fes/im in relation to the share
certificates occurred in April and May 2003.

The Tribunal observes that the two main versions of the Claimant’s case
described and elaborated upon above contradict each other in material aspects,
and that the Claimant’s witnesses were unable to give any convincing
explanation for this significant change of position.

c) The share transfer agreements reflected that “cash”
was paid by Libananco for the purchase of the shares

It was recorded on the face of the STAs that “cash” would be given as
consideration by Libananco in return for the transfer of shares. Hakan Uzan’s
evidence was that, if the unfortunate events of 12 June 2003 had not happened,
Libananco would have settled this debt eventually and would have made
payment to the individual transferors or sellers.

However, Hakan Uzan was unable to maintain his evidence in cross-
examination. When questioned, he said instead that his father Kemal Uzan
would not be paid by Libananco for the transfer of shares to Libananco. He
explained that Kemal Uzan received, in exchange for the transfer of shares to
Libananco, an especially large dividend, subsequent to which there would be no
further monies due (from Libananco) to him.

Hakan Uzan was also unable to explain why (assuming there was indeed a debt
recorded in Libananco’s books in favour of the sellers of the shares) the 2003
financial statements of Libananco recorded a US$ 234 million debt that was
owed to Mr Tiirkkan (who did not transfer any shares to Libananco).

These were yet further discrepancies for which no satisfactory explanation was
given by the Claimant.

d) The Tribunal’s conclusion on the share transfer
agreements

The reason for the creation of the STAs is suspect as the evidence of Mr Ciggin
(who allegedly drafted the template STA), when taken as a whole, was not
coherent on this point.

480.1 Mr Ciggin deposed that, when he was asked to draft the template STA
in 2002, it was only intended to memorialise each transferor’s intent to
effect the respective transfers. His evidence was that, in September 2002,
he advised Cem Uzan on the requirements under the Turkish Commercial
Code for a legally effective share transfer; namely that STAs would not be
necessary to accomplish the planned transfer.

480.2 But yet he admitted in cross-examination that the template STA which
he prepared purported on its face to be an instrument to effect the transfer
of legal ownership of the shares as such, i.e. the STAs themselves would
be capable of bringing about a legally effective transfer of ownership.

158

480.3. Mr Ciggin was unable to explain why he prepared a template STA in
that manner when his evidence was that the template STA which he
prepared was intended (in accordance with his advice to Cem Uzan on the
requirements for a legally effective transfer of ownership) only to
memorialise each transferor’s intent in relation to the shares.

480.4 Mr Ciggin also testified in cross-examination that he received no
instructions from Cem Uzan as to whether the template STA was intended
to be used as an instrument to effect the actual transfer of ownership of
shares as such, or whether its purpose was merely to memorialise the
intent to do so on the part of each transferor or seller. This does not explain
or clarify Mr Ciggin’s otherwise contradictory evidence.

480.5 The Tribunal did not find Mr Ciggin’s evidence on this issue
persuasive.

480.6 The Tribunal further observes that Mr Ciggin’s evidence that the
template STA was intended only to memorialise each transferor’s intent to
transfer ownership of the shares inconsistent with the earlier version of the
Claimant’s case that the execution of the STAs themselves was intended to
effect a legal transfer of ownership in respect of the shares.

481. Further, although the STAs were said by the Claimant to have been created and
executed in 2002 and 2003, the evidence that has emerged casts considerable
doubt on this.

481.1 Hakan Uzan’s evidence that Libananco’s acquisition of shares was
specifically structured to be carried out in tranches is meaningless in the
light of the Claimant’s change of position (i.e. the Claimant eventually
submitted that the transfer of ownership occurred pursuant to acts of tes/im
and not by way of execution of the STAs). This renders both the reason(s)
for the creation of the STAs and the time at which they were created
suspect.

481.2 Mr Tiirkkan’s evidence was that he would often receive several signed
STAs in a bundle (suggesting that they had all been signed at the same
time) and that sometimes he would not receive a particular document back
at all, and would have to create a new one. This is difficult to reconcile
with Hakan Uzan’s evidence that the transfer of shares was meant to occur
ina structured manner.

481.3 In 2009, the Claimant produced the hand stamp that it alleged was used
to apply the Libananco company seal to the STAs. It was only when the
Respondent pointed out that this hand stamp was of a “Shiny” model
which could not have been purchased before 2005 that the Claimant
submitted Mr Tiirkkan’s Second Witness Statement, in which he deposed
that there had been an earlier hand stamp that had broken in transit. Mr
Tiirkkan said that it was indeed this earlier hand stamp (which has, to date,
not been produced) that had been used to stamp some of the STAs.

159

482.

483.

484.

485.

486.

481.4 Crucially, Mr Tiirkkan said that all of the STAs produced in this
arbitration were printed in 2005 because some documents were missing
and some were not readable.

481.5 Mr Tiirkkan further admitted that some of the STAs could have been
stamped in 2005. His evidence was corroborated by Mr Partellas, who
deposed in his Second Witness Statement that Mr Tiirkkan “may have”
used the new stamp machine on some documents in November 2005.

Libananco’s Share Acquisition Report dated 20 May 2003 (Exhibit H-61), is
related to the STAs since its entries correspond to the information contained in
the individual STAs. This was therefore a document intimately connected with
the STAs themselves. The Claimant has no choice but to accept that the entries
in Exhibit H-61 are not accurate, since it subsequently submitted that teslim only
occurred in April and May 2003 (whereas Exhibit H-61 purported to show
Libananco’s acquisition of shares from October 2002 onwards). It follows that
Exhibit H-61, even on the Claimant’s own case, is not an authoritative or
accurate document. The Claimant has not given any satisfactory explanation for
this discrepancy, which serves only to further discredit the STAs.

For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the STAs were
likely to have been created on the dates that appear they bear.

11. Libananco’s board and management minutes

There were likewise a number of indications that Libananco’s board and
management minutes were not likely to have been created on the dates that they
bore.

To begin with, Mr Tiirkkan (who claimed to be responsible for the preparation
of Libananco’s minutes) was unable to explain some of the English terms used
in the minutes. At one point in the cross-examination, he even asked if he could
consult a dictionary. This brings into doubt his evidence that he personally
drafted the minutes.

More importantly, Mr Tiirkkan changed his evidence dramatically when, having
deposed in his First Witness Statement that the corporate meetings of Libananco
took place over the telephone, he later testified that there were in fact no
telephone calls, and therefore (by necessary implication) that those purported
meetings were in fact not attended by anyone at all. This was corroborated by
Mr Partellas’ evidence which was to the effect that none of his employees (who
were nominee directors in Libananco) attended any of Libananco’s corporate
meetings — they merely signed the minutes after they were prepared by Mr
Tiirkkan. The sum of Mr Tiirkkan’s and Mr Partellas’ evidence was therefore
that none of the meetings reflected in Libananco’s minutes actually occurred as
was alleged by Mr Tiirkkan in his First Witness Statement; rather, they were all
paper meetings.

 

160

487.

488.

o

489.

491

S

491.

49:

493.

494,

N

There were also tell-tale signs that, contrary to what the minutes purported to
show, those documents were not likely to have been prepared in 2002 and 2003.

Although Libananco’s Minutes of Directors’ Meeting of 23 September 2002
(Exhibit H-13) purported to record the appointment of Mr Ciggin as
Libananco’s legal advisor, Mr Ciggin testified that he was unaware of that
appointment and, in fact, had never been asked to provide such a a service. Even
if he had provided any legal advice in relation to Libananco to either Hakan
Uzan or Cem Uzan, there was no proof of this — Mr Ciggin did not have any
notes, letters, e-mail messages or other records to document his involvement in
the present case.

 

In the Minutes of Libananco’s Board of Directors’ Meeting of 10 July 2002
(Exhibit H-11), it was recorded that “PARTELLAS KILLIARIS LTD” would be
appointed as Libananco’s auditors. However, Mr Partellas testified that he only
formed a limited company in 2005. He explained this was a simple mistake that
anybody could have made. In the light of all the other available evidence, the
Tribunal did not find his evidence here persuasive.

. Significantly, Mr Tiirkkan testified that he “reprinted” all of Libananco’s

minutes in 2005. Those were the only versions of the minutes produced in this
arbitration. Although the Claimant alleged that the original documents remained
in existence or had existed at some earlier point in time, none of those originals
were produced and no satisfactory explanation was given for their absence.

Taking into consideration all the evidence as set out above on this point, the
Tribunal is not satisfied that the minutes are likely to have been created on (or
around) the dates that they bear .

12. Was legal ownership of the share certificates of CEAS and
Kepez in istanbul validly transferred to Libananco by 12 June
2003?

This is the linchpin of the Claimant’s case. The Claimant fails on the present
jurisdictional issue if it is unable to establish that it acquired ownership of the
share certificates before 12 June 2003.

a) Were the share certificates located in the Rumeli and
Dogus Buildings wrapped in brown paper and labelled
“Libananco”?

The starting point must be the act which, in the Claimant submission,
constituted tes/im in relation to the share certificates in Istanbul.

The Claimant submitted that certain share certificates which belonged to
members of the Uzan family and were destined for Libananco were stored in the
Rumeli and Dogus buildings in istanbul. The intent of the transferors to have
those shares transferred to Libananco was signified by the wrapping of the share
certifi

 

ites in brown paper and labelling them with the name “Libananco”. On
, the Claimant contended that Mr Ciggin’s inspection of the share

 

161

495.

496.

497.

certificates on 15 May 2003 on behalf of Libananco (coupled with the wrapping
and labelling of the share certificates which signified the intent of the transferors)
was sufficient to accomplish fes/im, consequent upon which the ownership in
the shares so inspected passed to Libananco.

The Tribunal has assumed (without deciding) for the purposes of the present
analysis that the method outlined above (i.e. the wrapping of the share
certificates in brown paper and subsequent labelling) would, under Turkish law,
be factually sufficient to demonstrate the intention of the transferors to transfer
ownership of the share certificates to Libananco. The findings below proceed on
this basis.

On this issue, the evidence of Messrs Ulusoy, Sirin, Bozkurt and Giiner is
relevant. The Tribunal makes the following observations and/or findings.

496.1 The Claimant’s witness Mr Ulusoy gave evidence that the share
certificates in the Rumeli Building were indeed wrapped in brown paper
on 23 March 2004 and that the “name of a foreigner” was marked on the
packaging. However, no weight has been accorded to Mr Ulusoy’s
Witness Statement for the reasons given in paragraph 335 above.

496.2. Mr Bozkurt only visited the Rumeli and Dogus from January 2005
onwards, more than one and a half years and therefore a substantial period
of time after the date in question (i.e. 15 May 2003). Accordingly, his
evidence that the share certificates were not packaged in March 2004 was
hearsay (i.e. not direct or firsthand testimony which could be tested by
cross-examination). It is therefore not admitted in the circumstances since
there was direct testimony from Messrs Sirin and Giiner on the same issues.

496.3 Mr Sirin confirmed that he had no part in the attachment procedures in
the Rumeli Building, but that he was on the second floor of the Dogus
Building on 29 March 2004 where he saw CEAS and Kepez share
certificates (which he deposed were not wrapped or otherwise packaged).

496.4 Mr Giiner was the only one of the Respondent’s witnesses who
testified that he was present at both the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings on 23
March and 30 March 2004 respectively. Although he deposed that he saw
no wrapping around the share certificates in the basement of the Rumeli
Building, he admitted in cross-examination that he did not look through all
of the steel cabinets at that location. Mr Giiner gave little elaboration in
relation to his observations at the Dogus Building.

Assuming (but not deciding) that the evidence of the Respondent’s witnesses on
this point is accepted, this only establishes the state of some (but not all) of the
CEAS and Kepez share certificates in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings as at
March 2004, some nine months after the date in question (i.e. 15 May 2003).
Further, in the light of the observations set out in paragraph 496 above, the
Tribunal is unable to make a positive finding, based only on the evidence given
by the Respondent’s witnes that there were no CEAS and Kepez share
certificates wrapped or packaged in brown paper and marked “Libananco” in the

 

162

498.

499.

500.

501.

Rumeli and Dogus Buildings as at March 2004. However, this is ultimately of
no moment since it is the Claimant which bears the burden of proof on this issue.

Since Mr Ulusoy’s evidence has been given no weight in these proceedings, Mr
Ciggin’s evidence (i.e. that the share certificates were wrapped in brown paper
and marked “Libananco”) determines the Tribunal’s findings on this issue. For
the reasons given at paragraph 504 below, the Tribunal does not find Mr
Ciggin’s overall account of the events of 15 May 2003 to be persuasive.
Accordingly, there was no satisfactory evidence from the Claimant that the
share certificates were so packaged and labelled other than the bare assertion of
Mr Ciggin, which was otherwise uncorroborated by facts on the record.

The Claimant has therefore failed to show that, on 15 May 2003, the share
certificates in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings were wrapped in brown paper
and labelled “Libananco”. For that reason, the Tribunal is unable to accept the
Claimant’s submission that the immediate possessors of the share certificates in
the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings were holding the share certificates with
instructions and/or the intention to deliver those share certificates to Libananco
for the purpose of effecting a transfer of ownership to Libananco. Consequently,
the Tribunal concludes that the immediate possessor of those share certificates
did not have the authority and hence the right to deliver the latter to Libananco.

 
 

b) Mr Ciggin’s alleged inspection of the share certificates
in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings in istanbul

Mr Ciggin’s evidence here is critical to the Claimant’s case since he was the
only witness who attested to the inspection of the share certificates in the
Rumeli and Dogus Buildings on 15 May 2003. The Claimant’s position stands
or falls on his evidence.

Before coming to Mr Ciggin’s evidence on the alleged inspection, the Tribunal
observes that certain aspects of the Claimant’s evidence more generally are not
consistent with the case it has put before the Tribunal. The following are
examples.

501.1 The Minutes of the Libananco Management Committee Meeting dated
18 April 2003 (Exhibit H-52) stated that Mr Ciggin was to “appoint a two
lawyer team to... actually physically recheck the storage of the shares, and
the labeling [sic] of the storage under the name of Libananco... on a
routine basis (once a month)”. However, there was no evidence that any
two-lawyer team was ever established, nor that any routine checks were
ever planned or executed, other than the alleged inspection on 15 May
2003 for the purposes of accomplishing tes/im.

501.2 Mr Tiirkkan deposed in his First Witness Statement that Mr Ciggin
was instructed to “re-check the storage of the shares and their labeling
[sic] under Libananco’s name... and conduct an inventory”. But there was
no evidence that such re-checking ever took place, let alone that a written
inventory was ever established or maintained by Mr Ciggin.

163

502.

503.

504.

501.3. Mr Ciggin himself confirmed that, in early 2003, he had a telephone
conversation with Mr Tiirkkan during which he was instructed by Mr
Tiirkkan that “the Share Certificates needed [sic] be checked at least once
a month as long as they were stored in that facility”. There was similarly
no evidence that such monthly checks were ever planned or executed.

It is surprising that Mr Ciggin (an experienced Turkish attorney) did not keep
any record of the share certificates that he was alleged to have inspected. He did
not have any record of the serial numbers of the share certificates that were
allegedly inspected and admitted that the entire process was undocumented.

Mr Ciggin explained that, at the time of the alleged inspection, he was in
possession of the inventory of share certificates that were to be inspected (the
inventory not being one he created on his own, but rather a document that was
sent to him by someone else whom he did not identify). However, he testified
that he destroyed that list because he did not want anyone to see it. There was no
evidence that such a document existed at any point in time other than Mr
Ciggin’s uncorroborated oral testimony.

There were other parts of Mr Ciggin’s evidence that the Tribunal found
unpersuasive.

504.1 He did not know who was responsible for the storage of the share
certificates which he had allegedly inspected. This reinforces the
Tribunal’s conclusion at paragraph 499 above that the Claimant has failed
to prove that the person(s) responsible for the storage of the share
certificates had the authority and hence the right to transfer possession to
Mr Ciggin (since the Claimant was unable to identify such person(s) in the
first place).

504.2 Based on Mr Ciggin’s evidence, there was no indication that he acted
on Libananco’s behalf to assume possession of the share certificates on 15
May 2003 (e.g. by way of transporting the share certificates to another
destination or by otherwise assuming constructive possession); on the
contrary, Mr Ciggin’s evidence was that he did no more than to perform a
visual or physical inspection of those share certificates.

504.3. Mr Ciggin was unable to explain in a satisfactory manner how, after
the large denomination share certificates representing more than 45 per
cent of the total share capital of CEAS and Kepez respectively were
counted and moved out of the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings on 15 May
2003 (the date of his alleged inspection), the remainder of the small
denomination (and hence bulky) share certificates were counted by 16
May 2003 (the date of the share custody invoices in respect of the latter).
Mr Ciggin’s explanation as to how the smaller denomination share
certificates were accurately counted in such a short time was not
persuasive for the following reasons.

(a) Although Mr Ciggin testified that the counting of the small
denomination share certificates could have been done in a short

164

505.

506.

time because the packages had information about the share
certificates contained within, he testified that his own inspection on
15 May 2003 (which did not involve the counting of share
certificates), required some seven or eight hours.

(b) Since the share certificates that were said to have remained in the
Rumeli and Dogus Buildings were those with small denominations
(and hence were more voluminous and bulky), it would have taken
a significantly longer time to count those share certificates.

(c) The Claimant has not otherwise given any satisfactory explanation
as to how the voluminous small denomination share certificates
were counted in a short period of time (one day) between 15 May
and 16 May 2003.

In addition, the Tribunal observes that the Claimant has provided only
photocopies of the share custody invoices, but not the originals for forensic
examination; as a result, the Parties’ document forensic experts were not
able to confirm the authenticity of the share custody invoices (see
paragraph 356.5 above). For all the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal is not
persuaded that the share custody invoices purporting to reflect Libananco’s
ownership of 13.9 per cent of the issued shares in Kepez and 15.82 per
cent of the issued shares in CEAS as of 16 May 2003 is an accurate and/or
authentic document.

504.4 Mr Ciggin was unable to explain why there was no disclosure by
Libananco or any of the directors of CEAS and Kepez that Libananco had
acquired substantial interests in those companies even though such
disclosure was required under Turkish law (the obligation to disclose was
triggered upon Libananco’s acquisition of 10 per cent or more of the total
share capital of CEAS or Kepez). His only evidence is that he probably
looked at this law when he was advising Libananco.

  

Not only does Mr Ciggin’s evidence fail to paint a complete picture of what was
alleged to have occurred on 15 May 2003, it also does not helpfully explain any
of the gaps in the Claimant’s case. Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that the
Claimant has failed to demonstrate that any inspection of the share certificates
Mr Ciggin may have conducted in the Rumeli and Dogus buildings in istanbul
on 15 May 2003 was on behalf of Libananco or that it accomplished fes/im in
respect of those share certificates.

Whilst Libananco’s Minutes of the Management Committee Meeting dated 18
April 2003 (Exhibit H-52) purported to demonstrate a concern by Libananco
that the security of the share certificates be checked (which in turn implied prior
possession by Libananco of those share certificates), it was not the Claimant’s
case that fes/im in respect of the share certificates in istanbul took place at any
point in time before 15 May 2003. Indeed, the Claimant did not submit any
evidence to show that actual inspections (as opposed to the mere giving of
instructions to Mr Ciggin to inspect) of the share certificates in istanbul
occurred prior to 15 May 2003, whether for the purpose of achieving teslim or

 

165

507.

508.

509.

510.

Si.

512.

513.

otherwise. Accordingly, and for the avoidance of doubt, the Tribunal makes no
finding as to whether any inspection (for whatever purpose) of the share
certificates in istanbul took place prior to 15 May 2003.

In any event, the Claimant’s evidence (in the form of Exhibit H-52 and oral
testimony from Mr Ciggin) to the effect that Mr Ciggin was to conduct repeated
and regular inspections is inconsistent with the objective of accomplishing
teslim since: (i) the latter is a one-time process and (ii) a mere inspection does
not (without more) constitute a transfer of possession (which is the essence of
teslim). Accordingly, it would be of no assistance to the Claimant’s case even if
it had been able to show that either an inspection or regular inspections took
place prior to 15 May 2003.

 

c) Hakan Uzan’s alleged inspection of the share certificates
in the garage in ikitelli, istanbul

The possibility that there was yet another act of tes/im (i.e. in addition to those
allegedly accomplished in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings in istanbul and via
telephone in respect of the share certificates located in Switzerland) was
mentioned for the very first time by Hakan Uzan on 23 March 2010 during his
cross-examination. Hakan Uzan testified that his father Kemal Uzan called him
to inform him to go to a garage in ikitelli, istanbul on 15 May 2003, where he
(ie. Hakan Uzan) accepted delivery of large denomination CEAS and Kepez
share certificates.

Hakan Uzan had no convincing explanation why this alleged third act of tes/im,
previously unmentioned, did not appear in any of the Claimant’s Witness
Statements or other documents.

What is most puzzling about the alleged garage fes/im is that Hakan Uzan said
that the share certificates which he allegedly inspected were only moved to the
garage in {kitelli after Mr Ciggin inspected those very same share certificates in
the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings. Accordingly, the share certificates Hakan
Uzan allegedly inspected in ikitelli would have been the same as those Mr
Ciggin had allegedly inspected earlier in the day.

This makes no sense. If tes/im had been accomplished by Mr Ciggin’s
inspection in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings, then Hakan Uzan’s inspection of
the same share certificates in Ikitelli would have been redundant. The
Claimant’s case is contradictory.

There is also no documentary evidence of this alleged third act of tes/im. In fact,
there is no other evidence at all on this point except for the belated and
uncorroborated oral testimony of Hakan Uzan.

The Tribunal accordingly finds that it is unlikely that the alleged delivery by
Kemal Uzan and corresponding inspection and acceptance by Hakan Uzan in the
garage in ikitelli ever took place. All of the evidence points in the opposite
direction. Hakan Uzan’s late introduction of this evidence into the record, in fact,
undermines the Claimant’s case further. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the

166

514.

S15.

516.

S17.

Claimant has failed to prove that the events alleged by Hakan Uzan to have
taken place in the garage in Ikitelli on 15 May 2003 in fact occurred.

d) Conclusion on the issue of whether fes/im in relation to
the share certificates located in istanbul was accomplished

The alleged delivery of share certificates in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings
and in the ikitelli Garage was attested to only by Mr Ciggin and Hakan Uzan.
The Tribunal did not find their evidence persuasive. Despite the crucial
importance of the process of tes/im, the Claimant was not able to produce the
slightest documentary evidence to support its argument, and indeed its witnesses
have admitted that the entire process was undocumented.

Further, the documentary evidence (see paragraph 100.1 above) introduced by
the Claimant to support the initial version of its case (i.e. that the shares were
acquired progressively from October 2002 to May 2003 by way of a series of
separate transactions) is completely contrary to the present version of its case
(i.e. that the shares were acquired by Libananco only in April and May 2003
pursuant to three acts of fes/im). Again, the Claimant has provided no
satisfactory explanation for this significant change of position.

 
 

 

The Tribunal summarises its findings in relation to the two acts of teslim which
were allegedly achieved in Istanbul on 15 May 2003 as follows.

516.1 The Claimant has failed to show that the immediate possessor of the
share certificates located in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings had the
authority and hence the right to deliver the latter to Libananco (see
paragraph 499 above).

516.2 The Claimant has failed to show that any inspection of the share
certificates Mr Ciggin may have conducted in the Rumeli and Dogus
buildings in istanbul on 15 May 2003 was on behalf of Libananco or that it
accomplished fes/im in respect of those share certificates (see paragraph
505 above).

516.3. The Claimant has failed to show that the alleged delivery of the share
certificates in the garage in ikitelli by Kemal Uzan and the corresponding
inspection and acceptance of the same by Hakan Uzan in fact occurred
(see paragraph 513 above).

The Tribunal returns to the requirements under Turkish law for a legal transfer
of possession necessary to accomplish tes/im. In that regard, the Tribunal refers
to paragraphs 398.5 above. On the basis of its review of the evidence, the
Tribunal reaches the following conclusions in relation to the share certificates
located in: (i) the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings and (ii) the garage in ikitelli.

 

517.1 In relation to (i), there could have been no transfer of possession by an
agent. By reason of the Tribunal’s finding in paragraph 516.1 above, the
Claimant has failed to show that any alleged agent of the transferors was
authorised to deliver the share certificates to Libananco. In relation to (ii),

167

518.

519.

there is no evidence that Hakan Uzan was authorised to act (as an agent)
on behalf of Libananco, and that Kemal Uzan was authorised to so act on
behalf of all the sellers.

517.2 In relation to both (i) and (ii), there was no assignment of the right to
possession since there is no evidence that the transferors of the share
certificates assigned their rights to claim for return of possession of the
shares certificates to Libananco. There is also no evidence that the
transferors instructed the immediate possessor to hold the share certificates
for Libananco going forward — in the case of (i), the immediate possessor
was an alleged third party whom was in any event not indentified by the
Claimant; in the case of (ii) Kemal Uzan was allegedly the immediate
possessor of the share certificates but there was no evidence that he was so
instructed by the alleged transferors.

 

 

 

517.3 In relation to both (i) and (ii), the question of constitutum possessorium
does not arise since no evidence has been adduced to show that there was
an agreement between the transferors and Libananco that the former would
continue to hold the share certificates on behalf of Libananco even after
the transfer of ownership was accomplished.

517.4 In relation to both (i) and (ii), the question of delivery by shorthand
likewise does not arise since the Claimant has not alleged that Libana
was in possession of the share certificates prior to its alleged acqui
ownership (nor is there any reliable evidence on the record which might
support such a factual finding). In any case, no evidence has been adduced
to show that such an agreement was made between the transferors and
Libananco (nor does any submission to that effect form part of the
Claimant’s case).

  

For all the foregoing reasons, the Claimant has failed to show that teslim was
accomplished on 15 May 2003 in respect of the share certificates in the Rumeli
and Dogus Buildings and the garage in [kitelli. For the avoidance of doubt, the
Tribunal further considers that, even if the Claimant had been able to prove that
Mr Ciggin inspected the share certificates on 15 May 2003 in the Rumeli and
Dogus Buildings (which it has not), such inspection (without more) would have
been insufficient to accomplish es/im for the reason given in paragraph 517.1
above.

13. Were the share certificates in Switzerland properly delivered to
Libananco so as to effect a transfer of ownership before 12 June
2003?

This act of teslim alleged by the Claimant is a telephone call between Hakan
Uzan and Mr Tiirkkan which took place in April 2003. The gist of the
conversation was that Hakan Uzan agreed that the share certificates of CEAS
and/or Kepez kept in a rented property in Switzerland would now be held in
custody for Libananco.

168

520.

521.

522.

523.

524.

The Tribunal found the evidence given by the Claimant’s witnesses here to be
unsatisfactory.

520.1 Hakan Uzan admitted that his telephone call to Mr Tiirkkan was not
recorded or documented in any way.

520.2. Mr Tiirkkan was not provided with any inventory or any other means
by which he could have identified the share certificates that were
supposedly being held for Libananco in Switzerland, and Hakan Uzan took
no steps to evidence the share certificates in respect of which teslim had
allegedly been accomplished in favour of Libananco.

Consequently, neither Hakan Uzan nor Mr Tiirkkan were able to identify which
of the share certificates in Switzerland were (subsequent to the telephone call)
allegedly held on behalf of Libananco. Hakan Uzan admitted that there was no
way to physically determine which of the share certificates located in
Switzerland were supposedly owned by Libananco and which were not.
Logically, teslim could not have taken place unless the property alleged to have
been delivered was certain and capable of identification.

However, an even more serious weakness in the Claiman’s case was Mr
Tiirkkan’s evidence to the effect that tes/im had not in fact occurred in relation
to the share certificates in Switzerland. Rather, he testified that teslim was
planned, but did not ultimately occur owing to the termination of CEAS’ and
Kepez’s Concession Agreements (see paragraph 269.4 above).

Consequently, the Tribunal finds that tes/im could not have occurred and did not
in fact occur in respect of the share certificates located in Switzerland. Any
attempted delivery (of which there is little or no evidence in the first place)
would not have been effective since it was impossible to ascertain which share
certificates were to be delivered.

14. The share certificates produced by the Claimant for inspection
in Vienna in 2009

The Tribunal acknowledges, for the avoidance of doubt, that many of the high
denomination CEAS and Kepez share certificates are presently in Libananco’s
possession and were delivered either by Libananco or other persons for
inspection in Vienna in 2009 (see paragraph 35 above). The Claimant submitted
that these share certificates were most likely to have been removed from the
Rumeli and Dogus Buildings before July 2003, when the SDIF first assumed
control over security in the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings. If this was not the case,
the high denomination share certificates would have been seized at that time by
the SDIF, and the Claimant would not have been able to produce them for
inspection in Vienna. The inference, according to the Claimant, is therefore that
the high denomination share certificates were removed from the Rumeli and
Dogus Buildings before July 2003. The Claimant submitted that this meant that
it was likely that it acquired possession (and hence ownership) of those share
certificates before July 2003 (see paragraph 146 above).

169

525. However, these facts (even if true) are of no assistance to the Claimant.

525.1 First, even if the high denomination share certificates in question were
removed from the Rumeli and Dogus Buildings before July 2003, this does
not show in any conclusive manner that Libananco in fact acquired
possession (or ownership) of those share certificates at that time. The
Tribunal considers that the logical connection between the two events is
tenuous at best.

525.2 Second, Libananco’s present possession of the share certificates in
question is irrelevant as the question before the Tribunal is whether the
Claimant has met its case that fes/im in respect of those share certificates
occurred at the material time (i.e. before 12 June 2003). In other words, the
key issue is when and how Libananco obtained possession of the share
certificates in question.

  

525.3 In that regard, the Claimant’s case is that tes/im occurred on two days:
first on a certain (unidentified) day in April 2003, and on 15 May 2003. As
determined by the Tribunal above, the Claimant has failed to establish the
occurrence of feslim on those days. Libananco’s ownership of the share
certificates in question at any other point in time is therefore not material.
It follows that the Claimant’s production of approximately 50,000 CEAS
and Kepez share certificates in Vienna for inspection in 2008 says nothing
about whether Libananco owned those share certificates before 12 June
2003. The Tribunal accordingly accepts the Respondent’s submission that
the Claimant’s possession of the share certificates in November 2008 does
not prove or otherwise evidence Libananco’s acquisition of those share
certificates before 12 June 2003.

   

526. The Respondent further submitted as follows.

526.1 In December 2004, the Board of Directors of CEAS and Kepez
resolved to exchange their old share certificates for new ones denominated
in the new Turkish currency. The companies announced, in the Turkish
newspaper Cumhuriyet on 9 January 2005 (Exhibits R-502 and R-503) that,
on 24 December 2004, their boards had resolved to cancel all existing
share certificates and to issue new certificates denominated in the new
Turkish Lira, the legal currency introduced in Turkey with effect from 1
January 2005. This new currency removed 000 000 (six zeros) from the
then existing Turkish Lira.

526.2 On 27 January 2005, CEAS and Kepez advised the Turkish Capital
Markets Board that the majority of their shareholders had already
exchanged their old share certificates for new ones (Exhibits R-504 and R-
505).

526.3 In submissions to the Adana and Antalya courts, CEAS and Kepez
repeated that “a /arge portion” of their shareholders had exchanged old
certificates for new ones, and that the old certificates were “destroyed
after being exchanged with new ones” (Exhibits R-506 and R-526).

  

170

52)

52!

529.

53

531.

7.

8.

6

S

526.4 Thus, as confirmed by CEAS and Kepez themselves, most of their
shareholders had exchanged their old share certificates in 2005, and the old
share certificates were cancelled and destroyed after they were turned in
by those shareholders. Yet in 2008, Libananco produced old share
certificates (the Depository Bank Report showed that all of the share
certificates produced by the Claimant in Vienna were denominated in old
Turkish Lira, i.e. pre-currency reform) representing approximately 35 per
cent of the share capital of CEAS and 45 per cent of the share capital of
Kepez.

526.5 The Respondent submitted that the Claimant did not explain how it
managed to produce substantial quantities of old (i.e. pre-currency reform)
CEAS and Kepez share certificates for inspection in Vienna in 2008 when
a majority of their shareholders had already exchanged the old share
certificates for new ones (i.e. post-currency reform) in 2005.

The Claimant did not explain its position on this issue.

The Respondent’s submission, based on its arguments above, appears to be that
the old share certificates could have been exchanged by Libananco in 2005 if
Libananco had indeed owned share certificates in CEAS and Kepez from 2003
onwards. It is observed that the facts recited by the Respondent in paragraph 526
above, even if shown to be accurate, do not conclusively prove that Libananco
had not acquired the share certificates in CEAS and Kepez before 12 June 2003.
The Tribunal therefore finds that those facts (assuming, but without deciding,
their accuracy) are merely suggestive that Libananco may not have owned the
share certificates in question before 12 June 2003.

 

Accordingly, in the light of the Tribunal’s findings in paragraphs 518 and 523
above, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant has not demonstrated that possession
and/or ownership of the CEAS and Kepez share certificates which it produced in
Vienna in 2008 was/were transferred to it at a time and in a manner which
entitles it to bring a claim in the present proceedings.

15. Conclusion on whether Libananco acquired ownership of
shares in CEAS and Kepez before 12 June 2003

Taking all the evidence on this issue as a whole, the Tribunal finds the
Claimant’s case based on the evidence of its factual witnesses who were
available for cross-examination to be highly strained and thus unpersuasive
overall.

One striking feature of this case, underscored by the nature and magnitude of the
transaction and investment in question, is the absence (even in the context of a
family investment) of any form of orderly procedure designed to produce an
adequate written record and compliance with the legal requirements that had to
be met in order to achieve the desired factual result. Indeed, the evidence shows
that even basic corporate and legal documents (many of which would be likely
to exist if the facts alleged by the Claimant are true) were neither created nor

 

171

retained by the persons responsible for managing or otherwise involved in
Libananco’s corporate affairs.

531.1 Although Hakan Uzan’s evidence was that Mr Tiirkkan was to hold
Libananco on trust for certain members of his immediate family, there
were no agreements or other documents (either formal or informal) to
evidence and record this important arrangement. Hakan Uzan’s evidence
was that the terms of the trust were never communicated to Mr Tiirkkan.

531.2 The acts of teslim alleged by the Claimant to have occurred in April
and May 2003 were completely undocumented, save for Mr Ciggin’s
inventory of the share certificates located in the Rumeli and Dogus
Buildings in istanbul; however, Mr Ciggin testified that the inventory was
later deliberately destroyed by him.

531.3 Although the intra-family transactions were allegedly recorded by
agreements recovered as deleted files on Mr Tiirkkan’s floppy disks, this
was very weak evidence since the provenance of those files has not been
explained in a satisfactory manner by Mr Tiirkkan (or any other of the
Claimant’s witnesses). Furthermore, those transactions were conducted in
a roundabout manner, for which there was again no convincing
explanation.

531.4 The intra-family transactions were allegedly carried out pursuant to the
“family divorce”, which was itself otherwise also undocumented.'”

532. The failure of the Claimant’s witnesses to comply with the relevant legal
requirements (which could easily have been complied with) is suspect since no
convincing reason for such non-compliance was forthcoming.

532.1 Libananco’s accounts for 2002, 2003 and 2004 were filed only in 2007,
although these were required by law to be filed annually. Although Mr
Partellas testified that Mr Tiirkkan had asked him to delay those filings, no
good reason was given for the delay. There was also no evidence that the
accounts were produced contemporaneously (which would have assisted
the Claimant in the circumstances if such evidence had been adduced).

  

 

532.2 Cem Uzan by his own admission deposed that there was no public
disclosure of Libananco’s alleged investment in CEAS and Kepez until
2005, even though the obligation (under Turkish law) to make such
disclosure would have been triggered upon Libananco’s acquisition of
interests in CEAS and Kepez.

533. There are many evidential gaps in the Claimant’s case, as well as serious
discrepancies for which no satisfactory explanation has been given.

' Save for the STAs, which the Claimant later alleged constituted agreements of intent to transfer. The
Tribunal did not find this to be persuasive evidence to support the existence of the alleged “family
divorce” given the Claimant’s significant and unexplained change of position in relation to the role
and function of the STAs.

172

533.1 There was no proof that the Instrument of Transfer was signed in April
2002 as alleged by the Claimant’s witness Mr Sarris. No convincing
reason was given as to why Mr Tiirkkan could not have signed the
Instrument of Transfer in April 2002 given that he was allegedly in Cyprus
in early April 2002.

533.2 Based on all the available evidence, the Claimant failed to prove that
Mr Tiirkkan travelled to Cyprus in April 2002 to undertake work in
connection with Libananco.

533.3 Exhibit R-821, which the Tribunal found to be representative of the
individual shareholding of members of the Uzan family in CEAS and
Kepez as at 20 May 2003 (and also the period leading up to 12 June 2003),
indicated that members of the Uzan family (and not Libananco) owned
majority interests in both CEAS and Kepez.

534. A further weakness in the Claimant’s case is that there is a substantial body of

53

53

5.

a

unrebutted evidence that brings into question the dates of creation and/or
accuracy of the key documents on which the Claimant has relied to establish the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal. For the reasons given above (at paragraphs 483 and
491 respectively), the Tribunal is unable to accept that the STAs and
Libananco’s minutes establish (either in part or in whole) the Claimant’s case
that Libananco acquired ownership of the shares in question before 12 May
2003.

Last but not least, the Tribunal found the Claimant’s significant and unexplained
change of position in relation to the role and function of the STAs troubling.

 

For all the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal considers that the Claimant has failed
to meet its burden of proof when all the evidence is viewed as a whole.
Although some of the evidence submitted by the Claimant tends to support
certain aspects of its case, the Tribunal finds that, in the light of the various
inconsistencies, conflicts and changes in the Claimant’s account of the events
that occurred, its final description and account of how it came to own shares in
CEAS and Kepez is not persuasive. The Claimant has therefore not discharged
its burden to show positively that it had acquired, by 12 June 2003, ownership of
any of the large quantity of shares in issue in the manner alleged, or at all.
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant has not proved that it owned
the shares in CEAS and Kepez, which represent the “Investment” in this
arbitration, by the critical date of 12 June 2003.

 

X.WAS LIBANANCO AN “INVESTOR” WITHIN THE
MEANING OF THE ICSID CONVENTION AND THE ECT?

537. The Tribunal having thus decided that Libananco has failed to prove that it

owned, on the critical date, the shares in CEAS and Kepez that formed the basis
of its claims, it is not strictly speaking necessary for the Tribunal to proceed to a
formal decision on the remaining three of the Preliminary Jurisdictional
Objections. As indicated above (at paragraph 33) the four Preliminary
Jurisdictional Objections were selected by the Tribunal for hearing on the basis

173

538.

XL.

that they were discrete, and that each of them was capable of bringing the
arbitral proceedings to an end. Once it is established that Libananco cannot be
regarded as the owner of the claimed investment at the relevant time, it becomes
without object to consider, for example, whether or not Libananco comes within
the class of potential investors under either the ICSID Convention or the ECT,
since without an “investment” there can be no “Investor”.

Nevertheless, out of deference to the care with which all of the Preliminary
Jurisdictional Objections have been pleaded by both Parties, and in the hope that
it may be of some benefit to those who have to confront these issues in future,
the Tribunal adds the following brief comments on certain general issues raised
by the third and fourth Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections (i.e. those set out in
paragraphs 105.3 and 105.4 above respectively) which are not specific to the
particular situation of Libananco. The Tribunal wishes to stress that these
comments should not be regarded as having the status of formal decisions by the
present Tribunal on these issues.

DO LIBANANCO’S) CLAIMS’ SATISFY EXPRESS

CONDITIONS OF TURKEY’S CONSENT TO ARBITRATE?

539.

540.

The essence of the third Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection (set out in
paragraph 105.3 above) is that the Turkey’s consent to arbitration is lacking
because Turkey is one of the Contracting Parties listed in Annex ID to the ECT
as falling within paragraph (3)(b) of Article 26 of the Treaty. To be more precise,
whereas paragraph (2) of Article 26 opens to an Investor of a Contracting Party
three avenues for the settlement of disputes with another Contracting Party, and
paragraph (3)(a) confers in that context an unconditional consent by each
Contracting Party to the submission of such disputes to arbitration or
conciliation, paragraph (3)(b), by contrast, limits that unconditional consent by
excluding from its scope disputes which the Investor has previously submitted to
the national courts or tribunals of the Contracting Party.”° The limitation is
brought about by sub-paragraph (i) and applies in respect of the Contracting
Parties listed in Annex ID. The provision is then completed by sub-paragraph
(ii), under which “/fJor the sake of transparency” each Contracting Party listed
in Annex ID “shall provide a written statement of its policies, practices and
conditions in this regard”. The statement is to be provided to the Secretariat no
later than the date of the deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance,
approval or accession by the Contracting Party concerned.

There is no need for the Tribunal to dwell on the disagreement between the
Parties as to whether — in general — compromissory clauses should be interpreted
restrictively or not, since it shares the view taken by the tribunal in RosInvestCo
UK Ltd v The Russian Federation (Award on Jurisdiction) (Arbitration Institute
of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Case no: Arbitration V 079 / 2005)
that:

“\.. the correct approach is to interpret the BIT even-handedly and
objectively, on its terms, under the rules laid down in the Vienna

> Or to any other applicable dispute settlement procedure previously agreed.

174

S41.

542.

543.

Convention, and without any presumption either in favour of or
against the Tribunal’s own jurisdiction”.

The Respondent’s argument is based on its submission that all of the Claimant’s
claims in this arbitration stem from the basic allegation that the Respondent’s
termination of the Concession Agreements was not authorised under the terms
of those agreements or applicable Turkish law. This, it is said, was the very
issue at the heart of the litigation pursued by CEAS, Kepez, Cem Uzan (and
others) before the Turkish courts. However, Turkey’s acceptance of the ECT
was conditioned by its inclusion in Annex ID on the basis that the Turkish
Constitution prevents the recognition of arbitral awards resulting from the re-
litigation of issues already decided by Turkish Courts, and this was understood
and accepted by the other Contracting States from Turkey’s statement of policy
to the Energy Charter Secretariat in 1999 which fulfilled the requirements of
Article 26(3)(b)(ii).

The Claimant challenges this qualification of the Turkish notification to the
Energy Charter Secretariat, on the grounds both that the notification represents
merely a factual account of the domestic ratification process and that it was not
submitted to the Secretariat in due time, and accordingly failed to meet either of
the two requirements embodied in Article 26(3)(b)(ii). The Claimant further
claims that the notification refers explicitly to res judicata, so that on its own
terms it is without legal effect unless all of the conditions for the application of
the res judicata principle are met, specifically an identity of parties, of subject
matter and of relief sought, none of which is fulfilled in the circumstances of the
present arbitration.

The text of Article 26 of the ECT reads as follows:

“(1) Disputes between a Contracting Party and an Investor of
another Contracting Party relating to an Investment of the
latter in the Area of the former, which concern an alleged
breach of an obligation of the former under Part III shall, if
possible, be settled amicably.

(2) If such disputes can not be settled according to the provisions
of paragraph (1) within the period of three months from the
date on which either party to the dispute requested amicable
settlement, the Investor party to the dispute may choose to
submit it for resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Contracting
Party party to the dispute;

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute
settlement procedure; or

(o) in accordance with the following paragraphs of this Article.

(3)(a) Subject only to subparagraphs (b) and (c), each Contracting
Party hereby gives unconditional consent to the submission of a

175

dispute to international arbitration or conciliation in
accordance with the provisions of this Article.

(b)(i) The Contracting Parties listed in Annex ID do not give such
unconditional consent where the Investor has previously
submitted the dispute under subparagraph 2(a) or (b).

(ii) For the sake of transparency, each Contracting Party that is
listed in Annex ID shall provide a written statement of its
policies, practices and conditions in this regard to the
Secretariat no later than the date of the deposit of its
instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval in
accordance with Article 39 or the deposit of its instrument of
accession in accordance with Article 41.

(0) .”

544. The letter on which the Respondent relies in this context is an extensive one, the
relevant part being in the following terms:

 

“funder the Turkish Act of Civil Procedures (Article 237 of Law No.
1086)] if a court of law of the Republic of Turkey has adopted a
decision on an issue, it has the force of final judgment on the principle
of res judicata pro veritate habetur (no double jeopardy —to avoid that
two judgments are issued to settle the same dispute).

Accordingly, it would not be possible for the national courts in Turkey
to recognise and enforce the awards of arbitration by the virtue of the
provision of the Law No. 2675 (Article 45(b)) on “Act on Procedure
Related to Private International Law”, which regulates the recognition
and enforcement of foreign arbitration awards in parallel with the
provisions of the New York Convention (Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards) which was
ratified by Turkey in 1988 by the Law No. 3731”.

545. The disagreements between the Parties in this respect accordingly give rise
(amongst others) to the following two issues.

(a) Does Article 26(3)(b) of the ECT create a form of entitlement on the part
of Contracting States to the ECT to avail themselves of its terms, but an
entitlement which is conditional on the making of a sub-paragraph (ii)
notification in proper form?

(b

Should a sub-paragraph (ii) notification be regarded in law as similar or
equivalent to a reservation, so that the scope and effect of its limitation of
consent would depend on the content of the particular notification?

546. The Tribunal is not convinced, on the argument before it, that either of these two
propositions is necessarily sound, as a matter of the interpretation of the ECT. It
seems to the Tribunal reasonably clear that the purpose of paragraph 3(b) in
Article 26 was to accept, and to incorporate into the terms of the negotiation of

  

176

547.

the ECT, that certain Negotiating States would, on becoming Party to the ECT,
give only a limited consent to arbitration by comparison with the unconditional
consent given by the other Contracting States. And the scope of the limitation is
defined in the Article itself as excluding from that consent disputes falling
within a certain descriptive category, i.e. disputes that had previously been
submitted to its own courts or administrative tribunals, or to some other pre-
agreed dispute settlement procedure. It therefore seems to the Tribunal plain,
simply on the way in which Article 26(3) is drafted, both that the limited
consent is foreseen and understood to take effect automatically, on the giving by
the State in question of its “consent to be bound”! by the Treaty, and (on the
other hand) that the States covered by this provision are definitively identified,
once and for all, by Annex ID itself as established at the time the ECT was
concluded and opened for signature. It would then follow that the limiting effect
cannot be conditional on the statement required by sub-paragraph (ii), either as
to the fact of the limitation, or as to its extent; and that is indeed reinforced by
the wording of sub-paragraph (ii) itself, with its express indication that the
requirement is merely “for the sake of transparency”. It seems rather to be the
case that listing under Annex ID has the automatic effect of registering that the
original consent of the Negotiating State in question is limited as precisely
described in Article 26(3)(b), sub-paragraph (i). One may contrast with this the
system set up by Article 45, which also allows individual Contracting Parties to
limit their consent (in this case to provisional application of the ECT), but is
clearly so constructed as to make the limitation of consent dependent on the
making of the declaration provided for in its paragraph (2). As the tribunal in
Yukos v. Russian Federation, Interim Award of 30 November 2009 on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility (“Yukos”), pointed out, the subjective operation
of Article 45, paragraph (2), stands in direct opposition to the objective
operation of paragraph (1).”? On that analysis it may be right that what we have
in sub-paragraph (ii) of Article 26(3)(b) is a collateral obligation, one coupled
with a specific time limit, but nothing more than that, so that whatever legal
consequences might follow from any failure to comply with the collateral
obligation, they would not extend to the invalidation of the listing in Annex ID
itself with all that flows from that. Faced with the clear prescription that the
States “listed in” Annex ID do not give their unconditional consent to (among
other things) arbitration, it would not appear to be open to a Tribunal to go
behind that listing in order to assemble some form of “constructive consent”, so
as to circumvent the fundamental rule that arbitration of any kind” is rooted in
consent to arbitrate.

For all those reasons, and particularly so in view of the outright prohibition on
reservations contained in Article 46 of the ECT, the Tribunal does not see what
warrant there would be for treating the system set up by Article 26(3) in the
same way as if it were a purpose-built regime for permitted reservations to the
ECT, nor therefore for applying to Article 26(3) the detailed rules pertaining to
reservations under the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (“VCLT”) or
general international law. That said, the Tribunal is also conscious of the fact
that the application of some aspects of Article 26(3) is not without its problems,

| Thid., Articles 11 et seq.
 Yukos, paragraphs 282 ff.
?3 i.e, not only arbitration between an investor and a State.

177

548.

notably (in the present context) what value should be attached to the
juxtaposition of “unconditional” [consent] with “its ... conditions” (where “its”
refers to the particular Contracting State listed in Annex ID). The drafting is
ambiguous as to whether, in not giving their “unconditional consent” the States
listed in Annex ID do not give consent at all (for the situations mentioned in
Article 26(3)), or whether they do in fact give a consent, but a “conditional” one,
with the particular “condition” remaining to be determined on another occasion.
It is conceivable that the form of drafting used was intended to leave open the
possibility for individual Annex ID States to use their declarations under Article
26(3)(b)(ii) for the purpose of converting their position into one of “conditional”
consent to arbitration etc., in which case the terms of the particular declaration
would become of critical importance in defining what consent had or had not
been given by the Contracting Party in question. That would appear, implicitly,
to have been the assumption made by the Yukos tribunal.” But the point was not
fully argued either before the Yukos tribunal or before the present Tribunal, and
the Tribunal sees no need to express any view on it.

Given the foregoing, there would, in the Tribunal’s view, be no purpose in
discussing further the competing arguments of the Parties in respect of the
doctrine of res judicata, on the basis of its having been mentioned in the
Respondent’ tement under Article 26(3)(b)(ii). There remains, however, a
question as to how far the references in the text of Article 26(3)(b)(ii) to “the
Investor” and “the dispute” themselves require some form of identity between
the claims in, say, domestic legal proceedings and in a potential arbitration. The
issue is not (as indicated) one which the Tribunal has to decide. The Tribunal is
in some doubt, however, as to whether the provisions of a multilateral Treaty of
this kind should be construed with the same strict rigour that might be
appropriate for the application of a national procedural rule, e.g. of res judicata.
The justification for a more flexible interpretative approach, informed by the
purpose the treaty rule is intended to serve, would be not simply the different
nature of the legal instruments involved, but also the difference in the
prospective effects: the application of a domestic rule of res judicata is there to
prevent the re-litigation of an issue that has already been authoritatively
determined; a treaty rule may serve the different purpose of preventing forum-
shopping.”> An approach as strict as the one the Claimant contends for here
would make the operation of Article 26(3)(b) entirely dependent (so far as its
relationship with domestic legal proceedings was concerned) on whether the
national law in question permitted the litigation of a treaty dispute as such in the
local courts or tribunals. But to make the issue turn in that way on the form in
which the local legal action had been brought, rather than on the real substance
of the underlying rights at issue would clearly run the risk of subverting what
may have been the intention behind the treaty provision. The alternative would
be to treat Article 26(3)(b) as a classic fork-in-the-road provision, of a kind
commonly encountered in the field of investment arbitration, and that would in
turn imply a much stricter approach to the identity of claims. Were the issue to

 

 

 

 

 

*4 And appears indeed to be the basis on which both Parties proceeded before it.

5 The Tribunal notes that the tribunal in Petrobart Ltd. v. Kyrgyz Republic, Arbitration Institute of the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce No. 126/2003, Award, 29 March 2005 (“Petrobart”), appears to
have regarded Article 26(3)(b) as a special treaty rule different from the general principle of res
judicata, whereas the tribunal in Yukos appears to have made a different assumption.

178

arise for determination in a future case, it would require the tribunal in such a
case to rank the relative weight of two treaty provisions of apparently coordinate
status, sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of Article 26(3): the one entailing an
unconditional giving of consent, and the other an unmistakable non-consent,
linked by the “subject to” formulation in sub-paragraph (a).

XII. IS LIBANANCO ENTITLED TO THE BENEFITS OF
ARTICLE 17 OF THE ECT?

549. The Tribunal passes now briefly to the fourth Preliminary Jurisdictional

55

551.

S

Objection (set out in paragraph 105.4 above), under which the Respondent
claims that it has in any event the right to deny Libananco the benefits of the
ECT, in application of its Article 17.

Article 17 of the ECT is a denial of benefits clause, under which each
Contracting Party “reserves the right” to deny the advantages of Part III of the
Treaty in, among other things, the following two cases:

 

(a) if the Investor is a legal entity owned or controlled by citizens or
nationals of a third state and if the entity has no substantial business
activities in the Area of the Contracting Party in which it is organised
(Article 17(1)); “Area” in this context is a term of art, defined in Article
1(10), and includes the land and maritime territory of a Contracting Party;
and

(b) if the Investment is an Investment of an Investor of a third state with or as

to which (among other things) the denying Contracting Party does not

maintain a diplomatic relationship (Article 17(2)).7°

The use of the phrase * “reserves the right” raises difficulties that have troubled
other tribunals,’ specifically what (if anything) the Contracting State must do in
order to exercise its reserved right; when it may (or must) do s«
effect is retrospective, or prospective only. The Tribunal has nothing of its own
to add to the debate on that subject.

 

 

There was no dispute in the present case as to whether Libananco was formed as
a Cypriot company and as to who held the rights of ownership or control over
Libananco”* at the time the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration was filed. There
was also no dispute as to the state of the diplomatic relationship between Turkey
and Cyprus. Nor was there any serious difference between the Parties as to the
nature of Libananco’s business activities in Cyprus. The issue that has occupied
the major part of the argument between the Parties is what meaning should be
attributed to “third state,” and whether the term has the same meaning in both

 

°6 A difference between the drafting of the two provisions is that the first of them is cast in objective
terms, whereas the second is in terms expressly imposing on the denying Contracting Party the
burden of establishing the factual predicate; see further below.

7 Cf. Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 February 2005, and Petrobart.

** Although there has been some debate between the Parties (not material for present purposes) as to
whether Cem Uzan, Hakan Uzan, ot Mr Tiirkkan had or had not become Jordanian nationals.

179

552.

553.

Article 17 and Article 7 of the ECT. The Tribunal had the benefit in this regard
of the testimony of Mr Craig Bamberger, who, as chief legal counsel to the
International Energy Agency, was closely associated with all aspects of the
drafting of the ECT during its negotiation, and who kept a detailed personal
record on which his Witness Statement had been based. Mr Bamberger was not
called for cross-examination, nor was his written testimony challenged. The
Tribunal therefore treats it as an accurate account of what took place during the
negotiations, which may be drawn on, as necessary, in interpreting and applying
the relevant provisions of the ECT.

Apart from a comprehensive account of the several national proposals that were
in due course amalgamated into what became the denial of benefits provisions in
Article 17, the following were the principal points to emerge from Mr
Bamberger’s evidence.

(a) The term “third state” appears in numerous Articles of the ECT, viz.
Articles 1(7)(b), 7(10)(a)(i), 9(1), 10(3), 10(7), 12(1), and in Article 17
itself.

(b) As the negotiations entered their final phase, the uniform usage in all
of these provisions (other than Article 7) was the phrase “state that is
not a Contracting Party”.

(c) This phrase was then replaced, at the very final stages, by the term
“third state,” but this was a purely technical drafting operation
undertaken by the Secretariat on the recommendation of the Legal Sub-
Group, and was not intended to bring about any change of meaning.

(d) Article 7 of the ECT was negotiated separately from Article 17, and
under the aegis of a different Conference committee. No specific
process was set in train, in the rushed final days of the Conference, to
ensure an overall concordance of texts, or in particular to compare or
reconcile the usage in Article 7 with that in other provisions, or vice

versa.”

Against that background, the Tribunal does not believe that the interpretation of
the disputed term raises anywhere near the difficulties that emerged in the
conflicting argumentation of the Parties. The Tribunal recalls that, in the
application of the principles of interpretation laid down in the VCLT, the
starting point for interpretation is the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms
of the treaty (in their context and in the light of the treaty’s object and purpose),
but that a special meaning shall be given to a term “if it is established that the
parties so intended”.*° No evidence has been led to suggest any such intention
in respect of the use of the term “third state” in Article 17, or indeed in the other
Articles listed above — with the possible exception of Article 7. The
interpretative process begins, accordingly, with the ordinary meaning of the

*° Suggestive of the rushed circumstances is the fact that in one place in the definitions Article itself,
Article 1(7)(b), the term “third state” appears in quotation marks, implying that there may have been
some thought of including a definition of that term as well.

© VCLT Article 31(4).

180

554.

term. The Tribunal is satisfied that ‘third state’ has a well recognised ordinary
meaning in treaty law. As appears from Section 4 of the VCLT (entitled
“TREATIES AND THIRD STATES”), the expression means simply “state not
party to the treaty in question”, which is indeed the only way in which one can
give meaning to the “General rule regarding third States” enunciated in Article
34 of the VCLT, or to the particular rules laid down in Articles 35-37, or to the
saving clause contained in Article 38.°*! This reading corresponds exactly to
what (according to the evidence of Mr Bamberger) transpired in the closing
stages of the Conference on the ECT, when the crystal-clear phrase “state that is
not a Contracting Party” was replaced by “third state”. Had the change not been
made, there would have been no room for argument on the question. But the
Tribunal is not persuaded that the blanket drafting change in all of the Articles
in which the longer version occurred was intended to — or had the effect of —
changing the sense of these provisions as a matter of “ordinary meaning”. If any
confirmation of this were needed, it can be found by looking at the uses of this
term in the ECT “in their context”, as the VCLT requires. Without performing
this analysis in detail, the Tribunal can content itself with observing that, in all
of the ¢; jisted above (with the exception of Articles 7 and 17), the reference
to a “third state” is juxtaposed immediately alongside a reference to “a
Contracting Party” or “the Contracting Parties”, in such a way as to leave no
room for doubt that the two situations were meant to indicate mutually exclusive
alternatives. The Tribunal regards that as powerful confirmation that the term
“third state” is used in the ECT in its normal sense. The wording of Article 17
on its own may offer, by contrast, no strong contextual evidence of the same
kind, but in its place we have Mr Bamberger’s account that the Article had been
worded “state that is not a Contracting Party” until the final stages, when the
wording was altered together with the same phrase in other articles.

 

Does it make any difference to this clear picture that Article 7 explicitly
provides that a “third state” can be a Contracting Party? In the Tribunal’s view,
it does not. This view does not depend in its entirety on Mr Bamberger’s
evidence referred to in paragraph 552(d) above, although the Tribunal observes
that Mr Bamberger’s evidence would be directly relevant if there were to exist
any ambiguity that might be resolved by reference to the preparatory work.”
But in truth there is no ambiguity in Article 7 itself, the terms of which admit
only one possibility, namely that in this Article a “third state” can be a
Contracting State, because that is what the definition in paragraph (10)(a)(i) says
expressly. Once again, moreover, it is the context that explains the usage, since
in this particular case, where the subject of the treaty provision is transit, there is
by definition a first state (the state of origin) and a second state (the state whose
territory is being transited), so that the state of destination becomes, in an
ordinary linguistic sense, a “third” state — but in circumstances in which it would
make no sense to apply the treaty to the carriage unless the “third” state were
itself a Contracting Party. However the clinching argument is in any case, as the
Tribunal sees matters, the explicit indication in the chapeau to Article 7(10) that

 

 

°' The term itself, “third state”, no doubt had its origin against the background of the classic bilateral
treaty, in which there were two (only) Contracting States, so that any non-Contracting State was by
that fact alone a “third” State, But it seems plain that the International Law Commission had not the
slightest difficulty in generalising the usage, by analogy, to treaties of alll kinds.

* Article 32(a) of the VCLT.

181

555.

556.

the two definitions which follow are “[fJor the purposes of this Article”™,
which automatically excludes the export of either of those two definitions to
other Articles, Article 17 included.

The only substantial argument remaining is the one from effet utile, on which
the Respondent, placed greater and greater reliance as the arbitration proceeded.
The essence of the argument is that the purpose and effect of Article 17(2) is to
deny benefits (“advantages”, in the treaty text), so that the provision would
make no sense unless those benefits were in principle available, from which it
must follow (so the argument continues) that “third state” must be capable of
including Treaty Parties, since otherwise “an Investment of an Investor of a
third state” would not enjoy Part III benefits in the first place.

The Tribunal does not find this argument convincing. One might begin by
pointing out that, under the Respondent’s construction, the picture contains no
“third” state at all (in the numerical sense). More substantively, though, both
“Investor” and “Investment” are capitalized in the wording of Article 17(2), so
indicating that they are used as terms of art defined as in Article 1. And the
definition of “Investor” in Article 1(7) is deliberately drawn so as to allow for
third state Investors. The clear probability must therefore be that Article 17(2)
had in mind a quite different eventuality from the one posited by the Respondent,
namely one in which the “Investment” itself is made — in a direct sense — from
within the circle of the Contracting Parties, but the ultimate beneficial owner or
controller of the “Investment” (the “Investor”) belongs to a “third state” as
envisaged in Article 1(7). That would then make sense of the difference in
phraseology as between paragraphs (1) and (2)**, with its requirement under
paragraph (2) that the denying Contracting Party has to “establish” the ultimate
third state nature of the Investor/Investment in order to be entitled to deny him/it
the advantages of Part III of the ECT. This seems to the Tribunal to be the
natural reading of Article 17, and it finds in fact some confirmation in the
account in Mr Bamberger’s witness statement.

XII. COSTS

557.

558.

Both Parties have asked that their legal and arbitration costs be borne in full by
the other party.

The Claimant has quantified its total costs at US$ 24,381,556. This sum consists
of US$ 18,099,523 by way of legal fees and US$ 6,282,033 in respect of other
expenses. Its advances to ICSID amount to US$ 627,754. In its Petition for
Costs of 1 July 2010, the Claimant contended, among other things, that the
Respondent attempted to frustrate the proceedings and acted in bad faith, and
that this conduct warrants an award of costs in favour of the Claimant.
According to the Claimant, the alleged misconduct includes the Respondent’s
attempts to intimidate the Claimant’s counsel, witnesses and experts (e.g. by
electronic surveillance), delaying tactics, knowingly false allegations of fraud,
default of Tribunal Orders and the withholding of evidence.

*3 Emphasis added.
Fn, 26 above.

182

559.

56

561.

562.

S

The Respondent has quantified its total costs at US$ 35,702,417.76. This sum
likewise cor sof US$ 25,699,521 by way of legal fees and
US$ 10,002,896.76 in respect of other expenses. Its advances to ICSID amount
to US$ 625,000. The Respondent contended that it has reasonably incurred these
costs in response to the nature of the claim and the manner in which the
Claimant conducted itself over the lengthy period of the proceedings, in
particular that it commenced and prosecuted an abusive claim. According to the
Respondent, the Claimant repeatedly altered its case theory and narrative, which
forced the Respondent to gather evidence from multiple jurisdictions and engage
counsel and experts to investigate, evaluate and refute the Claimant’s
contentions. The Respondent referred, in addition, to the considerable burden of
having to translate documents and submissions out of and into Turkish. The
Respondent requested for interest on the amount awarded, to accrue at a
reasonable commercial rate as from the date of the Award.

 

Under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention:

“the Tribunal shall, except as the parties otherwise agree, assess the
expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings,
and shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the fees and
expenses of the members of the Tribunal and charges for the use of
the facilities of the Centre shall be paid”.

The Tribunal considers that Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention gives it the
power to award costs (defined to include legal fees, out of pocket expenses as
well as costs of the arbitration) and the discretion to decide at what level to do
so. This view has also been expressed by other ICSID tribunals.

The costs claims mentioned above were submitted by the Parties in response to
an order from the Tribunal dated 2 April 2010. No page limit was prescribed,
and each Party’s submission on costs was full and detailed in the sense that
breakdowns of the total fees and expenses claimed were given, although not of
the actual work done represented by the various invoices rendered, nor (in all
cases) of the actual expenses incurred.

The Tribunal begins by noting that the amounts claimed by each Party as its
own costs and expenses are very substantial indeed. This applies to both the
claims for legal fees and to those for other expenses. The Tribunal
acknowledges of course that a multiplicity of issues of both fact and law has
been raised before it, that a significant amount of technical forensic evidence has
been deployed by each Party, and that experts in various disciplines have been
commissioned on both sides to present written reports to the Tribunal and to
testify orally in these proceedings. The Tribunal is nevertheless constrained to
observe that what it is presently adjudging in this Award, close to five years
after these arbitral proceedings commenced, remains, all the same, no more than
a selection of four among the set of Preliminary Objections raised by the
Respondent. An explanation of why each Party has incurred its costs and
expenses is not the same thing as a justification of their necessity. Many national
jurisdictions that follow a practice of awarding costs to the successful party also

 

 

 

183

563.

564.

make a distinction between the costs actually incurred by a litigating party and
those which are assessed by the court as having been reasonably and necessarily
incurred for the purposes of the litigation, and base their award of costs on the
latter not the former. Without being in any way bound by national practice of
this kind, the Tribunal regards the underlying approach as suitable for
international arbitration, and intends to follow it in the present case. In this
regard, the Tribunal has considered, among other things, the following factors
(in no particular order of importance):

    

 

(a) the importance of the matter to the Parties and the value of money or
property involved, namely the sum of some US$ 10.1 billion claimed by
the Claimant (which the Tribunal understands to be the largest claim in
ICSID arbitration at the time the Request for Arbitration was filed);

(b

the amount and extent of factual and expert evidence adduced in these
proceedings in relation to the issue of whether Libananco acquired
ownership of the share certificates in question by 12 June 2003;

(c
(d

the conduct of the Parties during the proceedings; and

 

the circumstances in which the work or parts of it were done (which the
Tribunal understands to have taken place across multiple jurisdictions
and involving extensive arrangements for travel, translation and
investigation made by both Parties).

Although many ICSID tribunals have ruled that each party should bear its own
costs, others have applied the principle that “costs follow the event”, or else
have proceeded to an allocation pro rata, i.e. an allocation proportionate to the
tribunal’s assessment of the relative merits of all claims made by the parties.
The present Tribunal is of the view that a rule under which costs follow the
event serves the purposes of compensating the successful party for its necessary
legal fees and expenses, of discouraging unmeritorious actions and also of
providing a disincentive to over-litigation. It also allows a tribunal sufficient
leeway to take due account of specific issues on which the overall losing party
has nevertheless succeeded, and to take account as well of the costs implications
of procedural motions raised by one or another party. The Tribunal accordingly
considers that it is appropriate to apply here the principle that “costs follow the
event” and that a costs order should be made in favour of the Respondent, on the
basis that the Claimant has not been able to prove its ownership of the
investment that forms the essential foundation for these lengthy and hard fought
proceedings.

 

 

 

However, the Tribunal has also to take into account those issues where it is not
appropriate for costs to be awarded in favour of the ultimate prevailing Party,
because it was not the winner on that particular issue or “event” or indeed
because there was no decision as to who won or lost. In the present case, the
Tribunal believes that the following matters are ones where the Respondent
should not be awarded its costs and expenses.

184

(a) Costs and expenses arising from complaints to the Tribunal by the
Claimant relating to the alleged covert surveillance of the Claimant’s
representatives, Counsel and witnesses, which led to the Tribunal’s order
of 1 May 2008 after an oral hearing. The reasons for the Tribunal’s
decision in this regard may be gleaned from its order of 1 May 2008.

 

(b) Costs and expenses arising from the Respondent’s application for
sequestration and forensic inspection of the CEAS and Kepez share
certificates held by Libananco pursuant to the Tribunal’s Decision on
Preliminary Issues of 23 June 2008 (directing the share certificates in
question to be held by an escrow agent and forensically inspected), as well
as the costs and expenses relating to the actual inspection. At the end of
the day, the evidence adduced arising from this inspection yielded little or
no evidence that assisted the Tribunal in its decisions, except to the limited
extent that the experts from both Parties were able to reach agreement.

 

 

(c) Costs and expenses arising from a similar application for forensic
inspection of the STAs and certain other documents in Washington, D.C.
pursuant to an order from the Tribunal dated 3 November 2008 as well as
costs and expenses relating to the actual inspection. Again, the ultimate
result of the inspections yielded little or no evidence that assisted the
Tribunal in its decisions, except to the limited extent that the experts from
both Parties were able to reach agreement on certain propositions.

 

(d) Costs and expenses in relation to the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections
which are dealt with at paragraphs 537 to 556 above (i.e. the second, third
and fourth Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections). For the reasons stated in
the earlier parts of this Award, once the Tribunal had decided on the main
factual issue, it became unnecessary to decide the remaining Preliminary
Jurisdictional Objections but, in view of the substantial submissions made
by the Parties, the Tribunal has set out its thoughts on them without
making any decision on any of them. While it would not be right to
penalise either Party for the costs of these undecided issues, the fact is that
there was no winner on any of them, and the Tribunal therefore does not
believe it appropriate to award any costs or expenses in regard to them in
favour of either Party.

 

565. Further, the Tribunal is inclined to exercise some restraint in assessing the
reasonable amount of c and expenses that should be awarded to the
Respondent pursuant to paragraph 563 above. While the Respondent’s wish to
assemble a powerful battery of legal and other resources is well understood,
given the magnitude of the claim against it, other underlying aspects of the
tensions between the Parties (reflected in the way the case was argued on both
sides), lend themselves less well to being reflected in a costs order by an ICSID
tribunal. Specifically, although the Tribunal is conscious that the claim was for a
sum in excess of US$ 10 billion, the Tribunal is mindful that:

 

 

(a) the claim for costs and expenses is significantly larger than any claim for
costs previously made in an ICSID arbitration, as well as significantly

185

566.

567.

568.

56!

©

larger than any previous award for costs and expenses made by any
previous ICSID tribunal;

(b) the Award in this case is on a jurisdictional issue (albeit hotly contested as
to facts and law) and a selection of other preliminary issues; and

(c) there needs to be some proportionality in the award (as opposed to the
expenditure) of legal costs and expenses. A party with a deep pocket may
have its own justification for heavy spending, but it cannot expect to be
reimbursed for all its expenditure as a matter of course simply because it is
ultimately the prevailing party.

The Tribunal is also not in the position of a national court which can undertake a
detailed a: ment on an item by item basis of a party’s claim for legal costs
and expenses. Following contemporary international arbitration practice, the
Tribunal takes a “broad-brush” approach to the task of determining a reasonable
figure to award for such legal costs and expenses.

  
 

For these reasons, the Tribunal considers that it is appropriate to order the
Claimant to pay the Respondent the sum of US$ 15,000,000 in respect of legal
fees and out of pocket expenses, representing what in the Tribunal’s view
amounts to an appropriate figure to award, having regard to the principles and
reasons set out above, and to all the circumstances of this case.

The above excludes the question of the costs of the arbitration (i.e. the fees and
expenses of the Members of the Tribunal and of the ICSID Secretariat), which
amount to approximately US$ 1,205,000. As a result, each Party’s
costs of arbitration amounts to approximately US$ 602,500. The decision of the
Tribunal is that such costs should follow the ultimate event, and must be paid in
full by the Claimant.

 

Accordingly, the Tribunal orders the Claimant to pay the Respondent the sum of
US$ 602,500 representing the estimated expended portion of the Respondent’s
advance on the costs of the arbitration, *° as well as a proportion of the
Respondent’s legal fees and out of pocket expenses in the sum of
US$ 15,000,000. The above amounts will bear interest on the outstanding
amount thereafter at the rate of three-month LIBOR plus one per cent per annum,
such interest to run from the 31™ day after the date of despatch of this Award on
the unpaid portion of the amounts due on this Award.

° The ICSID Secretariat will in due course provide the Parties with a financial statement of the case
account and the Parties will be reimbursed the remaining balance proportionally to the amount which
was paid by each Party.

186

XIV. OPERATIVE SECTION

570. On the basis of the foregoing, the Tribunal decides as follows.

570.1 The Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the present case as Libananco
has not proved that it owned shares in CEAS and Kepez before 12 June

2003.

570.2 All the Claimant’s claims in this arbitration are dismissed.

570.3 The Claimant is ordered to pay the Respondent US$ 602,500 in
reimbursement of the expended portion of the Respondent’s advance on
costs as well as US$ 15,000,000 in respect of the Respondent's legal fees
and out of pocket expenses; such amounts to bear interest on the
outstanding amount thereafter at the rate of three-month LIBOR plus one
per cent per annum, such interest to run from the 31* day after the date
of despatch of this Award on the unpaid portion of the amounts due on
this Award.

570.4 Recalling its Order of 1 May 2008 (pursuant to which the Claimant
was ordered, amongst other things, to deliver the original share
certificates to the custody of an escrow agent) and having regard to the
following matters:

(a) paragraph 3.2.7 of the Tribunal’s Order of 1 May 2008 (pursuant

(b)

(d

(e

to which the Tribunal retained the discretion to make further
orders concerning the custody of the share certificates held in
escrow);

the share certificates were ordered to be produced, pursuant to the
specific terms of the Tribunal’s order, for the sole purpose of
examination by the Parties (by means of their respective forensic
experts or otherwise);

such examination is now complete;

the Tribunal has dismissed the Claimant’s claim on the grounds
that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the present dispute;

there being no reason for Libananco’s share certificates to be held
in escrow any further;

the Tribunal now orders the release of the share certificates from escrow
to the Claimant.

187

         

Franklin Berman Q.C.
Arbitrator

ratér
Date: 31/08 /U Date: 99-§ - /

ee

% - hee Ge]
Michael Hwang S.C.

President of the Tribunal

Date: 25 fageat 2o1/

188

