 

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

LIBANANCO HOLDINGS Co. LIMITED
Applicant

v.

REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8
ANNULMENT PROCEEDING

 

DECISION ON APPLICANT’S REQUEST FOR PROVISIONAL MEASURES

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President
Judge Hans Danelius
Dr. Eduardo Silva Romero

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Martina Polasek

May 7, 2012
Representing Applicant Representing Respondent
Mr. Robert Volterra Dr. Veijo Heiskanen
Mr. Stephen Fietta Mr. Matthias Scherer
Mr. Ashique Rahman Ms. Laura Halonen
Volterra Fietta LALIVE
London, United Kingdom Geneva, Switzerland

Prof. Andreas Lowenfeld
New York, United States

I.

IL.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Procedure

 

Position of the Parties on the Request ..........c cece eeeeeeeeeneneeeeeeees

Applicant’s Request

 

Respondent’s Observations

 

Applicant’s Reply

 

Respondent’s Rejoi

Analysis of the Committee

 

Decision

 

3

soceseeeeeneeneeseesees 4

4

5

I. Procedure

1. On December 12, 2012, Libananco Holdings Co. Limited (“Applicant”) filed with
the Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID”) an application for annulment (“Application”) of the award of
September 2, 2011 (“Award”) rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal (“the Tribunal’) in
the arbitration between Applicant and the Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No.
ARB/06/8) (“Arbitration”).

2. On March 14, 2012, after the ad hoc Committee (“Committee) had been constituted
and the proceedings had begun, Applicant filed a Request for Provisional Measures
(“Request”).! By letter of March 15, 2012, the Committee invited the Republic of
Turkey (“Respondent”) to file its observations on the Request by March 23, 2012.

Respondent filed its observations as directed on March 23, 2012 (“Observations”).

3. On March 26, 2012, the Committee invited Applicant to file a reply on the Request
by April 2, 2012 and Respondent to file a rejoinder by April 9, 2012. Following
Respondent’s request for an extension to file the rejoinder due to the Easter
holidays, Applicant offered to file its reply earlier, by March 29, 2012.
Accordingly, Applicant filed its reply on March 29, 2012 (“Reply”) and Respondent
filed its rejoinder on April 9, 2012 (““Rejoinder”).

4. During the first session of the Committee on April 11, 2012, the parties made two

rounds of oral submissions on the Request, which were recorded and transcribed.

' The full procedural history of the annulment proceeding to date is described in the Committee’s Decision on Applicant's
Request for A continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award of May 7, 2012

II. Position of the Parties on the Request

J. Applicant’s Request

Applicant has requested that the Committee order provisional measures under Rule
39 of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”).
Applicant has also referred to Rule 53 which provides that, mutatis mutandis, the
Arbitration Rules shall apply to any procedure relating to the annulment of an

award.

According to Applicant, provisional measures are urgently needed “to preserve the
[Applicant’s] rights, including the right to due process of law, the right to a fair
hearing, the right to confidentiality and legal privilege and, ultimately, the right to
prepare and present its case without interference from the Respondent’s illicit

espionage.” (Request, para. 5)

Applicant argues that “[n]o finding of fact is required on the part of the ad
hoc Committee to issue the Orders set out in Section IV below. The requested
provisional measures are derived directly from the findings of fact and
determinations made by the Tribunal in the underlying arbitration. It was on the
basis of those determinations that the Tribunal based its own Orders restraining the
Respondent. The Claimant requests that the ad hoc Committee merely reproduce
those Orders, modified only to reflect the fact that this is now the annulment phase”.

(Request, para. 2)

Applicant states that Respondent conducted illicit espionage of Applicant, its
representatives, its counsel, witnesses and experts in the underlying arbitration (“the
espionage activities”), and used it for the purposes of the Arbitration. Hence, the
orders issued by the Tribunal on May 1, 2008 (‘the 2008 Orders”). Applicant
further states that Respondent continued its illicit espionage in violation of the
Tribunal’s orders and that there is no evidence that Respondent has ceased its illicit

espionage of Applicant.

Applicant contends that, in view of “the compelling evidence and the nature of the
rights which are at risk, it is a matter of urgency that the ad hoc Committee
recommend the requested provisional measures.” (Request, para. 19) Furthermore,
Applicant asserts that the measures are necessary to prevent harm or prejudice to
Applicant. According to Applicant, the standard to be applied is a standard of
reasonableness and it argues that “[i]t is reasonable to conclude that, in the absence
of restraint on the Respondent, the [Applicant’s] right to a fair trial, guaranteed in
the Convention and under international law, will be irreparably damaged.”

(Request, para. 20)

2. Respondent’s Observations

Respondent argues that, contrary to the understanding of Applicant, there is no basis
in the ICSID Convention for the Committee to order provisional measures in an
annulment proceeding. According to Respondent, the relevant article is Article
52(4) of the Convention, which does not include Article 47 in the list of provisions
applicable mutatis mutandis to proceedings before the Committee. Respondent
contends that “the power of an annulment committee to order stay of enforcement is
lex specialis to the annulment regime and the only provisional measure available to
it.” (Observations, para. 83) Respondent takes the position that an ICSID ad hoc
annulment committee has no power to “reproduce” automatically the provisional
measures recommended by the arbitral tribunal in the underlying arbitration.

(Observations, para. 85)

In any case, Respondent further argues, Applicant has not produced any evidence in
support of its Request and the provisional measures ordered by the original Tribunal
lapsed with the issuance of the Award. Respondent thus pleads that the Request be

dismissed with costs.

3. Applicant’s Reply

In Applicant’s Reply, it questions the analysis of the ICSID Convention by
Respondent and argues that Article 52(4) does provide for the application of Article
44 of the Convention mutatis mutandis to annulment proceedings. According to
Applicant, Article 44 ‘allows the Committee to refer to the Arbitration Rules to
determine any question of procedure, including the question of whether it has the
power to recommend provisional measures.” (Reply, para. 32) Applicant contends
that “it would be a procedural and substantive absurdity if an ICSID tribunal were
able to order certain behavior pending the outcome of the case but an ICSID ad hoc
Committee were not able to do so whilst the outcome of the case was still pending.”

(ibid.)

Applicant insists on the necessity and urgency of the measures requested based on
the evidence submitted in the underlying arbitration and the additional evidence of
“the Respondent’s illicit espionage of the underlying arbitration in the Request for
Provisional Measures.” (Reply, para. 34) Applicant requests that the Committee
draw all of the appropriate negative inferences from Respondent’s failure to provide
any assurance and concludes with pleading that the Committee recommends the

requested measures in order to safeguard its fundamental procedural rights.

4, Respondent’s Rejoinder

Respondent in the Rejoinder reiterates its argument that annulment committees have
no power to order interim measures because Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention
“expressly excludes Article 47.” (Rejoinder, para. 29) According to Respondent,
“Ti]f any of the ICSID Rules, or Articles in Section IV of the Convention, could be
reimported into annulment proceedings via Article 44, even though they have been
expressly excluded by Article 52(4), the exclusion would be deprived of any effet
utile. This cannot be right. The specific exclusion in Article 52(4) must prevail over

the general provision in Article 44.” (Rejoinder, para. 32)

6

Ill. Analysis of the Committee

. The Request gives rise to the question of whether the Committee has competence to

recommend provisional measures. The fact that Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention
does not refer to Article 47 of the Convention provides considerable support for the
view that the Committee has no such competence. Moreover, it is at least doubtful
whether the general reference in Article 44 of the ICSID Convention to the Arbitration
Rules, as read together with Rules 39 and 53 of the Arbitration Rules, is sufficient to
provide the Committee with such competence despite the absence in Article 52(4) of a

reference to the specific Article dealing with provisional measures.

. However, the Committee notes that a determination of this question of interpretation of

the ICSID Convention will only be necessary if the circumstances are such that,
assuming the Committee’s competence, they would justify granting the request for
provisional measures. The Committee considers in this regard that a decision
recommending provisional measures could not be issued unless Applicant has
established the need for such measures in order to preserve its rights in the proceedings

before the Committee.

. However, Applicant, while relying on occurrences and findings during the proceedings

before the Tribunal, has adduced no elements relating to the present situation but has
affirmed that no new findings of fact are needed for the Committee to re-issue, mutatis
mutandis, the 2008 Orders. The Committee cannot find it established that the present
situation is the same as that which caused the Tribunal to issue a decision on
provisional measures. Without evidence that Respondent is at present engaging in
activities harmful to Applicant’s procedural rights or interests, or that Respondent is
likely to engage in such activities in the course of the further proceedings, the
Committee cannot find a sufficient basis for issuing orders identical to those which

were issued several years ago by the Tribunal.

18.

19.

It follows that it is not necessary to determine the Committee’s competence to
recommend provisional measures, since in any case Applicant’s request for an order on

such measures must be dismissed.

Iv. Decision

For the reasons set forth above, the Committee unanimously decides:
(a) To dismiss the Request.
(b) To reserve its decision on costs related to the Request for a later stage

of the proceedings.

On behalf of the Committee

[ SIGNED]

Andrés Rigo Sureda

President

