BEFORE THE

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF
INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Lidercén, S.L.

Claimant,

Republic of Peru

Respondent

Case No. ARB/17/9

Award

Date of Dispatch: 6 March 2020
Tribunal:
Francisco Gonzalez de Cossio

Hugo Perezcano
Jan Paulsson

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABBREVIATIONS
THE PARTIES
INTRODUCTION
PROCEDURAL HISTORY
ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONCESSION CONTRACT
SALIENT CONTRACTUAL TERMS

POST-SIGNATURE DEVELOPMENTS

Lidercén's Relations with MML prior to the Acuerdo
Conciliatorio in August 2007

Liderc6n's Relations with MML Immediately After the
Acuerdo Conciliatorio in August 2007

The 2008 Ley ITV and the 2008 Regulation
The Situation Created for MML and Lidercon by the

Ley ITV
The 2011 Award and its unenforceability

ADMISSIBILITY

JURISDICTION

MERITS

Legal bases of the claim under the Treaty
Methodology of the Tribunal's appraisal

22

28

34

39

40
4l

43
51

56

63

67

67
69

Liderc6n conduct as an investor claiming entitlement to legal

protection under the Treaty

MML’s conduct as Liderc6n's contracting party

The Ministry's exercise of its regulatory functions
The conduct of INDECOPI and the Peruvian courts?
The conduct of other officials

Recapitulation: effect of the Tribunal's conclusions on the
individual claims

(a) The alleged use by Peru of its “potestades
legislativas” to eliminate an inconvenient

72
79
81
85
91

93

agreement of exclusivity, moreover attempting

to resolve a putative conflict of competencias
instead of seizing the Tribunal

Constitucional. 93
(b) The seemingly contradictory position taken by
INDECOPI, having accepted the terms of the
Concession but later changing its criterion to
declare its illegality on account of the alleged
existence of “bureaucratic barriers”. 94
(c) The “irrazonable e inadmisible” judgment of
the Corte Superior of Lima in September
2017. 97
(d) Peru's allegedly discriminatory treatment of
Liderc6n as compared to national
operators. 99
(e) Treatment of the investment by the Peruvian
judiciary in a manner that “ofende la
discrecionalidad judicial y conlleva a un
fracaso manifiesto de la justicia natural’ (...
offends judicial discretion and leads to a
manifest failure of natural justice). 100
0) Congressional investigations which
investigated both the bidding and the Contract
ina manner which was disdainful of Lidercén
and undermined its performance.
CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS 102
COSTS 104
DISPOSITIVE DETERMINATIONS 105

ABBREVIATIONS

Bullet Point 13

Concession Contract

or Contrato de Concesién

Entidades revisoras

INDECOPI

INDECOPI Commission

ITV

Ivesur

The last of 13 unnumbered bullet points
of Clause 1.3.20 of the Concession
Contract, extending the definition of
“Applicable Laws” to “norms that
modify, derogate from, complement,
replace or interpret those previously
identified.”

The Contrato de Concesion entered into
by MML, Lidercén Pert, and Ivesur on
20 September 2004.

Entities authorized to operate technical

vehicle inspections.

Instituto de Defensa de la Competencia
y de la Propiedad Intelectual (National
Institute for the Defense of Free
Competition and the Protection of
Intellectual Property), the Peruvian

competition authority.

INDECOPI’s Comisién de Eliminacién

de Barreras Burocraticas.

Inspecciones Técnicas Vehiculares
(referred to as “Revisiones” prior to the
enactment of the 2008 ITV Law).

Ivesur S.A., a Spanish entity which was
Liderc6n’s consortium partner and

owned 30% of Liderc6n Pert.

Liderc6n.

Liderc6n Pert

Liderc6n

MML

MTC or Ministry

Municipalities Law

Ordinance No. 506

Ordinance No. 694

SUTRAN

Lidercén, S.L., the Claimant, a Spanish
entity and the 70% owner of Lidercén

Perti

Lidercén Pert S.A.C., the

Concessionaire, a Peruvian entity.

Either Lidercén, S.L. or Lidercén Perit,

depending on the context

Municipalidad Metropolitana de Lima.

Ministerio de Transportes y

Comunicaciones.

Ley Organica de  Municipalidades
(2003), repealed in part by the 2008 Ley
ITV.

MML Ordenanza of 15 May 2003,
requiring all vehicles circulating in the
Province of Lima to have certificates of
inspection (repealed as a result of the
Third Final Provision of the Ley ITV).

MML Ordenanza of 16 September 2004,
requiring vehicles to be inspected by the
Entidad Revisora under the Contrato de
Concesion (repealed as a result the Third
Final Provision of the Ley ITV).

Superintendencia de Transporte
Terrestre de Personas, Carga y
Mercancias, an “autonomous”
department of MTC.

Treaty

1999 Law

2001 Regulation

2003 Regulation

2008 Ley ITV

2008 Regulation

2011 Award

Acuerdo para la Promocién y la
Protecci6én Reciproca de Inversiones
entre el Reino de Espafia y la Reptiblica
de Peru, the Bilateral Investment Treaty
between Spain and Pert, done in Madrid
on 17 November 1994.

Ley General de Transporte y Trdnsito
Terrestre of 7 October 1999.

Reglamento Nacional de Vehiculos of 25
July 2001.

Reglamento Nacional de Vehiculos of 7
October 2003.

Ley Nacional de Inspecciones Técnicas
Vehiculares of 28 May 2008.

Reglamento Nacional de Inspecciones
Técnicas Vehiculares of 24 August 2008.

The Award rendered on 4 November
2011 after the consolidation of four
proceedings initiated by Lidercén Pert
against MML under the Concession

Contract.

THE PARTIES

1. The Claimant Lidercén, S.L., Calle Condado de Trevifio no. 65,
Poligono Industrial de Villalonquejar, Burgos, Spain, is a Spanish
corporate entity represented in these proceedings by Mr. Lucas Osorio,
Mr. José Luis Huerta, Ms. Silvia Martinez, Ms. Alba Briones, Ms. Maria
E. Ramirez, Ms. Andrea Barracchini, Ms. Juliana de Valdenebro and
Mr. Richard C. Lorenzo from the law firms Hogan Lovells US LLP and
Hogan Lovells Int'l LLP.

2. The Respondent Republic of Peru is represented in these
proceedings by Mr. Ricardo Manuel Ampuero Llerena, President of the
Special Commission of the Republic of Peru; Ms. Ménica del Pilar
Guerrero Acevedo of the Special Commission; Ms. Marinn Carlson,
Ms. Jennifer Haworth McCandless, Mr. Patrick T. Childress, Ms.
Courtney Hikawa, Mr. Michael Krantz, Ms. Maria Carolina Duran, Ms.
Veronica Restrepo from the law firm Sidley Austin (DC) LLP, and Mr.
Stanimir A. Alexandrov from the law firm Stanimir A. Alexandrov
PLLC.

INTRODUCTION

3. In 2004, Lidercén, S.L entered into a concession contract
with the Metropolitan Municipality of Lima (“MML”) to build and
operate motor vehicle inspection centers under the MML’s authority
within its territory, which is inhabited by between one-fourth and one-
third of the population of Peru. The Contract is still in force,
but Lidercén complains of a failure on the part of Peruvian public
authorities to respect the condition of exclusivity to which it believes it
is contractually entitled, and contends that it is also entitled by contract
to be subject to supervision by MML instead of by the Ministry. While
foreign investors in various countries have complained about suffering
from discrimination, this is an unusual instance of a complaint about
being deprived of the benefits of excluding competitors, local or
foreign. (Lidercén also complains of discrimination, but of other
kinds.) Lidercén contends the elimination of its claimed rights of
exclusivity has been affected by Peruvian state instrumentalities in

breach of the Spain/Peru Bilateral Investment Treaty.

4, In this arbitration, Lidercén alleges that the value of its
investment has diminished to an extent which its Memorial evaluated
as being in excess of US$95 million by reason of a number of adverse
events, notably (A) a 2008 Law (the Ley /TV) setting out rules for
operating a national system of vehicle inspection administered by the
Ministry of Transportation and Communications (“MTC” or “the
Ministry”) which interfered with the rights Lidercén contends it was
granted by MML, (B) the judicial declaration that a 2011 arbitral award
favourable to Lidercén was partially unenforceable, and (C) a decision
in September 2007 by INDECOPI, subsequently judicially confirmed,
to the effect that MML Ordinance No. 694, which in effect authorized
the grant of exclusive rights under the Concession Contract, was an
illegal bureaucratic barrier. As a result, Lidercén has for years been
exposed to restrictions, and to competition from its business rivals, in
ways that infringe its concession, and alleges that these adverse
developments have constituted breaches of the Treaty attributable to
the State of Peru. Lidercén also complains of subsequent grave and
improper interference with the operation of its inspection centers,

which it says continued notwithstanding the pendency of the present

arbitration and culminated in the closure of its centers by the

authorities shortly after the September 2019 hearings.

5. In Peru, a national system of mandatory vehicle inspections
began to emerge at the turn of the century. The 1999 Ley General de
Transporte y Trdnsito Terrestre (“1999 Law”) established in Article 16
that the regulation and management of this system would form part of
the “competencias y funciones” (jurisdiction and powers) of the
Ministry, which in 2001 issued a Reglamento Nacional de Vehiculos
(2001 Regulation“) containing a chapter on motor vehicles which
notably provided in Article 52(E) that the Ministry had the authority to
regulate and supervise vehicle inspections in the country; in Article 52
(G) that vehicle owners were free to choose where they would obtain
inspection certificates; and in Article 54(A) that the Ministry could

delegate some of its functions to other entities.

6. The situation of the municipality of Lima was something of an
anomaly. A few months before the issuance of the 2001 Regulation, the
Ministry had agreed, in a Convenio de Gestién de Revisiones Técnicas
de Vehiculos en Lima Metropolitana (Management Agreement for the
Technical Inspection of Vehicles in Metropolitan Lima) with MML,
that the latter would supervise motor vehicle inspections in the capital.
Nevertheless, so Peru contends, the delegation was never implemented
according to its terms carried out with the result that the Convenio was

never given effect.

7. In any event, the consortium comprised of the Claimant and
Ivesur won the bid in 2004 for a concession from MML to build and
operate motor vehicle inspection centers. As a result, Lidercén and
Ivesur incorporated a Peruvian company, Lidercén Pert, S.A.C. (70%
owned by Lidercén and 30% by Ivesur) that would operate the
concession, as required by the Bases de licitacién (Bidding Rules) and

subsequently by the Concession Contract.

8. The Concession Contract was entered into by MML, Lidercén
Pert and Ivesur on 20 September 2004. Contractual relations soon
turned out to be difficult. By early 2008, Lidercén had initiated six

separate arbitrations against MML under the Contract. Part of the

difficulty, as will be explained below, resulted from the tension of
different conceptions of the attribution of authority to regulate vehicle
inspections as between the Ministry (nation-wide powers) and MML
(regional powers in the dominant, densely populated region of the
capital, where the problems of congestion and pollution are uniquely
acute), as well as of the compatibility of a sole-provider as entidad

revisora (inspection entity) with the public policy against monopolies.

9. The original texts of the documents examined by the Arbitral
Tribunal and quoted in this Award are in the Spanish language, and all
participants in these proceedings understand them in the original.
Nevertheless, the proceedings have been bilingual, and the oral
arguments by both sides were presented in English. For that reason,
some passages of documents quoted below are rendered in translation

to be consistent with the English words actually used in the hearings.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

10. On 21 December 2016, ICSID received a Request for Arbitration
of the same date from Liderc6n, S.L. and Lidercén Pert, S.A.C. against
the Republic of Peru (the “Request”). On 24 March 2017,
representatives of Liderc6n, S.L. and Lidercén Pert, S.A.C. submitted
a letter to ICSID withdrawing Lidercén Pert, S.A.C. as requesting
party. On 3 April 2017, Lidercén, S.L. submitted a revised version of its
Request to ICSID.

11. On 5 April 2017, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the
Request in accordance with Article 36 of the ICSID Convention and
notified the Parties of the registration. In the Notice of Registration,
the Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute an
arbitral tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Articles 37 and
40 of the ICSID Convention.

12. The Parties agreed to do so in accordance with Article 37(2)(a)
of the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal is composed by Professor Jan
Paulsson (French/Swedish), President, appointed by agreement of the
parties; Dr. Francisco Gonzalez de Cossio (Mexican), appointed by the
Claimant; and Professor Hugo Perezcano (Mexican), appointed by the

Respondent.

13. On 2 August 2017, the Secretary-General, in accordance with
Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
(the “Arbitration Rules”), notified the Parties that all three arbitrators
had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore
deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms. Mairée Uran
Bidegain, ICSID Team Leader/Legal Counsel, was designated to serve

as Secretary of the Tribunal.

14. On 25 August 2017, the Centre informed the Tribunal and the
Parties that Ms. Catherine Kettlewell, ICSID Counsel, had been
appointed as Secretary of the Tribunal in replacement of Ms. Uran

Bidegain.

15. In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1), the Tribunal
held a first session with the Parties on 22 September 2017, by
teleconference. On 16 October 2017 the Tribunal issued Procedural
Order No. | recording the agreement of the Parties on procedural
matters and the decision of the Tribunal on disputed issues. Procedural
Order No. | provides, inter alia, that the applicable Arbitration Rules
would be those in effect from 10 April 2006, that the procedural
languages would be English and Spanish, the timetable for
submissions, and that the place of proceeding would be Washington,
Dc.

16. On 6 February 2018, in accordance with the timetable for
submissions, the Claimant filed a Memorial on the Merits (“Claimant's
Memorial”) together with Exhibits C-1 through C-152 and Legal
Authorities CL-1 through CL-84; Witness Statements by Ratil Barrios
Fernandez Concha and Alberto Vicario Anuncibay, and an Expert

Report by Daniel Flores (Econ One Research, Inc.).

17. On 8 August 2018, in accordance with the timetable for
submissions, the Respondent filed a Counter-Memorial on the Merits
and a Memorial on Jurisdiction (“Respondent's Counter-Memorial”)
together with Exhibits R-OO1 through R-254 and Legal Authorities RL-
Ol through RL-046; Witness Statements by Silvia Hooker, Eduardo
Garcia-Godos, Alfieri Lucchetti, Janet Arias, Ellioth Tarazona, and
Arturo Ruiz; and Expert Reports by Brent C. Kaczmarek and Isabel S.
Kunsman (of Navigant Consulting, Inc., together with appendices 4

through 11), Diego Zegarra, Manuel Sanchez, and Francisco Eguiguren.

18. On 28 September 2018, each Party filed a request for the
Tribunal to decide on production of documents. On 17 October 2018,
the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 concerning production of

documents.

19. On | February 2019, in accordance with the timetable for
submissions, the Claimant filed a Reply on the Merits and Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction (“Claimant's Reply”) together with Exhibits
C-153 through C-284 and Legal Authorities CL-85 through CL-128;

Second Witness Statements by Ratil Barrios Fernandez Concha and

Alberto Vicario Anuncibay, a Second Expert Report by Daniel Flores
(Econ One Research, Inc.), and Expert Reports by Fernando

Cantuarias and Maria Teresa Quifiones Alayza.

20. On 22 April 2019, the Claimant filed a request for provisional
measures, together with Exhibits C-284 through C-336,' and Legal
Authorities CL-129 through CL-133; a Third Witness Statement by
Ratil Barrios Fernandez Concha; and an Update on Economic Damages
by Daniel Flores (Quadrant Economics LLC). On 9 May 2019, the
Claimant filed further information on the request for provisional

measures.

21. On 14 May 2019, the Respondent filed observations on the
Claimant's request for provisional measures, together with Exhibits R-
255 through R-311 and Legal Authorities RL-047 through RL-063; and

a Witness Statement by Daniella Canales.

22. On 21 May 2019, the Claimant filed a response to Respondent's
observations of 14 May 2019.

23. On 28 May 2019, the Respondent filed further observations on
the Claimant's response of 21 May 2019, together with Exhibits R-312
through R-315.

24. On 31 May 2019, the Tribunal decided on Claimant's request for

provisional measures as follows:

The arbitrators find it difficult to order national
authorities to suspend the enforcement of regulations
before they have found it to be wrongful. They are

moreover disinclined to do so even on a prima facie basis,

! The Claimant has submitted two different exhibits identified as Exhibit C-

284. The first was included in the Claimant's Reply (Sentencia de la Corte Superior de
Justicia de Lima, Primera Sala Permanente Contenciosa Administrativa, resoluci6n N°
03 de 28 de septiembre de 2018, expediente N° 18103-2016-30, dated 28 September
2018), and th ond was included in the Claimant's Request for Provisional Measures
(Acta de Verificacié6n 2901000915 para la Planta Materiales, dated 22 February 2019).

 

12

and will therefore at this time not order the provisional

measures sought by the Claimant.

25. In view of the evolution of the case, the Tribunal also decided
to adjust the process in the interest of time and costs and to exclusively
address non-quantum issues at the hearing foreseen in the timetable.
In regards to the bifurcation of the quantum issues, the Tribunal

specified:

It seems to the Tribunal that putting quantum issues to
the side for now has at least three conceivable advantages:
(i) avoiding the cost of full presentations of quantum at
this stage, which experience often shows to be a very
expensive process; (ii) allowing subsequently more
precise debate on quantum in light of the findings in
relation to liability; (iii) reducing the complexity and
therefore the length of the deliberations and drafting of
the Tribunal’s more limited decision, and (iv) conceivably
creating an impetus for the Parties, in light of the
Tribunal’s decision on the non-quantum matters, to

resolve the dispute directly.

26. On this basis, the Tribunal invited the Parties to consult in this
regard. After receiving the comments from the Parties, on | July 2019,
the Tribunal decided that the hearing would be held from 19 to 27
September 2019.

27. On 14 June 2019, in accordance with the timetable for
submissions, the Respondent filed a Rejoinder on the Merits and Reply
on Jurisdiction (“Respondent's Rejoinder”) together with Exhibits R-
213 bis, and R-316 through R-505, and Legal Authorities RL-064
through RL-099; Witness Statement by Carlos Jiménez Rodriguez,
Second Witness Statements by Daniella Canales, Janet Arias, Ellioth
Tarazona, Silvia Hooker, Alfieri Lucchetti and Arturo Ruiz; Expert
Report by Mercedes Bravo Osorio, and Second Expert Reports by Brent
C. Kaczmarek and Isabel S. Kunsman (of Navigant Consulting, Inc.,
together with appendices 3 and 12 through 16), Diego Zegarra, Manuel

Sanchez, and Francisco Eguiguren.

28. On July 22, 2019, once that the parties had confirmed their
availability, the Tribunal confirmed the pre-hearing conference call to
be held on 3 September 2019.

29. On 2 August 2019, in accordance with the timetable for
submissions, the Claimant filed a Rejoinder on Jurisdiction
(“Claimant's Rejoinder”) together with Exhibits C-337 through C-347,7
and Legal Authorities CL-134 through CL-137; Third Witness
Statement by Alberto Vicario Anuncibay, and Expert Report by Alberto

Vaquerizo Alonso.

30. On 21 August 2019, the Tribunal invited the Parties to consult
in the arrangements for the hearing. On 28 August 2019 the Parties
submitted their agreement on the hearing procedures and their
corresponding positions on those matters in which there was no
agreement. On 30 August 2019, the Claimant notified the Tribunal of
a possible disruption due to inclement weather which would impede
the participation of counsel for the Claimant at the pre-hearing
conference call. In view of the Claimant’s counsel situation, on 2
September 2019, the Tribunal cancelled the pre-hearing conference
call. On 3 September 2019, the Tribunal decided on the procedural
matters for the hearing not previously agreed by the Parties. The
Tribunal further invited the Parties to consult with each other and then
(1) indicate approval, (2) make a joint request for modification(s), or

(3) make unilateral application(s) for reconsideration.

31. On 31 August 2019, the Claimant requested leave from the
Tribunal to submit new evidence into the record. On | September
2019, the Tribunal indicated that a Party did not need permission to
make an application invoking exceptional circumstances and provide
evidence thereof, but that cannot prejudge its admissibility as to which
its opponent is naturally free to comment. On this basis, the parties
submitted new evidence on the record. The Claimant submitted

Exhibits C-348 to C-351 and the Respondent submitted in response

2 On August 23, 2019, the Claimant informed the Tribunal of an inadverted
error in Exhibit C-347 included In Claimant's Rejoinder. In this communication, the
Claimant submitted the correct Exhibit C-347 which was then introduced into the
record.

Exhibits R-506 to R-517 on 31 August 2019 and 14 September 2019,

respectively.

32. On | September 2019, the Respondent informed the Tribunal
that Mr. Alfieri Lucchetti was restricted from leaving Peru and would,
therefore, not be able to attend the hearing in person. The Respondent
offered, alternatively, to have Mr. Lucchetti testify via video
conference. On 6 September 2019, the Tribunal requested the
Respondent for further information regarding the presence of Mr.
Alfieri Lucchetti at the hearing indicating that remote testimony would
be undesirable. In view that Mr. Lucchetti’s presence at the hearing
could not been ensured, on 16 September 2019, the Tribunal provided
instructions for the parties to arrange his testimony via video

conference.

33. On 10 September 2019, the Tribunal requested further
information regarding the request for the Claimant to present the
direct examination for Dr. Cantuarias. On 12 September 2019, the
Tribunal reconsidered its decision on Dr. Cantuarias’ testimony
allowing Dr. Cantaurias to respond to Dr. Sanchez’s Second Legal

Opinion with respect to the three questions related to the 2011 Award.

34. On 16 September 2019, the Tribunal decided the following:

The evidence concerning SUTRAN’s actions is admitted
from both sides. The Secretary already has all of the
exhibits and they can be placed on the record. The
Respondent's request to admit certain supervening
evidence coming out of the court cases related to the 2011
arbitral award is also admitted; the Secretary can place the
documents on the record. If the Claimant wishes to submit
responsive evidence it is in principle free to do so but after
conferring with the Respondent in case there is any

objection as to responsiveness.

On this basis, Claimant submitted Exhibits C-351 to C-356.

35. A hearing on jurisdiction and the merits was held in
Washington, DC from 19 to 27 September 2019 (the “Hearing”). The

following persons were present at the Hearing:

Tribunal:

Prof. Jan Paulsson
Dr. Francisco Gonzalez de Cossio
Prof. Hugo Perezcano Diaz

ICSID Secretariat:
Ms. Catherine Kettlewell
For the Claimant:

Mr. Richard C. Lorenzo
Ms. Maria E. Ramirez

Ms. Alba Briones

Ms. Silvia Martinez

Ms. Andrea Barracchini
Ms. Juliana De Valdenebro
Ms. Marta M. Urra

Mr. Jared Schifman

Ms. Wilzette Louis

Mr. Alberto Vicario

For the Respondent:

Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov

Ms. Jennifer Haworth McCandless
Ms. Marinn Carlson

Ms. Maria Carolina Durén

Mr. Michael Krantz

Ms. Veronica Restrepo

Ms. Courtney Hikawa

Ms. Maria Marulanda-Miirrle

Mr. Ricardo Puccio Sala

Mr. Ricardo Ampuero Llerena

Ms. Ménica del Pilar Guerrero Acevedo

Ambassador Hugo De Zela
Ms. Giovanna Zanelli
Mr. Alberto Hart

Court Reporters:

Ms. Dawn K. Larson
Mr. Leandro Iezzi

President
Arbitrator
Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal

Hogan Lovells US LLP

Hogan Lovells US LLP

Hogan Lovells International LLP
Hogan Lovells International LLP
Hogan Lovells International LLP
Hogan Lovells US LLP

Hogan Lovells US LLP

Hogan Lovells US LLP

Hogan Lovells US LLP

Lidercén, S.L.

Stanimir A. Alexandrov PLLC
Sidley Austin LLP

Sidley Austin LLP

Sidley Austin LLP

Sidley Austin LLP

Sidley Austin LLP

Sidley Austin LLP

Sidley Austin LLP

Navarro & Pazos Abogados
Ministry of Economy and
Finance, Republic of Peru

Ministry of Economy and
Finance, Republic of Peru

Embassy of Peru
Embassy of Peru
Embassy of Peru

Worldwide Reporting, LLP
DR-Esteno

36.

Interpreters:

Mr. Daniel Giglio
Ms. Silvia Colla
Mr. Charles Roberts

English-Spanish Interpreter
English-Spanish Interpreter
English-Spanish Interpreter

During the Hearing, the following persons were examined:

The witnesses presented by the Claimant:

Mr. Alberto Vicario

Mr. Ratil Hernando Barrios Fernandez

Concha

Lidercén, S.L.

Liderc6én Pert, S.A.C.

The experts presented by the Claimant:

Dr. Fernando Cantuarias Salaverry

Dr. Maria Teresa Quifiones Alayza

Legal Expert - Decano de la
Facultad de Derecho de la
Universidad del Pacifico

Legal Expert - Quifiones
Alayza Abogados

The witnesses presented by the Respondent:

Mr. Félix Arturo Ruiz Sanchez

Mr. Ellioth Tarazona

Estudio Rubio Leguia Normand
(formerly, Asistente Legal de la
Gerencia Legal del Comité
Especial de Promocién de la
Inversién Privada (CEPRI) in the
Municipalidad Metropolitana de
Lima)

Gerente de Planeamiento y
Desarrollo, Asociacién
Automotriz del Peru (formerly,
Asesor Técnico and Asesor
Técnico de la Direccién de
Regulacién y Normatividad de la
Direccién General de Transporte
Terrestre (DGTT) del Ministerio
de Transportes y
Comunicaciones (MTC))

Ms. Janet Arias Directora de Circulacién Vial,
Ministerio de Transportes y
Comunicaciones (MTC)

Mr. Alfieri Bruno Lucchetti Rodriguez Asesor Legal de la Direccién de
Inversiones Descentralizadas de
la Agencia de Promocién de la
Inversién Privada
(Proinversi6n) (formerly,
Asistente Legal Senior de la
Secretaria Técnica de la
Comisién de Acceso al Mercado
del Instituto Nacional de la
Defensa de la Competencia y de
la Proteccién de la Propiedad
Intelectual (INDECOPD)

Mr. Eduardo Garcia-~Godos Instituto Peruano de
Facilitaci6n del Comercio
(formerly Comisionado de la
Comisi6én de Acceso al Mercado,
Instituto Nacional de Defensa
de la Competencia y de la
Proteccién de la Propiedad
Intelectual (INDECOPD)

Ms. Silvia Hooker Vocal de la Sala Especializada
en Defensa, Instituto Nacional
de Defensa de la Competencia y
de la Proteccién de la Propiedad
Intelectual (INDECOPI
(formerly, Gerencia Legal of
INDECOPI)

Ms. Daniella Canales Independiente (formerly,
Gerente de la Gerencia de
Supervision y Fiscalizacion de la
Superintendencia de
Transporte Terrestre de
Personas, Carga y Mercancias
(SUTRAN))

Mr. Carlos Jiménez Rodriguez Gerencia Legal, Instituto
Nacional de Defensa de la
Competencia y de la Proteccién
de la Propiedad Intelectual
(INDECOPI)

The experts presented by the Respondent:

Mr. Francisco José Eguiguren Praeli Legal Expert - Pontificia
Universidad Catélica del Peru;

Comisi6n Interamericana de
Derechos Humanos

Mr. Manuel Sanchez Legal Expert - Judge of the
Supreme Court of Peru,
Retired; Independent
Attorney

Dr. Mercedes Bravo Osorio Legal Expert - Bufete Barrilero

y Asociados

37. All witnesses were present in person before the Tribunal, save
Mr. Alfieri Bruno Lucchetti Rodriguez who testified via video

conference.

38. On 7 November 2019, the Parties submitted their agreed
corrections to the English and Spanish transcripts of the hearing. The

corrections were recorded by the corresponding court reporters.

39. On the same date, the Claimant submitted a Renewed Request
for Interim Relief together with Exhibits C-357 and C-358. The
Respondent commented on the Claimant's request on 13 November
2019, as invited by the Tribunal.

40. On 19 November 2019, the Claimant submitted further
comments and evidence (Exhibits C-359 and C-360) in support of its
request. On 21 November 2019, the Tribunal invited the Respondent
to comment, particularly with respect to two issues. On 22 November
2019, the Claimant submitted further evidence (Exhibit C-361). On 27
November 2019, the Claimant submitted further arguments related to
its request and Exhibits C-362 through C-367. In light of this
information, the Respondent requested an extension to respond. On 4
December 2019, the Respondent submitted its comments together
with Exhibits R-518 through R-521.

Al. On 11 December 2019, the Tribunal issued its decision on the

Claimant's Renewed Request for Interim Relief as follows:

The Arbitral Tribunal has considered the Claimant's
objections to the closing of its plants, and its desire for
immediate relief. The arbitrators however remain
disinclined to order the Peruvian public authorities to
undo steps they believe are essential from a regulatory
point of view. If the Claimant prevails on the merits and
the proceedings therefore move to a quantum phase, it
may turn out that the Respondent's actions have
exacerbated the prejudice the Claimant says it has
suffered, in which case it may secure relief then — but not

before.

42. On 10 January 2020, the Parties requested the Tribunal for
guidance on the presentation of cost submission. The Parties also
inquired whether the Tribunal wished to pose any questions in

preparation for the Hearing on Quantum.

43. On 17 January 2020, the Tribunal provided the following

instructions to the Parties:

1. Cost submissions. The Tribunal assumes that the Parties
now have the information available and could specify their
costs claims in 10 days. The Tribunal does not require
lengthy explanations, nor full details such as dates when
time was recorded, as well as by whom; or receipts of
expenditures. The Tribunal will take a view of the
reasonableness and proportionality of the claims in light
of their collective experience and judgment, as well as the
work that has been produced —with which they are well
acquainted indeed. Counsel's certification that fees have
been paid will be required. Each side will be invited to
react to the claims 10 days thereafter. These deadlines will
be adjusted if they cause difficulty. The submission of
costs claims at this stage would enable the arbitrators to
render either an Award or a Decision reserving costs

depending on the result of their deliberations.

2. Timing. The considerable volume of materials in this

case has affected the progress of deliberations.

20

Nevertheless, the arbitrators believe that they can reach
and communicate their decision some time before the end
of February, fully understanding as they do that the
sooner they do so the less the inconvenience for the Parties

who until then need to be on standby.

44. On 31 January 2020, the Parties simultaneously submitted
their cost submissions. On | February 2020, the Claimant submitted
an updated cost submission to reflect the line on experts with the
purpose of showing the same information as filed by Respondent. On
21 February 2020, the Respondent submitted comments on Claimant's
cost submission. Claimant objected alleging that the comments were
not timely submitted pursuant to the Tribunal’s instructions and
requested leave to comment on Respondent's submission. In light of
the advanced stage of the Tribunal’s deliberations, it was unnecessary

to pursue this matter as it did not require resolution.

45. The proceeding was closed on 6 March 2020.

21

ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONCESSION CONTRACT

46. Pre-contractual events are of particular interest in the present
case in light of the Claimant's alleged expectations with respect to the

rights it says were generated by the Concession Contract.

47. In May 2001, the Ministry and MML concluded a Convenio de
Gestion, or management agreement, by which these two governmental
departments agreed that MML would be charged with the task of
conducting vehicles inspections “en la provincia de Lima,” (in the
province of Lima) and that MML would be able to do so by granting
concessions “within the scope of its territorial authority”. The same
document contained a clause (tercera) (third) which mentioned that a
National Regulation of Technical Inspections was to be established,
and that it would include, “de manera explicita, el regimen especial de
gestion para la Municipalidad” (in an express manner, the special
regime for administration by the Municipality). The following clause,
moreover, provided that the “special regime” of administration by
MML would “form a part of” an anticipated national Regulation, and
would be drafted, with the participation of MML, within not more than

45 days of the signature of the Convenio de Gestion.

48. This never happened. So testified Mr. Ellioth Tarazona, a
Technical Advisor at the Ministry involved in the preparation of its
regulations from 2003 to 2008. To the contrary, as his first witness
statement puts it in Paragraph 9, the Regulation issued on 25 July
2001, implementing the 2001 Law, although it permitted in principle
the delegation of this function, identified the Ministry alone as the
entidad autorizada (authorized entity) to confer concessions with
respect to vehicle inspections, and did not envisage a special regime for
MML.

49. Mr. Tarazona’s evidence illuminates the tension between the
concept of national vs. regional regulatory authority in other respects
as well. He refers to the absence of vehicle inspections prior to 2001,
when the Regulation of that year first mentioned an obligation for
vehicle owners to submit to inspections (Paragraph 7), and insists

repeatedly on the need for a “sistema nacional de inspecciones”

22

(national inspection system). He expresses the view that in the wake
of the “turbulence” of the Fujimori regime, the Peruvian government
underwent a comprehensive restructuring which explains why the
Regulation designed to implement the 1999 Law was not issued until
2001 (Paragraph 6).

50. On 15 May 2003, MML issued municipal Ordenanza No. 506
regulating vehicle inspections in Lima. The Ordinance took as its
premise that MML’s “competencias y funciones" included the
inspection of motor vehicles and affirmed that it was obligatory for
every vehicle circulating in Lima. It also set out vehicle inspection
schedules and sanctions for car owners who had not passed required
vehicle inspections, conducted by public or private entities to be

approved in accordance with the applicable law.

Sl. On 26 May 2003, the Peruvian Congress enacted the Ley
Organica de Municipalidades. This was an omnibus piece of
legislation, which in some 60 pages set out a great number of directives
concerning the function and attributes of municipal entities. It
contained a full section comprising 14 Articles devoted to MML. Article
161 laid out MML’s competencias y funciones. Among them was a
succinct indication, in paragraph (7.6), of its authority to “verify and
control the performance of vehicles through periodic technical
inspections.” According to Paragraph 25 of Peru’s Counter-Memorial,
MML interpreted this provision to mean that it had the power to
authorize and regulate vehicle inspection centers within its
jurisdiction, but other officials disagreed, believing that MML had the
competence only to ensure that cars circulating in Lima had passed
vehicle inspections regulated by the latter and could not issue

certificates that were valid nation-wide.

52. On 7 October 2003, MTC issued the 2003 National Vehicle
Regulation. A number of its provisions, such as the rule in Article 102
that inspections could only be carried out in plantas autorizadas
(authorized centers), did not indicate which public entity might be
ensuring the implementation of the Regulation. But Article 106 cast
doubt on the prospect of the grant of exclusive rights to inspect, making
clear that owners could go to the inspection center of their choice.

Moreover, Article 119 defined MTC as the autoridad competente for

23

the grant of concessions with respect to vehicle inspection. In contrast
with the 2001 Regulation, which it supplanted, the 2003 Regulation
did not provide that MTC could delegate its authority to a different

government entity.

53. Mr. Tarazona notes that notwithstanding the 2003 Regulation,
MML relied on the Ley Orgdnica de Municipalidades issued earlier
that year as authorizing it to grant concessions for inspection centers
within its jurisdiction. He finds this to be incoherent with the fact that
the Ministry under the 2003 Regulation was to apply a national set of
criteria for those seeking to operate inspection centers, and to issue
certificates valid nation-wide. In any event, Article 5 of the 2008 Law
(or “Ley ITV’) prohibited the exclusive grant of concessions, thereby in
his view securing the public benefits of competition both in respect of
quality of services and cost. At the same time, however, this posed a
troublesome question of the Concession Contract’s compatibility with
the Ley ITV.

54. Lidercén for its part argues that its entitlement to rely on
MML’s authority was confirmed in a single-page letter from the
Minister of MTC dated 14 October 2003 to the Mayor of Lima,
following up a telephone conversation, observing that although his
Ministry would establish a system of vehicle inspections at the national
level the Municipality of Lima should put in place its own inspections.
Therefore, the Minister went on to suggest that MML might also
implement a bidding process “dentro de su jurisdiccién, de modo que
sea posible uniformizar el procedimiento a nivel nacional” (within its

jurisdiction, so as to bring about a uniform national process).

55. Mr. Tarazona states in his first witness statement in Paragraph
14 that although “I am ignorant of the Minister's motives in having
sent that letter”, he expresses disbelief that it could at the time have
been taken as proof that Lidercén enjoyed exclusive rights since the
Minister referred in the plural to Entidades Revisoras. He
nevertheless accepts (in the following Paragraph) that MML’'s
Ordenanza 694 had the explicit purported effect of subordinating the
process of inspections in the Province of Lima to the provisions of the
Contrato de Concesién signed with the “Entidad Revisora”, thus

purporting to give Lidercén 16 years of exclusivity.

24

56. Peru's Counter-Memorial asserts as follows:

27. According to the 2003 National Vehicle Regulation: (i)
vehicle inspections can only be carried out as Plantas de
Revisiones Técnicas that are authorized and supervised by
the MTC; (ii) Entidades Revisoras are companies that
operate the Plantas de Revisiones Técnicas and that may
render vehicle inspection services in accordance with a
concession obtained from the government; and (iii) users
may choose freely where to obtain vehicle inspections for
their vehicle, among other provisions. Even though the
MTC issued this new Regulation indicating that the MTC
had authority to govern vehicle inspection centers, the
MML continues to believe that it had authority to act
regarding vehicle inspection centers within the

Municipality of Lima.

28. Thus, there was tension between the MTC and the
MML regarding who had the competence to approve
vehicle inspection centers in Lima. Under Peruvian law,
where there is a disagreement between two government
entities on the scope of their competence, it may be
resolved via a constitutional proceeding (proceso
competencial) before the Constitutional Tribunal, where
the Tribunal interprets the applicable laws and decides
which is the competent entity. However, the
Constitutional Tribunal has clarified that Congress may
also issue laws granting competences to the national
government (such as the MTC) to maintain the “unity” of
the State. In those cases, via legislation, Congress clarifies

which national-level entity has the competence to act.

57. The choice ultimately made by the Peruvian national
authorities, as indeed Mr. Tarazona confirms, was to clarify the matter
of competence by legislative enactment. This finally had the effect of
congressional abrogation of the conflicting provision of the Ley de
Municipalidades. But that result was reached five years after MML had
charged its Special Committee for the Promotion of Private
Investment, commonly referred to by its Spanish acronym, “CEPRI”,

to conduct and conclude a tender process, open to both Peruvian and

25

foreign candidates. The invitation to tender was published between 21
March and 9 April 2004 in El Peruano, the official gazette, as well as
in several newspapers with broad national and international
circulation. The Bases de Licitacién, which served as terms of
reference, were made available to prospective bidders. The latter were
required to go through a phase of prequalification. A draft of the
Concession Contract was provided to interested parties on 17 May
2004. Revised Bases de Licitacién were finalized on 24 June 2004
after consultations with participants. They notably introduced a new
exclusivity clause for the provision of inspection services in “Lima

Metropolitana”.

58. Five companies sought prequalification. Of those, only two
were deemed to be compliant with the specified qualifications. One of
them was Ivesur, Lidercén’s consortium partner. Lidercén itself did
not satisfy the prequalification criteria; the Bases de Licitacién
required bidders to have specific experience and practical expertise in
the operation of vehicle inspection facilities, which Liderc6n lacked —

not having operated such facilities in Spain or elsewhere.

59. A third draft of the Contract was issued to the prequalified
bidders on 21 July, and in the absence of comments from the bidders a
final version on 26 July. On August 3, the Lidercén consortium
provided a copy of the final Contract signed by Ivesur S.A. as the
“prequalified operator”, together with a performance bond, a signature
copy of the Consortium Agreement, and an economic proposal. On 19
August, CEPRI announced that the Lidercén’s consortium had
prevailed by proposing the lowest inspection fee. On 20 September,
Lidercén, Ivesur, and MML formally signed the Contrato de

Concesion.

60. Four days before that, MML had enacted Ordenanza 694. Mr.
Arturo Ruiz, who served on CEPRI from 2004 to 2010 and “directly
participated in the preparation of Ordenanza 694’, writes in
Paragraph 12 of his first witness statement that this text was a
necessary complement to Ordenanza 506 in order to make clear, in
Article 5, that the obligation to undergo inspections in Lima applied to
“all vehicles registered in the Oficina Registral de Lima and Callao

whose owners are domiciled in the province of Lima.”

26

6l. Meanwhile, it is safe to say that trouble was brewing. Mr.
Tarazona testified before the present Tribunal that notwithstanding
the Minister's letter of 14 October 2003 his team was “fully certain”
that MML did not have the authority to regulate and administer vehicle
inspections. This divergence was the reason for consulting a leading
Peruvian law firm, the Estudio Jorge Avendaifio. Its opinion of 15 July
2004 confirmed the view of the Ministry's internal lawyers that MML
“no tiene competencia para otorgar en concesion el servicio técnico de
los vehiculos automotores que circulan dentro de su jurisdiccién"
(does not have authority to grant a concession for the technical service
of vehicles that circulate in its jurisdiction). In Mr. Tarazona’s
understanding, the Municipalities Law did no more than to authorise
MML to verify that motor vehicles circulating within its jurisdiction has
passed the inspection. (T 757:14-17.) For its part, MML solicited a
number of opinions which expressed a contrary view (as will be seen
below), but none of them was communicated to the Ministry as far as
Mr. Tarazona knew; he said he was seeing them for the first time on the

witness stand.

62. Another issue was being raised, initially by a written questions
from a member of the Peruvian Congress with respect to the fees to be
charged for the vehicle inspection services and the conformity of the
planned Concession with the constitutional prohibition of anti-
competitive agreements. The question was addressed to INDECOPI,
which has the authority to prevent governmental entities from creating
“barriers” to competition. INDECOPI thus examines the acts of public
entities and where it deems it appropriate takes action against them,
which may of course indirectly affect private parties who are
advantaged by the barriers. The question was received on 20 August
2004. The Comisién de Acceso al Mercado (Market Access
Commission) (as it then was called) instructed its Technical Secretary
to determine whether the conditions were met for the Commission to
open an investigation. In the report he produced ten days later, he
explained that no fees had yet been imposed and the matter was not
ripe for investigation by the Commission. He also concluded that the
concession was not a legal monopoly that affected free competition
rules. The documents he reviewed included neither the Concession
Contract (yet to be signed) nor MML’s Ordenanza 694 (which had not
yet been issued). He did review Ordenanza 506, but noted that the
inspection proceedings “will be regulated” by MML and _ the

27

corresponding fees established by means of an ordenanza, and made
clear that such implementation could be subject to investigation by the
Commission. As will be seen, the subsequent, substantive INDECOPI
investigation in 2007 was rather triggered by and focused on
Ordenanza 694.

SALIENT CONTRACTUAL TERMS

63. Although the Claimant seeks to establish breaches of the
Treaty, the alleged deprivation of which it complains is the wrongful
impairment of its rights under the Contrato de Concesioén. It is

therefore necessary to be acquainted with its essential provisions.

64. The Contrato was signed by Liderc6n Perti as the Sociedad
Concesionaria, by Ivesur S.A as Operador Precalificado (Prequalified
Operator), and by MML as El Concedente.

65. Clause 1.3 contains the following definitions:

1.3.4. “Bases”. Es el documento denominado “Bases de la
Licitacién Piblica Especial Internacional” N° 001-2004-
MML/CEPRI-LIMA para otorgar la Concesién de la
Ejecucién de la Infraestructura de las Plantas de
Revisiones Técnicas y la Explotacién del Servicio de
Revisiones Técnicas Vehiculares para Lima
Metropolitana, incluyendo cualquier formulario, anexo y
todas las modificaciones que se hubieran introducido en
el curso de la Licitaci6n, asi como las circulares emitidas
por el CEPRI LIMA de acuerdo con sus facultades para
establecer los términos de la adjudicacién de la

Concesion.

1.3.7. “Concesion”. Es el acto administrativo plasmado en
el presente Contrato, mediante el cual se establece una
relacién de Derecho Ptiblico, en cuya virtud EL
CONCEDENTE otorga a la SOCIEDAD

28

CONCESIONARIA el derecho a explotar los Bienes de la
Concesién y prestar el Servicio de Revisiones Técnicas
Vehiculares, de acuerdo con las condiciones establecidas

en el presente Contrato y a las Leyes Aplicables.

1.3.8. “Contrato de Concesién o Contrato”. Es el presente
documento. y sus anexos  celebrado entre’ EL
CONCEDENTE y la SOCIEDAD CONCESIONARIA, con
la intervencion del Operador Precalificado, el mismo que
define derechos y obligaciones de las Partes y regula la
Concesién otorgada a la SOCIEDAD CONCESIONARIA.
Forman parte integrante del presente Contrato las

Bases, Circulares y sus Formularios.

English translation:

1.3.4. “Bidding Rules”. It is the document called “Special
International Public Bidding Rules” No. OOI-2004-
MML/CEPRI-LIMA to grant the Concession for the
Execution of the Infrastructure of the Technical
Inspection Plants and the Operation of the Technical
Vehicle Inspection Plants Service for Metropolitan Lima,
including any form, annex and all the modifications that
would have been introduced in the course of the bidding
process, as well as the letters issued by CEPRI LIMA in
accordance with its powers to establish the terms of the

adjudication of the Concession.

1.3.7. “Concession”. It is the administrative act embodied
in this Contract through which a Public Law relationship
is established, in which virtue THE GRANTOR grants the
CONCESSIONAIRE COMPANY the right to exploit the
Concession Assets and provide the Technical Vehicle
Inspection Services, in accordance with the conditions

established in this Contract and the Applicable Laws.

1.3.8. “Concession Contract or Contract”. It is this
document and its annexes concluded between THE
GRANTOR and the CONCESSIONAIRE COMPANY, with

29

the intervention of the Prequalified Operator, which
defines rights and obligations of the Parties and regulates
the Concession granted to the CONCESSIONAIRE
COMPANY. The Bidding Rules, Letters and their Forms

are an integral part of this Contract.

66. Clause 2.1 stipulates that the Contrato and MML’s atribuciones
(powers) are delimited by the terms of the document and by the “Leyes
Aplicables” (Applicable Laws) as follows:

Por el presente Contrato, EL CONCEDENTE otorga a la
SOCIEDAD CONCESIONARIA la_ Concesi6n. Este
Contrato es de naturaleza administrativa y en él se
establecen los derechos y obligaciones de las Partes con
relacion a la Concesion. En el marco de la ejecuci6n de la
Concesion, las atribuciones de EL CONCEDENTE estan
delimitadas por el presente Contrato y las Leyes

Aplicables.

English translation:

By this Contract, THE GRANTOR grants the
CONCESSIONAIRE COMPANY the Concession. This
Contract is administrative in nature and it establishes the
rights and obligations of the Parties in relation to the
Concession. Within the framework of the execution of the
Concession, the powers of THE GRANTOR are delineated
by this Contract and the Applicable Laws.

67. The expression Leyes Aplicables (Applicable Laws) is defined
in Clause 1.3.20 as those cited in Clause 1.1 of the Contract which, in
turn, identifies the “Base Normativa” (Legal Framework) of the
Contract as including not only all the existing legal texts that are
applicable to the Contract, such as the Constitution, the Organic Law
on Municipalities, the 2003 National Vehicle Regulation, and
Ordinance No. 506, but also, in the last two of thirteen unnumbered

bullet points:

30

-- Las Bases de la Licitacién Ptiblica Especial
Internacional N° 001-2004-MML/CEPRI-LIMA,
incluyendo las Circulares emitidas por CEPRI LIMA en el

procedimiento de Licitacién Piblica.

-- Las normas  modificatorias,  derogatorias,
complementarias, sustitutorias o interpretativas de las

anteriormente citadas.

English translation:

68.

“dmbito geogrdfico de Lima Metropolitana” (Metropolitan Lima

-- The Special International Public Bidding Rules No. 0O1-
2004-MML/CEPRI-LIMA, including the Letters issued by
CEPRI LIMA in the Public Bidding process.

-- The rules modifying, repealing, adding, substituting or

interpreting the aforementioned.

Clause 2.3 provides that the Concession is granted within the

geographic area)

69.

Clause 2.4, entitled “Exclusividad” (Exclusivity), provides:

La SOCIEDAD CONCESIONARIA tendrd exclusividad en
la prestacion del Servicio en Lima Metropolitana durante

el plazo de vigencia de la Concesion.

La SOCIEDAD CONCESIONARIA no estd impedida de
prestar el mismo servicio en otras ciudades, provincias 0

regiones.

English translation:

The CONCESSIONAIRE COMPANY shall have exclusivity
to provide the Service in Metropolitan Lima during the

term of the Concession.

31

The CONCESSIONAIRE COMPANY is not prevented
from providing the same service in other cities, provinces

or regions.

70. Clause 4 defines the basic term of the concession as 16 years,
and defines the circumstances of its possible extension without the

requirement of a bidding process.

71. Clause 17 contains an arbitration clause calling for the
resolution of all disputes under the Rules of the National and
International Centre of the Chamber of Commerce of Lima, and the
acknowledgement that any award rendered thereunder shall

be definitivo e inapelable (final and not subject to appeal).

72. Clause 19.4 provides that the Contrato may be terminated by
the Concessionaire where the adoption and application of “a law,” or
an “act, fact or omission” by MML results in the impossibility of
performance or a grave non-observance of MML's undertakings. It

reads as follows:

La SOCIEDAD CONCESIONARIA, podrd resolver el
presente Contrato por culpa de EL CONCEDENTE
cuando, como resultado de la aprobacion y aplicacién de
una Ley o un acto, hecho u omisién de EL CONCEDENTE,
resulte: i) Un incumplimiento [sic] parcial, tardio o
defectuoso de las obligaciones contractuales si ello
determina la imposibilidad de la ejecucién del Contrato,
ii) Un incumplimiento grave de las obligaciones
asumidas por EL CONCEDENTE en el presente Contrato.
Se exige, ademds, que dichos incumplimientos tengan un
efecto sustancialmente adverso en el patrimonio de la
SOCIEDAD CONCESIONARIA y que no pueda ser

considerado como una Suspension.

Para efectos del ejercicio de la facultad de resolucién del
Contrato, laSOCIEDAD CONCESIONARIA remitird a EL
CONCEDENTE para que lo subsane dentro de los sesenta

(60) dias siguientes a la fecha de notificacién de dicho

32

requerimiento. De no subsanarse tal incumplimiento
dentro del plazo antes indicado, el Contrato quedard

resuelto de pleno derecho.

English translation:

73.

The CONCESSIONAIRE COMPANY, may terminate this
Contract by fault of THE GRANTOR when, as a result of
the passage and application of a law, or an act, a fact or
omission of THE GRANTOR, which results in: i) A partial,
late or defective breach [sic] of the contractual obligations
resulting in the impossibility of performance of the
Contract, ii) A grave non-observance of the obligations
assumed by THE GRANTOR in this Contract. It is also
required that such breaches have a substantially adverse
effect on the assets of the CONCESSIONAIRE COMPANY

and cannot be considered as a Suspension.

For the purposes of exercising the power to terminate the
Contract, the CONCESSIONAIRE COMPANY shall refer
to THE GRANTOR to remedy such breach within sixty
(60) days after the date of the notification of said request.
If such breach is not remedied within the aforementioned

period, the Contract shall be terminated in full.

Clause 23.2, which Peru invokes in support of

“the

understanding that the Contract was an agreement subject to future

changes” and refers to as “the equilibrium clause”, provides that either

party could submit a proposal to reestablish the contractual

equilibrium whenever it considered that the equilibrium had been

affected by variations exceeding 10% of Net Revenues as a result of

changes in the Leyes Aplicables (Applicable Laws), or their

interpretation or application — and if necessary submit any controversy

in that respect to arbitration:

cuando cualquiera de las Partes que considere que el
equilibrio econémico del Contrato se ha visto afectado
por variaciones mayores al 10% (diez por ciento) de los
Ingresos Netos, como producto de cambios en las Leyes

Aplicables, en la interpretacion o en la aplicaci6n de las

33

mismas, en relacién a aspectos econémico-financieros
vinculados a (a) la inversién, propiedad u operacién de
las Plantas de Revisiones Técnicas Vehiculares, 0 (b) la
ejecucion del Contrato de Concesién, podrd proponer por
escrito y con la necesaria sustentacion las soluciones y
procedimientos a seguir para restablecer el equilibrio
econémico en la magnitud que tenia en la Fecha de
Cierre.... Si las Partes no se pusieran de acuerdo dentro
del plazo de treinta (30) Dias mencionado, entonces
cualquiera de ellas podrd considerar que se ha producido
una controversia y queda facultada a someterla a los
mecanismos de soluci6n de controversias establecidos en

la Clausula Décimo Sétima.

English translation:

when any of the Parties that considers that the economic
equilibrium of the Contract has been affected by variations
of more than 10% (ten percent) of the Net Revenues, as
result of changes in the Applicable Laws, in the
interpretation or in the application thereof, in relation to
economic-financial matters related to: (a) the investment,
property or operation of the Technical Vehicle Inspection
Plants, or (b) the execution of the Concession Contract,
may propose in writing and with the necessary support the
solutions and procedures to be followed to reestablish the
economic equilibrium to the magnitude it had as of the
Closing Date.... If the Parties fail to agree within thirty
(30) days, either may consider that a dispute has arisen
and is entitled to submit it to the dispute resolution

mechanisms established in Clause 17.

POST-SIGNATURE DEVELOPMEN'

 

74. This case involves considerable controversy about events and

their causes, and about a multitude of actors and their motivation. To

34

understand and appraise the substantive claims and defenses, it is
helpful to be clear about the chronology. This Section seeks to set out
the broad sequence of relevant events without yet intending to make

any judgments about them.

75. This necessarily abbreviated narrative gives particular
attention to a central issue in this case, which is that of exclusivity.
Three types of exclusivity are at play: (A) an entitlement to be the sole
operator of inspection centers within MML’s jurisdiction, (B) the
imposition of an obligation on all residents and operators of
transportation services within MML/’s jurisdiction to use only centers
operated by Lidercén, and (C) the imposition of the same obligation on
all vehicles habitually using roadways within MML’s jurisdiction.
Three questions recur in the case of each of these putative entitlements:
(i) did MML in fact grant it; if so, (ii) did MML have the authority to
grant it; and, in any event, (iii) did Peru commit a breach of the Treaty
in curtailing it as part of its reform of the national vehicle inspection

regime?

76. On 1s September 2004, that is to say 20 days before the
Contract was concluded, the Technical Secretary of one of the
Commissions within the Peruvian competition authority, INDECOPI,
as already mentioned (see Paragraph 62 above) prepared a report
responding to questions submitted by a member of the Peruvian
Congress and concluding that no fees had yet been established for
INDECOPI to conduct an investigation. In Paragraph 15, however, he

wrote that the grant of concessions to conduct technical inspections:

..no puede catalogarse como la creacién de un
monopolio legal que afecte las normas de libre
competencia, toda vez que lo que se esta concesionando
no es una actividad econémica de iniciativa privada sino
una actividad piiblica o funcién piiblica que va ser
realizada con la participacion del sector privado, lo que
de por si constituye una actividad exclusiva de la

administracion publica.

35

English translation:

..cannot be categorized as the creation of a legal
monopoly affecting norms of free competition, because
the subject of the concession is not a private initiative
economic activity but rather a public activity or public
function to be carried out with private sector
participation, which itself constitutes an exclusive activity

of the public administration.

77. On 16 September 2004, that is to say four days before the
Concession Contract was signed, MML enacted Ordinance No. 694 (see
Paragraph 60 above). In Article 3, it provided in effect exclusive rights;
inspection services would be provided in accordance with the Contract
with the “Entidad Revisora”, i.e. Lidercén Peri. The Ordinance
moreover expanded the contractual exclusivity by providing that all
residents of the Province of Lima whose vehicles were registered in
either Lima or Callao, and any vehicles that drove within the Province,
were also required to obtain their certificates from the concessionaire’s
facilities, unless they had a certificate issued by an entidad revisora
authorised by the Ministry, or a temporary certificate issued by MML
allowing them to drive within the Province for up to 30 days within the

same calendar year.

78. Ordinance 694 was to trigger a review carried out in 2007 by
INDECOPI to determine whether it had created “illegal and
unreasonable bureaucratic barriers” to competition. This led to the

developments described in Paragraphs 101-113 below.

Relations between Lidercén and Ivesur

79. The Lidercén venture in Peru, it seems, was fraught with
recurrent disputation from the very beginning. Most of it involved
various public entities, but the first post-signature clouds on the

horizon concerned the relations between the two Spanish co-venturers.

36

80. The Bases de Licitacién required that bidders must have
operated more than five vehicle inspection centers in the last eight
years, of which more than three consecutive years as the primary
operator and with a flow of at least 500,000 vehicles per year. Ivesur
provided evidence of compliance with these conditions to CEPRI,
which informed Ivesur on 24 July 2004 that it had prequalified in the

tendering process.

81. The Liderc6n and Ivesur consortium won the bid and thereafter
incorporated Liderc6n Pert on 9 September. Lidercén became the
majority shareholder with a 70% stake in the Peruvian company. While
Ivesur took only a 30% stake, it was agreed that Ivesur's representative

would preside Lidercén Perti's board of directors.

82. Lidercén Peri, MML, and Ivesur (as the “Prequalified
Operator”), entered into the Concession Contract on 20 September, but
the ink had hardly dried on the Contract when the partners were at
logger-heads, leading to a series of arbitrations initiated by Ivesur,
which claimed that it was being ousted from the project even at the pre-

operational stage.

83. The first of these conflicts began to emerge little over one
month into the life of the Concession Contract. On 10 November 2004
Liderc6n Pert held a shareholders meeting in Malaga, Spain, where it
removed Ivesur's representative, Mr. Espinosa Vallés, as Chairman of
the Board, and appointed Mr. Vicario in his stead. Lidercén Perti kept
Mr. Espinosa Vallés as Vice-Chair. The appointments, however, did not
take effect because Lidercén Pert was unable to register them in the
Lima Public Registry of Corporations. Thus, Mr. Espinosa Vallés
continued to carry out his duties and exercise his powers as Chairman
of the Board, which apparently did not sit well with Mr. Vicario who on
31 January 2005 held another shareholder's meeting of Lidercén Pert
without informing Ivesur, and ousted Ivesur from the Board
completely. Mr. Vicario appointed himself as Chairman of the Board
and Mr. Ratl Barrios as Vice-Chair, Ivesur therefore initiated
arbitration against Lidercén Peri. On 17 March 2006 the arbitral
tribunal found in favor of Ivesur and annulled the appointments made
in January 2005. Undeterred, on 31 March 2006 Mr. Vicario

reappointed himself and Mr. Barrios as Chair and Vice-Chair,

37

respectively, but included Mr. Espinosa Vallés as the third member of
the board.

84. In August 2005, Ivesur initiated a second arbitration against
both Lidercén Peru and MML. It requested the termination of the
Concession Contract, notably on the grounds that it insisted on being
liberated from a contract where its partner had usurped operational
functions which it was not capable of performing. Ivesur published a
full page advertisement in the Peruvian press where it stated that both
Lidercén and MML had excluded Ivesur, the Prequalified Operator,
from the preoperative and operative phases of the Concession; it
warned that Lidercén had no experience whatsoever in vehicle
inspections, and that therefore Ivesur bore no responsibility for any
negative consequences arising out of vehicle inspections carried out in
Liderc6n Pert’s plants. It also informed the public at large that these
circumstances had led it to initiate an arbitration against Lidercén
Pert. Ivesur’s claim was dismissed in its entirety four years later
because the arbitrators decided that it lacked legal standing to seek

termination of the Concession Contract.

85. Between June 2005 and April 2006 Lidercén Pert, Ivesur and
MML engaged in negotiations to address difficulties that Lidercén Pert
faced in obtaining the necessary authorizations to construct the
inspection centers and the consequent need to postpone the deadline
set out in the Contrato de Concesién for the inspection centers to
commence operations. While Lidercén Peri and MML agreed to
extend the deadlines, Ivesur opposed any extension because Lidercén

Pert had excluded it from participating in the pre-operative phase.

86. On 8 September 2006, Lidercén Perti filed an arbitration
against MML under the Concession Contract which was in substance
directed at Ivesur, since it was seeking Ivesur’s removal from the
Contract altogether. MML rejected this request, and counter-claimed
instead for the simple termination of the Contract on the grounds that
both consortium members had acted in bad faith by not proceeding in
accordance with the contractual role originally set out in the Bases de
Licitacion. This case resulted in the 2007 partial settlement agreement

denominated Acuerdo Conciliatorio (Settlement Agreement), to which

38

reference will be made in the immediately following section dealing

with Lidercén’s relations with MML.

87. The conflict between Lidercén and Ivesur made their
cooperation impossible, and Liderc6n accordingly in September 2007
demanded that MML accept another entity, Denham, as a new Pre-
Qualified Operator —although Denham had been unsuccessful in its
attempt to qualify as part of a competing project in the course of the

bidding process.

88. This was the background of the findings of a Congressional
Commission one year after the signature of the Concession Contract
which criticized the way in which Lidercén had effectively ejected the
only entity that had the technical expertise and financial strength

required to comply with the Contract.

89. Although this narrative indicates significant tensions, the fact
that Ivesur’s association with Liderc6n ceased in acrimony did not lead
to the frustration of the Contrato de Concesién, which remains in effect
as of this writing. This part of the background is therefore not

significant to the outcome of this arbitration.

Lidercén's Relations with MML prior to the Acuerdo
Conciliatorio in August 2007

90. The Concession Contract called for the inspection centers to be
opened in September 2005. There was an agreed postponement to
March 2006. Even then, MML was not disposed to grant authorization
for the opening. Lidercén therefore initiated an arbitration, decided in
its favor in January 2007, with an award ordering MML to authorize
the immediate opening of the first center and the two others upon their
completion. MML remained dissatisfied and sought the setting aside of

the award.

91. That controversy flowed into the one which had already led to
the arbitration commenced in September 2006 (see above) relating to

Ivesur’s withdrawal from the project. Negotiations between MML and

39

Liderc6n resulted in an Acuerdo Conciliatorio in August 2007 which
Peru refers to as “the 2007 Partial Settlement Agreement”. The first
two inspection centers were accordingly opened in September 2007,
and the total number of centers was increased to five, although the
opening dates were variously extended —to mid-March 2008 in the
case of the final one, i.e. two and a half years later than the deadlines

of the Contract.

92. In the end (for present purposes) the import of the 2007
Acuerdo Conciliatorio is that it wiped the slate clean between MML
and Liderc6én Pert; all disputes were withdrawn and any potential
claims extant were waived. Although the State itself is not a party as
such to this document, Peru explicitly accepts this conclusion in

Paragraph 91 of its Counter-Memorial.

Lidercoén's Relations with MML Immediately After the Acuerdo

Conciliatorio in August 2007

93. The peace reached in August 2007 was not of long duration.
The first-opened centers were in MML’s view unable to meet the
demand, as customers had to face more than 24-hour waits to be
inspected. The fourth of the five centers (scheduled pursuant to the
Acuerdo Conciliatorio to open on 10 October 2007) was never
delivered, and led MML to seek the termination of the Concession
Contract by a Mayoral Declaration of Caducidad (termination) in
February 2008, leading to yet another arbitration, which proceeded by
way of consolidation to incorporate three additional cases also
commenced by Lidercén after the Acuerdo Conciliatorio (not counting
two which were terminated for failure of deposit of the required
arbitration fees). These arbitral proceedings were concluded in 2011 by
an award which is a central feature of this case, that is to say after the
Ley ITV and the 2008 Regulation adopted pursuant to the Ley /TV,

had come into effect.

40

The 2008 Ley ITV and the 2008 Regulation

94. The issue of attribution of regulatory authority described in the
above-quoted Paragraphs 27-28 of Peru’s Counter-Memorial (see
Paragraph 56 above) was dealt with by the adoption in 2008 of a
National Vehicle Inspection Law (the “Ley /TV” ) intended to create, as
the object defined in Article 1, a “national system” of technical vehicle

inspections.

95. The new Law followed a Congressional inquiry into the
Liderc6én Concession which had concluded that it had been awarded
with insufficient attention to Lidercén, S.L.’s lack of experience, that it
had created a monopoly in violation of the General Transportation
Law, and that the uncertainty with respect to MML’s powers to
authorize vehicle inspections should be resolved by Congressional
action. The report following this inquiry was followed by the

deliberation and enactment of the Ley /TV.

96. Specifically, the Ley ITV designated the Ministry, in Article 3,
as having “exclusive competence” with respect to approving and
overseeing vehicle inspections throughout the nation, thus preparing
the ground for MTC’s issuance of the 2008 Regulation. It also made it
clear that concessions for ITV Centers would not be exclusive (Article
3) and that vehicle inspection certificates were valid nationwide

(Article 7), i.e. irrespective of the owner's choice of inspection center.

97. Moreover, the Third Final Provision of the Ley JTV repealed
Article 161(7.6) of the Ley Orgdnica de Municipalidades (see
Paragraph 51 above) and rendered nugatory “todas las normas que se

oponen a la presente Ley” (all norms that conflict with this law).

98. On the other hand, the first of three “Final Provisions” of the
Ley ITV provided that the regulatory functions of the Ministry would
be “de aplicacién supletoria” (supplementary application) to any
concession contracts entered into under prior law, and that State
entities having entered into such Contracts would be responsible for

their contractual obligations under their own budgets.

41

99. In the same vein, the more detailed 2008 Regulation provided,
in the second of two “Disposiciones Complementarias", that parties
having been granted concessions prior to the entry into effect of the Ley
ITV could continue performing vehicle inspections, in strict
compliance with their contracts and, provided they confirm to the

provisions of that Regulation. The precise wording merits quotation:

Segunda.- Estando a lo dispuesto en la Primera
Disposicién Final de la Ley No. 29237, Ley del Sistema
Nacional de Inspecciones Técnicas, las personas
juridicas que hayan celebrado Contrato de Concesion al
amparo de otras normas en materia de revisiones 0
inspecciones técnicas vehiculares antes de la vigencia de
la _ citada Ley, podrdn continuar realizando las
inspecciones Técnicas Vehiculares materia de su contrato
de concesi6n en estricto cumplimiento de los alcances del
mismo, previa adecuacion a las disposiciones sefialadas
en el presente Reglamento mediante la presentacion ante
el Ministerio de Transportes y Comunicaciones del
Certificado de Inspeccion Inicial del CITV, el Certificado
de Homologaci6n de Equipos del CITV y la Constancia de
Calibracién de Equipos del CITV dispuestos en el presente
Reglamento, los mismos que deberdn ser emitidos de
conformidad con lo establecido en la Segunda
Disposici6n Complementaria Transitoria del presente
Reglamento. En estos casos, la obligatoriedad y
exigibilidad de las Inspecciones Técnicas Vehiculares se
sujetardn al cronograma que con cardcter general

apruebe la DGTT mediante Resolucién Directoral.

Las entidades del Estado que participaron en los
contratos referidos en el pdrrafo anterior ejercen sus
obligaciones contractuales con cargo a sus respectivos

presupuestos.

English translation:

Second.- In accordance with the First Final Provision of
Law No. 29237, Law of the National System of Technical

42

Inspections, the legal persons that have entered into a
Concession Contract under other norms on technical
vehicle inspections or revisions before of the entry into
force of the aforementioned Law, may continue to carry
out the Technical Vehicle Inspections subject to their
concession contract in strict compliance with the scope of
that contract, provided that they previously conform to
the provisions of this Regulation by submitting to the
Ministry of Transportation and Communications the
CITV Initial Inspection Certificate, the CITV Equipment
Conformity Certificate and the CITV Equipment
Calibration Certificate provided for in this Regulation,
which certificates shall be issued in accordance with the
provisions of the Second Provisional Supplementary
Provision of this Regulation. In these cases, the
mandatory nature and enforceability of the Technical
Vehicle Inspections will be subject to the schedule that the
DGTT generally approves by means of a Directive

Resolution.

The State entities that participated in the contracts
referred in the previous paragraph exercise their
contractual obligations in accordance with their respective

budgets.

The Situation Created for MML and Lidercén by the Ley ITV

100. As seen above, by the time of the enactment of the Ley /TV the
Municipality had already declared the Concession Contract to be void,
and Lidercén had reacted by filing an arbitration to challenge that

action.

101. The manner in which the Ley ITV, as well as the 2008
Regulation issued by the Ministry, dealt with already existing
concession contracts (in effect the Lidercén Contract) was thereafter
subject to debate in the then-pending arbitration between MML and

Lidercén, and continued into the present ICSID proceedings.

43

102. Once the 2008 Regulation was adopted in August 2008, new
applications emerged for authorizations to establish vehicle inspection
centers throughout Peru. In March 2009, an informe (report) of the
Ministry (No. 574-2009-MTC/08) made clear that in the absence of
“un pronunciamiento arbitral’ (a decision from an arbitral tribunal)

to contrary effect, the Ministry was obliged to respect both the

 

Contrato and its exclus'

 

ity clause, and therefore reject any
applications by other parties for authorization to carry out vehicle
inspections in Lima. As late as 2 December 2015, another informe
(No.919-2015-MTC/15.01), referring to the Disposicién Primera Final
of the Ley ITV, confirmed the same position to the effect that no
competing authorizations would be granted within the Province of
Lima. That this was the Ministry's position was confirmed by Ms. Arias

in the course of her cross-examination.

103. The Ministry declined to approve any applications for centers
in Lima until the INDECOPI Tribunal confirmed that the Ministry's
rejection of applications based on the Contract’s exclusivity clause was

unlawful.

104. INDECOPI, the Peruvian competition authority, is a large
agency of the Peruvian State attached to the Prime Minister's office. Its
elaborate organization includes Specialized Commissions that act in
first instance, one of which is the Comisidn de Eliminacién de Barreras
Burocrdticas (Elimination of Bureaucratic Barriers Commission)
[previously Comisién de Acceso al Mercado (Market Access
Commission)] (hereafter the “Comisién” or “Commission”) and of the
INDECOPI Tribunal, comprised of Specialized Chambers (Salas
Especializadas) of the INDECOPI Tribunal at the appellate level,
including the Sala Especializada en Defensa de la Competencia
(Specialized Chamber for the Defense of Competition). The
Commissions conduct investigations and issue administrative
decisions on the matters within their competence, and their decisions
can be appealed before the corresponding Chamber of the INDECOPI
Tribunal. The Tribunal’s decisions can then be challenged before the

Peruvian courts.

105. Article 61 of the Peruvian Constitution prohibits monopolies.

INDECOPI's tasks include ensuring compliance with this prohibition

44

by investigating “bureaucratic barriers” to competition created by
governmental entities and ordering them to be eliminated. Decisions
of the INDECOPI Tribunal are obligatory. Officials who fail to act in
accordance with them may, as Ms Arias testified without contradiction,

be sanctioned and fined personally (T. 856:1-8).

106. The Technical Secretary of the Comisién, as already explained,
wrote a report on | September 2004 in response to an inquiry from a
member of Congress. A passage of that report has already been quoted

in Paragraph 76 above.

107. Ordinance 506 did little more than to affirm the obligatory
nature of inspections in the province of Lima, which as explained by
Mr. Ruiz in his witness statement was insufficient “para regular las
revisiones técnicas en Lima” (to regulate the technical inspections in
Lima). As noted, Ordinance 694 broadened the exclusivity of the
Concession (see Paragraph 77). It also established the mandatory
program for recurring vehicle inspections. However, vehicle
inspections would not begin for another three years and Ordinance 694

does not appear to have attracted much attention until then.

108. On 8 September 2007, MML authorized the commercial
operation of the first two of Lidercén Pert’s inspection centres. The
previous day, it published Ordenanza 1064, which amended
Ordenanza 694 by establishing the new mandatory program for
recurring vehicle inspections (to which MML and Lidercén Perti had
agreed in the Acuerdo Conciliatorio; see Paragraph 91). On September
ll, the Technical Secretary of the INDECOPI Commission
recommended conducting an inquiry in order to determine if the
exclusivity provisions contained in Ordenanza 694 created an illegal
and irrational bureaucratic barrier. (INDECOPI's authority is limited
to the review of laws and regulations issued by the government. It does
not have jurisdiction to rule on the enforceability of contracts.) Two
days later, on September 13, INDECOPI ex oficio initiated the

proceeding.

45

109. Lidercén Perti was invited to submit its observations as an
interested “third party” but the Commission recorded that Lidercén

Pert failed to avail itself of that opportunity.

110... On 24 January 2008, the Commission entered a detailed
Resolucién deeming MML’s Ordenanza 694 to have created an

unconstitutional barrier to competition, which:

afecta a los potenciales competidores de la empresa
concesionaria y sobre todo, a los ciudadanos que se ven
forzados a contratar un servicio monopélico para poder

desarrollar sus actividades econémicas.

English translation:

affects potential competitors of the concessionaire
company and, above all, the citizens who are forced to hire
a monopolistic service in order to perform their economic

activities.

ll. After declaring it to constitute a bureaucratic barrier, the
Commission ordered that the Ordenanza be forwarded to the public

prosecutor to initiate an action for unconstitutionality.

112. Both MML and Liderc6én appealed to the INDECOPI Tribunal,
which on 22 August 2008 upheld the Commission's decision in a 126-
paragraph decision, containing notably (at Paragraph 116 of the
decision) this rejection of MML’s argument to the effect that the very

bidding process ensured competitive behavior:

el servicio de revisiones técnicas no tiene
caracteristicas de monopolio natural y de la informacién
que obra en el expediente, no encuentra justificacién
juridica o econémica la asignacién exclusiva de su
operacién a un competidor otorgando con ello un

monopolio legal. Durante el informe oral ante la Sala, la

46

Municipalidad seftal6é que la exclusividad en el servicio
buscaba asegurar la rentabilidad del operador.4 Sin
embargo, dicho argumento resulta inaceptable para

justificar el otorgamiento de un monopolio.

(44) En la audiencia de informe oral realizada el 10 de
junio de 2008, cuando se pregunté al representante de la
Municipalidad el por qué de la exclusividad en el servicio

de revisiones técnicas vehiculares, sefialé lo siguiente:

Municipalidad Metropolitana de Lima: Debido a
que durante dieciocho afios no hubo revisiones técnicas
fue necesario comenzar todo el proceso de cero. Para eso
se hizo, se contraté a una firma evaluadora de mercado
que detecto que la tinica forma de que fuera rentable para
un privado ejercer este servicio ptiblico, dado que la
Municipalidad es deficitaria, no tiene plata para hacer
este tipo de cosas por otras consideraciones econémicas,
se decididé que lo mejor era que lo hiciera un privado,

entonces (...)

Sala: Discilpeme, me esta diciendo usted que los
monopolios son rentables. La vinica manera de

rentabilizar es a través de garantizar (...) un monopolio.

Municipalidad Metropolitana de Lima: (...) Como
todos los contratos de concesién de monopolios naturales
hay que garantizarle al privado la estabilidad del

contrato.

English translation:

technical inspection services do not have the
characteristics of natural monopoly and the information
in the case file provides no economic or legal justification
for the allowing a competitor to operate as a legal
monopoly. In the course of oral submissions before the
Chamber, the Municipality argued that the exclusivity of

service was intended to ensure the profitability of the

47

operator.*4 This argument, however, does not justify the

grant of a monopoly.

FOOTNOTE 44. In the course of the oral hearings on 10
June 2008, when the representative of the Municipality

was asked the reason for exclusivity, he offered this:

MML: Given that for 18 years there were no technical
inspections it was necessary to start from zero. Therefore
advice was taken from a firm which analysed the market
and found that the only way to make it profitable for a
private party to carry out this public service, given that the
Municipality operates with a deficit, and does not have the
funds do carry out these kinds of things for other
economic reasons, it was decided that the best would be to

have it done by a private entity, and so ...

Chamber: Excuse me, you are telling me that monopolies
are profitable. The only way to achieve positive returns is

by granting a... monopoly.

MML: ... Like all concession contracts for natural
monopolies, one must assure the private party of

contractual stability.

113. In November 2008, MML formally repealed Ordinances 506,
694 and 1064 (along with Ordinance 1120 which had temporarily
suspended vehicle inspections) in order to conform its legal framework
to the Ley JTV, which had generally abrogated all norms that were
contrary to the Ley JTV. Yet the Contrato de Concession remained in
force and protected under the First Final Provision of the Ley /TV. The
difficulty thus created came to a head on numerous occasions. As early
as January 2009, Check & Go S.A.C. applied to MTC to obtain
authorization to operate an ITV center within the Province of

Lima. Other companies followed suit.

114. Prior to deciding Check & Go’s application, MTC sought not
only the opinion of its own legal counsel's office regarding the
exclusivity clause of the Concession Contract in relation to the Final

Provisions of the Ley /TV, but also that of external law firms. MTC

48

denied authorization for Check & Go to operate within the Province of
Lima because “it is under an obligation to respect the concession
contract entered into by LIDERCON and the Municipalidad
Metropolitana de Lima and therefore it cannot grant other operators
authority within the jurisdiction of Lima Metropolitana.” MTC
consequently denied Check & Go's administrative appeal for the same
reasons. This led Check & Go to resort to INDECOPI.

115. | In 2009 the INDECOPI Comisién concluded that MTC’s denial
of Check & Go's application was an illegal bureaucratic barrier because
MTC had not shown that the Contract was in force at the time, given
that MML had previously declared the caducidad of the Contract. MTC
then lodged an appeal with the INDECOPI Tribunal, arguing yet again
that it was under an obligation to respect the Concession Contract’s
exclusivity provision. MTC requested that Lidercén Peri be
summoned to participate in the appeal as an intervenor because it was
a party to the Contrato de Concesion and it had obtained an injunction
against the Declaratoria de Caducidad in the arbitration proceedings,
which had been granted, thus suspending its effects pending the

conclusion of the arbitration.

116. On 11 April 2011, the INDECOPI Tribunal confirmed the
Commission's determination that the MTC’s denial of Check & Go's
application was an illegal bureaucratic barrier because it had not been
shown that after the Declaratoria de Nulidad the Concession Contract
had remained in force. At the same time, the Tribunal stated that its
decision had no bearing on whether the Concession Contract (and its
exclusivity clause) was valid or not, because that matter was subject to
the jurisdiction of arbitration tribunals or the judiciary. Thus, it
cautioned that its decision was limited to Check & Go and only in

respect of the specific application that had been denied.

117... Check & Go sought in parallel to nullify the MTC decision
before the Corte Superior de Justicia of Lima. Both proceedings ran
concurrently (although the court case took longer to be
decided). Lidercén Pert also intervened in that proceeding. On 22
January 2011, the Court rejected Check & Go's complaint. It concluded
that the Concession Contract and its exclusivity clause were protected

under Article 62 of the Peruvian Constitution (which upholds the

49

stability of contracts). It found that the Concession Contract was in
force when MTC denied Check & Go's application because the arbitral
tribunal had granted injunctive relief against the Declaratoria de
Caducidad and MTC had no authority to grant authorizations that

conflicted with the exclusivity clause of the Contrato de Concesién.

118. In 2012, about a year after the INDECOPI Tribunal had issued
its decision in the Check & Go case, another company, Kensington,
applied to MTC for authorization to operate a CITV in the Province of
Lima. MTC denied the authorization on the same grounds that it had
invoked with respect to Check & Go: in essence, because it was under
an obligation to respect the Concession Contract’s exclusivity
clause. Kensington challenged this decision before the INDECOPI
Commission. Both MML and Lidercén Pert were summoned and they

appeared to present their views.

119. In December 2013 the Commission issued its decision. It
concluded that MTC’s denial of Kensington’s application was an illegal
bureaucratic barrier because the Ley JTV did not contemplate that
authorizations could be denied on grounds that the Contrato de
Concesion provided for exclusivity. The Commission made clear that,

to the contrary, the Ley JTV precluded exclusivity.

120. MTC, MML and Lidercén Perti appealed the decision. On 21
August 2014, the INDECOPI Tribunal confirmed the Commission's
decision. Kensington reapplied for authorization in March 2015. In
June, the MTC complied with the INDECOPI Tribunal’s decision and
granted Kensington a 5-year authorization to operate an ITV center,

the first it granted for vehicle inspections within Lima.

121. In 2017 Lidercén challenged a decision of the INDECOPI
Tribunal that was favorable to yet another one of its competitors,
Fermax, before the Corte Superior de Justicia of Lima, which joined
MTC and MML to the case en calidad de litisconsortes necesarios
activos (as indispensable active third parties in the proceeding). Once
again, INDECOPI’s Resolucién was upheld. In particular, the Court
analyzed the much-debated first disposicidn final of the Ley ITV as

follows:

50

Entre los diversos criterios de interpretacién de una
norma, se encuentra el de la interpretacion literal, el cual
exige que ello se realice atendiendo el sentido propio de

las palabras.

En ese entendido, dicha disposicion se encuentra referida
ala funcién normativa del MTC, esto es, a la funcién de
reglamentar la ley o emitir normas sobre la materia, mds
no lo supedita en el dmbito de Lima Metropolitana a la
observancia de la cldusula de exclusividad contenida en
el contrato de concesién en mencién ; ello encuentra
asidero ademds, en que el MTC tampoco podraé
contravenir lo establecido por la propia Ley, esto es, que
las autorizaciones para el funcionamiento de los CITV se

otorgan sin cardcter exclusivo.

English translation:

Literal interpretation, which focuses on the inherent sense
of the words used, is one of several criteria used to

interpret a norm.

Given this understanding, the provision in question refers
to the normative functioning of MTC, namely the function
of regulating the law or setting down relevant norms,
which is not subordinated, with respect to the zone of
metropolitan Lima, to compliance with the exclusivity
clause contained in the contract in question; this
conclusion moreover finds support in the observation that
MTC itself may not disobey what is established in the Law
itself, which means that authorisations to operate vehicle

inspection centers are to be granted without exclusivity.

The 2011 Award and its unenforceability

122. After MML adopted a Resolucién (on 7 February 2008)
declaring the caducidad of the Concession Contract due to Lidercén’s

alleged failure of performance, Lidercén brought arbitral proceedings

Sl

against MML under the rules of the Lima Chamber of Commerce in

order to compel compliance with the Contract.

123. On4 November 2011, the arbitral tribunal rendered its award,
comprising 95 single-spaced pages. Its initial substantive
determination, in Paragraph I.1 on the first page, refers to the new rules
established for the national system of ITVs which had emerged in 2008
as the Ley JTV. The arbitrators held simply that although these new
rules gave the Ministry “competencia exclusiva” (exclusive
jurisdiction) with respect to management, inspection, and sanctioning
on the national level, Metropolitan Lima constituted an “exception”
because it was governed (“se rige”) by the Lidercén Concession

Contract.

124. Inthe course of the arbitration, the tribunal had sent anumber
of letters to the Ministry which went unanswered, including a series of
communications between 12 April and 23 August 2011 to the Minister,
inviting him to designate someone to represent MTC in “sesiones de
trabajo” with the arbitrators, to determine whether, as the new
competent entity for ITVs, the Ministry could become subrogated in
MML’s contractual position and, if so, to consider the implications with
regard to existing disputes between Lidercén Pert and MML, and the
caducidad or required modification of the Contract in light of the Ley
ITV.

125. The proceedings were thereafter suspended by reason of the
withdrawal of one of the arbitrators and difficulties in reconstituting
the tribunal, whereupon the two remaining arbitrators, preoccupied by
the prospects of what they referred to as indefinite obstacles as well as
restrictions and incompatibilities with their professional activity,
inquired whether they could proceed as a truncated tribunal and

render the award.

126. On 27 July 2011, the arbitrators had received a communication
from the Vice-Minister, forwarding the text of an opinion from the
MTC General Counsel which concluded, in answer to a letter dated 23
July 2010, that the replacement of MML with MTC as Lidercén Pert's

contracting party was not “viable”.

52

127. Having finally been reconstituted, the tribunal was prepared to
render the award when it received a communication from SUTRAN,
the MTC agency responsible for the supervision of ITVs, expressing
concerns —in light of its regulatory responsibilities— with respect to
Liderc6n Perti’s refusal to submit to inspections of the functioning of
its centers; Liderc6n Pert was taking the position that SUTRAN had no
authority over it because its activities were entirely governed by the
Contract. SUTRAN requested that the arbitrators inform it of how
Liderc6n Perti was being supervised and which entity the arbitrators

had deemed competent to perform this duty.

128. The tribunal found, as explained in the 2011 Award, that
SUTRAN was not entitled to expect a response to its questions or
receipt of the requested information. Referring to provisional
measures which they had put in place, the arbitrators held that
“SUTRAN confunde fiscaliazaci6én del contrato, de los mecanismos
impuestos por el Tribunal Arbitral” (SUTRAN confuses oversight of
the contract and the mechanisms imposed by the Tribunal), related to
its provisional measures and referred to SUTRAN’s arguments as
“absolutamente incompatibles con las decisions adoptados por el
Tribunal Arbitral” (absolutely incompatible with the decisions
adopted by the Arbitral Tribunal).

129. The 2011 Award held that MML had not proved that Lidercén
had failed to meet its obligations as revised by the 2007 Partial
Settlement, and therefore deemed MML's termination (by Municipal
Resolution) to have breached the Contract, which it declared to be in
force although the arbitrators ordered revisions of some of its terms,
and ordered MML to resume full performance, including the return of
a performance bond and compensation for works performed (totaling
some US$ 700,000 plus interest).

130. MML applied for judicial annulment of the 2011 Award before
acommercial court of first instance in Lima, which in a brief judgment
of 29 September 2015 rejected the application and ordered the 2011
Award to be enforced.

53

131. |MML appealed this decision. Its grounds included, notably, the
arguments that carrying out the 2011 Award would violate the
Constitution (by allowing the operation of a monopoly), as well as the
Ley ITV, (by transgressing the prohibition of exclusivity as per its
Article 4). The appellate division of the Corte Superior de Justicia of
Lima rejected MML’s appeal by a judgment of 26 July 2016, holding
that these arguments could not be raised at this stage given that they

had not been argued before the arbitral tribunal.

132. Notwithstanding the 2011 Award, from June 2015 onward the
Ministry, as noted above (in Paragraph 120), had slowly begun to
authorise other operators to open ITV centers in Lima in compliance
with the INDECOPI Tribunal’s decisions (and over time had by 2019
given more than 50 such authorizations). In reaction, Lidercén had
sought and obtained a judicial order of ejecucién forzada
(enforcement); MML’s appeal from that order was rejected.
Thereafter, Lidercén also obtained the commencement of judicial
proceedings against officials of MML and the pronouncement of fines

on the Municipality for non-compliance with the 2011 Award.

133. MML appealed the orders of enforcement of the award. On 11
September 2017, the Corte Superior de Justicia of Lima rendered its
judgment, which Lidercén criticizes in vehement terms because the
Court concluded that the Ley /TV had conferred exclusive competence
on the Ministry over all matters concerning vehicle inspections and
deprived MML of such competence, including to enter into, regulate,
amend or adjust the Concession Contract, and to regulate and exercise
control or compliance oversight over CITVs. Therefore, it declared that
parts of the 2011 Award which called upon the Municipality to act

beyond the scope of its competence were unenforceable.

134. In sum, the only enforceable part of the 2011 Award was the
payment of the amounts the arbitrators had held were due by MML.
(The record shows that they have been paid in principal, C-127, p. 9;
there may still be an issue with respect to the computation of interest

thereon.)

54

135. In 2018, Lidercén Perti brought before a constitutional court an
accién de amparo against the Superior Court's judgment. The
constitutional court quickly dismissed it. The court noted that the
Superior Court judges had upheld MML’s appeal and that Lidercén
Perti’s complain was simply one of disagreement on the merits of the
decision, whereas amparo is intended to ensure that constitutional
protections, included due process, are not violated, and not as a further

means of appeal.

136. This sequence of arbitral and judicial decisions involved MML
and Lidercén Pert as disputing parties, but obviously had considerable
implications for the Ministry. As a result of yet another accién de
amparo brought by the Ministry against a different court judgment,
the Corte Superior de Justicia of Lima on 16 October 2017 upheld the
Ministry's petition that the 2011 Award be declared as being sin efecto
legal (without legal effect) with respect to the Ministry and three third
party companies (ferceros coadyuvantes) competing with Lidercén in

Lima.

55

ADMISSIBILITY

137. If Lidercén, S.L. is acting without requisite corporate authority,
as Peru asserts, its claim could not be brought before any jurisdiction.

This issue therefore falls to be treated as a matter of admissibility.

138. Peru contends that Mr. Vicario, the purported representative of
Liderc6n, initiated the present arbitration without necessary authority
and has not subsequently established it by ratification. Lidercén retorts
that Peru’s objection is absolutamente formalista (absolutely
formalistic), in concluding that Mr. Vicario lacked authority, has
incorrectly interpreted the legal import of the ICSID Institution Rules
as well as misstating the factual circumstances pertinent thereto; has
wrongly conflated the rules for initiation with the requirements of
admissibility; and has incredibly concluded that an investor which has
expended vast sums of money in these proceedings in the course of

three years never consented to this arbitration.

139. Counsel for Lidercén, SL, under the instruction of Mr. Vicario,
observed that the latter directly or indirectly controls 99.4 % of its
shares, as he confirms in his Third Witness Statement (Paragraph 5)
and demonstrates by producing documents from his two relevant
holding companies (Zilfeco Investimentos, S.A. and Inversiones y

Proyectos Zilfeco, S.L.). Nevertheless, Peru considers that these

 

proceedings are inadm

 

ssible because they were not initiated in
compliance with the ICSID Institution Rules (which amplify Article 36
of the ICSID Convention). Specifically, Rule 2 requires that a request
for arbitration “shall ... (f) state, if the requesting party is a juridical
person, that it has taken all necessary internal actions to authorize the

request.”

140. This objection is based on the discovery that Mr. Vicario’s
declaration of 18 January 2017 in support of Lidercén, SL's
Request incorrectly referred to him as the company's Administrador
Unico, whereas the structure of the company had been transformed on
31 October 2016 so as to be governed by a Board of Directors. (Mr.
Vicario himself became a Board Member at the time of ceasing his

function as Administrador Unico.) This also means, in Peru's

56

submission, that the appointment of Hogan Lovells as counsel with

powers of attorney (on 25 November 2016) was also unauthorized.

141. | Peru also complains of the fact that the subsequent decision to

place the company in liquidation was not disclosed.

142. The objection of lack of authority has raised a number of issues
of Spanish law which have been thoroughly debated, and been the
subject of extensive legal opinions by the Parties’ experts, Dr. Bravo for
Peru and Dr. Vaquerizo for Lidercén. (The former was also called to
testify before the Tribunal.) It is of course understandable that
the significance of purported acts of a Spanish corporate entity are
examined in light of Spanish law, but in the Tribunal’s view not without
hesitation, because in some respects the concerns of Spanish law in
this respect are conceived by the legislator in light of the exercise of
rights defined by Spanish law, including those of third parties. It is not
obvious that the requirement and solutions of Spanish law are
necessarily apposite, or exclusively applicable, in conjunction with
ICSID proceedings involving claims raised under an international
treaty. Nevertheless both sides have pleaded Spanish law, and the
Tribunal does not believe that another approach would have yielded a

different answer than the one to be given in this case.

143. In one respect, however, it is clear (as also perceived by the
Parties) that the issue involves the application of texts which are not
part of Spanish law, namely Article 36 of the ICSID Convention and the
more detailed Institution Rules to which it refers —specifically Rule 2.
Lidercén observes that no particular formal proof is specified. This is
unsurprising, given the variety of entities which might make claims as
investors, and the various ways in which they document corporate

actions.

144. The question then arises as to the consequences of the failure
to respect this Rule. It is not a matter ofjurisdiction, since
ICSID’s jurisdictional requirements are exclusively set forth in Article
25 of the ICSID Convention (as possibly affected by the terms of the
consent to arbitration in the instrument where it is expressed, be it

a contract, a treaty, or a national law). Lidercén insists that as a factual

S7

matter Mr. Vicario, at the moment he decided to commence this ICSID
arbitration, was in fact Administrador Unico. Although his status had
changed as of the date of the Request, Peru should not be allowed to
build a jurisdictional objection on a mere procedural rule;
no “omission, error, or defect" in the Request may be elevated to

a jurisdictional criterion.

145. Of course, Rule 2 must be satisfied if the Request is to be
registered by ICSID. Ifthe registration was affected with
apparently sufficient documentation later shown to be inaccurate, the
conclusion does not seem to be that the action is foreclosed, but rather
that the defect should be cured. This may lead to difficulties, for
example if there was a time limit for commencing the action. Such
questions have not been explored in argument here, and can be put to
the side at this stage of reasoning since they need not be resolved

unless the alleged defect turns out to be decisive.

146. According to Dr. Vaquerizo (in Paragraph 2 of his Opinion),
there are no requirements for the formal manifestation of a voluntad
negocial (transactional will) and such proof is therefore admissible in
any form. He maintains that Lidercén’s decision to commence
arbitration is sufficiently proved by either the engagement of Hogan
Lovells as arbitration counsel or the Notice of Dispute given on 2 May
2016. Given Peru’s failure torespond to the Notice, Mr.
Vicario’s instructions to Hogan Lovells demonstrate Lidercén’s
consent and constitutes proof of the decision taken to proceed to
arbitration in the absence of a constructive reply by the Respondent.
Lidercén’s decision was thus taken prior to the end of Mr. Vicario’s
service as Administrador Unico. In Dr. Vaquerizo’s view, the
subsequently elected Board of Directors remained bound by the
Administrador Unico's decision unless they then resolved to revoke or

modify them (Paragraph 7).

147. Moreover, the Board of Directors confirmed, by an Acta de
Manfestaciones notarized on 20 May 2019, its agreement that Mr.
Vicario continued to manage the arbitral proceedings which he had
decided to pursue while Administrador Unico. Peru rejects Liderc6n's
production of this and numerous other documents dated the same

month. In particular, Peru insists that a Declaration of the Board of

58

Directors confirming Mr. Vicario’s decision to proceed, and that he
should continue to supervise Lidercén’s efforts in this ICSID case,
would not cure the defects ofthe decision to commence ICSID

arbitration more than two years before.

148. For his part, Dr. Vaquerizoconsiders that the Board of
Directors validly ratified Mr. Vicario’s actions, noting (Paragraphs 33-
34) that Peru cannot point to its acquisition of any rights subsequent
to Mr. Vicario’s acts which could conceivably be jeopardized —such as
might be the case with respect to the sale of goods said to have been
sold by an invalid but putatively ratified act which, if accepted as a legal
transfer of title, would imperil a purchase made subsequently by a third

party.

149. The unanimous Members of Liderc6én’s Board, when ratifying
the decision to proceed to arbitration, also indicated that they had
become the liquidators of the company. Lidercén affirms that this
should also be accepted as signifying the unanimous ratification by the

liquidators.

150. Dr. Vaquerizo’s evidence demonstrates that a decision by a
general shareholders’ assembly was not necessary; Spanish law
and jurisprudencia (jurisprudence) confirms the power of board

members (administradores or administrators) to take such decisions.

151. Dr. Bravo, although she accepts that the fact that an entity has
been placed in liquidation does not affect its corporate capacity, insists
that in that event only acts filed formally with the Registro
Mercantil (Commercial Registry) are opposable to third parties. If it
follows, as Peru argues, that the Board Members’ ratification has no
effect, then, so Liderc6én retorts, it would remain the case that Mr.
Vicario, still identified as the Administrador Unico in the Registro
Mercantil (Commercial Registry), bound the company with his
decision; as a purely factual matter, this was unanimously ratified by
the board, which means that Peru's contention is “circular and defies

logic."

59

152. Finally, Peru has argued that the fact that the cost of this
arbitration exceeds 25% of the assets of the company means that the
decision to initiate arbitration required approval by a shareholders’
meeting. Liderc6n answers that this argument is based on an erroneous
interpretation by Dr. Bravo of Article 160(f) of the Spanish Ley de
Sociedades de Capital (Law of Capital Companies). As Dr. Vaquerizo
affirms, Article 160(f) is limited to the context of
specific transactions: “acquisitions”, “alienations”, or “contributions of
assets to another entity”. Moreover, he notes that this is an exception
to the general principle of the authority of the Board, and is to be

interpreted restrictively.

153. Inthe course of her cross-examination, Dr. Bravo was asked
whether an Administrador Unico was empowered to decide on behalf
of a company whether to take out a loan, hire a lawyer, or start an
arbitration. In each instance, she confirmed that this was the case, as a
general proposition, but qualified her answer by referring to the 25%
rule. She was then asked to indicate how she appraised the amount
of the transaction that should be so limited (and thus to address the
relevance of the limitation created under Article 160(f), and notably
how the initiation of arbitration could be equated to the three type of
transactions defined therein). The following was part of the exchange

on this point.

gel inicio de un arbitraje es una adquisicion de un activo?

R: Puede interpretarse como una adquisicién de un
activo. Sise ganara el arbitraje se va a conseguir

el principal activo de la compajia. [T: 1976:15-19]

English translation:

But the initiation of an arbitration, is that an acquisition
of an asset? A: It can be interpreted as the acquisition of
an asset. If you win the arbitration, you are going to get

assets for the company. [T: 1776:4-8]

60

154. This is an imaginative proposition, but hardly a straight-
forward interpretation. Moreover, as was then pointed out by Ms
Briones, this seemed at odds with Dr. Bravo's written testimony. It is
indeed curious that the answer seemed to contemplate the potential
upside of arbitration, and not the exposure to Joss. After
some hesitation, Dr. Bravo reoriented herself to the conception of her
written opinion, which was to focus on the costs of arbitration. Yet
even so, she did not indicate how one could know ex ante whether this
represented 25% of the corporate capital and thus require reinforced
authority. Dr. Bravo did not agree with the narrow interpretation of
Article 160(f), but even so it seems that the proponent of its application
would bear the burden of extending it to a hypothesis rather distant

from the natural focus of the wording of the Article.

155. | This equivocation with respect to the scope of Article 160(f),
especially inthe absence of any reference to precedents posing a
similar question, rather gives an advantage of persuasiveness to the

views of Dr. Vaquerizo.

156. _ Liderc6n relies on two letters signed by Mr. Vicario when he
was indisputably Administrador Unico of the Spanish entity, namely
the Notificacién de Controversia (Notice of Dispute) of 2 May 2016,
which expressly accepted “la oferta de sometimiento a arbitraje

internacional realizada por Peri" (the offer to international
arbitration from Peru), and the follow-up letter of 29 August 2016,
both addressed to the Peruvian Government and which stated

expressly that in the absence of a friendly solution:

se procederdé ainiciar un procedimiento arbitral en

los términos previstos en el articulo 9.2 del [Tratado.]

English translation:

An arbitration proceeding will be initiated in the terms

provided in article 9.2 of the [Treaty.]

61

157. This latter phrase, in the future indicative tense, expressed a
positive decision to initiate arbitration in the absence of successful
negotiations. At the time, Mr. Vicario was indeed Administrador Unico
of Lidercén, SL. And although he signed this notification as
Administrador Unico of each of the two Lidercén entities, there could
be no confusion about which one would be the claimant in arbitration;
only the Spanish entity could act against Peru under the Treaty.
Although he signed his declaration of 18 January 2017 as
Administrador Unico, this seems an inconsequential error; in fact the
text of his letter refers to his powers in sending the Notice of Dispute

in the past tense:

me correspondian todas las faculdades representativas

de la sociedad.

158. It is moreover difficult to see how insistence on non-
retroactivity assists Peru. The significant issue is whether Lidercén,
here and now, is acting with requisite authority, not whether that
authority was extant at the moment of the Request for Arbitration.
The function of the ICSID Institution Rules is “to confer a limited
screening power upon the Secretary-General”.? Indeed, it has been said
that “the Institution Rules apply to the period of time from the filing of
arequest to the dispatch of the notice of registration.”* The registration
is not dispositive of any issue save the limited question whether the
case will proceed to the constitution of a tribunal, after which it falls to
the arbitrators to decide issues of admissibility and jurisdiction,
without any indication that such controversies must be resolved as at

the date of receipt of the Request.

159. For this reason, and considering the limited function of

Institution Rule 2, this objection fails.

3 Martina Polasek, “The Threshold for Registration of a Request for Arbitration
under the ICSID Convention”, 5 Dispute Resolution International 177, at 178 (2011),
also noting at 184 that: “The ICSID Convention does not contain any reference to
admissibility and it is not a settled matter whether questions of admissibility should be
distinguished from questions of jurisdiction.”

4 Ibid., at note 4.

62

JURISDICTION

160. Liderc6én’s standing as such is not contested; it is a Spanish
entity and therefore entitled to avail itself of the Treaty if it can show
that its claim falls under its scope. Instead, Peru contends that
Liderc6n is impermissibly seeking to convert a contractual claim,
which is subject as a matter of binding contractual agreement to
another arbitral forum, into a claim against the State as a whole on the
same foundation of contractual breaches. Lidercén answers (Diplica

de Jurisdiccion, para. 42) that it:

no busca tinicamente el respeto del Contrato, sino el
resarcimi por miiltiples incumplimi ce idos
por los poderes legislativo, ejecutivo y judicial peruanos,
entre los cuales también se encuentra —-aunque no
uinicamente— la falta de respeto por estos terceros del
Contrato. La falta de respeto del Contrato por terceros,
por definicién, demuestra que no nos encontramos

meramente ante una disputa contractual.
English translation:

it seeks not only respect for the Contract, but also redress
for multiple infractions committed by the legislative,
executive, and judicial arms of Peru, among which are to
be found —but not exclusively— the failure by these third
parties to respect the Contract. The failure of third parties
to respect the Contract by definition proves that we are not

faced merely with a contractual dispute.

161. | The various precedents Liderc6én cites include notably the
decision by the Annulment Committee in Vivendi J (“it is one thing to
exercise contractual jurisdiction (arguably exclusively vested in the
Administrative Tribunals of Tucuman by virtue of the Concession
Contract) and another to take into account the terms of a contract in
determining whether there has been a breach of a distinct standard of

international law, such as that reflected in ... the BIT” —para. 105); the

63

award in RFCC v Morocco (to the effect that a case no longer concerns
the poor performance of a contract if “the State or its emanation went
beyond its role as a simple contracting party to play its specific role of
a puissance publique” —para. 65); and the decision on jurisdiction in
Impregilo v. Pakistan (“in order that the alleged breach of contract
may constitute a violation of the BIT, it must be the result of behavior
going beyond that which an ordinary contracting party could adopt.
Only the State in the exercise of its sovereign authority (puissance
publique), and not as a contracting party, may breach the obligations

assumed under the BIT” —para. 260).

162. The Tribunal endorses this important proposition in principle.
The question then becomes whether Peru's actions in relation to the
investor, notably as they affected the latter's contractual entitlements,
were acts of “sovereign authority” beyond the capacity of a simple
contracting party that breached the Treaty. Lidercén conveniently
summarizes the instances of such exercise of “imperium” as follows

(Diiplica de Jurisdiccion, para. 47):

(a) Perti emple6 sus potestades legislativas para
eliminar un compromiso de exclusividad que parecia
incomodarle a través de la aprobacion de la Ley de ITVs,
tratando ademds de resolver un supuesto conflicto de
competencias en lugar de plantear un recurso ante el

Tribunal Constitucional.

(b) El INDECOPI, un organismo piiblico, primero
mostr6é6 su conformidad con la_ Concesién, y
posteriormente cambiéd de criterio declarando la
ilegalidad de la misma por la supuesta existencia de

barreras burocrdticas.

(c) La Resolucién de la Corte Superior de Lima de

septiembre de 2017 es irrazonable e inadmisible.

(d) Pertti ha otorgado un trato discriminatorio a
Lidercén respecto de las empresas nacionales y ha sido
obligada a operar en un régimen de igualdad con otros
operadores que no compiten en las mismas

circunstancias.

64

(e) El trato de la Inversion por la judicatura peruana
ofende la discrecionalidad judicial y conlleva a un

fracaso manifiesto de la justicia natural.

) Las dos comisiones dependientes de la Comisién
de Transportes del Congreso han investigado tanto la
licitacién como el Contrato desprestigiando y acosando

en su actuar a Lidercon.

English translation:

(a) Peru used its legislative powers by enacting [the
Ley ITV] to eliminate an exclusivity undertaking which it
found not to its liking, seeking moreover to resolve a
supposed conflict of authority (competencias) instead of

having recourse to the Constitutional Court.

(b) INDECOPI, a public organ, first manifested its
acceptance of the Concession, and then changed the
criterion to declare it to be illegal due to the alleged

existence of anti-competitive “bureaucratic obstacles”.

(c) The judgment of the Superior Court of Lima in

September 2017 was unreasonable and unacceptable.

(d) Peru treated Lidercén in a discriminatory fashion

as compared to national enterprises.

(e) The treatment of the Investment by the Peruvian
courts offends notions of judicial propriety and has

resulted in a manifest violation of natural justice.

(ca The two sub-commissions of the congressional
Comisién de Transportes investigated the bidding process
as well as the Contract in a manner that discredited

Liderc6n and undermined its performance.

163. Counsel appearing for both sides have demonstrated
impressive familiarity with arbitral decisions that have dealt with more
or less similar issues, and the Tribunal (without being held by any rule

of stare decisis) has been attentive to these decisions and the Parties’

65

learned arguments by reference to them. The Tribunal does not see the
need to belabor its explanations by extensive reference to a burgeoning
jurisprudence which is subject to innumerable distinctions created by
unique factual circumstances. That said, some prominent citations
have achieved recognition as encapsulating important principles. One
of these is apposite here, and is to be found in the decision by the

Vivendi I Annulment Committee (para. 96):

whether there has been a breach of the BIT and whether
there has been a breach of a contract are different
questions. Each of these claims will be determined by
reference to its own proper or applicable law — in the case
of the BIT, by international law; in the case of the

Concession Contract, by the proper law of the contract...

and again (para. 98):

where the essential basis of a claim brought before an
international tribunal is a breach of contract, the tribunal
will give effect to any valid choice of forum clause in the

contract.

164. It should already be clear from the factual narrative presented
above that Lidercén is not seeking to escape from a forum which is not
to its liking, or to overcome an adverse ruling for such a forum. To the
contrary, Lidercén was satisfied with the 2011 Award, and has
defended it against unsuccessful attempts at annulment on the part of
its opponent, MML. In other words, Lidercon is not seeking to relitigate
aclaim which did not prevail in arbitration, but to rescue the benefit of
its successful defense in that arbitration by seeking reparation for what
it claims to have been Peru's wrongful prevention of the enforcement
of the 2011 Award. That is indeed the critical question on the merits.
This Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear Liderc6n’s claims, and Lidercén

is entitled to be heard in this forum.

66

MERITS

Legal bases of the claim under the Treaty

165. Lidercén contends that Peru has breached the Treaty in the
following ways: first, failing to accord fair and equitable treatment (in
the form of (a) denial of justice and (b) non-transparent acts in bad
faith that —whether taken separately or as “composite conduct’—
defeated legitimate expectations); second, imposing unjustified and
discriminatory measures, and third, breaching the Concession
Contract. The factual bases of these allegations overlap to a

considerable degree.

166. The Treaty provision regarding fair and equitable treatment is

Article 4(1). It reads as follows:

Each Contracting Party shall guarantee in its territory fair
and equitable treatment to the investments made by

investors of the other Contracting Party.

167. Lidercén’s Reply at Paragraph 480 relies without reservation
on the gloss on the fair and equitable treatment standard articulated in
Paragraph 98 of the award in Waste Management v Mexico II (2004),
and Peru also approves it at Paragraph 388 of its Rejoinder. The ICSID
Additional Facility Tribunal in that case wrote that the standard

requires proof of:

conduct attributable to the State and harmful to the
claimant [that] is arbitrary, grossly unfair, unjust or
idiosyncratic, is discriminatory and exposes the claimant
to sectional or racial prejudice, or involves a lack of due
process leading to an outcome which offends judicial
propriety—as might be the case with a manifest failure of
natural justice in judicial proceedings or a complete lack

of transparency and candour in an administrative process.

67

168. The Treaty standards with respect to unjustified or
discriminatory measures are distinct. The former flows from the
Treaty’s prohibition of medidas injustificadas (unjustified measures).
Here again, Peru notes that both Parties (Liderc6n in Paragraph 404 of
its Reply, expressly noting the Parties’ concordance in this respect;
Peru confirming in Paragraph 482 of its Rejoinder) accept the same
gloss on this provision, namely Professor Schreuer’s formulations, as
recorded and endorsed in EDF v. Romania (Paragraph 303), to the

effect that an unjustified measure is one that:

inflicts damage on the investor without serving any
apparent legitimate purpose; .... isnot based in legal
standards but on discretion, prejudice or personal
preference; ... [or is] taken for reasons that are different
from those put forward by the decision maker; [or] in

wilful disregard of due process and proper procedure.

169. As for discrimination, Lidercén’s Reply, at Paragraph 469,
advances the proposition that it arises when there is “unequal
treatment of equal circumstances without any justified motive”. There
are a number of similar formulations, but the Tribunal is satisfied with
this one (with the caveat that the word justified excludes capricious,
irrational, or absurd differentiation; see Enron v Argentina, Paragraph
282).

170. Finally, with respect to Liderc6én’s attempt to assert claims of
contractual breach on the basis of an “umbrella clause”, it faces a
number of obstacles which have been traversed at considerable length
in the pleadings, but in the interest of economy of expression the
present Tribunal will immediately point out that the attempt fails at the
very first hurdle as a matter of plain textual interpretation of the
Treaty; what Lidercén presents as an umbrella clause, namely Article

4(2) of the Treaty, is not one at all. It reads as follows:

68

This treatment shall not be any less favorable than what is
granted by each Contracting Party to the investments
realized in its territory by investors of a third party that

enjoys Most Favorable Nation treatment.

171. The pronoun “this” (este in the Treaty’s original Spanish
language, which of course is common to both signatory States) refers
to the subject of Article 4(1), which is “fair and equitable treatment”.
Lidercén has cited no authority for the proposition that the “fair and
equitable” standard achieves the transmission of clauses from other
treaties which speak of respect for contracts. It is conceivable that
contractual rights are dealt with in a manner which breaches the
standard of fair and equitable, but that is already covered by Article
4(1) in the present Treaty, and the pronoun in Article 4(2) does not
allow its expansion to cover alleged contractual breaches that are not

breaches of “this treatment”.

Methodology of the Tribunal's appraisal

172. | The main features of this dispute emerge from two streams of
legal disputation which have engendered extraordinary and ever-
expanding arbitral and judicial jousting —ultimately to the

disappointment of Lidercén as the aggrieved party.

173. One resulted from INDECOPI's determination that the
Ministry’s rejection of applications by third parties to operate in Lima
Metropolitana on grounds that the exclusivity clause in the Concession
Contract precluded anyone other than Lidercén Perti from operating
there was a barrier to competition, and its consequent order which
resulted in the Ministry granting authorizations to Lidercén’s

competitors to open ITV centers in Lima Metropolitana.

174. The other arose by reason of reciprocal allegations of non-
performance between Lidercén Peri and MML and the latter's
ultimate declaration of the nullity of the Concession Contract.
Liderc6n Perti initiated a number of arbitration proceedings which

were consolidated and resulted in the 2011 Award. Lidercén Pert’'s

69

claim, nonetheless, was ultimately defeated by a judicial determination
that declared the main parts of the award unenforceable because MML
lost the authority to regulate ITVs, and could no longer perform the

Contract.

175. Thus, the combination of the application of the Ley /TV, as
interpreted by INDECOPI and the Peruvian courts and the
determination of unenforceability of the 2011 Award ultimately
eliminated Lidercén’s fundamental advantage under the Concession

Contract.

176. The record of this case is dense. The pleadings have been prolix,
reflecting the inherent complexities of the narratives that underlie the
claims and defenses: the negotiation and performance of a concession
contract involving the private, for-profit supply of technical vehicle
inspections required by law, conducted in the context of spatially over-
lapping administrative authorities in an area of public services not
previously subject to national legislation and regulation, and affected
by numerous investigations, regulatory adjustments, arbitrations, and
other types of proceedings —whether public (judicial and non-judicial)
or private (arbitral). The documents put before the arbitrators are
voluminous, and subject to variable interpretations, if not indeed
inherent ambiguity. Fundamental questions of Peruvian law have been
traversed: administrative and constitutional law, the norms pertinent
to the attribution of authority between the State and its subdivisions
(both vertical/hierarchical and horizontal/geographical), and the
interpretation of a Concession Contract perhaps best described as sui

generis.

177. In this arbitration, all of these contentions and materials must
be viewed through the prism of international law, since all claims and
defenses involve allegations governed by the Treaty. Fortunately, the
Tribunal has been assisted by the high quality of the advocacy
conducted by both sides, helping the arbitrators to refine their analysis
and reduce what at first blush seemed an intractable narrative into
discreet points whose resolution allows the dispute to be decided by

reference to a limited number of fundamental determinations.

70

178. The essential elements of the dispute arise from the uneasy
overlapping of competencies between the Ministry and MML with
respect to the regulation, authorization and supervision of vehicle
inspection centers in the Province of Lima. The Concession Contract
granted Lidercén Pert an exclusive right to provide vehicle inspection
services within the Province of Lima (see Paragraph 69 above). The
scope of that exclusivity was expanded by Ordenanza 694 to cover, at
the time, all vehicle traffic within Lima Metropolitana. However, when
the Peruvian Congress proclaimed the Ley /TV in 2008, it declared that
the Ministry was empowered nation-wide to regulate, authorize and
supervise inspection centers and removed any such competence from
MML but at the same time stipulated that existing contracts having led
to the establishment of such centers entered into by other

governmental organs would be respected.

179. On this basis, given that Lidercén’s Contract contained an
exclusivity provision, the Ministry adopted the policy of rejecting the
application for centers by other candidates. This policy was examined
by INDECOPI, which found the Ministry's denials to constitute a
bureaucratic barrier to competition. INDECOPI's decisions in this
respect have, according to Mr. Jiménez’s witness statement (dated 4
June 2019) been upheld on each of the 12 occasions it has been
challenged before the courts of first instance (cited in his footnote 41,
and a part of the evidence of this case) and confirmed by Superior Court
of Lima in one case. More detail is provided in the section below
dealing specifically with the role of INDECOPI.

180. So ultimately the central issues crystallize in two simple

questions:

a. did any actions or determinations of instrumentalities of
the Peruvian State contribute to extinguish the Concession’s exclusivity
in a manner attributable to the State and constituting a breach of the

Treaty?

b. was Lidercén Pert entitled, by virtue of the Concession
Contract with MML, to resist the Ministry's (specifically SUTRAN)

attempts to inspect its inspection centers?

71

181. For their part, and applying their law, certain courts of Peru
have ultimately decided against the concessionaire. The question for
the present Tribunal therefore becomes whether conduct attributable
to the Respondent has breached the Treaty. As a matter of international
law, the instrumentalities whose conduct is in question may be those
found to be responsible for the losses occasioned by the outcome
endorsed by the courts, or indeed the courts themselves if they have

administered justice in a fundamentally flawed way.

182. Given the complexity of the case, it seems unhelpful to deal with
the merits of the dispute by reviewing a list of abstract propositions, as
this may lead to sterile catalogues of isolated points scored by one side
or the other. The hesitations and uncertainties as to the emerging ITV
regime puts a high-intensity spotlight on Bullet Point 13 of Clause 1.1

of the Concession Contract (see Paragraph 67 above).

183. What is of interest to the present Tribunal is not to derive
impressions of opinions and expectations of various interested parties
at various moments of the evolution of this transformation, but to
determine the legal position as expressed by the proper authority at the

requisite level of hierarchy.

184. The Tribunal will therefore evaluate the overall conduct of the
relevant actors one by one in light of an ascertainment of the regulatory
framework, leading to a final part of this Merits section recapitulating
the appraisal of that conduct in terms of its effect on Lidercén’s

individualized claims.

Liderc6én conduct as an investor claiming entitlement to legal

protection under the Treaty

185. The examination of Liderc6n’s stance follows two main vectors.
First, the legitimate ex ante expectations of the investor, taking the
word legitimate not as an abstract legal standard to be applied
universally, but as the reasonable understanding of an investor in the
context of the environment in which it was contemplating investing.

Second, at the other end of the chronology, the focus will be on the

72

investor's own obligations — viewed as the counterpart of the
entitlement to rely on the Treaty — in reaction to developments which

it considered to be adverse.

186. Legitimate expectations are of course a traditional and proper
consideration when appraising the treatment of foreign investors.
Before wondering about the meaning to attribute to the word
legitimate, however, one needs to consider not only the State's
conduct, but also that of the investor in order to ascertain whether
there were any expectations at all, including with regard to matters of
legal security. The Tribunal proceeds on the basis of a notionally
objective standard, namely what an ordinarily prudent investor would
have been looking at when weighing the risks of signing the Concession

Contract in September 2004.

187. Vehicle inspection was something new in Peru. The
Government was adjusting to the post-Fujimori era. A comprehensive
new law for the Ministry of Transport and Communications had come
into effect in 1999. It generally designated the MTC as regulator and

manager of ITVs.

188. The relevance of the factual context should be obvious.
Liderc6én was not investing in a familiar environment in which its
venture involved a well-known, much-regulated industry with a long
history of a stable administrative regime, such as the operation of toll
roads in certain countries. To the contrary, this experience was new to
both sides. Indeed, Mr. Vicario confirmed before the present Tribunal
what was evident in the bidding process: that neither Lidercén nor he
had in fact ever operated a vehicle inspection center anywhere before
commencing the venture in Peru (T: 302:9-22-303:1-13.).

189. As for the environment in which he was investing, the fields
were entirely green. Mr. Tarazona testified that Peruvians were
unfamiliar with an obligation to submitting their vehicles to technical
inspection. It was therefore an important and challenging task of public
administration, and moreover one which was being confronted in the
immediate wake of what he called the “turbulent epoch” of the Fujimori

years. The public authorities were finding their way.

73

190. There was an obvious dimension of policy to the matter; safe
and sound motor vehicles have an evident effect on traffic safety as well
as on pollution. Legislators are likely to be justly concerned with the
details of envisaged reforms, and the extent to which it might be
appropriate to entrust their implementation to public-private
cooperation. (Shoddy regulatory regimes are immediately exposed to
the specter of corruption, such as trafficking in certificates of
conformity.) The capital city of Lima, by far the most concerned with
traffic congestion and environmental degradation, might feel a

particular urgency and entitlement to address the problem.

191. At the same time, the Ministry was an obvious locus of
regulatory control. The starting point was the 1999 Law, which in
Article 16 designated MTC as the regulator and manager of the national
vehicle inspection system, without providing many specifics. The
implementing Regulation was not ready until 2001. It notably
confirmed the Ministry's authority to regulate and supervise vehicle
inspections throughout Peru (Article 52(e) and 54), granted vehicle
owners the right to select the center of their choice (Article 52(f)), and
stated that the Ministry would create a national database system to
connect with all centers for the purpose of issuing certificates (Article
52(h)).

192. Yet, at the same time other laws and regulations were being
adopted, and agreements entered into that either contemplated
delegation of powers to municipalities, such as the Ley de Bases de la
Descentralizacién (2002), the Ley Marco de Promocién de la
Inversién Descentralizada (2003) or, notably, the Organic Law on
Municipalities, that conferred explicit, seemingly overlapping
competencies on MML. Indeed, Article 161 listed among the
competencias y funciones of MML to “verify and control the

performance of vehicles through periodic technical inspections”.

193. In May 2003, MML issued Ordenanza 506 that made ITVs
mandatory in Lima Metropolitana and provided that public or private
entities to provide ITV services would be selected by MML. On the
other hand, it was rather quickly determined that the 2001 Regulation
needed more development, and in October 2003 a new Regulation was

issued by the Ministry providing as follows:

74

(i) The present Title provides the technical and
administrative procedures of the Technical
Inspections system for vehicles, and the basic
norms for the installation and functioning of the
Vehicle Inspection Plant that provides such
service. (Art. 101.)

(ii) The Technical Inspection procedure will only be
carried out in authorized Technical Inspection
Plants. (Art. 102.)

(iii) The user of the service shall decide freely the
Inspection Plant where it wishes its vehicle to

pass the Technical Inspection. (Art. 106.)

(iv) The Ministry is the competent authority for
granting concessions in favour of Inspection
Companies so that they operate the Technical
Inspection Plants through periodic tender

processes. (Art. 119.)

194. In September 2004, only four days before the Concession
Contract was signed, MML issued Ordenanza 694, which to a large

extent incorporated the content of the 2003 Regulation.

195. In the context of this evolving regulatory framework, Lidercén
and MML included in the Concession Contract Bullet Point 13, and
Clauses 19.4 and 23.2. Bullet Point 13 explicitly refers to Ley Organica
de Municipalidades and Ordenanza 506 as normative sources, among
others, and then adds those that modify, derogate, complement,
replace or interpret all of those sources. All of them encompass
significant potential alterations of the contractual regime; even the
notion of “complement” would bring in other applicable rules that were
not listed, such as Ordenanza 694, or could generate new ones by way

of supplying answers in the event of lacunae or ambiguity.

75

196. Public authorities may fail to accord fair and equitable
treatment if they create legitimate expectations that they subsequently
fail to meet. To be legitimate, however, an expectation must be of a

nature to induce reasonable reliance.

197. Moreover, Lidercén and MML explicitly included equilibrium
and “adverse-change” Clauses in the Contrato de Concesién, Clauses
23.2 and 19.4 (see Paragraphs 72-73). These provisions made it
explicitly clear that regulatory changes could alter the Concession’s
economic and financial equilibrium or prevent MML from complying
with its contractual obligations, and provided for appropriate

remedies.

198. Clause 19.4 of the Contract in particular provided that Lidercén
Pert had the right to terminate the Contract and to attribute fault to
MML if an amendment to an applicable law affected the
implementation of the Contract or prevented MML from performing
its contractual obligations. It seems fair to infer that this provision was
designed to prevent MML from insisting that because it was not
directly responsible for the new legislation it could require Lidercén
Pert to continue performing. The Contract thus treated such new

legislation as attracting the liability of MML.

199. A final aspect of Lidercén’s conduct to be examined here is its
approach to the way its own activity was to be inspected. To recall
Juvenal’s famous question quis custodet ipsos custodes? Who watches
the watchman? If Liderc6n issues certificates, who was to verify that
this function, of great significance in terms of road safety and pollution

control, is carried out properly?

200. As hard as it is to believe, it seems that in the context of the
hesitations as to the evolution of the once overlapping competencies of
the Ministry and MML, and as to the maintenance in principle of the
Concession Contract notwithstanding the establishment in the Ley JTV
of the exclusivity of the former's role with respect to the regulation and
supervision of ITVs, Lidercén took the position not only that it was
contractually entitled to be regulated by MML even after MML had
ceased to act in that capacity, but that this meant that Lidercén had the

76

right to shut the doors of its inspection centers to the inspection teams
of the Ministry (operating by its subordinate agency SUTRAN)
notwithstanding the legislated authority under which they were acting
by virtue of the Ley /TV. The astonishing reality therefore is that
Liderc6n Perti’s centers have simply not been inspected since 2011 at
the latest, as Mr. Barrios acknowledged. (T: 530). He explained that
“estdbamos en nuestro derecho de no dejar que una autoridad que no
tiene facultades nos fiscalice” (T: 531:17-19) (“we have the right not to
allow an authority that does not have the power to supervise us”,
[English T: 495:18-20]) and that “a través del contrato como
fiscalizadores no los podiamos dejar y nunca los hemos dejado de ese
manera’ (T: 553:5-10) (“but if you are coming here as supervisors, you

cannot come in, in such capacity” [English T: 515:4-6]).

201. There have been incidents of temporary closure and attendant
disruption of Liderc6n centers as a result of this intransigence on its
part. The brazenness of Lidercén’s insistence on living in the
alternative universe of the impregnable Contract is remarkable —as is
the relative forbearance of the Peruvian authorities in tolerating this
state of affairs. Contracts with public authorities which call for services
rendered to the public are of course in principle legally binding, but
when they are modified in accordance with new legislation or
regulations the consequence of prejudice to the private party is
generally found in compensation rather than specific performance, not

in self-judgment on the part of the latter.

202. Lidercén remarkably seeks to justify its stance by invoking
Article 46 of the Peruvian Constitution, which in translation reads as

follows:

No one owes obedience to a usurper government
or to anyone who assumes public office in violation

of the Constitution and the law.

The civil population has the right to insurrection

in defense of the constitutional order.

Acts of those who usurp public office are null and

void.

77

203. Mr. Barrios was asked how in his perception one is entitled to
react when one believes that officials are not operating within their
powers; can any citizen determine on their own that an official does not
have authority to enter an inspection site and on that basis deny
access? He answered: “Es correcto. Bajo la Constitucién del Pert es
correcto.” (T: 692:19-20) (“That is right. Under the Constitution of
Peru, that is correct.” [English T: 636:21-22]). And so, when Mr.
Barrios was asked to provide the date of the last time a Liderc6n center
was inspected by either SUTRAN or a municipal supervisor, he
answered: “Por la SUTRAN nunca.” As for MML, “me parece que fue
marzo de — abril de 2008”. (T: 569:17-19.) (“By SUTRAN? Never.”...
“jt seems to me that it was March or April of 2008” [English T: 529:20-
22] He stated that SUTRAN was welcome to come “de forma informal”
(T: 553:4) (“informally” [English T: 515:2]) to see Liderc6n’s superior
technology, but “nunca los hemos dejado que nos fiscalicen” (T: 555:4-

5) (‘we have never allowed them to oversee us” (English T: 516:18]).

204. Liderc6én’s argument is thus to the effect that the Ministry is a
usurper inasmuch as its insistence on inspecting Lidercén’s centers is
contrary to the Concession Contract, and therefore Lidercén has the
right to resist. This is ill-conceived. Parties holding contracts with
public bodies do not have the right, whenever there is a dispute, to
consider that the administration's alleged breach of a contract “usurps
public office” because it is a violation of “the law” (i.e. the validity of
contracts, which is also guaranteed by the Peruvian Constitution in
Article 62) and therefore entitles them to “insurrection”. This should
not even have to be explained. Article 46 clearly finds its origin in the
impulse to protect the constitutional order against coups d’état, and
has no place to play as a self-granted “remedy” on the part of
businessmen contending that an administrative contract has been
breached.

205. In closing argument, counsel for Lidercén sought to make
something of Ms. Canales’ answer when asked about Article 46 of the
Constitution, and she answered that “el ciudadano no tiene que
obedecer una disposicién de una autoridad que no tiene competencia”
(T: 1130:9-11) (“a citizen does not have to obey a provision by an
authority that is not competent” [English T: 1025:12-14]). This was
presented as reflecting something of an extraordinary characteristic of

the Peruvian constitutional order. But it is not, and it is sufficient to

78

consider her words to see that this is what one would expect in any
system which considers itself obedient to the rule of law. Of course
officials acting ultra vires do not have to be obeyed once it is established
that their orders constitute an excess of power. But that does not mean
that citizens are the judge of ultra vires, and welcome to take the law
into their own hands whenever they feel aggrieved by an official whom

they consider guilty of trespass.

206. In sum, Lidercén could not have had an expectation that the
Concession Contract would be insulated from legislative or regulatory
changes, and did not have a Constitutional right to refuse to be
inspected by the Ministry. This does not exclude the possibility that
Lidercén’s contractual entitlements might have been impaired by acts
attributable to the State in ways that breached the Treaty, and so we
now turn to examine the conduct of the public bodies which interacted

with Lidercén.

MML's conduct as Lidercén's contracting party

207. MML did not argue that the exclusivity clause was

unenforceable; its officials apparently believed the contrary.

208. Lidercén makes much of the fact that the first of
the Disposiciones Finales of the 2008 Ley ITV acknowledged the
survival of concession agreements entered into “antes de la vigencia de
esta Ley” (before this law was enacted). But that provision itself was
subject to obedience of its legal framework (as was the Concession
Contract itself), and the Ley /TV was naturally a significant intervening

factor in that legal construct.

209. The simple fact to bear in mind is that this first specific National
Law on Technical Vehicle Inspections —the Ley JTV— did not see the
light of day until 2008.

210. Unlike the situation in some well-known cases in the annals of
ICSID, this is not one where the investor has been run out of town. To

the contrary, the Ley /TV included what counsel for Lidercén

79

memorably referred to as a “carve-out” with respect to existing
contracts, including those entered into by other public bodies which no

longer would have the authority to select entidades revisoras.

211. The Ministry thereafter upheld the exclusivity clause of the
Contrato de Concesién until the INDECOPI and Peruvian courts ruled
that rejecting applications on the basis of that contractual provision
was an illegal bureaucratic barrier and ordered it to decide applications
strictly in terms of compliance with the requirements set out in the Law
and its Regulations. Although MML disagreed with the 2011 Award
and sought by the means legally available to it to seek its nullification,
it complied with the ultimate judicial partial upholding of the 2011
Award and thus accepted to pay amounts held to have been due

contractually.

212. So the Concession Contract has as a plain factual matter
endured to this day. The issue at hand therefore pertains to the
immutability of discrete aspects of that agreement, namely exclusivity
and the role of MML as the supervisory authority. Here one finds that
MML adopted a prudent course, already at the stage of drafting the
Contract; it took shape in the form of Clauses 19.4 and 23.2, which in
combination with Bullet Point 13 might be referred to as the very
opposites of a stabilization clause. Lidercén chose not to pursue the
remedies provided in these provisions and instead sought to fight for
the preservation of its exclusivity rather than seeking these

adjustments on account of its loss.

213. MML remains Lidercén’s co-contractant. Although the
contractual exclusivity was ultimately declared unenforceable by the
Peruvian Courts (where appeals are still pending), which may well have
the consequence that Lidercén’s ambitions were disappointed, it
remained open to it to seek the contractually contemplated

adjustments on that account.

214. There may be a contractual promise that in the event a
contractual provision is found to be unenforceable, the entire contract
must (or may) be deemed ineffective. Or, to the contrary, a contract

may provide that in such an event it is no longer possible for either

80

party to rely on the terms of the contract as written. In the present case,
Bullet Point 13 is clearly a rather far-reaching example of the latter
category. In such circumstances it may be possible for one party to
make a binding agreement to the effect that in such a case it will have
to make defined payments of compensation for the adverse

consequences to its co-contractant.

The Ministry's exercise of its regulatory functions

215. Liderc6n argues that it is no longer certain who its contracting
party is, and that this is stark evidence of mistreatment. The Tribunal
disagrees. For one thing, it is perfectly clear who the regulator is in
terms of controlling Lidercén’s vehicle inspections; it can only be the
Ministry, acting through its organ SUTRAN; there is no competing
regulator seeking to insist that it has a permanent contractual or legal
right (or for that matter duty) to fill this role. Lidercén has no

its’

entitlement to a contractual right to choose as regulator a
municipal body which no longer performs this role —and is excluded

from it by positive legislation in the form of the Ley JTV.

216. The Ministry was not required to take over the Concession
Contract. Quite to the contrary, the text of the 2008 Ley ITV, when
acknowledging the continued survival of previously signed contracts,
made it clear that they would fall under the budgetary responsibility of
the entity that signed them. There can therefore be no criticism of the
Ministry where the Peruvian courts have ruled that it was not bound by
the 2011 Award.

217. Dr. Cantuarias, a prominent Peruvian lawyer and academic
(since 2010 Dean of Faculty of Law of the Universidad del Pacifico) who
is well known in international circles for his scholarly writings and
frequent service as arbitrator, appeared in this case as an expert called
by Lidercén. His testimony was of particular interest in respect of the

following statements he made on the stand.

218. For one thing he advanced the following proposition.

81

Lo que se le exige al MTC es que como cabeza del sistema
haga cumplir la ley, y la ley no solamente es la
legislacion, son los fallos judiciales que pasan ala calidad
de cosa juzgada. [T: 1637:5-9]

English translation:

What is required of the MTC is that, as the head of the
system, it must carry out the law, and the law is not just
the legislation. It is also the judicial rulings that become
res judicata. [T: 1469:1-4]

219. Secondly, Dr. Cantuarias said this:

Lo que yo he dicho es que hay una cabeza del
sistema en base a la nueva ley del 2008, que es el
MTC. Y el MTC como cabeza del sistema no
solamente esta obligada a cumplir las leyes
escritas, sino también verificar que sus
subordinados cumplan las leyes y los fallos. [T:
1638:2-8]

English translation:

What I have said is that there is a head of the system
based on the 2008 Law, and the MTC as the Head
of the System is not only obligated to carry out the
written laws, but also verify that its subordinates
carry out the laws and judicial judgments. [T:
1469:19-22 to 1470:1-2]

220. This proposition rather serves to advance the Respondent's
case, and puts into question Liderc6én’s adamant refusal to accept the
new rules of 2008 as well as the ultimate restriction on the
enforceability of the 2011 Award.

82

221. Finally, there was this statement, which ostensibly supports the
Claimant, but in fact invites the present Tribunal to consider the juego
of the Contract in its full legal environment, including the contractual
provisions and the ultimate disposition of the obligations derived
thereunder pursuant to the lex arbitri, examined subject to any breach

of Treaty obligations attributable to the State.

Lo que esta afirmando es que la nueva ley aplica
en todo aquello que no contravenga las reglas de
juego del contrato de concesi6n. [T: 1665:21-22 to
1666:1]

English translation:

They are confirming that the new law applies to
everything that does not contradict the Concession
Contract. [1495:17-19]

222. The Second Complementary Final Provision of the 2008
Regulation that acknowledged the survival of prior concession
contracts made clear that this was on the footing that they would adapt
to the new Regulation (previa adecuacién a las disposiciones
sefialadas en el presente Reglamento) (“prior adaptation to the
provisions indicated in this Regulation”). Ms Arias testified that this
required obedience with the new provisions, and that they related to
“[rlequisitos técnicos, de recursos humanos, infraestructura, sistema
tecnolégico y demds reglas que estableceria el reglamento de
inspecciones técnicas” (T: 947:17-20) (“technical aspects, human
resources, infrastructure, technological aspects, and other rules that
would be included under the technical regulations.” [English T: 869:7-
9).

223. Mr. Vicario testified that Lidercén filed the documentation to
comply with the “new technical regulations” on 10 September 2008 (C-
26, confirmed by the copy of a request for certification of the East
Center, R-477), and the other fact witness for Lidercén, Mr. Barrios,

accepted that Lidercén centers did indeed comply with the 2008

83

Regulation in this respect (T: 543) and in December 2008 the Ministry
confirmed that it had. Mr. Barrios, however, maintained that in Peru
“tenemos dos sistemas de revisiones técnicas: el sistema de concesion,
que es el contrato nuestro, y tenemos el sistema de autorizaciones que
da el Ministerio” (T: 546:8-11) (‘we have two systems of technical
inspection, the Concession system, which is our Contract, and also we
have the authorization system provided by the MTC” [English T
:508:21-22 to 509:1-2]). Indeed, he acknowledged that Lidercén’s
centers could not be deemed to be “CITVs” as such, because they
needed certification from the Ministry. Ms. Canales's testimony was
consistent with this statement: Lidercén stations had not sought
authorization to operate from the Ministry —nor indeed from MML (T:
976:4-16), as confirmed by MML itself by a letter from Mr. Luchetti
dated 30 December 2015.

224. Ms. Canales confirmed in her testimony that “cuando un centro
ha estado adecuado, entonces los certificados ... tienen validez
nacional” (T: 1118:18-21) (‘when a center has been “adecuado’” ... then-
- the certificates ... are valid nationally” [English T: 1014:11-15) and that
“[n]uestra misién como SUTRAN es verificar que se cumplan ...
nuestra ley y sus normas complementarias” (T: 1120:1-3) (“[oJur
misi6n at SUTRAN is to make sure that ... the Regulations ... are abided
by [English T: 1015:15-17]). She explained to the Tribunal that
SUTRAN verified calibrations:

que los equipos que se utilizan para poder hacer las
inspecciones técnicas vehiculares cumplan con tener
las calibraciones semestrales que sefiala la norma,
tenemos también que verificar que los ingenieros que
se han acreditado por las plantas de inspecci6n técnica
vehicular sean los que efectivamente estdén en ese
momento, tanto el ingeniero supervisor de la planta o
los ingenieros, dependiendo de la cantidad de lineas
que haya. Y los técnicos de linea, que son los
encargados de hacer las revisiones y de aplicar los
equipamientos, hacer las pruebas que corresponden
enla linea [T: 1144:20-22 to 1145:1-11].

84

English translation:

to check that the equipment that is used to perform the
vehicle inspections meet the requirements of having
calibration at six-month intervals, as indicated in the
Regulation. We also need to verify that the engineers
accredited by the inspection centers are the ones who
are there at that time, both the supervising engineer of
the station or the engineers, depending on the number
of lines they have, and the line technicians, who are the
ones in charge of actually performing the inspections
and applying the equipment doing the tests online —in
the line. [T: 1038:7-18]

The conduct of INDECOPI and the Peruvian courts?

225. INDECOPI does not rule on the lawfulness or otherwise of
contracts, but rather on the impermissible erection by public
authorities of bureaucratic barriers to competition (which is how
INDECOPI characterized MML’s Ordenanza 694).

226. There is simply no evidence of a failure of due process in what
the present Arbitral Tribunal has been shown of the Peruvian court
proceedings relating to the Concession Contract. Nor can it be said that
the reasoning of the Peruvian judgments is so inept as to be
inexplicable otherwise than as the result of bias against the foreign
investor, or otherwise deserving of condemnation as “clearly improper
and discreditable” to use the familiar expression of the ICSID Mondev
award (in para. 127). Lidercén, S.L. may have faced powerful
opposition by business rivals; it may have been the victim of local
politics, as can happen when opponents of a government take aim at
project approved by it; members of legislative bodies may launch
annoying inquiries perceived as unfair. But such difficulties are not
faced by foreigners alone; the issue is whether the legal system properly

hears claims of legal entitlement.

85

227. Two direct authors of Liderc6n’s misfortune as pleaded are
clear: INDECOPI and the Peruvian courts (the latter taken collectively,
in the interest of simplification). It seems clear that the INDECOPI
Tribunal functionally plays a judicial role, and that it as well as the

ordinary courts could ex hypothesis be culpable of a denial of justice.

228. The effects of the 2011 Award have been litigated in the
Peruvian courts. The Claimant is discontent with judicial
determinations to the effect that elements of that 2011 Award are
unenforceable. The essential question then becomes the extent of the
present Arbitral Tribunal’s authority to examine whether Liderc6én has
asserted cognizable breaches of the Treaty related to actions of the

Peruvian courts.

229. Whether national courts uphold national awards is a matter of
national law, which may be liberal or restrictive with respect of arbitral
authority and the finality of arbitral awards. But all national legal
systems must have some ultimate limit of unenforceability; for
example, “awards” signed at gunpoint, or by a child, cannot be given

effect.

230. What international law does require is that foreigners are not
mistreated by national courts to a degree that satisfy the criteria of the
delict of denial of justice. Therefore, the task of the present Tribunal is
not to assess the quality of the work of the Peruvian arbitral tribunals,
but the judicial conduct which has led to the partial unenforceability of
the 2011 Award.

231. Denial of justice is a well-known form of breach of the fair and
equitable treatment (“FET”) standard. It is a central claim advanced by
Lidercén, and will be dealt with in a separate section to follow. But FET
breaches may take a great variety of other forms, such as deceptive
conduct, coercive misapplication by executive instrumentalities of laws
and regulations, harassment, and the like. Thus, claims of violation of
the FET standard vary greatly in terms of the intensity of the debate
due to the inherent degree of offensiveness of the accusation against
the respondent. Extortionate abuse of the power of public authority, if

proven, will readily be deemed to fall short of the FET standards,

86

whereas the disappointment of legitimate expectations is at once less
sensitive and harder to elevate to a breach of international law, given
the difficulty for a claimant to establish that a shortfall in the

fulfillment of its expectations gives rise to a cause of action.

232. Lidercén began its closing oral submissions by insisting that
Peru could and did not contest the fact that the 2011 Award, having
survived a challenge before the national courts, has res judicata effect
under Peruvian law (as per Article 59 of the Decreto Legislativo No.
2017, which is in effect the Peruvian Arbitration Act). Counsel took the
occasion to repeat no less than six answers from Dr. Sadnchez upon

cross-examination precisely to that effect.

233. The importance of the 2011 Award for present purposes was

that it deemed the Contrato de Concesién to be in force, including its

 

provision on exclusivity. It must be noted, however, that a legal
instrument may be partially unenforceable; the Contrato can remain

valid even if some of its elements cannot be enforced or applied.

234. Peru emphasizes the importance of the following five elements
of the Contract: (i) it was limited geographically to the Province of Lima
(beyond which MML has no jurisdiction); (ii) it required the building
of at least three inspection centers where services of a defined standard
would be rendered, specific cash investments, and specific payments to
MML,; (iii) the concessionaire’s exclusivity did not cover all cars that
habitually circulate in Lima (which may be driven by individuals
resident elsewhere); (iv) it contains a comprehensive dispute
resolution clause calling for arbitration in Lima; and (v) it is not a
Contrato-Ley (which stabilizes its legal regime as of its signature), but
to the contrary was subject to a variable legal regime the importance of
which is evident in this summary description in Paragraphs 66-69 of

Peru's Counter-Memorial (footnotes omitted):

67. Accordingly, when it signed the Contract, Lidercén
Pert agreed that the legal norms listed in the Contract—
including the Organic Law on Municipalities that gave the
MML (limited) competence over vehicle inspections in

Lima and municipal Ordinance No. 506 that regulated

87

vehicle inspections in Lima— would govern the
relationship between the parties. Lidercén Pert must
have known or understood that those legal norms evolved:
they could be modified, or even repealed and that any such
changes to those laws would then govern the Concession.
Importantly, the Contract does not contain a stabilization
clause or any other promise to Claimant that the
applicable legal norms would remain as they existed at the

time the Contract was signed.

68. Further support for the understanding that the
Contract was an agreement subject to future changes in
applicable legal norms can be found in Clause 23.2 of the

Contract...

69. Thus, the parties expressly anticipated that changes to
the Applicable Laws could impact the Contract and
provided procedures for proposing amendments to the
Contract in the event of such changes. If the parties were
unable to agree within 30 days on how to reestablish the
economic equilibrium of the Contract, either of the parties
could seek to resolve the dispute through the dispute

settlement mechanism established in the Contract.

235. Lidercén refers to the sequence of pronouncements by
INDECOPI as a “flip-flop”, ie. an arbitrary change of position
tantamount to a breach of the Treaty. Its complaint begins with the
memorandum of |*t September 2004 of the Technical Secretary of the
relevant Commission of INDECOPI (see Paragraph 62 above), which
Lidercén considers to be a ratification on the part of INDECOPI of the
Contrato de Concesién and its exclusivity provision. The Tribunal

disagrees for a number of reasons.

236. INDECOPI was created in 1992 under a Decree Law. Its
decision-making processes are elaborate and codified. With respect to
the issue of present relevance, ultimately the relevant Chamber of the
INDECOPI Tribunal follows a methodology laid out in a 1997
Resolution on Criteria for Determining Bureaucratic Barriers which

has been produced before the present Tribunal and described in the

88

witness statements of Mr. Garcia-Godos and Ms. Hooker, both of

whom appeared in the hearings.

237. On20 August 2004, a member of the Peruvian Congress (Pedro
Morales Mansilla) lodged a formal request with the Presidency of
INDECOPI to determine whether the inspection fees to be charged
under the authority of MML and moreover the Contrato de
Concesi6n itself contravened “las normas de libre mercado, posicién
de dominio o situacién monopélica” (in translation, “free trade rules,
dominance position or monopolistic situation”). This request was sent

on to the Comis:

  

bn de Acceso al Mercado (now known as the Comisién
de Eliminacion de Barreras Burocrdticas), which on 26 August in turn
instructed its Technical Secretary to evaluate whether the Commission

could open an investigation. His conclusion was negative.

238. The Technical Secretary's conclusions were limited to the two
questions posed by Congressman Morales. With respect to the fee
structure to be implemented under the concession, he noted that MML
had not issued an administrative act mandating the collection of fees,
so the issue was not ripe to be determined. As to whether the
Concession violated competition laws, he concluded that it did not. He
explained that technical vehicle revisions concessions could not be
deemed a legal monopoly because the subject of the concession was not
a private initiative economic activity, but rather a public activity or a
public function that was, in itself an exclusive activity of the public
administration, but which was to be provided with the participation of
the private sector. He added that the law allowed awarding concessions
through public tendering which, itself, was a mechanism that
promoted competition and economies of scale and scope would dictate
whether the competent authority opted to award the concession to one

or more operators.

239. The report thus simply responded to the inquiry by Mr.
Morales. That does not convert the memorandum to a binding
determination, and —above all— does not entitle Lidercén to treat it
for the purposes of a claim under the Treaty as a representation made
(A) to Liderc6n and (B) by the State.

89

240. Liderc6én invokes Article 62 of the Peruvian Constitution, which

provides that:

La libertad de contratar garantiza que las partes pueden
pactar vdlidamente segtin las normas vigentes al tiempo
del contrato. Los términos contractuales no pueden ser
modificadas por leyes o otras disposiciones de cualquier
clase. Los conflictos derivados de la relacién contractual
s6lo se solucionan en la via arbitral o en la judicial, seguin
los mecanismos de proteccién previstos en el contrato 0

contemplados en la ley.

English translation:

The freedom of contract guarantees that parties may
validly negotiate, according to the rules in effect at the
time of the contract. Contractual terms may not be
modified by laws or any other provision whatsoever.
Conflicts deriving from contractual relations may be
resolved solely through arbitration or judicial recourse, in
accordance with the protective mechanisms provided for

in the contract, or established by law.

241. In the first place, one readily perceives the immediate difficulty
in Lidercén’s attempt to rely on this Article. The constitutional
directive is that “contractual terms may not be modified by laws or
other dispositions of any category.” Yet Clauses 19.4 and 23.2 of this
Contract explicitly contemplate that legislation and other norms that
regulated the concession, and indeed even the interpretation of such
norms could change; and they provide for remedies if those changes
affected MML’s ability to comply with its obligations under the contract
in such a way that impaired Liderc6én’s investment or other property;
or if they altered the economic and financial equilibrium in relation to
Lidercén’s investment, property or the operation of its ITV plants, or

the enforcement of the Concession Contract.

90

242. Lidercén’s conundrum is not resolved by Dra. Quifiones’
assertion, in the course of developing that proposition in Paragraphs
66-69 of the Opinion relied upon by Lidercén, that Peruvian law “no
admite la modificacién unilateral de un contrato administrativo”
(paragraph 68) (“does not allow a unilateral modification of an
administrative contract”) because, while the Concession Contract itself
was not unilaterally amended by MML —or the Peruvian State acting
through other agents— both parties to the Contract acknowledged that
the laws and regulations that governed the Contract could change and
agreed on the remedies if such changes significantly affected Lidercén’s
investment or the Contract’s economic and financial equilibrium,
including by a supervening failure of MML to perform its contractual
obligations. Indeed, Dra. Quifiones accepted the contractual remedy
for such situations: While she reiterated that, even if the Disposiciones
Finales Primera of the Ley ITV and Segunda of its Regulations did not
exist, “an interpretation that a subsequent law can modify or “leave
without effects” what has been stipulated in a Concession Contract is
inadmissible”, she added in a footnote: “What in any event would have
occurred, had the New Ley /TV not included the Primera Disposicién
Final, is that Lidercén Pert would have had a right to terminate the
Concession Contract, the Grantor of the Concession having committed
a serious breach, as provided for in clause 19.4, if the Municipality were
unable to guarantee the exclusivity agreed to under clause 2.4” (Expert

Report of Dra. Maria Teresa Quifiones, para. 70, footnote 85) .

The conduct of other officials

243. Lidercén suggests that there were forces hostile to its
involvement, and indeed that INDECOPI’s actions were fomented by
its competitors. This may or may not be the case, but is of no moment
in assessing the treatment by the officials whose acts are attributable
to the Government. Competitors are what they are, and they are quite
likely to call attention to legal impediments to the actions of their rivals
—and all the more so if they concern alleged illegal restraint of
competition. (Hints of influence trafficking have not been backed by
evidence, were not seriously pursued with specificity, and are given no
traction by the Tribunal.) This is the challenge of modern markets, and
it behooves all actors to ensure that they have covered their legal bases.

Governments may encourage foreign investors, as indeed they do when

91

they enter into BITs, but they do not promise that private parties will
welcome them with open arms. Competition is competition, and may
be fierce. Local business interests may have allies in the political arena,
as well as in the media. Governments do not promise foreigners to be
exempt from opposition; the foreigner is entitled to respect for law and
the absence of complicity and other forms of discrimination. In this
case, there is no such evidence. To the contrary, it is striking that
MML’s attempt to achieve the nullification of the Concession Contract
as such has been rejected by Peruvian arbitrators and courts until this

day.

244. While the actions of a legislature may deprive a foreign investor
of its entitlements under international law, the State cannot be liable
simply because the investor believes that Congressional debates
demonstrate xenophobia or clientelism. Legislators are entitled to
express their opinions robustly, even if they espouse protectionism. For
liability to be engaged under the Treaty, there must have been
unjustifiable effects attributable to the State itself. The relevant laws
were —purely and simply, as a matter of contractual stipulation—
literally vouchsafed full prospective latitude by virtue of Bullet Point
13. The conclusion is that in the Contract, MML and Lidercén
specifically contemplated the actions that are at the source of
Liderc6én’s grievances under the Treaty, which are premised on the
proposition of disregard for contractual rights attributable to the State,
and they agreed on the appropriate remedies. Lidercén has failed to
avail itself of such remedies. Therefore, its claims here simply cannot
be directed at the conduct of the entities of the Peruvian Sate

responsible for taking such actions.

245. When the Technical Secretary of INDECOPI’s Commission
issued his 2004 Jnforme, neither the Concession Contract
nor Ordenanza 694 yet existed. In reaching his conclusions, the
Technical Secretary did not conduct hearings or otherwise adjudicate
between competing theses. His opinion was that an investigation was
not warranted at that time. The 2004 Informe and INDECOPI's later
determinations regarding Ordenanza 694 or the Ministry's denials of
authorization to operate in Lima Metropolitana are not proof of
inconsistency, but the ordinary functioning of decision-making in
response to different circumstances and at different moments in time

with respect to which intermediate assessments are by definition

92

inconclusive (unless interested parties create finality by accepting
them). INDECOPI’s decisions are subject to challenge. The 2004
decision not to initiate an investigation was not challenged by
Congress, the applicant in that case. Instead, Congress decided to
conduct its own investigation. As for the Ordenanza 694 proceedings
and those initiated by rejected would-be operators under the Ley ITV,
the Commission's decisions concerned different matters viewed
through the prism of an altered regulatory framework. Both sets of
actions were challenged before —and confirmed by— the INDECOPI
Tribunal. The point of having a final adjudicatory authority, namely
the Tribunal, means that INDECOPI does not “flip-flop” (to use
the expression of Lidercén’s counsel) when it reaches decisions that
deal differently with different circumstances and texts. In the end,

there was only one final decision of INDECOPI.

Recapitulation: effect of the Tribunal’s conclusions on the

individual claims

246. By reference to the recapitulation put forward in the Claimant's
Reply, reproduced in Paragraph 165 above, herewith a synthesis of the

results of the Tribunal’s appraisal of the evidence on Liderc6n’s claims:

(a) The alleged use by Peru of its “potestades legislativas” to
eliminate an inconvenient agreement of exclusivity,
moreover attempting to resolve a putative conflict of
competencias instead of seizing the Tribunal

Constitucional.

247. When one then reads the Contract, one perceives that this
initial question falls away, since the terms of the document provide that
the Ley Aplicable to it is subject to the comprehensive list of mutations
found in Bullet Point 13. Clause 19.4 tells the Concessionaire exactly
what it should do if performance of the Contract is impeded by
legislation, and Clause 23.2 provides a mechanism for financial
adjustment in the event the profitability of the Concession or the
concessionaire’s investment or property were to be significantly

affected or impaired. That is a complete answer to this part of the claim.

93

Nevertheless, in light of the debate that has unfurled before the present

Tribunal, some additional observations seem called for.

(b)The seemingly contradictory position taken by
INDECOPI, having accepted the terms of the Concession
but later changing its criterion to declare its illegality on
account of the alleged existence of “bureaucratic

barriers”.

248. The INDECOPI 2004 Jnforme and INDECOPI's later
determinations regarding Ordenanza 694 or the Ministry's denial of
authorizations to operate in Lima Metropolitana are not proof of
inconsistency, but the familiar functioning of decision-making

concerning different circumstances and at different moments in time.

249. Following a request by Congressman Morales after the
Concession was awarded in August 2004, INDECOPI's Market Access
Commission decided not to initiate an investigation based on a report
prepared by its Technical Secretary that concluded that no fees had
formally been imposed yet, so there was nothing to investigate, no
administrative act to consider in respect of Congressman Morales's
first request. Regarding his second request, the Technical Secretary
concluded that the exclusive concession was not contrary to the free
market, dominance and monopolies rules so an investigation was not
warranted. Mr. Lucchetti explained the nature of INDECOPI’s
responses to requests by Congress and the short timeframe that
INDECOPI had to prepare them. The report did not purport to provide
a full-fledged, comprehensive analysis or opinion about the concession.
At the time, the concession had been awarded but the Concession
Contract had yet to be signed, Ordenanza 694 had not been issued,
commencement of operations under the Concession were still a long
way off and, thus, no fees had been imposed on potential users of ITVs,
so there would have been little to investigate, had the Commission

decided otherwise.

250. Three years later, after Ordenanza 1064 officialized the ITV
schedule (agreed to by Lidercén Peri and MML in the context of their

settlement negotiations in one of the arbitration proceedings), and

94

operations under the Concession became imminent, the INDECOPI
Commission decided to initiate an investigation into the exclusivity
provisions contained in Ordenanza 694. MML was summoned, it was
given an opportunity to present objections and defend the legality of its
acts (namely Ordenanza 694) and a hearing was held. More
importantly, the Commission’s decision was subject to appeal before
the INDECOPI Tribunal —and indeed it was appealed.

251. The Tribunal finds no fault in the Commission declining a
request by Congress to investigate in 2004 and its decision to
investigate ex-oficio in 2007, or in its having arrived at different —even
opposite— conclusions in one instance and the other. There was
nothing arbitrary about it. The circumstances, including the status of
the concession and the necessary documents to implement it,
commencement of operations and the impact on vehicle owners, were
vastly different in one instance and the other. The decision to decline
to investigate in 2004 might have been subject to appeal but Congress,
who would have been the aggrieve party, did not do so. The
Commission’s decision of 2008 was appealed and then confirmed by
the INDECOPI Tribunal. Regardless, the issue quickly became moot
because the Ley /TV generally repealed “all norms opposed to this Law”
and MML followed suit shortly after and expressly declared
Ordinances 506, 694, 1064 and 1120 inapplicable.

252. INDECOPI’s decisions on the Ministry's denial of
authorizations to operate within MML’s jurisdiction after the entry into
force of the Ley JTV are of a different nature altogether. The legal
framework in which the concession operated and MML exercised its
jurisdiction changed with the adoption of the Ley /TV and its
Regulations. INDECOPI’s Commission analyzed the Ministry's
obligations in the context of this new legal framework. Those decisions
were appealed and confirmed by the INDECOPI Tribunal in every case.
Liderc6n Pert sought to annul one of those decisions on grounds that
the Ley ITV had preserved the Concession Contract, which granted
Liderc6n Pert exclusivity within Lima Metropolitana and was declared
valid by the 2011 Arbitral Award, and the application of the law was
subordinate to the Concession Contract. The Superior Court of Lima
rejected its complaint. It reasoned that the applicable legal provisions
related to the Ministry's administrative function, not the Concession

Contract, were at the basis of its analysis. It added that the 2011 Award

95

was res judicata but only as between the parties to the arbitration; it
did not bind the Ministry or INDECOPI; and it could not be enforced
against third parties. It also clarified that the Ley JTV was not
subordinate to the Concession Contract. The Court went further and
determined —albeit in a single brief paragraph— that the Concession
Contract’s exclusivity clause was contrary to Article 61 of the
Constitution. In any event, like INDECOPI, it ruled that the Ministry
had to assess whether applicants met the legal requirements to obtain
an authorization and it could not deny their application based on the

Concession Contract’s exclusivity clause.

253. MML’s drafters were prudent enough, in Clauses 19 and 23, to
anticipate such possible impediments to the realization of the

contractual stipulations.

254. There are many Peruvian court judgments on file in this
arbitration, and Liderc6n has prevailed on a number of occasions. But
in the end it is the maintenance of its exclusivity which was the prize,
and Lidercén therefore is adamant in its criticism of the judgment
rendered by the Corte Superior de Justicia of Lima in September 2017
(C-128), which held that although the 2011 Award was valid as between
the signatories to the Concession Contract and enforceable in terms of
MML’s duty to make certain payments ordered in the 2011 Award, the
decisions concerning amendments to, or performance of, the

Concession Contract were not enforceable.

255. Liderc6n affects outrage at the notion that the final 2011 Award
which has survived an application for annulment could nevertheless be
refused enforcement. Yet, it is not surprising that enforcement may be
denied where the relevant party has been deprived through legislation
of the ability to comply with the award or where it implicates the rights
of third parties who are not bound by the relevant arbitration
agreement, and whose interests were not represented in the arbitral

proceedings.

256. Ultimately, the res judicata character of the 2011 Award,
undeniable in and of itself, is of no avail to Lidercén. The

determinations of the arbitrators were final as a matter of contract.

96

They cannot be relitigated. Indeed, they cannot be overturned as a
matter of contractual interpretation. But that does not prevent a court
from taking an autonomous and unrestricted view as to the award’s

enforceability.

(c) The “irrazonable e inadmisible’ judgment of the Corte

Superior of Lima in September 2017.

257. The 2011 Award is a curiosity because it seems that the
arbitrators were focused on the Concession Contract almost to the
exclusion of the supervening regulatory texts (the Ley /TV and its
implementing Regulation of 2008) which their award hardly analyzed.
For instance, the 2011 Award declared, with hardly any reasoning at all,
that MML was bound by Ordenanzas 506 and 694 notwithstanding
that the latter was not incorporated into the Concession Contract and
they had been repealed by the Ley /TV three years before and
specifically declared inapplicable by MML shortly thereafter.

258. Regardless, the conclusion is that Lidercén has not complained
of due process violations on the part of the Peruvian courts, and there
has been no showing of a miscarriage of justice violative of

international law.

259. The Tribunal’s attention has been drawn in particular to the
judgment of the First Constitutional Court of Lima handed down on |
July 2019 in the case brought by the Ministry jointly against (1)
Liderc6én Peru, (2) MML, and (3) the arbitral tribunal that rendered the
2011 Award. The Ministry prevailed on the basis that it had not been a
party to the arbitration so the 2011 Award could not be enforced against
it; and because, by requiring MML to comply with the Concession
Contract, the 2011 Award infringed on the competencia y funciones of
the Ministry, since the Ley JTV had given it exclusive authority over
ITVs. This is of course a legitimate objective to be pursued by the
Ministry, and the burden of proving arbitrariness, discrimination, or
other forms of abuse of power is exacting. In looking at the 2011 Award
and its numerous judicial sequels, the present Tribunal finds no such

evidence.

97

260. Turning in particular to the multiplication of arbitral and
(especially) judicial disputation in the wake of the 2011 Award, the
following observations seem relevant in light of the evidence.
Beginning with the arbitrators, they seemed to confront a highly

unusual problem.

261. The arbitrators were faced with MML’s declaration of the
termination of the Concession Contract on 7 February 2008, invoking
failure of performance in accordance with the 2007 Partial Settlement
Agreement. The legal framework was instantly changed by the Ley JTV
and the 2008 Regulation.

262. The arbitrators also took on a role as conciliators, with no

success.

263. Finally, the effect of the 2011 Award was indeed to reinstate
Ordenanza 694, which the Ley /TV had repealed, since the arbitral
tribunal considered that vehicles registered in Lima had to be brought
to Lidercén’s centers. Moreover, the 2011 Award prescribed
amendments to the Contract, perhaps with the best intentions but
meeting resolute resistance. (They declared the Contract to be
extended by five years to compensate Lidercén for MML’s wrongful
termination, the elimination of MML’s right to reversion of assets used
in performance of the Contract, and an increase of Lidercén’s service
fee.)

264. As already seen, Lidercén prevailed in initial judicial
skirmishes relating to the 2011 Award. But MML and the Ministry
sought invalidation of the 2011 Award. Lidercén takes umbrage at this
resistance as being abusive, but the present Tribunal finds its
complaint unfounded. Parties are entitled to seek recourse against
unfavorable awards and judgments to the extent permitted by law.
Success on appeal vindicates the rejection of prior decisions. Lidercén
invites the present Tribunal to ignore the 11 September 2017 decision
of the Corte Superior de Justicia of Lima; to do so would require a
showing of manifest judicial impropriety which Lidercén has not
established. The 2017 judgment dealt with (and accepted) the
proposition that MML was statutorily incapable of performing the

98

Contract in view of the fact that the Ley /TV had taken away its

authority to regulate or supervise ITVs.

265. But since MML decided to declare the caducidad of the
Contract, the initiatives and reactions (or indeed the absence of
initiatives and reactions) on the part of all the protagonists to the
ensuing politico-commercial drama —whether MML, Lidercén, the
Ministry or indeed the national arbitrators and judges— did not set a
stage conducive to cohesive choreography. Each of the protagonists
seemed to take steps intended to resolve a tense and legally ambiguous
situation, but each was pursuing different objectives with incompatible
visions of the proper solution, resulting in what might without
exaggeration be called an imbroglio. As each of these actors proceeded,

the knots seemed to tighten rather than come undone.

266. Judgments or other decisions having tantamount to judicial
effect constitute a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standards
attributable to the State of which the adjudicatory body is a part only if
they were the result of a failure of due process, or if the decision is so
deficient as to constitute a decision which no reasonably competent

court could have reached, and therefore a denial of justice.

267. There is no allegation in this case of a failure of due process, nor
can the present Tribunal conclude that the Peruvian judgments of
which Liderc6n complains are aberrant to the point of being explicable

only as a denial of justice.

(d) Peru's allegedly discriminatory treatment of Liderc6n as

compared to national operators.

268. As already seen in subsection (a) above legislative changes were
anticipated by Bullet Point 13 and by Clauses 19 and 23, of which
Liderc6n choose not to avail itself.

269. Again, this is a complete answer to the claim with respect to

Peru's regulatory reforms, but leaves open the possibility that in the

99

actual performance of its regulatory or supervisory tasks the Ministry
conducted itself in a manner which ran afoul of Peru’s obligations to

the foreign investor under the Treaty.

(e) Treatment of the investment by the Peruvian judiciary in
a manner that “ofende la discrecionalidad judicial y
conlleva a un fracaso manifiesto de la justicia natural”
(offends judicial discretion and leads to a manifest failure

of natural justice).

270. Denial of justice may take two forms. In broad terms, they are
(A) a failure of due process, and (B) decisions so lacking in seriousness
as to indicate bias. (In perhaps the best-known formulation of the
latter, after noting that “an unjust judgment may and often does afford
strong evidence that the court was dishonest”, Fitzmaurice wrote that
the case may be “conclusive ... if the evidence be sufficiently flagrant,
so that the judgment is of a kind which no honest and competent court
could have given,” Gerald Fitzmaurice, “The Meaning of the Term
‘Denial of Justice”, 13 British Yearbook of International Law 112-113
(1932).)

271. Seeking to extend State responsibility for breaches of BITs by
judicial conduct even in cases where there has been no denial of justice,
Lidercén presents the novel argument that “es posible que se produzca
una violacién del Tratado como resultado del efecto de las medidas
administrativas tomadas contra la Inversién y los resultados de los
procedimientos locales iniciados para corregirlas’, Dtiplica de
Jurisdiccién, Paragraph 66 (“it is possible that a violation of the Treaty
may occur as a result of the effect of the administrative measures taken
against the Investment and the results of the local procedures initiated
to correct them). Its counsel has resourcefully produced an interesting

and (it seems) original doctrinal comment to the effect that:

If the original measure came so close to being a treaty
breach that only the availability of local remedies
prevented it from qualifying as such, the host State may
effectively have an obligation to provide redress through

its domestic courts to avoid that consequence. The failure

100

to do so may well have the consequence that the original
measure finally crystallizes into a breach, even in
circumstances where the court proceedings do not give
rise to a denial of justice. (Emphasis added.) (CL-136,
Hanno Wehland, “Domestic Courts and Investment
Treaty Tribunals: The Effect of Local Recourse Against
Administrative Measures on the Breach of Investment
Protection Standards”, in M. Scherer, ed., J. Int. Arb. 224-
5 (2019)).

272. The italics added to this passage suggest that in the defined
circumstances the local courts, even in the absence of a denial of
justice, if wrong, should be corrected at the international level.
Although the article certainly merits consideration, it seems that this
proposition, even if presented as one uniquely applicable to BITs,
cannot (at least yet) claim endorsement in decided cases. In particular,
as Peru points out, the Alghanim v. Jordan case cited by the author
rejected the claim, going no further than to acknowledge possible
liability only in the circumstances outlined as follows in Paragraph 366
of their award, of which subparagraph (b) seems a striking echo of

Fitzmaurice:

(a) The Tribunal will not set itself up as a court of
further appeal to determine the correctness of the
decision of either the [tax agency] or the Jordanian
courts as a matter of Jordanian law.

(b) Rather, it will consider whether the judgment of
the Court of Cassation was inexcusable (being one
that no reasonably competent court could arrive at
in order to decide whether the Claimants have
suffered a denial of justice and thus been
subjected to arbitrary treatment.

(c) The Tribunal will refer to Jordanian law for the
purpose of making this assessment, but not for the
purpose of substituting its decision for that of the
Court of Cassation.

(d) Unless the Tribunal finds that the judgments of the
Jordanian courts gave rise to a denial of justice, the

consequences will be that the [tax agency] cannot

101

be faulted for having acted on a construction of the

law validated by the courts.” (Emphasis added.)

273. At any rate, it is not necessary for the present Tribunal to take
a position as to Lidercén’s interesting argument, because in this case
the Peruvian adjudications of which Lidercén complains were resolved
in accordance with Peruvian law, and there is no competing
autonomous substantive standard of international law with respect to
the claim in question that would trump Peruvian law. (If for instance
there were substantial differences between a national law and
international law with respect to a matter of expropriation, a BIT
tribunal might consider that it has the authority and indeed the duty to
ensure that the international requirements are met; that may not be
the case in other areas where there is no autonomous standard of

international law.)

(f) Congressional investigations which investigated both the
bidding and the Contract in a manner which was

disdainful of Lidercén and undermined its performance.

274. A State cannot be held liable under international law for the fact
that a national legislative assembly comprised of representatives
elected from the ranks of a variety of political movements frequently,
as a function of the democratic process, raise harsh criticisms of the
actions of executive and administrative officials, and by ricochet of
private parties who contract with the public sector. No more need be

said.

CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS

275. The Tribunal notes that one of the slides (number 169)
accompanying Lidercén’s closing oral presentation contained a
differently worded list of “Peru's BIT Violations”, presented graphically
as six circles containing the following sentences: “Peru violated
Lidercén’s legitimate expectations”, “Peru denied justice to Lidercén”,
“Peru violated Lidercén’s due process”, “Peru failed to act

transparently”, “Peru adopted unreasonable measures”, and “Peru

102

adopted discriminatory measures”. Lidercén did not seek to make a
formal amendment of its pleadings at this stage, and the six sentences
were not developed orally given that the slide came at the end of the
presentation as time was running out. In any event, the Tribunal
considers that all of the six claims as thus worded have been dealt with

in this Merits section and call for no comment save to observe with

 

respect to the reference to “due process” that Lidercén has not
previously asserted that it was not heard in the multiple legal
proceedings that have arisen in the troubled story of this venture.
Inasmuch as the expression “due process” appears to have been
employed in this instance as a generic reference to allegations of
unfairness and arbitrariness which overlap with the other grievances
expressed on the slide, the Tribunal is satisfied that it has given full

reasons for its conclusion that there was no violation of due process.

276. There is unfinished business between Lidercén and Peruvian
government entities that this Award cannot deal with
comprehensively. Lidercén has not abandoned its inspection centers,
government entities continue to exercise their regulatory and
supervisory powers over them and there is ongoing litigation involving
the same or similar issues that have been put before this Tribunal. The
relations between Lidercén Peri and MML as co-contractants, and
between Lidercén Perti and the Ministry as regulator, have been
contentious and appear until this moment to be at something of a
stalemate. Lidercén has insisted in maintaining a concession contract
the terms of which are no longer viable under the current legal
framework as interpreted by Peruvian courts. Lidercén and the
Ministry have remained unwilling to explore how they might cooperate
in rescuing a practical arrangements in the wreckage of the Contract.

The Ministry asks that Lidercén simply get in line with other operators

 

who function under the Ley /TV and its implementing Regulation. Mr.
Barrios has testified that the automated systems of Lidercén’s
inspection centers are connected “en tiempo real” with the Ministry,
and that the certificates emitted by Lidercén automatically enter into
its system (T: 645-647), yet Lidercén insists that it should not be
subject to inspections by the only entity now conducting them, and

complains that no one wishes to speak to it as its contractual partner.

277. The situation is one of considerable disorder. In fact it

corresponds to the type of hypotheses envisaged by Clause 19.4 of the

103

Contract (namely that of regulatory changes that impede MML’'s
performance of the Contract; see Paragraph 72), but Lidercén chose to
fight the regulatory regime rather than to avail itself of the contractual
solution. Still, given that the Ley JTV allowed pre-existing contracts to
endure providing that they conformed to the relevant laws and
regulations, Peru cannot ignore the situation of an investor who relied
on that general principle if it now seeks adjustments of its modus
operandi in cooperation with the regulators. This Tribunal does not,
however, have the mission or the mandate to devise practical solutions
and will do no more than to discharge its mission to decide the issues

presented to it in the ambit of the pleadings.

COSTS

278. The Tribunal acknowledges the high professional quality and
courteousness of the presentations of this case by counsel for both
sides, which has greatly assisted the Tribunal in its endeavor to deal

with its unusual factual and legal complexity.

279. The Parties have claimed costs as follows: Lidercén
EUR 3,609,986.49 plus USD 642,106.77, and Peru USD 6,742,880.54.
The amount claimed by the parties included the advance payments
made to ICSID. The dollar amounts received from each party by ICSID
amounted to the following: Lidercén USD 524,823.00 and Peru
USD 525,000.00. The final costs of arbitration amounted to
USD 929,402.93. The remaining balance will be reimbursed to the
Parties in proportion to the payments that they advanced to ICSID.

280. The claim in this case has failed. On the other hand, Peru's
threshold objections have been found to be unmeritorious, and they
were given significant attention (and therefore resulted in significant
costs). Moreover, the evolving regulatory framework of the first decade
of the century created challenges for the foreign investor as a
contracting party which to some extent remain unresolved by this

Award, which deals only with claims under the Treaty.

104

281. As for the reasonableness of the expenditures on both sides, the
Tribunal considers that neither side has made excessive claims, but
that some discount must be made for inefficiencies which incurred on
both sides.

282. In the exercise of their discretion the arbitrators conclude that
it is appropriate to order the Claimant to reimburse to the Respondent
60% of the latter's contribution to the costs of the arbitration, as well
as 60% of the cost of presenting its defense. The single exception to the
unanimous character of this Award relates to this disposition of the
claims with respect to costs, which is decided by majority; one of the
arbitrators disagrees with the magnitude of costs awarded in light of
what he considers to be the bona fide differences between the Parties,
the existence of which being to a significant degree attributable to both

sides.

DISPOSITIVE DETERMINATIONS

283. For the above reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal

1. Declares itself to have jurisdiction to hear the claims raised;
2. Declares the claims to be admissible;
3. Rejects the claims in their entirety in the absence of proof of

breach of the Treaty;

4. Orders the Claimant to pay the Respondent USD 4,006,516.64
on account of costs;

5. Observes that the Concession Contract remains in force, with
effects yet to be determined as necessary, preferably by

negotiated accommodations rather than renewed disputation.

105

 

Dr. Francisco Gonzalez de Cossio Prof. Hugo Perezcano Diaz

Arbitrator Arbitrator
21 FEB 2020 Ds 28 FEB 2020
jan Paulsson
President of the Tribunal
mss Q4 MAR 2020

106

