Liman Caspian Oil BV and NCL Dutch Investment BV v. Republic of Kazakhstan
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/14)

Excerpts of Award dated June 22, 2010 made pursuant to Rule 48(4) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules of 2006
Claimants

Liman Caspian Oil BV (“LCO” or Claimant No. 1”) and NCL Dutch Investment BV (“NCL” or
“Claimant No. 2”) (companies incorporated under the laws of the Netherlands)

Respondent

Republic of Kazakhstan (“ROK”)

Tribunal

Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel (President; German), appointed by the party-appointed arbitrators
Kaj Hobér (Swedish), appointed by the Claimants

James Crawford (Australian), appointed by the Respondent

Award

Award of June 22, 2010 in English

Instrument relied on for consent to ICSID arbitration

Energy Charter Treaty (“ECT”)

Licence for the Exploration and Extraction of Hydrocarbons (alternative and subsidiary consent to ICSID
arbitration)

Procedure

Applicable Arbitration Rules: _1CSID Arbitration Rules of 2006

Place of Proceedings: Washington, D.C., sessions held in London, U.K.
Procedural Language: English

Full procedural details: Available at

http: worldbank.org/ICSID/FrontServlet?requestType=SearchRH
&actionVal=SearchSite& Searchlte:

 

Factual Background

In 2000, the Investment Agency of the ROK granted to a company incorporated in Kazakhstan, (““X”), a
licence to explore and extract hydrocarbons in the Liman Block in Western Kazakhstan (the “Licence”).
In October 2002, X assigned the rights and obligations under the Licence to LCO, Claimant No. | (the
“Assignment Agreement”). At the time of the assignment, the majority of the shares in X (99.9%) were
held by a UK company (“Y”) and the remaining shares were held by two persons (“P” and “Q”).

P and Q subsequently filed claims in ROK courts to have the Assignment Agreement invalidated,
claiming that the Licence had been transferred without their knowledge or consent and in breach of the
Kazakhstani law of July 10, 1998 No. 281-1 on Joint-Stock Companies (the “JSC Law”). In 2004, a ROK
court declared the Assignment Agreement invalid, and LCO was ordered to restore the Licence to X. By

that time, X was controlled by another company, (“M”), which had joined the ROK court proceedings and
also claimed that the Assignment Agreement should be invalidated.

LCO’s appeal and counterclaim against the shareholders of X to reclaim the consideration for the transfer
of the Licence were dismissed. Accordingly, in May 2005, X was reinstated as the licence holder and
subsequently transferred the Licence to another company.

NCL, Claimant No. 2, owned 90% of the shares in LCO and was in turn wholly owned by a Canadian
company, (“Z’”), in which the controlling interest, according to the Claimants, was indirectly held by a
Swiss national. The remaining 10% of the shares in LCO was held by Y, the original majority shareholder
of X. The corporate structure of the Claimants was established by Z and Y for the purpose of the transfer
of the Licence.

The Claimants claimed that the actions of the ROK courts amounted to a denial of justice and that the
ROK had therefore violated the investment protection provisions of the ECT. They also claimed that the
Respondent had breached the Licence.

ook

EXCERPTS

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.
IN THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDING BETWEEN
LIMAN CASPIAN OIL BV AND NCL DUTCH INVESTMENT BV
CLAIMANTS
AND
THE REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN
RESPONDENT
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/14)
AWARD
Members of the Tribunal:
Professor Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, President
Professor Dr. Kaj Hobér, Arbitrator

Professor James Crawford SC, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Ms Eloise Obadia

Administrative Assistant of the Tribunal:

Ms Helene Bubrowski
Representing Claimants: Representing Respondent:
Mr Audley Sheppard, Mr Ali Malek QC,
Mr Alexandros Panayides, Mr Christopher Harris
Mr Gareth Kenny, 3 VERULAM BUILDINGS
Ms Christina Schuetz and
CLIFFORD CHANCE LLP Mr David Warne,

Ms Belinda Paisley,

Ms Chloe Carswell,
Ms Dina Nazargalina
REED SMITH LLP

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 22 June 2010

Table of Contents*

 

 

 

 

 

A. THE PARTIES 11
B. THE TRIBUNAL 12
C. SHORT IDENTIFICATION OF THE CASE
CL CLAIMANTS’ PERSPECTIVE 12
CAL RESPONDENT’S PERSPECTIVE 12
D. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 12

 

E. THE PRINCIPAL RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS

EL ENERGY CHARTER TREATY,
Ell. KAZAKH LAW OF 10 JULY 1998 No. 281-1 “ON JOINT-STOCK COMPANIES” (JSC LAW
EI. KAZAKH INVESTMENT LAWS OF 1994 AND 2003 ....2::-:+000

EIV. RELEVANT ICSID PROVISION:

F. RELIEF SOUGHT BY THE PARTIES. 44

 

 

 

FL. RELIEF SOUGHT BY CLAIMANTS
FIL RELIEF SOUGHT BY RESPONDENT

G. SUMMARY OF FACTS REGARDING LIABILITY.......

GI. SUMMARY OF FACTS PRESENTED BY CLAIMANTS ..
GIL. SUMMARY OF FACTS PRESENTED BY RESPONDENT

H. SUMMARY OF CONTENTIONS 45
H.I. CONTENTIONS REGARDING JURISDICTION

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

#A1.1, Summary of Ce ions by Claimants
1.2. Summary of Ce ions by Re de
HLIL CONTENTIONS REGARDING DENIAL OF ADVANTAGES (ECT ARTICLE 17)
HLILI. Summary of Ce ions by Claimants.
A112. Summary of Ce ions by Responde

 

H.II. CONTENTIONS REGARDING LIABILITY ..
AIII.1, Summary of Contentions by Claimanas
ALII.2. Summary of Ce ions by Res}

J. CONSIDERATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS OF THE TRIBUNAL...

JL PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS.........-+
J11. Applicable Law
i. Claimants
ii. Respondent
IL2. Final Admissibility of Disputed Evidence admitted by Procedural Order No.
J.1.2.a) Are the disputed portions of evidence of Mr [...] and Mr [...] admissible?...
i. Claimants
ii. Respondent.

iii. Tribunal
J.1.2.b) Have Claimants waived any right to challenge the evidence of Mr [...] and the
evidence of Mr [...] save in respect of those items identified at paragraph (c) and (g) of
Respondent’s letter of 21 May 2009 in any event?.. 48
i. Claimants

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ii. Respondent

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

iii. Tribunal
J.1.3. Burden of Proof.
i. Claimants
ii. Respondent
iii. Tribunal
J.1.4, Evaluation of Mr [...]’s Testimony given at the Hearing ....
i. Claimants
ii. Respondent
iii. Tribunal
ILS. Relevance of Decisions of other Tribunals .........

 

JIL JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBUNAL
JI. Was Claimants’ investment lawful as a matter of Kazakh and/or international law?..51

 

 

i. Claimants 51
ii. Respondent 51
iii. Tribunal 51

 

J.I1.2. In case of unlawfulness of the investment, does it fall outside the scope of Respondent’s
consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre? .... 53

 

 

 

 

 

 

i. Claimants
ii. Respondent
iii. Tribunal
J.H1.3. Should Claimants’ investment be not protected as a matter of public policy?......
i. Claimants
ii. Respondent
iii. Tribunal

 

 

J.1.4. Have Claimants established a prima facie claim (i) with respect to the action of the
Kazakh courts; (ii) with respect to the actions of the Ministry of Energy; and (iii) for breach of
ECT Article 13 - Expropriation?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

i. Claimants 55
ii. Respondent 55
iii. Tribunal 55
J.H.S. Is Respondent a proper party?. 56
i. Claimants 56
ii. Respondent 56
iii. Tribunal 56
J.1I.6. Has NCL complied with the negotiation period set forth in ECT Article 26 and, if not,
does this affect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction?
i. Claimants
iii. Tribunal
J.IL.7. Jurisdiction under the arbitration clause of the Licence Agreement...
i. Claimants
ii. Respondent
iii. Tribunal

 

JAI. DENIAL OF ADVANTAGES (ECT ARTICLE 17(1)).
J.IL1. Can the right to deny advantages only be exercised prospectively

 

 

 

 

i. Claimants
iii. Tribunal
JH.2. Is the first limb of Article 17(1) in this case satisfied?.......
i. Claimants
ii. Respondent

 

iii. Tribunal

J.HI.3. Does the fact that Respondent has purported to exercise its right to deny advantages
after the commencement of the ICSID arbitration affect its ability to do so?..... 63

 

 

 

 

 

 

i. Claimants 63
ii, Respondent 63
iii. Tribunal 63
J.I1.4, Does ECT Article 17(1) feprine the Tribunal of jurisdiction to hear the affected claims
or does it make the claims inadmi. 63
i. Claimants 63
ii. Respondent

 

iii. Tribunal
J.IV. ISSUES REGARDING LIABILITY.
J.IV.1. Applicable Standard for Determining Breaches of the ECT...
J.IV.1.a) What is the relationship between the obligations of treatment provided for in ECT
Article 10(1) and the minimum standard of treatment under international law?...... 64

 

 

 

 

 

i. Claimants
ii. Respondent
iii. Tribunal

 

J.IV.1.b) How does the international law delict of denial of justice relate to the fair and
equitable treatment standard under ECT Article 10(1)?....

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

i. Claimants

ii, Respondent 65

iii. Tribunal 65
J.IV.1.c) What is the scope of the international law delict of denial of justice?.... 66

i. Claimants 66

ii, Respondent 66

iii. Tribunal 66

 

J.IV.1.d) How is the conduct of national courts to be measured when there are allegations of
breaches of the protections for investors set out in ECT Article 10(1)? 68

 

 

 

i. Claimants
ii. Respondent.
iii. Tribunal

 

J.IV.1.e) What is the scope of the standard of most constant protection and security in a
Article 10(1)?

 

 

 

i. Claimants 0
ii. Respondent 70
iii. Tribunal 70

 

J.IV.1.f) Was there an expropriation or measure or measures having effect equivalent to
expropriation pursuant to ECT Article 13 71

 

 

 

i. Claimants 71
ii. Respondent 71
iii. Tribunal 71

 

J.IV.2. Has Respondent breached ECT Article 10(1) second sentence (fair and equitable
treatment)?
JAIV.2: a) WN Was the transfer of the Licence i in breach of the JSC Law Requirement:

 

  

 

 

i. Claimants 72
ii. Respondent 72
J.IV.2.a)bb) Were the Kazakh law mandatory requirements for major transactions

lied with? 7

 

i. Claimants 72

ii. Respondent 72
J.IV.2.a)cc) If not, did that render the transaction voidable at the suit of an interested
party? Could the breaches subsequently be ratified? .........

 

i. Claimants 72
ii. Respondent 72
JAIV.2.: a)dd) Could LCO avail itself of the good faith exception under Article 80(1) of he
JSC Law?
i. Claimants 73
ii. Respondent 73
J.AIV.2: a)ee) If it could, did LCO in fact argue this point before the Kazakh courts? Was
the burden on LCO to raise Article 80(1) of the JSC Law, or was the burden on the

 

 

 

Kazakh courts to raise it? 73
i. Claimants 73
Respondent 73

 

J.IV.2.a)ff) Was the transfer of the Licence a transaction with interest?...... 73

 

 

 

 

 

i. Claimants 73
ii. Respondent 73
J.IV.2.a)gg) Were the Kazakh law mandatory requirements for transactions with interest
lied with? 73

i. Claimants 73
ii. Respondent 73

 

J.IV.2.a)hh) If not, did that render the transaction voidable at the suit of an interested
party? Could the breaches subsequently be ratified? ......... 74

 

i. Claimants 74
ii. Respondent 74
J.IV.2.a)jj) Did both the major transaction and transaction with interest requirements
apply to the transfer of the Licence and if so, what was the effect on the validity of the

 

 

 

 

transfer?. 74

i. Claimants 74
ii. Respondent 74
J.IV.2.a)kk) Tribunal 74
JIV.2.b) [Q's licati 76

 

J.IV.2.b)aa) Was this “document an application to withdraw a suit, or a statement of
evidence from [Q]?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

i. Claimants 76
ii. Respondent 76
J.IV.2. b)bb) If it was intended to be an application to withdraw a suit, (i) did it comply
with the licable Kazakh law for such an lication and (ii) would it
have made any difference to the claims asserted by [M] and the outcome of the Kazakh
Court Pri dings? 76
i. Claimants 76
ii. Respondent 76
J.IV.2. bec) Was it filed before the Almaty City Court, or only later before the Civil
College? 716
i. Claimants 76

 

ii. Respondent 16

J.IV.2.b)dd) Did the Civil College treat the document in accordance with the applicable

 

 

 

principles of Kazakh law? 7
i. Claimants 77
ii. Respondent cal

J.IV.2.b)ee) Tribunal val

 

 

J.IV.2.c) [M]’s claim for invalidation of the transfer of the Licence to LCO.
J.IV.2.c)aa) Did the Kazakh courts determine [M]'s claim correctly as a matter of Kazakh
law?78

i. Claimants 78
ii. Respondent 79

JAIV.2. c)bb) If not, were the decisions of the Kazakh courts a breach of Respondent's
obligations under the ECT? 7

 

i. Claimants 79
ii. Respondent 79
JAIV.2. ccc)’ Tribunal

J.IV.2.d) Consideration of the [X] minutes by the Kazakh courts..
J.IV.2.d)aa) How was evidence of [X] board and shareholder meeting minutes presented
in the case addressed by the Kazakh courts? .... sesseeeeeee 80

 

 

  

i. Claimants 1
ii. Respondent 1
J.AIV.2. d)bb) Would the minutes submitted by LCO, even if they had been accepted, have
altered the outcome of the trial — do they affect the Court’s determination that the transfer
of the Licence was in breach of the JSC Law? .............. 81

   

 

 

 

i. Claimants 1

ii. Respondent 1
J.IV.2.d)cc) Tribunal 1
J.IV.2.e) The Supervisory College’s treatment of LCO’s application for supervisory review in
February 2005 2

 

 

J.IV.2.e)aa) Was the Supervisory College’s treatment of LCO

application for
supervisory review in February 2005 in accordance with Kazakh law? 83

 

 

 

 

 

 

i. Claimants 3
ii. Respondent 3
J.IV.2.e)bb) If not, did the treatment constitute a breach of Respondent's obligations
under the ECT? 3
i. Claimants 3
ii. Respondent 3
J.AV.2. e)cc)' Tribunal 3,

 

 

J.IV.2.f) The denial of LCO's application for permission to bring a second appeal.......
J.IV.2.f)aa) Was the denial of LCO's application for permission to bring a second appeal
to the Supervisory College in January 2006 in accordance with prevailing Kazakh

 

 

law? 4
i. Claimants 4
ii. Respondent 4,

 

J.AIV.2. fbb) If not, did such denial amount to a breach of Respondent's obligations under
the ECT? 4

 

i. Claimants 4

J.IV.3. Has Respondent breached Article 13 ECT (expropriation)?...

ii. Respondent 5
JIV.2: fcc)’ Tribunal 5
J.IV.2.g) Did the Supervisory College’s two refusals of a supervisory appeal affect the
outcome of the case and/or cause Claimants any loss: i.e., is there a real prospect that the
Supervisory College would have overturned the determinations of the Almaty City Court and

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

the Civil College? 6
i. Claimants 6
ii, Respondent 6
iii. Tribunal 6

J.IV.2.h) What is the relevance of the ultimate transfer of the Licence by [X] to [...]?..........87
i. Claimants 7
ii, Respondent 7

Tribunal 7

 

J. WV. 2.j) The Corruption Case
J.IV.2.j)aa) Were the judgments of the Kazakh court proceedings such that no honest and
competent court could possibly have given them? ............ 8

 

 

i. Claimants
ii. Respondent
SIV. 2.j)bb) What weight (if any) is to be given to Claimants’ (disputed) evidence that
[...] indicated to LCO that the claimants in the Kazakh court proceedings had paid
money and that LCO would have to pay a similar amount?.....

 

 

i. Claimants
ii. Respondent
SIV. 2j)ec) What weight (if any) is to be given to Claimants’ (disputed) evidence that the
representatives of [M] expressed extraordinary confidence in the outcome of the Kazakh
court proceedings?

 

 

i. Claimants 9
ii. Respondent 9
SIV. 2j)dd) What weight (if any) is to be given to Claimants' (disputed) evidence that the
Correspondence from the Ministry of Energy was sent to LCO by a company, [...]?.....89
i. Claimants 9
ii. Respondent 9
SIV. V.2j)e) ¥ What weieht (if any) is to be given to Claimants’ (disputed) evidence that
89

 

i. Claimants
ii. Respondent

JIV.2,j)ff) Tribunal

 

 

J.IV.3.a) The invalidation of the transfer of the Licence by ‘the Kazakh ¢ courts and the
retransfer to [X] by the Ministry of Energy
i. Claimants

 

 

 

 

 

 

ii. Respondent
iii. Tribunal
J.IV.3.b) The rejection of LCO’s alleged evidence of payment for the transfer of the
Licence 92
i. Claimants 92
ii. Respondent 92

 

iii, Tribunal 93

 

J.IV.4. Has Respondent breached ECT Article 10(1), last sentence (umbrella clause)?.....
J.IV.4.a) If there was a breach of the Licence, was such breach also a violation of the
"umbrella clause" in the last sentence of ECT Article 10(1)?......

 

 

 

i. Claimants
ii. Respondent
iii. Tribunal

 

J.IV.4.b) Did Respondent breach its Investment Laws of 1994 and 2003? If so, was such a
breach also a violation of the "umbrella clause" in the last sentence of ECT Article 10(1)? ..95

 

 

 

 

 

i. Claimants
ii. Respondent
iii. Tribunal
J.IV.5. Has Respondent breached the Licence Agreement ? .........0.00+
i. Claimants
ii. Respondent:

 

 

 

J.V. DAMAGES AND QUANTUM
J.V.1. Did any of the alleged failures and/or wrongful acts by the Kazakh courts and/or the
Ministry of Energy in fact cause Claimants the alleged or any loss, or was there an intervening
cause attributable to other third parties and/or Claimants themselves? ....

 

 

 

 

i. Claimants
ii. Respondent
iii. Tribunal

 

J.V.2. Did Claimants take all reasonable steps to mitigate such loss as they in fact suffered as a

 

 

 

 

 

result of the avoidance of the transfer of the Licence? .... 99

i. Claimants 99

ii. Respondent 99

iii. Tribunal 99

JVI. Costs 100
K. DECISIONS 101

 

*The page numbers in the Table of Contents of the Excerpts do not match the page numbers of the
original Award.

 

A. The Parties

Claimants

Represented by

Respondent

Represented by

Liman Caspian Oil BV

c/o Aurado Management S.A.
Piazza del Sole 2

CH-6982 Agno

Switzerland

NCL Dutch Investment BV
c/o Aurado Management S.A.
Piazza del Sole 2

CH-6982 Agno

Switzerland

Mr Audley Sheppard

Mr Gareth Kenny

Ms Christina Schuetz

Mr Alexandros Panayides
Clifford Chance LLP

10 Upper Bank Street
London E14 5JJ

United Kingdom

Republic of Kazakhstan

H.E. President Nursultan Nazarbayev
Beibitschlik str. 11

Astana 473000

Republic of Kazakhstan

Mr Ali Malek QC,
Mr Christopher Harris
3 Verulam Buildings
Gray’s Inn

London

United Kingdom

Mr David Warne

Ms Belinda Paisley
Ms Chloe Carswell
Ms Dina Nazargalina
Mr Paul Skeet

Reed Smith LLP

The Broadgate Tower
20 Pimrose Street
London EC2A 2R2
United Kingdom

B. The Tribunal

Professor Dr. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, President

Professor Dr. Kaj Hobér
[..]

Professor James Crawford SC

[J

C. Short Identification of the Case

C.I. Claimants’ Perspective

C.II. Respondent’s Perspective

D. Procedural History

3. On 16 July 2007, the Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID) registered a Request for Arbitration (CRfA) dated 18
June 2007 under the ICSID Convention on the basis of the ICSID clause contained in
Article 26 of the Energy Charter Treaty (ECT), submitted by Liman Caspian Oil BV and
NCL Dutch Investment BV against the Republic of Kazakhstan (ROK).

4. Claimants appointed Professor Kaj Hobér as arbitrator and Respondent appointed

Professor James Crawford as arbitrator.

5. By letters of 3 December 2007, ICSID informed the Parties and Professor Karl-Heinz
Bockstiegel that the party-appointed arbitrators had appointed Professor Béckstiegel as

President of the Tribunal.

6. By letter of 24 January 2008, ICSID informed the Parties that all three arbitrators had
accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted

and the proceedings to have begun on 24 January 2008.

7. By letter of 28 January 2008, ICSID informed the Parties that the President of the
Tribunal invited the Parties to hold the First Session in London on Wednesday, 2 April
2008. Claimants agreed on the date by letter of 30 January 2008. Respondent agreed by
letter of 1 February 2008. The Parties were provided with a Provisional Agenda for the
session and were invited to confer and jointly advise the Tribunal of any points of the

agenda on which they are able to reach agreement.

8. By letter of 29 February 2008, the Parties submitted a joint advice of the points on
which they reached agreement. The Parties also informed ICSID about the respective

participants of the First Session.

9. The First Session of the Arbitral Tribunal was held at the IDRC in London on 2 April

2008. Its results are recorded in the Minutes approved after consultation with the Parties.

10. Present at the session were:
Members of the Tribunal:

Professor Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, President
Professor Kaj Hobér, Arbitrator
3. Professor James Crawford, Arbitrator

No

CHANDY

10.
dl.
12.
13.

ICSID Secretariat:

Mr Tomas Solis, Secretary of the Tribunal

Attending on behalf of the Claimants:

Mr Audley Sheppard, Clifford Chance LLP

Mr Ignacio Suarez Anzorena, Clifford Chance LLP

Mr Gareth Kenny, Clifford Chance LLP

Mr Marco Mahler, Liman Caspian Oil BV and NCL Dutch Investment BV

Mr Walter Remmerswaal, a financial and legal adviser to Liman Caspian Oil
BV and NCL Dutch Investment BV

Attending on behalf of the Respondent:

Mr Ali Malek QC

Mr David Warne, Reed Smith Richards Butler LLP
Ms Belinda Paisley, Reed Smith Richards Butler LLP
Mr Paul Skeet, Reed Smith Richards Butler LLP

11. The following issues were discussed during the First Session and summarised in the

Minutes which were sent to the Parties by letter of 1 May 2008.

I. Procedural Matters
The President invited the parties to confirm their agreements reached as
contained in their amended Joint Draft Agenda, as follows:

1. Constitution of the Tribunal and Tribunal Members’ Declarations
(Arbitration Rule 6).

The President noted that the Tribunal had been constituted on January 24,
2008, and that it had been properly constituted in accordance with the
ICSID Convention and the applicable ICSID Arbitration Rules (the Rules).
Further copies of the Tribunal Members’ Declarations are attached to
these Minutes as Annex 3.

The parties confirmed their agreement that the Tribunal had been properly
constituted and that they had no objections to its Members.

2. Representation of the Parties (Arbitration Rule 18).
The Claimants' representatives and their contact information are as
follows:

Clifford Chance LLP Audley Sheppard

10 Upper Bank Street +44 20 7006 8723

London audley.sheppard@ cliffordchance.com
E14 5JJ

United Kingdom Alexandros Panayides

Tel: +44 20 7006 1000
Fax: +44 20 7006 5555

+44 20 7006 4880
alexandros.panayides @ cliffordchance.com

Ignacio Suarez-Anzorena
+1 202 912 5008
ignacio.suarezanzorena @ cliffordchance.com

Gareth Kenny
+44 20 7006 8642

gareth.kenny@ cliffordchance.com

Kazakhstan's representatives and their contact information are as follows:

Ali Malek QC

3 Verulam Buildings
Gray's Inn

London WCIR SNT
United Kingdom

Tel: +44(0)20 7831 8441
Fax: +44(0)20 7831 8479
am@ 3vb.com

Christopher Harris

3 Verulam Buildings
Gray's Inn

London WCIR 5NT
United Kingdom

Tel: +44(0)20 7831 8441
Fax: +44(0)20 7831 8479
charris @3vb.com

Reed Smith Richards Butler LLP
Beaufort House

15 St Botolph Street

London EC3A 7EE

United Kingdom

Tel: +44 (0) 20 7247 6555

Fax: +44 (0) 20 7247 5091

David Warne
+44 (0) 20 7772 5709
dwarne@ reedsmith.com

Belinda Paisley
+44 (0) 20 7772 5727
bpaisley@ reedsmith.com

Paul Skeet
+44 (0) 20 7816 3898
pskeet @ reedsmith.com

3. Apportionment of Costs and Advance Payments to the Centre
(Convention Article 61; Administrative and Financial Regulation 14;
Arbitration Rule 28).

The parties agreed that ICSID Convention Article 61 and ICSID
Administrative and Financial Regulation 14 shall apply to the proceeding,
the parties therefore would defray the expenses of the proceeding in equal
parts, without prejudice to the right of the Tribunal to allocate costs in
accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 28, or the rights of the parties to
request such an allocation as the facts may justify.

It was noted that the Centre had, under cover of a letter of January 30,
2008, requested that each party pay a sum of US$100,000.00 (one
thousand United States dollars) to defray the costs of the proceeding
during its first three to six months. Payment has been received from both
parties.

4. Fees and Expenses of the Tribunal Members (Convention Article 60;
Administrative and Fi ial Regulation 14; ICSID Schedule of Fees).

The parties agreed that the fees and expenses of the Tribunal Members
shall be determined and paid in accordance with the current ICSID
Schedule of Fees and the Memorandum on Fees and Expenses of ICSID
Arbitrators.

The parties agreed that the Members of the Tribunal shall be entitled to
receive the fees, per diem subsistence allowances, travel and other expense
reimbursements referred to in Administrative and Financial Regulation
14(1). Such payments are to be calculated in accordance with the
Memorandum on Fees and Expenses of ICSID Arbitrators. In accordance
with the ICSID Schedule of Fees, each Member of the Tribunal shail
receive:

(a) a fee of US$3,000 (three thousand US dollars), or such other fee as
may be set forth from time to time in the Centre’s Schedule of Fees, for
each day of meetings or each eight hours of other work performed in
connection with the proceeding or pro rata; and

(b) subsistence allowances and reimbursement of travel and other
expenses within limits set forth in ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulation 14.

It was noted that by letters of January 11 and January 18, 2008, from
counsel for the Respondent and counsel for the Claimants, respectively,
the parties agreed that the Chairman of the Tribunal can claim as
expenses in addition to his fees the VAT of 19% which the Chairman has to
pay to the German tax authorities on all his fees. The parties’ letters are
attached to these Minutes as Annex 4.

5. Applicable Arbitration Rules (Convention Article 44).

In accordance with Article 44 of the Convention, the parties agreed that
the proceeding shall be conducted in accordance with ICSID Arbitration
Rules in force as at 10 April 2006 (but not any amendments thereto).

6. Place of Proceeding (Convention Articles 62 and 63; Administrative
and Financial Regulation 26; Arbitration Rule 13(3)).

The parties agreed that the legal seat of proceedings shall be Washington,
D.C. as provided for in Article 62 of the Convention. In accordance with
Article 63 of the Convention and Arbitration Rule 13(3), without prejudice
to any requests for individual sessions to be held at other convenient
locations, the parties agreed that the proceedings shall be held in London
at an appropriate institution with which the Centre may make
arrangements for that purpose. The Tribunal may meet without the parties
at any place convenient to its Members.

7. Procedural Language (Arbitration Rules 20(1)(b) and 22).
The parties agreed that the procedural language shall be English.

In relation to witness and expert evidence, the parties agreed that:

(a) the evidence of witnesses or experts shall be given either in English or
in the principal language of the witness or expert, at the option of such
witness or expert;

(b) witness or expert statements may be submitted in the principal
language of the witness or expert, but shall be accompanied by an English
translation;

(c) witnesses or experts called to testify at any hearing before the
Tribunal may give their evidence in English or in their principal
language; and

(d) in the event that the witness or expert testifies in his or her principal
language which is not English, the parties shall agree arrangements, in
consultation with ICSID (but failing agreement ICSID shall arrange on
behalf of the parties) for independent, professional interpreters to provide
either simultaneous or consecutive interpretation, as agreed by the parties
at a later stage before the hearing, of counsel and Tribunal's questions
and the witness or expert's responses.

In relation to documents, the parties agreed that the party who relies on a
document written in a language other than English shall be obliged to
provide, in addition to a complete version of the original document, an
English translation of that document or of the part of the document relied
upon (including a translation of sufficient portion of the document to
provide for reasonable context for the part relied upon). Each party
reserves its right to: (i) challenge the accuracy of the English translation
submitted by the other; and (ii) submit additional translated parts of any
document not translated in its entirety. The parties further agreed that the

translations of documents or portions thereof need not be certified, unless
the translation submitted in the first instance proves controversial.

8. Records of Hearings (Arbitration Rule 20(1)(g)).

The parties agreed that sound recordings and verbatim transcripts be
made of each day's proceedings during any hearing (not including the
First Session or any pre-hearing procedural conference unless otherwise
directed by the Tribunal) and that the parties will share equally the cost of
sound recordings and transcript production, subject to any later costs
award. The parties further agreed that:

(a) transcripts be prepared by a professional service selected by the
parties in consultation with ICSID (or failing agreement by ICSID);

(b) provisional transcripts be provided to the parties at the email
addresses set out above, and to the Tribunal, in electronic form on the
same day as the proceedings they record;

(c) there should be an opportunity to suggest corrections to the transcripts
as first presented, with the Tribunal to consider (in the event of
disagreement between the parties) whether or not such corrections are to
be adopted;

(d) final edited and corrected transcripts of each day’s proceedings
during any hearing shall follow within two weeks of the close of such
hearing; and

9. Means of Communication and Copies of Instruments (Arbitration
Rules 20(1)(d) and 23; Administrative and Financial Regulations 24 and
30).

Except as provided below, the parties agreed that all communications and
written instruments shall be introduced into the proceeding by sending
them to the Secretary of the Tribunal at ICSID in Washington, D.C.

The parties further agreed that:

(a) routine administrative or procedural correspondence be emailed (in
MS Word format) to the Secretary of the Tribunal with a copy to counsel
for the other party;

(b) pursuant to ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulation 24, the
Secretariat is the official channel of communication between the Tribunal
and the parties. Only in urgent situations, the parties may send copies of
procedural communications, in addition to the Secretary of the Tribunal,
directly to the Tribunal; and;

(c) each party shall send an original and five copies of any written
submission to the Secretary of the Tribunal in A-5 format for their
distribution to the Tribunal. Counsel should, at the same time, courier two
additional copies of any written instrument to opposing counsel directly;
(d) in order to facilitate that parts can be taken out and copies can be
made, submissions of all documents including statements of witnesses and
experts shall be submitted separated from the memorials, unbound in ring
binders and preceded by a list of such documents consecutively numbered

 

18

with consecutive numbering in later submissions (C-1, C-2, etc. for the
Claimants; R-1, R-2- etc. for the Respondent). Longer submissions shall
be preceded by a Table of Contents;

(e) all documents (including texts and translations into English of all
substantive law provisions, cases and authorities) considered relevant by
the parties shall be submitted with their memorials, as established in the
Procedural Timetable agreed to below (the Timetable);

(f) electronic versions of all such filings, excluding documentary
evidence, should be sent to opposing counsel and the Secretary of the
Tribunal on the stipulated filing date or the date actually filed with ICSID,
whichever is sooner;

(g) while allowing some flexibility in this respect, for the avoidance of
unfair surprise, new factual allegations or evidence shall not be any more
permitted after the respective dates for the rebuttal memorials indicated in
the Timetable, unless agreed between the parties or expressly authorized
by the Tribunal;

In addition, each party shall send six CD-ROM copies, which shall contain
the entire submission (pleadings, statements and any documentary
evidence), to the Secretary of the Tribunal. Counsel shall further courier
two additional CD-ROM copies of the entire submission (pleadings,
statements and any documentary evidence) to opposing counsel directly.

The parties further agreed that a written submission should be considered
to have been submitted in a timely fashion if, on or before the applicable
due date: (i) the submission (excluding exhibits if voluminous) is
transmitted in electronic form; and (ii) dispatched in hard form by courier
for delivery to ICSID and to counsel in accordance with the provisions set
out above.

10. Presence and Quorum (Arbitration Rules 14(2) and 20(1)(a)).
The parties agreed that the presence of all three Members of the Tribunal
be required at its sessions.

11. Decisions of the Tribunal by Correspondence (Arbitration Rule
16(2)).

The parties agreed that in accordance with Arbitration Rule 16(2), the
Tribunal may take any decision by correspondence by majority among all
its Members, or by any other appropriate means of communication,
provided that all Members take part in the decision-making process.

12. Delegation of Power to Fix Time Limits (Arbitration Rule 26(1)).
The parties note that under ICSID Arbitration Rule 26(1), the Tribunal
may delegate its power to fix time limits to its President.

Short extensions may be agreed between the parties as long as they do not
affect later dates in the Timetable and the Tribunal is informed before the
original due date.

Extensions of deadlines shall only be granted by the Tribunal on
exceptional grounds and provided that a request is submitted immediately
after an event has occurred which prevents a party from complying with
the deadline.

The Tribunal indicated to the parties, and the parties took note thereof,
that in view of travels and other commitments of the Arbitrators, it might
sometimes take a certain period of time for the Tribunal to respond to
submissions of the parties and decide on them.

13. Written and Oral Procedures (Arbitration Rules 20(1)(e) and 29).
The parties agreed that pursuant to Arbitration Rule 29, the proceeding
should consist of both a written phase and an oral phase.

14. Number and Sequence of Pleadings, Time Limits, Supporting
Documentation (Arbitration Rules 20(1)(c) and 31).

Without prejudice to the Respondent’s right to raise jurisdictional
objections howsoever arising and any procedures related to such
objections, the parties agreed that the question of whether or not there
should be bifurcation of liability and remedies should be deferred until
after the Respondent has served its counter-memorial.

The parties further agreed that, whilst the Claimants shall be required to
particularise their alleged heads of loss in their Memorial, the detailed
quantification of Claimants’ monetary claim shall be deferred until the
submission of expert evidence on quantum.

It was agreed that the written phase of the proceedings shall, subject to the
Tribunal’s further order on the questions of (a) dealing with any issue
relating to jurisdiction as a preliminary issue and (b) the bifurcation of
issues of liability and remedies, consist of two rounds of briefing: a
memorial to be submitted by the Claimants, a counter-memorial to be
submitted by the Respondent, a reply by the Claimants, and a rejoinder by
the Respondent. The first round of briefing shall be submitted as follows:

The Claimants shall file their Memorial, together with any documentary
evidence on which the Claimants intend to rely, by no later than May 19,
2008. For the avoidance of doubt, witness statements of fact and expert
reports are to be served after the completion of the first round of
memorials and not to be served with those memorials;

The Respondent shall file its Counter-Memorial, together with any
documentary evidence on which the Respondent intends to rely, by no later
than August 4, 2008;

20

The Respondent shall submit on August 4, 2008, together with its Counter-
Memorial, and the Claimants shall submit on August 20, 2008, their
respective positions on the issues of:

J. whether any issue relating to jurisdiction shall be treated as a
preliminary issue;

2. whether there shall be a bifurcation of the issues of (a) liability and (b)
remedies; and

3. the procedural timetable for the remainder of the arbitration and, in
particular, the timing of the filing of:

(a) an agreed List of Issues arising for determination in the arbitration;

(b) a joint submission by the parties requesting the production of
documents (see also item no. 18);

(c) the Claimants’ reply;

(d) the Respondent’s rejoinder;

(e) witness statements of fact;

(f) expert reports (including disciplines; the number of experts and
whether reports should be exchanged or given on a sequential basis);

(g) the timing of any pre-hearing conference (see also item no. 16); and
(h) the exchange of skeleton submissions (limited to 25 pages).

The Respondent shall reply to the Claimants’ submission of August 20,
2008, by September 3, 2008.

On September 23, 2008, the Tribunal shall hold a telephone conference
with the parties, or a meeting in London if necessary, to hear the parties’
position on the issues listed above.

15. Witnesses and Experts; Written Statements and Reports (Arbitration
Rules 35 and 36).

The parties agreed that:

(a) without prejudice to the power of the Tribunal to request or allow the
parties to produce further evidence at any stage of the proceedings, any
signed witness statements and expert reports shall be submitted together
with copies of (or reference to if already submitted) the written instruments
which they support and shall be sufficiently detailed so as to constitute the
evidence-in-chief of each factual or expert witness;

(b) a witness shall testify at a hearing unless given notice by the other
party or by the Tribunal that he/she is not required to attend; and

(c) the issue of whether witness statements and expert reports should be
submitted together with the Reply and Rejoinder, respectively, or whether
there should be a separate phase for exchange of such statements/reports,
shall be revisited by the parties after the first exchange (round) of
pleadings.

16. Pre-Hearing Conference (Arbitration Rule 21).

The parties acknowledge that ICSID Arbitration Rule 21 shall apply to this
proceeding and suggest that, in the event such a conference does take

21

place, it may be conducted by telephone or video conference unless
otherwise directed by the Tribunal.

17. Dates of Subsequent Sessions (Arbitration Rule 13(2)).

The parties agreed that the scheduling of any subsequent sessions beyond
September 23, 2008 is premature and acknowledge that ICSID Arbitration
Rule 13(2) shall apply to this proceeding.

18. Production of Evidence (Convention Article 43; Arbitration Rules 24
and 33-37).

The parties acknowledge that ICSID Convention Article 43 and ICSID
Arbitration Rules 24, 33-37 shall apply to this proceeding. The parties and
the Tribunal may be guided by the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in
International Commercial Arbitration.

It was agreed that the appropriate procedure and timetable for the
production of documents shall be discussed and agreed upon during the
telephone conference call, or meeting if applicable, between the parties
and the Tribunal of September 23, 2008.

19. Time Limit for the Preparation of the Award (Arbitration Rule 46).
The parties acknowledge that ICSID Arbitration Rule 46 shall apply to this
proceeding.

20. Publication of Decisions and Award (Arbitration Rule 48(4)).

The parties are currently considering whether they will consent to the

publication of Decisions and Awards of the Tribunal and will revert to the
Tribunal in this regard later in the proceeding.

I. Other Matters
The parties stated they did not have any other matters to discuss.

Closing of the session

12. By letter of 5 May 2008, ICSID informed the Parties that the date set for a possible

meeting in London or telephone conference was moved from 23 September 2008 to 29

September 2008.

. Claimants filed a Statement of Claim (C I) dated 19 May 2008, which was received by
ICSID on 21 May 2008. A copy was sent to counsel for Respondent by counsel for

22

oo

20.

. Respondent filed a Counter-Memorial (R I) dated 4 August 2008, which was received

by ICSID on the same date. A copy was sent to counsel for Claimants by counsel for

Respondent.

. By letter of 5 August 2008, counsel for Respondent notified its propositions in relation to

bifurcation of jurisdiction, bifurcation of issues of liability and remedies and the

procedural timetable to counsel for Claimants.

. Counsel for Claimants presented its position by letter of 20 August 2008 on bifurcation

of jurisdiction, bifurcation of issues of liability and remedies and the procedural

timetable.

. By letter of 3 September 2008, counsel for Respondent replied to the letter of Claimants’

counsel setting out proposals on the same matters.

. By letter of 4 September 2008, ICSID informed the Parties that the Tribunal considered

that given the number and complexity of the issues regarding the further procedure, the
meeting on 29 September should be done in person and invited them to attend the
meeting at the International Disputed Resolution Centre (IDRC) in London on 29

September 2008 in order to discuss the further procedure.

. By letter of 22 September 2008, counsel for Claimants filed a Parties’ joint proposal of

the further procedure, including a timetable with dates. The only item on which the
Parties did not reach an agreement was the discipline of experts as referred to at section

14(3)(f) of the Minutes of the First Session.
By letter of 23 September 2008, ICSID informed the Parties about the Tribunal’s

decision that because of the Parties’ agreement, the meeting scheduled for 29 September

2008 was no longer necessary and was therefore cancelled.

23

21. By letter of 6 October 2008, a draft Procedural Order No. 1 regarding the further

procedure was sent to the Parties. Parties were invited to comment on the draft no later

than 13 October 2008.

22. By letter of 13 October 2008, counsel for Respondent and counsel for Claimants

submitted comments on the draft Procedural Order No. 1. The Parties had discussed the

draft and agreed on several amendments.

23. Taking in account the Parties’ comments, the Tribunal issued the following Procedural

Order No 1 (PO-1) by letter of 15 October 2008.

A.

3.2.

3.3.

Earlier Rulings

The Tribunal recalls the earlier rulings in the Minutes of First Session of
the Parties and the Arbitral Tribunal held in London on Wednesday, 2
April 2008. These earlier rulings remain valid unless changed expressly.

Further Procedure
Based on the Parties’ Joint Proposal for the Procedural Timetable for the
Remainder of the Arbitration dated 22 September 2008:

The parties have agreed that the Tribunal should consider jurisdictional
issues with the merits.

The parties have agreed to bifurcation of liability and quantum/relief.
Accordingly, the procedure established hereafter shall only deal with
issues of jurisdiction and liability and not with issues of quantum/relief.
Regarding the latter, should the Tribunal find that there is liability, a
further phase of the procedure shall be established in consultation with the
Parties.

Production of documents

The parties have agreed to the use of a Redfern Schedule in the form
attached to their joint proposal.

As agreed at the First Session, the parties and the Tribunal may be guided
by the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Commercial
Arbitration.

Timetable for production of documents

 

| Step

| Date |

 

| Requests to produce documents | 24 October 2008 |

 

24

 

Production or objection

10 November 2008

 

Reply to objection

24 November 2008

 

Tribunal orders production

By 19 December 2008,

Tribunal to decide and order
date for production (should be
before date for submission of
Reply)

 

Documents produced

 

Since it will be difficult to
obtain documents from
Kazakhstan in short order,
documents shall be produced
within 21 days of the
Tribunal's order.

 

 

 

3.4.

It is agreed that a further round of document disclosure after service of
Claimants' Reply and Respondent's Rejoinder is unnecessary. The parties
agree that, subject to maintaining the timetable up to the hearing, either
party may make a further specific document request in respect of any new
issue, which if opposed may be referred to the Tribunal for determination.

 

 

4. Further pleadings/witness statements and expert reports
Step Date
Claimants to serve Reply 23 January 2009

(together with all further
documents, witness statements
and expert reports they wish to
rely on)

 

Respondent to serve Rejoinder

 

31 March 2009

(together with all further
documents, witness statements
and expert reports it wishes to
rely on))

 

 

 

Discipline of experts

By 30 April 2008, Claimants shall have the right to submit a short
memorial with expert reply evidence on any expert evidence submitted by
the Respondent in its Rejoinder that goes beyond the expert evidence, in
terms of discipline of experts, submitted by the Claimants in their Reply,
and by 29 May 2008, Respondent shall have the right to submit a short
memorial with expert evidence in response to any such reply expert
evidence served by Claimants, limited to those matters addressed by such
reply expert evidence.

25

71.

7.2.

8.2.

9.2.

9.3.

9.4

dl.
11d.

11.2.

Thereafter, no new evidence may be submitted, unless agreed between the
Parties or expressly authorized by the Tribunal.

By a date at least six weeks before the date set for the hearing, the Parties
shall submit:

 

of the wit and experts pres 1 by themselves or by
the other Party whom they wish to examine at the Hearing,
a List of Issues arising for determination should such a list be agreed
between the parties.

Pre-Hearing Conference

By a date at least four weeks before the hearing, a telephone Pre-Hearing
Conference between the Parties and the Tribunal, if considered necessary
by the Tribunal.

As soon as possible thereafter, the Tribunal issues a Procedural Order
regarding further details of the Hearing, if considered necessary.

Trial Bundle

By a date at least six weeks before the starting date set for the hearing, the
Parties shall agree on a chronological Core Bundle, containing the key
documents that each party intends to rely upon during the hearing.

By a date at least six weeks before the starting date set for the hearing, the
Parties shall agree on a Kazakh law bundle, containing the key extracts of
Kazakh law that each party intends to rely upon during the hearing.

At the beginning of the hearing, the Parties shall provide a copy of the
Core Bundle and Kazakh Law Bundle for each member of the Tribunal
and the Tribunal Secretary and for use by the witnesses and experts during
the hearing.

At the beginning of the hearing, the Parties shall provide to the Tribunal
one single set of all pleadings, documents, witness statements and expert
reports submitted in this arbitration.

Pre-hearing briefs

The parties agree that skeleton submissions (limited to 25 pages without
any new documents) shall be submitted two weeks before the starting date
set for the hearing.

Hearing

The hearing shall be in London for a period of one week (5 days)

from I to 5 September 2009.

In order to make most efficient use of time at the Hearing, the Witness
Statements and Expert Reports shall come in lieu of direct examination of
fact witnesses and experts at the hearing. The Party calling a fact witness
or an expert will be deemed to have submitted that witness’s or expert's
direct testimony in his or her Statement or Report. Thus, absent leave of
the Tribunal for reasonable cause, the direct examination of a fact witness

26

11.3.

11.4.

11.5.

11.6

or an expert at the hearing shall be limited to confirming his or her written
testimony, a short introduction of up to 10 minutes, and comments on any
new developments that have occurred after the Statement or Report was
made.

Taking into account the time available during the period provided for the
Hearing in the Timetable, the Tribunal intends to establish equal maximum
time periods both for the Claimants and for the Respondent which the
Parties shall have available. Changes to that principle may be applied for
at the latest at the time set for the Pre-Hearing Conference. The equal time
periods during the hearing shall be set in the last procedural order before
the hearing.

No new documents may be presented at the Hearing. But demonstrative
exhibits may be shown using documents submitted earlier in accordance
with the Timetable.

At the end of the Hearing, the Tribunal will consult with the Parties
whether Post-Hearing Briefs may be appropriate and regarding which
issues they should be directed.

After its decision on liability, the Tribunal will issue any directions it
considers necessary at that time.

24. Counsel for Respondent filed Respondent’s Request for Documents in form of a

25.

26.

Redfern Schedule on 24 November 2008, including Claimants’ Comments and

Objections and Respondent’s Replies.

Counsel for Claimants filed Claimants’ Request for Documents in the form of a

Redfern Schedule on 24 November 2008, including Respondent’s Comments and

Objections and Claimants’ Replies.

The Tribunal issued the following Procedural Order No. 2 (PO-2) by letter of 12
December 2008 with the annexed Redfern Schedules which had been submitted by the

Parties.

Introduction

The Tribunal has taken note of the submissions of the Parties regarding
the issues of document production on which they cannot agree.

Reference is made to Art. 43 of the ICSID Convention and Art. 24 and 34
of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. As provided in section 18 of the Minutes of
the I" Session, the “IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International
Commercial Arbitration” can be considered as a guideline giving

27

3.2.

indications regarding the relevant criteria for what documents may be
requested and ordered to be produced.

In its decisions, the Tribunal takes into account that, according to the
timetable for the further procedure agreed between the Parties and
recorded in section 3.4. of PO-I, the Parties have considered a further
round of document disclosure as unnecessary, only subject to specific
document requests in respect of any new issue. Subject to that latter
exception, therefore, requests should be granted now and not only after the
further Memorials of the Parties.

The Tribunal recognizes that, on one hand, requests and orders regarding

the production of documents are today a regular feature of international
arbitration, but, on the other hand, the present arbitration is a case also
involving parties of a Civil Law country where production of documents is
used far less than in Common Law countries.
The Tribunal further recognizes that, on one hand, ordering the
production of documents can be helpful for a party to present its case and
in the Tribunal’s task of establishing the facts of the case relevant for the
issues to be decided, but, on the other hand, (1) the process of discovery
and disclosure may be time consuming, excessively burdensome and even
oppressive and that unless carefully limited, the burden may be
disproportionate to the value of the result, and (2) Parties may have a
legitimate interest of confidentiality.
Finally the Tribunal notes that, insofar as a Party has the burden of proof,
it is sufficient for the other Party to deny what the respective Party has
alleged and then respond to and rebut the evidence provided by that
respective Party to comply with its burden of proof.

Documents to be produced

As provided in section 3.3. of PO-1, all documents identified as to be
“ordered” in the Tribunal’s Decisions in the Redfern Schedules attached
to this Order shall be produced within 21 days of the date of this Order to
the other Parties in this procedure, but not yet to the Tribunal, subject to
the further qualifications and limitations in this Order. The receiving Party
may then decide in how far it wishes to rely on such documents in its
further submissions to the Tribunal and may submit the respective
documents with its next Memorial.

Qualifications and Limitations of Document Production

All documents produced under this Order may be utilized by the other
Parties only in direct connection with the present arbitration procedure.
Insofar as a Party requests the production of “all” documents of a certain
category, the requested Party is only required to produce those documents
which can reasonably be considered as relevant and material for the other
Parties to present their case and for the Tribunal to decide on the claims
raised in this procedure taking into account the factual allegations and
legal arguments presented by the Parties.

28

3.3.

3.4.

3.5.

Of the documents ordered by the Tribunal, the following documents or
categories of documents need not be produced, but the reason for the non-
production must be identified. If they:

do not exist or do not yet exist,

or are not in the possession, custody or control of a Party,

or have already been sent or copied to the requesting Party,

or are of special political sensitivity or have been classified as secret or
privileged by law or by orders of the government,

or include information regarding third parties for which the ordered Party
has an obligation of confidentiality,

or are subject to attorney-client privilege under the legal or ethical rules
by which Counsel of the Parties are bound in their respective jurisdictions,
or which reflect the seeking or rendering of a legal opinion by internal or
external counsel.

If a document or category of documents ordered by the Tribunal only
contains some information or sections which do not have to be produced
according to Section 3.3 above, the respective document may be redacted
in such a way that those sections are excluded from the production. But the
reason for non-production or redaction and the extent of such redaction
must be indicated in a separate note or in the document.

“Documents” should be understood to include permanent records in any
form, including on paper and electronic.

Adverse Inference

Insofar as documents ordered are not produced or not produced as ruled
in this Order, the Tribunal may take this into account in its evaluation of
the respective factual allegations and evidence including an inference
against the Party refusing production.

Annexed Redfern Schedules

According to Section 2 above, the following Redfern Schedules submitted
by the Parties are annexed in which the respective decisions of the
Tribunal are added in the last column:

Annex 1: Tribunal Decisions on Claimants’ Request
Annex 2: Tribunal Decisions on Respondent’s Request to Claimant

27. In accordance with Section 4 of PO-1 and an extension agreed by the Parties, Claimants

filed Claimants’ Reply (C ID) on 26 January 2009 which was received by ICSID on the

same date. A copy of the submission was sent directly by counsel for Claimants to

counsel for Respondent.

29

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

4S.

By letter of 29 January 2009, counsel for Claimants informed ICSID that Respondent
had failed to comply with PO-2 with respect to Claimants’ Requests for Documents 1 and

5.

By letter of 2 February 2009, ICSID informed the Parties that the Tribunal considered
that a production of Document 1 was not any more required according to Section 3.3. of
PO-2. Regarding Document 5, the Tribunal decided that Respondent had to continue its
search and produce the documents as soon as possible and in any case no later than 27

February 2009.

By letter of 5 March 2009, counsel for Respondent asked for an extension of the deadline
to submit Respondent’s Rejoinder to 3 April 2009 and noted that Respondent was so far

unable to locate the Document 5.

By letter of 17 April 2009, counsel for Respondent asked for a further extension of the
deadline to submit the Rejoinder to 24 April 2009. Claimants agreed by letter of 17 April
2009; the Tribunal’s agreement was notified to Respondent by letter of 21 April 2009 by
ICSID.

On 28 April 2009, the Tribunal and the Parties agreed to postpone the Hearing in London
to 8 to 12 December 2009.

In accordance with Section 4 of PO-1 and two agreed extensions, Respondent filed

Respondent’s Rejoinder (R ID) on 24 April 2009 with ICSID.

On 9 October 2009, counsel for Claimants sent an agreed List of Issues to ICSID on
which both parties agreed for the most part. Counsel for Claimants and counsel for
Respondent also notified to ICSID the respective witnesses and experts they wish to

examine during the Hearing.

30

46. On 28 October 2009, a draft Procedural Order No. 4 regarding further details of the

Hearing in London on 8 to 12 December 2009 was sent to the Parties. Parties were

invited to comment on the draft no later than 9 November 2008.

47. Taking into account the Parties’ comments, the Tribunal issued the following Procedural

Order No. 4 (PO-4) regarding further details of the Hearing by letter of 11 November

2009.

Instead of the option of a pre-hearing conference, provided for in section 8.1.of
PO No.1, a draft of this PO was communicated to the Parties, who were invited to
submit their comments by 9 November 2009. Taking into account the comments
received, the Tribunal hereby issues the PO in its final form.

1.

Ld.

1.2.

1.3.

2.1.

Introduction

This Order recalls the earlier agreements and rulings of the Tribunal and
particularly takes into account the recent submissions and letters of the
Parties.

In particular, sections 8 to 11 of PO No. 1 are recalled and hereby
confirmed. Regarding the preparation and conduct of the hearing. The
Parties are invited to assure that these provisions are complied with.

By 24 November 2009, the Parties:

e shall submit notifications of the persons who will be attending the
hearing on their respective sides;

e may submit a notification if they do not intend to examine any of the
witnesses so far notified. If a Party does not call a witness for cross-
examination at the hearing, this will not be considered as an
acceptance of that witness’ testimony;

e may submit a notification on any agreement they have reached
regarding the order for the examination of witnesses and experts
during the hearing.

Time and Place of Hearing

The Hearing shall be held at
IDRC

70 Fleet Street

London,

EC4Y IEU

31

2.2.

2.3.

3.1.

3.2.

As agreed, five days are blocked from Tuesday 8 to Saturday 12 December
2009.

To give sufficient time to the Parties and the Arbitrators to prepare for and
evaluate each part of the Hearings, the daily sessions shall not go beyond
the period between 9:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. However, the Tribunal, in
consultation with the Parties, may change the timing during the course of
the Hearings.

Conduct of the Hearing

In addition to the provisions of section 11 of PO No.1, the following shall
apply:

In view of the examination of witnesses and experts, the following Agenda
is established for the Hearing:

J. Introduction by the Chairman of the Tribunal.
2. Opening Statements of not more than one hour each for the Claimants
and for the Respondent.
3. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties:
Examination of Claimants’ witnesses and experts:
a) Affirmation of witness or expert to tell the truth.
b) Short introduction by Claimants (This may include a short direct
examination on new developments after the last written statement
of the witness or expert).
c) Cross-examination by Respondent.
d) Re-direct examination by Claimants, but only on issues raised in
cross-examination.
e) Re-cross examination by Respondent but only on issues raised in
redirect examination.
Sf) Remaining questions by members of the Tribunal, but they may
raise questions at any time.
4. Examination of Respondent's witnesses and experts (as under item 3 a)
through f) above).
5. Any witness or expert may only be recalled for rebuttal examination by
a Party or the members of the Tribunal, if such intention is announced in
time to assure the availability of the witness and expert during the time of
the Hearing.
6. If agreed by the Parties or if, after consultation with the Parties,
authorized by the Tribunal: closing arguments of up to 2 hours each for
the Claimants and for the Respondent.
7. Remaining questions by the members of the Tribunal, if any.
8. Discussion regarding the timing and details of post-hearing submissions
and other procedural issues.

32

3.3.

3.4.

3.5.

3.6.

Examination of witnesses and experts shall take place in the order agreed
by the Parties. If no such agreement has been reached, unless the Tribunal
decides otherwise, Claimants’ witnesses and experts shall be heard first in
the order decided by Claimants, and then Respondent’s witnesses and
experts shall be heard in the order decided by Respondent.

Unless otherwise agreed between the Parties or ruled by the Tribunal,
witnesses and experts may be present in the Hearing room during the
testimony of other witnesses and experts.

For convenience, the following sections of PO No. I are recalled:

11.2. In order to make most efficient use of time at the Hearing, the
Witness Statements and Expert Reports shall come in lieu of direct
examination of fact witnesses and experts at the hearing. The Party calling
a fact witness or an expert will be deemed to have submitted that witness’s
or expert’s direct testimony in his or her Statement or Report. Thus, absent
leave of the Tribunal for reasonable cause, the direct examination of a fact
witness or an expert at the hearing shall be limited to confirming his or
her written testimony, a short introduction of up to 10 minutes, and
comments on any new developments that have occurred after the Statement
or Report was made.

11.3. Taking into account the time available during the period provided for
the Hearing in the Timetable, the Tribunal intends to establish equal
maximum time periods both for the Claimants and for the Respondent
which the Parties shall have available. Changes to that principle may be
applied for at the latest at the time set for the Pre-Hearing Conference.
The equal time periods during the hearing shall be set in the last
procedural order before the hearing. 11.4. No new documents may be
presented at the Hearing. But demonstrative exhibits may be shown using
documents submitted earlier in accordance with the Timetable.

In accordance with section 11.3. of PO No. 1, the Tribunal establishes the
following maximum time periods which the Parties shall have available for
their pr i and inatic and cross-e. inatic of all
witnesses and experts. Taking into account the Calculation of Hearing
Time attached to this Order, the total maximum time available for the
Parties (including their opening statements and closing arguments, if any)
shall be as follows:

13 hours for Claimants
13 hours for Respondent

33

3.7.

3.8.

3.9.

4.1.

4.2.

It is left to the Parties how much of their allotted total time they want to
spend on the Agenda items 2, 3, 4, and 6, as long as the total time period
allotted to them is maintained.

The Parties shall prepare their presentations and examinations at the
Hearing on the basis of the time limits established.

If a witness whose statement has been submitted by a Party and whose
examination at the Hearing has been requested by the other Party, does
not appear at the Hearing, his statement will not be taken into account by
the Tribunal. A Party may apply with reasons for an exception from that
rule.

In so far as the Parties request oral examination of an expert, the same
rules and procedure shall apply as for witnesses.
Other Matters

ICSID has confirmed the availability of the court reporter. ICSID is in the
process of finding available Russian-English-Russian interpreters.

The Tribunal may change any of the rulings in this Order, after
consultation with the Parties, if considered appropriate under the
circumstances.

48. On 30 November 2009, Claimants and Respondent filed their respective Skeleton

49.

Submissions in accordance with section 10 of PO-1.

The Hearing was held at the IDRC in London from 8 to 12 December 2009. The Parties

agreed with the Tribunal on a few changes of the agenda regarding the schedule of the

daily sessions and the end of the Hearing in accordance with section 2.3. of PO-4. The

Hearing on Jurisdiction was recorded and a transcript (Tr) was to be made available to the

Parties.

The Hearing was attended by:

Members of the Tribunal:

1. Professor Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, President

34

2. Professor Kaj Hobér, Arbitrator
3. Professor James Crawford, Arbitrator

Assistants to the Tribunal:

4. Mr Tomas Solis, ICSID
5. Ms Helene Bubrowski, Administrative Assistant

Attending on behalf of the Claimants:

6. Mr Audley Sheppard, Clifford Chance LLP

7. Mr Gareth Kenny, Clifford Chance LLP

8. Ms Christina Schuetz, Clifford Chance LLP

9. Mr Christopher Gray, Clifford Chance LLP

10. Mr Anirudh Krishnan, Clifford Chance LLP

11. Mr Marco Mahler, Liman Caspian Oil BV and NCL Dutch Investment BV

12. Mr Giovanni Mahler

13. Mr Mirko Wojcik

14, Mr Walter Remmerswaal, a financial and legal adviser to Liman Caspian Oil
BV and NCL Dutch Investment BV

15. Mr Alexey Bukhtiyarov

Attending on behalf of the Respondent:

16. Mr Ali Malek QC

17. Mr Christopher Harris

18. Ms Belinda Paisley, Reed Smith Richards Butler LLP
19. Mr David Warne, Reed Smith Richards Butler LLP

20. Ms Chloe Carswell, Reed Smith Richards Butler LLP
21. Ms Dina Nazargalina, Reed Smith Richards Butler LLP
22. Mr Ruslan Irgaliev

23. Dr Rinat Mukhamedshin

24. Mr Beken Turganaliev, Steiger & Zingermann

25. Professor Peter Maggs

50. Regarding the details of the Hearing, reference is made to the transcript and to Procedural
Order No. 5 recorded in the next paragraph. It should be noted that during the Hearing the
Tribunal issued the following ruling on Ruling on Mr [...]’s and [...]’s witness

statements (Tr 288/3-21):

3 THE CHAIRMAN: Can we restart again.
4 I take it that our next witness will be

35

51.

5 Mr [...]. Before we come to him, there are

6 a couple of things we would like to tell the

7 parties. The first of the two is that the witnesses

8 with so-called disputed evidence, we feel we should
9 tell you how we come out on that before we start on
10 this. We have discussed that matter and our

11 conclusion is that we should admit the evidence of
12 both Mr [...] and Mr [...], however, with

13 the caveat that we will take into account in the

14 evaluation of the evidence the circumstances of

15 their testimony, that they have been in the law firm
16 formally advising the Claimant and so on and with
17 regard to Mr [...], as I told you already at the

18 beginning of the hearing, we can't see him in person
19 but only by videolink so that would be taken into

20 account. But the evidence as such would be admitted
21 to the file.

In addition, the following section from the transcript of the last day (Tr 681/6-13) of the
Hearing should be noted:

CHAIRMAN: My usual and final question in this context is do the parties have any
objection to the procedure that the Tribunal has applied up to this point?

MR SHEPPARD: There is no objection from the Claimants.

MR MALEK: There is no objection from the Respondent.

By letter of 15 December 2009, the Tribunal issued the following Procedural Order
No. 5 (PO-5) regarding the further procedure after the Hearing in London:

Taking into account the discussion and the agreements reached with the Parties at
the Hearing held in London from 8 to 12 December, 2009, the Tribunal issues this
Procedural Order No. 5 as follows:

d. Post-Hearing Briefs

IJ. By 15 January 2010, the Parties shall simultaneously submit Post-
Hearing Briefs, limited to a maximum of 45 pages (double-spaced) in
length, containing the following:

1.1.1. Any comments they have regarding issues raised at the Hearing;

36

1.1.2. Separate sections responding in particular to the questions and issues
mentioned in section 3 below.

1.2. The sections of the Post-Hearing Briefs requested under 1.1.1 and 1.1.2
above shall include short references to all sections in the Party’s earlier
submissions, as well as to exhibits (including legal authorities, witness
statements, and expert statements) and to the sections of the hearing
transcript on which the Party relies regarding the respective issue.

1.3. Except for the agreed bundle of documents handed out during the hearing,
no new documents shall be attached to the Post-Hearing Briefs unless
expressly authorized in advance by the Tribunal.

1.4. The Briefs shall be sent by the Parties to ICSID as usual, but the electronic
versions of these Briefs also at the same time by the Parties directly by e-
mail to each member of the Tribunal and to the Administrative Assistant of
the Tribunal Helene Bubrowski:

Khboeckstiegel @ aol.com
kho @msa.se
jrc1000@ hermes.cam.ac.uk
jrc3000@ aol.com
helene.bubrowski @ gmx.de.

2. Cost Claims

2.1. By 28 January 2010, the Parties shall simultaneously submit Cost Claims,
briefly setting out the costs incurred by each side. Such Cost Claims need
not include supporting documentation for the costs claimed.

2.2. By 4 February 2010, the Parties shall simultaneously submit any
comments on the Cost Claims submitted by the other side.

3. Questions

The Parties are particularly requested to address the following questions and
issues separately in the Post-Hearing Briefs:

3.1. Following the List of Issues submitted by the Parties before the Hearing,
for each of these issues, what are the conclusions from the oral testimony
given at the hearing regarding the disputed facts and legal arguments
relevant for this case?

3.2. Which Party has the burden of proof for which of these disputed facts?

3.3. How should the Tribunal evaluate the testimony of Mr. [...]?

37

3.4. Any additional comments on the concept of ownership and control in
application of Art. 17 ECT and how the facts in this case relate thereto.

3.5. Any additional comments regarding the relation between the concepts of
denial of justice and fair and equitable treatment as relevant for this case.

52. On 15 January 2010, Claimants and Respondent filed their respective Post-Hearing

Briefs in accordance with section 1 of PO-5. Respondent filed its cost claim on 28
January 2010 in accordance with section 2 of PO-5S. Claimants’ cost claim was filed one
day later. On 4 February 2010, the Parties submitted their respective comments on the
cost claim submitted by the other side. This Award constitutes the closure of the

proceeding pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 38.

E. The Principal Relevant Legal Provisions

The following legal provisions from international and Kazakh law are referred to by the Parties

and taken into account by the Tribunal.

5

w

E.I. Energy Charter Treaty

. Article 10(1):

Each Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty,
encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and transparent conditions for
Investors of other Contracting Parties to make Investments in its Area. Such conditions
shall include a commitment to accord at all times to Investments of Investors of other
Contracting Parties fair and equitable treatment. Such Investments shall also enjoy the
most constant protection and security and no Contracting Party shall in any way impair
by unreasonable or discriminatory measures their management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment or disposal. In no case shall such Investments be accorded treatment less
favourable than that required by international law, including treaty obligations. Each
Contracting Party shall observe any obligations it has entered into with an Investor or an
Investment of an Investor of any other Contracting Party.

38

54. Article 13(1):
Investments of Investors of a Contracting Party in the Area of any other Contracting
Party shall not be nationalized, expropriated or subjected to a measure or measures
having effect equivalent to nationalization or expropriation (hereinafter referred to as
“Expropriation” ) except where such Expropriation is:
(a) for a purpose which is in the public interest;
(b) not discriminatory;
(c) carried out under due process of law; and
(d) accompanied by the payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation.

Such compensation shall amount to the fair market value of the Investment expropriated
at the time immediately before the Expropriation or impending Expropriation became
known in such a way as to affect the value of the Investment (hereinafter referred to as
the “Valuation Date” ). Such fair market value shall at the request of the Investor be
expressed in a Freely Convertible Currency on the basis of the market rate of exchange
existing for that currency on the Valuation Date. Compensation shall also include
interest at a commercial rate established on a market basis from the date of
Expropriation until the date of payment.

55. Article 17:
Each Contracting Party reserves the right to deny the advantages of this Part to:
(1) a legal entity if citizens or nationals of a third state own or control such entity and if
that entity has no substantial business activities in the Area of the Contracting Party in
which it is organized; or
(2) an Investment, if the denying Contracting Party establishes that such Investment is an
Investment of an Investor of a third state with or as to which the denying Contracting
Party:
(a) does not maintain a diplomatic relationship; or
(b) adopts or maintains measures that:
(i) prohibit transactions with Investors of that state; or
(ii) would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Part were accorded to
Investors of that state or to their Investments.

56. Article 26(2):
If such disputes cannot be settled according to the provisions of paragraph (1) within a
period of three months from the date on which either party to the dispute requested
amicable settlement, the Investor party to the dispute may choose to submit it for
resolution:
(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Contracting Party party to the dispute;
(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute settlement procedure;
or
(c) in accordance with the following paragraphs of this Article.

57. Article 26(6):

“A tribunal established under paragraph (4) shall decide the issues in dispute in
accordance with this treaty and applicable rules and principles of international law.”

39

EI. Kazakh Law of 10 July 1998 No. 281-1 “On Joint-Stock
Companies” (JSC Law)

58. Rules in relation with major transactions (Art. 76 — 80 JSC Law):
Chapter 7: Completion of Major Transactions:

Article 76. Major transactions

1. For the present Law the following shall be recognised as a major transaction:
1) a transaction and (or) several mutually interlinked transactions in connection
with the acquisition or alienation or the possibility of acquisition or alienation by
a company, directly or indirectly, of a company's property whose overall balance-
sheet value amounts to twenty five percent or more of the balance-sheet value of
the company's assets for a company which is not a national company, or ten
percent or more of the balance-sheet value of assets for a national company, with
the exception of transactions completed in the course of carrying out ordinary
economic activity in conformity with a company's charter;
2) a transaction and (or) several mutually interlinked transactions in connection
with purchase or sales, including by issuing and placing company securities,
amounting to twenty five or more percent of the total number of securities in a
company that is not a national company, or ten percent or more for a national
company.

2. Other transactions, in addition to those enumerated in paragraph I of the present

article, and also certain categories of other transactions of importance for maintaining a

company's financial stability which are carried out under the procedure stipulated for

major transactions, may be categorised as major transactions by the company's charter

or by decision of a general meeting of shareholders.

Article 77: Cost of property which is the object of a major transaction

I. The cost of a company's property being alienated which is the object of a major
transaction may not be lower than the existing market price for similar property at the
location and on the day of the major transaction being concluded.

In the event it is economically expedient to complete a major transaction at other prices,
company officers shall have the right, acting honestly and in the interests of the company,
to enter into a transaction at prices that differ from market prices. In this case a report of
the transaction must be considered at the next general meeting of shareholders.

2. The market price of property being acquired or alienated which is the object of a
major transaction shall be determined by an auditor or independent valuer.

Article 78: Determining the market price of property which is the object of a major
transaction

1. The market price of property is the price at which a seller who had full information on
the value of the property, and on its other characteristics which might affect its price,
would agree to sell it, and a buyer who had full information on the value of the property,

40

and on its other characteristics which might affect its price, would agree to acquire the
said property.

2. In the event that the property whose market price needs to be determined is shares or
other securities negotiable on an organised market, then when the price of the said
property is determined, attention must be paid to purchase prices, or buying and bid
prices on the organised securities market.

3. In the event that the property whose market price needs to be determined is shares in a
company, then to determine the market price of the said property attention may also be
paid to the size of the company's ownership capital, the price which a buyer who has full
information about the- combined value of the company's shares agrees to pay for the
shares and other factors which the person determining the market price of the property
shall consider important.

Article 79: Procedure for taking decisions on completing a major transaction

1. A decision by a company to complete a major transaction shall be approved by a
general meeting of shareholders.

A company's Council of Directors shall be obliged to provide the general meeting of
shareholders with all the information in relation to major transactions that is necessary
for a decision to be taken on good grounds.

2. All the creditors of a company must be notified in writing by the company of the
completion of any major transaction by the company by means of promulgation of the
relevant information in a printed publication determined by the company's charter not
less than ten days before its completion.

3. Shareholders who have not participated in voting or have voted against a decision to
complete a major transaction shall have the right to demand that the company buy the
shares belonging to them under the procedure laid down in the present Law.

Article 80: Consequences of non-compliance with the requirements for completion of a
major transaction

J. Non-compliance with the requirements stipulated by the present Law when a major
transaction is completed shall entail the transaction being invalid, with the exception of
cases when the person who entered into the transaction with a company was acting
honestly and did not know or ought not wittingly to have known of the company's non-
compliance with the said requirements.

2. A legal action for a major transaction to be recognised as invalid may be brought by
any interested persons.

3. A person who has deliberately entered into a major transaction in breach of the
requirements laid down by the present Law and the company charter shall not have the
right to claim that the transaction should be recognised as invalid if such a claim arises
out of mercenary motives or an intention to avoid liability.

59. Rules in relation to transactions with material interest (Art. 81 - 84 JSC Law):
Chapter 8: Material Interest in the Completion of a Transaction by a Company
Article 81: Material interest in the completion of a transaction by a company
1. A company's officers and a shareholder owning jointly with persons affiliated to them
ten or more percent of the voting shares in a company that is not a national company or

41

five or more percent of the voting shares in a national company shall be recognised as
persons with a material interest in the completion of a transaction by the company
(hereinafter - interested persons) if the said person, the person's spouse, parents,
children, brothers, sisters or persons affiliated to the person:
1) are a party to the transaction or take part in it as a representative or
intermediary;
2) are persons affiliated to a juridical person who is a party to the transaction or
who takes part in it as a representative or intermediary, including persons owning
ten or more: percent of the voting shares (equity, shareholding) in such a juridical
person or five or more percent of the voting shares in such a juridical person if
that person is a national company.
2. The provisions of the present article shall not be applied to:
1) exercise by shareholders of a pre-emptive right to acquire shares in conformity
with the present Law;
2) acquisition by a company of shares in a case where all the shareholders
owning shares have equal rights to sell the shares belonging to them in proportion
to the number of shares that belong to them;
3) reorganisation of a company carried out in conformity with the present Law.

Article 82: Information concerning a material interest in the completion of a
transaction by the company
Persons referred to in paragraph 1 of article 81 of the present Law shall be bound to
bring to the notice of the Council of Directors of the company, the company's internal
auditing commission (auditor) and external auditor, information:
1) on their being a party to a transaction or their participation in it as a
representative or intermediary;
2) on juridical persons to whom they are affiliated, including juridical persons in
whom they own independently or jointly with persons affiliated to them ten or
more percent of the voting shares (equity, shareholding) or five or more percent
of the voting shares in a national company, and. on juridical persons in whose
executive bodies they hold positions;
3) on transactions being completed or proposed that are known to them in which
they may be recognised as interested persons.

Article 83: Requirements of the procedure for entering into a transaction in whose
completion there is a material interest

1. A decision by an open company to enter into a transaction in whose completion there-
is a material interest shall be taken by the company's Council of Directors by a majority
of the votes of members who do not have a material interest in its completion.

2. A decision by a national company to enter into a transaction in whose completion
there is a material interest shall be taken by the company's Council of Directors by a
majority of the votes of independent directors who have no material interest in its
completion.

3. For a decision to be taken to enter into a transaction in whose completion there is a
material interest, it must be established by the company's Council of Directors that the
proceeds which the company will receive in return for property to be alienated or

42

services to be provided will be no lower, and the expenditures which the company will
incur in return for property to be acquired or services to be received will be no higher,
than the market price for such property or services determined in conformity with the
present Law.
4. A decision that a company will enter into a transaction in whose completion there is a
material interest shall be taken by a general meeting of shareholders in the following
cases:
1) if the amount of the transaction exceeds five percent of the balance-sheet value
of the company's assets as at the date of the decision being taken by a general
meeting of shareholders;
2) if the transaction and (or) several mutually interlinked transactions represent a
placement of voting shares in the company, or other securities convertible into
voting shares, in a quantity exceeding five percent of the voting shares previously
issued by the company.
5. The conclusion of a transaction in whose completion there is a material interest shall
not require: a decision by a general meeting of shareholders as stipulated in paragraph 4
of the present article in the event that:
1) the transaction is a loan provided to the company by an interested person;
2) the transaction is completed in the course of conduct of ordinary economic
activity between the company and the other party which took place before the time
since which: the person with a material interest has been recognised as such in
conformity with article 81 of the present Law.
6. In the event that it is impossible, as at the date of a general meeting of shareholders
being held, to determine the transactions in whose completion a material interest may in
the future arise, the requirements of paragraph 4 of the present article shall be deemed to
have been fulfilled on condition that a decision by the general meeting of shareholders is
taken: to establish the contractual relationships between the company and the other
person with an indication of the nature of transactions that may be completed and their
maximum amounts.
7. In the event that all the members of a company's Council of Directors are recognised
as interested persons, a transaction may be completed by decision of a general meeting of
shareholders taken by a majority of the votes of shareholders with no material interest in
the transaction.
8. In the event that a transaction in whose completion there is a material interest is at the
same time a major transaction, the provisions of Chapter 7 of the present Law shall be
applied to the procedure for its completion.

Article 84: Consequences of non-compliance with requirements for the procedure for
entering into a transaction in whose completion there is a material interest

A transaction in whose completion there is a material interest which has been entered
into in breach of the requirements stipulated in the present Law governing the procedure
under which it should be entered into shall be recognised as invalid in a judicial
procedure.

A person with a material interest in the completion by a company of a transaction that
has been entered into in breach of the requirements governing the procedure for its
conclusion stipulated in the present Law, shall bear liability towards the company in the

43

amount of the losses caused by that person to the company. In the case of a transaction
completed by several persons, their liability towards the company shall be joint.

E.III. Kazakh Investment Laws of 1994 and 2003

60. Law No. 266-XIII of 27th December 1994 of the Republic of Kazakhstan

6

6

2.

Concerning Foreign Investments:

Article 8: Guarantees from Illegal Acts of State Bodies and Official Persons

Acts of state bodies and their official persons, which are adopted in violation of the
Republic of Kazakhstan legislation, and which deteriorate the legal status of foreign
investors shall have no legal force.

. Law No. 373 of 8th January 2003 of the Republic of Kazakhstan concerning

Investments:

Article 4: The Guarantee of Legal Protection of Investor Activities in the Territory

of the Republic of Kazakhstan

2. An investor shall have the right to compensation for harm caused to him as a result of
adoption by state authorities of acts which are not consistent with the legislative acts of
the Republic of Kazakhstan, as well as resulting from illegal acts (commission of act) of
officials of those authorities in accordance with the civil legislation of the Republic of
Kazakhstan.

E.IV. Relevant ICSID Provisions

Article 42(1):

The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as may be
agreed by the parties. In the absence of such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the law
of the Contracting State party to the dispute (including its rules on the conflict of laws)
and such rules of international law as may be applicable.

Relief Sought by the Parties

F.I. Relief Sought by Claimants

F.II. Relief Sought by Respondent

G. Summary of Facts Regarding Liability

G.I. Summary of Facts presented by Claimants

G.IL Summary of Facts presented by Respondent

H. Summary of Contentions

H.I. Contentions Regarding Jurisdiction

H.I.1. Summary of Contentions by Claimants

45

Led
H.1.2. Summary of Contentions by Respondent

[J

H.II. Contentions Regarding Denial of Advantages (ECT Article 17)

H.II.1. Summary of Contentions by Claimants

[J

HI1.2. Summary of Contentions by Respondent

[J

H.III. Contentions Regarding Liability

H.III.1. Summary of Contentions by Claimants
Led
HIII.2. Summary of Contentions by Respondent

[J

J. Considerations and Conclusions of the Tribunal

J.I. Preliminary Considerations

J.L1. Applicable Law

i. Claimants

46

L.]
ii. Respondent

[..]
iii. Tribunal
148. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

cI paras. 150-156
CI __ paras. 95-100
RI para. 40

RII paras. 103-106

150. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal’s
considerations are:

151. The Parties agree that the law applicable to the claim under the ECT is the ECT
itself and international law. Kazakh law comes into play only in so far as it is
relevant in determining whether Respondent acted in breach of an international
obligation. The Parties further agree that the claim under the Licence is governed
primarily by Kazakh law. The Tribunal concludes that there is no relevant dispute
between the Parties with regard to the applicable law.

J.1L2. Final Admissibility of Disputed Evidence admitted by Procedural Order No.3
J.1.2.a) Are the disputed portions of evidence of Mr [...] and Mr [...] admissible?
This matter is No. 26 in the Agreed List of Issues.
i. Claimants

[..]
ii. Respondent

[J

iii. Tribunal

47

155. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

Clifford Chance, letter of 13 May 2009 and 3 June 2009
Reed Smith, letters of 21 May 2009 and 11 June 2009

J.1.2.b) Have Claimants waived any right to challenge the evidence of Mr [...] and the
evidence of Mr [...] save in respect of those items identified at paragraph (c) and (g) of

Respondent’s letter of 21 May 2009 in any event?
This matter is No. 27 in the Agreed List of Issues.
i. Claimants

[..]
ii. Respondent

[..]
iii. Tribunal
159. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

Clifford Chance, letter of 13 May 2009 and 3 June 2009
Reed Smith, letters of 21 May 2009 and 11 June 2009

J.1.3. Burden of Proof
This matter is question 3.2 of PO-S.

48

i. Claimants

[J

ii. Respondent

[J

iii. Tribunal

163.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

164.

cP paras. 172-173
RP paras. 27, 114

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal notes that
the Parties agree on the general principle that the burden of proof generally lies
with Claimants to establish the facts on which the claim is based. However, the
Tribunal considers that the burden of proof can shift to Respondent with regard to
any exception on which Respondent relies in its defence. The denial of
advantages according to Article 17(1) of the ECT is such a situation in which the
burden shifts to Respondent.

J.L.4, Evaluation of Mr [...]’s Testimony given at the Hearing

This matter is question 3.3 of PO-S.

i. Claimants

[J

ii. Respondent

[J

iii. Tribunal

167.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

49

Parties’ Submissions:

168.

cP paras. 174-177
RP paras. 16-17

The Tribunal regrets that Mr [...] was unable, on short notice, to travel to London
to give testimony; it is unable, however, in the circumstances, to draw any
categorical conclusion from that fact, for which several different reasons might
account. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal
decides to consider the matter further when and insofar as the evaluation of Mr

[...]’s evidence becomes relevant to questions of Respondent's liability.

J.LS. Relevance of Decisions of other Tribunals

169.

170.

171.

In the legal arguments made in their written and oral submissions, the Parties
relied on numerous decisions of other courts and tribunals. Accordingly, it is
appropriate for the Tribunal to make certain general preliminary observations in
this regard.

First of all, the Tribunal considers it should make it clear from the outset that it
regards its task in these proceedings as the very specific one of applying the
relevant provisions of the ECT as far as that is necessary in order to decide on the
relief sought by the Parties. In order to do so, the Tribunal must, as required by
the “General rule of interpretation” of Article 31 of the VCLT, interpret the
ECT’s provisions in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be
given to them in their context and in light of the ECT’s object and purpose. The
“context” referred to in the first paragraph of Article 31 is given a specific
definition in the second paragraph of Article 31 and comprises three elements: (i)
the ECT’s text, including its preamble; (ii) any agreement between the Parties to
the ECT in connection with its conclusion; and (iii) any instrument which was
made by one of the Parties in connection with the conclusion of the ECT and
accepted by the other Parties to the ECT. The “ordinary meaning” as defined
above applies unless a special meaning is to be given to a term if it is established
that the parties so intended, as it is stated in the fourth paragraph of Article 31.

As provided in the “Supplementary means of interpretation” of Article 32 of the
VCLT, the Tribunal may have recourse to supplementary means of interpretation
(i) in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of Article 31 of
the VCLT, or (ii) when the interpretation according to Article 31 of the VCLT

50

172.

173.

174.

either leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure, or leads to a result which is
manifestly absurd or unreasonable. Those supplementary means of interpretation
include the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion.
Thus, recourse to the supplementary means of interpretation of Article 32 may
only be had if the situations mentioned at (i) and (ii) above occur.

While Article 38.1.d. of the Statute of the International Court of Justice expressly
mandates the Court to also take into account “judicial decisions”, there is no such
express rule either in the ECT, the ICSID Convention or other applicable part of
international law as to whether, and if so to what extent, arbitral awards are of
relevance to the Tribunal’s task. It is in any event clear that the decisions of other
tribunals are not binding on this Tribunal. The many references by the Parties to
certain arbitral decisions in their pleadings do not contradict this conclusion.

However, this does not preclude the Tribunal from considering arbitral decisions
and the arguments of the Parties based upon them, to the extent that it may find
that they shed any useful light on the issues that arise for decision in this case.

Such an examination is conducted by the Tribunal later in this Award, after the
Tribunal has considered the Parties’ contentions and arguments regarding the
various issues argued and relevant for the interpretation of the applicable ECT
provisions, while taking into account the above-mentioned specificity of the ECT
to be applied in the present case. This latter aspect gives particular relevance to
decisions of other tribunals also interpreting the ECT rather than other investment
protection treaties.

J... Jurisdiction of the Tribunal

J.IL.1. Was Claimants’ investment lawful as a matter of Kazakh and/or international

law?

This matter is No. 1(a) in the Agreed List of Issues.

 

Claimants

Respondent

Tribunal

180.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

cil paras. 169-196
cs paras. 11.2-11.7
cP paras. 13-15
RI paras. 332-336
RIT paras. 33-38
RS paras. 37-49
RP paras. 41-44

Expert Reports:

[...], paras. 20-29; 84-85
[...], paras. 6.1.-6.3

Hearing:

181.

182.

Testimony [...], Tr 264/5-10
Testimony [...], Tr 426/25-427/14
Testimony [...], Tr 506/16-507/3

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that there is a distinction to be drawn between a transaction which is void or
invalid, and a transaction which is merely voidable. Whereas a void or invalid
transaction has no legal effect from the very beginning, a voidable transaction
continues to have legal effect until the moment when it is declared invalid by a
Court. However, such a declaration of invalidity, after it is issued, generally has
retroactive effect which means that the transaction will then be invalid from the
moment of its conclusion.

The Tribunal will not deal here with the question whether the transfer of the
Licence was a major transaction or a transaction with interest in terms of the JSC
Law (Art. 76-80 and Art. 81-84). However, it notes that if the transaction was in
breach of the Kazakh law provisions, it follows from Art. 80(2) and Art. 84 of the
JSC Law that the transaction is not automatically invalid. Rather, a legal action for
the transaction to be recognised as invalid has to be brought by an interested
person. Therefore, despite the inconsistent use of the word “invalid” in Art. 80(1),
the Tribunal concludes that a transaction in breach of the JSC Law is only
voidable. The Tribunal notes that the legal expert presented by Respondent,
Professor [...], agreed with this position in his oral testimony (Tr 506/16-20). The

52

183.

Tribunal considers that the term “unlawfulness” does not have any specific legal
significance in this context.

The Tribunal will deal with Respondent’s allegation of fraud infra at J.I1.3.

JIL.2. In case of unlawfulness of the investment, does it fall outside the scope of

Respondent’s consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre?

This matter is No. 1(b) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

[J

ii. Respondent

[J

iii. Tribunal

186.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

187.

CII paras. 169-196
cP paras. 16-17
RI paras. 325-336
RII __ paras. 33-38
RP para. 44

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that the scope of Respondent’s consent to jurisdiction must be understood to
extend also to those investments in respect of which the underlying transaction
was made in breach of Kazakh law and was therefore voidable. Since the transfer
of the Licence was not invalid, but only voidable, Claimants’ investment does not
fall outside the scope of Respondent’s consent to jurisdiction. But even in the case
of an investment finally found to be in breach of Kazakh law from the very
beginning it could be argued that an investment had still been made and
consequently that a dispute over such an investment regarding an alleged breach
of the ECT would fall within the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. In such a case, the
question of legality might well be relevant to the merits, but it would not have
preclusive effect at the level of jurisdiction.

J.1.3. Should Claimants’ investment be not protected as a matter of public policy?

This matter is No. 1(c) in the Agreed List of Issues.

L.

L.

i. Claimants

J

ii. Respondent

J

iii. Tribunal

192. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

cil paras. 169-196
cP paras. 18-19
RI paras. 355-371
RIT paras. 33-38
RP para. 44

Exhibits:

Ex RA-28, Inceysa v. El Salvador, paras. 229-252
Ex RA-31, World Duty Free v. Kenya, paras. 136-141
Ex RA-32, ICC case No. 1110

193. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal points out
that, in contrast with its conclusion (supra at J.1/.1.) that a transaction made in
breach of the JSC Law was only voidable, there are situations in which a
transaction is to be considered as automatically invalid from the very beginning. A
violation of international public policy is such a case in which an investment is
invalid without a legal action for invalidation and without a court declaration of
invalidity having to be issued.

194. The Tribunal agrees with the authorities cited by the Parties that it does not have
jurisdiction over investments made in violation of international public policy.
However, the burden of proving fraud and bribery regarding the making of the
original investment lies with Respondent. The Tribunal considers that Respondent

54

has not provided sufficient proof for its allegations that the Licence was acquired
by fraudulent misrepresentation to the Ministry of Energy and/or by fraud on the
minority shareholders. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent was not
able to satisfy its burden of proof of facts showing a breach of international public
policy.

J.1.4. Have Claimants established a prima facie claim (i) with respect to the action of

the Kazakh courts; (ii) with respect to the actions of the Ministry of Energy; and (iii)
for breach of ECT Article 13 —- Expropriation?

L.

L.

This matter is No. 1(d) (i) (ii) and (iii) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i.
J
ii.

J

iii.

Claimants

Respondent

Tribunal

200.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

201.

CII para. 167

cs paras. 11.8.-11.9.
CP. para. 20

RI paras. 371-374
RII paras. 97-98

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that the question whether Claimants have established a prima facie claim is a
moot issue. As set out in section B.1. of PO-1, the Parties have agreed that the
Tribunal should consider jurisdictional issues with the merits. The Tribunal is now
at the stage where it is to rule on questions of liability. Before its consideration of
liability, therefore, it does not need to consider whether a prima facie claim has
been established.

J.ILS. Is Respondent a proper party?

This matter is No. 1(e) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

ii. Respondent

[J

iii. Tribunal

204.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

205.

206.

CRfA paras. 5.6.-5.8
cI paras. 211-216
CII para. 197-200

cs paras. 11.10-11.11
CP. para. 21

RI para. 375

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that in accordance with Article 26(3) of the ECT, the claim has to be directed
against a party to the ECT, and therefore against the Republic of Kazakhstan in
the case at hand. The question whether the conduct of other legal entities is
attributable to Respondent is an issue of liability.

The Tribunal notes that Claimants further allege a violation of Section 29.5 of the
Licence. In the Request for Arbitration, Claimants maintain that Section 27 of the
Licence provides for disputes and disagreements to be submitted to ICSID.
However, the claim for breach of the Licence must also be directed against the
Republic of Kazakhstan since the Ministry of Energy which is a party to the
Licence is, on any view, part of the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan.

J.11.6. Has NCL complied with the negotiation period set forth in ECT Article 26 and,

if not, does this affect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction?

This matter is No. 1(f) in the Agreed List of Issues.

L.

i.

ii.
J

iii.

Claimants

Respondent

Tribunal

209. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

CII paras. 201-206
cs para. 11.2

CP. para. 22-23
RI paras. 376-378

Exhibits:

Ex C-55, CCB-125

Hearing:

210.

Testimony [...], Tr 282/17-284/5

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal notes that
LCO notified its claim to the Ministry of Energy by letter of 15 July 2005 which
was confirmed by the legal department of the Ministry by letter of 26 August
2005. Therefore, as of August 2005, the Ministry had knowledge of the dispute
concerning the invalidation of the transfer of the Licence to LCO. The Tribunal
notes that Respondent only gained knowledge of NCL’s claim by a letter from
counsel for Claimants of 18 June 2007. However, NCL’s claim involves exactly
the same legal and factual issues as LCO’s claim. The Tribunal considers that the
purpose of Article 26 of the ECT is to afford Respondent the possibility to
examine the issues involved in the case, possibly initiate negotiations, and to
prepare its defence. Respondent was in a position to do this as of August 2005,
and there is no indication that it was prejudiced by the late introduction of NCL

57

into the case. The Tribunal concludes that in the circumstances a different
treatment of this question would be too formalistic and that, therefore, the entire
claim is admissible notwithstanding Article 26 of the ECT.

J.UL.7. Jurisdiction under the arbitration clause of the Licence Agreement

L.

ii.
J

iii.

Clause 27 of the Licence reads as follows:

“27.1. The parties take all measures to settle disputes and disagreements upon the
Contract conducting negotiations.
27.2. If during 60 days from the moment of moot question arise, it can not be resolve by
negotiations, the Parties can appeal to:
- one of the following arbitration bodies:
- international centre on regulation of investment disputes (further-centre)
created with respect to convention on regulation of investment disputes (IKSID), if
the State is a participant of this convention...” [sic]

Claimants

Respondent

Tribunal
213. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

 

Submi

 

CRfA paras. 5.6.-5.8
cI paras. 142-143
RII para. 159

214. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that the wording of Clause 27 of the Licence is sufficiently clear to constitute
consent of both Parties to ICSID jurisdiction to resolve any disputes and
disagreements arising under the Licence. Therefore, the Tribunal has jurisdiction
over the claims for a breach of the Licence in addition to the claims based on the

58

ECT. It goes without saying that this conclusion is without prejudice to the
question to be considered later in this Award whether LCO was a party to the
Licence agreement in spite of the court decisions regarding the transfer of the
Licence.

215. After having considered the jurisdictional issues stricto sensu, the Tribunal will
now have to examine whether Respondent can invoke the right to deny the
advantages of the ECT to Claimants according to ECT Article 17.

J.I1. Denial of Advantages (ECT Article 17(1))

Article 17 of the ECT reads as follows:

Each Contracting Party reserves the right to deny the advantages of this Part to:
(1) a legal entity if citizens or nationals of a third state own or control such entity and if that
entity has no substantial business activities in the Area of the Contracting Party in which it is
organized; or
(2) an Investment, if the denying Contracting Party establishes that such Investment is an
Investment of an Investor of a third state with or as to which the denying Contracting Party:
(a) does not maintain a diplomatic relationship; or
(b) adopts or maintains measures that:
(i) prohibit transactions with Investors of that state; or
(ii) would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Part were accorded to
Investors of that state or to their Investments.

J.1IL.1., Can the right to deny advantages only be exercised prospectively?
This matter is No. 3 in the Parties Agreed List of Issues.
i. Claimants

[...]

ii. Respondent
[...]

iii. Tribunal

223. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

CII paras. 230-241
cs paras. 12.5-12-6
cP paras. 26-27
RII paras. 63-87

RS paras. 17-25
RP paras. 69-71

Exhibits:

Ex C-55; CCB-125
Ex C-56; CCB-129
Ex RA-30, Plama v. Bulgaria, Award on Jurisdiction

Hearing:

224.

225.

Testimony [...], Tr 282/22-284/19; Tr 286/3-287/5
Claimants’ Oral Closing Submissions, Tr 621/21-622/5

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal notes that
there is no disagreement between the Parties on the point that Article 17 contains
a notification requirement to the effect that a state must expressly invoke Article
17(1) of the ECT to rely on the rights under that provision. The Tribunal agrees
that this is the only interpretation that can be drawn from the wording that the host
state “reserves the right to deny the advantages of this Part”. To reserve a right, it
has to be exercised in an explicit way.

With regard to the question of whether the right under Article 17(1) of the ECT
can only be exercised prospectively, the Tribunal considers that the above
mentioned notification requirement — on which the Parties agree — can only lead to
the conclusion that the notification has prospective but no retroactive effect.
Accepting the option of a retroactive notification would not be compatible with
the object and purpose of the ECT, which the Tribunal has to take into account
according to Article 31(1) of the VCLT, and which the ECT, in its Article 2,
expressly identifies as “to promote long-term co-operation in the energy field”.
Such long-term co-operation requires, and it also follows from the principle of
legal certainty, that an investor must be able to rely on the advantages under the
ECT, as long as the host state has not explicitly invoked the right to deny such
advantages. Therefore, the Tribunal finds that Article 17(1) of the ECT does not
have retroactive effect.

60

226.

227.

In view of the above conclusions, the Tribunal does not have to deal with the
question of whether the intention to rely on the right under Article 17(1) of the
ECT must be notified to the investor prior to the making of the investment. To
decide the case at hand, it is sufficient to note that when Respondent invoked
Article 17(1) of the ECT for the first time in the Counter-Memorial on 4 August
2008, it did so belatedly since it was more than one year after Claimants had filed
their Request for Arbitration.

The Tribunal also does not have to decide whether in case of a change in the
relevant factual circumstances or appearance of new facts, the host state may
exceptionally be permitted to retroactively invoke the right under Article 17(1) of
the ECT at the time when it becomes aware of the new situation. In that context,
the Tribunal finds that, in any event, the state relying on Article 17 would have the
burden of proof with regard to the relevant facts, its belated knowledge, and that
such knowledge would have caused it to invoke Article 17. Therefore, in the
present case, Respondent had to prove that the Ministry of Energy neither had
actual knowledge nor was in a position to know of the involvement of [Z] in the
transaction and that such knowledge would have caused it to invoke Article 17.
From the Ministry’s letter of 26 August 2005 (ExC-55 and CBB-125) and the
testimony of Mr [...] (Tr 282/22-284/19) the Tribunal concludes that Respondent
already had the relevant knowledge at that time. Furthermore, Respondent had a
more detailed knowledge of [Z]’s role at the latest when on 18 June 2007 the
Request for Arbitration was filed, which exposed the details of the transaction
(CRA paras. 6.2.-6.8.). Respondent has not given any explanation why more than
one further year passed before it invoked Article 17(1) of the ECT for the first
time.

J1.2. Is the first limb of Article 17(1) in this case satisfied?

This matter is No. 2 in the Agreed List of Issues.

L.

L.

i.
J
ii.

J

iii.

Claimants

Respondent

Tribunal

248.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

61

Parties’ Submissions:

CII paras. 213-229

cs paras. 12.1-12.3

CP. paras. 24-25 and paras 178-196
RI para. 352

RII paras. 44-62

RS paras. 5-16

RP paras. 45-68

Exhibits:

Ex C-71, CCB-185

Ex C-72, CCB-186

Ex C-81, CCB-195

Ex C-110, CCB-155

Ex C-112, CCB-160
Pleadings II Appendix 11, 492

Witness Statements:

[...], paras. 7-15
[...], paras. 7-13
[...], paras. 13-14, 27
[...], paras. 9-21

Hearing:

249.

Testimony [...], Tr 126/4-202/16
Testimony [...], Tr 203/25-213/7
Testimony [...], Tr 396/3-13; 398/12-407/23

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that the question whether Mr [...] owned or controlled Claimants is a moot issue
because, as concluded above, the right to deny advantages can only be exercised
prospectively. Respondent invoked Article 17(1) of the ECT for the first time in
the Counter-Memorial of 4 August 2008. Therefore, the provision is not
applicable to Claimants’ claim notified to Respondent on 15 July 2005 and filed
on 18 June 2007.

62

J.I1.3. Does the fact that Respondent has purported to exercise its right to deny
advantages after the commencement of the ICSID arbitration affect its ability to do so?

This matter is No. 4 in the Agreed List of Issues.
i. Claimants

[..]
ii. Respondent

[J

iii. Tribunal

 

253. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

CII paras. 242-248
cs para. 12.7

CP. para. 28

RII paras. 88-91
RS paras. 26-30

254. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that the question whether ECT Article 17(1) right can be exercised after consent to
arbitration is a moot question because, as seen above, ECT Article 17(1) cannot be
invoked retroactively by Respondent with reference to the dispute at hand.

J.11.4. Does ECT Article 17(1) deprive the Tribunal of jurisdiction to hear the affected
claims or does it make the claims inadmissible?

This matter is No. 5 in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

 

ii. Respondent

63

iii. Tribunal

257. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

CII para. 166

CP. para. 29

RI paras. 339-350, 353-354
RII paras. 92-96

Exhibits:
Ex RA-30, Plama v. Bulgaria, Decision on Jurisdiction

258. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that the question of whether ECT Article 17(1) is a matter of jurisdiction or
of admissibility is irrelevant for the case at hand because, as seen above, this
provision cannot be invoked by Respondent in the circumstances of the present

case.

259. After having concluded that Respondent cannot invoke ECT Article 17(1) to deny
advantages, the Tribunal will now have to examine the issues regarding liability.

J.IV. Issues Regarding Liability

J.IV.1. Applicable Standard for Determining Breaches of the ECT

With regard to this matter, the Parties address the following points in their Agreed List of Issues:

J.IV.1.a) What is the relationship between the obligations of treatment provided for in ECT

Article 10(1) and the minimum standard of treatment under international law?
This matter is No. 19 (a) in the Agreed List of Issues.
i. Claimants

[..]
ii. Respondent

64

[..]
iii. Tribunal
262. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file :

Parties’ Submissions:

Cll __ paras. 108-117, 132

cs para. 8.5

cP para. 160

RI paras. 235-236, 240-243, 251
RII paras. 109-113, 114-122

263. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that the purpose of ECT Article 10(1), second sentence, is to provide a protection
which goes beyond the minimum standard of treatment under international law.
The ECT was intended to go further than simply reiterating the protection offered
by the latter. In this respect, ECT Article 10(1), second sentence, differs from
NAFTA Article 1105 (in its interpretation given by the Free Trade Commission
on 31 July 2001) which contains an express reference to international law.
Therefore, when assessing Respondent’s actions, a specific standard of fairness
and equitableness above the minimum standard must be identified and applied for
the application of the ECT.

J.IV.1.b) How does the international law delict of denial of justice relate to the fair and
equitable treatment standard under ECT Article 10(1)?
This matter is No. 19(b) in the Agreed List of Issues.
i. Claimants
[..]
ii. Respondent
[..]
iii. Tribunal
267. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

65

Parties’ Submissions:

268.

CII _- paras. 118-121
cP paras. 156-159
RI paras. 246, 251
RII paras. 134-141

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that the international delict of denial of justice is an example of the standard of
fair and equitable treatment under Article 10(1), second sentence, of the ECT. In
other words, fair treatment implies that there is no denial of justice. The Tribunal
does see merit in Claimants’ argument that the two standards are not synonymous
with regard to acts of courts because this would introduce a distinction between
acts of courts and acts of other State entities for which no support is provided by
the ECT. But, on the other hand, one will have to take into account the different
functions held by administrative organs and judicial organs of a state and the
resulting differences in their discretion when applying the law and in the appeals
available against their decisions. The Tribunal will take that into account in later
sections of this Award. However, to decide the case at hand, the Tribunal does
not have to deal with the relationship between fair and equitable treatment and
denial of justice in general or, if that were at all possible, to make a clear-cut
ruling in the abstract on this matter in this preliminary consideration of the
applicable standard.

J.IV.1.c) What is the scope of the international law delict of denial of justice?

L.

L.

This matter is No. 19(c) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i.
J
ii.

J

iii.

Claimants

Respondent

Tribunal

272.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

CII paras. 122-126
cs para. 8.9-8.11

66

cP paras. 164-171
RI paras. 256-264
RII __ paras. 124-133
RP para. 30

Exhibits:

Ex RA-19, Mondev v. USA

EX RA-12, ELSI

Ex CA-23, Azinian v. USA

Ex CA-5, AMCO IIT

Ex CA-10, Loewen v. USA

Ex RA-9, Azinian v. USA

Ex RA-6; RA-47; Ex CA-9; CA-61 (Jan Paulsson: Denial of Justice)

Hearing:

273.

274.

275.

Oral Closing Submissions Tr 574/21-575/6

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal notes that
the Parties share the same reasoning concerning the basic ideas of the scope of
denial of justice as a principle of international law. However, Respondent focuses
on procedure while Claimants also include under this rubric, in extreme cases, the
substance of decisions of national courts.

The Tribunal emphasizes that an international arbitration tribunal is not an
appellate body and its function is not to correct errors of domestic procedural or
substantive law which may have been committed by the national courts. The
Tribunal stresses that the threshold of the international delict of denial of justice is
high and goes far beyond the mere misapplication of domestic law.

To determine the scope of denial of justice, the Tribunal takes into account the
several authorities which have been referred to by the Parties. In Mondev v.
United States of America (Ex RA-19), para. 127, the NAFTA tribunal, relying on
the ELSI case, held:

“The test is not whether a particular result is surprising, but whether the shock or
surprise occasioned to an impartial tribunal leads, on reflection, to justified
concerns as to the judicial propriety of the outcome, bearing in mind on the one
hand that international tribunals are not courts of appeal, and on the other hand
that Chapter 11 of NAFTA (like other treaties for the protection of investments) is
intended to provide a real measure of protection. In the end the question is
whether, at an international level and having regard to generally accepted
standards of the administration of justice, a tribunal can conclude in the light of all
the available facts that the impugned decision was clearly improper and

67

discreditable, with the result that the investment has been subjected to unfair and
inequitable treatment.”

276. In his work “Denial of Justice” (introduced to the proceedings by both Parties, cf.

Ex RA-6; RA-47; Ex CA-9; CA-61), Jan Paulsson defines the scope of denial of
justice, at p. 98, as follows:
“Denial of justice is always procedural. There may be extreme cases where the
proof of the failed process is that the substance of a decision is so egregiously
wrong that no honest or competent court could possibly have given it. Such cases
would sanction the state’s failure to provide a decent system of justice. They do
not constitute an international appellate review of national law.”

277. The Tribunal further takes into consideration the definition of denial of justice in

Article 9 of the Harvard Law School, Draft Convention on the Law of the
Responsibility of States for Damages Done in Their Territory to the Person or
Property of Foreigners (set out in Paulsson, Denial of Justice, at p. 96 and
introduced by Claimants in C II para. 125, footnote 119):
“A state is responsible if an injury to an alien results from a denial of justice.
Denial of justice exists when there is a denial, unwarranted delay or obstruction of
access to courts, gross deficiency in the administration of judicial or remedial
process, failure to provide those guarantees which are generally considered
indispensable in the proper administration of justice, or a manifestly unjust
judgment. An error of a national court which does not produce manifest injustice
is not a denial of justice.”

278. The Tribunal finds further support for the above position regarding the
interpretation of denial of justice in the Loewen case, Final Award (Ex CA-10)
para. 132: “Manifest injustice in the sense of a lack of due process leading to an
outcome which offends a sense of judicial propriety is enough ....” This
qualification seems correct even if one does not agree with all other conclusions
of that award.

279. Taking into account the above authorities, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent
can only be held liable for denial of justice if Claimants are able to prove that the
court system fundamentally failed. Such failure is mainly to be held established in
cases of major procedural errors such as lack of due process. The substantive
outcome of a case can be relevant as an indication of lack of due process and thus
can be considered as an element to prove denial of justice.

J.IV.1.d) How is the conduct of national courts to be measured when there are allegations

of breaches of the protections for investors set out in ECT Article 10(1)?
This matter is No. 19(d) in the Agreed List of Issues.
i. Claimants

68

 

Respondent

Tribunal

284.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

cil paras. 130-138

RI paras. 252, 292, 294
RII paras. 123-126; 134-141
RP paras. 35, 38

Exhibits :

285.

Ex CA-15, Waste Management v. Mexico

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal reiterates
that there is no need to take any general position on the relationship between the
standard of fair and equitable treatment and denial of justice. To decide the case at
hand, it is sufficient to state that a judicial act breaches both or either of those
standards only if the act attains the high threshold which is described in Waste
Management, Final Award (Ex CA-15) at para. 98:

“Taken together, the S.D. Myers, Mondev, ADF and Loewen cases suggest that the
minimum standard of treatment of fair and equitable treatment is infringed by conduct
attributable to the State and harmful to the claimant if the conduct is arbitrary, grossly
unfair, unjust or idiosyncratic, is discriminatory and exposes the claimant to sectional
or racial prejudice, or involves a lack of due process leading to an outcome which
offends judicial propriety—as might be the case with a manifest failure of natural
justice in judicial proceedings or a complete lack of transparency and candour in an
administrative process.”

The Tribunal views that a misapplication of domestic procedural or substantive
law provision might under certain circumstances be an indication of lack of due
process. However, the Tribunal emphasizes, and the Parties agree, that by no
means would this be sufficient to establish a breach of Article 10(1) ECT
committed by a judicial act.

69

J.IV.1.e) What is the scope of the standard of most constant protection and security in ECT
Article 10(1)?

L.

L.

This matter is No. 19(e) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i.
J
ii.

J

iii.

Claimants

Respondent

Tribunal

288.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

CIl paras. 127-129
cs para. 8.15

RI paras. 265-272
RII __ paras. 142-147

Exhibits:

289.

Ex CA-22, CME v. Czech Republic

Ex CA-13, Azurix v. Argentine Republic
Ex CA-63, Occidental v. Ecuador

Ex CA-24, Siemens v. Argentina

Ex CA-20, Saluka

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal emphasizes
again at this point that it is not an appellate body on national law, neither is it a
forum to resolve contractual disputes. With regard to the standard of most
constant protection and security, the Tribunal holds that this provision, which
must have a meaning beyond, and distinct from, the standard of fair and equitable
treatment, provides a standard which does not extend to any contractual rights but
whose purpose is rather to protect the integrity of an investment against
interference by the use of force and particularly physical damage. The actions
disputed in the present case do not involve any such interference and, therefore,
are not covered by this additional standard.

70

J.IV.1.f) Was there an expropriation or measure or measures having effect equivalent to

expropriation pursuant to ECT Article 13?

This matter is No. 20 in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

[J

ii. Respondent

[J

iii. Tribunal

292.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

CIl paras. 127-129
cs para. 8.15

RI paras. 265-272
RII __ paras. 142-147

Exhibits:

293.

Ex CA-22, CME v. Czech Republic

Ex CA-13, Azurix v. Argentine Republic
Ex CA-63, Occidental v. Ecuador

Ex CA-24, Siemens v. Argentina

Ex CA-20, Saluka

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal notes that
the Parties agree in principle on the standard and understanding of Article 13 of
the ECT. A measure constitutes an expropriation if it constitutes a substantial
deprivation of property forming all or a material part of the investment, provided
that the measure is attributable to Respondent. If it is an expropriation, it is lawful
if the requirements set forth in ECT Article 13 are complied with. Whether that
agreed standard has been met will have to be considered in later sections of this
Award after having examined the measures disputed in this case.

71

J.IV.2. Has Respondent breached ECT Article 10(1) second sentence (fair and

equitable treatment)?

J.IV.2.a) Was the transfer of the Licence in breach of the JSC Law Requirements?

With regard to this matter, the Parties address the following points in their Agreed List of issues

which, in view of their interrelation, the Tribunal will consider together:

J.IV.2.a)aa) Was the transfer of the Licence a major transaction?

   

This matter is No. 6(a) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

 

[..]
ii. Respondent
(-]
JIV.2.a)bb) Were the Kazakh law de y requirements for major transactions c lied
with?

This matter is No. 6(b) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

ii. Respondent

 

ion voidable at the suit of an interested party?
Could the breaches subsequently be ratified?

This matter is No. 6(c) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants
(-]

ii. Respondent

72

 

This matter is No. 6(d) in the Parties Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

ii. Respondent

JIV.2.a)ee) If it could, did LCO in fact argue this point before the Kazakh courts? Was the
burden on LCO to raise Article 80(1) of the JSC Law, or was the burden on the Kazakh courts to

raise it?
This matter is No. 6(e) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

 

This matter is No. 6(f) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

[..]
ii. Respondent
[..]
JIV.2.a)gg) Were the Kazakh law di y requirements for transactions with interest

 

complied with?
This matter is No. 6(g) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

 

ii. Respondent

73

[J

JV.2.a)hh) If not, did that render the transaction voidable at the suit of an interested party?

Could the breaches subsequently be ratified?

This matter is No. 6(h) in the Agreed List of Issues.

 

i. Claimants

 

the transfer of the Licence and if so, what was the effect on the validity of the transfer?

 

This matter is No. 6(i) in the Agreed List of Issues.
i. Claimants

[..]
ii. Respondent

[..]
JIV.2.a)kk) Tribunal
323. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

CII paras. 53-54, 70-74

CP. paras. 30-37

Letter by Clifford Chance of 9 October 2009
RI paras. 6, 44-54

RII __ paras. 170-200

RS paras. 39-42

RP paras. 98-106

Exhibits:
Ex C-90, CCB-58, p. 4, 8
Ex C-44; CORE-33
Ex NE-4 ; CORE-28 p. 435
Ex R-12, CCB-93, p. 6

74

Ex R-11, CCB-82, p. 9

Ex R-16; CORE-7

Ex C-17; CORE-6

Ex C-18A/R-20, CORE-18

Expert Reports:

...], paras. 19-63
...], paras. 2.7-2.13, 3.1.-3.3
...], paras. 45-53
...], paras. 17-31

Hearing:

324.

325.

326.

Claimants’ Oral Opening Submission, Tr 43/4-14; Tr 50/10-15; Tr 52/1-6
Claimants’ Oral Closing Submissions, Tr 609/12-16

Testimony [...], Tr 505/23-508/19

Testimony [...], Tr 469/12-472/12

Testimony [...], Tr 484/15-489/6

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties regarding the various
issues addressed above, the Tribunal’s major considerations are found below:

With regard to the applicable standard for breach of ECT Article 10(1), second
sentence, the Tribunal recalls again that it must not function as an appeal body to
correct errors, if any, of domestic procedural or substantive law committed by the
host states’ national courts. Therefore, the Tribunal sees no need to deal with the
question of whether the transaction of the Licence from [X] to LCO was a major
transaction or a transaction with interest in terms of the JSC Law and whether the
requirements of this law were complied with.

The Tribunal notes that even if Claimants’ investment does not comply with the
requirements set out in the JSC Law and even if LCO could not avail itself of the
good faith exception under Article 80(1) of the JSC Law, it is clear from the
Parties’ contentions and the testimony of the legal expert presented by Respondent
that the transactions were then only voidable (Claimants’ Opening Submissions,
Tr 43/15-23; Testimony Maggs Tr 506/16-20). This means that under Kazakh law,
they are considered valid until they are declared invalid at the request of an
interested person by a decision of a court. However, this conclusion has no legal
significance for the only relevant issue which is whether the Kazakh courts
violated ECT Article 10(1), second sentence, when making their decisions. From
the perspective of international law, a state cannot invoke national law as a
justification for its failure to perform a treaty (cf. Article 27 of the VCLT).
Domestic law is only considered to be relevant from the international perspective
in so far as domestic court decisions are acts attributable to a state and must be
assessed under international law like any other state behavior. Therefore, a court
decision can be incorrect in terms of domestic law but still be irreproachable from

75

the perspective of international law. And vice versa, a court decision which is
lawful under domestic law can still be considered to violate international law.

J.IV.2.b) [Q]’s statement/application:

With regard to this matter, the Parties address the following points in their Agreed List of Issues

which, in view of their interrelation, the Tribunal will consider together:

JIV.2.b)aa) Was this document an application to withdraw a suit, or a of evidence
from [Q]?

This matter is No. 7(a) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

[..]
ii Respondent
[..]

JIV.2.b)bb) If it was i: led to be an application to withdraw a suit, (i) did it comply with the

 

difference to the claims asserted by [M] and the outcome of the Kazakh Court Proceedings?

This matter is No. 7(b) in the Agreed List of Issues.
i. Claimants

[..]
ii. Respondent

[..]
JIV.2.b)cc) Was it filed before the Almaty City Court, or only later before the Civil College?

This matter is No. 7(c) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

ii. Respondent

76

 

principles of Kazakh law?
This matter is No. 7(d) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants
[..]
ii. Respondent

[..]
JIV.2.b)ee) Tribunal

345. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

cI paras.
cil paras.
cs paras.
cP paras.
RI paras.
RI paras.
RS paras.
RP paras.
Exhibits:

89-100
23-46
6.3-6.10
38-51, 54
110-129
201-246
52-58
73-80

Ex C-43, CORE-31
Ex R-13, CORE-27
Ex C-46; CCB-107
Ex C-48; CCB-110
Ex C-50; CCB-145
Ex C-51; CCB-149
Ex C-44; CORE-33

Expert Reports:

77

346.

347.

348.

349.

Testimony [...], Tr 529/1-546/11
Testimony [...], Tr 421/16-21, Tr 430/24-438/17

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties regarding the various
issues addressed above, the Tribunal acknowledges that the Parties agree, and the
testimony of the legal experts confirms, that Kazakh law does not require a party
to comply with a specific procedure to withdraw a claim as long as the withdrawal
is in writing. The Tribunal further takes into account that [Q] had expressed in her
statement that she did not have any claims against LCO. Therefore, if the Tribunal
were an appeal body, it might come to a different conclusion than the Kazakh
court decisions in this respect.

However, the Tribunal’s mandate is restricted to assessing breaches of the ECT.
Therefore, it does not extend to the question whether the Kazakh courts applied
the Kazakh provisions on withdrawal of claims correctly or in a persuasive
manner. The Tribunal’s task is restricted to examining whether the Kazakh court
decisions breach Respondent’s obligations under the ECT. In examining this
question, the Tribunal takes into account that the wording of [Q]’s statement is not
entirely unambiguous, because she did not explicitly state that she withdrew her
claims. The Tribunal also takes into account the fact that, in the same court
proceedings, [Q] had earlier affirmed the opposite with regard to shareholder
approval (Ex R-13, CORE-27). In other words, her sworn testimony in the
proceeding was self-contradictory, and this could have provided a reason for not
simply accepting the second statement without explanation.

The Tribunal notes that the Kazakh courts did take notice of the statement. In the
circumstances, the decision to treat the statement as evidence and the refusal to
base the decision on it did not reach the threshold of judicial conduct which could
be considered arbitrary, grossly unfair, unjust or idiosyncratic or involving lack of
due process. Neither this procedural treatment, nor the substantive outcome,
offended judicial propriety, even if they could be considered surprising.

The Tribunal concludes that the Kazakh court decisions, from the perspective of
international law, are therefore irreproachable and must be accepted.

J.IV.2.c) [M]’s claim for invalidation of the transfer of the Licence to LCO

With regard to this matter, the Parties address the following points in their Agreed List of Issues

which, in view of their interrelation, the Tribunal will consider together:

JIV.2.c)aa) Did the Kazakh courts determine [M]'s claim correctly as a matter of Kazakh law?

This matter is No. 8(a) in the Agreed List of Issues.

78

i. Claimants

Led
ii. Respondent

Led

JIV.2.c)bb) If not, were the decisions of the Kazakh courts a breach of R lent's obli;

under the ECT?
This matter is No. 8(b) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

[..]
ii. Respondent
[..]
JIV.2.c)cc) Tribunal
363. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

cI paras. 101-107
cil paras. 47-58

cs paras. 6.11-6.17
cP paras. 57-95
RI paras. 135-155
RI paras. 247-269
RS paras. 59-62
RP paras. 81-88

Exhibits:

Ex R-19; CCB-42
Ex C-63; CCB-35
Ex CA-55, KL-16
Ex KL-17

Expert Reports:
[...], paras. 2.1-2.17
719

[...], paras. 64-75
[...], paras. 33-44

Hearing:

364.

365.

366.

Testimony, [...], Tr 497/6-498/21; 523/16-526/1
Testimony, [...], Tr 438/19-450/14

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties regarding the several
issues, the Tribunal reiterates that it is not an appellate body which has the
competence to control the proper application of the Kazakh law provision on
standing to bring a claim before national courts. For the determination of whether
the court decisions violate ECT Article 10(1), second sentence, the Tribunal takes
into consideration that [M] was not a shareholder of [X] at the time of the transfer
of the Licence. The Tribunal also acknowledges that [M] realized a profit by first
paying US$ 50,000 to acquire a 94.5% share in [X], to which the Licence was
then retransferred, being worth about US$ 200 million at the time.

However, the Tribunal only has to consider from the perspective of international
law the decision of the Kazakh courts that [M] had standing to bring a claim. Even
if this decision were incorrect as a matter of Kazakh law, the conclusion that the
right to bring suit for invalidation of a transaction is associated with the share and
passes from a seller to a buyer certainly is not a decision which can be
characterized as arbitrary, grossly unfair, unjust, idiosyncratic or involving lack of
due process. The rules governing corporate conduct — here, major transactions or
transactions with interest — may often be underpinned by serious legal
consequences, such as the voidability of the transaction in question. In such cases
the law may well be that the loss lies where it falls. If Claimants had been
properly advised, they would have ensured that the original transfer of shares was
unimpeachable. Instead they chose to run a legal risk, and it was not a breach of
ECT Article 10(1), second sentence, for the Kazakh courts to draw the apparent
consequences.

Therefore, from the perspective of international law, this decision is
irreproachable and must be accepted.

J.IV.2.d) Consideration of the [X] minutes by the Kazakh courts

With regard to this matter, the Parties address the following points in their Agreed List of Issues

which, in view of their interrelation, the Tribunal will consider together:

JIV.2.d)aa) How was evidence of [X] board and shareholder meeting minutes presented in the

case addressed by the Kazakh courts?

80

This matter is No. 9(a) in the Agreed List of Issues.
i. Claimants

[..]
ii. Respondent
[..]
JIV.2.d)bb) Would the minutes submitted by LCO, even if they had been accepted, have altered
the outcome of the trial — do they affect the Court’s determination that the transfer of the Licence
was in breach of the JSC Law?
This matter is No. 9(b) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

[..]
ii. Respondent

[..]
JIV.2.d)cc) Tribunal
376. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

cI paras. 108-118

cil paras. 67-69

cs paras. 6.18-6.22

cP paras. 96-104

RI paras. 156-180

RII paras. 175-177, 270-294
RS paras. 63-71

RP paras. 95-97

Exhibits:

Ex R-15; CORE-5
Ex C-16; CORE-4
Ex R-17; CORE-15
Ex R-16; CORE-7
Ex C-17; CORE-6

81

Ex C-18; CORE-14
Ex R-18; CORE-16
Ex R-19; CORE-17
Ex C-18A/R-20; CORE-18
Ex C-44; CORE-33
Ex C-65; CORE-19

Expert Reports:

[...] paras. 54-69
[...] paras. 4.1.-4.4
[...] paras. 38-41

Hearing:

Testimony [...], Tr 423/18-427/14
Claimants’ Oral Opening Submissions, Tr 43/4-14; Tr 50/10-15; Tr 52/1-6

377. Taking into account the contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers that the
treatment of the minutes by the Kazakh courts might indeed have violated the
Kazakh law provisions on the consideration of evidence. The Tribunal
acknowledges that the Kazakh courts did not take into account the minutes of the
meetings in 2002 when making their decisions (Minutes of the Shareholders’
Meeting of APL on 11 September 2002 (Ex R-16; CORE-7 and Ex C-17; CORE-
6); Minutes of the APL Board Meeting held on 8 August 2002 (Ex R-15; CORE-5
and Ex C-16; CORE-4). The Tribunal further notes that the Kazakh courts did not
give any reason for preferring the minutes of the Shareholder Meeting on 8 June
2003 provided by the Almaty Department of Justice over the minutes submitted
by LCO. The Tribunal thus agrees with Claimants that there might have been
irregularities in the treatment of the minutes. However, Claimants were not able to
prove arbitrariness in the consideration of the minutes. The reasons for the courts’
treatment of the minutes laid out by Respondent are not entirely convincing. But
the Tribunal, particularly in view of the discretion courts have in the evaluation of
evidence, does not consider that Claimants have met their burden of proving a
misapplication of domestic law in this regard to such an extent that it attains, as
regards the jurisdiction of national courts, the threshold for a breach of ECT
Article 10(1), second sentence, as identified in the above sections of this Award.

J.IV.2.e) The Supervisory College’s treatment of LCO’s application for supervisory review

in February 2005

82

With regard to this matter, the Parties address the following points in their Agreed List of Issues

which, in view of their interrelation, the Tribunal will consider together:

JIV.2.e)aa) Was the Supervisory College’s treatment of LCO’s application for supervisory

review in February 2005 in accordance with Kazakh law?

This matter is No. 10 in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

 

[..]
ii. Respondent
[..]
JIV.2.e)bb) If not, did the treatment constitute a breach of Ri lent's obligations under the
ECT?

This matter is No. 11 in the Agreed List of Issues.
i. Claimants

[..]
ii. Respondent
[..]
JIV.2.e)cc) Tribunal
382. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

cI paras. 123, 189

CIl__ paras. 76-77, 133 (4)
cs paras. 6.29-6.30

cP paras. 105-107

RI paras. 189-194, 289-295
RII paras. 314-334

RS paras. 79-82

Exhibits:

Ex C-48; CORE-37

83

Expert Reports:

383.

[...] paras. 77-84
[...] paras. 77-84

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal reiterates
that it has no competence to control the application of Kazakh law by the Kazakh
courts. The Supervisory Court might have performed a rather cursory review of
the lower court decisions. However, especially on matters of procedure and the
assessment of evidence, the practices of final appellate courts differ, and the fact
that reasons were succinctly expressed does not entail that the underlying
arguments were not considered. On balance, the Tribunal cannot find that there is
any proof that the decision was arbitrary, grossly unfair, unjust or idiosyncratic or
involved any lack of due process. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that the
supervisory review in February 2005 did not breach ECT Article 10(1), second
sentence.

J.IV.2.f) The denial of LCO's application for permission to bring a second appeal

With regard to this matter, the Parties address the following points in their Agreed List of Issues

which, in view of their interrelation, the Tribunal will consider together:

 

Supervisory College in January 2006 in accordance with prevailing Kazakh law?

 

This matter is No. 12 in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

 

[J
ii. Respondent
[J
J1V.2.fbb) If not, did such denial amount to a breach of R lent's obligations under the
ECT?

This matter is No. 13 in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

84,

ii. Respondent

[..]
JIV.2.fycc) Tribunal

388. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

cI paras.
Cll paras.
cs paras.
cP paras.
RI paras.
RII paras.
RS paras.
RP paras.
Exhibits:

124-125, 189
79-80, 133(4)
6.31-6.32
108-111

195-201, 289-295
315, 335-344
83-86

107-112

Ex C-51; CORE-41
Ex CA-57; KL-18

Ex K-12

Expert Reports:

[...], paras. 5.1-5.5
[...], paras. 85-100

Hearing:

Testimony [..

-], Tr 462/1-466/12

389. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties regarding the several
issues, the Tribunal does not need to deal with the details of the date of entry into
force of laws in Kazakhstan. The Tribunal considers that both Claimants and
Respondent put forward convincing reasons for their respective positions on the
requirements for the official publication of a new law.

390. In considering that the publication only in the Russian language is an official
publication in terms of the Kazakh CoCP, the Supervisory College came to a
conclusion which at least can be considered as plausible. On that basis, it did not

85

violate the standard of fair and equitable treatment under ECT Article 10(1),
second sentence, as identified in the above sections of this Award for the
jurisdiction of national courts.

J.IV.2.g) Did the Supervisory College’s two refusals of a supervisory appeal affect the
outcome of the case and/or cause Claimants any loss: i.e., is there a real prospect that the
Supervisory College would have overturned the determinations of the Almaty City Court
and the Civil College?

This matter is No. 14 in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

[..]
ii. Respondent
[..]

iii. Tribunal

394. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

CII __ paras. 75-80
cP para. 112

RI para. 201

RII paras. 331, 346
RS para. 81

RP para. 110

Exhibits:

Ex C-48; CORE-37
Ex C-51; CORE-41

Expert Report:
[...], para. 100

Hearing:

86

Testimony [...] Tr 459/20-460/20

395. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that the question of whether the Supervisory College’s two refusals of a
supervisory appeal affect the outcome of the case is a moot issue. Having
concluded that the two decisions were beyond reproach from the perspective of
international law, the Tribunal does not have to deal with the question whether a
different treatment of LCO’s application at the supervisory review would have led
to a different outcome.

J.IV.2.h) What is the relevance of the ultimate transfer of the Licence by [X] to [...]?
This matter is No. 18 in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

ii. Respondent

iii. Tribunal
399. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

CII para. 58, footnote 4
cP para. 141

RI paras. 148-155
RII para. 269

Exhibits:

Ex C-105; CORE-39
Ex C-107; CCB-147

400. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that Claimants’ allegations of the ultimate transfer of the Licence to [...] are either
unfounded or at least not sufficiently shown to be relevant for the issues to be
decided here. The Tribunal does not find any proof of the “shadowy nature” of

87

[M]’s involvement in the transfer and re-transfer of the Licence which would be
relevant to its consideration of a possible breach of the ECT. The fact that [M]
benefitted from the re-transfer of the Licence to [X] was addressed supra at
J.IV.2.c) and is irreproachable under international law.

401. The Tribunal acknowledges that the fact that the Licence is now owned by [...]
may be relevant to possible remedies. Under international law, the primary
remedy is restitution which may become impossible when the Licence is
transferred to a new holder. However, the question of remedies only needs to be
addressed if Respondent is held to be liable. As the Parties have agreed on the
bifurcation of liability and quantum/relief according to section B.2 of PO-1, this
matter does not have to be considered at present.

J.IV.2.j) The Corruption Case

With regard to this matter, the Parties address the following points in their Agreed List of Issues
which, in view of their interrelation, will be considered by the Tribunal together:

JIV.2.j)aa) Were the jud; s of the Kazakh court proceedings such that no honest and
competent court could possibly have given them?

This matter is No. 16 in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

 

indicated to LCO that the claimants in the Kazakh court proceedings had paid money and that
LCO would have to pay a similar amount?

This matter is No. 17(a) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

ii. Respondent

88

JIV.2.j)cc) What weight (if any) is to be given to Claimants’(disputed) evidence that the

representatives of [M] expressed extraordinary confidence in the outcome of the Kazakh court

   

proceedings?
This matter is No. 17(b) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

 

is to be given to Claimants’ (disputed) evidence that the

Corr lence from the Ministry of Energy was sent to LCO by a company, [...]?
This matter is No. 17(c) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants
[..]

ii. Respondent

[J

JIV.2.j)ee) What weight (if any) is to be given to Claimants’ (disputed) evidence that
Respondent’s courts have a problem with corruption and undue influence?
This matter is No. 17(d) in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants
[..]
ii. Respondent

[J
LIV.2.j)ff) Tribunal

420. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

cI paras. 83-88, 106, 126-128
Cll paras. 5-8, 81-87

89

cS
cP
RI
RIE
RS
RP

Exhibits:

paras. 7.1-7.8

paras. 120-133

paras. 10-13, 142-147, 202-205
paras. 347-370

paras. 87-90

paras. 15; 113-138

Ex C-6; CCB-163
Ex C-55, CCB-125
Ex C-95, CCB-81
Ex C-97; CCB 89
Ex C-99, CCB-91
Ex C-103, CCB-126
Ex CA-62

Witness Statements:

[...] paras. 38-40, 57-58
[...] paras. 33, 38
[...] para. 24

Hearing:

421.

422.

423.

Testimony [...] Tr 324/3-336-22; Tr 342/23-343/25

Testimony [...] Tr 383/10-24; Tr 386/15-393/8

Testimony [...] Tr 230/25-233/22; Tr 240/14-241/6; Tr 247/4-252/2
Testimony [...] Tr 180/14-182/8

Testimony [...] Tr 555/21-556/8

Testimony [...] Tr 413/16-414/8

Taking into account the above contentions regarding the several issues raised by
the Parties, the Tribunal’s major considerations are as follows.

Corruption, if found, would constitute a grave violation of the standard of fair and
equitable treatment under ECT Article 10(1), second sentence. The Tribunal
emphasizes that corruption is a serious allegation, especially in the context of the
judiciary. The Tribunal notes that both Parties agree that the standard of proof in
this respect is a high one. Therefore, generalized allegations of corruption in the
Republic of Kazakhstan do not meet Claimants’ burden of proof. [...]

The Tribunal is aware that it is very difficult to prove corruption because secrecy
is inherent in such cases. Corruption can take various forms but in very few cases

90

can reliable and valid proof of it be brought which is sufficient as a basis for a
resulting award declaring liability. However, the Tribunal considers that this
cannot be a reason to depart from the general principle that Claimants must fully
comply with their undisputed burden to prove that in the case at hand there was
corruption.

424. [...] It is not sufficient to present evidence which could possibly indicate that
there might have been or even probably was corruption. Rather, Claimants have to
prove corruption, [...]. [T]he issue is not one of inference, and the Tribunal
considers that Claimants have not met their burden of proof in this regard.

J.IV.3. Has Respondent breached Article 13 ECT (expropriation)?

J.IV.3.a) The invalidation of the transfer of the Licence by the Kazakh courts and the
retransfer to [X] by the Ministry of Energy

L.]

i. Claimants:
[..]

ii. Respondent:
[..]

iii. Tribunal
429. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

Cl paras. 196-203

CIl paras. 139-146

cs paras. 8.24-8.27
cP paras. 144-146

RI paras. 296-299, 252
RII paras. 148-158

Exhibits:
Ex RA-9, Azinian v. Mexico

91

430.

431.

432.

433.

434,

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal
acknowledges that the domestic courts of Kazakhstan are, from the perspective of
international law, organs of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Therefore, their decisions
are attributable to Respondent and could be measures falling under ECT Article
13. On the other hand, it is also clear and undisputed that Claimants, insofar as
they were subject to Kazakh law, were subject to the jurisdiction of the Kazakh
courts. The mere fact that decisions of the Kazakh courts declared that Claimants
did not prevail and were not holders of rights they claimed to have, therefore, is
not sufficient to find an expropriatory measure falling under ECT Article 13.

In its consideration of ECT Article 10(1), second sentence, the Tribunal found that
the Kazakh court decisions were not arbitrary, grossly unfair, unjust,
idiosyncratic, discriminatory or lacking due process, even if they might have been
incorrect as a matter of Kazakh law, and that correspondingly they have to be
accepted from the perspective of international law and particularly that of the
ECT. Consequently, the invalidation of the transfer of the Licence by the Kazakh
courts has to be accepted under international law and under the ECT.

For these reasons, it cannot be concluded that the transfer was wrongfully
annulled as Claimants allege. The decisions of the Kazakh courts do not constitute
an expropriation.

With regard to the action of the Ministry of Energy, the Tribunal agrees with the
reasoning of the Azinian tribunal holding that a governmental authority cannot be
reproached for acting in accordance with a decision taken by the state’s own
courts. This is at least so if, as found above, such court decisions are
irreproachable and have to be accepted from the perspective of international law.

For these reasons, the order of the re-transfer of the Licence to [X], which only
executed the court decision, does not constitute an act which could be
independently considered as an expropriatory measure according to Article 13 of
the ECT.

J.IV.3.b) The rejection of LCO’s alleged evidence of payment for the transfer of the

Licence

L.

J

ii.

This matter is No. 15 in the Agreed List of Issues.

Claimants

Respondent

92

L.

J

iii.

Tribunal

437.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

cI paras. 119-122
CIl__ para. 92

cs paras. 6.23-6-25
cP paras. 113-119
RI paras. 181-187
RII __ paras. 371-380
RS paras. 91-94

Exhibits:

Ex C-21; CCB-72;
Ex CCB-73

Ex C-20; CORE-26
Ex C-45; CORE-34
Ex C-44; CORE-33
Ex C-46; CORE-35

Expert Report:

438.

[...] paras. 70-76

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that Claimants were not able to prove that US$ 3,000,000 had been paid for the
transfer of the Licence. The Tribunal notes that LCO itself had not made the
payment and that there is no proof that [...] paid on behalf of LCO. Furthermore,
Claimants did not produce sufficient evidence that the payment represented a
benefit to [X] nor that it was received by [Y], but only established that US$
3,000,000 have been credited to an account at the [...]. Considering these
inconsistencies, the Tribunal concludes that the Kazakh court decisions are
irreproachable, from the perspective of the ECT, in considering that there was not
sufficient evidence of the payment for the transfer of the Licence. The fact that the
decisions do not order the restitution of US$ 3,000,000 to LCO equally does not
constitute a violation of ECT Article 13.

93

J.IV.4. Has Respondent breached ECT Article 10(1), last sentence (umbrella clause)?

J.IV.4.a) If there was a breach of the Licence, was such breach also a violation of the

"umbrella clause" in the last sentence of ECT Article 10(1)?
This matter is No. 22 in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

[..]
ii. Respondent

[..]
iii. Tribunal
441. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

cI paras. 209-216
Cll paras. 147-148
cs paras. 8.20-8.23
cP para. 148

RI paras. 213-216
RII paras. 159-164
RS paras. 100-102

Exhibits:

Ex RA-9, Azinian v. Mexico
Ex CA-4, Amco IT

442. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that there could only be a breach of the Licence Agreement, and thus of ECT
Article 10(1), last sentence, if LCO was a contracting party to the Licence
Agreement. However, the Kazakh courts have invalidated the transfer of the
Licence from [X] to LCO. This Tribunal has concluded above with regard to ECT
Article 10(1), second sentence, and Article 13 that the decisions of the courts do
not constitute a violation of international law and have to be accepted in
considering possible breaches of the ECT. The result of the court proceedings that

94,

LCO is not a contractual party to the Licence therefore has to be accepted by this
Tribunal when examining a possible breach of the Licence.

443. This means that this Tribunal has to accept that LCO, not being a contractual
party, did not have any rights stemming from the Licence. Therefore, LCO cannot
invoke any rights of the Licence Agreement or bring a claim for a breach of it or
of ECT Article 10(1). Under these circumstances it is unnecessary to consider the
various questions raised relating to the so-called umbrella cause in ECT Article
10(1).

J.IV.4.b) Did Respondent breach its Investment Laws of 1994 and 2003? If so, was such a

breach also a violation of the "umbrella clause" in the last sentence of ECT Article 10(1)?

This matter is No. 23 in the Agreed List of Issues.

The provisions of the Kazakh Investment Laws referred to by Claimants read as follows:

Law No. 266-XIII of 27th December 1994 of the Republic of Kazakhstan Concerning Foreign
Investments

Article 8: Guarantees from Illegal Acts of State Bodies and Official Persons

Acts of state bodies and their official persons, which are adopted in violation of the Republic of
Kazakhstan legislation, and which deteriorate the legal status of foreign investors shall have no
legal force.

Law No. 373 of 8th January 2003 of the Republic of Kazakhstan concerning Investments:

Article 4: The Guarantee of Legal Protection of Investor Activities in the Territory

of the Republic of Kazakhstan

2. An investor shall have the right to compensation for harm caused to him as a result of
adoption by state authorities of acts which are not consistent with the legislative acts of the
Republic of Kazakhstan, as well as resulting from illegal acts (commission of act) of officials of
those authorities in accordance with the civil legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.

[.]

i. Claimants
[..]
ii. Respondent

[J

iii. Tribunal

95

447.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

CIl paras. 149-153
cP para. 149

RI paras. 213-216
RII __ paras. 416-421

Exhibits:

Ex CA-54 = KL-7(Law No. 266-XIII of 27th December 1994 and Law No. 373 of
8th January 2003 of the Republic of Kazakhstan)
Ex RA-9, Azinian v. Mexico

Expert Report:

448.

449.

[...], paras. 7.1-7.4

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
that it is not clear from the wording of ECT Article 10(1), last sentence, whether
the “umbrella clause” also encompasses state legislation concerning the protection
of foreign investment such as the Kazakh Investment Laws of 1994 and 2003. The
Tribunal notes that the words “obligation the Respondent has entered into with an
investor or an Investment of an Investor of any other Contracting Party” in ECT
Article 10(1), last sentence, rather seem to suggest that a contractual or similar
bilateral relationship must exist between the host state and the investor. On the
other hand, the Tribunal acknowledges that in the context of consent to
jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals, it is commonplace that the host state’s unilateral
offer in its national legislation to submit the dispute under certain international
arbitration rules to the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal, once duly accepted by
the claimant, is a sufficient and binding submission to arbitration. This offer can
be accepted by the investor by submitting its claim to the arbitration institution or
arbitral tribunal. Applying this reasoning to ECT Article 10(1), it could be argued
that an abstract unilateral promise by the state in its national legislation and
particularly in its laws directed to foreign investors is encompassed by the
“umbrella clause”.

However, the Tribunal does not have to decide this question in the case at hand.
The Tribunal refers to its discussion of ECT Article 10(1), second sentence, and
Article 13, and its conclusion that the court decisions and the acts of the Ministry
of Energy do not constitute a violation of the ECT and have to be accepted by this

96

450.

Tribunal. If that is so, these actions must be accepted as being in conformity with
Kazakh law including the Kazakh Investment Laws. In this context, the Tribunal
notes that the Law No. 266-XIII of 27th December 1994 contains a general
reference to Kazakh law in its Article 3 and, according to the above-quoted
Article 8 banns the application of “Acts [...] which are adopted in violation of the
Republic of Kazakhstan legislation”, and that the Law No. 373 of 8th January
2003 in its Article 2 contains a similar general reference to Kazakh law. The
Tribunal further notes that the above-quoted Article 4 provides for compensation
only with regard to “acts which are not consistent with the legislative acts of the
Republic of Kazakhstan”.

The Kazakh courts have decided on the application of Kazakh law and, as seen
above, this Tribunal has to accept these decisions as valid. On this basis, a breach
of these laws, which would be a precondition for the breach of the umbrella
clause, has not been shown by Claimants.

J.IV.5. Has Respondent breached the Licence Agreement?

This matter is No. 21 in the Agreed List of Issues.

L.

L.

i.
J
ii.

J

iii.

Claimants

Respondent

Tribunal

454.

The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

Parties’ Submissions:

cI paras. 209-216
Cll paras. 154-155
cP para. 147

RII __ paras. 416-421
RS paras. 100-102

Exhibits:

Ex RA-9, Azinian v. Mexico
Ex CA-4, Amco IT

97

Witness Statement:

[...], paras. 12, 19-22

455. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal first notes
that its jurisdiction to decide the Licence claim is based on the dispute settlement
provision in the Licence Agreement (Clause 27), supra J.II.7.

456. With regard to the issue of a breach of the Licence the Tribunal reiterates its
conclusions regarding ECT Article 10(1), last sentence, supra J.IV.4.a).
Acknowledging that Kazakh law is applicable to claims under the Licence, the
Tribunal considers that it cannot accept LCO as a legitimate holder of the Licence
because the transfer of the Licence from [X] to LCO was invalidated by the
Kazakh courts. It follows from the discussion above of ECT Article 10(1), second
sentence, and Article 13 that these court decisions are irreproachable from the
perspective of international law and the ECT in particular. Therefore, this
Tribunal has to accept that LCO did not become a contracting party to the Licence
Agreement and cannot bring a claim alleging breach of the Licence Agreement.

J.V. Damages and Quantum

With regard to this matter, the Parties address the following points in their Agreed List of Issues:

J.V.1. Did any of the alleged failures and/or wrongful acts by the Kazakh courts and/or
the Ministry of Energy in fact cause Claimants the alleged or any loss, or was there an
intervening cause attributable to other third parties and/or Claimants themselves?

This matter is No. 24 in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

ii. Respondent

iii. Tribunal
459. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:

98

Parties’ Submissions:

Cll paras. 158-164
cs para. 10.1

RI paras. 308-312
RII __ paras. 426-442

Exhibits:

Ex CA-4 (Amco IT)

460. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
the question of causation of the damage to be moot because it has found
Respondent to be liable neither under the ECT nor under the Licence.

J.V.2. Did Clai take all r ble steps to miti, such loss as they in fact
suffered as a result of the avoidance of the transfer of the Licence?

This matter is No. 25 in the Agreed List of Issues.

i. Claimants

[...]
ii. Respondent

[...]
iii. Tribunal
463. The Tribunal, without repeating the contents, takes particular note of the

following documents on file:
Parties’ Submissions:
CP. para. 151
Clifford Chance, letter of 9 October 2009

RI paras. 315-317
RII paras. 443-446

99

464.

Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the Tribunal considers
the question of mitigation to be irrelevant to the Award because Respondent has
not been found liable either under the ECT or under the Licence. Apart from that,
it should be noted that the Parties have agreed on the bifurcation of liability and
quantum/relief according to section B.2 of PO-1.

J.VI. Costs

465.

466.

467.

468.

The Tribunal has taken note of the cost claims submitted by the Parties and of
their respective comments submitted by the Parties in accordance with PO-5 No 2.

The length and complexity of this arbitral procedure shows that neither of the
Parties could have easily identified the procedural and substantive outcome of this
dispute. Claimants have prevailed on jurisdiction and with regard to the issues
under ECT Article 17(1). Respondent has succeeded on the merits of the case.
Thus, both sides have been partly successful and partly unsuccessful in their
arguments raised during the course of this proceeding.

Taking into account the circumstances of the case and using its discretion under
Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal considers it fair that the costs
of arbitration shall be borne in equal shares between Claimants on one side and
Respondent on the other side.

Also, taking into account these circumstances of the case and using its discretion
under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal considers it fair that
each Party bears its own costs of legal representation.

(The Decisions and Signatures of the Tribunal appear on the following separate page of

this Award)

K. Decisions

For these reasons, the Tribunal decides as follows:

1.

2.

The Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider the Claimants’ claims.

The Respondent is not liable under the Energy Charter Treaty or under the
Licence.

All other claims submitted by the Claimants in their relief sought are denied,
subject to the following decisions regarding costs.

The costs of arbitration shall be borne in equal shares between the Claimants on one
side and the Respondent on the other side.

Each Party shall bear its own costs of legal representation.

Signatures of the Tribunal:

/Signed/ /Signed/
Professor Kaj Hobér Professor James Crawford
Arbitrator) Arbitrator
Date: 29 April 2010 Date: 20 April 2010
/Signed/

Professor Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel
President
Date: April 26, 2010

101

