ARBITRATION INSTITUTE OF THE STOCKHOLM CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

ARBITRATION Ne 080/2005

IN THE MATTER OF: An arbitration pursuant to the Energy Charter Treaty and
the Rules of the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of

Commerce:
LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY AMTO
(Claimant)
and

UKRAINE

(Respondent)

Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades, Chairman
Mr. Per Runeland, Arbitrator
Mr. Christer Soderlund, Arbitrator

FINAL AWARD

This is an arbitration pursuant to Article 26 of the Energy Charter Treaty
(hereafter «ECT») and the Rules of the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm
Chamber of Commerce adopted in 1999 and in force as at the commencement of
the arbitration (hereafter «SCC Rules»),

I. PARTIES

§1.- The Claimant is: Limited Liability Company AMTO a corporation
pursuant to the laws of Latvia, with its registered office at Terezes 1, Riga, LV-
1012 Latvia (hereafter «AMTOy» or the «Claimant»).

The Claimant is represented in this arbitration by Advokat Sverre B. Svahnstrom
and Ms. Irina Tkatsenko, Advokatfirman Svahnstrom, Taby Centrum, Ing. S, SE-
183 34 Taby, Sweden (Tel: +46 8 15 80 00; Fax: +46 8 54 47 42 55; E-mail:
sbs@svahnstrom.se and irina.tkatsenko@svahnstrom.se), and Prof. Kaj Hober
and Mr. Fredrik Andersson of Mannheimer Swartling, Norrmalmstorg 4, Box
1711, SE-111 87 Stockholm (Tel: +46 8 505 765 00; Fax: +46 8 505 765 01; E-
mail: kho@msa.se and fra@msa.se).

The Respondent is: UKRAINE (hereafter «Ukraine» or the «Respondent»), c/o
The Ministry of Justice of Ukraine, with offices at 13 Horodetskogo street, Kiev
01001, Ukraine (Tel/Fax: +380 44 278 37 23).

The Respondent is represented in this arbitration by Grischenko & Partners (Dr.
Sergiy Voitovich, Messrs Dmitri Grischenko and Dmitry Shemelin), 37-41
Artema Street, 04053, Kiev, Ukraine (Tel: +38 (044) 490 37 07; Fax: + 38 (044)
490 37 09; E-mail: sav@gp.ua) and Proxen & Partners (Messrs Andriy Alexeyev
and Oleg Shevchuk), Apartment 6, 3" Floor, Shota Rustaveli Street 20, Kiev,
01033, Ukraine (Tel: + 38 (044) 495 2220; Fax: + 38 (044) 289 1546; E-mail:
a.alexeyev@proxen.kiev.ua.

§2.- The Claimant and the Respondent are collectively referred to as the
«Parties».

11. COMMENCEMENT OF THE ARBITRATION
§3.- The Request for Arbitration dated October 31, 2005 of AMTO and
AOZT Elektroyuzhmontazh-10 (a closed joint stock company registered in

Ukraine) (hereafter «EYUM-10») was received by the Arbitration Institute of the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (hereafter «SCC Institute») on November 24,

2/67

2005. In the Request for Arbitration AMTO and EYUM-10 appointed as an
arbitrator in this case Mr. Per Runeland, SJ Berwin LLP, 10 Queen Street Place,
London EC4R 1BE, United Kingdom.

The Respondent submitted its Reply to the Request for Arbitration to the SCC
Institute on February 17, 2006. The Respondent submitted for the reasons set out
in this document that the Request for Arbitration be dismissed for manifest lack
of jurisdiction of the SCC Institute pursuant to Article 7 of the SCC Rules.

§4.- After receiving the Claimant's comments the SCC Institute decided on
March 9, 2006 that: (i) it was not clear that the SCC Institute lacks jurisdiction
over the dispute regarding AMTO; and (ii) it was clear that the SCC Institute
lacked jurisdiction over the dispute regarding EYUM-10, and so the claims
raised by EYUM-10 were dismissed. The SCC Institute also directed the
Respondent to appoint an arbitrator.

By letter dated March 21, 2006 the Respondent appointed as arbitrator Mr.
Christer Soderlund, Advokatfirman Vinge, Smalandsgatan 20, P.O. Box 1703,
SE-11187 Stockholm, Sweden.

By letter dated March 22, 2006 and pursuant to Article 13 of the SCC Rules, the
SCC Institute advised the Parties of its decisions (i) to appoint Mr. Bernardo M.
Cremades, B. Cremades y Asociados, Goya 18, 2°, 28001, Madrid, Spain, as
Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal; (ii) to fix the place of arbitration as
Stockholm; and (iii) to fix the advance on costs (since revised).

§5.- The advance on costs was paid and the case was referred to the Arbitral
Tribunal pursuant to Article 15 of the SCC Rules on April 7, 2006.

III. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

§6.- On April 21, 2006 and after consultation with the Parties, the Arbitral
Tribunal issued Procedural Order Ne 1 setting a preliminary timetable for the
arbitration and addressing certain procedural matters. The timetables established
in this and subsequent procedural orders were amended on various occasions at
the request of or after consultation with the Parties.

§7.- On June 2, 2006 the Claimant submitted its Statement of Claim,
supported by various exhibits.

3/67

On July 13, 2006 the Respondent submitted its Statement of Defence, including
its objections to jurisdiction and admissibility, supported by numerous exhibits.
The Statement of Defence also included a counterclaim for non-material injury
subsequently quantified at the request of the Arbitral Tribunal.

On October 16, 2006 the Claimant submitted its Reply to the Respondent's
Statement of Defence, supported by various exhibits.

§8.- By letter dated November 10, 2006 the Respondent requested that the
Arbitral Tribunal rule on the admissibility of the Claimant's Exhibits C-12 and C-
13 (respectively the commission agreement and registration certificates relating
to the Claimant's shareholding in EYUM-10) and Exhibits C-58 and C-59
(witness statements of Messrs Timofeyev and Kuznetsov). The Arbitral Tribunal
denied the Respondent's requests to declare these exhibits inadmissible in its
letters of November 16 and December 7, 2006.

On January 18, 2007 the Respondent submitted its Rejoinder in this arbitration,
supported by various exhibits.

§9.- The Arbitral Tribunal and the Parties had an intensive exchange of
communications relating to the further procedural steps in the arbitration
(including whether or not to bifurcate the proceedings for preliminary
consideration of jurisdictional issues), the presentation of evidence, the conduct
of the hearing, and the timetable for the remainder of the arbitration. The
Claimant specifically requested an oral hearing and both Parties made extensive
submissions regarding the issues raised, including the procedure for an oral
hearing.

On March 7, 2007 the Arbitral Tribunal issued Procedural Order Ne 2. Paragraph
1 of Procedural Order Ne 2 provided for a single further exchange of submissions
and evidence by the Parties. Paragraphs 2 and 3 provided as follows (emphasis
original):

2. The Pre-hearing briefs shall be accompanied by any further written evidence

(including witness statements and expert reports) in relation to all issues in this
ding jurisdic liability and dc ) that the Parties wish
to submit in support of their cases, as well as any further relevant legal
submissions;

 

arbitration (i

3. The Pre-hearing briefs are the final opportunity of the Parties to_present
written bmissi witness expert reports or v
evidence to the Arbitral Tribunal prior to the hearing. Further, the Parties

4/67

shall not present any witnesses or experts for oral evidence at the hearin:
except in respect of matters included in their written statements.»

   

Paragraph 4 provided for a single hearing on all issues of up to five days
duration, that the Tribunal proposed to begin on June 25, 2007; paragraph 5 dealt
with the availability of witnesses and counsel on the proposed hearing date and
the language(s) of the witnesses; and paragraph 6 provided for the hearing
procedure.

§10.- There were further applications by the Parties for extensions of time
for the submission of the Pre-hearing briefs, resulting in the postponement of the
hearing, so as to begin on October 3, 2007.

On April 27, 2007 the Claimant submitted its Pre-hearing brief (entitled
'Surrejoinder') together with various exhibits and witness statements.

On May 7, 2007 the Arbitral Tribunal ruled on a request by the Claimant for the
production of documents, requiring the production of certain documents.

On June 18, 2007 the Respondent submitted its Pre-hearing brief, with various
exhibits attached.

On May 9, 2009 the Arbitral Tribunal confirmed dates for the oral hearing for all

issues between the Parties for October 3 to October 7, 2007. On June 27, 2007

the Arbitral Tribunal confirmed the hearing date, venue, and other arrangements
for the oral hearing.

§11.- On September 20, 2007 the Claimant advised the Arbitral Tribunal
that the Parties had reached an agreement regarding the procedure for the
remainder of the arbitration. This agreement included the cancellation of the
hearing scheduled to begin on October 3, 2007. On September 24, 2007 the
Arbitral Tribunal received an ‘Agreement on How to Conclude the Procedure’
executed by both the Claimant (dated September 21, 2007) and the Respondent
(dated September 24, 2007). On the same date the Arbitral Tribunal cancelled the
hearing pursuant to the Parties' procedural agreement.

On September 24, 2007 the Arbitral Tribunal also issued Procedural Order Ne 3

confirming the terms of the Parties' procedural agreement. Procedural Order Ne 3
read as follows:

5/67

«PROCEDURAL ORDER N: 3

Considering:

i. The Parties in a document entitled ‘Agreement on How to Conclude the
Procedure’ dated September 21, 2007 (Claimant) and September 24, 2007
(Respondent), agreed to ask the Arbitral Tribunal to cancel the hearing scheduled
to take place October 3-7, 2007 in Stockholm and to render an award based solely
upon the respective Parties' written submissions, including attached exhibits,
subject to the eight conditions therein set out; and

2. The Arbitral Tribunal has accepted the Parties' agreement and accordingly has

cancelled the hearing, and in this Procedural Order N ° 3 confirms the procedure
for the remainder of this arbitration:

The Arbitral Tribunal Hereby Orders as Follows:

 

1. The Parties shall refrain from submitting further Briefs, with the exceptions
outlined below.

2. The Parties shall refrain from submitting further witness statements.

3. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be allowed, at its discretion, to ask written questions
to the Parties.

4, Each Party shall submit written answers to the Arbitral Tribunal's questions.

5. Each Party shall be given one opportunity to comment upon the other Party's
answers to the Arbitral Tribunal's written questions.

6. The Arbitral Tribunal shall draft and submit to the Parties a Recital to the
Award, including the undisputed facts of the case and the Parties' legal grounds
and argumentation.

7. Each Party shall be given one opportunity to comment in writing on the Recital.

8. The Arbitral Tribunal shall set final deadlines for the submissions, it being
understood that a Party's non-compliance with a deadline shall be acknowledged
as a waiver to make the relevant submission, and that such non-compliance shall
not prevent the Arbitral Tribunal from rendering the Award.»

§12.- On October 3, 2007 the Claimant requested that the procedure agreed
between the Parties for the conclusion of the arbitration, as confirmed in
Procedural Order Ne 3, be amended to allow the Parties to summarise their
respective cases in one final set of written pleadings. The Respondent opposed
any amendment to the Parties' agreement. After receiving the further
submissions of the Parties, the Arbitral Tribunal dismissed the Claimant's

6/67

request to amend the agreed procedure, for the reasons set out in its decision of
October 17, 2007.

§13.- On December 1.8, 2007 the Arbitral Tribunal submitted to the Parties
a draft Recital to the Award (consisting of the parts relating to the Parties,
Commencement of the Arbitration, Procedural History, Factual Background and
Claims, Defences and Legal Grounds of the Parties) in accordance with the
Parties' agreement and paragraph 6 of Procedural Order Ne 3. The Tribunal also
asked three questions relating to the ownership or control of the Claimant. The
Tribunal received the Parties' comments on the draft Recital and their answers to
the questions on January 18, 2008, and subsequently their comments on the other
party's answers.

The Respondent in its letter of January 23, 2008 objected to certain parts of the
‘Claimant's Comments on the Draft Recital’ on the basis that they went beyond
the scope of the requested comments and were in fact rebuttal statements. The
Respondent also requested the exclusion of new exhibits presented by the
Claimant. The Claimant responded to these objections and also requested the
exclusion of certain material in the Respondent's submissions of January 18 and
28, 2008. The Respondent in its letter of February 5, 2008 then requested the
exclusion of certain further comments.

The Agreement of the Parties of September 21, 2007, as confirmed by Procedural
Order Ne 3 dated September 24, 2007 required the Parties to refrain from
submitting further briefs. The issue of further submissions was also dealt with in
the Arbitral Tribunal's decision of October 17, 2007. The material objected to by
the Parties consists, firstly, of further argumentation on factual and legal issues
and, secondly, of certain new information presented by the Claimant. The factual
and legal issues had already been comprehensively argued by the Parties, and the
further argumentation on these issues by both Parties was neither requested nor
necessary.

The Claimant also presented new information relating to the termination of the
sixth bankruptcy proceeding, including the text of the decision of the
Commercial Court of Kiev of December 6, 2008. The Arbitral Tribunal has
examined this material to decide whether it was significant to the determination
of the issues in this arbitration. If it were significant, then the Respondent would
have been entitled to make further submissions relating to its admissibility and/or
to make submissions in response. Having considered this new material, it does
not affect any decision of the Arbitral Tribunal, and therefore no further
submissions have been required from the Respondent.

7/67

At the request of the Arbitral Tribunal and on February 18, 2008 the Parties
submitted their statements on the amount and the payment of the costs in this
arbitration.

§14.- On various dates and with notice to the Parties the SCC Institute
extended the period of time for rendering an Award in this arbitration pursuant to
Article 33 of the SCC Rules. The latest decision of the SCC Institute (advised on
December 21, 2007) extended the time for making the Award until March 31,
2008.

IV. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

§15.- The Claimant is a limited liability company with its legal address in
Terezes iek 1, Riga, LV-1012 Latvia. It was established on March 6, 1998, and
registered in the Commercial Register on February 14, 2005 (United Registration
number 50003383371). Its subscribed .and paid up capital is 4800.00 LVL. As of
February 14, 2005 its total capital (divided into ten shares of 480.00 LVL each)
was held by Five Key Invest & Assets Limited Holding JSC, registered in
Liechtenstein. The shares of Five Key Invest & Assets Limited Holding JSC are
held by Key's Depository Foundation, Vaduz, Liechtenstein, as of November 21,
2006.

§16.- According to AMTO, the Claimant's main business activity is to act
as an investment company. It has been registered for VAT in Latvia since 1998,
has made residents income tax and social security payments since 2000, has
operated a multi-currency bank account in Latvia since March 6, 1998, and has
rented an office in Latvia since September 2000. The Claimant asserts that it has
investments in Finland, Ukraine, the United States and Latvia. The Latvian
investment project, initiated on February 1, 2006, relates to a real estate
acquisition and development project in Riga which, however, has still not been
executed.

§17.- EYUM-10 is a closed joint stock company registered in Ukraine. Its
Certificate of State Registration was issued on December 9, 1994, with its major
types of activities stated to be ‘installation of electric wiring and reinforcement’,
‘installation of fire and security alarm systems' and ‘painting works'. It has an
issued share capital of 1 519 040 UAH, divided into 303,808 shares.

8/67

§18.- EYUM-10 is the legal successor of a state entity called (in
translation) Erection Division Ne 10 of the EYUM Group that had participated in
the construction of the Zaporozhskaya AES (hereafter «ZAES») nuclear power
plant. EYUM-10 became a supplier of services to ZAES. EYUM-10 was
reorganised as a closed joint stock company in 1994.

§19.- In late 1999 the Claimant sought an investment in the nuclear energy
industry in Ukraine, and decided to buy shares in EYUM-10. The shareholding
was dispersed amongst several hundred employees of EYUM-10. As stated in
the "Minutes Ne 11 of the session of the Management Board" of EYUM-10
dated August 22, 2000, by August 2000 AMTO had acquired 16% of the shares
in EYUM-10. It had encountered the active opposition of the management to its
share acquisitions, as recorded in the 'Minutes Ne! 1':

«HEARING GIVEN TO:

The information of Lomakin A.M., the Chairman of the Management Board ...The
Members of the Management Board of CTJSC EYUM-10 and the Administration, the Legal
Department, have arranged for and conduct the work on protection of the enterprise against
attempts of foreign company LLC "AMTO "w to overtake the majority shareholding of CTJSC
EYUM-10, in accordance with the adopted decisions of the Management Board (Minutes No.
10 of 19.07.00).»

«HEARING GIVEN TO:

- The information of Lomakin A.M., on the operation of the commission for the securities.
In accordance with the previously adopted decisions of the Management Board, there has been
developed a scheme of purchase of shares of CTJSC EYUM-10, respective announcements
made in the press, on TV, via radio. There has been arranged a reserve fund for shares
purchase.

LLC "AMTO" holds 16% of the shares of CTJSC EYUM-10. Upon the filed statements of
claim Energodar Court will consider the legality of the deals of purchase and sale of the shares
of CTJSC EYUM-10 by LLC "AMTO ".

- information about shareholders working at CTJSC EYUM-10 and having sold shares
in CTJSC EYUM-10...

RESOLVED:

1 That the Legal Department analyse an opportunity to revoke the credits to the
employees of CTJSC EYUM-10, who had sold their shares - unanimously.

2. That meetings be held in the subdivisions of CTJSC EYUM-10, at which meetings the
matters of the enterprise's granting of the privileges at the expense of its profit to the employees
of CTJSC EYUM-10, who had sold their shares, be discussed. That a suggestion be lodged that
amendments should be made to the Collective Agreement of CTJSC EYUM-10 which
amendments to be aimed at protection and consolidation of the labour collective -
unanimously.»

9/67

The Claimant continued to purchase shares and on January 21, 2002 a share
certificate for 200508 shares was issued to the Claimant, with a certificate for a
further 3657 shares issued on March 4, 2003. The Claimant's total shareholding
in March 2003 was therefore 204,165 shares or 67.2% of the total share capital.

§20.- ZAES is the largest nuclear power plant in Ukraine. It is a separate
division of the National Nuclear Power Generating Company 'Energoatom'
(hereafter «Energoatom», owned by the Respondent. At the time of the
Claimant's purchase of shares in EYUM-10, EYUM-10 had established
relationships with ZAES/Energoatom, and the Claimant asserts that by that time
ZAES/Energoatom was EYUM-10's largest debtor. A letter from ZAES to
EYUM-10 dated February 28, 2002 refers to the financial difficulties of ZAES
and the nature of its relationship with EYUM-10.

«SD «Zaporozhskaya AES" ofGP NAEK "Energoatom», understanding the problems of
your company, would like to advise you of the following... The existing situation does not allow
us to pay taxes, to implement the production and technical program of our company and to
exploit the nuclear power plant normally.

Taking into account that for many years SD ZAES and CJSC EYUM-10 had partner
relations we send you the schedules of debts on the following contracts liquidation to be agreed
by EYUM-10:

Contract No. 2 KRE-99, the amount of debt-1 898 297,07 UAH
Contract No. 1PKE-2000, the amount of debt-8 916 550, 95 UAH
Contract No. 9PKE-99, the amount of debt-1 094 998,38 UAH
Contract No. 2KRE-2000, the amount of debt-12 574 088,95 UAH

Monthly payments in the amount of 408 068,36 UAH, we are going to make will allow
your company to pay the restructured budgetary debt as well as current taxes. Only at this
approach SD ZAES will be able to make orders for your works and to pay for them in 2002.

CJSC EYUM-10 has been being the strategic partner ofSD ZAES for 20 years executing
important works on reconstruction and technical rearmament repair. We consider CJSC
EYUM-10 works to be strategically important and directed on the reliable and safe exploitation
of power units of our nuclear power plant. Taking into account the actuality of your work SD
"Zaporozhskaya AES" hopes that our further cooperation with your company will be fruitfitl,
mutually beneficial and long-term. The continuation of the contractual relations is vitally an
important stage not only for SD ZAES but also for atomic energy on the whole.»

§21.- In 2002 and 2003 EYUM-10 commenced court proceedings in the
Commercial Court of Zaporozhskaya Oblast in respect of amounts pursuant to
eleven contracts between EYUM-10 and Energoatom/ZAES entered into in
1998, 1999 and 2000. EYUM-10 was successful in its claims, that were upheld
on appeal and cassation was denied. The Respondent accepts that EYUM-10

10/67

obtained judgement against ZAES for the total amount of 28,377,868.04 UAH
(not including state duty and court fees).

EYUM-10 sought execution on the basis of its judgments. Execution was stayed
because of bankruptcy proceedings against Energoatom. There were six separate
bankruptcy proceedings commenced between March 2002 and December 2003,
as follows:

1. First Bankruptcy Proceedings: 12 March 2002-May 17, 2002;

2. Second Bankruptcy Proceedings: May 21, 2002-October 11, 2002;

3. Third Bankruptcy Proceedings: October 11, 2002-February 6, 2003;

4. Fourth Bankruptcy Proceedings: February 7, 2003-October 29, 2003;

wn

. Fifth Bankruptcy Proceedings (Case Ne 05-5-43/50551): October 29,
2003-July 6, 2005;

6. Sixth Bankruptcy Proceedings (Case Ne 43/167): Commenced December
2, 2003

There were numerous procedural steps, orders and appeals related to these

proceedings. The Ukrainian bankruptcy legislation and the conduct of these

bankruptcy proceedings are fundamental to the Claimant's claims pursuant to the
Energy Charter Treaty in this arbitration.

§22.- On July 25, 2003 the Resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers of
Ukraine No. 1160 entitled 'On changes to the list of highly hazardous enterprises,
whose discontinuance of operations requires special measures to prevent harm to
human life and health, property, facilities and the environment! decreed that the
list of highly hazardous enterprises which had been previously approved by the
Resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine No. 765 of May 6, 2000
should be worded as follows:

«Power Engineering State body
National Nuclear Energy Generating Company "Energoatom "
Dneprgidroenergo GAG K Dnestrgidroenergo GAEK Dneprenergo JSC
Donbasenergo JSC GEK Tsentrenergo JSC Zapadenergo JSC Vostokenergo
Ltd.»

11/67

On 26 July 2005, Law No. 2711-VI 'On Measures to Ensure the Stable Operation
of Fuel and Energy Sector Enterprises’ was published in the organ of the
Ukrainian Parliament 'Holos Ukrayiny' and entered into force (except for Articles
3 to 11 which entered into force on September 26, 2005) (hereafter, «Law 2711-
IV»). The Preamble of this Law states that: «The objective of this Law is to
support the improvement of the financial standing of the fuel-and-energy sector
enterprises, prevent their bankruptcy, and enhance their investment
attractiveness by regulating the procedural issues and implementing mechanisms
of the debt repayment, granting the right to use them to the business entities,
specifying the procedure of the interaction of state authorities, local self-
administration bodies, and budget fund administrators with business entities in
respect of the application of the debt repayment mechanisms»

§23.- On May 15, 2006 EYUM-10 and Energoatom signed an Agreement
relating to Energoatom's outstanding debts to EYUM-10, including the eleven
judgment debts referred to above, two further judgement debts of 2005, and an
acknowledgement of debt. This Agreement was entitled 'Agreement on
Substitution of Primary Obligation by the New Obligation Between the Same
Parties’.

The Claimant states that this agreement did not enter into force because
Energoatom did not provide a required bank guarantee, although Energoatom
made payments in accordance with the time schedule of the agreement. The
Agreement was amended and re-executed on August 11, 2006, and Energoatom
made certain payments in reduction of its outstanding debt to EYUM-10.

§24.- The Parties submitted numerous documents, witness statements,
expert reports and other exhibits with their pleadings. The Tribunal received
witness statements or expert reports on factual, legal or damages issues submitted
by the Claimant of: Mr. Valentin Blueger, Partner at Blueger & Plaude; Mr.
Mikhail Petrovich Timofeyev; Mr. Ivan Vladimirovich Kuznetsov; Baker Tilly
International; Ms. Anna V. Tsyrat, of Jurvneshservice, Kiev, in relation to
Ukraine bankruptcy proceedings; Mr. Oleksy Svyatogor in relation to the
Ukraine electricity industry; and Mr. Urpo Salo of Tietotili Consulting Oy in
relation to lost revenue.

The Tribunal received witness statements or expert reports on factual, legal or
damages issues submitted by the Respondent of Mr. Volodymyr Maksymovych
Pyshny, Vice President for Repairs and Plant Production of Energoatom;
Emergex Business Solutions LLC. in respect of damages issues; Mr. Oleg
Mykolayovych Rogozhnikov; Mr. Yuriy Oleksandrovych Nedashkovsky, former
President of Energoatom and Deputy Minister of Fuel and Energy of Ukraine;

12/67

Mr. Alexander N. Biryukov on bankruptcy law issues; and Mr. Maslak Yuriy
Gennadiyovych on economic issues.

V. CLAIMS, DEFENCES AND LEGAL GROUNDS OF THE PARTIES

§25.- The Claimant has commenced this arbitration pursuant to Article 26
ECT alleging that the Respondent has breached various provisions of the ECT.
The Claimant refers in particular to Articles 10(1), 10(12), and 22(1), and seeks
compensation and other relief. The Respondent asserts that the Arbitral Tribunal
does not have jurisdiction over this dispute, and denies any violation of the ECT.
The Respondent also denies the Claimant's claims for compensation, and asserts
a counterclaim based on the unfounded allegations of the Claimant in this
arbitration. The Claimant asserts that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction under
Article 26 ECT over the counterclaim, and in any event the counterclaim is
unfounded.

1. The Respondent's Objections to the Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal:

§26.- The Respondent states that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction
under Article 26 ECT to determine the issues raised by the Claimant or the
claims are otherwise inadmissible on a number of grounds, including the
following:

(a) AMTO's shares in EYUM-10 do not constitute a qualified 'Investment' under
the ECT, since they are not ‘associated with an Economic Activity in the Energy
Sector’, as required by Article 1(6) of the ECT: The Respondent states that
EYUM-10's activities, which consist of electric installation works, repair,
reconstruction and technical re-equipment works and services to ZAES, do not
fall within any of the categories listed in Article 1(5) of the ECT, which
constitutes the controlling definition of 'Economic Activity in the Energy Sector’,
and also do not fall within the illustrative list of Economic Activity in the Energy
Sector’ presented in the Understandings IV.2.b.ii of the Final Act of the European
Energy Charter Conference. Further, AMTO's shares in EYUM-10 are not
sufficiently closely "associated with" an economic activity of ZAES/Energoatom
in the energy sector, such as the production (or sale) of Energy Materials and
Products.

The Claimant states that its ownership of shares in EYUM-10, pursuant to the
broad definition laid down in Article 1(6) of the ECT, constitutes an Investment,
and hence, makes AMTO an Investor under Article 1(7). Furthermore, the
Claimant states that AMTO's Investment, i.e. the ownership of shares in EYUM-
10, ‘are associated with an Economic Activity in the Energy Sector’. The
Claimant further states that EYUM-10 provided and still provides qualified

13/67

construction and maintenance services to the nuclear industry in Ukraine, and
according to the illustrative list contained in Understanding No 2, such work
shall be deemed to constitute "Economic Activity in the Energy Sector! pursuant
to Article 1(5) of the ECT.

(b) There is no relevant or appropriate consent_on the part of the Claimant to
arbitrate: The Respondent states that Article 26(4)(a) of the ECT requires a
separate written consent on the part of the Investor to be provided to a relevant
Contracting Party to the ECT prior to commencement of arbitration, and that
submission of a request for arbitration is not sufficient. A belated submission of a
written consent is invalid under both the ECT and the SCC Rules. The
Respondent states that the belated submission of a written consent of the
Claimant dated April 27, 2006 also shall be deemed to support the Respondent's
submission of the necessity of a separate written consent to arbitration. In any
case, according to the Respondent, belated consent was defective as based on an
invalid power of attorney, and this defect cannot be cured by ratification of
consent itself half a year later and almost a year after the initiation of arbitration.
The Respondent also submits that the initial absence of an arbitration agreement
cannot be cured by subsequent agreement or conduct if a party disagrees on this
point.

The Claimant states that the lack of a separate written consent is of no legal
consequence, since AMTO accepted Respondent's offer to arbitrate by
commencing these arbitration proceedings and further submitted an additional
and separate written consent. Initial absence of an arbitration agreement can
indeed be cured by subsequent agreement or conduct.

(c) The ECT does not confer substantive protection to the pre-investment period,
and_so events occurring prior to the making of the Investment should be
disregarded by the Arbitral Tribunal as not subject to its jurisdiction in this case.
The Respondent states that the investment period began either: (i) on March 4,
2003 when AMTO was issued with the share certificate bringing AMTO's
ownership in EYUM-10 up to 67.2 percent; or (ii) on January 21, 2002 when the
first share certificate was issued to AMTO, although by that time AMTO did not
yet own the entire 67.2 percent of shares in EYUM-10.

The Respondent contends that the commission agreement of AMTO with a
broker for purchase of shares in EYUM-10 concluded in March 2000 did not
confer on AMTO any right to undertake "the Economic Activity in the Energy
Sector" as per Article 1(6)(f) of the ECT.

The Claimant states that it engaged a broker in order to acquire shares in EYUM-

10 which had been distributed among EYUM-10's employees. By entering into a
commission agreement with the broker on 1 March 2000, AMTO acquired

14/67

contractual rights qualifying as an Investment under Article 1(6)(f) of the ECT.
Moreover, as soon as AMTO acquired its first shares in EYUM-10 in March
2000, it made a qualifying investment under Article 1(6)(b) of the ECT.
Accordingly, the Claimant maintains that it enjoyed protection as an Investor
under the ECT at all times from the date of conclusion of the commission
agreement with the broker and the acquisition of its first shares in EYUM-10 in
March 2000 and onwards.

(d) There was no relevant dispute between AMTO and Ukraine: The Respondent
states that this is a trivial commercial dispute between two Ukrainian juridical
persons and does not involve Ukraine as a State. This is a unilateral grievance
which may not be equated with a dispute, since it did not exist prior to the Claim
Letters but arose afterwards due to the non-response thereto.

The Respondent further contends that the Claimant did not request the amicable
settlement of the dispute under Article 26 of the ECT, and the Respondent's
consent did not extend to disputes which were not subject to a request for
amicable settlement. The Claim Letters could not be viewed as a request for
amicable settlement of a dispute ‘non-existing prior to non-response thereto
within a reasonable period of time'. Accordingly, there was no '‘cooling-off
period' as required by the ECT as a prerequisite for admissibility of a claim
under the ECT.

The Claimant states that the Claim Letters make clear that the Respondent is
considered to have breached the ECT. The fact that Respondent did not respond
to the letters does not prevent the existence of a dispute. In any case, questions as
to the existence of a 'dispute' and compliance with the cooling-off period relate
to admissibility and not to jurisdiction, and the Claimant submits that the
Tribunal cannot dismiss a case on the grounds of admissibility.

(e) The subject matter_of the actual dispute between EYUM-10_and
ZAES/Energoatom has already been exhausted and therefore there is no basis for
the _present_arbitration: The Respondent relies upon the agreements between
EYUM-10 and Energoatom/ZAES for the repayment of the outstanding debts,
which are already being performed.

The Claimant states that the 'agreement' of May 15, 2006 never came into force,
and that the subsequent 'agreement' of August 11, 2006 was made for the sole
pucose of saving the managers of Energoatom from criminal liability for having
spent public funds without a valid agreement. Although Energoatom unilaterally
made some voluntary payments as indicated by the two 'agreements', Energoatom
subsequently breached the ‘agreement’ by simply ceasing its payments and
requiring EYUM-10 to repay the last instalment. Accordingly, the Claimant

15/67

maintains that the purported settlement agreements between EYUM-10 and
Energoatom/ZAES do not in any way preclude this ongoing arbitration.

(f) There was no valid Power of Attorney in respect of the Claim Letters, the
belated consent to arbitrate, or the Request for Arbitration: Accordingly there
was no valid request for amicable settlement, consent by the Claimant, or request
for arbitration for the purpose of Article 26 ECT.

The Claimant states that the alleged deficiencies in the Power of Attorney issued
to AMTO's counsel Mr Svahnstrom should not be taken seriously. The Claimant
denies that AMTO's counsel lacked authority to act on behalf of AMTO. The
initial power of attorney was valid in all the three involved countries (Ukraine,
Latvia and Sweden), despite the fact that the exact date of its signature was
missing. In any case the Claimant subsequently submitted a new power of
attorney, in October 2006, in which it is clearly stated that the legal
representative of the Claimant reconfirms the first power of attorney and
confirms and ratifies all actions and measures taken by Mr. Svahnstrom on behalf
of AMTO.

(g) The Tribunal's jurisdiction (if any) is limited to the claims (if admissible) set
out in the Claim Letters: The Respondent states that as the claims submitted in
the Request for Arbitration and the Statement of Claim are not the same as in the
Claim Letters. In the alternative, the scope of the case can be no more than as it is
framed in the Request for Arbitration.

The Respondent further asserts that the new/different facts, arguments, causes of
action and legal claims, which are not contained in the Claim Letters or Request
for Arbitration, shall be disregarded, since, in particular, they are not covered by
the Respondent's consent in the absence of any request on the part of the
Claimant for amicable settlement thereof.

The Claimant states that the Tribunal's jurisdiction is not limited by the Claim
Letters nor by the Request for Arbitration. In any case, pursuant to Article 22(1)
of the SCC Rules, AMTO is entitled to change and amend its claims unless the
Tribunal considers it inappropriate.

h) This case is inadmissible as the Respondent denies the advantages of Part III
of the ECT on the basis of Article 17(1) of the ECT: The Respondent states that a
dispute concerning interpretation and application of Article 17 of the ECT is
excluded ratione materiae from this arbitration, since Article 26 of the ECT deals
with breaches of ‘obligations', and Article 17 of the ECT refers to a ‘right’. The
Respondent states that the Claimant has failed to prove that it is not ultimately
beneficially owned or controlled by nationals of a third state and that it has
substantial business activities in Latvia within the meaning of Article 17(1).

16/67

Also, the Respondent criticised the Plama Decision on various grounds,
including, without limitation, its retrospective only effect of the ‘denial of
advantages’.

The Claimant states that AMTO is not owned or controlled by citizens of a third
state within the meaning of Article 17(1) of the ECT, but rather owned by
corporate entities of signatory states of the ECT. AMTO is owned by a company
tegistered in Liechtenstein, which in turn is owned by a foundation based in
Liechtenstein. Furthermore, AMTO has substantial business activities in Latvia
within the meaning of Article 17(1) of the ECT. The reference to "substantial
business activities" in Article 17(1) of the ECT is intended to exclude so called
mailbox companies from protection under the ECT. AMTO is not such a
company. AMTO is a registered company in Latvia and maintains office
premises in Riga with full-time employees. Further, AMTO has bank relations in
Latvia. Thus, the Claimant states that there is no ground for the application of
Article 17 of the ECT.

(i) Suspension of termination of this proceeding is required because _of the
parallel international proceeding before the European Court of Human Rights.
The Respondent asserts that such parallel international proceedings manifestly do
not contribute to the legal security of the international resolution of disputes, and
to avoid possible double recovery shall be executed for reasons of fairness and
predictability of international arbitration. Lis pendens and res judicata
approaches relied upon by the Claimant should not be applied formalistically.

According to Claimant, application to the European Court of Human Rights (the
«ECHR») is not a ground for suspension nor termination of this arbitration. The
case at hand is not subject to /is pendens with respect to the proceeding before
the ECHR. Lis pendens would require parallel proceedings involving the same
parties and the same causes of action. However, EYUM-10, the claimant in the
ECHR proceeding, is not a party to this arbitration. Further, in the ECHR
proceeding, EYUM-10 relies on the Respondent's violations of the European
Convention of Human Rights. In this proceeding, however, AMTO's claims are
based on the ECT. Therefore, a ruling by the ECHR would not have res judicata
effect in this arbitration. Accordingly, there is no /is pendens in the arbitration.
Further, as alleged, a risk of double recovery cannot be a jurisdictional objection,
relying on the Nycomb tribunal's conclusion in this matter.

2. The Claimant's Allegations of Violations of the ECT:
§27.- The Claimant alleges the following violations of the ECT by the
Respondent:

17/67

a) Violation of Article _10(1) of the ECT: The Claimant states that the
Respondent has violated Article 10(1) of the ECT in that:

(i) The Respondent has failed to "encourage and create stable, equitable,
favourable and transparent conditions for investors of other Contracting
Parties to make Investments in its Area" in accordance with the first
sentence of Article 1 of the ECT. The Claimant suffered intimidation,
discrimination and constant obstruction at the hands of Energoatom from
the very first moment it became known that the Claimant intended to
acquire shares in EYUM-10. In particular, malicious rumours were released
about AMTO and its reasons for investing in EYUM-10; potential sellers of
EYUM-10 shares to AMTO were threatened and intimidated; AMTO was
obstructed from holding meetings with the workers and shareholders of
EYUM-10; and AMTO's representatives were accused of inciting a strike
against Energoatom which was said to cause harm to the country.

Once the Claimant had made its investment in EYUM-10, the Respondent
continued to treat the Claimant's investment unfavourably. While
Energoatom was in a position to obtain extra funding for certain purposes, a
conscious decision was taken not to obtain funding to pay the debts owed to
the foreign owned EYUM-10. As a direct 'punishment' for EYUM-10's
attempts to recover its receivables by reverting to the courts of Ukraine,
ZAES/Energoatom - being the monopoly buyer in Energodar - stopped
ordering services from EYUM-10. The Respondent tried through its tax
authority and the local court to destroy EYUM-10 by imposing an
injunction on EYUM-10's assets thus preventing it from using its funds and
unreasonably refusing to allow EYUM-10 to make necessary payments to
its staff and service providers.

(ii) The Respondent has accorded AMTO's investment in the Ukraine
treatment less favourable than that required by international law. In
particular, AMTO has been subjected to a denial of justice under
international law. This denial of justice comprises (i) the Respondent's
general failure to provide EYUM-10 with an effective means of enforcing
its bankruptcy claim; (ii) the interference by the Government of Ukraine in
the bankruptcy proceedings against Energoatom; and (Hi) the actions of the
Ukrainian courts in handling EYUM-10's attempts to recover its legitimate
claims, i.e. the refusal to allow EYUM-10 to participate in the first three
bankruptcy proceedings in violation of applicable law; the delaying, staying
and dismissal of EYUM-10's own bankruptcy claim in breach of applicable
law, the wrongful dismissal of EYUM-10's second bankruptcy claim, and;
the unreasonable delay in the handling of case No. 43/167.

18/67

(iii) The Respondent has failed to accord AMTO's investment fair and
equitable treatment by breaching many of the specific elements identified in
this standard by international tribunals. In particular, (i) the interference by
the Government of Ukraine in Energoatom's bankruptcy amounts to
arbitrary and discriminatory treatment; (ii) the deficient manner in which
the proceedings were handled by the Ukrainian courts violates the
requirement of due process; (iii) the various breaches of the Ukrainian
Bankruptcy Law constitute a direct infringement of the principle of legality;
(iv) AMTO's legitimate expectations of enjoying an effective means for
enforcing EYUM-10's claims against Energoatom have been grossly
offended; and (v) the sum-total of the Respondent's actions show that it
manifestly failed to provide a stable, predictable and transparent framework
for AMTO's investment.

(iv) Actions of Energoatom amount to discriminatory measures in breach of
the third sentence of Article 10(1) of the ECT. Energoatom pursued a
campaign of hostility and intimidation towards AMTO and continually
refused to pay the undisputed claims owed to EYUM-10. This treatment all
stems from discrimination against AMTO as a foreign investor in direct
breach of the third sentence of Article 10(1).

(v) The Respondent failed to provide Energoatom with adequate funding to
pay its debts.

The Claimant relies on the final sentence of Article 10(1) that the Respondent
shall observe any obligations it has entered into with an investor or an investment
of an investor. The Claimant states that international liability is not precluded by
the allegations that AMTO has failed to comply with its duty to assess its
investment's risk or by alleged non-exhaustion of local remedies. AMTO asserts
that it has not failed in assessing the investment risks, since AMTO was entitled
to believe that Ukraine, being a Contracting Party of the ECT, and its organs and
enterprises, would act in conformity with the obligations under the Convention.
Moreover, AMTO had in fact exhausted all local remedies by (through EYUM-
10) being successful in the court cases. AMTO/EYUM-10's request, after having
found that the firm judgments could not be enforced, that Energoatom, one of
Ukraine's largest, state owned and multi-privileged enterprises, be declared in
bankruptcy, is not a normal local 'remedy' against the state authorities' refusal to
enforce the judgments. In any case, after three and a half years of unsuccessful
attempts to obtain that Energoatom be declared in bankruptcy it could no longer
be required from AMTO/EYUM-10 that they should continue to pursue the
seemingly hopeless bankruptcy alternative.

§28.- The Respondent contends that there is no violation of Article 10(1) for
a number of reasons including the following:

19/67

(i) the alleged breach of the first sentence of Art. 10(1) of the ECT
concerns the pre-investment period;

(ii) if the standard of treatment required by international law under the
ECT prohibits the denial of justice under the ECT such protection exists
only for investments and AMTO is not an investment, nor has it resorted
to any legal proceeding in Ukraine, so that it cannot have been denied
justice. Further, EYUM-10 is a national of the Ukraine State, so that it
cannot avail itself of international protection meant for aliens (nor did it
ever appropriately disclose (much less claim) its foreign-related status
before the Ukrainian authorities in the actual and alleged proceedings in
Ukraine;

(iii) the fair and equitable treatment standard assures a minimum standard
of treatment, it applies to pre-investment stage, it is not a direct
commitment of the Contracting Parties to the ECT, and in any event it is
necessary to demonstrate that both elements were violated, which is not
demonstrated here because of the absence of any plausible comparison
(even if "unfair" treatment could be assumed). Further, the breach of this
standard requires both the accumulation of breaches and the impact on the
investor to reach a minimum threshold of intensity that is missing in this
case. The Respondent also denies the normative nature and character of
the elements of 'fair and equitable treatment’ as discerned by arbitral
tribunals;

(iv) the Claimant has failed to show prima facie a ‘like’ situation and its
discrimination claim is mostly based on unsupported allegations.

The Respondent further states that a denial of justice may be attributed only to a
final action of the state's judicial system. The ECT is not a carte blanche for an
investor's conduct in disregard and neglect of its logical and reasonable duties of
general due diligence, and EYUM-10 has not been 'deprived' of its rights to
enforce since deprivation has a sense of irreversibility, meaning that enforcement
was made completely impossible, which has not been tested nor proven. The
Respondent also states the final sentence of Article 10(1) (the 'umbrella clause’)
does not apply, that the State was not involved in negotiating, executing and
implementing Energoatom's obligations towards EYUM-10, and that
suppositions about lack of funding of Energoatom are insufficient to invoke the
umbrella clause of Article 10(1).

(B) Violation of Article 10(12) of the ECT:
§29.- The Claimant submits that the Respondent has failed to provide
EYUM-10 (and consequently, AMTO) with effective means by which to assert

20/67

its legitimate claims. For a period of more than five years, EYUM-10 (and
consequently, AMTO) has been prevented from enforcing its rights under eleven
final and binding court judgments.

The Claimant states that Energoatom has since March 12, 2002 almost constantly
been under a moratorium, thus preventing EYUM-10 from enforcing its rightful
claims against Energoatom. The Claimant further asserts that the procedure
regarding bankruptcy cases in Ukraine makes it possible for a debtor effectively
to escape enforcement by abusing the legal system. In Energoatom's case the
courts of Ukraine have supported Energoatom's abuse of the bankruptcy
legislation, by continuously acting in breach of the Bankruptcy Law. For
example, decisions to initiate bankruptcy proceedings have not been publicly
announced, which has deprived creditors such as EYUM-10 of the possibility to
participate in the proceedings. EYUM-10's own requests for Energoatom to be
declared bankrupt have been wrongfully dismissed by the courts. When EYUM-
10 was finally allowed to participate in an on-going bankruptcy proceeding, the
handling of the case has been constantly postponed and has still not been tried by
the court of first instance.

The Claimant further submits that the Government of Ukraine has interfered in
the on-going bankruptcy cases against Energoatom. Firstly, the Cabinet of
Minister of Ukraine issued an ad hoc Resolution characterising Energoatom as a
"highly hazardous enterprise" on the same day as Energoatom filed its additional
appeal against the commencement of EYUM-10's bankruptcy claim against
Energoatom. This ad hoc Resolution was intended as a clear signal to the
Commercial Court of Appeal and ultimately resulted in Energoatom's appeal
being accepted by the court five days after the Resolution was issued. Secondly,
shortly after the Commercial Court of Kiev finally ruled that a preliminary
hearing would take place in the sixth bankruptcy case, the Respondent introduced
Law 2711-VI which provided Energoatom with enhanced protection against
bankruptcy. Thirdly, on 28 November 2005 Energoatom was put on the list of
companies in the energy sector to which the special procedure for payment of
debts according to the Law 2711-VI applies.

In light of these circumstances, the Claimant submits that the Respondent has
breached Article 10(12) of the ECT, under which the Contracting Parties have
specifically undertaken a positive obligation to provide an effective means for the
assertion of claims and the enforcement of rights that exists over and above the
general concept of denial of justice in customary international law.

§30.- The Respondent states that Article 10(12) expresses an element of the
minimum standard of customary international law requiring access to courts and
other enforcement authorities, but it does not require the satisfaction of monetary

21/67

demands and repayment of debts during a moratorium period, especially between
two domestic entities and without any attempts to enforce its rights on the part of
the alien before the host state courts. In particular, the judicial proceedings
involving EYUM-10 have always been consistent with Ukrainian laws and
delays were possible under the said laws and/or caused by creditors’ actions, and
any errors committed in the course of these judicial proceedings have been
corrected by the appellate courts in Ukraine. The Respondent denies any
cooperation between Energoatom and its creditors and submits that Claimant has
not proven otherwise. Resolution No. 1160 did not constitute governmental
interference in judicial proceeding but it was merely a clarification of a previous
resolution (and was not taken into account in the court judgements), and the
passing of new legislation had a largely positive effect for EYUM-10 because of
partial lifting of moratorium on payment of previous debts.

§31.- The Claimant states that that the acts and omissions of Energoatom
are attributable to the Republic of Ukraine pursuant to Article 8 of the ILC's
Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts.

The Ukraine has failed to ensure that the state enterprise Energoatom was
conducting its activities in relation to the services in its Area in a manner
consistent with Ukraine's obligations under ECT (Article 22(1)).

AMTO admits that the relationship between EYUM-10 and Energoatom has
included civil law and commercial acts. This does not mean, however, that such
acts cannot be attributed to the State. It follows from Article 8 of the ILC Articles
that any act, which is in fact carried out on the instructions of, or under the
direction or control of the State, is attributable to it. The ultimate purpose of all
Energoatom's dealings is to implement the Government's policy, to achieve the
results, and to maintain a high degree of productivity, safety and stability in the
production of electricity, in the interests of the Nation and in accordance with
instructions from, and under the ultimate control of, the superior political organs
of the Ukraine. The procurement, negotiating, purchase and performance of the
construction and maintenance services constitute activities that are attributable to
the State. This is even more so with respect to Energoatom's failure to pay its
clear and unquestionable debts towards EYUM-10, due to lack of funding within
the framework of the highly centralised and regulated electrical power industry.
This is conduct attributable to the State and for which the State is responsible.

In relation to the so-called structural-functional test for arbitration, the Claimant
states that this test has been applied by the arbitral tribunals in the Maffezini v.
Spain and Nykomb v. Latvia arbitrations. In its analysis of the ownership-control
relationship in Nykomb v. Latvia, the tribunal took into consideration the
legislative and governmental control of the company, and also the fact that it was

22/67

a nation-wide monopoly. The tribunal found the conduct of Latvenergo to be
attributable to the State. The same factors, reasoning and conclusion also apply to
Energoatom.

AMTO maintains that Energoatom does indeed belong to the governmental
structure of Ukraine, through its participation in the highly centralised and totally
state controlled Wholesale Energy Market. The structural test has thus been met.
In this context AMTO refers to the opinion of Professor Walde, quoted by the
Respondent in the Rejoinder. Professor Walde explains that state ownership
creates a rebuttable presumption that the structural test has been met. AMTO
agrees with the view of Professor Walde, that state ownership of a private
company leads to the presumption of state control. In this case, however, it
should be noted that Energoatom is not an ordinary private joint stock company.
It is by nature a specific juridical person known as a 'state company’
(Gosudarstvennoe predpriyatie, GP). More importantly, the Respondent has not
rebutted, and cannot rebut, the presumption of state control.

The Claimant states that Energoatom's 'underpayment' of its debts towards
EYUM-10 was a direct consequence of the Government's failure to provide
Energoatom with financial means, which would have made it possible for
Energoatom to pay. By creating the Wholesale Energy Market, Ukraine has
created a structure whereby Energoatom was no longer able to obtain payment
for the electricity it produces and sells to the market, and where it has turned out
that Energoatom has been barred from successful debt collection through the
courts and enforcement agents.

The Respondent contests the alleged attribution of acts of Energoatom to Ukraine
by the Claimant, and states in particular that the requirements of the structural-
functional test for attribution are not satisfied in the present case.

The Respondent also contends that Article 22(1) does not apply in the present
case, since the contractual obligation of Energoatom to pay under the commercial
contracts is not an obligation of a Contracting Party under Part III of the ECT.
Further, the contractual relations of ZAES/Energoatom with EYUM-10 do not
fall under relations described in Article 22(1) of the ECT (it was EYUM-10
which provided services to ZAES/Energoatom, and not vice versa as provided in
Article 22(1)).

3. The Relief sought by the Claimant:
§32.- The Claimant seeks the following relief:

«AMTO requests the Tribunal to

23/67

(i) declare that the Respondent has breached the ECT and is liable towards
AMTOfor damage suffered as a result of the Respondent's breaches;

(ii) order the Respondent to restore AMTO's investment by paying to EYUM-10,
Euro 3,529,194 together with interest at a yearly rate of eight (8) percent on
Euro 6,117,187 from I January 2002 to 31 May 2006, on Euro 5,881,848
from I June 2006 to 15 June 2006, on Euro 5,641,312 from 16 June 2006 to
15 July 2006, on Euro 5,403,774 from 16 July 2006 to 15 August 2006, on
Euro 5,166,236 from 16 August 2006 to 15 September 2006, on Euro
4,928,698from 16 September 2006 to 15 October 2006, on Euro 4,687,711
from 16 October 2006 to 15 November 2006, on Euro 4,452,230 from 16
November 2006 to 15 December 2006, on Euro on 4,223,318 from 16
December 2006 to 15 January 2007, on Euro 3,989,098 from 16 January
2007 to 15 February 2007, on Euro 3,758,262 from 16 February 2007 to 15
March 2007 and on Euro 3,529,194 from 15 March 2007 until full payment
is made;

(Hi) order the Respondent to restore AMTO 's investment by paying to EYUM-10,
Euro 11,470,000 together with interest thereon at a yearly rate of eight (8)
percent on Euro 692,000 from I January 2001 to 31 December 2001, on
Euro 2,861,000 from 1 January 2002 to 31 December 2002, on Euro
5,067,000 from I January 2003 to 31 December 2003, on Euro 7,150,000
from I January 2004 to 31 December 2004, on Euro 9,012,000 from 1
January 2005 until 31 December 2005 and on Euro 11,470,000 from 1
January 2006 until full payment is made.

(iv) order the Respondent to compensate AMTOfor costs in the amount of USD
594,902 plus interest thereon at the rate of eight (8) percent per annum, from
16 October 2006 until payment is made;

() order the Respondent to compensate AMTO for its arbitration costs, including
counsel's fees and the costs for experts and witnesses, and, as between the
parties, alone to bear the compensation due the Arbitral Tribunal and the
SCC Institute, in amounts to be specified at a later stage.»

§33.- The Respondent states that the Claimant has not demonstrated that it
is entitled to any compensation as it has failed to prove any breach of the ECT, or
that any such breach had a detrimental effect on its investment (AMTO's shares
in EYUM-10). Further the Claimant is not entitled to restitution as restitution is
distinguished from compensation as a form of non-monetary relief. The Claimant
states that since restitution in kind is not possible in this case, AMTO claims
restitution/reparation which should take the form of, first, payment of
Energoatom's debt to EYUM-10 less payments already made pursuant to the
Settlement Agreement and, secondly, payment of lost revenue from 2000 to
2005.

The Respondent states that the claims for restitution of revenue are unclear,

unfounded and speculative. The Respondent also challenges the Claimant's
treatment of inflation and currency conversion. The Claimant considers that lost

24/67

revenue should be translated into Euros in order to compensate for the severe
inflation in Ukraine during the relevant period. Furthermore, Claimant contends
that AMTO is entitled to formulate its claim in whatever currency it deems
appropriate. Explicit ECT support for conversion into Euros is not required.

According to the Respondent, the claims for arbitration and non-arbitration costs
(plus interest) lack legal foundation and are unsupported. These expenses do not
qualify as an investment and may not be reimbursed under the ECT. The claim
for arbitration costs should be dismissed since the statement of claim is not
legally and factually grounded, lacks proper evidence and is subject to dismissal.

§34.- As regards the claim for interest, the Respondent contends that (i) the
Claimant requests interest in addition to the 10% increase in sales calculated over
the lost profit, which amounts to double recovery; (ii) taking into account triple
overpricing in the underlying contracts, it is logical to submit that the final
settlement already covers any reasonable conceivable interest; (iii) there is no
reason why non-arbitration costs should include interest, and (iv) the Claimant's
reliance on the Swedish statutory interest rate does not support its suggested 8
percent rate. The Claimant states that it is well established that an aggrieved
party is entitled to interest on money that should have been paid at an earlier
moment in time. There is no double recovery since the growth rate and the
interest claim serve different purposes and a flat annual interest rate of 8 percent
is clearly reasonable compared to the Swedish statutory default rate of interest.
Additionally, AMTO relies on Article 7.4.9 of the UNIDROIT Rules to support
its claim for interest.

Finally, Respondent submits that there is a risk of multiple recovery because the
same amounts are being claimed in various fora and that any assessment of
damages to AMTO should be made proportional to AMTO's percentage of
ownership in EYUM-10. AMTO denies that there is any risk of double recovery.
All amounts paid under the Settlement Agreements have been taken into account.
Any amounts awarded in this arbitration will effectively preclude AMTO/
EYUM-10 from obtaining compensation on the same grounds in any other
proceedings. If the Respondent is ordered to pay directly to EYUM-10, AMTO
will benefit in proportion to its shareholding, and there is no need to adjust the
claim as alleged by the Respondent.

4. The Respondent's Counterclaim and Prayer for Relief.

§35.- The Respondent requests that the Claimant's case is dismissed on
jurisdiction/admissibility grounds and on the merits. Further, the Respondent
counterclaims: (i) for reimbursement of the arbitration costs and related
expenses; and (ii) compensation for non-material injury to its reputation in the
amount of 25,000 Euros as a result of unfounded allegations that

25/67

DonetskOblEnergo's claim was fictitious, and of co-operation between
Energoatom and DonetskOblEnergo.

The Claimant contends that Respondent does not have the right to raise
counterclaims pursuant to Article 26 (1) of the ECT, and that in any case
Respondent has failed to show that AMTO has caused any injury whatsoever and
AMTO cannot be penalised for presenting its claim on the basis of alleged
breaches of the ECT. The Respondent submits that the allegations of the
fictitiousness of the DonetskOblEnergo's claims and of collusion are included in
the alleged breach of Respondent's obligations of Part III and are therefore
covered by the definition of Art. 26(1) of the ECT; and that the ECT does not
prohibit the right to raise counterclaims. Moreover, by virtue of Article 26(4)(c)
of the ECT, Respondent is entitled to submit counterclaims under Article 21(2) of
the SCC Arbitration Rules.

VI. DECISION: JURISDICTION

(a) Investment/Economic Activity in the Energy Sector:

§36.- The Respondent's first jurisdictional objection is that AMTO's shares
in EYUM-10 do not constitute a qualified 'Investment’ under the ECT. Article
1(6) of the ECT defines 'Investment' as follows:

«6. —‘Investment' means every kind of asset, owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by an Investor and includes:

(a) tangible and intangible, and movable and immovable, property, and
any property rights such as leases, mortgages, liens, and pledges;

(b) a company or business enterprise, or shares, stock, or other forms of
equity participation in a company or business enterprise, and bonds
and other debt of a company or business enterprise;

() claims to money and claims to performance pursuant to contract
having an economic value and associated with an investment;

(a) Intellectual Property;
(e) Returns;

() any right conferred by law or contract or by virtue of any licenses and
permits granted pursuant to law to undertake any Economic Activity in
the Energy Sector.

A change in the form in which assets are invested does not affect their
character as investments and the term ‘Investment’ includes all investments,
whether existing at or made after the later of the date of entry into force of
this Treaty for the Contracting Party of the investor making the investment
and that for the Contracting Party in the area of which the investment is
made (hereinafier referred to as the 'Effective Date’) provided that the

26/67

Treaty shall only apply to matters affecting such investments after the
Effective Date.

‘Investment' refers to any investment associated with an Economic Activity in
the Energy Sector and to investments or classes of investments designated by
a Contracting Party in its area as 'Charter efficiency projects' and so
notified to the Secretariat.»

This definition of Investment has three parts: a wide definition (‘every kind of
asset’) illustrated by a list of six types of rights; a clarification (covering changes
in form, and a temporal qualification of the investment), and a restriction as to
the types of economic activity included in the definition of investment. The
definition part reflects a standard formula of investment treaties; the
clarifications are also routine; and the restriction reflects the purpose of the
Energy Charter Treaty to promote long term cooperation in a particular sector,
namely the energy sector.

§37.- 'Economic Activity in the Energy Sector' is defined in Article 1(5) as
follows:

«5. ‘Economic Activity in the Energy Sector' means an economic activity
concerning the exploration, extraction, refining, production, storage, land
transport, transmission, distribution, trade, marketing, or sale of Energy
Materials and Products except those included in Annex N1, or concerning the
distribution of heat to multiple premises.»

Annex NI lists certain energy materials and products excluded from the
definition of 'Economic Activity in the Energy Sector'. These exclusions are not
relevant to the present case.

§38.- The Energy Charter Treaty was adopted in the Final Act of the
European Energy Charter Conference. The Final Act, which included
representatives of the Republic of Latvia, the Principality of Liechtenstein, and
Ukraine, also adopted certain understandings in respect to the ECT, including
Understanding 2 and 3 in relation to Articles 1(5) and 1(6):

«By signing the Final Act, the representatives agreed to adopt the following
Understandings with respect to the Treaty:

2. With respect to Article 1(5)

(a) It is understood that the Treaty confers no rights to engage in economic
activities other than Economic Activities in the Energy Sector.

27/67

)

The following activities are illustrative of Economic Activity in the Energy
Sector:

(i) prospecting and exploration for, and extraction of, e.g. oil, gas, coal
and uranium;

 

(ii) construction and operation of power ion facilities, i di
those powered by wind and other renewable energy sources;

(Hi) land transportation, distribution, storage and supply of Energy
Materials and Products, e.g., by way of transmission and
distribution grids and pipelines or dedicated rail lines, and
construction of facilities for such, including the laying of oil, gas,
and coal-slurry pipelines;

(iv) removal and disposal of wastes from energy related facilities such as
power stations, including radioactive wastes from nuclear power
stations;

(v) decommissioning of energy related facilities, including oil rigs, oil
refineries and power generating plants;

(vi) marketing and sale of, and trade in Energy Materials and Products,
e.g., retail sales of gasoline; and

(vii) research, consulting, planning, management and design activities
related to the activities mentioned above, including those aimed at
Improving Energy Efficiency.

With respect to Article 1(6)

For greater clarity as to whether an Investment made in the Area of one
Contracting Party is controlled, directly or indirectly, by an Investor of any
other Contracting Party, control of an Investment means control in fact,
determined after an examination of the actual circumstances in each situation.
In any such examination, all relevant factors should be considered, including
the Investor's.

(a)
(7)

oO

financial interest, including equity interest, in the Investment;

ability to exercise substantial influence over the management and
operation of the Investment; and

ability to exercise substantial influence over the selection of members of
the board of directors or any other managing body.

Where there is doubt as to whether an Investor controls, directly or indirectly,
an Investment, an Investor claiming such control has the burden of proof that
such control exists.»

§39.- The Arbitral Tribunal accepts that the Claimant owns 204,165 shares
in EYUM-10. These shares constitute a kind of asset owned by the Claimant
within the definition of the first part of Article 1(6) ECT, and in particular
constitute 'shares ...in a company or business enterprise’ identified in Article
K6)(b).

However, the Respondent has objected that the Claimant's shares do not
constitute a qualifying Investment for the purposes of the ECT because they do
not satisfy the requirements in the last paragraph of Article 1(6) in that these
shares are not «associated with an Economic Activity in the Energy Sector.» The
Respondent states that EYUM-10's operations neither constitute in themselves
an 'Economic Activity in the Energy Sector’ nor are they ‘associated with' such
an activity.

§40.- The Claimant and the Respondent have both submitted evidence on
the nature of the contracts concluded between EYUM-10 and
Energoatom/ZAES. The Claimant submitted descriptions of its contracts as of
April 2006, and the Respondent submitted eleven contracts or contractual
amendments from the period 1999-2001. The Tribunal finds that EYUM-10's
contracts related to electrical installation, repairs and technical reconstruction or
upgrading -in short, the provision of technical services- at the ZAES nuclear
power plant.

The Respondent submitted that the provision of technical services does not fall
within the definition of 'Economic Activity in the Energy Sector' in Article 1(5).
The Respondent notes that Understanding 2 of the Final Act includes amongst
activities illustrative of Economic Activity in the Energy Sector the
«construction and operation of power generation facilities» but emphasizes that
the Understandings are not part of the ECT and cannot be used to extend or
modify the definition in Article 1(5); in any event «construction and operation»
is a compound and single standard and if the Claimant's activities amount to
construction (which the Respondent denies) they did not involve or concern the
operation of power generation facilities.

Further, the Respondent states that the Claimant's investment is not ‘associated
with' an Economic Activity in the Energy Sector. It states that the ECT does not
protect ‘investments remotely or loosely related to Economic Activity in the
Energy Sector' and refers to the fact that ZAES/Energoatom has dozens, if not
hundreds, of contractual relationships. It is not the object and purpose of the
ECT to extend investment protection to ordinary commercial transactions. The
Respondent states that an Investment «should have stable, long-term, intensive

episodic, fragmentary, incidental, etc». The Respondent states that EYUM-10's
short term case-by-case relationships with ZAES in respect of repair and
reconstruction works 'do not have such integrity and stability’ as to justify ECT
protection.

§41.- The Claimant states that EYUM-10's operations constitute Economic
Activity in the Energy Sector, as its specialised construction and maintenance
services to the nuclear power industry are 'construction' within the meaning of
Understanding 2 of the Final Act. Alternatively, EYUM-10's operations are
‘associated with' an Economic Activity in the Energy Sector.

§42.- The Parties' submissions require the Arbitral Tribunal to interpret the
final part of Article 1(6) to decide whether AMTO's shareholding in EYUM-10
qualifies as an investment «associated with Economic Activity in the Energy
Sector». The definition of investment in the first part of Article 1(6) is broad and
inclusive, and the energy sector restriction in the final part of Article 1(6) is
open-textured. The drafters of the Energy Charter Treaty did not require an
Investment to be an Economic Activity in the Energy Sector, but only to be
‘associated with' such an activity.

The Respondent submitted that a mere contractual relationship with an entity
engaged in an economic activity in the energy sector is not sufficient to be
‘associated with' that activity. The Respondent referred to contracts of a power
station for publishing, advertising or security services as examples of contractual
relationships that would not be ‘associated with' an Economic Activity in the
Energy Sector.

The Arbitral Tribunal considers that the interpretation of the words ‘associated
with' involves a question of degree, and refers primarily to the factual rather than
legal association between the alleged investment and an Economic Activity in
the Energy Sector. A mere contractual relationship with an energy producer is
insufficient to attract ECT protection where the subject matter of the contract has
no functional relationship with the energy sector. The open-textured phrase
‘associated with' must be interpreted in accordance with the object and purpose
of the ECT, as expressed in Article 2. The associated activity of any alleged
investment must be energy related, without itself needing to satisfy the definition
in Article 1(5) of an Economic Activity in the Energy Sector.

§43.- In the present case, ZAES/Energoatom is engaged in an Economic
Activity in the Energy Sector as its activity concerns the production of Energy
Material and Products, namely electrical energy. EYUM-10 provides technical

30/67

services -installation, repair and upgrades- directly related to the production of
electrical energy. It has provided these services through multiple contracts over a
substantial period of time. In its letter to EYUM-10 dated February 28, 2002
ZAES described EYUM-10 as being a 'strategic partner for 20 years' and stated
that EYUM-10's services were «strategically important and directed on the
reliable and safe exploitation of power units of our nuclear power plant.» The
close association of EYUM-10 with ZAES in the provision of services directly
related to energy production means that AMTO's shareholding in EYUM-10 is
an «investment associated with an Economic Activity in the Energy Sector».

For these reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that the Claimant's shareholding in
EYUM-10 is an Investment within the meaning of the Energy Charter Treaty.

(b) The Claimant's consent to arbitrate:

§44.- The Respondent submits that an investor initiating arbitration
pursuant to Article 26(4) ECT must expressly consent to arbitration, which the
Claimant has failed to do. The Respondent refers to the language of Article 26(4)
that any Investor choosing international arbitration «shall further provide its
consent in writing», (emphasis Respondent). The Respondent also relies on
Article 26(5) that refers to the State party consent «together with the written
consent of the Investor given pursuant to paragraph (4).» The Respondent
submits that «The investor's consent in writing as a separate instrument must be
addressed and delivered to the ECT Contracting Party to the dispute». The
Respondent recognized the widespread opinion that an investor's consent to
arbitration can be perfected by initiating an arbitration proceeding, but stated that
this is not possible under the express language of the ECT.

The Respondent also states that the Claimant's Request for Arbitration did not
include a copy of the arbitration agreement or clause (as required by Rule 5(iv)
of the SCC Rules) nor «the Claimant's explicit and unequivocal positive consent
in writing...for arbitration».

The Respondent states that Article 26 of the ECT contains a standing offer to
investors of dispute resolution by arbitration, but this «offer can operate as
unconditional only to the extent that it is accepted correctly». (Rejoinder,
paragraph 59). The express consent to arbitrate of the Claimant after the Request
for Arbitration was belated, defective, impermissible and inadmissible. The ECT
requires the Investor's consent prior to commencement of the arbitration.

§45.- The existence of an arbitration agreement must be determined in
accordance with the ECT, supplemented as required by the SCC Rules. It is well
established that arbitration pursuant to an investment treaty such as the ECT

31/67

requires an arbitration agreement. However, this arbitration agreement is not
created by a contemporaneous exchange of promises between the parties in the
manner of a commercial arbitration agreement. Rather, often offer and
acceptance are separated in time and form. The State parties make an open offer
of arbitration to investors of the other party or parties in the Treaty itself, which
can be accepted by an investor when a dispute arises. Only at this time is there
mutual consent to arbitration and therefore the Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction
over the dispute (see, for example, banco International, Inc v. Argentine
Republic, 1CSID ARB/97/96 'Preliminary Decision on Jurisdiction’ December 18,
1998, paragraph 44; 401LM 457 (March, 2001).

Article 26(3) ECT provides the ‘open offer' of the State Parties to arbitration. It
states (as far as is relevant) that «...each Contracting Party hereby gives its
unconditional consent to the submission of a dispute to international
arbitration... in accordance with the provisions of this Article.»

The Respondent's objection relates to the Claimant's consent. There is no doubt
that the Claimant must consent to arbitrate and this consent must be 'in writing’
(Article 26(4), opening sentence). The Respondent submits that the consent must
also be express, for the reasons explained above.

§46.- Consent to arbitrate, as the foundation of the jurisdiction of an arbitral
tribunal, should be unequivocal. The consent of an Investor under the ECT must
be unconditional, as consent is mutual and also the consent of the State Party
described in Article 26(3) is unconditional. However, where the consent of the
Investor to arbitration is in writing, unequivocal and unconditional then the ECT
imposes no further formal requirements.

A request for arbitration is by its very nature a consent to arbitrate because a
legal proceeding cannot be requested by a party without their own participation
in the proceeding. To request legal process is to submit to this process. An
unconditional request to initiate arbitration proposed by another is the consent
that completes the arbitration agreement and establishes the jurisdiction of the
arbitral tribunal.

§47.- In the present case, the Claimant's Request for Arbitration
unequivocally seeks to submit a dispute with the Respondent to arbitration
pursuant to the ECT. It does not seek to modify the arbitration process defined in
Article 26 ECT, to which Ukraine has already consented, by imposing any of its
own conditions. The Request for Arbitration therefore satisfies the requirement
of Article 26(4) that the Investor 'further provide its consent in writing’ for this
dispute to be submitted to arbitration.

32/67

The Respondent's objection to jurisdiction on the grounds of the Claimant's lack
of consent is therefore dismissed.

(©) Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis:

§48.- The Parties have put in issue the date when the investment was made,
and therefore when the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal begins. While the
Respondent argues that the investment period began on March 4, 2003 under a
‘conservative’ approach or on January 21, 2002 under a ‘liberal’ approach, the
Claimant contends that it made its initial investment as early as March 2000.

The fact that AMTO engaged the services of a broker for purposes of acquiring
shares in EYUM-10 is not by itself an investment in EYUM-10, i.e. the
acquisition of shares therein. Nor is the fact that AMTO on March 17, 2000
forwarded a payment to the broker indicative of any actual acquisition of shares
in EYUM-10.

However, the 'Minutes No. 11 of the session of the Management Board' of
EYUM-10 dated August 22, 2000 records a discussion of the purchases of shares
in EYUM-10 and states that AMTO holds 16% of the shares in EYUM-10. This
statement provides, in the view of the Tribunal, sufficient evidence that AMTO
at that date had achieved a shareholding in EYUM-10.

Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that jurisdiction ratione temporis begins on
August 22, 2000.

(d) The Existence of a ‘dispute’:

§49.- Article 26 provides a procedure for the settlement of disputes, and the
existence of a dispute precedes the initiation of international arbitration in
accordance with the provisions of this Article. The Respondent makes two
distinct submissions. Firstly, there was no dispute between the Parties, as the
only dispute was a commercial dispute between EYUM-10 and Energoatom.
Secondly, any dispute is now disposed of, as EYUM-10 and Energoatom / ZAES
have reached a settlement, which is in the process of being performed.

The Respondent refers to international jurisprudence articulating the principle
that a dispute is 'a disagreement on a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal
views or interests between parties’ or a 'claim of one party... positively opposed
by the other.’ It also refers to the decision in Emilio Agustin Maffezini v.
Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7) describing the natural sequence
of events from which a dispute emerges.

33/67

«96. The Tribunal notes in this respect that there tends to be a natural sequence of
events that leads to a dispute. It begins with the expression of a disagreement and
the statement of a difference of views. In time these events acquire a precise legal
meaning through the formulation of legal claims, their discussion and eventual
rejection or lack of response by the other party. The conflict of legal views and
interests will only be present in the latter stage, even though the underlying facts
predate them. It has also been rightly commented that the existence of the dispute
presupposes a minimum of communications between the parties, one party taking
up the matter with the other, with the latter opposing the Claimant's position
directly or indirectly.»

The Respondent has affirmed that the Claim Letters of May 16, 2005 represented
the first communication to the Ukraine alleging a breach of the ECT. There was
no conflict at this time, as the Respondent had taken no position on the
Claimant's allegations, and therefore there was no ‘dispute! for the purposes of
Article 26. In effect, the Respondent states that the Claim Letters were mere
notifications of a claim, and the initiation of communication that might lead to a
dispute, but not a request to amicably settle an existing dispute pursuant to
Article 26(2). The Respondent further notes that there was no response to the
Claim Letters. If this non-response itself gave rise to a dispute then it was
obligatory for the Claimant to subsequently request amicable settlement of such
dispute, so that a three month cooling off period might legitimately start to run
under Article 26(2). As there was no request for amicable settlement, the
Respondent's consent under Article 26(3) does not cover this dispute, and the
Arbitral Tribunal has no jurisdiction.

§50.- It is commonplace for investment treaties to provide for a period of
consultation or settlement discussions (often inappropriately referred to as
"cooling-off periods" or "waiting periods"). Some previous awards have found
that non-compliance with such clauses did not constitute a bar to jurisdiction (see,
for example, Ethyl Corporation v. The Government of Canada, Award on
Jurisdiction, June 24, 1998; 38 ILM 708, paragraphs 79-88 (Article 1120 of
NAFTA); SGS Societe Generale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of
Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/13), Decision of the Tribunal on Objections
to Jurisdiction of August 6, 2003, paragraphs 183-184 (Switzerland-Pakistan
BIT)). However, each instrument and each case must be dealt with independently,
and there is certainly no general principle that an investor may ignore
consultation or settlement clauses with impunity.

The purpose of the Energy Charter Treaty includes the promotion of long-term
cooperation in the energy field, based on complementarities and mutual benefits,
in accordance with the objectives and principles of the Charter. This purpose is
facilitated by the amicable settlement of disputes. The request for amicable
settlement required by Article 26(2) ensures that a State party is notified of a
dispute prior to the initiation of an arbitration and has an opportunity to

34/67

investigate and take steps to resolve the dispute. Article 26(2) does not raise any
fundamental rights -there is no breach of due process in the loss or curtailment of
a period for settlement discussions- but is an important element of the dispute
resolution process and is a manifestation of the cooperation in the energy sector
that is at the heart of the ECT.

§51.- The Respondent states that there was no dispute involving Ukraine
prior to the Claim Letters, but rather a commercial dispute between two
Ukrainian juridical persons (i.e. EYUM-10 and Energoatom). This submission
defines the dispute by reference to contract claims, and therefore inevitably
excludes the treaty claims pursuant to the ECT (unless the parties were identical,
which is not the case here). Two Ukrainian juridical entities, and the non-
payment of contractual debts and court judgments, were at the centre of the
dispute. Nevertheless, both the Claimant and the Respondent were involved in
the dispute. The Claimant was directly involved in the negotiations between
EYUM-10 and Energoatom. Mr. O.M. Rogozhnikov, the deputy general director
for economy and finance of Energoatom stated that during negotiations with
contractors in 2000-2001 he was aware of the new foreign ownership of EYUM-
10. In his witness statement he states that he met several times with a Mr.
Viktorov «who simultaneously represented EYUM and its foreign investor. At
those meetings, we discussed plans of restructuring indebtedness towards EYUM,
whereat Mr. Voktorov... repeatedly offered assistance of foreign investor in
solving financial problems at ZNPP.»

§52.- The Claimant did not articulate and transmit a claim pursuant to the
ECT to the Respondent prior to the Claim Letters. The Claimant until this time
concentrated its efforts of recovery on Energoatom, but the close links of
Energoatom with the State leads the Tribunal to the conclusion that the Claimant,
EYUM-10, Energoatom and the Respondent were all part of the same dispute
prior to the sending of the Claim Letters. Ukraine knew of the debt repayment
problems of Energoatom. The Claim Letters did not make known to Ukraine a
set of circumstances for the first time, but rather advised that a particular investor
had turned its efforts for relief from a state-owned entity to the State itself. In
short, the novelty of the Claim Letters was their legal pretensions. The factual
background to those pretensions was already known to Ukraine. It is true the
background was not known in all its detail, but was sufficiently well known not
to be at all unexpected. Further, the Respondent was in a position to respond
promptly to the Claim Letters. Nevertheless, it chose not to reply to these letters.

For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant and the Respondent were
parties to an existing dispute at the time of the Claim Letters. Accordingly, the

35/67

Claimant was entitled to request amicable settlement pursuant to Article 26(2),
and at the expiry of its three month period, to initiate arbitration.

§53.- Additionally, a State party that considers the amicable settlement
requirements of Article 26(2) have not been complied with by an Investor has an
obligation, as a matter of procedural good faith, to raise its objections
immediately. This ensures the Investor can, if necessary, remedy the defect so
that both parties are in a position to engage in the amicable settlement
discussions envisaged by the ECT, and thereby help to preserve their long term
cooperation in the energy sector.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that by failing to raise any immediate objection
to the Claim Letters, the Respondent recognized the existence of the dispute and
the validity of the Claim Letters.

§54.- Finally, the Respondent submits that the subject matter of the dispute
has been exhausted by the settlement agreement between EYUM and
Energoatom.

The settlement agreement relates to the contractual dispute between EYUM-10
and Energoatom and not to the treaty claims of the Claimant against the
Respondent pursuant to the ECT. The contract and treaty claims are, of course,
part of the same wider dispute, and the contractual settlement, depending on the
parties to the settlement and its terms, might preclude the ECT claims, but that is
not the case here. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the settlement agreements
have no implications for the jurisdiction of this Tribunal.

(e) Jurisdictional Submissions Relating to the Claim Letters:

§55.- The Respondent makes two distinct jurisdiction submissions based
upon the Claim Letters. Firstly, the Claimant impugns the validity of the power
of attorney of the Claimant's counsel, Mr. Sverre B. Svahnstrom, enclosed with
the Claim Letters, and on this basis submits that the request for amicable consent,
investor's consent to arbitrate, and Request for Arbitration are all unauthorized.
Secondly, the Claim Letters define the scope of the dispute for the subsequent
arbitration, so that the Claimant cannot include claims in the arbitration that were
not submitted to amicable settlement.

The power of attorney included in the Claim Letters specifically referred to
arbitration and proceedings against the Ukraine pursuant to the ECT. It was
signed by 'Leonids Krizanovskis, Director' and dated 'Riga.......... May 2005' with
the actual date of signature not completed. The Respondent states that the

36/67

authority of Mr. Krizanovskis to issue powers of attorney is not confirmed in any
way either by the constituent documents of AMTO or by-laws, or otherwise.

§56.- The applicable law in the present arbitration is the ECT itself, and
‘applicable rules and principles of international law' (Article 26(6)). There is no
requirement in the ECT relating to powers of attorney, and nor has the
Respondent identified any relevant principles of international law relating to
powers of attorney. Further, the Respondent's objection is purely formal, in that
there is no evidence to suggest that Mr. Svahnstrom was not in fact authorized by
the Claimant to act on its behalf, either at the time of the Claim Letters or at any
subsequent time, or has in any manner exceeded his authority. Accordingly, the
Arbitral Tribunal accepts the power of attorney provided with the Claim Letters,
and finds that the Claim Letters, their request for amicable settlement, the
Claimant's consent to arbitrate and the Request for Arbitration have all been fully
authorized by the Claimant. The Respondent's objection based on lack of
authority is therefore dismissed.

§57.- The Respondent also submits that the Claim Letters define the dispute
that can be submitted to arbitration. This submission misconceives the nature of
the request for amicable settlement. Article 26(2) requires the Claimant to submit
the 'dispute' for amicable settlement. A dispute, as already explained, is a state of
affairs involving a failure to agree. The purpose of a request for amicable
settlement is to discuss the dispute, with a view to exchanging views over its
causes, the interests involved, clarifying factual uncertainties and possible
misunderstandings, and identifying possible solutions within the framework of
the promotion of long term cooperation in the energy field based on
complementarities and mutual benefits. A party can request amicable settlement
of a dispute without identifying any ECT claims, and an Investor may have good
reason not to formulate claims at this stage, in order to avoid taking a position or
appearing to threaten the State party with arbitration before bona fide settlement
discussions. The purpose of Article 26(2) -to provide for settlement discussions-
requires the avoidance of legal forms, and the facilitation of open
communication. The Investor must inform the State of the state of affairs
involving disagreement, and request amicable settlement. If the State considers
there is insufficient information to initiate discussions then the good faith
response is simply to so advise the Investor, and require more detail. In other
words, to initiate the type of communications envisaged by Article 26(2).

Similar views have been expressed by other tribunals. For example, in
Generation Ukraine, Inc v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9 ) page 45:

«The requirement to consult and negotiate, however, does not serve to compel the
investor to plead its legal case on multiple occasions. To insist upon a

37/67

precise congruity in the investor's articulation of its grievances in these
different for a would only have a chilling effect on consultation and negotiation
between the investor and the host State.»

§58.- The Arbitral Tribunal considers that the Claim Letters satisfied the
minimum requirements of advising the Ukraine of a dispute and requesting
amicable settlement. In the subsequent Request for Arbitration the Investor was
free to frame its claims as it wished, provided they related to the same dispute, as
here they clearly do. Accordingly, the Respondent's objection that the Request
for Arbitration includes claims not raised in the Claim Letters is rejected.

(f Article 17 ECT/Denial of Advantages:

§59.- The Respondent submits that the claims brought by the Claimant are
inadmissible by operation of Article 17(1) of the ECT and alleges that Article
17(1) ECT requires the termination of this arbitration. Article 17 provides:

«ARTICLE 17
NON-APPLICATION OF PART III [le. Articles 10-17 ECT, entitled
"Investment Promotion and Protection'] IN CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES

Each Contacting Party reserves the right to deny the advantages of this Part to:
(1) a legal entity if citizens or nationals of a third state own or control such

entity and if that entity has no substantial business activities in the Area of
the Contracting Party in which it is organized)...

 

(2) an Investment, if the denying Contracting Party establishes that such
Investment is an Investment of an Investor of a third state with or as to which
the denying Contracting Party:

(a) does not maintain a diplomatic relationship; or
(b) adopts or maintains measures that:
(i) _ prohibit transactions with Investors of that state; or

(ii) would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Part were
accorded to Investors of that state or to their Investments.»

The Respondent asserts that the exercise of its right under Article 17 is not
arbitrable. In the alternative, it states that the Claimant has failed to prove that it
is not owned or controlled by citizens of a third state or that it has substantial
business interests in Latvia. Further, the Respondent can exercise its right to
deny advantages at any time, meaning that the right can be exercised during the
arbitration, and did not need to be exercised at the time of the making of the
Investment, or prior to the alleged breaches.

38/67

i) Arbitrabilitv and Article 171:

§60.- The Respondent's first submission is that the State's 'right' to deny
advantages under Article 17 is not subject to arbitration, so that the State is the
sole and exclusive judge of whether the Investor has the characteristics described
in Article 17(1). This submission has a terminological basis, as Article 26(1)
entitles an Investor to submit to arbitration an alleged dispute relating to the
State's ‘obligations', and Article 17 refers not to a State's obligations but a 'right'
to deny advantages. Therefore, the Arbitral tribunal has no jurisdiction rationae
materiae.

A dispute regarding an obligation includes a dispute relating to the existence of
an obligation. Indeed, this is the essence of the competence/competence principle
in international arbitration. The State might assert 'rights', 'powers,' 'privileges'
or 'immunities' to deny, annul or evade an obligation, but the legal description of
the objection does not detach it from the Claimant's assertion of the existence and
breach of an obligation. The Respondent's exercise of its 'right' to deny
advantages is an aspect of the dispute submitted to arbitration by the Claimant,
and within the jurisdiction of this Arbitral Tribunal.

Accordingly, the Respondent's submission that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction
over its exercise of its 'right' to deny advantages pursuant to Article 17 ECT is
rejected.

 

ii) Interpretative Issue:
§61.- Article 17 enables a State party to deny the Part III treaty rights to
certain classes of investors. Article 17(1) excludes Investors that are legal
entities rather than natural persons, where the legal entity has no real connection
with its nominal nationality. Article 17(2) excludes protection for Investments of
Investors from countries with which the State does not maintain normal
diplomatic or economic relationships.

Article 17 can be read together with the definition of 'Investor' in Article 1(7) as
establishing two classes of Investors of a Contracting Party for the purposes of
the ECT. The first class comprises Investors with an indefeasible right to
investment protection under the ECT. This class includes nationals of another
Contracting Party -whether natural persons or juridical entities- except for those
nationals falling within the second class.

The second class comprises Investors that have a defeasible right to investment
protection under the ECT, because the host State of the investment has the power
to divest the Investor of this right. In this second class are legal entities that
satisfy the nationality requirement by reason of incorporation but are owned or
controlled by nationals of a third state in a manner potentially unacceptable to

39/67

the host State. Such foreign ownership or control is potentially unacceptable
where it involves a State with which the Host State does not maintain normal
diplomatic or economic relationships, or where it is not accompanied by
substantial business activity in the state of incorporation.

As the purpose of the ECT is to establish a legal framework 'in order to promote
long-term cooperation in the energy field, based on complementarities and
mutual benefits...' then the potential exclusion of foreign owned entities from
ECT investment protection under Article 17 is readily comprehensible. 'Long
term economic cooperation’, 'complementarities' or 'mutual benefits' are unlikely
to materialise for the host State with a State that serves as a nationality of
convenience devoid of economic substance for an investment vehicle, or a State
with which it does not enjoy normal diplomatic or economic relations.

§62.- Article 17(1) affects only juridical rather than natural persons, and
requires the fulfilment of two requirements in order for the host state to exercise
its right to deny. First, the investor must be owned or controlled by citizens or
nationals of a 'third state’. 'Third state’ is not defined in the ECT, but is used in
Article 1(7) in contradistinction to ‘Contracting Party’, which suggests that a
third state is any state that is not a Contracting Party to the ECT. Secondly, the
investor must have 'no substantial business activities' in the state of its
incorporation. These are cumulative requirements so that both must exist before
the respondent can exercise its right to deny.

§63.- There are important differences in drafting between Article 17(1) and
17(2). In particular, Article 17(2) places the burden of proof to establish the facts
necessary to exercise this power on the State Party, while Article 17(1) is
expressed in a neutral manner in respect of the burden of proof.

§64.- The burden of proof of an allegation in international arbitration rests
on the party advancing the allegation, in accordance with the maxim onus
probandi actori incumbit. In application of this principle, a claimant has the
burden to prove that it satisfies the definition of an Investor so as to be entitled to
the Part III protections and the right to arbitrate disputes in Article 26. On the
same basis, the claimant would be expected to have the burden of proof that it
controls, directly or indirectly, an Investment for which protection is sought, and
this is a fact explicitly stated in Understanding 3 to the Final Act. However,
when a respondent alleges that the claimant is of the class of Investors only
entitled to defeasible protection, so that the respondent can exercise its power to
deny, then the burden passes to the respondent to prove the factual prerequisites

40/67

of Article 17 on which it relies. Article 17(2) adopts exactly this approach but, as
already mentioned, Article 17(1) is neutral on the question of burden of proof.

§65.- Burden of proof is an important issue in respect of Article 17(1) as it
might be difficult, as the present case demonstrates, for the respondent to
determine who owns or controls an Investor when ownership or control might
involve a number of entities in different jurisdictions. Similarly, the claimant
knows exactly what its business activities are in a particular area, and can easily
present the evidence to establish those activities, while this information might
not be accessible to the respondent.

Nevertheless, the relative accessibility of evidence would not seem to justify any
modification to the normal rules regarding the burden of proof. It would support
a duty to disclose evidence so that a respondent could request the disclosure of
specific documents from the claimant where the documentation is not otherwise
accessible. Alternatively, where the agreed procedure, as in this case, provides
for Tribunal questions then the Tribunal can request the necessary clarifications.
In both cases, negative inferences might be drawn against the claimant for a
failure to provide the requested documents or information. Alternatively, as the
Respondent sought to do in this case, the respondent might seek to exploit the
paucity or ambiguity of the evidence relating to the claimant's business activities
to argue these activities have no substance, thereby effectively compelling the
Claimant to supplement this evidence, or defend its limitations.

iii) Ownership or control:

§66.- AMTO is a Limited Liability Company incorporated in Latvia and
first registered on March 6, 1998. Its shares used to be owned by Mr. Leonids
Krizanovskij, a Latvian citizen and the current managing director of AMTO. Mr.
Krizanovskij's shareholding was wholly transferred to Five Key Invest & Assets
Limited Holding JSC on February 14, 2005. There is also evidence that for an
undefined period Alston Ltd, an English legal entity, was the owner of the shares
in Five Key Invest & Assets Limited Holding JSC. Five Key Invest & Assets
Limited Holding JSC is a company registered on May 4, 2001 under the laws of
Liechtenstein. The Board is composed of Mr. Harry Jean Louis Gstohl (a
Liechtenstein citizen) and Mr. Ivan Vladimirovich Kuznetsov (a Russian citizen).
Five Key Invest & Assets Limited Holding JSC is the current owner of all shares
in AMTO.

On November 21, 2006 all the shares in Five Key Invest & Assets Limited
Holding JSC were transferred to a Liechtenstein foundation called Key's
Depositary Foundation (hereafter, «the Foundation») with its registered office in
Vaduz, Liechtenstein. According to the Claimant, the Foundation has no owners.
It has a director and a so-called protector. The ultimate beneficiaries, who cannot

41/67

exercise ownership rights, are (1) Anastasia Kuznetsova, citizen of USA; (2)
Alexandra Kuznetsova, citizen of USA; (3) Irina Kuznetsova, permanent resident
of Cyprus, citizen of the Russian Federation; (4) Prokhor Kuznetsov, permanent
resident of Cyprus, citizen of the Russian Federation; (5) Ivan Kuznetsov,
permanent resident of Cyprus, citizen of the Russian Federation.

The Claimant stated in its Surrejoinder that the Foundation's «ultimate
beneficiaries are Russian nationals». The Claimant provided additional
information regarding the ownership and control of AMTO in response to the
Tribunal's written questions.

In summary, AMTO is incorporated in Latvia and wholly owned by Five Key
Invest & Assets Limited Holding JSC, a company incorporated in Liechtenstein.
This company is in turn wholly owned by the Foundation.

§67.- The Tribunal notes that one of the Claimant's witnesses, Mr. Ivan
Vladimirovich Kuznetsov is almost certainly also a member of the Board in Five
Key Invest & Assets Limited Holding JSC given that their names are identical
except for a minor spelling divergence (Kuznetsov/Kusnetsov), they share
Russian nationality and reside in St Petersburg. Mr. Kuznetsov is also one of the
beneficiaries of the Foundation.

Five Key Invest & Assets Limited Holding JSC's Board is composed of only two
people: Mr. Harry Jean Louis Gstohl and Mr. Kuznetsov. Liechtenstein's law
requires at least one of the members of the Board of a joint stock company to
have the nationality of a country belonging to the European Economic Area. Mr.
Gstohl is a citizen of Liechtenstein and Mr. Kuznetsov is a Russian citizen.
Taking into account that Mr. Kuznetsov is one of the beneficiaries of the
Foundation that owns all the shares in Five Key Invest & Assets Limited Holding
JSC and also a member of Five Key Invest & Assets Limited Holding JSC, the
Tribunal concludes that Mr. Kuznetsov is the person who controls AMTO.

Accordingly, AMTO is controlled by a Russian national. This finding raises a
difficult interpretive issue of the whether Russia is a 'third state' within the
meaning of Article 17(1). However, the Tribunal's finding on the second pre-
condition in Article 17(1), relating to substantial business activity in Latvia,
means the Tribunal does not need to determine this question.

iv") Substantial business activities:
§68.- The application of Article 17(1) ECT in this case also requires that
AMTO has substantial business activities in the country in which it is organised,
i.e., in Latvia.

42/67

In support of its contention that AMTO conducts substantial business activity in
the territory of Latvia, the Claimant has submitted: (i) a report by the law firm of
Blueger & Plaude; (ii) a tax certificate from the State Revenue Service of Riga;
(iii) a statement from its landlord; and (iv) a bank statement.

The Blueger & Plaude Report states that AMTO's main activity is in the field of
financial investments by participating as a shareholder in companies in Finland,
Ukraine, USA and Russia. The Report refers to various agreements and share
certificates relating to these investments, but these were not presented to the
Tribunal. The Blueger & Plaude Report also refers to a project on real estate
acquisition in Riga of which only a preliminary purchase agreement had been
concluded as of September 18, 2006. Neither the preliminary agreement nor any
subsequent agreement or related evidence has been submitted.

AMTO's tax certificate shows payment of taxes during the period from January
1, 2000 until March 31, 2007 of the following types: (i) residents income tax; (ii)
social insurance obligatory payments; (iii) internal VAT; and (iv) entrepreneurial
activity risk state fee. The Claimant states that it employs two staff full-time and
the 'social insurance obligatory payments' relate to these staff. No VAT has been
paid during the referred period.

AMTO also holds a multi-currency account in the Latvian bank Rietumu Banka.
A brief statement of the activity of this account from March 6, 1998 to March 31,
2007 giving the total amount of transactions in each currency has been presented
as evidence by the Claimant. However, this bank statement provides no evidence
of payments in respect of day-to-day business activities, and the Tribunal has not
been provided with evidence that any other bank account exists.

The Claimant also submitted a statement from AMTO's landlord, certifying that
AMTO has been renting an office in Riga from September 1, 2000 to the date of
the statement, March 30, 2007.

§69.- The ECT does not contain a definition of 'substantial', nor does the
Final Act of the European Energy Charter Conference that would serve as
guidance for interpretation. As stated above, the purpose of Article 17(1) is to
exclude from ECT protection investors which have adopted a nationality of
convenience. Accordingly, 'substantial' in this context means ‘of substance, and
not merely of form'. It does not mean ‘large’, and the materiality not the
magnitude of the business activity is the decisive question. In the present case,
the Tribunal is satisfied that the Claimant has substantial business activity in
Latvia, on the basis of its investment related activities conducted from premises
in Latvia, and involving the employment of a small but permanent staff.

43/67

§70.- Therefore, the second requirement of Article 17(1) ECT. Accordingly,
the Respondent has no right to deny the Claimant the advantages of Part III as
AMTO has substantial business activities in the territory of Latvia.

As a consequence, the Tribunal does not need to determine whether Russia
qualifies as a 'third state’ for the purposes of this Article 17(1), or whether
Respondent can exercise its right to deny advantages at any time, including after
the initiation of an arbitration.

(g) Parallel international proceedings:

§71.- On December 16, 2004 EYUM-10 submitted an application to the
ECHR based on alleged violations of the Convention for the Protection of Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (the «European Convention») against
Ukraine.

The Respondent has requested that the present arbitration be terminated or
suspended based on the existence of a parallel international proceeding before the
ECHR. The Respondent considers that the doctrine of lis pendens should be
applied flexibly to avoid international proceedings concerning the same events
and similar claims, even if the parties and the respective causes of actions are
formally different.

According to the Claimant, EYUM-10's application to the ECHR is no ground
for either termination or suspension of this arbitral proceeding, since the parties
to both proceedings are different and so is the legal basis or cause of action for
the respective proceedings.

This is a case of an international tribunal and a supra-national court having
concurrent jurisdiction over a dispute arising out of similar facts. However, the
parties and the causes of action are different in these two proceedings. With
regard to the parties, EYUM-10 is not a party to the present arbitration and
AMTO is not a party to the ECHR proceedings. With respect to the causes of
action, the present arbitration is based on alleged breaches of the ECT, while
proceedings before the ECHR are based on Article 6(1) of the European
Convention and its Protocol No. 1, Article 1. These circumstances are sufficient
to disqualify the Respondent's /is pendens objection.

Accordingly, this Arbitral Tribunal concludes that the ECHR proceedings

provide no justification to terminate or suspend the arbitration, and the
Respondent's submission on this ground is rejected.

44/67

§72.- Accordingly, all of the Respondent's jurisdictional objections are
tejected, and, as a consequence, the Arbitral Tribunal turns now to consider the
merits of the dispute.

VII. DECISION: MERITS

(a) Introductory Comments:

§73.- The Claimant alleges that the Respondent has breached Articles 10(1)
and 10(12) ECT in the various ways set out above. Articles 10(1) and 10(12)
read as follows:

«ARTICLE 10 PROMOTION,
PROTECTION AND TREATMENT OF INVESTMENTS

(1) Each Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty,
encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and transparent
conditions for Investors of other Contracting Parties to make Investments in
its Area. Such conditions shall include a commitment to accord at all times to
Investments of Investors of other Contracting Parties fair and equitable
treatment. Such Investments shall also enjoy the most constant protection
and security and no Contracting Party shall in any way impair by
unreasonable or discriminatory measures their management, maintenance,
use, enjoyment or disposal. In no case shall such Investments be accorded
treatment less favourable than that required by international law, including
treaty obligations. Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligations it
has entered into with an Investor or an Investment of an Investor of any other
Contracting Party.»

(12) Each Contracting Party shall ensure that its domestic law provides effective
means for the assertion of claims and the enforcement of rights with respect
to Investments, investment agreements, and investment authorizations.»

Article 10(1) is a complex provision of five sentences. It opens with an
expansive obligation to ‘encourage and create, stable, equitable, favourable and
transparent conditions for Investors...to make Investments...'. The four
subsequent sentences refer to various other obligations, some of which are well
known in investment treaty law. Some obligations relate to 'Investments' and
some to 'Investors'. Some are explicitly unlimited in time (‘commitment... at all
times'; 'the most constant protection’), but the temporal application of the
opening sentence is ambiguous and has been the subject of conflicting
interpretations by the Parties in this arbitration. The final sentence is an
‘umbrella clause! requiring the State to observe any obligations it has entered
into with an Investor or an Investment of an Investor.

45/67

§74.- There is clearly overlapping within Article 10(1). It refers to both fair
and equitable treatment and the minimum standard required by international law,
when these two standards may be identical in many contexts. Conduct that
breaches these standards might also constitute 'unreasonable or discriminatory
measures' or failure to ‘create stable, equitable, favourable and transparent
conditions for Investors'. The result is that a claimant can plead that the same
conduct breaches various obligations in Article 10(1) in circumstances where the
content and relationship between these obligations is not clear.

§75.- The Claimant in the present arbitration also alleges a denial of justice.
Denial of justice is a concept of state responsibility afflicted by imprecision. It is
a manifestation of a breach of the obligation of a State to provide fair and
equitable treatment and the minimum standard of treatment required by
international law. Denial of justice relates to the administration of justice, and
some understandings of the concept include both judicial failure and also
legislative failures relating to the administration of justice (for example, denying
access to the courts).

In Article 10(12) of the ECT there is a specific obligation to ensure that domestic
law provides an effective means for the assertion of claims and the enforcement
of rights. Legislative failures affecting the administration of justice in cases
under the ECT can therefore be measured against the express standard
established by Article 10(12).

§76.- In respect of the applicable standard to establish a case of denial of
justice under Article 10(1) in respect of judicial decisions, the Tribunal refers to
the discussion in Mondev International Limited v United States of America,
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2) Award of October 11, 2002 (42 ILM 85
(2003)), at paragraphs 126-127. This tribunal concluded (paragraph 127):

«The test is not whether a particular result is surprising, but whether the shock or
surprise occasioned to an impartial tribunal leads, on reflection, to justified
concerns as to the judicial propriety of the outcome, bearing in mind on one hand
that international tribunals are not courts of appeal, and on the other hand
[investment treaties are] intended to provide a real measure of protection. In the
end the question is whether, at an international level and having regard to
generally accepted standards of the administration of justice, a tribunal can
conclude in the light of all the available facts that the impugned decision was
clearly improper and discreditable, with the result that the investment has been
subjected to unfair and inequitable treatment. This is admittedly a somewhat open-
ended standard, but it may be that in practice no more precise formula can be
offered to cover the range of possibilities.» (footnote omitted)

46/67

In the context of the present arbitration, the Tribunal would add that the
experience of an investor in domestic courts may involve a series of decisions,
and these decisions should be considered in their entirety. Further, the available
means within the host State's legal system to address errors or injustices, and
whether or not they were exercised, are relevant to the assessment of the
propriety of the outcome. The investor that fails to exercise his rights within a
legal system, or exercises its rights unwisely, cannot pass his own responsibility
for the outcome to the administration of justice, and from there to the host State
in international law.

(b) Proceedings in the Ukrainian Courts:

§77.- The Claimant states that the handling of EYUM-10's attempt to seek
enforcement of its claims before the Ukraine courts amounts to a denial of
justice. Accordingly, the treatment of its claims by the Ukraine courts was
‘treatment’ less favorable than that required by international law and therefore a
breach of Article 10(1) of the ECT.

The allegations of a denial of justice relate to the six bankruptcy proceedings
against Energoatom commenced between March 2002 and December 2003.
EYUM-10 was the initiating creditor in two of these proceedings (the fourth and
fifth bankruptcy proceedings) and a bankruptcy creditor in the sixth claim. It
complains of the delay, error and tolerance of procedural abuse by the Ukraine
courts in these proceedings. EYUM-10 was not a party to the first three
bankruptey proceedings but claims that it was prevented from participating in
these proceedings 'due to the courts' failure, in violation of applicable law, to
order the initiating creditors to publicly announce the opening of the bankruptcy
cases’.

§78.- The treatment of an investor by national courts should be examined in
its entirety to determine whether or not there has been a denial of justice.
Accordingly, an investor may complain, as in this case, that its treatment in
various proceedings cumulatively meets the standard of a denial of justice. When
considering the investor's treatment in its entirety the tribunal must consider
proceedings both initiated or available to the investor. In the present case the
Claimant's involvement in the Ukrainian courts began with eleven cases of
contractual non-payment. The Claimant was successful in all of these cases, and
there are no allegations regarding the Ukrainian courts in respect of these
proceedings.

The Claimant complains that procedural violations meant that it was denied an

opportunity to participate in the first three bankruptcy proceedings, and that
these three proceedings were terminated in breach of the Law on Restoring

47/67

Debtor's Solvency, or Declaring a Debtor Bankrupt of May 14, 1992 (the
«Bankruptcy Law»). The Tribunal accepts the Respondent's submission that the
Claimant has not adequately proven its allegations of irregularities relating to
these proceedings. In particular the duty to publicise the bankruptcy proceedings
rested with the applicant and not with the court itself, and no basis to impute a
failure by a private creditor to the Ukrainian courts has been established. Further,
the loss of opportunity to participate in these bankruptcy proceedings was
remediable by the Claimant commencing its own bankruptcy proceedings. This
was in fact the course adopted by the Claimant, in initiating the fourth
bankruptcy proceeding, less the nine months after the dismissal of the first
proceeding.

§79.- The fourth bankruptcy proceeding was commenced by EYUM-10 and
six other creditors in the Commercial Court of Kiev on February 7, 2003. The
Claimant complains of various procedural irregularities that delayed these
proceedings, but the Tribunal considers these irregularities insignificant and
accepts the Respondent's submission that they can be explained by the
interaction of the Bankruptcy Law with the Code of Economic Procedure of the
Ukraine, and procedural steps taken by the debtor. On July 16, 2003 the
Commercial Court of Kiev dismissed a further request by the debtor company
for suspension of the proceedings and ordered the initiation of the judicial
procedure for the administration of the debtor's property, appointed a liquidator,
recognized EYUM-10 and various other entities as judgment creditors in the
proceedings, and made various related orders. Energoatom appealed to the
Commercial Court of Appeal of Kiev. The Commercial Court of Appeal issued
its decision on August 1, 2003 partially allowing the appeal and quashing the
decision of the Commercial Court of Kiev and referring the case back to this
court. EYUM-10 filed a request for cassation with the Superior Court of Ukraine
which was dismissed on October 29, 2003. The Claimant complains that the
decision of the Commercial Court of Appeal was influenced by Resolution 1160
by the Cabinet of Ministers. The Claimant states that the decision of this court
«lacks foundation in reality as well as in law... The ruling of the Commercial
Court of Appeal is nothing but an obedient reaction to the very clear signal sent
by the Cabinet of Ministers through the adoption of the superfluous Resolution
Ne 1160». Further, the decision of the Superior Commercial Court to reject the
cassation appeal was based on arguments «which have not before been
recognized in Ukrainian Case Law».

§80.- The Arbitral Tribunal has considered the decisions of both the
Commercial Court of Appeal and the Superior Court. There is no evidence,
either within these decisions or otherwise adduced by the Claimant, that the
courts were improperly influenced by Resolution 1160. The decisions adopt a

48/67

formalistic approach to the requirements of the bankruptcy law, and indicate
some uncertainty over the proper procedural treatment of debts of a subdivision
of an entity such as Energoatom. However, these decisions respond to legal and
procedural issues raised by these bankruptcy proceedings, were delivered
without undue delay, and there is no indication that the parties were not properly
heard. In the absence of any demonstrated procedural irregularity or interference,
the Claimant's objection to these decisions is simply that they are wrong in law.
This Tribunal is not a court of appeal for the decisions of the Ukrainian courts
and, in any event, the Tribunal does not accept that these decisions are wrong in
law.

§81.- EYUM-10's response to the decision of the Superior Court of the
Ukraine was to exercise its right in Ukrainian law to present a new bankruptcy
petition against Energoatom. This was presented the same day as the Superior
Court's decision. It was initially rejected by the Commercial Court of Kiev
wrongly, in the Claimant's submission. The remedy for this error lay in EYUM-
10's right of appeal. EYUM-10 duly exercised its right of appeal and the
Commercial Court of Appeal of Kiev quashed the earlier decision, so any error
in this proceeding was rectified within the Ukraine legal system. The fifth
bankruptcy proceeding was consolidated into the sixth bankruptcy proceeding
and does not need to be further considered.

§82.- The sixth bankruptcy proceeding was initiated by a creditor called
DonetskOblEnergo, another state owned enterprise, on December 2, 2003. The
Claimant makes numerous complaints regarding the conduct of these
proceedings, including failure to follow the statutory procedure for publication
of the proceedings and for the preliminary hearing; exclusion of EYUM-10 and
other creditors; collusion between the petitioning creditor and Energoatom (both
state-owned enterprises); procedural delays and interference by legislative
decree. These allegations are denied by the Respondent. The Respondent also
points to the procedural complexity of these bankruptcy proceedings and the
need for resolution of various procedural objections raised by creditors and the
debtor (including another creditor actually owned by the Claimant), which led to
legitimate appeals or cassation complaints that necessarily required time for
resolution. The Respondent rejects the claims of collusion between the
petitioning creditor and the debtor, and refers to an earlier judgment on which
the petition was based. The Respondent also rejects the allegations of
interference by legislative decree.

§83.- The Arbitral Tribunal finds that there is no denial of justice in respect
of the sixth bankruptcy proceeding. The Claimant has not established any

49/67

improper conduct by the Ukrainian courts, and the delay in the proceeding is not
excessive, and is explained by the procedural complexity of the case.

§84.- Accordingly, the Claimant has failed to demonstrate any denial of
justice in the handling by the Ukrainian courts of the bankruptcy proceedings or
any series of circumstances that cumulatively amount to a denial of justice. The
Claimant was frustrated that over a period of years it was unable to enforce its
judgment debts against Energoatom. However, there were many other judgment
creditors, and the debtor was a large and strategic state enterprise. The
Claimant's submissions demonstrate unrealistic expectations of a simple and
rapid result, in a juridical structure where there were many other interests and
competing rights to be considered by the Ukraine courts. These creditors may
not have always complied with their obligations under the Bankruptcy legislation
but such conduct cannot be imputed to the Ukrainian courts and to the Ukrainian
State. The decisions of the Ukraine courts might be considered by practitioners
from other jurisdictions to be formalistic, but bankruptcy legislation is a technical
subject matter. In any event, the Ukraine courts appear to have applied the law
and to have in fact resolved the many appeals and cassation requests relatively
rapidly. EYUM-10 also established its debts before the Ukrainian courts without
any problems. EYUM-10's experience of Ukrainian bankruptcy proceedings may
have been a frustrating process but its submissions suggest that its expectations
were unrealistic, and its evidence fails to prove any legal error, abuse, undue
delay or interference in the process by the Ukrainian courts. Accordingly, the
allegations of a denial of justice with respect to the bankruptcy proceedings are
rejected in their entirety.

(c) The Ukrainian Bankruptcy Legislation:

§85.- The Claimant also submits that the bankruptcy legislation in the
Ukraine is clearly inadequate and does not live up to the standard required by
international law. The Claimant states that this constitutes a breach of Article
10(12) of the ECT in that the Respondent has failed to ensure that its domestic
law provides effective means for the assertion of claims and the enforcement of
rights with respect to investments. The Claimant identifies three specific
deficiencies in the Bankruptcy Law of Ukraine.

«(i) Under Ukrainian law, no remedies are available when a debtor is
protected by moratorium, at the same time as creditors are denied to
participate in the on-going bankruptcy proceeding;

(ii) Under Ukrainian law, no remedies are available when a court does not
adhere to the stipulated timeframes in the Bankruptcy Law, thus
preventing creditors from participating in the ing bankruptcy

 

proceeding;

50/67

(Hi) Under Ukrainian law, no remedies are available when the debtor
cooperates with the initiating creditor (as Energoatom obviously does
with DonetskOblEnergo in the pending bankruptcy case No 43/167), with
the purpose of depriving other creditors of the right to enforce their
legitimate claims.»

The Claimant relies on the expert evidence of Dr. Anna Tsyrat, an experienced
Ukrainian commercial lawyer. The Claimant also relies on the success of
Energoatom in escaping enforcement in the six bankruptcy proceedings and over
many years as confirmation of the inadequacy of the Bankruptcy Law. The
Claimant did not provide any comparative analysis of bankruptcy legislation, or
identify any international standards against which the Bankruptcy Law of the
Ukraine might be assessed.

§86.- The Respondent provided an expert opinion by Dr. Alexander N.
Biryukov, a Ukrainian lawyer and professor specializing in bankruptcy law. It
also referred to the international assistance in the preparation of the Bankruptcy
Law, and its subsequent evaluation. The Bankruptcy Law of 1999 was drafted
with the assistance of the international auditing firm Deloitte & Touche, and also
a U.S. bankruptcy judge. In the opinion of Dr. Biryukov the bankruptcy law
reflected both «international trends and regional developments». The
Bankruptcy Law was not sufficient in itself to modernise bankruptcy
proceedings in Ukraine, with Deloitte recognizing that «effective implementation
was required, including training of practitioners, bankers, lawyers, judges,
company owners and managers; designing procedures; revising other elements
of the bankruptcy regime; extending the activities to all parts of the country». A
USAid report entitled 'Ukraine Financial Sector Review 2004' reports on
progress, stating that the Bankruptcy Law «was an important step forward.
There has been extensive training of judges, lawyers and others on the law but
continuing work in this area is necessary for the law to be effectively
implemented» (page 14). The report also said that «Ukraine should take steps to
address the recognised weaknesses in the current bankruptcy law and improve
enforcement of the law» (page 15). The same report quoted from a European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development assessment of the bankruptcy law of
Ukraine that identified the following advantages and weaknesses:

«Positive Compliance Provisions

* Speedy hearing and determination of proceedings.

+ Adequate stay/suspension of action provisions on the opening of
proceedings.

Representation of creditors through a committee.

* Priority provisions.

Serious Weaknesses and Defects

51/67

+ Debtor delivery of property and information to trustee.

* Reorganization: no independent assessment of plan, lack of provisions for
material information, lack involvement of creditors, and no supervision of
the plan.

* Barely basic provisions for avoidance ofpre-bankruptcy transactions.

Additional Weaknesses

* Complicated requirements for filing application to initiate the process,
including employee consultation.

+ Debt must be at least 3 months overdue before commencing proceeding.

+ Absence of individual notice to creditors of the proceeding.

* Qualifications required for appointment as an insolvency representative
(trustee).

+ Absence of set off:

* Sanctions for creditors who fail to file timely.

* Insufficient sanctions for failure to comply with the law.

+ Absence of provisions dealing with recognition of cross-border
insolvency.»

The Tribunal notes that the list of ‘additional weaknesses' includes problems
relating to the initiation of the process, notice to creditors, and insufficient
sanctions for non-compliance, which are all matters complained of by the
Claimant in its experience of Ukrainian bankruptcy proceedings.

The Respondent also submits that the moratorium provisions of the Ukrainian
legislation are not unusual or inconsistent with Ukraine's obligations under the
ECT. Further, in this case the special character of Energoatom had to be
recognized as it is an enterprise responsible for the nuclear security of the
country, «A bankruptcy of such an enterprise -would inevitably raise a number of
complex issues, which need careful and time-consuming decision-making..., the
Claimant would not plausibly have legitimate expectations that Energoatom
would be bankrupt within a short period of time...».

§87.- The fundamental criteria of an ‘effective means' for the assertion of
claims and the enforcement of rights within the meaning of Article 10(2) is law
and the rule of law. There must be legislation for the recognition and
enforcement of property and contractual rights. This legislation must be made in
accordance with the constitution, and be publicly available. An effective means
of the assertion of claims and the enforcement of rights also requires secondary
tules of procedure so that the principles and objectives of the legislation can be
translated by the investor into effective action in the domestic tribunals.

There is no question that the Ukraine satisfies this fundamental criteria in the

enforcement of contractual rights. EYUM-10 established its contractual rights
and obtained judgment against Energoatom without difficulty. There is also a

52/67

modern Bankruptcy Law for the enforcement of these claims, and an Economic
Procedural Code and competent courts to enforce the claims. The Claimant's
submission presupposes that Article 10(12) requires a State not only to ensure
legislation and rules are promulgated ito recognise and enforce property and
contractual rights, but also that the quality of the legislation meets minimum
international standards. This must be correct because, for example, a State that
has legislation on regulating an important area of law such as the institution of
bankruptcy which is constitutional and accessible, but also antiquated and totally
ineffective does not satisfy Article 10(12). Accordingly, Article 10(12) is not
only a rule of law standard, but also a qualitative standard.

§88.- The difficulty is to identify the criteria by which to assess the
effectiveness of the legislation and rules called into question under Article
10(12) ECT. Bearing in mind the context and the object and purpose of the ECT,
the Tribunal considers that 'effective' is a systematic, comparative, progressive
and practical standard. It is systematic in that the State must provide an effective
framework or system for the enforcement of rights, but does not offer guarantees
in individual cases. Individual failures might be evidence of systematic
inadequacies, but are not themselves a breach of Article 10(12). It is comparative
in that compliance with international standards indicates that imperfections in
the law might result from the complexities of the subject matter rather than the
inadequacies of the legislation. It is progressive in the sense that legislation ages
and needs to be modernized and adapted from time to time, and results might not
be immediate. Where a State is taking the appropriate steps to identify and
address deficiencies in its legislation -in other words improvement is in
progress- then the progress should be recognized in assessing effectiveness.
Finally, it is a practical standard in that some areas of law, or the application of
legislation in certain circumstances, raise particular difficulties which should not
be ignored in assessing effectiveness.

§89.- In the present case, the Claimant has not demonstrated that the
Bankruptcy Law does not provide an effective means to enforce a creditor's
rights in the Ukraine. It is a modern law, which introduced new concepts. Its
introduction has been accompanied by training programmes for participants in
the bankruptcy process. There are some problems with the law, which have been
exploited by both creditors and debtors to their own advantage, and it seems that
Ukrainian economic procedure, or the customs of thought of its lawyers and
judges, have not succeeded in finding solutions to these problems. Its application
to a state entity of strategic importance in the energy sector has not surprisingly
caused problems. EYUM-10 has had a frustrating experience in the collection of
its debts from Energoatom, but the Claimant has failed to demonstrate that the
Bankruptcy Law is not effective for the enforcement of rights within the

53/67

meaning of Article 10(12) of the ECT, or that its provisions otherwise constitute
a denial of justice. Accordingly, the Claimant's claims on this ground are
dismissed.

(d) State Interference in the Bankruptcy Proceedings:

§90.- AMTO alleges that as a result of ad hoc interference in ongoing
bankruptcy proceedings by the Government of Ukraine, AMTO's investment in
Ukraine, EYUM-10, has been prevented from enforcing legitimate claims
against Energoatom.

The Claimant has identified three instances of interference by the Ukraine in the
ongoing bankruptcy proceedings: (i) the ad hoc Resolution No. 1160 dated July
25, 2003; (ii) Law 2711-IV 'On Measures to Maintain Stable Functioning of
Fuel-and-Energy Enterprises' dated June 23, 2005; and (iii) the Law ‘On
amendment to Article 3 of the Law No 2711' dated December 22, 2006. Relying
particularly on the timing and content of these measures, the Claimant states that
they amount to breaches of Articles 10(1) and 10(12) of the ECT, and in
particular, are discriminatory treatment, unfair and inequitable and a denial of
justice.

§91.- The Respondent denies any interference in the ongoing judicial
proceedings. The Respondent submits that the Claimant's allegations that the
Resolution was a kind of 'signal' from the government to the court and that it
made any impact on the bankruptcy proceedings in question are unsupported and
wrong. With regard to Law 2711-IV, the Respondent contends that the Claimant
seriously errs with respect to the time of its entrance into force, its effect and its
scope. As to the scope of Law 2711-IV, the Respondent submits that it is
addressed not solely to Energoatom, but to many other enterprises as well.
Pursuant to this Law, the Ministry of Fuel and Energy of Ukraine issued the
Order No. 568 'On Approval of the List of Enterprises', which had decided to
participate in the procedure of repayment of indebtedness. Initially, this List
included 440 enterprises, but did not consist of solely government-owned
Energoatom. Accordingly, enhanced protection against the bankruptcy and the
different measures that form part of bankruptcy proceedings were obtained not
only by Energoatom, but by many other enterprises. The Respondent has also
challenged the Claimant's allegations regarding the effect of the December 22,
2006 amendment.

§92.- The Tribunal has examined the Resolution and has compared it to the
previous Resolution No. 765. The Resolution substitutes the list of "highly
hazardous enterprises, whose discontinuance of operations requires special

54/67

measures to prevent harm to human life and health, property, facilities, and the
environment" composed of three generic types of power plants (nuclear power
plants, water power plants and cogeneration plants) with a list featuring the
actual names of the enterprises affected, including Energoatom.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Resolution was not a ‘mere clarification'
as its effect was to include Energoatom in the list of highly hazardous
enterprises. Indeed, Energoatom itself states in its additional appeal submitted on
July 25, 2003 (drawing the attention of the Court of Appeal of Kiev to the
Resolution in the fourth bankruptcy case) "the status of the State body NNEGC
‘Energoatom' has changed and it currently belongs to highly hazardous
enterprises. Accordingly, the bankruptcy proceedings against the State body
NNEGC "Energoatom " were conducted without due regard to the requirements
stated in Article 43 of the Law of Ukraine "On the restoration of solvency of the
debtor or declaring it bankrupt.""" (Emphasis in the original)

However, Energoatom was not the only enterprise affected by the Resolution
since seven other enterprises are also listed in the Resolution. Further, the ruling
of the Court of Appeal does not rely on or even mention the Resolution, but is
based on entirely different grounds. Therefore, the Tribunal finds that the
promulgation of the Resolution during the fourth bankruptcy case was a mere
coincidence in time, and does not constitute ad hoc regulation by the Respondent
aimed at interfering with the bankruptcy proceeding. The Resolution did not
affect the finding of the court and it does not appear to have been enacted
specifically for this purpose. Consequently, it does not evidence any violation of
» Article 10(1) or 10(12) ECT.

§93.- Law 2711-IV suspends the moratorium of the debtor during the
period of the debt repayment procedure, and this period was extended several
times including by the December 22, 2006 amendment. The Claimant contends
that this legislation constitutes an intervention of the Respondent in the
bankruptcy proceeding against Energoatom with the effect of causing delay and
preventing EYUM-10 from enforcing its rights. The Respondent affirms that its
aim is precisely to allow settlements with creditors, thus procuring a result which
is largely beneficial for EYUM-10.

The objective of the Law 2711-IV reads as follows: "to support the improvement
of the financial standing of the fuel-and-energy sector enterprises, prevent their
bankruptcy, and. enhance their investment attractiveness by regulating the
procedural issues and implementing mechanisms of the debt repayment..."

55/67

Article 4.1(vi) of the Law 2711-IV determines that: "the settlement participants
shall not be subject to the moratorium for the satisfaction of claims of creditors...
during the validity period of the debt repayment procedure."

Article 3.4 of the Law 2711-IV initially set August 10, 2006 as the time limit of
the debt repayment procedure. This was subsequently extended, and Article 3.4
of the Law 2711-IV as modified by the December 22, 2006 amendment reads:
"The procedure of repayment of indebtedness for the fuel and energy complex
enterprises shall be effective up to by January 1, 2008."

§94.- The Tribunal notes that Law 2711-IV entered into force no later than
on September 26, 2005 in accordance with Article 12(1) and (2), which provides
for entry into force on the date of publication, except for Articles 3-11, set to
enter into force two months after the publication of the law. Law 2711-IV was
published on July 26, 2005. Therefore, it was wholly in force by the end of
September 2005, which does not coincide with any relevant date of the
bankruptcy proceeding. Similarly, the two amendments of the Law 2711-IV
dated July 28, 2006 and December 22, 2006 that extended the procedure of debt
repayment do not coincide with any significant date in the bankruptcy
proceeding.

Further, The Tribunal considers that Law No. 2711-IV was a bona fide attempt
to remedy the immobilization of payment flows throughout the fuel and energy
sector created by serious imperfections in the pricing and payment system. Law
2711-IV was not specifically aimed at Energoatom, or to the special detriment of
EYUM-10. In fact, it appears that the effect of the Law 2711-IV and the
subsequent amendments on EYUM-10 as a creditor was to assist debt recovery
from Energoatom. The second Settlement Agreement was signed between
Energoatom and EYUM-10 on August 11, 2006, benefiting from the amendment
to Article 3.4 of the Law 2711-IV introduced by Law No. 51-V of July 28, 2006,
which extended the debt repayment period that would otherwise have expired
one day before the second Settlement Agreement was signed.

§95.- Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimant has not
established any instance of State interference in the bankruptcy proceedings by
these legislative enactments.

(e) Tax Inspection and Bankruptcy Proceedings Against EYUM-10:

§96.- The Claimant alleges that 'aggressive! conduct on behalf of tax
authorities constitutes further evidence of a breach of Article 10(1), by failing to
provide treatment that is not unreasonable or discriminatory, and fair and

56/67

equitable treatment. In addition, the Claimant has stated that the implementation
of an aggressive tax inspection against EYUM-10 including the arrest of EYUM-
10's assets was unreasonable and disproportionate as well as arbitrary and in
breach of AMTO's legitimate expectations.

Further, the Claimant has submitted that the tax authorities imposed a number of
measures on EYUM-10, including the illegal enforcement by freezing EYUM-
10's assets and thereby immobilizing its operations. «The management of EYUM-
10 and of [the Claimant] strongly felt that the tax authorities’ attempts to destroy
EYUM-10 was linked with its foreign ownership.»

§97.- Bankruptcy proceedings were commenced against EYUM-10 in
November 2002 by the Energodar United Tax Authority of Zaporizka Oblast
(hereafter the «Tax Authority»), alleging non-payment of state taxes since 1998.
EYUM-10's assets were then subject to administrative arrest from March 27,
2003. EYUM-10 took steps to seek to use available funds for activities such as
the payment of wages and the completion of existing contracts, but its request
were denied by the Tax Authority on April 16, 2003. On April 17, 2003 EYUM-
10 applied to the Commercial Court of Zaporizka Oblast against the Tax
Authority's decision and on the same date decided to submit a request for its
own bankruptcy. On May 8, 2003, the court annulled the Tax Authority's
decision, which it found 'not grounded’. EYUM-10 finally reached a settlement
agreement with its creditors, including the Tax Authority, according to which a
significant part of EYUM-10's total debt was written off.

§98.- The Claimant has alleged that the Tax Authority was perfectly aware
of the fact that EYUM-10's failure to pay taxes in time was due to Energoatom's
failure to pay its debts. Nevertheless it sought to bankrupt EYUM-10, refused its
applications to continue to trade without giving any reasons, and acted illegally.
It treated EYUM-10 in a discriminatory manner because of its foreign ownership
and its actions against Energoatom in the Ukraine courts. It puts forth that «the
intention of the tax inspection cannot have been any other than to starve and
strangle EYUM-10 to death».

§99.- The Tribunal finds that the Claimant has not demonstrated any
discriminatory or unfair treatment, or any other breach of Article 10(1) arising
from the actions of the Tax Authority. The Tribunal notes that the bankruptcy
petition by the Tax Authority was based on non-payment of taxes since 1998, i.e.
a period of time which preceded AMTO's ownership, and well before EYUM-
10's legal action against Energoatom. There were also other creditors of EYUM-
10 who participated in the bankruptcy proceedings, and in the settlement

57/67

agreement. The Tribunal also accepts the Respondent's submission that the Tax
Authority acted in accordance with Ukrainian law, and its decisions were
properly reviewed by the Ukrainian courts. In summary, there is no evidence
arising from the tax inspection and related bankruptcy proceedings of any
unreasonable, disproportionate, arbitrary, or discriminatory conduct, or any
breach of its legitimate expectations. There was no unfair or inequitable
treatment, or any other breach of Article 10(1) ECT.

(f) Allegations relating to the Actions and Funding of Enersoatom:

§100.- The Claimant makes several allegations relating to the conduct of
Energoatom. These allegations include specific acts of intimidation,
discrimination and obstructive behaviour and more general allegations relating to
inadequate funding and the Respondent's responsibility for Energoatom's failure
to pay its debts to EYUM-10.

(i) Energoatom and its relationship with the Respondent:

§101.- The Claimant's allegations raise questions of the legal nature of
Energoatom, its relationship with Ukraine, and the possible attribution of its
conduct to the State.

Energoatom is a separate legal entity owned by the Respondent. It is not an
ordinary private company, but a specific juridical person known as a state
company. It was established in 1996 through Resolution Ne 1268 of October 17,
1996 of the Cabinet of Ministers. Its close links with the State are demonstrated
by Article 4 that provides that «The president, the first vice-president and the
vice-president of the company are appointed and dismissed by the Cabinet of
Ministers of Ukraine, and the board members are appointed and discharged from
their responsibilities by the Ministry of fuel and energy.» The Charter of
Energoatom (as amended in 2005) also confirms the role of the Cabinet of
Ministers and the Ministry of Fuel and Energy in the appointment of its senior
executives.

Article 3.7 of the Charter provides:

«3.7. SE "NNEGC "Energoatom" shall bear no responsibility for obligations
of the State...

SE "NNEGC 'Energoatom" shall bear responsibility under its obligations to the
extent of the property belonging to it pursuant to the effective laws.»

Ukrainian law provides for the separate legal responsibility of the State and state

owned legal entities. The Civil Code of Ukraine provides that «The State...shall
not be responsible under the obligations of juridical persons created thereby,

58/67

except for the cases established by law» (Article 176.1, in force from January 1,
2004; a provision to similar effect was in force prior to this date).

Energoatom is a strategically significant state entity, in close communication
with the State. The Claimant submitted that Energoatom's legal independence
was purely formal as even its commercial activities were controlled by the State,
with prices, retailers, and forms of payment established by law and ultimately
fixed and controlled by a state organ called the National Energy Regulatory
Commission of Ukraine. However, the Tribunal finds that Energoatom was a
separate legal entity and not an organ of the Ukraine state.

§102.- In these circumstances the Arbitral Tribunal considers that the
conduct of Energoatom is attributable to the Ukraine, in accordance with
established principles of international law, where it is shown that Energoatom
was exercising puissance publique (governmental authority) or acted on the
instructions of, or under the direction or control of, the State in carrying out the
conduct.

      

of Obstructive Behaviour:

§103.- The Claimant complains of intimidation, discrimination and constant
obstruction on the part of Energoatom, so that the conditions which AMTO
experienced when making its investment in the Ukraine were in no way
equitable or favourable. Moreover, the tactics invoked by Energoatom were far
from being transparent. The Claimant states: (i) AMTO was from the very
beginning confronted by hostility from Energoatom and its representatives; (ii)
malicious rumours were spread about AMTO and its intentions with its
investment; (iii) potential sellers of shares to AMTO were threatened and
intimidated in order to discourage them from selling shares to AMTO; (iv) the
management of Energoatom/ZAES tried to prevent a meeting that AMTO had
arranged with the workers and shareholders of EYUM-10; (v) the representatives
of AMTO were accused of inciting a strike against Energoatom; (vi) although
Energoatom had financial problems it has been able to obtain extra funding for
specific purposes, but not for the payment of its debts to EYUM-10 owned by
foreigners; (vii) as a direct punishment! for EYUM-10's attempts to recover its
receivables by turning to the courts of Ukraine, ZAES/Energoatom stopped
ordering services from EYUM-10; and (vii) refers to actions by the Tax
Authority and the local courts.

The Tribunal has already dealt with the actions of the Tax Authority and will not
re-examine them here.

59/67

§104.- The Claimant alleges that the discriminatory conduct «resulted in a
dramatic reduction of orders from Energoatom which, in its turn, reduced
EYUM-10's sales volumes». The Respondent's punishment policy' affected the
orders by Energoatom from the middle of the year 2000 and onwards. This
dramatic fall, it is argued, was in terms of time and factual circumstances linked
to the acquisition of EYUM-10 by foreign owners.

The Respondent states that Energoatom had unrestricted liberty to place orders
for maintenance services whenever it wished, and that Energoatom did not need
to justify why orders have not been placed. There has been no duty incumbent on
Energoatom to place any particular volume of orders with Energoatom under
domestic law and, even less, under international law.

In the view of the Tribunal, the mere fall in procurement, whether dramatic or
not, does not as of itself establish a case of discriminatory conduct. There is no
direct evidence of a deliberate policy to this effect, nor any demonstration based
on technical, commercial and other business policy considerations that no bona
fide reason existed for the failure to place further orders.

§105.- The Claimant also referred to two witness statements, a flyer, a letter
by Mr. Pyshnyj's to EYUM-10 dated 22 January 2003, an article by the local
press and a clarification. The Respondent has denied the statements of the
witnesses and has submitted its own witness statements denying any wrong
against the new owners by Energoatom.

The evidence does not establish the alleged intimidation or obstruction. The flyer
is not signed and its origin is uncertain, and consequently cannot be attributed to
Energoatom.

The letter by Mr. Pyshnyj demands revocation by EYUM-10 of its application
for Energoatom to be declared bankrupt, and requires EYUM-10 to sign a
number of amicable settlements or the further renewal of the contractual
relations between SD ZAES and EYUM-10 CJSC will not be 'possible'. This
letter is dated January 22, 2003, and so cannot be supportive of actions alleged to
have taken place before that date. In fact, the Claimant itself acknowledges that
«EYUM-10 does not have any document, which demonstrates how the
punishment policy was established».

The article refers to a press conference that took place on February 21, 2002
between representatives of Energoatom/ZAES and EYUM-10 in Energodar. At
that conference, the deputy financial director of the ZAES, Mr. Prokofiev, is
quoted by the journalist as saying: 'the class of owners of the contractor has
changed’. In a later clarification issued by the newspaper, the quotation is
expanded as follows: «owners of a new type took over the contractor's company
-bad guys, the new Latvian shareholders, began to extort money from SS

60/67

ZNPP...» The director of the newspaper, in this clarification, said that these
words were interpreted as a rebuke to the management of AMTO because it
imposed harsh conditions upon SS ZNPP and demanded immediate repayment
of all the debts.

In these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that there is insufficient evidence
to establish the alleged facts, or their possible attribution to the Respondent.
Accordingly, the allegations of a violation of Article 10(1) ECT on the basis of
these events are dismissed.

(iii) Allegations Relating to the Ukraine Energy Sector and the Funding of
Energoatom:

§106.- The Parties made lengthy submissions relating to the structure of the
energy sector in the Ukraine, the commercial dependence or independence of
Energoatom in relation to the State, and its pricing and funding.

§107.- The Claimant alleges a breach of Article 10(1) because Ukraine did
not provide Energoatom with adequate funding. «/f the funding had been
properly organised and performed as AMTO as a foreign investor had a right to
expect, then Energoatom would have been able to pay EYUM-10 for all ordered
performed and approved services already before the end of 2001.» Further «The
Respondent's selective allocation of funds to Energoatom, for certain purposes
but not for paying debts owing to EYUM-10, money which EYUM-10 was entitled
to and needed for its survival, constitutes an improper favouring of certain
creditors, and thus a discrimination against EYUM-10».

 

The origin of the Claimant's claims is the non-payment of contractual debts by
Energoatom. The payment or non-payment by a state entity of contractual debts
owed to a service provider involves no exercise of sovereign authority or
puissance publique, and cannot be attributed to the Ukraine. The Claimant has
sought to elevate contractual non-payment into a structural or funding problem in
the Ukrainian energy sector, so as to condemn these decisions as unfair or
discriminatory to its Investment and therefore involving responsibility pursuant
to Article 10(1) ECT.

The Claimant relies on the non-payment by Energoatom of its debts and its
involvement in bankruptcy proceedings as proof of the structural problems in the
energy sector and inadequate funding. In the Claimant's submission, the fact that
some creditors were paid and not others, and particularly that EYUM-10 was not
paid, confirms discrimination.

61/67

§108.- In the Tribunal's view, the evidence establishes that Energoatom had
financial problems, and that EYUM-10 sought to recover its debts with
determination and little success. Failure to actively ensure adequate funding of
Energoatom's operations may have negative implications, but it is not of the
importance to elevate it to the nature of an international breach. There is
insufficient evidence to establish the reasons for the funding difficulties of
Energoatom and the selection of the creditors it would pay, within the limits of
its financial capability. There are no specific decisions of Ukraine demonstrated
to have caused the non-payment of EYUM-10's debts. Further, the Claimant has
not established any discriminatory intent on the part of the Ukraine against either
the Claimant or EYUM-10. The Arbitral Tribunal finds that the chain of
causation for the non-payment of EYUM-10's debt goes no further than
Energoatom. The decisions not to pay EYUM-10, and to resist enforcement in
bankruptcy proceedings were decisions taken by Energoatom. These decisions
did not involve puissance publique and it has not been shown that they were
made on the instructions of, or under the direction or control of Ukraine.

Accordingly, the Claimant's claims under this heading are dismissed.

(g) Umbrella Clause/ Respondent's Liability for Energoatom's Breach of its
Obligations:

§109.- The Claimant refers to the 'umbrella clause' in the final sentence of
Article 10(1) and states that «the broad definition of ‘any obligations' includes
both specific contractual obligations and the more general commitments made

under the domestic investment legislation of a Contracting Party».

The Respondent has denied that any liability can be based on the umbrella
clause, noting that there is no contractual relationship between the Claimant and
the Respondent, but between two Ukrainian legal entities, Energoatom/ZAES
and EYUM-10.

§110.- The so-called ‘umbrella clause’ of the ECT is of a wide character in
that it imposes a duty on the Contracting Parties to 'observe any obligations it
has entered into with an Investor or an Investment of an Investor of the other
Contracting Party'. This means that the ECT imposes a duty not only in respect
of the investor which is otherwise customary in an investment treaty context, but
also vis-a-vis a subsidiary company, established in the host state. This means
that an undertaking by Ukraine of a contractual nature vis-a-vis EYUM-10 could
very well bring into effect the umbrella clause. However, in the present case the
contractual obligations have been undertaken by a separate legal entity, and so
the umbrella clause has no direct application.

62/67

§111.- The Arbitral Tribunal has also considered the possible application of
the umbrella clause in conjunction with Article 22(1) ECT. Article 22(1)
provides:

«Each Contracting Party shall ensure that any state enterprise which it maintains
or establishes shall conduct its activities in relation to the sale or provision of
goods and services in its Area in a manner consistent with the Contracting Party's
obligations under Part III of this Treaty.»

Energoatom is wholly-owned by the Ukraine, and the question arises as to the
effect of Article 22(1).

§112.- The Tribunal considers that Article 22 does not go so far as to
impose liability on the State in the event that a state-owned legal entity does not
discharge its contractual obligations in relation to an ‘Investment’, i.e. a
subsidiary of the foreign investor. Rather, it imposes on the state a general
obligation to 'ensure' that state-owned entities conduct activities which, in
general terms of governance, management and organization, make them capable
of observing the obligations specified under Part III of the ECT. It does not
constitute an obligation of the state to assume liability for any failing of a state-
owned legal entity to discharge a commercial debt in a given instance.

(i) Conclusion:
§113.- The Claimant made the following submission in its Surrejoinder:

«...the Respondent has undertaken an express obligation in Article 10(1) of the
ECT to encourage and create stable, equate favourable and transparent

for i ‘s to make in i} is added). There is no
requirement in the ECT to consider a particular level of development and
experience of the host state before making investments. The actions carried out by
Energoatom with respect to AMTO 's investment clearly show that the Respondent
has failed to create stable, equitable, favourable and transparent conditions for
investors in Ukraine.»

 

The logic of this passage is that the non-payment of the accounts receivable of
an Investment of a foreign investor by a state entity and resistance to
enforcement ipso facto demonstrates inadequate investment conditions, and a
breach of the ECT. The Claimant here explicitly submits that 'there is no
requirement in the ECT to consider a particular level of development and
experience of the host state before making investments’. In effect, an investor
can assume that its investment shall always enjoy the ‘favourable conditions'
referred to in the ECT, and therefore the investor is relieved of the normal
assessment and assumption of investment risk.

§114.- The arbitration of foreign investment disputes raises difficult
questions of responsibility, both in the factual sense of establishing the operative
causes of the loss, and in terms of legal responsibility. In the present case, the
Claimant established the contractual responsibility of Energoatom in Ukrainian
law in the Ukrainian domestic courts. It has failed to establish any liability under
the ECT for Ukraine. In the end, the responsibility for the non-payment of
EYUM-10's debts for so long, in fact and in law, lies with Energoatom.

§115.- The Parties' submissions and evidence have raised many issues. The
Claimant has formulated its allegations of breaches of the ECT in a number of
different ways, and has argued both that specific actions attributable to the
Respondent amount to breaches of the ECT, and also that actions in
combinations or cumulatively establish breaches of the ECT. Having considered
all the Claimant's submissions and allegations, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that
no breach of the ECT by or attributable to the Respondent has been established.

Accordingly, all of the Claimant's claims are dismissed.

VIII. RESPONDENT'S COUNTERCLAIM

§116.- The Respondent makes a counterclaim for arbitration costs, and for
non-material injury to the Respondent's reputation as a result of the Claimant's
wrongful allegations of collusion between Energoatom and DonetskOblEnergo.
The Respondent quantified its counterclaim for non-material injury at
€25,000.00.

The claim for costs in international arbitration does not require a counterclaim.
Costs may be claimed on the basis of the applicable rules, relate to the
proceedings as a whole, and are considered by the Arbitral Tribunal after the
determination of jurisdiction, and the substantive claims and counterclaims. The
Arbitral Tribunal has treated the Respondent's claim for costs accordingly in the
next section, and so the claim for costs does not need to be further considered in
the context of the counterclaim.

§117.- The Claimant states that the Respondent has no right to raise
counterclaims under the ECT, and accordingly the counterclaim must be
dismissed. Further, the Claimant states that the Respondent has suffered no
injury, and AMTO cannot be penalised for presenting a claim for compensation
for alleged breaches of the ECT.

The Respondent states that Article 21 of the SCC Rules applicable in this case
permits the Respondent to make a counterclaim. As to the substance of the
claim, the Respondent states that the Claimant has irresponsibly and insistently
disseminated to the SCC Institute and to the Arbitral Tribunal untrue information
about collusion between two state-owned entities, with the implication that
Ukraine was involved. The Respondent considers that 'such dissemination does
not deviate very much from libel’.

§118.- The jurisdiction of an Arbitral Tribunal over a State party
counterclaim under an investment treaty depends upon the terms of the dispute
resolution provisions of the treaty, the nature of the counterclaim, and the
relationship of the counterclaims with the claims in the arbitration.

Article 26(6) ECT provides that the applicable law to an ECT dispute is the
Treaty itself and 'the applicable rules and principles of international law'. The
Respondent has not presented any basis in this applicable law for a claim of non-
material injury to reputation based on the allegations made before an Arbitral
Tribunal. Accordingly, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that there is no basis for a
counterclaim of this nature and it is accordingly dismissed.

IX. Costs

§119.- Articles 39 to 41 of the SCC Rules draw a distinction between the
‘Arbitration Costs' (meaning arbitrators' fees, the Administrative Fee of the SCC
Institute, arbitration expenses and the fees and expenses of any tribunal
appointed expert) and the costs incurred by the Parties for legal representation.
The Arbitral Tribunal is empowered by Article 40(2) and Article 41 to make
orders in respect of both classes of costs:

«Article 40 Payment of Arbitration Costs

(2) The Arbitral Tribunal decides on the apportionment of the Arbitration Costs as
between the parties with regard to the outcome of the case and other
circumstances.

Article 41 Costs incurred by a Party
Unless the parties have agreed otherwise, the Arbitral Tribunal may, at the request
of a party, in an Award or other order by which the arbitral proceedings are

terminated, order the losing party to compensate the other party for legal
representation and other expenses for presenting its case.»

65/67

§120.- The Claimant and the Respondent have both sought an award of
costs in their favour, including Arbitration Costs, counsel's fees, disbursements
for experts and other services and expenses. The Respondent made its claim for
costs under the heading 'Counterclaim' in its pleadings, but, as already stated,
costs are a separate matter from a counterclaim. Both the Claimant and the
Respondent have submitted statements quantifying their respective costs and
expenses, and the Respondent has also submitted full supporting documentation.

§121.- All issues in this arbitration have been strongly contested. The
Claimant has succeeded on the questions of jurisdiction, and the Respondent has
succeeded on the merits. The Parties have therefore shared success, and the
Arbitral Tribunal does not consider there is a ‘losing’ party within the meaning
of Article 41 of the SCC Rules entitled to an Award in its favour for legal
representation and related expenses.

§122.- Accordingly, each Party shall pay one-half of the Arbitration Costs
as determined by the SCC Institute, and each Party shall bear its own costs for
legal representation and other expenses.

Payment of the Arbitration Costs will be made from the Advances of the Parties
on the basis of the joint and several liability for these costs vis-a-vis the SCC

%

Institute and the members of the Arbitral Tribunal.

X. AWARD

In light of the foregoing and having considered the claims, counterclaims and
defences submitted by the Parties, and all the submissions and evidence relating
thereto, this Tribunal decides and declares that:

1. The Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction over claims submitted by the Claimant
arising from August 22, 2000;

2. The claims of the Claimant are dismissed in their entirety;
3. The counterclaim of the Respondent is dismissed;

4. The Arbitration Costs, as determined by the SCC Institute, amount to the
following:

T) Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades: Fee of EUR 139,125.00, and
compensation for expenses of EUR 677.00;

ii) Mr. Per Runeland: Fee of EUR 83,475.00, and compensation for
expenses of EUR 1,600.00;

iii) Mr. Christer Soderlund: Fee of EUR 83,475.00 plus VAT of EUR
20,868.75, and compensation for expenses of EUR 2,100.00 plus VAT
of EUR 525.00;

iv) SCC_ Institute: Administrative Fee of EUR 26,125.00, and
compensation for expenses of EUR 13,205.00.

In the relationship between the Parties, each of them shall be liable for 50%
of the Arbitration Costs.

5. Each party is to bear its own costs for legal representation and other
expenses.

Place of Arbitration: Stockholm, Sweden.
Date: March 26, 2008

 

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
Mr. Per Runeland Bernardo M. Cremades Mr. Christer Soderlund
Arbitrator Chairman Arbitrator

67/67

