 

FINAL AWARD

IN THE MATTER OF AN UNCITRAL ARBITRATION

Between

CLAIMANT

Link-Trading Joint Stock Company
Str, Ghioceilor, 1

2012 Chisinau

Republic of Moldova

And

RESPONDENT

Department for Customs Control
of the Republic of Moldova
Columna Str. 65

2001 Chisinau

Republic of Maldova

Page 2

A. Factual Background

Claimant, Link-Trading Joint Stock Company, is a US-Moldovan joint venture
company established under the laws of the Ropublic of Moldova in July
1996. Its business consisted essentially of the import of consumer products
into the Free Economic Zone of Chisinau {hereinafter “the FEZ” or “the
Chisinau FEZ") and their resale to retail customers, mainly Moidovan
citizens, for their personal use.

Claimant registered as a resident in the FEZ as of November 15, 1996. It
rented premises in Pavillion No. 1 located in the FEZ and commenced its
operations in the beginning of 1997.

Under the legislation in effect in Moldova on the date when Claimant
registered to bacame a resident in the FEZ in 1996, (1) Claimant was totally
exempt from import duties and value added taxes upon import of its goods
into the FEZ and (2} Claimant's retail customers were partially exempt from
duties and taxes on import from the FEZ into tha customs territory of
Moldova of such goods, The partial exemption according to the Budget Law
for 1996 was limited to the local currency equivalent of the first USD600 of
such goods purchased in any given month.

The source of Claimant's exemption on imports into the FEZ was a law
regulating the Chisinau FEZ, namely Law No. 625 adopted on November 3,
1995, The source of its customers USD600 exemption was Annex 11 to the
State Budgel Law for 1996, adopted on December 14, 1995. The State

Page 3

Budget Law was referred to in Regulation No. 05/1-07/507 of the Ministry of
Finance dated April 11, 1996, which clealt with the imposition of taxes and
duties in the FEZ, Article 1(1}{8) of the Regulation provided that :

“individuals who are not subjects of entrepreneurial activity may take out
from the territory of the free enterprise zone on the customs territory of the
Republic of Moldova, goods free of customs duties, VAT and excises in the
amount and limits set up anaually by the Law on State Budget of the
Republic of Moldova...”

The Budget Law for 1997, adopted on March 21, 1997, reduced the
exemption applicable to Claimant's customers from USD600 to USD400.
The Budget Law for 1998, adopted on December 27, 1997, further reduced
the said exemption to USD250. And then in July 1998, an amendment to
the Budget Law for 1998 was introduced by Law No. 96 of July 18, 1998,
eliminating the USD250 exemption effective August 8, 1998. A new
exemption based upon quantitative quotas for specified categories of
consumer products, without regard to the value of the products involved,
was established for imports from abroad by physical persons for their own
consumption in Moldova, but this exemption was not applicabla to purchases
made in the FEZ.

With a view to implementing the amended Budget Law for 1998, the
Respondent, Department for Customs Contro! of Republic of Moldova,
issued a latter no. 583-005 on August 8, 1998 to the Administration of the
Chisinau FEZ and, subsequently, issued an Order No, 466 on October 21,
1998 calling for residents of the Chisinau FEZ, including Claimant, to act as
collecting agent for the Republic by adding to the price of goods sold to
customers for import into the customs territory of Moldova the amount of

Page 4

customs duties and value added tax due on sales of its products and to remit
this amount to the State.

Claimant protested, taking the position that this change of the customs and
tax treatment of its customers violated governmental guarantees of tax
stability which had been given to Claimant for a 10-year period, substantially
deprived it of Its business, and constituted measures tantamount to an
expropriation of its investment without compensation in violation of the
provisions of the Bilateral Investment Protection Treaty between the USA
and the Republic of Maldova. The Treaty was signed on April 21, 1993 and
had become effective on November 25, 1994 (hereinafter “the Treaty”).
According to Claimant, this expropriation took place as of August 8, 1998,
the date of Respondent's letter no. 583-005. Respondent disagreed with
Claimant's position, and asserted that the change in customs and tax
treatment was not a breach of any obligation owing to the Claimant but was

a normal and proper exercise of the State’s regulatory power.

B. Procedural History of the Case

On November 27, 1999, somewhat more than a year after the dispute arose,
Claimant served a Notice of Arbitration upon Respondent on the basis of the
Treaty and in accordance with the UNCITRAL arbitration rules referred to in
the Treaty. Upon its constitution pursuant to the UNCITRAL tules (as more
fully set forth in the Award on Jurisdiction rendered by this Tribunal on
February 16, 2001), the Tribunal by letter of August 3, 2000 invited Claimant
to submit its Statement of Claim andl Respondent to submit its Staternent of
Defense.

 

 

Page 5

On August 9, 2000, Claimant confirmed that its Notice of Arbitration
constitutes its Statement of Claim in this arbitration. In its Notice of
Arbitration/Staterment of Claim, Claimant sought the follawing relief:

{A declaration off the existence of the right of the company “Link-Trading" to
sell goods in conditions of exemption from customs and fiscal tax during the
entire prior period of company's activity;

{A declaration off the existence of the right of individuals to buy goods from
company “Link-Trading” in conditions of exemption from customs and fiscal
tax in value of USD600 at import onto the customs territory of the Republic of
Moldova;

{A declaration off the existence of tha violation of these rights by the
Department for Customs Control and Customs Service of the FEZ;

Qualification of these violations as measures tantamount to expropriation;
Award of compensation for caused damages and lost profits (equivalent in
lef of USD3,458,813.25) from the account of the Department for Customs
Contro}.

. On August 30, 2000, Respondent filed a Response to the Statement of

Claim containing certain objections to jurisdiction as well as arguments on
the merits of the dispute, and denying liability.

. The Tribunal, on October 16, 2000, posed a series of specific questions to

both of the parties with respect to jurisdiction and requested responses by
November 15, 2000. Claimant responded on November 14. Respondent
chose not to respond, despite a reminder fetter sent by the Tribunal affording

Respondent additional time to do so.

FE SRR RRR BRR RRR RRR RRS!

12.

14,

15.

Page 6

By agreement of the parties, the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections were
considered without an oral hearing as a preliminary matter and, on February
16, 2001, the Tribunal rendered an Award on Jurisdiction, holding that the
Tribunal was properly constituted and has jurisdiction over the parties and
the subject matter of the dispute before it. The question of the allocation of
arbitration costs as between the parties was reserved until the Final Award.

. Subsequent to the Award on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal requested the parties

to submit further arguments and evidentiary materials on the merits of the
claim and the quantum of damages by June 15 as for the Claimant and by
July 15 as for Respondent, and to indicate by June 1, 2007 as to whether an
oral hearing was requested.

On May 30, 2001, Claimant confirmed in writing that an oral hearing was not
necessary. Respondent did not reply.

Claimant requested and received an extension of time to make its further
submission until July 15. Respondent was given a similar extension until
August 15, 2001. Claimant made its submission on July 12, including an
expert opinion on expropriation under international law provided by Mr. Todd

Jeffrey Weiler.

. In its July 12, 2001 submission, Claimant proposed to amend its Request for

Relief as follows:

“The issues to be resolved by the Arbitraf Tribunal at the request of company
‘Link-Trading’.

Whether the Aepublic of Moldova's treatment of the investments of Alai
Trading Corporation (‘the investor’) constitutes an expropriation for which

BPFRERR BS BRR KR KR KR HRAR AB RA REG!

17.

Page 7
compensation is owed under Article fff of the US-Moidovian BIT;

Whether the Republic of Moldova's treatment of ‘Link-Trading’ (‘the
investment’) constitutes a breach of the international law treatment
standards contained within Article H(3) of the US-Moldovian BIT; and

Jn the event that a breach of the BIT has occurred, what the appropriate
amount of compensation should be to remedy such breaches.

Alternatively, fto find that) this Tribunal has authority io determine that
such amendment is not necessary because the application of BIT Article
1{3) is already contemplated within the claim.”

Claimant also submitted on this occasion a new evaluation of its alleged
damages and lost profits in an amount substantially exceeding the amount
originally sought in its Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim,

. On August 2, 2001, Respondent informed the Tribunal that a government

commission had appointed a group of experts to study the matter in dispute
and make proposals. It requested an extension of three months for its
further submission in the arbitration. Claimant objected to such extension.
The Tribunal decided to grant an extension but only until September 30,
2001.

. On September 28, 2001, the Deputy Prime Minister of Moldova wrote fo the

Tribunal requesting on behalf of Respondent a suspension of proceedings
pending completion of negotiations between the parties. Foltowing further
exchanges, and by consent of the parties, the Tribunal ordered a suspension
of the proceedings until October 19, 2001 for settlement negotiations ta take
place and further ordered that, in the event that the proceedings resumed

RR RRB RE RE RBR KR KR RR KR KR RB BRR EA!

20.

21.

22.

23.

24

25.

Page 8

thereafter, Respondent shall make its suspended submission by October 31,
2001.

On October 22, 2001, Claimant wrote the Tribunal to inform that, despite the
signing of a Protocol No. 2 on October 8, 2001 between Claimant and the
governmental commission studying the dispute, which it attached ta its letter,
no compensation had been received. it requested the resumption of the
arbitration.

On October 28, 2001, a Moldovan attorney, Mr Mihail Buruiana {unrelated to
the arbitrator, lon Buruiana, appointed by Claimant in this case), appeared
on behalf of Respondent and requested an extension of 30 days from
October 31 ta file Respondent's submission. The Tribunal granted an

extension until November 30, 2001.

An issue arose as to the validity of Mr. Burutana’s power of attorney. This
was resolved to the satisfaction of Claimant and the Tribunal. Respondent
was granted one further extension untii December 10, 2001 to file its
submission, and was advised that no further extensions would be granted.

On December 10, 2001, Respondent made its submission, which it
characterized as a “Statement of Defense,” including an expert opinion of
Professor Dr. Hans-Joachim Schramm on the question of expropriation

under internationaf law.

In its submission, Respondent objected to Claimant's proposed amendments
to its Statement of Claim and also raised further jurisdictional arguments.

On December 18, 2004, Claimant at its own initiative submitted a Rejoinder
to Respendent’s submission. In light of this further submission, on January

 

26.

27.

28

Page 9

2, 2002, the Tribunal invited Respondent to submit a reply to the Rejoinder
by January 18, 2002, adding that no extensions would be granted and no
further submissions would be accepted from either party.

On January 9, 2002, the American law firm of Vinson & Elkins wrote to the
Tribunal to advise that it had been retained by the Claimant and Ciaimant’s
Parent company, Alai-Trading. It requested an opportunity to make a further
submission on behalf of Claimant and further requested an oral hearing “if
the Tribunal determines that such would assist it in its review of the case.”
The Tribunal responded by referring counsel! to the Tribunal’s letter of
January 2, 2002 closing the evidence in the case. It also recalled the fact,
which had been noted by Vinson & Elkins as well, that Claimant had
previously declined an oral hearing on the merits. The Tribunal concluded
that it did not believe that it would be helpful at this point for it to order a
hearing,

Respondent made its final submission on January 18, 2002 in accordance
with the Tribunal's January 2, 2002 letter.

in connection with its deliberations, the Tribunal requested each party to
exchanges statements of their costs in accordance with the UNCITRAL rules
by February 15, 2002 and allowed an opportunity for an exchange of
objections by February 28, 2062. Submissions were made by both parties in

this regard.

 

CA

29.

30.

3t.

=

32.

Page 10
C. Contentions of the Parties
Clalmant's Contentions

Claimant's case is predicated on the characterization of the amendment to
the 1998 Budget Law and Respondent's implementation of that amendment
as being tantamount to an expropriation of Claimant's investment in the
Chisinau FEZ for which it is entitled to prompt and adequate compensation
under Articles Il] and X of the Treaty, In its July 12, 2001 submission,
Claimant asserted that this amendment also violated the international

treatment standards of Article If of the Treaty.

In its Statement of Claim, Claimant contends that at the time of its
investment in the Chisinau FEZ, Moldovan law guaranteed it for a period of
10 years against adverse change in customs and tax regulations and that
the change in the customs and VAT exemptions applicable to its customers
violated this obligation and had such an adverse effect upon Claimant's
business as to constitute an expropriation of its investment under Articles IIf
and X of the Treaty.

In its July 12, 2001 submission, Claimant sought leave to amend its claim in
the manner cited in para. 16 hereinabove. Respondent objected to this
proposed amendment as untimely and prejudicial.

Although Claimant noted that the adverse changes occurred over time, as
the exemption ceiling was reduced first fram USO600 to USD400 and then
from USD400 to USD250, it is Claimant's contention that the alleged
expropriation finally occurred when the amended 1998 Budget Law
eliminated the exemption altogether and, more specifically, on August 8,

33.

34.

Page 11

1998, when the tax authorities sought to implement within the FEZ the
corresponding provisions of the amended 1998 Budget Law.

Claimant relies on several sources of law in support of its alleged entitlement
to protection from changes in taxes and customs duties for a 10-year period.
First and foremost, Claimant refers to Law No. 625 of November 3, 1995 on
the Chisinau FEZ that provides in Article 7 as follows:

“In case of adoption of new legal acts deteriorating the circumstances of
activity of residents of the free zone as regards the customs and lax regime
foreseen by this Law, residents are entitted to be Subject to the law of the
Republic of Moldova in force on the date of their registration in the free zone
for period of ten years.”

The customs and tax regimes foreseen by Law No. 626 are contained in its

Articles 5 and 6, which read in relevant part as follows:
Article & Customs Regime

(2) The following goods...shaif be exempt from the customs tax:

Goods imported to the Free Zone for ultimate consumption;

Zone-origin goods exported from the Free Zone into the customs territory of
the Republic of Maldova;

Zone-origin goods exported from the Free Zone outside the customs territory
of the Republic of Moldova;

Any-origin goods exported via the Free Zone outside the customs territory of
the Republic of Moidova;

Goods temporarily exported from the Free Zone without sale and returned
back, including in another (processed or treated) form.

Page 12

{4} Goods...imported to the Free Zone and having undergone no substantial
treatment or re-cycling and exported into the customs territory of the
Republic of Moldova shal! be govemed by the customs legislation provisions
pertaining to the cost af the imported component....

Article 6. Tax Regime

The taxation of the incomes of the Free Zone residents shall be set at 45
percent of the corresponding tax rate existing in the Republic of Moldova.

(3) Free Zone residents which have invested a minimum USD250,000
capital equivalent in the Zone development shail be exempt from paying the
income tax during 5 years starting from the year quarter folowing the quarter
when the investment has reached the above-mentioned volume.

(5) Goods...originating from the Free Zone, shai! not be subject to vatue-
added taxation,

(6) The Free Zone Administration shall have the right to impose zonal taxes
in accordance with the fegistation.

(7) Exempt from VAT and excise duties shall be the following goods...

Goods exported from the Free Zone in conformity with the Customs Regime
as envisaged by items b, c, d and e in Article 5/2);

Goods imported to the Free Zone from outside the customs territory of the
Republic of Moldova;

Good originating from the customs territory of the Republic of Mofdova and
imported to ihe Free Zone for ultimate consumption, except those for sale
through retailing.

35.

36.

37.

38.

Page 13

The customs and tax regimes contained in Law No. 625 with respect to the
Chisinau FEZ were consistent with the regimes applicable generally to FEZs
in Moldova as set forth in the Law on the Free Zones No. 1451-XI! of May
25, 1993 to which Claimant also refers.

Claimant argues that, since it is uncontested that retail sale of goods is a
permittad activity within the FEZ, "ultimate consumption” within the meaning
of Article 5.2(a) above must refer to retail sale of goods in the FEZ and
buyers of those goods must be deemed to have associated rights to the
exemption provided in connection with such sale of goods.

It then refers to Article 1.1.8 of Regulation No. 05/1-07/507 of the Ministry of
Finance dated April 11, 1996 regarding imposition of taxes in the FEZ, which
is cited in relevant part earlier in this decision, but which we repeat here:

‘individuals who are not subjects of entrepreneurial activity may take out
from the territory of the free enterprise zone on the customs tertitory of the
Republic of Moldova, goods free of customs duties, VAT and excises in the
amount and limits set up annually by the Law on State Budget of the
Republic of Motdova....”

Finally, Glaimant refers to Law No. 998 on Foreign investments of April 1,
1992 which provides at Article 43(1):

“In case of adoption of new legistation affecting the business of enterprises
with foreign investments established before the adoption of such tegisiation,
these enterprises are entitled during a ten year period as from the date of
entry into force of the new legistative act to be subject to the legistation of
fhe Hepublic of Moldova in force on the date of establishment of the
enterprise.”

PRERRR RRR RRRBRRRRRRR ES

39.

40.

41

42.

43.

44.

Page 14

As regards the measure of its damages, Claimant sought, in its submission
of July 12, 2001, leave to amend its original claim in order to seek a higher
amount of Compensation based on new calculations made by its expert
advisors. Respondent objected ta such an amendment on the ground that it
was untimely and prejudicial at such a late stage in the proceedings to allow
Claimant to modify the amount in dispute, particularly when such amount
could have been calculated ai the outset.

Finally, in its July 12, 2004 submission, Ciaimant sought leave to amend its
claim to seek a declaration of the rights of its parent company, as “Investor.”
Respondent also objected to this amendment on the grounds that it would
improperly add a new party to the proceedings.

Respondent's Contentions

Respondent has argued that Claimant's case fails for jurisdictional,

procedural and substantive law reasons.

As regards jurisdiction, Respondent asserts that Ciaimant does not have
standing to bring this action under the Treaty, since Claimant is a Moldovan

and not an American company.

Moreover, it alleges that Claimant's US parent company, Alai-Trading, is no
longer in existence since March 1, 2000, according ta a certificate obtained
from the Secretary of State of Delaware, its place of incorporation, and that
this affects Claimant's standing to bring the present action under the Treaty.

Respondent further asserts that Claimant’s action is time-barred by the
Moldovan prescription period that if alleges to be one year from the time the

dispute arose,

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

Page 15

On substantive grounds, Respondent argues that no State obligatian was
undertaken towards Claimant not to change the USD600 exemption from
customs duties and value added tax upon import of goods by individuals into
the Maldovan custams territory that was in effect in 1996 and that the
possibility of such a change was a commercial risk assumed by Claimant at
the time of its invesiment.

It argues that the 10-year stability proviston in Article 7 of Law No. 625 on
the Chisinau FEZ, relied upon by Claimant, is expressly restricted to the
Customs Regime and Tax Regime stiputated in that Law, which are set out
in Articles 5 and 6 of the Law, and that nothing therein gives an exemption to
finished imported goods purchased at retail in the FEZ and imported into the
customs territory of Moldova.

Respondent argues that Law No. 625 is not the source of the limited
exemption afforded to non-residents to make purchases in the FEZ for
import into the customs territory, and that such exemption derives solely
from the State Budget Law.

Respondent further argues that the Regulation No. 05/1-07/507 on which
Claimant relies is not a Law, and cannot create rights that do not have their
source in a Law. Moreover, it argues that the Regulation in any event
confirms that the exemption derives from the Budget Law and that the
Budget Law is established on an annual basis.

As regards the general 10-year stability provision in the Foreign Investment
Law, Respondent points out that Article 43(2) of that Law expressly excludes
from the stability provision protection from changes in tax and customs

Jegislation. Article 4342} reads as follows:

50.

$1.

52,

53.

Page 16

"2 Section 1 does not apply fo customs, fax, financial, money-credit,
currency and anti-monapoly fegistation.. .

Furthermore, Respondent argues that the amendment to the 1998 Budget
Law was a normal regulatory measure, neither unfair by its nature nor
arbitrary or discriminatory in its application, and cannot therefore be viewed
either as a measure tantamount to expropriation or as a violation of the
international treatment standards set forth in Article 1] of the Treaty.

Respondent further argues that Claimant has not carried its burden of
proving the causa! relationship between the allegedly confiscatory measures
of the State and Claimant’s alleged damages. Respondent submitted
evidence that the Moldovan currency devalued by more than 10! 2% following
the Russian financial crisis in August 1998, and argued that this was an
equally likely or more probable cause of the setbacks in Claimant's
business. [It noted that the change in the Budget Law did not prevent
Claimant from continuing to conduct its business through most of 1999.

Respondent further contests the calculations made by Claimant of its
specific losses arguing that they include double counting, speculative
amounts, and other amounts which are not properly recoverable even in the

event of an expropriation.

In conclusion, Respondent requests in its submission of December 13, 2001
that the Tribunal adjudge and declare:

that claimant has shown no prima facie act of expropriation attributable to
Moldova, and that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction fo entertain the
faim;

64,

Page 17

further or alternatively, that no act of expropriation has occurred or is
attributable io Moldova within the meaning of Article IH! of the BIT;

furiher or alternatively, thal no reach of the international law treatment
standards contained within Article (3) of the BIT has occurred or is
attributable to Moldova;

that the Request by the Claimant be dismissed; and

that the Claimant be required to pay Moldova's costs in this matter and the
cosis of the Arbitral Tribunal.

D. Discussion of the [ssues Raised

This is an investment dispute under the Treaty. The Tribunal has already
held in its Partial Award on Jurisdiction that it has jurisdiction to determine
whether or not a breach of Article X(2) and Article II) of the Treaty has
occurred and that Claimant has standing to bring this arbitration under the
terms of the Treaty. As previously noted, Article VI{8) of the Treaty states
that:

“for purposes of an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this Article {which
inctudes the present UNCITRAL arbitration}, any company legally constituted
under the applicable law of a Party [Moicova] but that, immediately before
the occurrence of the event or events giving rise to the dispute fi.e. August 8
1998] was an investment of companies of the other Party {USAJ, shail be
treated as a company of such other Party.”

Therefore, Claimant is treated as an American company for purposes of this
arbitration under the Treaty, despite the fact that it is established in the
Republic of Moldava.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

Page 18

Respondent has raised a new jurisdictional challenge based on evidence
that Claimant's parent company, a Delaware company, has ceased to exist
as of March 1, 2000. Hawever, we find this fact to be irrelevant, since the
critical date for purposes of determining Claimant's standing to sue, as a
company controlled by a US investor, is the date on which the expropriation
is alleged to have taken place, namely August 8, 1998.

In its July 12, 2001 submission, Claimant has sought to amend its request
for relief to read as quoted in para. 16 above.

In its amended request for relief, Claimant no longer seeks the declaratory
relief referred to in the first three paragraphs of its original Statement of
Claim, as quoted in para. 9 above.

Claimant does seek, however, for the first time a determination that its
parent company, Alai Trading, suffered an expropriation under the terms of
Article Ill of the Treaty. Since its parent company is not a party to this
arbitration, this Tribunal has no jurisdiction to make any determination as to
its rights under the Treaty. In accordance with the terms of the Treaty, had
Alai Trading wished to make its own claim in arbitration, it would have had to
comply with the procedures set forth in the Treaty for initiating such an
arbitration, It has not done so. We consider, however, that this new claim is
not intended to be an abandonment of Claimant's own claim of expropriation
as set forth in the original Statement and argued in its subsequent
submissions.

Claimant also seeks to add a new independent claim based upon alleged
violation of the internationaf treatment standards of Article Il{(3) of the Treaty.
Article 11(3} provides in relevant part as follows:

60.

61.

Page 19

(a) Investment shall at aif times be accorded fair and equitable
treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security and shall in no case be
accorded treatment jess than that required by international law.

(b). Neither Party shalt in any impair by arbitrary or discriminatory
measures ihe management, operation, maintenance, use, enfoyment,
acquisitian, expansion, or disposal of investments...

{c) Each Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into
with regard to investments.

As we have already held in our Award on Jurisdiction, our competence in
this arbitration is expressly limited to Articles X and | of the Treaty.
However, since Article Ul cross-references to Article 1(3), it is within our
competence for purposes of Article II] to determine whether a violation of the
standards of conduct envisaged by Article 11(3) has occurred. ‘

Finally, Claimant continues to claim for damages and lost profits but
increases the amount stated in its original claim. While Claimant does not
adequately justify the late recatculation of its claim, in tight of the long time
period between Claimant's July 12, 2001 submission and Respondent's
answer on December 10, 2001 we do not believe that Respondent was
prejudiced thereby.

There have been some references in the arguments of the parties to
contracts concluded by Claimant with authorities in the FEZ with respect to
the proposed investment. Claimant has not, however, formulated a claim
based upon breach of any of said contracts. Moreover, as has already been
noted in the Award on Jurisdiction, this Tribunal is not competent to
determine whether the contractual provisions have been respected by the
parties thereto, since said contracts create civil law relations and are

62,

63.

64.

Page 20

governed by their own specific arbitration agreements between the parties
thereto.

Respondent has argued that Claimant's action should be considered time-
barred by virtue of a one-year prescription period applicable to certain civil
law claims under Moldovan civil law. Claimant has countered by referring to
a 3-year prescription period which it believes is applicable. We consider
both such prescriptian perieds to be inapplicable to the present action since
this is not an action for breach of contract under Moldovan civil law, but for
viciation of the State's treaty obligations as defined in the investment
Protection Treaty. The Treaty contains no applicable prescription period.

Claimant's case is predicated upon a change of tax and customs regulations
allegedly constituting an act of expropriation under the Treaty. it argues that
Article X(2) of the Treaty required Respondent to respect the terms of
Claimant's investment in the State's tax policy, Article X of tha Treaty does
indeed permit claims of expropriation ta be predicated on tax measures
where such measures are found to go beyond normal regulatory action and
constitute a direct or indirect taking of a protected investor's investment.
Article X provides in relevant part as follows:

“With respect to its tax policies, each Party should strive to accord fairness
and equity in the treatment of investment of nationals and companies of the
other Party. Nevertheless, the provisions of this Treaty, and in particular
Article Vi and Vii, shall apply to matters of taxation only with respect to the
following:

expropriation, pursuant to Articte Hl...”

it is clear from paragraph (1) of Article X of the Treaty that not all fiscal
measures necessarily constitute an expropriation, although their habitual

@ fs @

65.

66.

Page 21

effect is to cause the taxpayer to surrender part of his income or property to
the State. As a general matter, fiscal measures only become expropriatory
when they are found to be an abusive taking. Abuse arises where it is
demonstrated that the State has acted unfairly or inequitably towards the
investment, where it has adopted measures that are arbitrary or
discriminatory in character or in their manner of implementation, or where
the measures taken violate an obligation undertaken by the State in regard

to the investment.

The policy of the Republic of Moldova over a number of years, as reflected
in its annual budget laws, has been to reduce the dollar exemption it had
originally allowed on duty- and tax-free imports of retail goods into its
territory from ihe FEZ. Respondent has asserted that the 1995 Budget Law
had authorized a USD1000 exemption which had been reduced to USD600
prior to Claimant's investment. Although the text of the 1995 Budget Law is
nat in evidence, Claimant has not challenged this assertion. A pattern of
reduclions did, however, occur thereafter until August 1998, when the
monetary exemption applicable in the FEZ was eliminated and a new system
of quantitative exemptions was introduced with respect to goods imported by
Moldovan citizens upon return from abroad. The new quantitative
exemptions were construed by the Customs Department as not applicable to
retail purchases by Moldovan citizens made in the FEZ, on the ground that
the FEZ was located within the national borders of the Republic. The new
policy was maintained and stated more clearly in subsequent budget laws
through 2001.

Claimant maintains that the amended 1998 budget law, as interpreted, was
an unfair, inequitable, arbitrary or discriminatory taking of its business in
violation of Article [ll and Article II(3) of the Treaty, in that its Moldovan
customers could no longer make retait purchases in the FEZ on a tax

67,

68.

89,

70,

71,

Page 22

exempt basis, while they could import into Moldova the same types of
merchandise upon return from travels abroad and benefit from the newly

established quantitative exemptions,

Putting aside for the moment the question of whether a causal link has been
established between the above-mentioned tax measures and the failure of
Claimant's business, were the measures taken by the Respondent,
unfavorable as they were, of a type that should he considered to be an
arbitrary or discriminatory exercise of the State’s tax powers vis-a-vis
Claimant?

Customs policy is a matter that clearly falls within the custamary regulatory
powers of the state and the burden is on Claimant to establish that there has
been an abusive exercise of that power as regards Claimant and that this
abusive exercise of power produced consequences tantamount to
exprapriation of its investment.

The changes to the import regime that took place in the present case were
contained in annexes to the national budget which, as in most countries, is
adopted annually and is subject to annual change. As such, they were
changes of general application, and not directed specifically against
Claimant.

In this connaction, we believe that the impact of these changes on Claimant
must be analyzed in the context of their impact on other retailers in the FEZ
and/or elsewhere in Moldova, since this is the relevant territory with respect

to which the Moldovan government exercises its regulatory power.

No evidence has been submitted to show that Claimant was treated less
favorably than any other retailer within the FEZ ‘by virtue of these

 

72.

73.

74.

Page 23

regulations. Nor was Claimant treated less favorably in relation to retailers in
Moldova located outside the FEZ, since there is nathing to indicate that the
same customs duties and VAT were not payable with respect ta the
imported merchandise of such other retailers. indeed, since Claimant
continued to be able to import goods into the FEZ on a duty-free and tax-free
basis, it could.defer the payment of duties and VAT until final resale,
whereas local retailers presumably were obliged to pay these charges upon
import, Moreover, Claimant enjoyed special reduced income tax treatment
under the regulations pertaining to residents in the FEZ, treatment that was
presumably not available to local retailers outside of the FEZ.

We therefore conclude that the substance of the tax measures adopted by
the Moldovan government, while unfavorable to Claimant, were not
dissimilar to the policies of many countries in the world levying duties and
taxes on imports into their customs territory and were not inherently abusive,
arbitrary or discriminatory towards Claimant. They did not place Claimant in
@ worse competitive position than any other category or nationality of retailer
in Moldova.

Tax measures may also become expropriatory without necessarily being
arbitrary or discriminatory, when their application violates a specific
obligation that the State has previously undertaken in favor of a particular
person or class of persons, such as an investor protected under a treaty.
Indeed, expropriation under Article Hl of the Treaty is prohibited when it
violates the principles of treatment set out in Article 11(9) of the Treaty,
including Article IK3)(c) which requires a State Party to “observe any
obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments.”

Did, then, the reduction and elimination of the USD600 exemption enjoyed
by Claimant's customers at the time when Claimant started business in the

 

75.

76.

77.

78.

Page 24

FEZ violate Claimant’s rights conferred or created by the Treaty with respect
to its investment?

Claimant's principal contention in this arbitration, and indeed the basis for
the laga! analysis of Claimant's expert on expropriation, Mr. Weiler, has been
that the change and ultimately the elimination of the exemption originally
available to Claimant's customers on their purchases in the FEZ was a
violation of an obligation of 40-year tax stability owing to Claimant both
under Article 7 of the Law No. 625 on the FEZ and under Article 43(1} of the
Law No, 998 on Foreign Investments of April 1, 1992.

We are not persuaded by this contention for the following reasons.

Article 7 of Law No 625 on the FEZ provides for stability only with respect to
the tax exemptions provided for by that Law, i.e. “the customs and tax
regime foreseen by this Law.” That regime is defined in Articles 5 and 6 of
Law No. 625 cited in relevant part earlier in this decision.

Article & (Customs Regime) lists five cases in which goods shall be exempt
from customs duties. Four of these casas deal with exports from the FEZ.
Claimant has not argued that its goods would fall within any of those cases.
(Article 5(2)(b)-{e}}. The fifth case deals with imports of goods into the FEZ
for “ultimate consumption” (konechnoe potreblenie}), which might also be
translated as “tinal use." Goods imported into the FEZ for final use are not
subject to customs duties on import into the FEZ. Even if one were to
interpret “final use” to include retail sale of the goods, there is no basis for
reading this provision to mean that, in tha event that goods are then
exported from the FEZ into the customs territory of Moldava no customs duty
would be payable. If this had been intended, such goods would have been
covered by an express export exemption as in the other four cases listed.

79.

80,

81.

82.

Page 25

Article 5(2)(a) speaks only of an exemption on the import of goods into the
FEZ.

Moreover, it must be noted that the Article 5(2}(a) exemption is a total
exemption. If Claimant's customers were indeed beneficiaries of such an
exemption upon bringing goods into the customs territory of Moldova, then
they would have been entitled to a full exemption, and not one limited to only
USDE6a0.

We find further support for this interpretation in the wording of Article 5(4).
Here it is made clear that the imported component of goeds produced in the
FEZ and then exported into the customs territory of Moldova will be subject
to the customs legislation pertaining to the cost of the imported component.
If goods imported for incorporation into products to be manufactured in the
FEZ are subject to duty upon export of the manufactured product to the
customs territory, the import and sale for export to the customs territory of

finished goods would appear to be an a fortiori case.

Nor do we find this inconsistent with the uncontested fact that retail business
was clearly an authorized activity in the FEZ under Article 3 of the Law.
Other incentives existed for a retailer to invest in the FEZ, including the duty-
free import of goods to the FEZ provided by Article 5(2}(a) and the favorable
income tax treatment for FEZ residents provided under Article 6(1).

Article 6 (Tax Regime) defines the VAT and excise duly exemptions
applicable in the FEZ. Three cases are identified — two dealing with imports
into the FEZ, which are exempted, and one dealing with exempted exports
from the FEZ, As regards the case of exports from the FEZ, Article 6(7)(a)
provides that exempted goods are those exported from the FEZ in
conformity with the Customs Regime as envisaged by items (b), {c), (d) and

83,

84,

85.

Page 26

{e) in Article 5(2), (Cited supra). It may be recalled that none of these items
corresponded to the present situation. Claimant maintained that its sales fall
under Article 5(2)(a}, not Article 5(2)(b)-(e),

Claimant heavily relias on Article 1.1.8 of Regulation No. 05/1-07/607
fegarding imposition of taxes in the FEZ as proof that the 10-year tax
Stability in Law No. 625 was intended to extend to the partial exemption
enjoyed by its customers on bringing their purchases from the FEZ into the
customs territory of Moldova, which it characterized as an “associated right"
of Claimant. However, a literal reading of Article 1.1.8, cited earlier in this
decision, leads to the opposite conclusion, Article 1.1.8 expressly refers to
the Law on the State Budget, nat to Law No. 625, as its lagislative basis, and
states that such customs and VAT exemptions are in an amount and limits
set up annually by the Budget Law. In light of this language, there were no
reasonable grounds for assuming that this partial exemption would not be
subject to legislative review and possible modification each year in the
context of the annual budget.

Claimant also refers the Tribunal! to Article 43(1) of the Foreign Investment
Law which more generally protects enterprises with foreign investments
(regardless of whether or not located in the FEZ) from “new fegal acts that
would change the conditions for activity” of the enterprise during a 10 year
period from the creation of the enterprise.

However, as Respondent pointed out, Article 43(2) goes on to provide that
‘{Tjhe provisions of paragraph 1 shall not extend to customs, tax,
antimonopoly, financial, credit monetary, foreign exchange, as well as the
fegisiation that regulates the insurance of state security, protection of
environment, public order, morality and health of the Population.” Since we

 

86.

87.

88.

89.

Page 27

are hera dealing with a tax measure, the Foreign Investment Law stability

provision is inapplicable.

We therefore conclude that the State had not assumed any specific
obligation towards Claimant to maintain unchanged the customs and tax
regimes applicable to Claimant's customers for import of goods from the FEZ

into the customs territory of the Republic of Moldova.

The essence of any claim of expropriation is that there has been a taking of
property without prompt and adequate compensation. However, many
investment protection treaties and the Treaty which is the basis for the
present arbitration extends the notion of a taking to include what has often
been referred to as “creeping” or “indirect” expropriation by the State through
measures which so substantially interfere with the investors business
activities that they are considered to be “tantamount” to an expropriation.
Claimant has the burden of proving the causal link between the measures
complained of and the deprivation of its business.

Claimant has alleged that the change of its customers’ tax treatment led to
the failure of its business sines it was no longer economically viable for its
business to compete in the marketplace. It has alleged that the prices of its
merchandise increased by an average rate of 44% as a result of the fina!

elimination of the exemptions enjoyed by its customers.

Respondent, however, has asserted that there was a 100% devaluation of
the locai currency following the Russian financial crisis in August 1998 and
that this was a more likely cause for the decline of Respondent's business,
which involved the sale of doflar valued imported merchandise,

EE OE OE ee eS eae eae eee

90.

91.

92.

Page 28

Annex A of Claimants submission of July 12, 2001 sets out the monihly
sales Statistics of the venture and the applicable monthly exchange rates
over the period from January 1997, when business activity began, until end
September 1999. We have noted that, despite Claimant's contention that it
was expropriated on August 8, 1998 by virtue of the Respondent's
interpretation of the amended 1998 Budget Law eliminating the exemption of
its customers as from that date, Claimant's sales actually increased in
September 1998 and then continued albeit at a decreasing level through
September 1999. We have further noted that the applicable exchange was
essentially stable from January through August 1998 and sharply dropped
from September 1998 to January 1999 fram 4,78 to 8.32 to the dollar, and to
41,01 in September 1999.

in light of this, we consider that Claimant has not presented sufficient proof
that Claimant's business was expropriated as of August 1998, nor that the
cause of the subsequent decline of its business was a direct result of the
elimination of its custamers' tax exemption as opposed to the devaluation of
the Moldovan currency and the resulting decline in its customers’ buying
power. While one might suppose that the new tax measures contributed to
Claimant's losses, that is not enough to constitute expropriation. Otherwise,
the concept would be unlimited, since most tax measures have a cost impact
on taxpayers. To prove expropriation, Claimant must show that as a direct
consequence of the measures complained of Claimant was deprived of its
investment. Claimant has not carried its burden of proof of this causal link.

In light of our conclusions as set forth above, we do not reach the question
of the amount of compensation that might be due in the event of
expropriation.

| / 83.

|
|
94.
95.
. 96.

Page 29
E. COSTS

Both parties have sought recovery of the costs of the arbitration and have
made corresponding submissions thereon. Article 38 of the UNCITRAL
tules states that the Tribunal shall fix the costs of arbitration in its Award and
defines the term “costs.” According to Article 40 of the UNCITRAL rules, the
costs of arbitration, including fees for lega! representation and assistance,
Shall in principte be borna by the unsuccessful party, although the Tribunal
May apportion such costs among the parties if it determines that this would
be reasonable under the circumstances of the case.

in fight of our decision that Claimant has failed to prove its claim of violation
of tha Treaty by the Respondent, the reasonable costs of this arbitration
shall be awarded to Respondent. Respondent has mada a submission as to
its costs on February 15, 2002, which consists of attorney fees of USD138,
352 and expenses of USD1,456.80, legal expert fees of USD2,200, and
other expenses of the Respondent of USD2,414, for a total of
USD144,422,80.

Considering that this arbitration did not involve any hearing and that
Respondent's counse! appeared at a late date in the procaedings and was
required to make only limited submissions, the Tribunal considers that it
would be reasonable to award to Respondent an amount for its counsel fees
and expenses of USD20,000. The fees af the legal expert appear to be
reasonable at USD2,200, There is no substantiation for Respendeni's other
expenses, and thease expenses are therefore denied, The total amount of
party costs awarded to Respondent shall therefore be USD22,200.

The Tribunal has received a total amount of USD120,000 solely trom
Claimant as a security deposit for the Tribunal's fees and disbursements in

Page 30

this arbitration. At the time of the Award on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal had
incurred fees and expenses in the amount ot USD40,000, which was paid to
the Tribunal by way of an advance. The time incurred by the Tribunal since
then has significantly exceeded what ihe Tribunal reasonably anticipated
when the security deposit was set. This was due principally to the
unsolicited further submission of Claimant on December 18, 2001 which
necessarily required a further responsive pleading from Respondent. This
being said, the Tribunal has decided not to award fees and expenses
beyond the amount of the security deposit, but to allocate the deposit as

follows in full satisfaction of its fees and expenses, to wit:

 

Expenses Fees Totals
J. M. Herzfeld, Esq. USD2,200 USD 51,174 (45%) USD 53,374
Prof. |, V.Buruiana ~=USD1,080 USD 31,273 (27.5%) USD 32,353
Prof. |. S. Zykin USD3,000 USD 31,273 (27.5%) USD 34,273

 

 

USD6,280 USD113,720 USD120,000

For these costs the parties are jiable jointly and severally. As between the
parties they shail ultimately be borne by Claimant. They will be covered out

of the advance.

Page 31
NOW THEREFORE THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
DECIDES

A. Respondent did not violate Claimant's rights under Articles X and fl! of the
US-Moldova Investment Protection Treaty, including with respect to the
international jaw treatment standards envisaged therein by reference to
Article Il of the Treaty, by virtue of Respondent's reduction or elimination of
the exemption from customs duties and taxes applicable to imports of goods
by Claimant's customers from the FEZ onto the customs territory of the
Republic of Moidova.

B. This Tribunal has no jurisdiction with respect to Alai-Trading, Claimant's
parent company, and makes no determination with respect to the rights or
obligations of Alai-Trading.

C. Claimant's claims are dismissed and its request for damages including lost

profit is denied.

D. Claimant Link Trading Joint Stock Company is ordered to pay to Respondent
Department for Customs Control of the Republic of Moldova compensation
for Respondent's reasonable arbitration costs in the amount of USD22,500.

E. Both parties are ordered to pay jointly and severally the costs of the
Arbitration Tribunal as follows:

Jeffrey M. Hertzield, Esq., Presiding Arbitrator USD53,374
Professor fon V. Buruiana, Arbitrator USD32,353
Professor Ivan S. Zykin, Arbitrator USD34,273

 

Page 32
As between the parties, these costs shalt be ultimately borne by Claimant.
Place of Arbitration: Chisinau

Date of Award: April _{ 97”, 2002

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

Mbp ——

Prof. lon V. Buruiana Jeffrey M. Hertzfeld, Esq. Prof. van S. Zykin
Arbitrator Chairman Arbitrator

 

