IN THE MATTER OF:
Link-Trading vs. Department for Customs Control of Republic of Motdova
UNGITRAL Arbitration — Chisinau. Moldova

MNS

Arbitrators:

Jeffrey M. Hertzfeld, Esa. {Paris}, Presiding
Professor fon Buruiana {Chisinau}
Professor lvan Zykin (Moscow)

€: Claimant:

Link-Trading Joint Stock Company
Str. Ghioceilor, 4

2012 Chisinau

Republic of Moldova

Respondent:

Depariment for Gustoms Control of the Republic of Moldova
Columna Str. 65

2001 Chisinau

Republic of Moldova

AWARD ON JURISDICTION

q In the mafler before this Tribunal, Clalmant, a US-Moidovan joint venture
company established in Novernber 1996 In the Free Economic Zone of Chisinau
(hereinafter “the PEZ") in the Republic of Moldova, alleges to have suffered an
Indirect expropriation for which It seeks compensation pursuant ihe Bilateral
Investment Protection Treaty between the USA and the Republls of Moldova,
signed on Apri 21, 4993 and effective November 25, 1994 (hereinafter “the BIT").
Clalmant has named the Department of Customs Control of the Republic of
Moldova as Respondent. The Tribunal has bsen set up under UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, one of the optional arbitratlon systems referred to in the BIT.

Claimant's allegation of indirect expropriation is based upon a change in the rates
of duties and VAT exemptions introduced in the 1988 Moidovan Law on the
Budget the aliaged effect of which was to destroy the economic viability of
Claiment's business. According fo the Claimant, ils business consisted
essentially of the duty-free import of consumer products into the FEZ for sale 19

 

 

ye

 

Page 2

Meldovan sitizens, At the lime of Claimant's investment in the FEZ, it appears to
be ungantested that Moldovan citizens were permitted to purchase such products
in the FEZ and import them Into the customs territory of Moldova free of VAT and
duties, within the maximum limit of $600.

quently reduced under the 1997 Budget Law to $400 and
vader the 1926 get Law to $250. The 1998 Budget Law was then amended
in August 1998 elintinating the exemption altogether. Claimant maintains that the
reduction and final olimination of this exemption disregarded governmental
guarantees of 40-year stability of the tax and customs regime, which guarantees
were contained in the Law on the FEZ and the Moldovan Law on Foreign
Investment In effect at the time of Claimant's creation, and constituted an indirect
expropriation of its investrrent. Under such circumstances, it clairns entitlement
te compensation under the BIT.

This iimit was suts

   

 
  

Claimant confirmed to the Tribunat by letter of August 9, 2009 that it considers it
Notice of Arbitration served on November 27, 1999 as constituting its Statement
cf Claim under LINCITRAL Rufes. Respondent filed a Response to the
Statement of Claim on August 30, 2000, setling forth, inter alia, certain
jurisdictionat objections, some of which had been previously raised by
Respondent in its letter of April 4, 2000 addressed to the Arbitration Institute of
the Stockholrn Chamber of Commerce (the appointing authority designated by
the Permanent Court of Arbitration in the Hague -. see below).

Both parties have requested the Tribunal to consider Respondent's jurisdictional
Chjections 4s a preliminary matter before preceeding further with the merits of the
case. Neither Party requested an oral hearing on the jurisdictional objections.

 

By letter of October 16, 2000, the Tribunal posed a serles of specific questions to
bath of the Parties bearing upon the issue of jurisdiction and requested their
responses thereto by November 15. Ciaimant submitted its response on
November 14. Respondent has not responded, despite @ reminder letter sent by
the [ribunel affording Respondent an additional time period to do so.

Respondent's jurisdictional objections may ba summarized as follows:

1 Thut na agreement to arbitrate has been signed by and between Claimant
and Respondent.

2. That the Republic of Moldova and the Ministry of Finance should have been
or should be invited to join the arbitration.

 

Page 3

. Thai, pursuant to Article (2) of the BIT, the Republis of Moldova has the right

te deny ic any cormpany tne acvantages of the BIT.

That, pursuant to the Arlisle 7 of the Law on Expo-Business-Chisinau FEZ
No, 625, Clalmant’s only recourse In the case of an adverse change of law is
to the Msidovan Parliament.

_ That, under the terms of the BIT, Claimant has the right of examination of his

claim by a competent judicial or adrninistrative authority of the Republic of
Moldava or the USA, but not by an international tribunal.

_ That Clairnant did not wait the required six month period under Article VI{3) of

the BIT before commensing this arbitration.

| Frat the Notive of Arbitratlon was defective since It fails to make teference to

the contract that is the basis of the dispute or to propose the number of
arbitrators as required by UNCITRAL rules.

_ That the Claimant's claim does nct constitute an expropriation under the 81 T.

The Tribunal will address each of these paints in sequence.

1

That no agreement to arbitrate has been signed by and between
Claimant and Respondent.

The asserted basis for arbitration is not a contract or agreement signed
between the Claimant and Respondent, but rather a consent to arbitrate set
forth in the BIT. :

Claimant as a US-Moldoven joint venture entity Is a proper party claimant
thereunder in accardance with Article V1(3) of the BIT which provides:

"For purposes cf an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this Article, any
company legally constituted. under the applicable laws and reguiations of a
Party or a political subdivision thereof but that, immediately before the
oceurrence of the event or events giving rise to the dispute, was an
investment of companies of the other Party, shall be treated as
@...company of such other Party...”

 

a

Page 4

Evidense has been submitted that at the time of its creation and at all times
since then Ciatmant has been owned and cantrofled by a company
estabtished in the United States.

 

The Nepartmerd af Customs Conwoi of the Republic of Moldova is likewise a
proper party resuendent in this arbitration. The Republic of Moldava has
given its consent to arbitrate under the terms of the BIT in the circumstances
defined in the BIT. !n bringing its action against the Department of Customs
Contra! of the Republic of Moldova, the Claimant is, in the opinion of the
Tribunal, suing the Republic in the name of ifs Customs Department, Indeed,
Respondent has not contested its standing as a proper party in this
arbitratiar.

   

. That the Republic of Mofdova and the Ministry of Finance should have

been or should be invited te join the arbitration.

As indicated above, Respondent has not contested its standing as a proper
party, Rather, it has requested that the Tribunal invite the Government of
Moldcva or the Ministry of Finance to join the arbitration as well. Claimant
has cxywessed no objection te such participation in the arbitration.

it is not the role of the Tribunal te request any particular representatives of the
Government or the Ministry of Finance to participate in these proceedings,
However, in light of the wishes of both parties, the Tribunal has no objection
to such participation on the side of the Respondent, if Respondent considers
that its position will be better rapresented in this wey. This being said, in so
doing, it stould be clear that neither the Goverment nor the Ministry of
Finance wouls be viewed as a now or separate party from the Respondent,
but rather as additional emanations of the same party in interest, the Republic
cf Moldova.

 

 

  

. That, pursuant to Article I{2) of the Treaty, the Republic of Moldova has

the right to deny to any company the acivantages of the BIT.

While Article I{2) of tha BIT sets forth certain circumstances In which a
company (as defined under Article 1(1Xb) of the BIT) may be denied the
advantages of tne BIT. no evidence has been submitted establishing the
existence of any of these circurnstances in the present case, Consequently,
the Tribunal sees no basis for denying the benefits of the BIT to Claimant.

 

 

4. That, pursuant to the Article 7 of the Law on Expo-Business-Chisinau

FEZ No. 625, Claimant's cnly recoursa in the case of an adverse change
of law is to the Moldovan Parliament.

The ‘Tribunal finds thet this argument which goes to the issue of State
authe ts deal with disputes arising as a result of adverse changes in
‘eqistation is irrelevant in light of the issue before us, which concerns not the
mant of rational obligations but international obligations.

 

 

  

riot impose on Claimant an obligation to seek a change in
tion as a condition to seeking recourse under the BIT.

 

. That, under the terms of the BIT, Claimant has the right of examination
of his claim by a competent judicial or administrative authority of the
Republic of Moldova or the USA, but not by an international tribunal
Ti

re
national fud or administrative authorities, as opposed to international

arbitration.

 

Article V1(2) of tha BIT provides an agurieved party the right, but not the
obligation, te apply te a national court or administrative authority for
examination of his stain. In no way is tris intended to deprive such party of
the right to arbitrate in appropriate circumsiances under the terms of the
treaty, In the present case, Claimant chose not to avail Itself of the right of
examination by a caurt or administrative authority, and to proceed instead to
arbitration under the BIT.

 

_ That Claimant did not wait the required six month period under Article
VI/3) of the BIT before commencing this arbitration.

Article VI(3) requires a waiting peried of six months “from the date on which
“ne dispute arose” before an aggrieved company may subrnlt an arbitrable
dispute under the BIT to binding arbitration.

Respondent argues that the dispute arose only when Claimant submitted its
formal complaint on November §, 1999. Respondent formally responded to
the complaint on November 22, 1999 rejecting Claimant's position, and
Claimant thereunon served ifs Notice of Arbitration on November 25, 1999.

in cur opinion the format complaint sent on November 5, 1999 represented
the culmination, not the inception, of the dispute. The dispute in question

BIT does not require Claimant to pursue examination of its claim by"

Page 6

st upon notification of the elimination of the customs exemption
by Claimant's customers in the FEZ in August 1998. Evidence
hae been submitted showing that, on August 19, 1998, the Respondent sent
its letter n¢. 583-005 to the FEZ Administration with respect to the
implementation cf the new legislation relative fo the changes in the
customs/VAi exemption. Thereafter, according to allegations made by
Claimant in its Notice of Arbitration and not rebutted by Respondent, the
Customs authorities repeatedly during the period September thraugh
November 1998 brought pressures to bear upon Claimant and others in the
FEZ to comply with the changed customs rules,

  

 

Tig purpose of the six-month waiting period in the BIT is to encourage parties
to exercise reasonable efforts to resolve disputes before resorting to the
castly and time-consuming remedy of international arbitration. The Tribunal
believes that where, as here, there is an evident refusal of Claimant's position
gy Respondent, such a waiting period should be interpreted restrictively.
Inceed, we are comforted in this view by the fact that a year has passed since
the commencement of this arbitration and ap peaceful settlement of the
Gispute has proven possible during this period, The only consequence of
adopiing a ‘iberal interpretation of the six-month waiting period, as
Respondent proposes, would therefore have been'to aggravate the possible
claim of damages.

. That Notice of Arbitration was defective since it fails to make reference
to the contract that is the basis of the dispute or to propose the number
of arbitrators as required by UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,

The Notice ef Arbitration invoked tha BIT at its page 3: “Another factor
ensuring the right of [Claimant]...is the Treaty between the Republic of
Moldove and ihe United States of America canceming the encouragement
and reciprocal protection of investments. Art. X(2)(c) of the Treaty foresees
that the Party must respect terms (conditions) of a certain investment in his
tax policy (the Treaty is annexed ~ source: Ministry of the Economy and
Reforms}.” Under the circumstances it was not necessary to make reference
ta any other contract. The UNICTRAL Arbitration Rules are applicable in a
given case to ie extent consistent with the Treaty. The Treaty itself may
serve and actualty serves here as a ground out of oy in relation to which the
dispute arises (Ayticle 3(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules).

The Notice also proposed the choice of a single arbitrator (with Claimant's
suggested names set forth) and the designation of an appointing authority in
the event thal this should prove necessary.

 

 

Page 7

Under Article 5 of the UNCITRAL Rules, where the parties have not agreed
on the number of arbitraters, the number should be three.

Wren the Respondent failed to respond to Claimant's abave-mentioned
proposala, Claimant relying upon UNCITRAL Ruies — one of the sets of rules
stipulsted in the BIT -- appointed as its party-designated arbitrator — Professor
lori Buruiana -- by notice served on Respondent on December 13, 1999.

When Respondent failed to appoint a second arbitrator within the 30-day
period stipulated in the UNCITRAL rules, Claimant applied to the International
Bursa of the Permanent Court of Arbitration in the Hague by communication
dated January 18, 2000 for the designation of an appointing authority to select
such arbitrator.

   

Respondeni mistakenly refers to Article VII(1) as the basis for asserting that it
should have hac two months from the date of notice of arbitration to nominate
ar arbitrator, Article VIi concems only disputes between Parties to the BIT,
i.e. inter-governmentai disputes. . The present case has been brought under
Article VI to the BIT tor disputes involving a company and a State Party, and
the two-month peried does not apply.

Tho Secretsry General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, after
establishing its competence and seeking the views of the parties and having
received no reply trom Respondent, designated the Arbitration Institute of the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce as appcinting authority, which then
appointed Professor Ivan Zykin as the second arbitrator on April 13, 2000 and
ultimately Jefirey Hertzfald Esq. as the presiding arbitrator on July 19, 2000,

 

 

Respondent has not asserted that tne procedures followed by the Hague
Court and the Arbitration Institute were in any way improper.

The Tribunal therefore finds that the Notice of Arbitration was proper and
adequate. Since the prrties had not egreed upon a sole arbitrator, the proper
number of arbitrators is three. The Tribuna! has been properly constituted.

. That the Claimant’s claim does not constitute an expropriation under the

BIT.

This is the most difficult aspect of the jurisdictional issue -- firstly, because it
touches particulary complex issues of international law and secondly,

 

 

Page 8

because, heing presented as a preliminary question, it poses the challenge of
separating the jurisdictional element from the substantive element.

The Tribunal must therefore determine whether Ctalmant presents the
elements of a cause of action for exprcpriation under the BIT, without
deciding whether it has sufficient evidence to carry its burden of proof of the
actual existence of these factual eluents.

The BIT permits claims of expropriation under its Article f1I{1) to be brought to
UNCITRAL arbitration {among other optional dispute resolution systems) If
they constiiite "investment disputes" under Article VI of the BIT.

An “investment dispute” is defined in Article VI of the BIT as

“a cispute between a Party and a ...company of the other Party arising out
of or relating to (@) an investment agreement between that Party and
such...company; (b) an investment authorization granted by that Party’s
foreign invesiment authority to such...company; or (c) an alleged breach
of any right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect ta an
investment.”

As indicated earlies, under Article VI{8), Claimant as a US-controlled
Moicoven company is treated as a US company fnr purposes te the BIT.

An "investment" is defined in the BIT very broadly, in Article I{1)fa), to include

“every kind of Investment in the territory of one Party owned or controlled
directly or indirecily by...companies of the other Party, such as equity,
debt, and service end investment contracts; and includes: (i) tangible and
intangibie property...(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any
licenses and permits pursuant te law.”

 

 

Ciaimant hes suomitted evidence of the existence of such investments, both
equity and debt. The fact that an investment consists of debt financing does
not appear to a‘fect its characterization as an investment under the BIT.

The Tribunal does not need to determine whether the agreement allegedly
concluded by Claimant with the administration of the FEZ and/or the
ainhorization allegedly obtained by Claimant to operate in the FEZ meet(s)
the requirements of Arlicie Vi, since the Tribunal considers that Claimant
would in any event have a sufficient basis for an action under subparagraph

  
 

(c) of Article Vi by alleging “a breach of right conferred or created by this

 

 

Page 9

Treaty with respect to an investment" pursuant to Article I(4), namely the
right not ic

“be exproprated...eithor directly or indirectly through measures
tantamount to expropdation...except,..upon payment of prompt, adequate
and effective compensation...”

According to Article X(2)(a), matters of taxation, if they give rise to
axpropriation of an Investment, may be subject to arbitration. The Tribunal
considers the cofprence fo “taxation” here to be broad enough to cover
customs duties and other forms of raising revenue that are within the State's
power.

Expropriation, including indirect expropriation, is not forbidden by the BIT.
Tne BIT only establishes certain standards with respect to the exercise by 4
Party-State of its power of expropriation as affecting protected Investors.
These ars standards of fairness and nen-discrimination as well as rights of
adequate comransation for the company exproptiated. The criteria for
detennining adequate compensation are set forth in Article tI{1) of the BIT.

 

The question ther is "what consiftutes indirect exptoprlation?” Here, the BIT
givas litte guidance and it is necessary to consider intemational law and
pracuce

Claimant has noted that it enjoyed a right to tax and customs duty stability for
a peried of ten years from the date of its investrnent, by virtue of the law
regulating activity in the FEZ as well as the Moldovan Law on Foreign
Investment. Claimant has alleged that this right was violated by virtue of the
change in customs rules appheabte in the FEZ subsequent to its investment,
which had an allegedly disastrous impact on the economic viability of its
business.

if these allegations were proven to be the case, precedents do exist [n
international practica that would consider a State’s disregard of legislatively
granted rights «as tantamount to expropriation.

Tne Trbuna! has noted that the 10-year stabliity provision relates to the
customs and tax imes stipulated by the Law on the Expo-Business-
Chisinau Free Enterprise Zone N. 625-XIl as In effect on the date of
Claimant's registration in the Free Zone (certificate dated 15 November 1996)
and that the regime in effect at that time appears to have envisaged the
adopticn of annual Budget Laws which might change the applicable rates of

 

Page 10

exemptions from one year to the next. To the extent that Claimant seeks to
prove that it reasonably relied upon the stability of the $600 exemption that its
customers enjoyed in 1996, it would need to demonstrate (1) that the stability
provisions of the jaw extended to this exemption despite reference in the
customs regitre to the adoption of budget laws on an afinual basis and (2)
that Claimant did not assume the risk of change in the exemption rates within
the framework of the customs and tax regime,

Of course, a dramatic change of legistation that has the effect of depriving an
investor of his investment may also amount to an indirect expropriation, even
in the absence of an express governmental guarantee against such a change.
For example, in certain cases under BITs, it has been found that promulgation
of a particularly confiscatory tex may constitute an expropriation even though
it is within the State's regulatory powers to do so. The State in such a case
may still be responsible for compensating an investor who has lost his
investreent by vittue of the new regulations. Indeed, commentators on the
subject of “indirect expropriation” have noted how difficult it is sametimes to
draw ihe fine between non-confiscatory regulation and indirect expropriation."

The Tribunal does not attempt at this stage in the proceedings to make any
finding as to the soundness of Claimant's allegation that the stabilization
guarantees ia the Moldovan regulations prohibited a change in the customs
exemption applicable ta purchases within the FEZ. Nor do we address the
guestion of whether the changes in exemptions were of such a magnitude as
to constitute an indirect expropriation per se. It might in this connecilon be
relevant to consider whether the measures taken were reasonable and usual
in the light of general practice tn other countries of the world, whether the
measures had a discriminatory character or were of general application, and
other specific facts related to the present circumstances. Clearly, not every
change of law constitutes an expropriation, and the ‘Tribunal would stress that
Claimant bears the burden of proof that on the facts of this case an indirect
expropriation should be found to have taken place.

“¢ BIT won't Bite: Tre American Silateral Investment Treaty Programs,” in 33 Am.UL.
92+, (1984) p. 331 at p. 963: “indireot expropriatary acts, such as the levying of laxes,,.or the
impaicmant or cearivaticn of the,,.economic vaiue of an invesimert, are the reat risks investors
fase in LDUs, The ne between regulation and expropriation is very thin.” For a further
discussion of some of the compiexitias of the concent of "Indirect expropriation”, see also Dolzer,
“jndirsct Expropriation sien Property,” in IGSID Review Foreign Invessnent Law Journal, Vol.
t, No. 1 (19863 p.47 et seq.

 

4

 

 

Page 11

However, the Tribunal does conclude that Claimant has made a colorable
claim of indirect exprepriation that is arbitrable under the BIT between the
USA and the Republic of Moldova.

we ey

For ail of the reasons stated above, and in accordance with Articles 21(1) and
(4) and 32(1) of the UNCITPAL Rules, the Tribunal hereby

 

DECIDES;

That the Tribunal has been property constituted end has Jurisdiction over the
parties and the subject matter of the dispute before it; and

Thai the question of the allocation of arbitration costs as between the parties
is reserved ustil the final award in the arbitration.

 

The present Decision has been taken unanimously.

The Decision has been established and signed by the Tribunal in five (5)
originais — ene for each arbitrator, one for Clalmant and one for Respondent.

Chisinau, February LG , 2001

Presiding Arbitrator
4 a
i jfle—

Srofessor lon Buriiana Proféssor, Zykin ~
Agbitratar Arbitratér

SS

SS

 

 

 

