INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF
INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P.
v.
United Mexican States

(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2)

DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT’S PRELIMINARY OBJECTION
UNDER ART. 45(6) OF THE ICSID ARBITRATION
(ADDITIONAL FACILITY) RULES

Members of the Tribunal
Juan Fernandez-Armesto, President of the Tribunal
David J.A. Cairns, Arbitrator
Ricardo Ramirez, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Anneliese Fleckenstein

Assistant to the Tribunal
Luis Fernando Rodriguez

December 12, 2016

VI.

VII.

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION. 3
THE PARTIES 3
PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

 

FACTUAL BACKGROUND.........

 

 

THE PARTIES?’ POSITIONS. .....sssssssssssssscesssscssssnceneeneescenseneenceneensesessecsecsncseseneee 8
DISCUSSION 10
THE TRIBUNAL?’S DECISION....c..scssssssssessesseesessecssenssneenesssssnennesecsncencencencenees 18

2 of 18

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

I, INTRODUCTION

1. This Decision sets out the Tribunal’s reasons and the Tribunal’s decision on the
Respondent’s Preliminary Objection under Art. 45(6) of the ICSID Arbitration
(Additional Facility) Rules [Arbitration AF Rules”).

Il. THE PARTIES

2. The Claimant in this arbitration is Lion Mexico Consolidated LP [“Lion” or
“Claimant”], a partnership constituted under the laws of Quebec, Canada, and
with its main place of business in Texas, USA.

3. Lion is represented in this arbitration by Onay Payne, of Lion Mexico
Consolidated L.P.; Robert J. Kriss, of Mayer Brown LLP (Chicago, USA); and
Dany Khayat, Alejandro Lépez-Ortiz, and José J. Caicedo, of Mayer Brown
(Paris, France).

4. The Respondent is the United Mexican States [“Mexico”]. Mexico is
represented in this arbitration by Leticia Ramirez Aguilar, Cindy Rayo Zapata,
and Geovanni Hernandez Salvador, of the Consultoria Juridica de Comercio
Internacional (Secretaria de Economia, Mexico); Aristeo Lopez Sanchez, of
Embajada de México (Washington D.C., USA); J. Cameron Mowatt and
Alejandro Barragan, of J. Cameron Mowatt, Law Corporation; and Stephan
Becker, of Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman.

Il. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

5. On December 11, 2015 Lion filed with the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes [“ICSID”] a Request for Arbitration against Mexico,
pursuant to the Arbitration AF Rules and Chapter 11 of the North American Free
Trade Agreement [“NAFTA”].

6. On August 24, 2016 Mexico filed a Preliminary Objection to the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction under Art. 45(6) Arbitration AF Rules, on the grounds that Lion’s
claims are manifestly without legal merit!.

' Preliminary Objection, para. 6.

3 of 18

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

On August 31, 2016 the Arbitral Tribunal issued a procedural schedule for the
Parties to exchange two rounds of pleadings on the Preliminary Objection.

On September 26, 2016 the Tribunal and the Parties held a first session by
teleconference under Art. 21(1) Arbitration AF Rules, in order to deal with case
management issues.

On the same date, Lion submitted its Response to Mexico’s Preliminary
Objection.

On October 13, 2016 Mexico submitted its Reply to Lion’s Response on the
Preliminary Objection.

On October 14, 2016 the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 1, setting out
the procedural rules that govern this arbitration, in accordance with Arts. 21 and
28 Arbitration AF Rules.

Finally, on October 31, 2016 Lion submitted its Rejoinder on Mexico’s
Preliminary Objection.

IV. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The following factual background summarily describes the facts that are
necessary to understand and adjudicate this Preliminary Objection, and is based
on Claimant’s statement of the facts in support of its claims. These facts are
accepted for the purposes of this decision only, and without prejudice to a final
determination of the facts by the Tribunal at a later stage.

THE LOANS

Lion is a Canadian company that for the last decade has invested over $1 billion
in real estate projects throughout Mexico. From February to September 2007
Lion made three loans [collectively “Loans”], for a total amount of $32 million,
to three Mexican companies: Inmobiliaria Bains, S.A. de C.V. [“Bains”], C&C
Ingenieria y Proyectos, S.A. de C.V. [*C&C Ingenieria”] and C&C Capital,
S.A. de C.V. [“C&C Capital”]. The three corporations are controlled by the
same Mexican citizen.

The purpose of the Loans was to provide funds to develop three real estate
projects in the Mexican states of Nayarit and Jalisco’.

? Request for institution of arbitration proceedings, para. 33.

4 of 18

20.

21.

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

The loans were structured through three loan agreements [the “Loan
Agreements”], secured by certain pagarés (promissory notes) and hipotecas
(mortgages).
The Loan Agreements present certain common features, including:

- short-term maturities (ranging from 90 days to 18 months);

- ordinary interest at an annual rate of 18% compounded quarterly; and

- default interest at an annual rate of 25%, to be charged in addition to
ordinary interest.

Each loan was not only formalized in a loan agreement, but also secured by a
pagaré and by one or more hipotecas.

1.1 THE First LOAN

A loan agreement dated February 28, 2007 was executed by and between Lion
as Lender, Bains as Borrower and C&C Ingenieria as Joint and Several Obligor
[“First Loan”]? :

The First Loan had the following features’:

principal amount of $15 million;

original maturity of 18 months;

it was documented by and conditional upon the execution and delivery of a
$15 million pagaré in favor of Lion;

it was secured by an hipoteca granted by Inmobiliaria Bains in favor of
Lion over lots of land located in the state of Nayarit, Mexico.

The First Loan was amended on four occasions*. Each of those amendments
extended the loan for time periods ranging from 60 to 156 days, and left the
other terms of the loan largely unchanged. Every time the First Loan was
amended, the pagaré was cancelled and replaced with a new one that reflected
the new due date.

> Exhibit C-008.
+ Exhibits C-008, C-009, and C-010.
> Exhibit C-011.

5 of 18

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

Taking all the amendments into consideration, the First Loan had an ultimate
maturity of 945 days (or 2.6 years)°.

1.2. THe SEconD LOAN

Another loan agreement dated June 13, 2007 was executed by and between Lion
as Lender, C&C Capital as Borrower and Bains as Joint and Several Obligor
[“Second Loan”]’.

This Second Loan had the following features*:

principal amount of $12.45 million;

- original maturity of 90 days;

it was documented by and conditional upon the execution and delivery of a
$12.45 million pagaré in favor of Lion;

it was secured by an hipoteca granted by a company called “Bansi S.A.,
Institucién de Banca Multiple” as trustee as per the instructions of C&C
Capital, as founder and beneficiary of the trust in favor of Lion over a
property located in Guadalajara, Jalisco’.

The Second Loan was amended on seven occasions" in order to extend the due
date.

Taking all the amendments into consideration, the Second Loan had an ultimate
maturity of 839 days (or 2.3 years)".

1.3. THE THIRD LOAN

Another loan agreement dated September 26, 2007 was executed by and
between Lion as Lender, C&C Capital as Borrower, and Bains as Joint and
Several Obligor [“Third Loan”]!.

This Third Loan had the following features!:

- principal amount of $5.35 million;

° Preliminary Objection, para. 28.

7 Exhibit C-012.

* Exhibits C-012, C-013, C-014, and C-015.

° Exhibit C-041.

' Request for institution of arbitration proceedings, para. 34.b). See Exhibit C-015.
" Preliminary Objection, para. 35.

” Exhibit C-016.

® Exhibits C-016 to C-019.

6 of 18

29.
30.

31.

32.

333

34.

35.

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

- original maturity of 18 months";

- it was documented by and conditional upon the execution and delivery of
$5.35 million promissory note in favor of Lion;

- it was secured by an hipoteca granted by a company called “Bansi S.A.,
Institucién de Banca Multiple” as trustee as per the instructions of C&C
Capital as founder and beneficiary of the trust in favour of Lion over a
property located in Guadalajara, Jalisco!’.

The Third Loan was amended six times to extend the due date"®.

Taking all the amendments into consideration, the Third Loan had an ultimate
maturity of 735 days (or two years) °.

LION HAS NOT RECOVERED THE LOANS

On September 30, 2009 and after several extensions, the total amount of the
Loans became overdue. No additional extensions were granted.

For the next two years Lion tried and failed to recover the outstanding debt.
Eventually, in February 2012, Lion decided to sue the three debtor companies,
demanding immediate payment of the Loans, plus ordinary and default
interest’,

Lion says that in December 2012, it chanced to learn from third parties that, a
few months earlier, a commercial judge in Jalisco — without Lion’s knowledge —
had ordered the cancellation of the hipotecas and the return of the pagarés that
secured the Loans.

Since then, Lion has pursued several legal actions to collect the outstanding debt
or to reverse the cancellation of the hipotecas and pagarés. Lion alleges to have
been the victim of a series of fraudulent actions and judicial errors that the
Mexican judicial system has proved unable to address or remedy to this day””,

Against this backdrop, on December 11, 2015 Lion commenced the present
proceedings against Mexico, claiming that the State has violated Arts. 1110 and
1105 NAFTA, on the following grounds:

* See Clause 1.1(6), Exhibit C-016.

'S Exhibit C-018.

'S Exhibit C-019.

"7 Preliminary Objection, para. 42.

'8 This is the Claimant’s version as per Request for institution of arbitration proceedings, paras.36-38.
' Request for institution of arbitration proceedings, paras. 42-50.

7 of 18

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

- Mexico has expropriated Lion’s investment by unlawfully cancelling the
pagarés and hipotecas issued in favor of Claimant, and

- Mexico has not guaranteed fair and equitable treatment and full protection
and security of Lion’s investment by failing to guarantee an adequate legal
system to protect Lion’s rights

Lion seeks to recover over $223 million in damages resulting from these
violations, together with interest and costs

On August 24, 2016 Mexico filed a Preliminary Objection to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction under Art. 45(6) Arbitration AF Rules, on grounds that Lion’s
claims are manifestly without legal merit”.

 

MEXICO’s POSITION

Mexico’s application is straightforward: it submits that the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction ratione materiae because Lion has no investment in Mexico under
Chapter 11 NAFTA”.

Mexico contends that, pursuant to Art. 1139(d) NAFTA, a loan to an enterprise
can be considered an “investment” for the purposes of Chapter 11 NAFTA only
if

- itis a loan to an affiliate of the investor or
- the original maturity of the loan is at least three years.

Otherwise, loans and debt securities fall outside the scope of Chapter 11
NAFTA.

In this case — Mexico argues — the three Loans made to Mexican borrowers do
not qualify as an investment under Chapter 11, because they do not meet the
three-year original maturity requirement. The longest loan was the First Loan,
which had an original maturity of 18 months.

20 Request for institution of arbitration proceedings, paras. 51-64.

2! Request for institution of arbitration proceedings, para. 16, footnote n. 7.
22 Preliminary Objection, para. 6.

?3 Preliminary Objection, para. 6.

8 of 18

42.

43.

44,

45.

46.

47.

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

As the Claimant does not dispute this fact, it is “plainly obvious” — Mexico
submits — that the Claimant’s Loans do not qualify as a protected investment
under Chapter 11 NAFTA”.

Finally, Respondent says that if the Tribunal dismisses the objection because
Lion’s claims are not “manifestly without legal merit,” or for any other reason,
Mexico still reserves its right to raise this objection under Art. 45(2) Arbitration
AF Rules. Mexico states”*:

“97. Si el Tribunal no considera satisfecha la objecién preliminar con
respecto a que la reclamacién carece manifiestamente de mérito legal, o
concluye que los escritos de las partes son muy extensos y elaborados, 0
considera que los aspectos controvertidos de derecho mexicano que se
expusieron en los escritos son importantes para la decision, 0 si es de la
opinion que existe ambigtiedad en el Articulo 1139 y ello requiere
considerar la historia de negociaciones del Tratado y/o del punto de vista de
Jas otras Partes del TLCAN, y decide desechar la solicitud de la Demandada
presentada al amparo del Articulo 45(6), esto serd sin perjuicio del derecho
de la Demandada a plantear la objecién al amparo del Articulo 45(2).”

Mexico requests that the Tribunal dismiss the claims pursuant to Art. 45(6)
Arbitration AF Rules and order Lion to reimburse Mexico for its costs of the
arbitration and costs of legal representation.

The Respondent in its Preliminary Objection sought further relief in the nature
of suspension of the proceedings. This request has been superseded by
Procedural Order No. 1 and does not need to be further considered”®.

CLAIMANT’S POSITION

Claimant rejects Mexico’s objection as an attempt to mischaracterize Lion’s
claims. Claimant submits that its claims are not based on the Loans themselves,
but on the hipotecas and pagarés that secured and formalized the Loans and that
the Mexican judicial authorities unlawfully cancelled’’. These hipotecas and
pagarés do meet the definition of investment as required by Arts. 1139(g) and
(h) NAFTA.

First, Lion says that Mexico is incorrect as a matter of Mexican and international
law. The three-year requirement in Art. 1139(d) NAFTA and other
subparagraphs do not apply to subparagraphs Arts. 1139(g) or (h) NAFTA. The
duration of the investment is not relevant for property or interests that fall within
the meaning of Arts. 1139(g) or (h) NAFTA.

*4 Preliminary Objection, paras. 49, 50, and 51.

25 Reply to Lion’s Response, para. 97.

?6 Preliminary Objection, para 77; Response to Mexico’s Preliminary Objection, paras 168-169.
?7 Rejoinder on Mexico’s Preliminary Objection, para. 11.

9 of 18

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

54,

55.

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

Second, Lion argues that hipotecas and pagarés under Mexican law provide
different and additional rights to their holders and are enforced in a different
way than the Loans. Hipotecas and pagarés are intended to furnish additional
certainty and predictability in commercial transactions, which promote
investment — NAFTA objectives as described in its Preamble.

The conduct of the Mexican courts in this case highlights that the hipotecas and
pagarés are separate from the loan agreements, since the judicial authorities
ordered the cancellation of those property interests separately, as they
represented property interests in addition to the loan agreements”*,

In conclusion, the Claimant requests the Tribunal:

to reject Mexico’s Preliminary Objection since the claims are not
“manifestly without legal merit”, and

to declare that the hipotecas and pagarés are indeed investments under
Art. 1139(g) and (h) NAFTA and, consequently, that the Tribunal has
ratione materiae jurisdiction to adjudicate the claims brought by Lion.

Lion finally contends that, at any rate, Mexico’s arguments should be

adjudicated by the Tribunal after offering Claimant full procedural opportunities
— including an evidentiary hearing — in an ordinary arbitral proceeding’ 9.

VI. DISCUSSION

In its Preliminary Objection Mexico requests, pursuant to Art. 45(6) Arbitration
AF Rules, that the Tribunal dismiss Lion’s claims, and order the company to
reimburse all of Mexico’s costs*’.

Lion asks the Tribunal to dismiss Mexico’s Preliminary Objection in its entirety.
The Tribunal considers that the Preliminary Objection should be dismissed
because the Claimant’s allegation that its hipotecas and pagarés constitute
protected investments under Art. 1139 (g) and (h) NAFTA is not “manifestly
without legal merit”.

THE APPLICABLE STANDARD

Article 45(6) Arbitration AF Rules describes the present application as follows:

28 Response to Mexico’s Preliminary Objection, paras. 5.c), f), and g).
29 Rejoinder on Mexico’s Preliminary Objection, paras. 128 and 129.

10 of 18

56.

57.

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

(6) Unless the parties have agreed to another expedited procedure for making
preliminary objections, a party may, no later than 30 days after the
constitution of the Tribunal, and in any event before the first session of the
Tribunal, file an objection that a claim is manifestly without legal merit. The
party shall specify as precisely as possible the basis for the objection. The
Tribunal, after giving the parties the opportunity to present their observations
on the objection, shall, at its first session or promptly thereafter, notify the
parties of its decision on the objection. The decision of the Tribunal shall be
without prejudice to the right of a party to file an objection pursuant to
paragraph (2) or to object, in the course of the proceeding, that a claim lacks
legal merit.

Article 45(6) Arbitration AF Rules contains effectively the same language as
Rule 41(5) ICSID Arbitration Rules. Thus, the Tribunal draws guidance, as to
the applicable standard, from the jurisprudence developed in the interpretation of
Art. 45(6).

The relevant provisions of NAFTA are Art. 1101 and 1139:
“Article 1101: Scope and Coverage.

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party
relating to:

(a) investors of another Party;

(b) investments of investors of another Party in the territory of the Party;
and

Ll
Article 1139: Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter:
[J
investment means:
(a) an enterprise;
(b) an equity security of an enterprise;
(c) a debt security of an enterprise (i) where the enterprise is an affiliate
of the investor, or (ii) where the original maturity of the debt security
is at least three years, but does not include a debt security, regardless

of original maturity, of a state enterprise;

(d) a loan to an enterprise

11 of 18

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

(i) where the enterprise is an affiliate of the investor, or
(ii) where the original maturity of the loan is at least three years,

but does not include a loan, regardless of original maturity, to a state
enterprise;

(e) an interest in an enterprise that entitles the owner to share in income
or profits of the enterprise;

(f) an interest in an enterprise that entitles the owner to share in the assets
of that enterprise on dissolution, other than a debt security or a loan
excluded from subparagraph (c) or (d);

(g) real estate or other property, tangible or intangible, acquired in the
expectation or used for the purpose of economic benefit or other
business purposes; and

(h) interests arising from the commitment of capital or other resources in
the territory of a Party to economic activity in such territory, such as
under

(i) contracts involving the presence of an investor's property in the
territory of the Party, including turnkey or construction contracts, or
concessions, or

(ii) contracts where remuneration depends substantially on the
production, revenues or profits of an enterprise;

but investment does not mean,

(i) claims to money that arise solely from (i) commercial contracts for the
sale of goods or services by a national or enterprise in the territory of a
Party to an enterprise in the territory of another Party, or (ii) the
extension of credit in connection with a commercial transaction, such
as trade financing, other than a loan covered by subparagraph (d); or

(j) any other claims to money,

that do not involve the kinds of interests set out in subparagraphs (a)
through (h).”

58. | The general rule of interpretation in the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties [“Vienna Convention”] requires that a treaty be interpreted “in good
faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the
treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose”.

3! Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, United Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 1155, p. 331 (May 23,
1969), Article 31.

12 of 18

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

Preliminary objection

Under Art. 45(6) Arbitration AF Rules the respondent in an arbitration pursuant
to the ICSID Arbitration AF Rules may raise, at the outset of the proceedings, a
preliminary objection that the claims brought by the claimant should be
dismissed for being “manifestly without legal merit”.

The tribunal, after giving claimant an opportunity to be heard, must promptly
adopt a decision:

- Ifthe tribunal accepts the respondent’s objection, it will partially or totally
dismiss claimant’s claims;

- Ifthe tribunal rejects the objection, the main proceedings are resumed and
respondent may raise the objections again in the normal course of the
arbitration.

For an objection to succeed in this special procedure, respondent must prove that
it refers to a claim that is “manifestly without legal merit.” If the threshold is not
reached, the Tribunal dismisses the objection pro tem.

“Manifestly”

The term “manifestly” generally means something that is “evident”, “clear” or
“obvious” to the observer. The word appears not only in Art. 45(6) ICSID
Arbitration AF Rules, but also in Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
which has been interpreted by a number of arbitral tribunals.

For example, the Decision on the Respondent’s Objection Under Rule 41(5) of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules of the tribunal in Trans-Global Petroleum, Inc. v.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/25 [“Trans-
Global Petroleum”| analysed the use of the expression “manifestly” in other
articles of the Convention and the opinion of legal authorities, and arrived to the
following conclusion:

“the ordinary meaning of the word requires the respondent to establish its
objection clearly and obviously, with relative ease and despatch. The
standard is thus set high [...] The exercise may thus be complicated; but
it should never be difficult.”

The Tribunal considered that “the special procedure imposed by Rule 41(5)”
confirmed that meaning and went further to state that “as a basic principle of

*» Tyans-Global Petroleum, § 88.

13 of 18

65.

66.

67.

68.

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

procedural fairness, an award under Rule 41(5) can only apply to a clear and

obvious case, [...] [to] ‘patently unmeritorious claims’ 33

This conclusion was later endorsed in Global Trading Resource Corp. and
Globex International, Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/11
[“Globex”|**, RSM Production Corporation and others v. Grenada, ICSID Case
No. ARB/10/6 [“RSM”P> and Brandes Investment Partners, LP v. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/03 [“Brandes”)°°.
In Brandes, the Tribunal also made the following consideration*’:

“(T]he new procedure of the preliminary objections under Rule 41(5) is

intended to create the possibility to dismiss at an early stage such cases

which are clearly unmeritorious”.

The procedure established by Art. 45(6) Arbitration AF Rules is an expedited
procedure. It is directed to cases that are “evident”, “clear” or “obvious”, not
those which entail a greater degree of difficulty or which require a more
thorough and extensive analysis of the legal and factual issues to dispose of the
claim. Article 45(6) is thus intended to capture cases that are clearly and
unequivocally unmeritorious, not those which are novel, difficult, refer to
disputed legal issues or where claimant has a tenable or arguable case. The

standard is demanding and rigorous”®.

The Tribunal therefore sees no reason to depart from the interpretations rendered
under Rule 41(5) ICSID Arbitration Rules, and adopts the same approach in this
case.

“Without legal merit”

According to the language of Art. 45(6), the issue to be determined (i.e. what
must be “manifest”) is that a claim is “without legal merit”. The term “legal” is
used in Rule 41(5) ICSID Arbitration Rules (and by analogy in Art. 45(6)
Arbitration AF Rules) in opposition to “factual,” as shown by the drafting
history of the provision: the Secretariat’s Working Paper of May 2004 made
reference to claims “manifestly without merit”’. The term “legal” was added
thereafter in order to avoid inappropriate discussion on the facts of the case at

% Tyans-Global Petroleum, § 89, 92.

* Globex, § 35.

35 RSM, § 6.1.3.

36 Brandes, § 62.

37 Brandes, § 62.

38 PNG, § 88.

3° Working Paper of the ICSID Secretariat, Suggested Changes to the ICSID Rules and Regulations (May
21, 2005), p. 7.

14 of 18

69.

70.

71.

72.

2B.

74.

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

that stage”. A preliminary objection must therefore relate to “legal” issues, not
to matters of fact.

The Tribunal in Trans-Global Petroleum emphasized the same idea:

“The tribunal considers that the adjective “legal” in Rule 41(5) is clearly
used in contradistinction to “factual” given the drafting genesis of Rule 41(5)
[...] Accordingly, it would seem that the tribunal is not concerned, per se,
with the factual merits of the Claimant’s three claims. At this early stage of
these proceedings, without any sufficient evidence, the Tribunal is in no
position to decide disputed facts alleged by either side in a summary
procedure’!.”

The Tribunal is therefore of the view that the expression “without legal merit” in

Article 45(6) Arbitration AF Rules limits the issues that can be addressed by the

panel to legal considerations as opposed to factual.

Objections to jurisdiction v. objections to the merits

Article 45(6) Arbitration AF Rules does not specifically state whether objections
must refer to the merits of the case, or whether jurisdictional objections are also
admissible. The standard required by the Rule — that “a claim is manifestly
without legal merit” — is ambiguous.

Mexico is submitting a jurisdictional objection: that the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction ratione materiae because Claimant does not hold an investment in
Mexico. Claimant has not disputed that Mexico is entitled to submit
jurisdictional objections by way of the Art. 45(6) procedure.

The arbitral tribunals that have considered this question have arrived at the
conclusion that jurisdictional objections are admissible under the Art. 45(6)
procedure.

For example, the Tribunal in Brandes was the first to decide the issue and it
came to the following conclusion™:

“The Tribunal first of all notes that Rule 41(5) does not mention
‘jurisdiction’. The terms employed are ‘legal merit’. This wording, by itself,
does not provide a reason why the question whether or not a tribunal has
jurisdiction and is competent to hear and decide a claim could not be
included in the very general notion that the claim filed is ‘without legal
merit’.

“© Aurélia Antonietti, The 2006 Amendments of the ICSID Rules and Regulations and the Additional
Facility Rules, 21 ICSID Rev. — FILJ 427, 439, p. 440.

4! Tyans-Global Petroleum, § 97.

® Brandes, §§ 50-52.

15 of 18

7.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

* * *

Until 2006 the Rules therefore did not provide for any possibility to
terminate the proceedings at an early stage in the case of requests which are
patently unmeritorious. There exist no objective reasons why the intent not
to burden the parties with a possibly long and costly proceeding when
dealing with such unmeritorious claims should be limited to an evaluation of
the merits of the case and should not also englobe an examination of the
jurisdictional basis on which the tribunal’s powers to decide the case rest.”

The Tribunals in Globex, RSM and PNG were confronted with the same
question, and all explicitly agreed with the findings of Brandes”.

Additional requirements

The additional requirements established in Art. 45(6) Arbitration AF Rules are
met in this case. It is undisputed that the Parties have not agreed to another
expedited procedure for making preliminary objections and that Respondent
submitted its Preliminary Objection within the timeframe of 30 days after the
constitution of the Tribunal.

APPLICATION OF THE STANDARD TO THE OBJECTION

Under the Preliminary Objection Mexico alleges that hipotecas and pagarés do
not qualify as an investment under any of the categories defined in Art. 1139
NAFTA. The key question in order to adjudicate this Objection is whether
Lion’s claim — that the pagarés and hipotecas qualify as protected investments
under Art. 1139 (g) and (h) NAFTA -— is manifestly without legal merit.

Both Mexico and Lion have made extensive submissions and have marshalled
significant evidence and legal authority in support of their respective positions.
Lion’s submissions cover almost a hundred pages, accompanied by over 130
legal exhibits, on the legal characterization of hipotecas and pagarés as
investments according to NAFTA and international law; Mexico’s submissions,
shorter than those of Lion, include, quote, and cite to a similar wealth of legal
authorities and case law.

The amount of evidence and the length and detail of the arguments shows the
complexity of the underlying legal question.

The Tribunal further notes that the issue of whether pagarés and hipotecas that
formalize and secure loans with a maturity of less than three years can be
considered as investments under Art. 1139 (g) and (h) NAFTA — separately from
contemporaneous loan transactions — seems to be a novel issue, which has never
been addressed in previous decisions.

* Globex, § 30; RSM, § 6.1.1. and 6.1.2; PNG § 91.

16 of 18

81.

82.

83.

84,

85.

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

After studying each Party’s submissions, and examining carefully the evidence
presented, the Tribunal considers that the question whether the pagarés and
hipotecas constitute an investment pursuant to Art. 1139 (g) and (h) NAFTA, or
whether their status must be considered exclusively pursuant to Art. 1139 (d)
NAFTA, raises complex interpretative issues and requires a greater degree of
consideration and a more thorough analysis of Mexican law and international
legal principles. The Tribunal requires further legal argument on these issues
within the context of the full development of the Parties’ cases.

Furthermore, the issue of what constitutes precisely an investment under
NAFTA is relevant, not only to the Parties involved in the present proceedings,
but also to other countries signatories of NAFTA — and Art. 1128 permits that
the position of other NAFTA Parties be heard.

On this basis, the Tribunal considers that the Claimant’s claims cannot be
described as “manifestly without legal merit”. This is not an appropriate case for
the expedited Art. 45(6) procedure and therefore the Preliminary Objection must
be dismissed.

Other requests

Lion has also sought a declaration that the hipotecas and pagarés are
investments under Art. 1139(g) and (h) NAFTA and, consequently, that the
Tribunal has ratione materiae jurisdiction to adjudicate the claims brought by
Lion. It is not appropriate under the expedited procedure of Art. 45(6) for a
claimant to seek a final declaration of rights with res judicata effects.
Accordingly, the Claimant’s application to this effect is also dismissed.

Finally, Mexico has sought an award of costs. The Tribunal considers that costs

on the complex issue of whether the Claimant has an investment for the
purposes of NAFTA should be reserved.

17 of 18

Lion Mexico Consolidated L.P. v. United Mexican States
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2

VII. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

86. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal decides as follows:

1. Respondent’s Preliminary Objection is dismissed;

2. All questions as to the costs of the Preliminary Objection are reserved;
3. All other requests are dismissed;
4.

. The further procedure for this arbitration will be according to the
Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1.

On behalf of the Tribunal,

[Signed]

Juan Fernandez-Armesto
President of the Tribunal

18 of 18

