INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF
INVESTMENT DISPUTES

LION MEXICO CONSOLIDATED LP
Claimant

v.
UNITED MEXICAN STATES

Respondent

(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2)

 

DECISION ON BIFURCATION

Members of the Tribunal
Juan Ferndndez-Armesto, President of the Tribunal
David J.A. Cairns, Arbitrator
Ricardo Ramirez, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Anneliese Fleckenstein

Assistant to the Tribunal
Luis Fernando Rodriguez

 

May 29, 2017

ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2
Decision on Bifurcation
May 29, 2017

This decision rules on the “Solicitud de bifurcacion y sintesis de las excepciones
jurisdiccionales” [the “SdB”] that Mexico filed on April 4, 2017. Additionally,
Mexico requests the Tribunal to change the seat of this arbitration from
Washington (USA) to Toronto (Canada).

The Tribunal will first rule on the SdB, bifurcating the proceedings with respect
to one of the objections. Then it will reject the request for a change of the seat as
untimely and unwarranted.

Request to bifurcate the proceedings

In its SdB Mexico alleges two objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Art.
45(2) ICSID Additional Facility Rules, namely:

1) — The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae because Lion did not make
an investment in Mexico within the terms required by Arts. 1101 and 1139
NAFTA [“Objection 1”]!.

2) — The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae and/or ratione voluntatis
to hear Lion’s claim that Mexico breached the minimum standard of
treatment (Art. 1105 NAFTA). Mexico alleges that NAFTA Chapter 14
(“Financial Services”), rather than Chapter 11 (“Investment”) might govern
this dispute [“Objection 2”]*. Chapter 14 does not include the minimum
standard of treatment among its protections.

For these reasons, Mexico urges a bifurcation of the case*.

Lion submitted its Response to Mexico’s SdB [the “Response”] on May 4, 2017,
opposing the SdB and demanding that Mexico’s objections to jurisdiction be
heard together with the merits of the dispute’.

In the procedural calendar attached as Annex A to Procedural Order [“PO”] No.1,
the Arbitral Tribunal established a period of one month after Claimant’s
Response to issue its decision on bifurcation.

The Arbitral Tribunal now issues its decision on Mexico’s SdB within the
established time period.

The Tribunal has carefully analyzed the arguments Mexico and Lion have
submitted. It finds that, for the following reasons, Objection 1, but not Objection
2, should be bifurcated.

' SdB, paras. 5 and 7-9.
2 SdB, para. 5 and 10-28.
3 SdB, para. 38.

+ Response, para. 68.

20f 4

ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2
Decision on Bifurcation
May 29, 2017

First, Objection 1 may potentially extinguish all the claims. In addition, the
objection raised is not intertwined with the merits of the dispute.

Second, Objection 2 is not dispositive of the case. If Mexico prevails, the dispute
would still go forward, with fewer claims and different scope. Besides, Objection
2 may require opening a document production phase within the jurisdictional
phase so that Mexico may gather evidence in support of its allegation. As Mexico
admits, “[E]sta objecion no se puede resolver sobre la base del expediente en su
estado actual, sin embargo, es posible hacerlo de manera eficiente . . . siempre
que la Demandante coopere revelando hechos y documentos relevantes durante
la etapa de jurisdiccién’*. This means that, even if the objection is eventually
upheld, this document production phase would not spare the Parties either the
merits phase or a second document production exercise. And that would
undoubtedly cause a significant delay in the proceedings.

Therefore, in order to abide by the principles of procedural economy and cost
efficiency, the Tribunal decides to bifurcate the proceedings in respect of
Objection 1 exclusively.

The procedural calendar established as Annex A to PO No. | provides that, in
case of bifurcation, the Tribunal “shall establish a separate calendar for the
exchange of pleadings on jurisdiction after consultation with the Parties”.

In the meantime, as Annex A to PO No. | also provides, “the proceedings on the
merits shall remain suspended until the Tribunal decides otherwise”.

Accordingly, the Tribunal asks the Parties to confer and submit, by June 7, 2017,
a joint proposal of a procedural calendar for this jurisdictional phase. If the Parties
are unable to agree on a common proposal, they are kindly requested to submit
simultaneously its own proposal by June 14, 2017.

The Tribunal may decide at any time after the presentation of the last submission
on the jurisdictional issues to join the jurisdictional issues to the merits and decide
on both issues in the same award.

If the Tribunal decides to opt-out of the bifurcated proceedings, the case will
continue in accordance with the calendar for the merits phase. If the Tribunal
decides not to opt-out of the bifurcated proceedings, it shall issue an Award on
Jurisdiction.

Request to change the seat of the arbitration

Mexico includes an additional petition in its SdB, asking the Tribunal to change
the seat of this arbitration from Washington (USA) to Toronto (Canada). Mexico
argues it is now clear that Lion is a “vehiculo de inversion” created by US entities

5 SaB, para. 27.

3 of 4

ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/2
Decision on Bifurcation
May 29, 2017

to invest in Mexico and with no real ties with Canada°. Lion opposes this
request”.

18. The Tribunal rejects Mexico’s application. The request is untimely and has no
direct connection with the issue at this procedural stage: the Tribunal already

fixed the seat of the arbitration in its PO No. 2. The facts and legal basis for the
Tribunal’s decision remain unchanged, and do not warrant reconsideration.

On behalf of the Arbitral Tribunal,

[Signed]

Juan Fernandez-Armesto
President of the Arbitral Tribunal

6 SaB, paras. 16-28 and 38.
T Response, paras. 61-67 and 69.

4 of 4

