IN THE MATTER OF:

THE LOEWEN GROUP, INC. and
RAYMOND L. LOEWEN,

Claimants/Investors,
v.

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

 

 

Respondent/Party
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3
ARTICLE 58 SUBMISSIONS AS TO
RAYMOND L. LOEWEN’S ARTICLE 1116 CLAIM

John H. Lewis, Jr. D. Geoffrey Cowper, Q.C.

Christina D. Frangiosa
MONTGOMERY, McCRACKEN, WALKER & FASKEN MARTINEAU DUMOULIN, LLP
RHOADS, LLP Barristers & Solicitors
123 South Broad Street Suite 2100 - 1075 West Georgia Street
Philadelphia, PA 19109 Vancouver, British Columbia V6E 3G2
USA CANADA
Tel: 215 772 7596 Tel: 604 631 3131
Fax: 215 772 7620 Fax: 604 631 3232
Attorneys for the Claimant, Barrister & Solicitor for the Claimant,
Raymond L. Loewen Raymond L. Loewen

September 19, 2003

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUMMARY

 

ARTICLE 1116 CLAIM

EXHAUSTION OF LOCAL REMEDIES

CONCLUSION

 

 

PROCEDURAL MATTERS

 

Summary

These submissions are pursuant to leave granted by the Tribunal, and comment on the
request made by the Respondent, The United States of America (the “United States”), for
the Tribunal to issue a supplemental decision with respect to the Article 1116 claim

advanced by the Claimant, Raymond L. Loewen (“Raymond Loewen”).

It is respectfully submitted that the Tribunal is obligated to render a supplemental
decision pursuant to Article 58 of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules as to Raymond
Loewen’s Article 1116 claim because it omitted deciding that claim in the Award

dispatched to the parties on June 26, 2003.

In the course of deciding Raymond Loewen’s Article 1116 claim, the Tribunal must
determine the merits of the claim and in so doing consider whether their obiter dicta as to

the merits expressed in the Award require correction.

The Claimant submits that the Tribunal completely overlooked his Article 1116 claim,
and that upon this being recognized, he is entitled to ask the Tribunal to return to the
merits and decide the merits of his claim in accordance with all the submissions and to

make all findings necessary to determine the claim.

The essence of the reasoning on the merits contained within paragraphs 215 to 217 of the
Award is obiter dicta, is manifestly in error, and requires the evidence to be reconsidered.
Uncontradicted and unchallenged evidence was placed before the Tribunal disclosing The
Loewen Group, Inc.’s (“TLGI’”) reasons for entering into the settlement agreement rather
than attempting to pursue other alleged options and, in particular, the “Supreme Court
option”. Indeed, the Carvill Declaration, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit A to this
submission, directly addressed these questions and established proof to the standard set
out by the Tribunal in paragraphs 215 and 216, namely that settlement was the only

course which TLGI could reasonably have been expected to take in all the circumstances.

-2-

As stated in The Loewen Group’s submissions concerning the United States’

jurisdictional objections:

62. The advice received by Loewen confirms this analysis.
According to the principal outside counsel for Loewen responsible
for dealing with the O'Keefe verdict, the Company was advised
that the likelihood of obtaining Supreme Court review was
‘extremely remote’, and that a collateral attack in federal district
court was so clearly ‘foreclosed’ by the Pennzoil decision as to be
possibly sanctionable. (See Carvill Decl. at 3-5.)

Submission of The Loewen Group, Inc. Concerning the

Jurisdictional Objections of the United States, dated May 26, 2000,

para. 62
TLGI also filed, as part of its initial material, the Declaration of John Napier Turner, an
independent director, a member of the Special Committee to consider the outcome of the
Mississippi proceedings, and former Minister of Justice and Prime Minister of Canada,
who testified that the Board of Directors sought, received, and acted upon the advice of
its expert advisors, including Wynne S. Carvill, and those he had retained to advise

TLGI.

Submission of The Loewen Group, Inc. Concerning the
Jurisdictional Objections of the United States, Declaration of Rt.
Hon. John N. Turner, P.C., C.C., Q.C., Tab D

This evidence was not only before the Tribunal: it was not challenged by contrary

evidence or even the subject of cross-examination by the Respondent.

While it might be understandable that Raymond Loewen’s Article 1116 claim could be
overlooked in the massive material and documentation submitted to the Tribunal, and in
view of the fact that these Declarations were primarily the subject of argument during the
hearings on the Respondent’s objection to competency and jurisdiction, nevertheless
Article 58 now invoked by the United States, permits parties to request that the Tribunal
perfect an otherwise incomplete Award. This procedure being invoked, it is now the
obligation of the Tribunal to decide Raymond Loewen’s Article 1116 claim on all the

material and submissions.

Article 1116 Claim

Pursuant to Chapter 11, Article 1116, an investor is entitled to commence a claim on his
or her own behalf in respect of any breach of the NAFTA (the “Treaty”) which affects his

or her own investment in an Enterprise.

In the present case, the Claimant, Raymond Loewen, filed a claim pursuant to Article
1116 in respect of the shares he held in the company: approximately 15% of the issued
shares of the parent public company. He also filed pursuant to Article 1117 on behalf of

the Enterprise — The Loewen Group, Inc.

Notice of Claim, dated October 30, 1998; Memorial of The Loewen

Group, Inc., dated October 15, 1999; Memorial of Raymond L.

Loewen, dated October 15, 1999
Part II of the Award makes no reference to Raymond Loewen’s Article 1116 claim.
Similarly, in paragraph 41(5) in reciting the Respondent’s objection to competence and
jurisdiction, reference is made to the Article 1117 claims, but it is nowhere noted that no
challenge was made to the Article 1116 claims made by Raymond Loewen as an investor.
As observed in the United States’ request for a supplemental decision, the Award refers
to Raymond Loewen’s claims in the plural, but disposes of those claims on a

jurisdictional basis applicable only to Article 1117 terms set out in paragraph 239.

Memorial of United States on Jurisdiction, dated February 18,
2000, Part V, pp. 88-91

The United States never made any objection to Raymond Loewen’s standing to bring an

Article 1116 claim. As expressly noted in the previous submissions:

The Government does not challenge Mr. Loewen’s standing to
bring his claim under Article 1116.

Submission of Raymond L. Loewen Regarding Competence and
Jurisdiction, dated May 25, 2000, para. F, p. 26

In the Counter-Memorial to the post-hearing objections, it was noted:

-4-

2. No objection has been made in the recent filing by the United
States to Raymond L. Loewen’s Article 1116 claim. Raymond L.
Loewen has always been and remains a Canadian citizen.

3. Raymond L. Loewen respectfully notes that as there has been
no objection to his claim pursuant to Article 1116 of NAFTA he
requests that the Tribunal render its award on the merits of his
claim.

Counter-Memorial of the Claimant Raymond L. Loewen on the

U.S. Objection, dated March 29, 2002, paras. 2 and 3
The United States could not do so, of course, because the scope of the Treaty’s
guarantees include expropriation without compensation. Accordingly, the Treaty
contemplates that an Article 1116 claim may well be taken for redress of a wrongful
expropriation of shares. Of necessity, this means that claimants under Article 1116 may
or may not continue to hold any shares in an Enterprise or an Investment at the time of
the filing of the claim. In the present case, of course, Raymond Loewen alleges that the
value of his shares was devastated by the wrongs committed by the state of Mississippi

for which the United States is internationally responsible.

North American Free Trade Agreement, Chapter 11, Article 1110

Accordingly, the objection to Raymond Loewen’s standing that carried over to the merits
hearing was the objection to the Article 1117 claim. This was recognized by the

Tribunal, as then constituted, in its earlier decision:

The objection on this ground, if upheld, would not be dispositive
of the second Claimant’s entire claim which is partly based on
Article 1116.

Decision of Arbitral Tribunal on Hearing of Respondent's

Objection to Competence and Jurisdictional, dated January 5,

2001, p. 22
The letter from the United States requesting an additional decision pursuant to Article 58
of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules elides over these realities and adopts the pretence
that the Article 1116 claim was addressed and dismissed in the Award, notwithstanding
the obvious gap in the reasoning which provoked the United States to apply for an

additional decision under Article 58. Article 58, of course, allows the parties to request

Ill.

-5-

an additional decision where the Tribunal failed to address a question. It does not permit
the Tribunal to issue a supplemental decision to discuss, or further elaborate on, why it
dismissed a claim. In the present case, in the absence of a supplemental decision, the
Award would be imperfect and liable to be set aside in appropriate judicial proceedings.
Such a process would, however, result in the Article 1116 claim being returned to this
Tribunal for adjudication. For the reasons stated in this submission, Raymond Loewen is
content to submit to this Tribunal addressing and answering his Article 1116 claim in

accordance with the record and submissions.

Exhaustion of Local Remedies

Raymond Loewen accepts as decided the appropriate standard with respect to exhaustion
of local remedies set out in the Tribunal’s award at paragraphs 215 and 216 to the effect
that it must be shown the settlement “was the only course which Loewen [TLGI] could

reasonably be expected to take.”

At paragraph 215, the Tribunal in its obiter dicta identified as “the central difficulty” in
TLGI’s case the failure to “present evidence disclosing its reasons for entering into the
settlement agreement in preference to pursuing other options, in particular the Supreme

Court option”, and in paragraph 216:

Although entry into the settlement agreement may well have been
a reasonable course for Loewen to take, we are simply left to
speculate on the reasons which led to the decision to adopt that
course rather than to pursue other options. It is not a case in which
it can be said that it was the only course which Loewen could
reasonably be expected to take.
Finally, in concluding that Raymond Loewen had failed to pursue its domestic remedies,

the Tribunal stated: “notably the Supreme Court option”.

ICSID Award, dated June 26, 2003, paras. 216 and 217

These conclusions, obiter though they are, are clearly wrong and entirely overlook the
uncontradicted, uncontested and clear evidence on the point sworn to by Wynne S.
Carvill, and supported by the equally clear evidence of a director of TLGI, John Napier

Turner.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

-6-

In his Declaration, Mr. Carvill, a distinguished member of the U.S. Bar, a graduate of
Harvard Law School, a law clerk to the United State Court of Appeals, a leading counsel
and a partner in a distinguished firm, testified to his personal involvement in the
assessment of the options identified by Loewen in the face of the Mississippi proceedings
which have now been held to be a violation of the minimum standard of justice in

international law.

Declaration of Wynne S. Carvill, Exhibit A, paras. 1 and 3

Mr. Carvill and his firm were not involved in the discovery or trial of the O’Keefe matter,
but he was the principal outside counsel responsible for coordinating a response to the

Mississippi developments.

Declaration of Wynne S. Carvill, Exhibit A, paras. 2 and 3

He assessed the outcome at trial, retained new counsel to assist in post-trial motions and
appeals, interviewed and selected a specialist counsel to consider possible appeals to the
United States Supreme Court, participated in the decision to retain and discharge
bankruptcy counsel, coordinated settlement discussions and eventually represented

Loewen in the negotiations which resulted in the settlement.

Declaration of Wynne S. Carvill, Exhibit A, para. 3

In short, Mr. Carvill is not only a useful witness but was the central professional witness
who addressed the very issue of whether a motion to the Supreme Court was considered a

reasonably available and adequate remedy open to TLGI.

With respect to the option of an appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States, in his
Declaration, Mr. Carvill addressed the general issue of consideration of relief in the
Federal Court system and, in essence, testified that all the options were reviewed and

rejected on professional and rational grounds including:

(a) Collateral attack on the Federal District Court was foreclosed by
the commanding Pennzoil precedent such that an attorney signing
the pleadings might have been subject to sanctions for doing so. In
any event, they viewed a collateral attack in Federal Court as
prejudicing whatever chances existed for relief from the

(b)

(c)

@

(e)

-7-

Mississippi Supreme Court which was throughout seen as the best
alternative;

Declaration of Wynne S. Carvill, Exhibit A, para 6; Submissions of
The Loewen Group, Inc. Concerning the Jurisdictional Objections
of the United States, May 26, 2000, para. 62

An action based on constitutional grounds was carefully
considered, but could only have been raised through an appeal on
the merits and not through a collateral attack in the Federal District
Court. In particular, there was no evidence on which it could be
said that the Mississippi Supreme Court’s decision on the bond

was infected by anti-Canadian bias which might raise a
constitutional issue meriting pursuit;

Declaration of Wynne S. Carvill, Exhibit A, para. 7; Submissions
of The Loewen Group, Inc. Concerning the Jurisdictional
Objections of the United States, May 26, 2000, paras. 59 to 62

Very serious consideration was given to the possibility of direct
appellate relief, but in the circumstances was concluded to be “an
illusory choice”;

Declaration of Wynne S. Carvill, Exhibit A, para. 8

Supreme Court specialists were retained and advised that the
chance of success was “extremely remote”;

Declaration of Wynne S. Carvill, Exhibit A, para. 8; Submission of
The Loewen Group, Inc. Concerning the Jurisdictional Objections
of the United States, para. 62

The advice received at the time was consistent with the expert
witness statement of Laurence H. Tribe;

Submission of The Loewen Group, Inc. Concerning the
Jurisdictional Objections of the United States, Reply Statement of
Laurence H. Tribe, Tab B

In particular, the timing was made extremely difficult because the
company did not know how much time it would have to seek
relief. Indeed, “conceivably, on any court day we could receive an
order lifting the stay effective within a matter of days unless the
bond were increased to $625 million. Mr. Carvill also carefully
identifies the company’s analysis of bankruptcy considerations.

Declaration of Wynne S. Carvill, Exhibit A, paras. 12-14; and
Final Submission of Raymond L. Loewen Concerning the

25.

26.

27.

-8-

Jurisdictional Objections of the United States, dated July 27, 2000,
p. 23
In accordance with the standard set by this Tribunal at paragraph 216 of its Award, Mr.
Carvill’s uncontradicted and, indeed, unchallenged evidence clearly meets the burden of
establishing that the settlement option, in accordance with TLGI’s determination at the

time, was indeed “the only reasonable option”.

Mr. Carvill’s Declaration was supported by a declaration filed by an outside director of
The Loewen Group, Inc., a former Prime Minister of Canada, and a distinguished lawyer,

John Napier Turner.

Submission of The Loewen Group, Inc. Concerning the
Jurisdictional Objections of the United States, Declaration of Rt.
Hon. John N. Turner, P.C., C.C., Q.C., Tab D

In that Declaration, Mr. Turner confirmed that a group of senior management and outside
advisors including Wynne Carvill considered simultaneously the several options and
remedies available after the O'Keefe verdict, including settlement, financing and appeal
bond, and pursuing federal court collateral relief or appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.

He declared that:

The Board was advised by Mr. Carvill that, after consulting with
several experts in the area and fully considering all avenues of
possible relief in the U.S. federal court system, the possibility of
relief from the U.S. Supreme Court was extremely remote and the
likelihood of a collateral attack was so remote that the lawyers
would run a risk of being sanctioned under U.S. procedural rules
for filing such a case. The Board was also advised that any efforts
in federal court would greatly prejudice the Company’s chances of
obtaining bonding and other relief in the Mississippi state courts.
Such relief in the Mississippi state courts was the primary strategic
objective at that time.

Submission of The Loewen Group, Inc. Concerning the
Jurisdictional Objections of the United States, Declaration of R.
Hon. John N. Turner, P.C., C.C., Q.C., Tab D, para. 14

28.

29.

30.

31.

-9-

Much of the material considered whether TLGI was required to seek Chapter 11
bankruptcy protection for the simple reason that it was alleged by the United States to be

a necessary step under international law.

The Tribunal in its Award has expressly rejected the submission of the United States that
TLGI’s consideration of its options could not take into account business judgment. As

stated by the Tribunal:

213. Entry into the settlement agreement no doubt reflected a
business judgment by Loewen that, of the various options then
open, settlement was the most attractive, in all probability because
it provided certainty. Other alternatives involved financial
consequences which would not have been easy to predict.

214. Respondent argues that, because entry into the settlement
agreement was a matter of business judgment, Loewen voluntarily
decided not to pursue its local remedies. That submission does not
dispose of the point. The question is whether the remedies in
question were reasonably available and adequate. If they were not,
it is not to the point that Loewen entered into the settlement, even
as a matter of business judgment. It may be that the business
judgment was inevitable or the nature outcome of adverse
consequences generated by the impugned court decision.

ICSID Award, dated June 26, 2003, paras. 213 and 214

As there is no basis on which to assert that TLGI was an “impecunious claimant” as
contemplated by the Tribunal under paragraph 209, it is submitted that the United States’
submissions as to Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection have been disposed of in the decision
of this Tribunal. All that remains to be decided with respect to Raymond Loewen’s
Article 1116 in light of all the evidence is whether the reasons for not pursuing an appeal
to the U.S. Supreme Court satisfy the standard determined by this Tribunal. The
evidence clearly shows that based on the advice it had received, entry into the settlement

agreement was the only course which TLGI could reasonably be expected to take.

Conclusion

Raymond Loewen is keenly aware of this Tribunal’s earnest desire to determine these

claims in all their procedural and substantive complexity in accordance with reason and

32.

33.

34.

35.

-10-

justice. He accepts that the Tribunal simply overlooked his Article 1116 claim and
overlooked the evidence of Wynne S. Carvill and the Rt. Hon. John Turner. While this

matters not in the result to TLGI, it very much matters to Raymond Loewen.

Raymond Loewen also acknowledges that the Tribunal has publicly acknowledged the
puzzling outcome of its Award and the international reaction that could result from its
condemnation of the judicial proceedings in Mississippi without providing any remedy to
any party after all these years and expense. What is now apparent is that the dismissal of
all claims was not necessary or appropriate. This Tribunal still has the authority and duty
to demonstrate that the NAFTA does indeed have teeth, that international law does
indeed follow principle, and that Raymond Loewen, still a Canadian, has a right to be

compensated for his losses apart from TLGI’s claims.

ICSID Award, dated June 26, 2003, para. 241

The Tribunal noted in its dismissal of the claims that this has been an exhausting and
expensive process. Indeed, Raymond Loewen’s resources are exhausted, both personally
and financially. He now sits at the door of this Tribunal with a final hope that justice at

long last will be done.

The Tribunal should, pursuant to Article 58 of the ICSID Arbitration (Additional
Facility) Rules, issue a supplemental decision declaring that it has jurisdiction over
Raymond Loewen’s Article 1116 claim, that it has reconsidered the evidence relating to
exhaustion of local remedies, and finds liability proven against the Respondent, the

United States, with damages to be assessed.

Procedural Matters

Article 58 contemplates that the Tribunal will determine the procedure for the
consideration of any supplemental decision. The errors set out above are sufficiently
clear and controlling that Raymond Loewen asks that these be considered his submissions
on these matters both as to jurisdiction and merits. He reserves the right of reasonable

written reply to the United States’ submissions in response to these submissions.

-ll-

36. Should the Tribunal determine that any further oral hearings are necessary or would be
useful, it is submitted that they should be confined to the issue of fact concerning whether
there was any reasonably available and adequate option other than entering into the
settlement agreement on the basis of the existing record. Counsel for Raymond Loewen
will appear, if requested, before the Tribunal to address oral submissions on that question.
Raymond Loewen asks that any oral hearing on the question be set for hearing in the near

future in accordance with the convenience of counsel and the Tribunal.

37. Finally, Raymond Loewen stands before this Tribunal as the only remaining Claimant
and asks that the Respondent be required to post any additional fees required for the

determination of these matters.

Respectfully Submitted,

 

D. Geoffrey Cowper, Q.C. John H. Lewis, Jr.

FASKEN MARTINEAU DUMOULIN MONTGOMERY, McCRACKEN, WALKER &
Barristers & Solicitors RHOADES, LLP

Suite 2100 - 1075 West Georgia Street 123 South Broad Street

Vancouver, B.C. V6E 3G2 Philadelphia, PA 19109

Tel: 604 631 3131 Tel: 215 772 1500

Fax: 604 631 3232 Fax: 215 772 7620

DATED: September 19, 2003

