The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen
v
United States of America
(t}CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3)
D ion on hearing of Resp 's obj
to competence and jurisdiction

 

. INTRODUCTION

1. This dispute arises out of litigation brought against the first Claimant,
the Loewen Group, Inc (‘TLG!’) and Loewen Group International, Inc (‘LGII’),
its principal United States subsidiary, in Mississippi State Court by Jeremiah
O'Keefe Sr., his son and various companies owned by the O'Keefe family
(collectively called ‘O’Keefe’). The litigation arose out of a commercial
dispute between O’Keefe and the Loewen companies which are competitors
in the funeral home and funeral insurance business in Mississippi. The
dispute concerned three contracts between O’Keefe and the Loewen
companies said to be valued by O'Keefe at $980,000 and an exchange of two
O'Keefe funeral homes said to be worth $2.5 million for a Loewen insurance
company worth $4 million approximately.

2. The Mississippi jury awarded O'Keefe $500 million damages, including
$75 million damages for emotional distress and $400 million punitive
damages: The verdict was the outcome of a seven-week trial in which,
according to the Claimants, the trial judge repeatedly allowed O’Keefe’s
attorneys to make extensive irrelevant and highly prejudicial references (i) to
the Claimants’ foreign nationality (which was contrasted to O’Keefe’s
Mississippi roots); (ii) race-based distinctions between O’Keefe and the
Loewen companies; and (iii) class-based distinctions between the Loewen
companies (which were portrayed as large wealthy corporations) and O'Keefe
{who was portrayed as running family-owned businesses). Further, according
to the Claimants, after permitting those references, the trial judge refused to
give an instruction to the jury stating clearly that nationatity-based, racial and
class-based discrimination was impermissible.

3. The Loewen companies sought to appeal the $500 million verdict and
judgment but were confronted with the application of an appellate bond
requirement. Mississippi law requires an appeal bond for 125% of the

judgment, but allows the bond to be reduced or dispensed with for ‘good
cause’.

4. Despite the Claimants’ claim that there was good cause to reduce the
appeal bond, the Mississippi Supreme Court refused to reduce the appeal
bond at ail and required the Loewen companies to post a $625 million bond
within seven days in order to pursue its appeal without facing immediate
execution of the judgment. According to the Claimants, that decision
effectively foreclosed the Loewen companies’ appeal rights.

5. The Claimants allege that the Loewen companies were then forced to
settle the case ‘under extreme duress’. Other alternatives to settlement were
said to be catastrophic and/or unavailable. On January 29, 1996, with
execution against their Mississippi assets scheduled to start the next day, the
Loewen companies entered into a setttement with O'Keefe under which they
agreed to pay $175 million.

6. In this claim the Claimants seek compensation for damage inflicted
upon TLGI and LGII and for damage to the second Claimant's interests as a
direct result of alleged violations of Chapter Eleven of the North American
Free Trade Agreement (‘NAFTA’) committed primarily by the State of
Mississippi in the course of the litigation.

I T

7. The first Claimant TLGI is a Canadian corporation which carries on
business in Canada and the United States. The second Claimant is Raymond
Loewen, a Canadian citizen who was the founder of TLGI and its principal
shareholder and chief executive officer.

8. Raymond Loewen submits his claim as ‘the investor of a party’ on
behalf of TLGI under NAFTA, Article 1117.

9. In these proceedings, until June 1, 1999 the Claimants were
represented and from that date the first Claimant has been represented by:
Mr Christopher F. Dugan Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue
Mr James A. Wilderotter Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue
Mr Gregory A. Castanias Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue
From June 21, 1999 the second Claimant has been represented by:
Mr John H. Lewis, Jr. Montgomery, McCracken, Walker & Rhoads

10.

The Respondent is the Government of the United States of America. It

has been represented by:

11.

Mr Kenneth L. Doroshow U.S. Department of Justice
Mr Mark A. Clodfelter U.S. Department of State
Mr Barton Legum U.S. Depariment of State

The Government of Canada on September 7, 2000 and the

Government of Mexico on September 7, 2000 gave written notice of their
intention to attend the hearing on competence and jurisdiction.

12.

13.

Hl.
14.

Canada has been represented by:
Mr Fulvio Fracassi, Department of Foreign Affairs and
International Trade, Ottawa, Canada

Mexico has been represented by:
Mr Hugo Perezcano Diaz, Secretaria de Commercio y
Fomento Industrial (SECOFI), Mexico City, Mexico

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On July 29, 1998 the Claimants delivered to the Respondent a Notice

of Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration in accordance with NAFTA, Article
1119. On October 30, 1999 the Claimants delivered to the Respondent a
written consent and waiver in compliance with NAFTA, Article 1121(2){a) and

{b).

15.

On July 29, 1998, and pursuant to NAFTA, Article 1120, the Claimants

filed their Notice of Claim with the International Centre for Settlement of

Investment Disputes (‘ICSID') and requested the Secretary-General of ICSID 1
to approve and register its application and to permit access to the ICSID :
Additional Facility.

16.

On November 19, 1998, the Secretary-General of ICSID informed the

parties that the requirements of Article 4(2) of the iCSID Additionai Facility
Rules had been fulfilled and that the Claimants’ access to the Additional
Facility was approved. The Secretary-General of ICSID issued a Certificate of
Registration of the Notice of Claim on the same day.

17. On March 17, 1999 the Tribunal was constituted. The Secretary-
General of ICSID informed the parties that the Tribunal was ‘deemed to have
been constituted and the proceedings to have begun’ on March 17, 1999, and
that Ms Margrete Stevens, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.
All subsequent written communications between the Tribunal and the parties
were made through the ICSID Secretariat.

18. On April 6, 1999, the Respondent filed an objection that the dispute is
not within the competence of the Tribunal. The Respondent requested that
the objection be dealt with by the Tribunal as a preliminary question and that
the parties be given an opportunity to brief the issue in accordance with a
separate schedule pursuant to Article 38 of the Additional Facility Rules.

19. The first session of the Tribunal was held, with the parties’ agreement,
in Washington D.C. on May 18, 1999. In accordance with Article 21 of the
ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules (‘the Rules’}, the Tribunal
determined, with the agreement of the parties, that the place of arbitration
would be Washington D.C.

20. The President noted the parties’ agreement that the quorum for sittings
of the Tribunai would be constituted by all three of its members. It was also
noted that the Tribunal could take decisions by correspondence among its
members, or by any other appropriate means of communication, provided that
all members were consulted. Decisions of the Tribunal would be taken by the
majority of its members.

21. The Tribunal made the following orders:

(1) The Claimants to file their memorial by Monday, July 19, 1999.

{2) Respondent to file its memorial on competence and jurisdiction,
if any, stating the grounds of its objection, by Wednesday,
August 18, 1999.

(3) Following receipt of the Respondent's memorial on competence
and jurisdiction, if any, the Tribunal will rule whether the
objection to jurisdiction and competence will be determined as a
preliminary matter or joined to the merits of the dispute. The
Tribunal reserves the right to call for a written response from the
Claimants before giving its decision on the question whether
competence and jurisdiction will be determined as a preliminary
matter or otherwise.

(4) | The Respondent to file its counter-memoria! on the merits within
60 days after either the Respondent's not filing a memorial on
competence and jurisdiction within the time limited or the
Tribunal’s determination that the objection to jurisdiction and
competence shall be joined to the merits.

(5) Having regard to the statement made by the Claimants’ counsel
the Respondent shall be entitled to reasonable discovery within
the time limit for the. filing of its counter-memorial but that
entitlement shall be exercised only for the purpose of the
Respondent formulating its memorial on jurisdiction and
competence and its counter-memorial.

22. On July 6, 1999 the Tribunal confirmed that, by subsequent agreement

of the parties,
(1) the Claimants were to file their memorial by Monday, October 18, 1999;
and

(2) the Respondent was to file its memorial on jurisdiction and
competence, if any, by Friday, December 18, 1999.

23. Each Claimant through its attorneys has filed its own memorial, written
submission and final submission on competence and jurisdiction, and has
made its own submissions.

24. On May 26, 1999, the Respondent requested that all filings in this
matter, not excluding the minutes of proceedings, be treated as open and
available to the public. The Claimants agreed that the minutes and other
filings should be publicly available but only after the matter is concluded.

25. On September 28, 1999, the Tribunal delivered its Decision on the
Respondent's request for a ruling on disclosure. By its Decision the Tribunal
noted that Article 44(2) of the ICSID Additional Facility Arbitration Rules
provides that the minutes kept of all hearings pursuant to Article 44(1) ‘shall
not be published without the consent of the parties’. The Tribunal pointed out
that this prohibition is primarily directed to the Tribunal but was understood in
the Metaiclad Arbitration (ICSID Case ARB(AF)/97/1) Decision as being
directed to the parties as well. The Tribunal went on to deny the
Respondent's request to the extent that it sought to bring about a situation in
which the Tribunal or the Secretariat makes available to the public all filings in
this case.

26. In its Decision the Tribunal rejected the Claimants’ submission that
each partly is under a general obligation of confidentiality in relation to the
proceedings. The Tribunal stated that in an arbitration under NAFTA, it is not
to be supposed that, in the absence of express provision, the Convention or
the Rules and Regulations impose a general obligation on the parties, the
effect of which would be to preclude a Government (or the other party) from
discussing the case in public, thereby depriving the public of knowledge and
information concerning government and public affairs. The Decision
concluded by repeating the comment made by the Metaiciad Tribunal, namely
that if would be of advantage to the orderly unfolding of the arbitral process if
during the proceedings the parties were to limit public discussion to what is
considered necessary.

27. On November 1, 1999, the Respondent requested a further extension
of time until February 18, 2000, within which to file its memorial on
competence and jurisdiction. The request, which was opposed by the
Claimants, was granted by the Tribunal on December 9, 1999. At the same
time the Tribunal dealt with an application by the Respondent for further and
better discovery. While rejecting the Respondent’s submission thai there had
been a waiver by the Claimants of attorney-client privilege, the Tribunal
ordered that the Respondent was entitled to discovery of the attorney-client
communications of the Claimants or either of them relating directly to the
issue of duress.

28. On February 14, 2000, the first Claimant sought clarification of the
Tribunal’s Decision of September 28, 1999, relating to confidentiality. The
request followed the release by the Respondent on January 10, 2000 of
materials relating to the arbitration, including ‘the minutes of the May 18, 1999
hearing before the Tribunal as well as the audio recording of that hearing’.
The Respondent interpreted the Decision as merely limiting the right of the
Tribunal or the Secretariat to release information, not the right of the parties
themselves to release information. On the other hand, the first Ciaimant
interpreted the Decision as restricting the right of the parties to disclose
minutes and related material. By its Decision on June 2, 2000 the Tribunal
affirmed the correctness of the first Claimant's interpretation of the Decision
on September 28, 1999, stating that the Convention and the Rules prohibit
publication by the Tribunal and the parties of the minutes and a full record of
the hearing and any order made by the Tribunal. However, the Decision of

June 2, 2000 stated that neither it nor the earlier Decision was intended to
affect or qualify, or could affect or qualify, any statute-imposed obligation of
disclosure by which any party to the arbitration might be bound.

29. By its Decision of June 2, 2000, the Tribunal also dealt with an
application by the Respondent for further and better discovery, in particular
relating to documents and information reflecting the advice and conclusions of
the Claimants and their advisers during the Mississippi proceedings
concerning alternatives to settlement of the Mississippi litigation. The Tribunal
ordered the Claimants to produce all information in the possession of the
Claimants, their counsel or others who acted on their behalf that relates
directly to the question whether Loewen had alternatives to entering into the
Mississippi settlement. The Tribunal stated that information ordered to be
produced should include commitments from lenders for financing the Loewen
Group's ongoing operations in anticipation of the possible reorganization filing
and draft petitions for the purpose of seeking possible retief from the
Mississippi Supreme Court's bonding decision in the US federal courts and
the Supreme Court. The documents were to be produced within twenty-one
{21) days of June 2, 2000.

V,___THE NATURE OF THE CLAIMANTS’ CLAIM

30. The Claimants’ case is that

(i) the trial court, by admitting extensive anti-Canadian and pro-American
testimony and prejudicial counsel comment, violated Article 11062 of
NAFTA which bars discrimination against foreign investors and their
investments;

(ii) the discrimination tainted the inexplicably large verdict;

(iii) the trial court, by permitting extensive nationality-based, racial and
class-based testimony and counsel comments, violated Article 1105 of
NAFTA which imposes a minimum standard of treatment for
investments of foreign investors;

(iv) the excessive verdict and judgment (even apart from the
discrimination) violated Article 1105;

(v) the Mississippi courts’ arbitrary application of the bonding requirement
violated Article 1105; and

{vi) the discriminatory conduct, the excessive verdict, the denial of the
Loewen companies’ right to appeal and the coerced settlement violated
Article 1110 of NAFTA, which bars the uncompensated appropriation of
investments of foreign investors.

31. The Claimants allege that the Respondent is liable for Mississippi's
NAFTA breaches under Article 105, which requires that the Parties to NAFTA
shali ensure that all necessary measures are taken to give effect to the
provisions of the Agreement, including their observance by State and
provincial governments. The Claimants also allege that, by tolerating the
misconduct which occurred during the O’Keefe litigation, the Respondent
directly breached Article 1105, which imposes affirmative duties on the
Respondent to provide ‘full protection and security’ to investments of foreign
investors, including ‘full protection and security’ against third-party
misconduct.

Vv. THE RESPONDENT’ BJECT! COMPETENCE AND
JURISDICTION

32. By its Memorial on Competence and Jurisdiction, the Respondent

objected to the competence and jurisdiction of this Tribunal on the following

grounds:

(i) the claim is not arbitrable because the judgments of domestic courts in
purely private disputes are not ‘measures adopted or maintained by a
Panty’ within the scope of NAFTA Chapter II;

(ii) — the Mississippi court judgments complained of are not ‘measures
adopted or maintained by a Party’ and cannot give rise to a breach of
Chapter Eleven as a matter of law because they were not final acts of
the United States judicial system;

(iii) a private agreement to settle a litigation matter out of court is not a
government ‘measure’ within the scope of NAFTA Chapter II;

{iv) _ the Mississippi trial court's alleged failure to protect against the alien-
based, racial and class-based references cannot be a ‘measure’
because Loewen never objected to such references during the trial;
and

(v) Raymond Loewen's Article 1117 claims should be dismissed because
he does not ‘own or control’ the enterprise at issue.

33. Each of the Claimants filed submissions in answer to the Respondent's
objections contesting each of the grounds of objection advanced by the
Respondent. The Respondent filed iis final submissions in reply. The
Claimants then filed submissions in response.

34. The hearing on the Respondent’s objection to competence and
jurisdiction took place in Washington D.C. on September 20, 21 and 22, 2000.

- 35. — After the conclusion of the oral hearing, pursuant to an order made by
the Tribunal, the Government of Mexico filed, on October 16, 2000,
submissions concerning certain matters of interpretation of NAFTA which
addressed the effect of Article 1121, the meaning of the word ‘measure’, the
tights of an investor to advance a claim under Article 1117 and the decisions
in Azinian v United Mexican States Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2; 14 ICSID
Review-FILJ 538 and Metaiciad v United Mexican States Case No. ARB(AF)
97/1 which were referred to in oral argument by the disputing parties.

36. The disputing parties responded to Mexico’s submission by filing
written submissions pursuant to the order made by the Tribunal at the
conctusion of the oral hearing on September 22, 2000. It will be convenient to
refer to Mexico’s submissions when we consider the Respondent's grounds of
objection.

37. In determining the Respondent's objection, it is proper to look at the
Claimants’ notice of claim for it is by the Notice of Claim itself and the request
for arbitration that the Claimants submit their claim to arbitration under Articles
41116 and 1117 of NAFTA. It has not been suggested that there is in this case
any material difference between the nature of the claim formulated in the
Notice of Claim and that formulated in the Memorials filed by the Claimants.

38. No distinction has been drawn in the submissions of the disputing
parties between the concepts of competence and jurisdiction. Tne ICSID
Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules make specific provision for objections to
‘competence’ (Article 46) but make no such provision for objections to
‘jurisdiction’. Article 46 has been applied on the footing that it extends to
objections which go to jurisdiction as well as -objections going to the
constitution and composition of the Tribunal.

VI TH NDENT'S FIRST Gi IND OF CT
WHETHER JU L_ACTS IN LITIGATION BETWI RIVATE
PARTIES ARE ‘MEASURES’ REGULATED BY NAFTA?

39. Article 1101(1) of NAFTA provides:

10

‘This Chapter [Eleven] applies to measures adopted or maintained by a

party’ relating to:

(a) investors of another Party;

(b) investments of investors of another Party in the territory of the
Party; ...”

40. Article 201 defines ‘measure’ as including ‘any taw, regulation,
procedure, requirement or practice’. The breadth of this inclusive definition,
notably the references to ‘law, procedure, requirement or practice’, is
inconsistent with the notion that judicial action is an exclusion from the
generality of the expression ‘measures’. ‘Law’ comprehends judge-made as
well as statute-based rules. ‘Procedure’ is apt to include judicial as well as
legistative procedure. ‘Requirement’ is capable of covering a court order
which requires a party to do an act or to pay a sum of money, while ‘practice’
is capable of denoting the practice of courts as well as the practice of other
bodies.

41. Article 1019(1), which requires each Party to promptly publish any law,
regulation, precedential judicial decision, administrative ruling of general
application and any procedure ... regarding government procurement’ differs
from the definition of ‘measure’ in Article 201, which contains no explicit
reference to judicial decisions. While Article 1019(1) is directed only to the
imposition of an obligation to publish rules of general application, it does not
follow that this obligation should be regarded as co-extensive with the
inclusive definition of ‘measure’ or as confining what the definition
comprehends. Although Article 1019 clearly indicates that a precedential
judicial decision is not only a ‘measure’ but also a measure ‘adopted or
maintained by a Party’, the Article is consistent with the Respondent's
submission that ‘measures’ does not extend to every judicial action.

42, Other NAFTA provisions indicate that judicial action is not beyond the
teach of the word ‘measures’. Article 1716, in requiring a NAFTA Party to
provide ‘that its judicial authorities shall have the authority to order prompt and
effective provisional measures’ to prevent infringement of intellectual property
rights, recognises that judicial orders may constitute ‘measures’. Article 1715
requires a Party to provide specified ‘civil judicial procedures’ for the
enforcement of intellectual property rights. These ‘procedures’ extend to the
making of a variety of judicial orders, including final judgments (Article
1715(2)). Article 1701(t) is concerned to ensure that ‘measures to enforce

1

intellectual property rights do not themselves become barriers to legitimate
trade’. Plainly ‘measures’ there includes the judicial procedures in Article
1715 i.e. judicial orders. See also Article 1715(2)(f) (where the reference to
‘measures ... taken’ must be understood as referring to judicial acts,
including injunctions and other entorcement procedures).

43. The Respondent concedes that when a government entity is involved
in a domestic court proceeding, it may be that, in appropriate circumstances,
a resulting court judgment constitutes a ‘measure adopted or maintained by a
Party’. This concession is at odds with the argument that the failure to
mention ‘judicial order’ or ‘judgment’ in Article 201 signifies an intention to
confine ‘measures’ to legislative and executive actions. In general, where the
meaning of ‘measures’ is so confined, the restricted meaning arises from an
express limitation or an implied limitation arising from the context. No such
limitation is to be found in Article 201.

44. ‘Nor can ‘measures’ be confined to provisional or interim judicial acts as
distinct from final judicial acts. Such a distinction finds support neither in
Articie 1701 nor Chapter 10 of NAFTA (which applies to ‘measures adopted or
maintained by a Party relating to procurement’). The reference in Article
1019(1) to ‘precedential judicial decision’ which is one instance of a measure
‘adopted or maintained by a Party’, is to a final decision as well as a
provisional decision. See also Annex 1010.1B paras 2 and 3.

45. The approach which this Tribunal takes to the interpretation of
‘measures’ accords with the interpretation given to the expression in
international law where it has been understood to include judicial acts. in
Regina v Pierre Bouchereau, Case 30 77 [1977] ECR 1999, the European
Court of Justice rejected the argument that ‘measure’ excludes actions of the
judiciary, holding that the word embraces ‘any action which affects the rights
of persons’ coming within the application of the relevant treaty provision (at
41). In the Fisheries Jurisdiction Case (Spain v Canada), No. 96 (ICJ 4
December 1998), the Internationa) Court of Justice stated that ‘in its ordinary
sense the word {‘measure’] is wide enough to cover any act, step or
proceeding, and imposes no particular limit on their material content or on the
aim pursued thereby’ (at 66). See also Oil Fields of Texas Inc v NIOC, 12
Iran-US Cr Trib Rep 308 (1986) at 318-319 (where the judicial acts in
question were held to be expropriations within the expression ‘expropriations

12

or other measures affecting property rights’, thus amounting to ‘measures
affecting property rights’).

46. The significance for this case of the interpretation of ‘measures’ in the
context of international taw is that Article 102(2) of NAFTA requires the
Parties to interpret and apply its provisions ‘in the light of its objectives set out
in paragraph 1 and in accordance with applicable rules of international law’.
Further, an interpretation of ‘measures’ which extends to judicial acts
contorms to the objectives of NAFTA as set out in Article 102(1), more
particularly objectives (b), (c) and (e), namely to

‘(b) promote conditions of fair competition in the free trade area;

(c) increase substantially investment opportunities in the territories

of the Parties;

(e) create effective procedures for the implementation and
application of this Agreement, for its joint administration and for
the resolution of disputes’.

47. Such an interpretation of the word ‘measures’ accords with the general
principle of State responsibitity. The principle applies to the acts of judicial as
well as legislative and administrative organs. (See draft Article 4 on State
Responsibility adopted by the International Law Commission and later
provisionally adopted by the United Nations Generai Assembly Drafting
Committee on its second reading, Geneva, May 1—June 9, July 10-August 18,
2000, A/CN.4/L.600, August 21, 2000.) In Azinian v United Mexican States
Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2, 14 ICSID Review-FILJ 538, the Tribunal, in rejecting
the claim that there were violations of NAFTA, quoted (at 567) with approval!
the comments made by the former President of the International Court of
Justice who, after acknowledging the reluctance in some arbitral awards of
the fast century to admit that the State is responsible for judicial actions,
stated:
“... in the present century State responsibility for judicial acts came to
be recognized. Ajthough independent of Government, the judiciary is
not independent of the State: the judgment given by a judicial authority
emanates from an organ of the State in just the same way as a law
promulgated by the legislature or a decision taken by the executive.’
(Eduardo Jimenez de Aréchaga, ‘International Law in the Past Third of
a Century’, 159-1 Recueil des Cours (General Course in Public
International Law, The Hague, 1978).

The former President went on to say that State responsibility for acts of
judicial authorities may result from three types of judicial decision, the first of
which is a decision of a municipal court clearly incompatible with a rule of
international law. The second type is what is known traditionally as a denial of
justice. The Claimants assert that the NAFTA violations of which they
complain fail within these categories of judicial decision.

48. The Azinian Tribunal pointed out (at 568) that State responsibility for
judicial decisions does not entitle a claimant to a review of national court
decisions as though the international jurisdiction seised has plenary appellate
jurisdiction. This is neither true generally nor for NAFTA. As the Tribunal
said,
‘What must be shown is that the court decision itself constitutes a
violation of the treaty’ (at 568).

49. The views expressed by the Azinian Tribunal were not necessary for
the decision in that case because it involved no challenge to the decisions of
the Mexican courts. Subject to our later consideration of the rule of
exhaustion of local remedies and the rule of judicial finality, the views are
nonetheless persuasive and support our view that ‘measures’ in Chapter
Eleven, according to its true interpretation, does not exclude judicial acts.

50. A Tribunal established pursuant to NAFTA Chapter Eleven, Section B,
must decide the issues in accordance with the provisions of NAFTA and
applicable rules of international law (Article 1131(1}). Further, as already
noted, Article 102(2) provides that the Agreement must be interpreted in the
light of its stated objectives and in accordance with applicable rules of
international law. These objectives include the promotion of conditions of fair
competition in the free trade area, the increase of investment opportunities
and the creation of effective procedures for the resolution of disputes (Article
102(1)(b), (c) and (e)).

51. Guided by these objectives and principles, we do not accept the
Respondent's submission that NAFTA is to be understood in accordance with
the principle that treaties are to be interpreted in deference to the sovereignty
of states. In AMCO Asia Corp v Republic of Indonesia 1 ICSID Reports 377
(1983) the Tribunal rejected the suggested principle (at 394, 397). Whatever
the status of this suggested principle may have been in earlier times, the

 

14

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties is the primary guide to the
interpretation of ihe provisions of NAFTA (Ethy! Corporation v Canada, Award
on Jurisdiction, June 24, 1998, at 55-56, 38 ILM 708 (where a NAFTA
Tribunal expressly rejected the argument that Section B of Chapter 11 is to be
construed strictly). See also Pope & Talbot v Canada, Interim Award, June
26, 2000 (where a NAFTA Tribunal adopted a broad interpretation of the
expression ‘investment’ in Article 1110). NAFTA is to be interpreted in good
faith in accordance with the ordinary-meaning to be given to its terms in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose (Vienna Convention, Article
31(1)). The context includes the preamble and annexes (Vienna Convention,
Article 31(2)).

52. We agree with the Respondent that not every judicial act on the part of
the courts of a Party constitutes a measure ‘adopted or maintained by a
Party’. Mexico submits that, in order to constitute a ‘measure’, the judicial
action under consideration must have a general application. Thus a judicial
affirmation of a general principle might well constitute a measure, whereas a
specific order requiring a defendant to pay a sum of money would not. The
definition of ‘measure’ in Article 201 (which inctudes ‘requirement’) is by no
means consistent with this argument.

53. The question then arises whether the words ‘measures adopted or
maintained by a Party’ should be understood, as the Respondent argues, to
exclude judicial acts being the judgments of domestic courts in purely private
matters. The purpose of Chapter Eteven, ‘Section B — Settlement of Disputes
between a Party and an investor of Another Party’ is to establish ‘a
mechanism for the settlement of investment disputes that assures both equal
treatment among investors of the Parties in accordance with the principle of
international reciprocity and due process before an arbitral tribunal’. The text,
context and purpose of Chapter Eleven combine to support a liberal rather
than a restricted interpretation of the words ‘measures adopted or maintained
by a Party’, that is, an interpretation which provides protection and security for
the foreign investor and its investment: see Ethy! Corporation v Canada,
Award on Jurisdiction, June 24, 1998, 38 ILM 708, (where the NAFTA
Tribunal concluded that the object and purpose of Chapter Eleven is to ‘create
effective procedures ... for the resolution of disputes’ and to ‘increase
substantially investment opportunities’ (at 83)).

15

54. Neither in the text or context of NAFTA nor in international law is there
to be found support tor the Respondent's submission that measures adopted
or maintained by a Party’, in its application to judicial acts, excludes the
judgments of domestic courts in purely private disputes. Neither the definition
of ‘measure’ in Article 201 nor the provisions of Chapters 10 and 17 relating to
‘measures’ and ‘procedures’ contain any indication that, in its application to
judicial acts, the existence of a measure depends upon the identity of the
litigants or the characterisation of the dispute as public or private. An
adequate mechanism for the settlement of disputes as contemplated by
Chapter Eleven must extend to disputes, whether public or private, so long as
the State Party is responsible for the judicial act which constitutes the
‘measure’ complained of, and that act constitutes a breach of a NAFTA
obligation, as for example a discriminatory precedential judicial decision. The
principle that a State is responsible for the decisions of its municipal courts (or
at least its highest court) supports the wider interpretation of the expression
‘measure adopted or maintained by a Party’ rather than the restricted
interpretation advanced by the Respondent.

55. Generally speaking, litigation between private parties is less likely to
generate a ‘measure adopied or maintained by a Party’ but, in some
circumstances, private litigation may do so. In this respect, we do not regard
the discussion of private litigation in Retail, Wholesale and Department Store
Union, Local 580 v Dolphin Delivery Ltd [1986] 2 SCR 572, upon which the
Respondent relies, as influential in the present context. The discussion
relates to s. 32(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms which
applies Charter provisions to the legislative, executive and administrative
branches (but not the judicial branch) of government.

56. As the Claimants submit, the Mississippi trial court’s judgment ordering
Loewen to pay O'Keefe $500 million and the Mississippi Supreme Court
requirement that Loewen post a $625 million bond were ‘requirements’ within
the meaning of the definition of ‘measure’ in Article 201, subject to
consideration of Article 1121, the principle of finality of judicial acts and the
tule of exhaustion of local remedies.

57. The Respondent argues that the words ‘adopted or maintained’ in
Article 1101 are indicative of an intent to limit Chapter 11 to those actions that
involve ratification by government. This limitation, so the Respondent
submits, accords with the ‘act of state’ doctrine. That doctrine is a doctrine of

16

municipal rather than international law. See W.S. Kirkpatrick & Co Ine v
Environmental Tectonics Corporation international 493 US 400 (1990) at 404
(where the Court acknowledged that it had ‘once viewed the doctrine as an
expression of international law’ but had more recently described it ‘as a
consequence of domestic separation of powers, reflecting the strong sense of
the Judicial Branch that its engagement in the task of passing on the validity
of foreign acts of state may hinder the conduct of foreign affairs (Banco
Nacional de Cuba v Sabbatino 376 US 398, 423 (1964))’. No authority and no
materials have been placed before us which justify the conclusion that the act
of State doctrine has been adopted by sufficient countries to be considered as
a rule of international law pursuant to Article 38 of the Statute of the
Internationa! Court of Justice. In any event, the act of State doctrine is now
expressed in terms of ‘acts of a governmental character done by a foreign
state within its own territory and applicable there’ (Restatement (Third) of
Foreign Relations Laws of the United States §443(1)), without differentiating
between ‘public’ and ‘private’ litigation.

58. Whatever the effect of the act of State doctrine may be, Article 1105, in
requiring a Party to provide ‘full protection and security’ to investments of
investors, must extend to the protection of foreign investors from private
parties when they act through the judicial organs of the State.

59. Further, the award of punitive damages would satisfy the public
element of the Respondent's public/private dichotomy. It is generally
accepted that punitive damages awards are intended to serve the public
interest (D.B. Dobbs, Dobbs Law of Remedies §3.11(1) at 457 (2d ed 1993).

60. We reject therefore the Respondent's objection that the Mississippi
Court judgments are not ‘measures adopted or maintained by a Party’
because they resolved a dispute between private parties.

Mil. THE RESPON T COND INI TION:
MISSISSIPPI TS ARE NOT ‘MEASURE
ADOPTED AINTAINED BY A PARTY’ Al iT
TO A BREAC! 11 BECAI T
T ICAL SYSTEM

61. The Respondent argues that the expression ‘measures adopted or
maintained by a Party’ must be understood in the light of the principle of
customary international law that, when a ctaim of injury is based upon judicial

ae eee erent

17

action in a particular case, State responsibility only arises when there is final
action by the State's judicial system as a whole. This proposition is based on
the notion that judicial action is a single action from beginning to end so that
the State has not spoken until all appeals have been exhausted. in other
words, the State is not responsible for the errors of its courts when the
decision has not been appealed to the court of last resort. The Respondent
distinguishes this substantive requirement of customary international law for a
final non-appealable judicial action, when an international claim is brought to
challenge judicial action, from international law’s procedural requirement of
exhaustion of local remedies (‘the local remedies rule’).

62. The Respondent submits that there is nothing to show that in Chapter
Eleven the Parties intended to derogate from this substantive rule of
international law when judiciat action is the basis of the claim for violation of
NAFTA. To the contrary, the Respondent argues that the terms of Article
1101, ‘adopted or maintained by a Party’, incorporate the substantive rule of
international law and require finality of action. Only those judicial decisions
that have been accepted or upheld by the judicial system as a whole, after all
available appeals have been exhausted, so the argument runs, can be said to
possess that degree of finality that justifies the description ‘adopted or
maintained’.

63. The Claimants’ response to this argument is that Article 1121(1)(b) of
NAFTA requires an arbitral claimant to waive its local remedies, not exhaust
them. This Article authorizes the filing of a Chapter 11 claim only if
‘the investor and the enterprise waive their right to indicate or continue
before any administrative tribunal or court under the law of any Party,
or other dispute settlement procedures, any proceedings with respect
to the measure of the disputing Party that is alleged to be a breach
referred to in Article 1116 ...’.

The Claimants submit, first, that ‘the Article eliminates the necessity to
exhaust local remedies provided by the host country’s administrative or
judicial courts’. (B. Sepulveda Amor, Intemational Law and International
Sovereignty: The NAFTA and the Claims of Mexican Jurisdiction, 19 Houston
Journal of International Law 565 at 574 (1997)). The Claimants submit,
secondly, that the so-called substantive principle of finality is no different from
the local remedies rule and that international tribunals have reviewed the

1 EERE TT

18

decisions of inferior municipal courts where the exhaustion requirement has
been waived or is otherwise inapplicable.

64. The Respondent argues that Article 1121(2)}(b) is not a waiver
provision and that it does not waive the local remedies rule or for that matter
the. rule of judicial finatity. The Respondent acknowledges, however, that the
Article relaxes the local remedies rule to a partial but limited extent, without
defining or otherwise indicating what that extent is or may be.

65. Observations of the NAFTA Tribunals in both Metaiclad Corporation v
United Mexican States ICSID Case No. ARB/AF/97/1 (footnote 4) and in the
Azinian Case, to which we have referred, support the Claimants’ case to the
exient that it is based on Article 1121(2)(b). But Mexico, in its written
submissions to this Tribunal, points out that the Metaiciad Tribunal which, in
the relevant passage, purported to state Mexico’s position in that case, did not
do so accurately. Mexico also points out that, in the Azinian Case, as these
was no complaint of any violation of NAFTA based on a judicial act, the
Tribunal’s observations were not necessary for its decision. Other cases
relied upon by the Claimants include G.W. McNear Inc v United Mexican
States, Docket No. 211, Opinions of the Commissioners 68 at 71, 72 (1928)
and The Texas Company Claim, Decision 32-B, American-Mexican Cl Rep
142 (1948), but in these cases the relevant treaty waived exhaustion.

66. There is support for the view that no distinction should be drawn
between the principle of finality and the local remedies rule. indeed, Edwin M.
Borchard, The Diplomatic Protection of Citizens Abroad 198 (1915), upon
which the Respondent relies, stated:
‘It is a fundamental principle that the acts of inferior judges or courts do
not render the state internationally liable when the claimant has failed
to exhaust his local means of redress by judicial appeal or otherwise,
for only the highest court to which a case is appealable may be
considered an authority involving the responsibility of the state’.
In the Finnish Ships Arbitration 3 RIAA 1497 (1937) it was pointed out that
exhaustion of local remedies meant that there must be a final decision of a
court which is the highest in a hierarchy of courts to which the claimant can
resort in the host State. Borchard is not the only commentator who regards
the principle of finality and the local remedies rule as different sides of the
same coin {see C.F. Amerasinghe, Local Remedies in National Law 181
(1990)). And in the Interhandel Case (1959) \CJ 6, the claim was dismissed

19

expressly on the ground that Switzerland ‘has not exhausted the local
remedies available to it’ (at 11, 19, 26-27). Although the case was taken by
Interhandel to the United States Supreme Court, the Supreme Court
remanded the case to the District Court and proceedings were still pending in
that court.

67. While the content of the two rules is similar, if not the same, the rules
were thought to serve different purposes. The local remedies rule (described
as ‘procedural’) was designed to ensure that the State where violation of
international law occurred should have the opportunity to address it by its own
means, within the framework of its own domestic legal system (interhandel
Case (1959) ICJ Reports 6 at 27). Most, if not all legal systems, have a self-
correcting capacity. In other words, the claimant was bound to take steps to
ensure that the self-correcting mechanism of the State’s judicial system is fully
engaged as a condition precedent to recognition of the State’s responsibility
for breach of its international obligation. See the Report of the Internationat
Law Commission to the United Nations General Assembly, Yearbook of the
International Law Commission, 1975, Vol. I], 62. Now, compliance with the
local remedies rule is seen as a condition precedent to invoking the
responsibility of a State for breach of an international obligation. (See Article
45 of the draft articles on State responsibility, provisionally adopted by the
Drafting Committee of the United Nations General Assembly on second
reading, based on the draft previously adopted by the International Law
Commission (A/CN.A/L.600, August 21, 2000)).

68. On the other hand, the rule of judicial finality (often described as
‘substantive’) was thought to be directed to the responsibility of the State for
judicial acts. As the statement by Borchard, already quoted, makes clear, it
was considered that the State was not responsible for the acts of lower courts.

69. Although it has been said that the responsibility of the State for a
breach of international law constituted by an alleged judicial action arises only
when there is final action by the State’s judicial system considered as a
whole, it is now recognised that the judiciary is an organ of the State and that
judicial action which violates a rule of international law is attributable to the
State (A.V. Freeman, The International Responsibility of States for Denial of
Justice, 31-33 (1970)). The rule of judicial finality was influenced by the
principles of separation, independence of the judiciary and respect for the
finality of judicial decisions. However, the judiciary, though independent of

 

 

20

Government, is not independent of the State and the judgment of a court
proceeds from an organ of the State as does a decision of the executive.

70. The modern view is that conduct of an organ of the State shall be
considered as an act of the State under international law, whether the organ
be legislative, executive or judicial, whatever position it holds in the
organisation of the State. That, in effect, is the principle expressed in draft
Article 4 on State Responsibility, provisionally adopted by the Drafting
Committee of the United Nations General Assembly, based on the draft
previously adopted by the International Law Commission (A/CN.A/L.600,
August 21, 2000). Although the draft has not been finally approved, it is a
highly persuasive statement of the law on State Responsibility as it presently
stands. Draft Article 4 accords with the view expressed by Eduardo Jimenez
de Arechaga, the former President of the International Court (‘International
Law in the Past Third of a Century’, 159-1 Recueil des Cours, (General
Course in Public International Law, The Hague, 1978).'

71. — Viewed in this light, the rule of judicial finality is no different from the
local remedies rule. Its purpose is to ensure that the State where the violation
occurred should have an opportunity to redress it by its own means, within the
framework of its own domestic legal system.

72. Just as it was said that the function of the local remedies rule was to
establish whether the point had been reached at which the home State may
raise the issue on the international level (G. Schwarzenberger, International
Law, 604, (1957)), now it is the function of the rule to establish that State
responsibility for a breach of an intemational obligation may be invoked.

73. We accept thai an important principle of international law should not be
held to have been tacitly dispensed with by an international agreement, in the
absence of words making clear an intention to do so (Elettronica Sicula SpA
(Elsi) (United States v italy) (1989) ICJ 15 at 42), Such an intention may,
however, be exhibited by express provisions which are at variance with the
continued operation of the relevant principte of international law.

‘Cited in Azinian v United Mexican States Case No. ARB/(AF)/97/2, 14 ICSID Review-FILJ at
S67.

 

21

74, Having reached this point in our consideration of the arguments, we
have concluded that this ground of objection should be dealt with at the
hearing on the merits. Our reasons for reaching this conclusion relate parity
to the arguments based on Article 1121(2)(b) and Chapter Eleven and partly
to other arguments advanced by the Claimants in response to the
Respondent’s objection. We have already mentioned the lack of specificity in
the Respondent’s acknowledgment that the Article partially relaxes the local
remedies rule. Consideration might be given by the Respondent to the
possibility of presenting an argument that Article 1121(2)(b) does no more
than curtail or restrict rights that a claimant would otherwise have but for the
existence of Article 1121(2}(b). The remarks of the international Court of
Justice in Headquarters Agreement (Advisory Opinion) ICJ Reports 12 at 29,
42-43, a decision not cited in argument, may have a bearing on the operation
of Article 1121(2)(b) and also on the Claimants’ submission that an agreement
to arbitrate dispenses with any obligation to have recourse to municipal
courts. Another argument of the Claimants, namely that the iocal remedies
rule has no application to denial of justice cases, is one that can conveniently
be dealt with at the hearing on the merits where the argument can be
considered in the context of the particular allegations by the Claimants of
denial of justice on which findings can then be made. Similarly put over is
consideration of the Respondent's submissions that the Loewen companies
failed to pursue various local remedies which, according the Respondent,
were open to them and would, if successful, have resulted in an effective
remedy under municipal law. The hearing of this ground of objection should
therefore stand over to the hearing on the merits.

Vill. THE RESP: . F OBJECTION:
T AGREEMENT Ti F
AT IS NOT A GOV u ” WITHIN TH PE
OF HAPTER ELEVEN

75. — This ground of objection was not strongly pressed. in this case much
turns on the circumstances in which the Mississippi proceedings came
to be settled and that is a matter which must be dealt with at a hearing
on the merits.

 

22

IX. THE RESPONDENT'S FOURTH GROUND OF OBJECTION:
THAT THE MISSISSIPPI TRIAL COURT'S ALLEGED FAILURE TO
PROTECT AGAINST THE ALIEN-BA RACIAL_AND CLASS-

B, E A ‘MEAS ’ B E
LOEWEN NEVER ECTED TO H_REF! DB
HE TRIAL

76. This ground of objection does not, in our view, go to competence or
jurisdiction. If the Respondent’s case on this point is made out, it could result
in a dismissal of the claim. It is an issue which appropriately and conveniently
should be heard and determined at a hearing on the merits.

X.__THE FIFTH GROUND OF OBJECTION:

RAY N WEN’'S ARTICLE 17

ISMISSED BECAUSE HE DOES NOT OWN OR NTROL THE

ENTERPRISE AT ISSUE
The objection on this ground, if upheld, would not be dispositive of the second
Claimant's entire claim which is partly based on Article 1116. Further, it is far
from clear that the objection goes to jurisdiction and, in any event, it is an
objection which can be dealt with at the hearing on the merits. For this reason
we do not consider it appropriate to decide this question on an objection to
competence and jurisdiction.

QRDERS

In the result we make the following orders:

1. Dismiss the Respondent's objection to competence and jurisdiction so
far as it relates to the first ground of objection.

2. Adjourn the further hearing of the Respondent's other grounds of
objection to competence and jurisdiction and join that further hearing to
the hearing on the merits.

3. The Respondent to file its counter-memorial on the merits within 60
days of the date of this Decision.

4. The Claimants to file their replies within 60 days of the time limited for
the filing of the Respondent’s counter-memorial on the merits.

 

23
5. The Respondent to file its rejoinder within 60 days of the time limited

for the filing of the Claimants’ replies.
6. Fix October 15, 2001 as the date of the hearing on the merits.

Brrr

Sir Anthony Mason, President

  

( Lhsrrsn /

Judge Abner J. Mikva

DATED the fifth dayof January 2001.

