 

 

- 8/2020/ppp

PCA Case No. 2014-26
IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION BEFORE A TRIBUNAL
CONSTITUTED IN ACCORDANCE WEPH THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION
RULES 1976 AND THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF
THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC
OF FRANCE ON THE RECIPROCAL PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF
INVESTMENTS DATED 2 SEPTEMBER 1997

2 BETWEEN

LOUIS DREYFUS ARMATEURS SAS (FRANCE)

The Claimant
and

THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA

The Respondent

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

22 December 20145

The Arbitral Tribunal:
Mis. Jean E. Kalicki (Presiding Arbitrator)
Prof. Julian D.M. Lew OC
Mr. John Christopher Thomas QC

Registry:
The Permanent Court of Arbitration

 

 

J18/2020/ppp

VI.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE PARTIES AND THEIR REPRESENTATIVES. .........cccccsccssscsecssccsscsesssessecssesnensseoscecsasss 1
PROCEDURAL. FAISTORY cinitepscsasressscisinncadpenbicnesscaspcesesintck cgssteccstses dodsicnsevbeiseh ews tansinieiiesasimiis 1
As COMMENCEMENT OF THE ARBITRATION ccsssisscnsvcssssscsvssicccvacsscsscsubsccidivsesvccsdiatherisviecsdis I
B. RMB TT TU TOW CUE TE PRT CWAG ssiiieciasanccitatinssnediedsind shidiciiashaicebainieniandamatreneineeias 2
C. INITIAL PROCEDURAL STEPS......... ehseaeeeiealab vas ese babii ilo nese Naas Vistiarydndnentivatinaiesanhuaise z
Thy BOEPETERGA TICINO PRC ETE ss es cae nicssren vaseistithwienbei cov nine spc boviniblosianeubate tenlniasdedesoocsbees
SO OES CREO 2 RNs, PRR SN Reyes dvcnseaintachedcdde oy ancinalduinalvitncencennenecesinniasichraerspsnevacerettentvesspel 4
RELEVANT LEGAL PIO VISIONS cicssccsisccsccsccssscassesaivicsscevsesinessvetesedbcedpetaisesevabsdbibeiavivadsaens 7
Bg, SIERIE-TEDT: sxeaphscivnenuproerandssaehasasinsitistacsspanadiekpasdsesatideevoteins ais tepsucdévetvossuvess teosisudad eds tbbthenssbsiadade 7
Bis: © GAN ea NW aidspileead Aisa a aazasklasbstactastgk ahora pdicua oigisnd ba esaoebuaord adam ankles aah stead via ansdatavahicnad x

THE RESPONDENT'S FIRST OBJECTION: THE TRIBUNAL LACKS
JURISDICTION RATIONE VOLUNTATIS BECAUSE THE CLAIMANT FAILED
TO COMPLY WITH JURISDICTIONAL PRECONDITIONS TO ARBITRATION ........ 4

A. Re VIG EU i vashcdescncchavaadsnsnatsivuncdstensidasishaccackasanatdaaucescn etadvaesebeadadiitesieklisesdihitidauaiundess 10
Ds ‘TRE POSETHONS OF THE PARTIES soccsisissiceccisiccsscscsssiceissiineissaisiusasinbeceantacoesanenitanensiiedls wh
1. Necessity of Amicable Settlement Efforts for Six Months under Article 9 of

UE TER eeianecheraetatovocnataanltahinadiseesiiiceleta sends pet ciat cde asia aiiiateion 13

The Claimant & Pasition.o........ccc0000.: sie pacts ‘ ea

The Respondent s Position scpenitbenss re sah incnes a wi?
2. Amicable Settlement Periods as Jurisdictional Requirements under

SLUT REMIERD CRW atin eisesandcesisecninciaesiznsnipcindedadind inten inti detoeperiewstitedaeNekintneedesteasbannciaals 20)

The Claimant s Position : ss sane : 3 20

The Respondent's Position .. Lt

3. Retroactive Satisfaction of any Amicable Settlement Period oo... ces eeeeeees 21

The Claimant s Position... sie atkins ianawhachanbrassareinn cidehoaasitad bivsmennaeel

The Respondent's Position Z2

4. Relevance of the Alleged Futility of Amicable Settlement Efforts .00.0... 22

PRE Claman $ POSTION. asics ccrtiiannsmdnndaicenss pik pihibedttha-acips ticks cacthntutdpiniqugunee

The Respondent's Position .. | . 24

C. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS ....ccsccccccscsecccosssvensccsseussosncsonsnsnensenccenss 25
THE RESPONDENT'S SECOND OBJECTION: THE TRIBUNAL LACKS

JURISDICTION BECAUSE THE INVESTMENTS WERE MADE THROUGH A

COMPANY OF WHICH THE CLAIMANT OWNS LESS THAN 51 PERCENT.............38

Ais, RELEVANT FACTS scsnasevassvamanivanesentanesinnceeninsmnsansnrpinssenchinacnnidap kanhanpenuniovavaaesesiaaieeranasieaieend sto

B, THE POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES ciccccvcscersinsnisissanssicosnsinssasissnceesonibsuiedssisiennvinueeveensarsasonste 41

345018/2020/ppp

1. Interpretation of the Minimum Ownership Requirement in Article 2(1) of

WG TREY vcisicncsanteviesoesia pbikimeentseTeaenaetndisnabenss seisednenmesbebansannspuniiavehiecressebesinivpavendsansonss
The Cleitmant’s Positwon 0000... sessheonas$s3 dda taais arinarediteeiadiibiaanatpatansnstcdaee ed

The Respondent's Position ..... seins ‘5 srad a platandieephihasaee OS

2. The Applicability of the MEN Clause ........cccccscceeceeeeenerees sbiaiist jaisundenieisee sideedshas 46
The Claimant's Position. 4h

The Respondent s Position saat anerpicss ; woremix cians Se

3. The Possibility of Proceeding on the Basis of LDA’s Direct Investment in

Dia ...........cccccee panies maak airanlateasnaaes aise anaes nde take nciteieaianan publpitaitiinecoustcceconbibinipladca tae

- The Claimant « Position......... lauder adaaes agi decaltun dua sod gatinahsaniacuatpua Vecaasdiaoemnesas.ateen

The Respondent s Position , seavenias via SO)

“ .: THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS vocccccceccens sebicndiinaandaan Sosiciubshsbetuasnuenaganseceen

345018/2020/ppp

GLOSSARY OF DEFINED TERMS / LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

ALBA
Berths
BIT (Treaty)

Claimant
Consent Order

Consortium

Contract (Project)

Contracting Parties
Counter-Memorial

ECT

First Objection

HBT
HDC

KoPT
(Kolkata Port Trust)

LDA

MEN

Notice of Arbitration
Notice of Suspension
Notice of Termination
Notification of Claim

Objections

Parties
PO!
POQ2
POS

ALBA Asia Private Limited
Berths Nos. 2 and 8 at the Kolkata Port Haldia Dock Complex

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of the Republic of France on the Reciprocal
Promotion and Protection of Investments, dated 2 September 1997

Louis Dreyfus Armateurs SAS or LDA
Consent Order, dated 12 September 2012

Consortium Consisting of ABG Infralogistics and its subsidiary
ABG Kolkata Container Terminals Private Limited

Agreement between the Board of Trustees for the Port of Kolkata
and ABG Haldia Bulk Terminals Private Limited in Respect of
supply, Operation and Maintenance of Different Cargo Handling
Equipment at Berth No. 2 and 8 of Haldia Dock Complex. Kolkata
Port Trust, dated 16 October 2009

The Government of the Republic ef India and the Government of the
Repubhe of France as contracting parties to the BIT

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility,
dated 7 July 2015

Energy Charter Treaty, dated 17 December 1994

Phe first Objection (Tribunal lacks jurisdiction Ratione boltntatis
because the Claimant failed to comply with jurisdictional
preconditions to arbitration)

Haldia Bulk Terminals Private Limited
Haldia Dock Complex

Board of Trustees for the Port of Kolkata

Louis Drevfus Armateurs SAS or the Claimant

Most Favored Nation clause

Notice of Arbitration, dated 31 March 2014

Notice of Suspension of Operations, dated 23 August 2012
Notice of Termination, dated 3! October 2012
Notification of Claim, dated 11 November 2013

Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction, Nos. [-11. set out in
Respondent's Request
The Claimant and the Respondent
Procedural Order No. |. dated 13 April 2015
%

Procedural Order No. 2, dated 13 August 2015

Procedural Order No. 3, dated 11 September 2015

iil

345018/2020/ppp

Port

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction
Reply on Jurisdiction
Respondent
Respondent's Request
Response to Request

Second Objection

Statement of Claim
Statement of Defense

Tender

Treaty (BIT)

UNCTTRAL Rules

VCLT

Port of Kolkata (Calcutta), India

Respondent's Reyoinder on Jurisdiction, dated 23 October 20148
Claimant's Reply on Jurisdiction dated, 18 September 2015

lhe Republic of India

Request for Bifurcation, dated 7? July 2018

Claimant's Response to Request for Bifurcation, dated 28 July 2015

The second Objection (the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because the
Investments were made through a company of which the Claimant
owns less than SI percent)

Statement of Claim, dated 3 March 2015
Statement of Defense, dated 7 July 2015

Tender for Supply, Operation and Maintenance of Different Cargo
Handling Equipment at Berth # 2 & 8 of Haldia Dock Complex,
Kolkata Port Trust, No. Ad/Equipping/2007-08

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of the Republic of France on the Reciprocal
Promotion and Protection of Investments, dated 2? September 1997

Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission — on

International Trade Law 1976

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, dated 23 May 1969

345018/2020/ppp

a

THE PARTIES AND THEIR REPRESENTATIVES

The Claimant is Louis Dreyfus Armateurs SAS, a company incorporated and existing under the
laws of France (registered under No. 652-012-311 in the Companies and Trade Registry of
Nanterre, France), having its reaistered office at Immeuble “Les écluses,” 28, Quai Gallien,
92158 Suresnes Codex, France (LDA™ or “Claimant’). The Claimant is represented in these
proceedings by: Dr. Tariq Baloch, whose address is 3 Verulam Buildings, Gray’s Inn, London,
WCIR SNT, United Kingdom; Mr. Farhad Sorabjee, Mr. Varghese Thomas, Ms. Arti
Raghavan, Ms. Shanaya frani, and Ms. Neeraja Balakrishnan of J. Sagar Associates, Vakil’s
House, 18 Sprott Road, Ballard Estate, Mumbat 400 001, India: and Professor Vaughan Lowe

OC of Essex Court Chambers, 24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London WC2A 3G, United Kingdom.

The Respondent is the Government of the Republic of India, a sovereign state (“India or
“Respondent,” together with the Claimant, the “Parties”) The Respondent is represented by
Mr. Mark A. Clodfelter, Dr. Constantinos Salonidis, Ms. Oonagh Sands, Mr. Ofilio J. Mayorga,
Mr. Joseph Klingler, and Ms. Diana Tsutieva of Foley Hoag LLP, 1717 K Street NW,
Washington, DC 20006-8342. United States. The Respondent is further represented by Messrs.
Thomas Bevilacqua and Antoine Lerosier of Foley Hoag AARPI, 153 rue du Faubourg Saint-

Honoré. 78008 Paris. France.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
COMMENCEMENT OF THE ARBITRATION

On 31 March 2014, the Claimant submitted a Notice of Arbitration (“Notice of Arbitration”),
invoking the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Republic of France on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments dated 2
September 1997 (the “Treaty” or “BIT™) and the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations

Commission on International Trade Law 1976 (the “UNCITRAL Rules”).

VU

345018/2020/ppp

bB.

6

~j

Q-

CONSTITUTION OF THE PRIBENAL

On 17 April 2014, the Claimant appointed Professor Julian D.M. Lew, OC as first arbitrator.
On 8 July 2014, Claimant requested that the Secretary-General of the PCA, pursuant to Article
7(2) of the UNICTRAL Rules and Article 9(3) of the Treaty, appoint the second arbitrator. On
10 July 2014, the PCA wrote to the Respondent inviting its comments on the Claimant's request
by 28 July 2015. By letter dated 31 July 2014, the PCA granted the Respondent an extension
until 1] August 2014 to respond to the Claimant’s application to the PCA. The Respondent
rephed by letter dated 8 August 2014, in which it appointed Mr, John Christopher Thomas, Qt

as second arbitrator.

On 8&8 September 2014. in accordance with Article 9(3\b) of the BIT, the co-arbitrators

appointed Ms. Jean E. Kalicki as Presiding Arbitrator

On 3 November 2014, the Parties and members of the Tribunal signed the Terms of

Appomtment

INITIAL PROCEDURAL STEPS

On 9 March 2018, Claimant submitted its Statement of Claim (“Statement of Claim”), which
included: (1) Exhibits C-t to C-492; (1) Legal Authorities CLA-| to CLA-121: (ii) Appendices
| and Il, (tv) Witness Statements of Messrs. Manpreet Jolly, Saket Agarwal. Pradip Ghosh,
Ohvier Morel-Jean, Jean-Michel Pap. Hans Starrenburg, Gurpeet Malhi, Gildas Maire, and
Babu Rajeev, dated 9 March 2015, and of Mr. Yogesh Agarwalla, dated 6 March 2009; and (v)

the bxpert Report of Mr. James Gilbey. dated 6 March 2015, with appendices..

The Tribunal held a preliminary procedural meeting with the Parties on 25 March 2015 in The

Hague. During that meeting, the Respondent indicated that it intended to request bifurcation of

the proceedings so that jurisdictional objections might be considered as a preliminary question,

On 13 April 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 (*POU), which set forth two
alternative procedural timetables, one envisaging the potential future bifurcation of the

proceedings, with the other envisaging no such bifurcation.

345018/2020/ppp

10. On 7 July 2015. Respondent filed its Statement of Defense (“Statement of Defense”), Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction and Liability (*Counter-Memorial”), and Request for Bifurcation
(“Respondent's Request’) in accordance with POL, [hese were accompanied by: (1) Exhibits
R-1 to R-64, and (ii) Leval Authorities RLA-1 to RLA-245. The Respondent’s Request set
forth eleven separate objections to jurisdiction (*Objections”)’ and requested bifurcation of the
proceedings to allow each issue to be addressed as a preliminary question prior to any

examination of the merits.

11. On 28 July 2015, the Claimant filed its response to the Respondent’s Request. including

Exhibits C-1 to C-499 and Leyal Authorities CLA-1 to CLA-159 (“Response to Request”).

DD. BIFURCATION OF PROCEEDINGS

12. On 13 August 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 (°PO2"), in which it granted
the Respondent's request for bifurcation in respect of the first and second of the Respondent's
Objections (“First and Second Objections”), and denied the Respondent's request for

bifureation in respect of the remaining Objections,

“

13. On 11 September 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 (°PO3"), in which it fixed

the procedural timetable in accordance with the Parties’ agreement.

 

 

| As described and numbered in the Respondent's Request, these were that (1) “The Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction
Ratione Voluntatis Because The Claimant Failed To Comply With The Jurisdictional Requirements In Article 9
Of The BIT’. (2) “The Tribunal Lacks Junsdiction Over All OF The Claimant's Claims, Because The
Investments Were Made Through A Company Of Which The Claimant Does Not Own At Least 51 Percent And
The Claimant Therefore Cannot Benefit From The Treaty's Protections Under Arucles 101) And 201)". (3) “The
lribunal Lacks Jurisdiction Over All of The Claimant’s Claims Because The Claimant's Alleged Investment
Was Not Made In Accordance With Indian Law”: (4) “The Claimant's Allegedly Indirectly-Held Rights Under
The Contract Do Not Qualify As A Protected Investment Under The BIT’: (8) “Prima facie Junsdiction Is
Lacking Over Claims Relaung To The Claimant's Indirect Shareholding Ip HBT, Which The Claimant Claims
To Be Its Investment, Because It Alleges No Treatment By India Of That Shareholding Interest”, (0)
“Jurisdiction Is Lacking Over The Entirety OF The Claimant’s Claims, Because They Are Based On Contract
Rights That Belong To An Affiliated FPntity And Because The Claimant Suffered No Distinct. Individual Loss”
(7) "The Tribunal Has No Jurisdiction Over Conduct That Is Not Attributable To The State Under Internanuonal
Law’, (8) “Parallel Preceedings”; (9) “The Tribunal Lacks Junsdiction Over The Claimant's Claims Based
Upon Facts And Disputes Setiled By Virtue OF The Consent Order Of The Caleutta High Court”; (10) “The
Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction Over The Claimant's Claims To The Extent That They Are Based Upon Actions O;
Omissions That Occurred Before The Claimant Made Its Alleged Investment In HBT, and (11) “The Tribunal
Lacks Prima Facie Jurisdiction Over The Claimant's Claims To The Fxtem That They Are Based Upon Actions
Or Omissions That Occurred Before India Acquired Knowledge Of Claimant's Shareholding In HB i
Response to Request, pp. 6-17,

12

345018/2020/ppp

1S,
if,
It.
17
LS.

Pursuant to the agreed timetable. on |8 September 2015, the Claimant submitted its Reply on
Jurisdiction related to the First and Second Objections, including Exhibits C-1 to C-499 and

Legal Authorities CLA-1 to CLA-169 (“Reply on Jurisdiction’).

On 23 October 2015. the Respondent submitted its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction related to the First

and Second Objections (“Rejoinder on Jurisdiction’).

On 5 November 2015, a bifurcated jurisdictional hearing was held at the International Dispute
Resolution Centre in London. The Claimant was represented at the hearing by Professor
Vaughan Lowe QC. Dr. Tariq Baloch; Mr. Farhad Sorabjee, and Ms. Art) Raghavan. The
Respondent was represented by Messrs. Clodfelter, Bevilacqua, Klinger, and Lerosier, Dr

Salonidis, and Ms. Sands, assisted by Mmes. Kalinowski and Schmidt.

NATURE OF THE DISPUTE

Phe Claimant seeks declaratory and compensatory relief from the Respondent for “jeopardising
and ultimately dispossessing” * the Claimant of its investment, defined im the Notice of
Arbitration as “comprising of its interest in the contract dated 16" October 2009 for the ‘supply,
operation and maintenance of cargo handling equipment at Berth Nos. 2 and & of Haldia Dock
Complex'* (*Berths”) at the Port of Kolkata (“Port”), between Haldia Bulk Terminals Private
Limited (formerly ABG Haldia Bulk Terminals Private Limited) (HBT) and the Board of

Trustees for the Port of Kolkata (*KoPT™) (“Contract” or Project”)

As discussed further herein. the Claimant's claimed connection to the Contract Hes through tts
equity stake in ALBA Asia Private Limited (formerly ABG-LDA Bulk Handling Private
Limited) (“ALBA”), a joint venture company incorporated under the laws of India between the
Claimant and ABG Ports Limited (also a company incorporated under the laws of India) (“ABG

Ports’). The Claimant held 49% of ALBA’s shares, and ABG Ports held the remaining 31% of

Statement of Claim, © 320

* Notice of Arbitration, © 1.4

* Notice of Arbitration, © 14

* Agreement between KoPT and HBT for Supply, Operation, and Maintenance of different cargo handling
equipment at the Berths, the Port, dated 16 October 2009 (C-2)}

4

lo

1+
345018/2020/ppp

ALBA’s shares. ALBA in turn held a 63% equity stake in HBT. and as a result of certain

arrangements, including preferential shares, was enutled to a 98.78% share of HBT’s profit.”

19. The Claimant alleges that the Respondent's acts and omissions resulted in the premature
termination of the Contract on 31 October 2012.7 The Claimant divides those acts and
omissions into “three chapters.” According to the Clarmant:

a) the first chapter entails the Respondent's “inexplicable resistance and obstruction™ of
the Claimant's investment, including through: (1) KoPI’s delay in issuing
i documentary pre-requisites to the Contract, such as a letter of intent, delayed for

almost 250 days;' (11) KoPT’s refusal to commence allocation of cargo to HBT,

ee contrary to the terms of the Contract; (iii) the Indian police's failure to ensure the sate
passage of the Claimant's equipment, ’* purchased pursuant to the terms of the
Contract; and (iv) KoPT’s obliging HBT to recruit “double the number of workers
HBT had planned for and required” '* following “threats, protests and acts of
vandalism perpetrated by local labour unions.”

b) the second chapter demonstrates “the way in which KoPT choked HBT’s finances” ”
through KoPT’s “conscious decision [...] to not utilize HBT's Berths optimally” © and
failure “to make timely payments to HBT:"’ and

* Response to Request. © 27(d); Statement of Claim, © | 28

* Notice of Arbitration, © 1.7.
. Statement of Clam, * 11
Statement of Claim, © 12

'S Starement of Claim, © 14
Statement of Claim, © 12
2 Statement of Ciaim, © 13
Statement of Claim. © 16

'S Statement of Clam, © 16.
Statement of Claim, © 17

® Statement of Claim. © 17,

Statement of Claim, © 19

345018/2020/ppp

ce) the third chapter begins with HBT’s issuing a Notice of Suspension of Operations on
23 August 2012. the High Court of Calcutta’s issuing a Consent Order on 12
September 2012 (“Consent Order”), which settled the dispute between HBT and
KoPT and “reiterated the terms of the Contract:”'* and HBT’s dismissing “excess
Workers and sub-contractors.” The chapter continues with “a violent backlash.”
which saw HBT’s staff “subjected to multiple acts of augression in the form of mobs
preventing operations. assaulting HBT personnel |...] and threatening their personal
security {and that of their families).’-! to which KoPT. the police, the District
Magistrate and the Ministry of Shipping responded with denials, silence. or apathy I
& , & Pes} pau)
concludes with the alleged kidnapping at gunpoint of three HBT employees and thei

a families and KoPT subjecting “HBT to a manifestly unfair blacklisting procedure.”

20. The Claimant asserts that such conduct renders the Respondent in breach of. inter alta the

following provisions of the Treaty:

a) Article 6 of the BIT, which prevents the Respondent from taking “any measure of
expropriation or nationalisation or any other measures having the effect of
dispossession. direct or indirect’ unless it satisfies the conditions lard out in that

article:

b) Article 4(2) of the BIT, which obliges the Respondent to “extend fair and equitable
treatment in accordance with internationally established principles” to the investments

of French investors in India:

c) Article 4(1) of the BIT, which provides that investments made by French investors

“shall enjoy full and complete protection and safety” in India: and

* Statement of Claim, © 20
Statement of Claim, © 20
Statement of Claim, © 22
' Statement of Claim, © 22
~~ Statement of Claim, © 28
“ Arucle 6(1) of the BIT

ty

10

345018/2020/ppp

d) the most-favored nation (“MEN”) clauses in Article 5 of the BIT, which require India
to accord French investors and their investments “treatment which shall not be less

favourable than that accorded to” third-State investors and their investments

21. The Respondent disputes that: (4) the Tribunal has jurisdiction over these claims.*? Gi) the
claims are admissible:* (iii) India has violated any of the standards of protection set forth in the
Treaty:** and (iv) India is responsible for any loss incurred by LDA as a result of the violations

alleged."

o. Iv. RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS

rs A. THe BIT

,Y

22. For the purposes of the two bifurcated jurisdictional objections, the following provisions of the

BIT are immediately relevant.
23. Article 1(1) of the BIT states:

The term “investment” means everv kind of asset, such as goods, intellectual
property rights and other rights and interest of whatever nature, invested in the
area of the Contracting Party in accordance with the laws of that Contracting
Party. and in particular though not exclusively includes:

a) Moveable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem

nn b) Shares and other kinds of interest including minority or imdirect
forms, in companies constituted in the territory of one Contracting
Party:

Debentures or rights to money, or in any legitimate performance
having a financial value,

G

d) Business concessions conferred by law or under contract, including
concessions to search for, extract or exploit natural resources, which
are located in the maritime area of the Contracting parties |sic|

-

“ Counter-Memorial, © 3.

>

* Counter-Memorial, © 3.

bo

 Counter-Memorial, ©

* Counter-Memorial. © 2.

345018/2020/ppp

+. Article 2(1) of the BIT provides:

[The Treaty] shall apply to any investment made by investors of either
Contracting Party in the area of the other Contracting Party. including an indirect
investment made through another company, wherever located, which is owned
to an extent of at least Si per cent by such investors. whether made before or
after the coming into force of this Agreement.

ho
4

Articles 4¢1) and 5(2) of the BIT state:

(1) Lach Contracting Party shall accord to investments of investors of the other

Contracting Party, including their operation, management, maintenance.

~ use, enjoyment or disposal by such investors. treatment which shall not be

less favourable than that accorded to investments of its investors. or than

~ the most favourable treatment accorded to investors of any third country,
whichever is more tavourable

(2) In addition each Contracting Party shall accord to investors of the othe
Contracting Party. including in respect of returns on their investments.
treatment which shall not be less favourable than that accorded to investors
of any third State.

fo. Article 9 of the BIT reads:

(1) Any dispute conceming the investment occurring between one Contracting
Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party shall, if possible. [sic]
be settled amicably between the two parties concemed.

(2) Any such dispute which has not been amicably settled within a period of six
months from written notification of a claim may be sumitted [sic] to
imernational conciliation under the Conciliation Rules of the United

_ Nations Commission on International Trade Law, if the parties So agree.
(3) Notwithstanding paragraph 2. [sic] the dispute may he referred to

arbitration at any time as follows: [...] (b) if the investor so decides. the
dispute shall be referred to an ad hoc arbitral tribunal in accordance with the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law, as adopted by the General Assembly on December 13, 1976 Coast

B. PHE VCLT

27. Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, dated 23 May 1969 (°WCLT"),

sets forth the Convention's general rule of treaty imerpretation:

(1) A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be yviven to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the
light of its object and purpose.

345018/2020/ppp
28.
~ Vs

(2) The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise.
In addition to the text. including its preamble and annexes:

a. any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the
partes in connexion with the conclusion of the treaty.

>. any instrument which was made by one or more parties in
connexion with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the
other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.

(3) There shall be taken into account. together with the context:

a. any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions:

b. any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which
establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

¢. any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
between the parties

(4) A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties

so intended,

Article 32 of the VCLT states:

Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including the
preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in order
to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, er to
determine the meaning when the interpretation according to article 3}:

(a) Leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure: or

(bh) Leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable

THE RESPONDENT'S FIRST OBJECTION: THE TRIBUNAL = LACKS
JURISDICTION RATIONE VOLUNTATIS BECAUSE THE CLAIMANT FAILED TO
COMPLY WITH JURISDICTIONAL PRECONDITIONS TO ARBITRATION

The Respondent's First Objection is that the Claimant failed to comply with certain alleged
preconditions to arbitration in Article 9 of the BIT. including an obligation to attempt amicable
settlement in good faith and, in any event, to wait at least six months before commencing
arbitration, The Respondent contends that the Claimant rushed tO arbitration without

meaningfully attempting amicable settlement discussions and did not Wall for six months

between its notification of a Treaty dispute on L1 November 2013 and its filing of the Notice of

Arbitration on 31 March 2014. The Respondent contends that these are mandatory

jurisdictional requirements that cannot be excused by the subsequent running of time following

Y

10

345018/2020/ppp
30.
3}
A.

the Notice of Arbitration, nor can they be excused on ground of “futility.” as a matter of law or

under the tacts of this case.

by contrast, the Claimant contends that no such requirements exist in the BIT. that in any event
such amicable settlement and waiting period provisions would be procedural rather than
jurisdictional in nature, that waiting (or “cooling off") periods can be satisfied by the subsequent
running of time prior to a decision on jurisdiction, and finally, that any such requirements could

and should in this case be excused on grounds of futility

[he Tribunal sets forth below the core facts relevant to this Objection, followed by a more
detailed summary of the Parties’ respective positions. These positions are summarized with
respect to the four embedded issues in the Objection, namely whether: (1) Article 9 of the BIT
requires a six-month period of amicable settlement before the commencement of arbitration: (11)

any such amicable settlement period is a requirement for the Tribunal’s jurisdiction: (il) any

such amicable settlement period may be fulfilled subsequent to the fling of a Notice of

Arbitration; and (iv) whether non-compliance with any required amicable settlement period mas
be excused on grounds of futility, as a matter of law or under the facts of this case. The

Tribunals analysis follows.

RELEVANT FACTS

On 10 March 2010, HBT —then still known as ABG Haldia Bulk Terminals Private Limited**

wrote to the Ministry of Shipping in New Delhi outlining its grievances and requesting that the
Ministry (1) “give all necessary directions to KoPT to ensure that cargo handling operations at
Berths Nos. 2 & 8 using the equipment already deployed by ABG is commenced immediately,”
and (ii) “give all necessary instructions to KoPT to withdraw its show cause notice and refund
us the liquidated damages paid to us and ensure that all Force Majeure events are removed and
Berths Nos, 2 & S are made available for cargo handling operations by ABG in an environment

free of threats and labour unrest”

 

“* See Incorporation Documents of HBT (C-25)

~ Letter dated 10 Mareh 2010 from Director of HBT. Saket Agarwal, to Thiru G. KO Vasan (Ministry of
Shipping) (C-139).

IQ

ig

345018/2020/ppp

‘43
2

By letter dated 30 May 201] to the Chairman of KoPT and the Manager of Haldia Dock
Complex (“HDC”), HBT requested that KoPT fix a meeting immediately to “resolve

outstanding disputes, settlements, claims” under the Contract.*"

34, On 8 June 2011, HBT wrote to the Ministry of Shipping, seeking its “immediate intervention
and issuance of appropriate direction’s to KoPT,” claiming that “KoPT’s actions are now
seriously threatening the continuation and operation of the said Project.” and averring that
“KoPT may not reciprocate” HBT’s commitment to amicable settlement.

3S. On 18 June 2011, HBT sought the Ministry's “immediate intervention” to ensure that KoPT

reverse its “arbitrary and unreasonable deduction of substantial amounts by KoPT™ from HBT’s
running bills for the month of May 2011 and claiming that KoPT had ignored a request by HBT

on 30 May 2011 to remedy the situation.“

36. On 6 September 2012, HBT wrote to the Ministry of Shipping seeking an appointment to

discuss “various matters / issues” related to the Berths.””
5’. HBT apparently received no response to any of these letters.

38. On 29 October 2013. the Ambassador of France. Francois Richier, wrote to the Chief Minister
of West Bengal. the Minister of Commerce and Industry.“ the Minister of External Affairs.“

the Minister of Shipping,” the Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister”* and the Secretary to

* Letter dated 30 May 2011 from Director of HBT, Co Babu Rajeev. to the Chairman of KoPT and the Manager
of Haldia Dock Complex (C-209),

' Letter dated 8 June 2011 trom Gurpreet Mathi (HBT) to the Ministry of Shipping (C-210)
Letter dated 18 June 2011 from Gurpreet Malhi (HBT) to the Ministry of Shippma (C-211)
* Letter dated 6 September 2012 {rom Gurpreet Mathi (HBT) to the Ministry of Shipping (C-246),

* Letter dated 29 October 2013 from the A mbassador of Franee, Francois Richier, to the Chief Minister of West
Bengal, Kum Mamata Banerjee (C-407).

* Letter dated 29 October 2013 from the Ambassador of France. Francois Richier, to the Honourable Minister of
Commerce and Industry, Shr Anand Sharma (C-408)

Letter dated 29 Qetober 2013 from the Ambassador of France, Francois Richier. to the Honourable Minister of
Uxternal Affairs, Shr Salman Khurshid (C-409).

* Letter dated 24 October 2013 from the Ambassador of France. Frangois Richier. to the Honourable Minister of

Shipping, Shri G.K, Vausan (C-410).
1]

4U

345018/2020/ppp

the President.’ to “draw [...] attention to the difficulties being faced bv” HBT. Thase letters
expressly referred to LDA as a French investor and noted that LDA “has decided to institute
legal proceedings against the Government of India in an international arbitration tribunal on the

basis of’ Article 9 of the BIT. The Ambassador received no response to any of these letters.

39, On Tl November 2013, the Claimant, through counsel, issued to the Republic of India what i
described as a “formal notification of claim under Article 9" of the BIT (“Notification of

Claim”). The letter indicated that the Claimant intended to initiate arbitration “in the absence

of an immediate and urgent resolution of all disputes.” * or otherwise stated, “in the absence of

a formal written commitment by India within a period of two weeks from the date of receipt

hereof to fully satisfy and settle all claims of LDA." LDA receiv ed no response to this letter.

40. Thereafter, on 20 November 2013, the Chief Executive Officer of LDA wrote to the Chief
Minister of West Bengal, cautioning that LDA’s equipment “will soon have lost its entire value”
and claiming that “LDA is. still ready and eager to discuss to settle its dispute with KoPT

4). On ? January 2014, the Additional Secretary to the Government of West Bengal forwarded
LDA’s letter to the Chairman of KoPT., explaining that LDA had contacted the State
government and “expressed their intention to settle its dispute with KoPT amicably.” The
Additional Secretary solicited the views of the Chairman of KoPT.“ No evidence was
presented to the Tribunal showing any response from the Additional Secretary or KoPT on this

matter,

* Letter dated 29 October 2013 from the Ambzssador of Franee, Francois Riehier. to the Principal Secretary to
the Prime Minister. Shri Pulok Chatterjee (C-41 1).

“ Letter dated 29 October 2013 from the Ambassador of Franee, Francois Richier, to the Seeretary to the
President, Smt Omita Paul (C-412)

~ Letter dated 1} November 2013 trom J yagar Associates to the Republic of India. p. | (C-414)
* Letter dated 11 November 2013 from J. Sagar Associates to the Republic of India, p. 1 ¢C-414)
* Letter dated 11 November 2013 from J. Sagar Associates to the Republic of India, p. 12 (C414)

* Letter dated 20 November 2013 from the Chiet’ Executive Officer of LDA. Cildas Maire, to the Honourable
Chief Minister of West Bengal, Kum Mamatz Banerjee (C-4.15)

* Letter dated 7 January 2014 from the Additional Secretary to the Government of West Bengal, Mr. M. Jha to
the Chairman of KoPT (C-490),

ZI

345018/2020/ppp

42. On 30 January 2014, the Chief Executive Office of LDA wrote to the Additional Secretary to
the Government of West Benwal, thanking him for his intervention, explaining that LDA had
“been unsuccessfully trying to settle this matter for a considerable time and have therefore been
compelled to issue a Notification of Claim,” and requesting a meeting with an appropriate
person “to further discuss our difficulties and see if the situation can somehow be resolved.”

LDA received no response to this letter.

45. On 31 March 2014, as noted above, the Claimant initiated these proceedings with the

submission of a Notice of Arbitration

B. THE POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES
iy Necessity of Amicable Settlement Efforts for Six Months under Article 9 of the BIT
lhe Claimant's Position

44. The Claimant contends that Article 9(1) of the BIT is a declaration that pares to a dispute
“should amicably settle the dispute if possible “° Relying on the interpretation of an amicable
settlement provision in Ahaclat vy Argentina.” the Claimant submits that A rticle 9C1) 1s merely
an expression of goodwill, but does not impose any particular consultauion requirement on

parties in dispute, much less a “best efforts” obligation.“

45. The Claimant asserts that Article 9, read as a whole, does not Impose any waiting period prior to
commencement of arbitration, during which amucable settlement efforts may be expected to be

an attempted. It notes that the only temporal reference in Article 9 appears in paragraph 2. which
addresses conciliation, and argues that the ordinary m caning of the words “notwithstanding

paragraph 2° and “at anv time” in Article 9(3) “clearly indicate that any course of action

 

~ Letter dated 30 January 2014 from the Chief Executive Officer of LDA. Gildas Maire. to the Additional
Secretary to the Government of West Bengal, Mr. M. dha (C-417)
“ Hearing Transeript dated $ November 2015, at p. 102, lines 9-10.

dhactat et al v The Argentine Republic. ICSI) Case Now ARB/OT/0S. Decision on Jurisdiction und
Admissibility dated 4 August 2011. (CLA-124)

* Hearing Transcript dated 4 November 2615, a1 p. 103, lines 10-25 and p.104, lines 1-10

13

Z9

345018/2020/ppp

mandated by Article 9 paragraph (2) can be disregarded insofar as the referral of a dispute to

, . psd
arbitration is concerned.

46. To support its view of the ordinary meaning of “notwithstanding” in Article 9(3), the Claimant
cites the interpretation of that term by the tribunal in Yukos vo The Russian Federation. which
was construing Article 45 of the Energy Charter Treatv (“ECT™). The pertinent part of Article

45 of the ECT reads:

(1) Each signatory agrees to apply this Treaty provisionally pending its entry
Into force for such signatory in accordance with Article 44, to the extent that

— such provisional application is not inconsistent with its constitution, laws or
regulations.

(2) (a) Notwithstanding paragraph (1) any signatory may, when signing,
deliver to the Depository a declaration that it is not able to accepl provisional
application, The obligation contained in paragraph (1) shall not apply to a
Signatory making such a declaration. Any such signatory may at any time
Withdraw that declaration by written notification to the Depository.”

lhe Claimant cites the Yukos tribunal's construction of the term “notwithstanding.”

Furthermore, the use of the word “[njotwithstanding”™ to introduce Article 45(2)
plainly suggests that the declaration in Article 43(2\(a) can be made whether or
not there in fact exists any Inconsistency between “such provisional
application” of the ECT and a signatory’s consutution, laws or regulation.”
47. By analogy to that provision, the Claimant concludes that the ordinary meaning of “the word
‘hotwithstanding’ in paragraph (3) of Article 9 of the 1 reaty plainly indicates that arbitration

can be commenced ‘whether or not’ a cooling-olf period has been observed."

48, The Claimant considers that the ordinary meaning of the words “at any time” in Article 9(3) of
the BET bolsters its interpretation of the term “notwithstanding,” and “makes i clear that any

thought that the cooling off period might apply not only to the referral of a dispute to

" Reply on Jurisdiction, © 5; see aise Reply on Jurisdiction, © 9
* Claimant's emphasis added.

Reply on Jurisdiction, © 6-8 (citing Yukos Vaiversal Limited v. The Russian Federanon. PUA Case No A A
22°. Interem Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility dated 30 November 2000. © 26> (CLA-162}

~ Claimant's emphasis added

“ Reply on Jurisdiction, € 8.

£4

345018/2020/ppp

* In the Claimant's view,

oar ° . . - : 1 ‘ Noa bein oe,
concthation but also to a referral to arbitration would be incorrect.
the Respondent’s interpretation 1s “illogical,” since it would deprive Article 9(3) of ans

independent meaning.”

49, The Claimant considers the ordinary meaning of Article 93) as a “complete answer to the
Respondent's first objection.”"° The Claimant rejects the Respondent's arguments that its
Interpretation stands contrary to the context. object. and purpose of the Treaty. by imposing
more onerous preconditions to conciliation than to arbitration. The Claimant finds “nothing
illogical” *’ in a provision that distinguishes between amicable settlement followed by

om conciliation, on the one hand. and recourse to arbitration “at any ume.” on the other. The
Claimant argues, for example. that additional time to “lay the foundations for a conerliation
effort by first having six months of direct talks” * might be necessary tO maximize the chance

of a successful outcome, in a system of dispute resolution that requires voluntary participation

If the parties do not agree to conciliation, or have never directly discussed the
dispute, it is unlikely that conciliation would be successful. Arbitration, in
contrast, does not depend upon a commonality of purpose and does not need to
build upon a period of direct negotiation between the parties. Hence, arbitration
can be initiated at any time by a party acting alone.*”

S0, The Claimant rejects the Respondent's reference to the treaty practice of Franee and India in
their dealings with other States, because the treaty practice ts inconsistent and the Contracting
Parties were free to depart from such practice even if it were to exist.” In the Claimant's view.
Indian bilateral investment treaties embody a diversity of approach, with some providing six-
month cooling-off periods. others three months. and others none at all.° The Claimant argues

_ that even consistent treaty practice by either India or France with respect to mandatory cooling-

"Reply on Jurisdiction, © 9

~ Response to Request, © 20.

” Response to Request, © 16.

"Response to Request, © 10.

* Response to Request, © 19.

Response to Request, © 19

Hearing Transcript dated 5 November 2015, at p. 107, lines 13-15

" Reply on Jurisdiction, © 13 (citing Finland-India, Netherlands-India, and Austria-India BITs)

| 5

49

345018/2020/ppp

off periods would fail to strengthen the Respondent's interpretation. In the Claimant’s view,
the textual deviation in the France-India BIT from the Respondent’s postulated otherwise
consistent approach to waiting periods suggests a desire to depart from precedent, rather than to
emulate it.’ The Claimant notes that Article 14.3 of the Respondent's own “Model Text for the
Indian Bilateral Investment Treaty” has long included a cooling-off period specifically
applicable in the context of the referral of disputes to arbutration. India’s choice not to adopt the
language from its Model BIT, in the Claimant's view. reflects a willingness to depart from a

mandatory cooling-off period rather than to impose it. in the manner urged by the Respondent,”

_ Sl. The Claimant also submits that the VCLT “gives no warrant for” recourse to supplementary
materials to determine France and India’s own views on the Treaty Fven if it did, the
Claimant considers the Respondent's reliance on French legislative materials as unavailing. For
example, it characterizes the references to Article 9 in the two French legislative materials the
Respondent cites as “sunply summary deseriptions of provisions and not actual analyses of
provisions.”"’ and invokes two other French documents that it describes “as patently more

as

detailed analyses [.,.] than the deseriptions” invoked by the Respondent. “* It emphasizes that

one of these documents. Report 314 to the French Senate states, “al any Ume, an appeal to

ee

arbitration is possible.” At best, the Claimant asserts, the French documents are “equivocal
and vou can find passages which support either view in the French documents.” The Claimant

also queries the apparent lack of “Indian records corresponding to these French reports.” ”'

* Hearme Transcript dated 4 November 2018, at pp. 107, Imes 24-25 and p.108, line |
* Response to Request, © 21; Reply on Jurisdiction, © 14.

“ Reply on Jurisdiction. © 10 (citing Article 14.3 of the Model Text for the Indian Bilateral Investment Treaty
(CLA-f61))

* Reply on Jurisdiction. © 14.

* Hearing Transcript dated 5 November 2018, at p. 107, lines 11-12
* Hearing Transeript dated 3 November 2015, at p. 98, lines 5-6.

* Hearing Transeript dated 5 November 2015, at p. 97, lines 22-25.

*? An English translation of excerpts from Report No. 314 dated 25 February 1998, p.s (CLA-172): Hearing
Transcript dated S November 2015, at p. 108, lines 18-25 and p.109, line |

“ Hearing Transeript dated $ November 2015, at p. 98, lines 7-10

Hearing Transcript dated 5 November 2015, at p. 109, lines 5-6. See also Hearing Transcript dated 5
November 2018, at p. YS, tines 12-14,

I

345018/2020/ppp

47
een,
Fatal
53
4,
—

~ Hearing Transcript dated 5 November 2015, at p. 4, lines 2

lhe Respondent ‘ Pasition

[he Respondent contends that “[the terms of Article 9 require an interpretation heavily rehant
en context to make sense of the provision and to establish consistency with their context nig
Applying Articles 31-32 of the VCLT. the Respondent contends that a good faith interpretation
of Article 9 of the BIT, having regard to its ordinary meaning, context, and object and purpose.
and confirmed by supplementary means of interpretation, renders the Contracting Parties’
consent to arbitration under Article 9(3) subject to three preconditions: “G) written notification
has been provided of Treaty claims, (ii) a good faith effort has been made to settle the dispute
amicably, and (iii) a period of six months has passed betore arbitration is commenced.” ”* The
Respondent argues that the Claimant has not fulfilled the second and third of those

preconditions and therefore the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over its claims must be denied.”

The Respondent emphasizes that the ordinary meaning of “shall” in Article 9(1) indicates that 11
is “obligatory, not optional’ ~ that an amicable dispute settlement process precede the
commencement of arbitration proceedings. The Respondent asserts that the mandatory
language in Article 9(1), contrasted with the permissive language (“may”) in Articles 9(2)-13).
reveals that the context and purpose of Article 9(3) mandate a six-month waiting period betore

the commencement of arbitration. *

For the Respondent, the context and object and purpose of Article 9 of the BIT 1s amicable
dispute resolution,” of which a mandatory waiting period is an integral part. The Respondent
argues that a mandatory waiting period allows the Parties “an opportunity to explore possible
settlement with a sufficient understanding of the dispute and in an atmosphere that 1s not

complicated by pending litigation.” ”* That the waiting period applies under Article 9(2) to

 

R48
Bz

 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, € 67; see also Counter-Memorial, © 16

 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 67, Counter-Memorial. © 40..

~

© Counter-Memorial, © [4.

* Coumer-Memoral,

} 4

’ Counter-Memarial. © 14.

§ Counter-Memorial, © 14: see afso Counter-Memorial, * 7

|?

345018/2020/ppp

conciliation-—itself a mode of amicable dispute settlement--evidences that the waiting period

should be read also as applying to arbitration, according to the Respondent

a
a

To confirm its view, the Respondent points to what it considers supplementary sources ol treaty
interpretation, pursuant 1 Article 32 of the VCLT. The Respondent asserts that Indian BIT
practice “has uniformly and universally applied the waiting period as a condition to India’s offer
to consent to arbitrate: “of a total of 77 other BITs entered into by India, 76 include a waiting
period requirement. And in every instance. the requirement was expressed as a condition to
arbitration.”"“” The Respondent finds parallels in the treaty-making practice of France: “out ofa
— total of 93 other BITs entered into by France, 87 imposed a waiting period requirement. And tn
every instance, that requirement was expressed as a condition fo Le Conimencement of iInvestor-

State arbitration. *'

As such, the Respondent characterizes Article 9 of the BIT as the latest
iteration of a line of such provisions adopted by both Indian and French treaty negotiators that

required a discrete waiting period before the commencement of arbitration. *-

56, The Respondent also cites Legislative Bill No, 231 transmitting the BIT to the F rench Senate lor
ratification. The salient section of the statement reads: “Arucle 9 makes it possible for an
investor, in the case of a dispute with the host State of its investment, to call upon an arbitral
tribunal set up in comphance with recognized international standards if an amicable settlement

has not been reached after a period of six months.” ™

~J

tn

The Respondent challenges the Claimant's interpretation of Article 9 as dissonant with the
-* ordinary meaning of the provision in hight of its content and object and purpose.” First, the

Respondent rejects the Claimant's reading of Article 9 3) as “overly literal.”*° Rather than

 

” Counter-Memorial, © 20,

© Reoinder on Jurisdiction, © 82: see alse Counter-Memorial, © 21-24
© Rejoinder on Jurisdicuon, © ST.

* ¢ ounter-Memortal, © 25.

® Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 84 (citing Legislative Bill No, 231 transmitting the Treaty to the Senate by
Foreign Ministry dated 21 January !998 (R-67)).

*? Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 85 (cuimg R-67).
* Counter-Memorial, © 28.
S Ciunter-Memorial. © 17

Is

345018/2020/ppp

-— 28
39,
60.

* Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, *

exempting arbitration from the six-month waiting period, the Respondent argues the words
“notwithstanding paragraph 2°" in Article 9(3) merely “confirm the optional nature” of
conciliation, the mode of dispute resolution identified tn “paragraph 2.7 It distinguishes the
interpretation of the word “notwithstanding” by the )}wéoy tribunal as pertaining to “a very
different treaty provision.” namely Article 45(2a) of the ECT. The Respondent also denies
that the words “at any time” in Article 9(3) of the BIT are a “cross-reference to. and
dispensation from, the obligation to allow six months to pass” between a notice of claim and the

initiation of proceedings.”

Second, the Respondent contends that the Claimant's literalist interpretation “cormpletels

defeats” the object and purpose of Article 901). which Respondent notes is the creation of

favorable conditions under which parties are more likely to settle thei disputes before

committing to lengthy and expensive litigation.”!

Third, the Respondent challenges the Claimant’s request to treat as dispositive the fact that the
six-month waiting period and the Treaty’s discussion of arbitration are separated within
different subsections of Article 9. Rather, the Respondent urges the Tribunal consult the context

in which Article 8 of the BIT was drafted.

Fourth, the Respondent contends the Claimant's interpretation of Article 9 imposes more
onerous preconditions on concihation than on arbitration and as such, does not comport with the
context of Arncle 9 It regards the waiting period as “a key piece of the overall dispute

resolution framework?” of the BIT, geared toward amicable settlement. Since conciliation ts

vt

Loe

* Rejomder on Jurisdiction, 79

* Repoinder on Junsdiction, © 74.

“ Counter-Memorial, © 19.

* Counter-Memorial, © 18,

°2 Reyoinder on Jurisdiction, © 76,

19

£0

a9

345018/2020/ppp

even less adversarial than arbitration, it “defies logic” “ to apply the waiting period to
conciliation alone.”

61. Finally, the Respondent submits that the Claimant's interpretation would allow for abuses of the
arbitral process. The Respondent argues that the Claimant's interpretation of Article 9 would
allow claimants to immediately follow a dispute letter with a request for arbitration—conduct of
which. the Respondent notes, the Murpin v Ecuador tribunal was critical.”

2. Amicable Settlement Periods as Jurisdictional Requirements under International
Law
Sue The Claimant s Position

62. The Claimant considers that international investment tribunals have deemed it “otiose to force
parties to engage in a consultative exercise ‘that ts doomed to fail from the outset7°"® On that
basis. the Claimant contends that amicable settlement is not a mandatory jurisdictional
requirement and that non-compliance even with express cooling-off periods can be excused in
appropriate circumstances.”

The Respondent's Position

63. The Respondent argues that international law and investment treaty jurisprudence regard the

failure to fulfill preconditions to dispute resolution as grounds for denying a Tribunal’s
ae jurisdiction ratione voluntaris. Citing PCI” and ICS” jurisprudence, the Respondent submits
.

 

eet

> Counter-Memorial, © 1s.
“ (ounter-Memorial, © 1S: Reyomnder on Jurisdiction, © 76.

* Counter-Memorial, © 19 (citing Murphy Exploration and Production Company international vo Republic of
Kenador. ACSID Case No. ARB/OS8/4, Award on Jurisdiction dated 15 Dec. 2010, € 133 ¢ RLA-185)).

United Republic of Tanzania ICSI) Case No ARB/O5/22), Aw ard dated 24 July 2008, © 343 (CLA-16)),

* Reply on Jurisdiction, © 16 (quoung AAaciar ef al. © 364 (CLA-124), and Biwuter Gaff (Tanzania) Ltd

* Reply on Jurisdiction, © 16 (ering Bivater Gauff. €€ 348.347 (CLA-16); Sociéte Generale de Surveliance
Sd v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case No, ARB/OV/TS, Decision dated 6 August 2003, © [84 (CLA-
167): and Abaclat e¢ ai S83-888 (CLA-1240.

°% Sates of Eastern Carelia, Advisory Opinion dated 2! April 1923, PCL Series IB, No. 8, p. 87, at p. 27 (RLA-4),

” smbaticlos Case (Greece v. United Kinadom), Judgment dated 19 May 1983, 1CJ Reports 1983, p. 10. atp. 19
(REA-17)

2)

ae *

 

JU

345018/2020/ppp

that it is a “fundamental principle of international law’ '”

that “tribunals can exercise
| beghice A ? “a £ Cte % with ate . ’ ss iB “eT ‘| u ¥ * * ok re t 5 a f k go » te ‘

jurisdiction over a State only with its consent™’”’ and such consent is limited to the extent of any
conditions to that consent expressed in a compromissory clause of an international agreement. °°
The Respondent cites, inter alia, Kilic lasaat vo Turkmenistan’ and ST-AD v. Bulgaria’ for
the proposition that compliance with conditions set out in the dispute setement provisions of

the BIT “consututes a furisdictional requirement |”

in the investment treaty context. The
Respondent further contends that a severeign’s general immunity from arbitral jurisdiction
requires that conditions to its consent to arbitration not be lightly discarded.’ It notes that the

tribunals in, fuer alia, Murphy vo Feuador and Enron vo Argentina deemed non-compliance

with an amicable settlement period requirement as grounds to deny jurisdiction
Bs Retroactive Satisfaction of any Amicable Settlement Period
The Claimant's Positiov
64. The Claimant argues that tribunals have held that mandatory cooling-off periods may be
considered satistied if they are “met subsequently,” so long as the period in question has been
“ Counter-Memonial, © 27
a ~ Counter-Memonal, #27
 Counter-Memonial, © 27 (cng Armed denvities on the Territory of the Conge (Democratic Republic of the

Convo vo Rwandai Jursdicnon of the Court and Admissibility of the Application dated 3 February 2006, ICI
Reports 2006, p. 6, 4 SS (RLA-118))

S Kile Insaat ithatat hracat Sanayi ve Ticaret Anonim Sirketi vo Turkmenistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/10/1,
Award dated 2 July 2013, © 6.2.9 (RLA-220)

bie S7T-ap Canbdt v. The Repubtic of Bulgaria. PCA Case No. 2011-06. Award on Jurisdiction dated 18 July
2013, © 336 (RLA-222),.

© Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 29 (citing Adi. © 6.2.9 (RLA-220)).

 Counter-Memorial, © 31 (citing Tulip Real Estate Investment and Development Netherlands BV v. Republic
af Turkey, ICSID Case No ARB/11/28, Decision on Bifurcated Jurisdictional Issue dated 5 March 2013, © 72
(RLA-217}; Omer Dede and Serdar Elitisevni vy Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/10/22, Award dated §
September 2013, © £73 (RLA-223}).

ig 7;

Counter-Memoral, © 32 (ening Murpliy Exploration, a© 157 (RLA-188): Enros Corporation & Ponderosa
Assets, L.P v The Argentine Republic, WCSID Case No. ARB/O13. Decision on Jurisdiction dated 14 January
2004, © 88 (RLA-100)), see vise Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 9%.

21

345018/2020/ppp

66.

exhausted by the time a tribunal reaches a decision on jurisdiction.“ Since more than six
months have now elapsed since the date of its Notification of Claim (Ze@., 1) November 2013).
the Claimant urges the Tribunal to regard any requirement of an amicable setiiement period as

yey

met. Crane Teinver v Argentina, the Claimant urges that a contrary result that would “now

require the Claimant to withdraw the claim and re-file afresh would be a ‘waste of time and

resources, 718

The Respondent's Position

The Respondent rejects the Claimant's suggestion that “after the fact” satisfaction of the waiting
requirement might be sufficient to meet the “pre-condition” to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction found
in Article 9 of the BIT.” To allow a matter at the heart of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to be
retroactively satished would, in the Respondent's view, stand in tension with a well-developed
line of jurisprudence by the International Court of Justice’ and contribute to a “parallel vet

unwritten and unconditional entitlement to arbitrate)

4. Relevance of the Alleged Futility of Amicable Settlement Efforts
The Claimant's Position

Without prejudice to its submission that there exists no mandatory cooling-off period
requirement, the Claimant submits that non-compliance with any amicable settlement period

Would be excused by “the evident tunity of any attempt to amicably settle the dispute.)

 

Reply on Jurisdiction, © 25 (citing Philip Morris y. Urirguay, Decision on Jurisdiction dated 2 July 2013, *
id4 (CLA-168), and Teinver SA Transportes de Cercanias SA & Autobuses Urbanos del Sur SA v Thi
lreentine Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction dated 71 December 2012. © 135 (CLA-1693).

Reply on Jurisdiction, © 25,

Reply on Jurisdiction. © 25 (citing Teiaver er ai. © 138 (CLA-1695)

! Rejyoinder on Jurisdiction, © 96.

 Rejoinder on Jurisdicuon, © 97-99,

 Rejomnder on Jurisdiction, © 96 feiting Omer Dede, at © 220 (RLA-223)),

™ Reply on Jurisdiction, © 16 (citing Bavater Gauff, “© 345-347 (CLA-16); Societe Genérate, © 184 (CLA-
167), and Adeaciar ef al, (© S83-S88 (CLA-124))

~_

ne eee

Ji

345018/2020/ppp

"Response to Request, ©
Republic, Award dated 3 September 2001. @ 188-190 (CLA-125))

67,
OS.
69.

Citing Biwater Gauffv. Tanzania, Société Generale vo Pakistan, and Abuctat v. Areentina,’* the
Claimant argues that non-compliance with cooling-off periods may be excused “if it is evident
that any attempt at amicable settlement would be futile.”''® Relving on Bawater, the Claimant
considers that “the purpose of a cooling-off period requirement is to facilitate amicable

settlement, not to impede or obstruct arbitration when amicable settlement is not possible 7!”

The Claimant asserts that “futility is writ large in the facts of the present case."''* rendering

comphance with any cooling-off period unnecessary and irrelevant to the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction.”""” The Claimant claims it “repeatedly and sincerely tried over the course of mans

months to engage the Respondent in amicable discussions, but without any success.”'"?) The
Claimant recalls six letters issued through the French embassy in October 2013 to “various

instrumentalities of the Respondent state, secking an amicable resolution of the dispute.”

The Claimant also recounts that the Respondent gave no substantive response to the submission
of Notification of Claim on 11 November 2013? or the Claimant's attempts after the

Notification of Claim to engage the Respondent in amicable settlement discussions.’ In this

West Bengal, which was “merely forwarded” to KoPT, and the fetter to the Respondent dated
30 January 2014.'-* Accordingly, the Claimant characterizes its Notice of Arbitration on 3!

March 2014 as an option of last resort."”

“

23 (ening Biwater Gauff ™ 343-344 (CLA-16); Ronaid S Lauder vo The Czech

'® Response to Request, © 16

Response to Reguest, © 16

* Reply on Jurisdiction, © 17

” Reply on Jurisdicuon, © 23,

Reply on Jurisdiction, © 2},

~ Response to Request, © 22 (citing correspondence in C-407 to C-412)

~ Reply on Jurisdiction, © 18.

Response to Request, © 22, Reply on Jurisdicuon, © 17-20: Statement of Claim. © 366ib}

* Reply on Jurisdiction, © 19 (citing Letter dated 20 November 2013 from Gildas Maire of the Claimant to the
Chief Minister of West Bengal and to the Minister in Charge. Finance and Excise) (C-417))

© Reply on furisdiction, © 20

ty
oJ

Jd

345018/2020/ppp

~

‘0. The Claimant also refers to India’s attempt to obtain an anti-arbitration injunction in its
domestic courts after the Notice of Arbitration. In the Claimant's view, this action is strongly

suggestive of the Respondent's unwillingness to engage in amicable settlement discussions. °°

‘1, The Claimant also contends that the Respondent's failure to raise non-compliance with the
cooling-off period at the start of proceedings!’ suggests that the Respondent had no interest in
engaging in amicable settlement discussions and evidences the futility of compliance with any

amicable settlement period. '**

~ The Respondent's Position
- 72 The Respondent rejects the possibility of a futility exception to Article 9 of the BIT. First. it

hotes the absence of any such express exception in the text of Article 9 of the BIT.’ Second.
relying on Rurefee v Bolivia, the Respondent considers an investor's anticipation that attempts
at negouaton will not bear fruit “irrelevant” to the “obligation of means” embodied by
mandatory cooling-off periods. Citing Guaracachi America. v. Bolivia,’ the Respondent
argues that the waiting period is not “an obligation that a specific level of progress or settlement
be achieved.”'* Third, the Respondent distinguishes Biwarer Gauff v. Tarzania-—-and other
arbitral jurisprudence that apparently recognizes a tuulity exception-~as the product of

circumstances that are inapplicable to the present dispute. |”

’ Reply on Jurisdiction, © 22 (referring to KoPT’s application tor Internm Relief in the form of an anti-
arbitration injunction dated 17 June 2014 (C-481))

Reply on Jurisdiction, © 24 (citing Letier dated 13 May 2014 trom the Respondent to the Claimant (C-479).
KoPT’s application for Interim Retief in the form of an anti-arbitration injunction dated 17 June 2014 (C-481):
PCA's letier dated 13 August 2014, forwarding a copy of the Respondent's letter dated § August 2014 (C-486):
Letter dated 24 July 2014 from the PCA, forwarding an ex-parte letter sent by the Respondent (C-482).

* Reply on Jurisdiction, § 24

~* Counter-Memorial, © 34: Reyoinder on Jurisdiction, @€ 10, 95
“ Counter-Memorial, © 39 (ening Guaracacht America, lic & Rurelee PLC \, Plurinational State af Bolivia.
POA Case No. 2011-17, Award dated 31 January 2014. © 392 (RLA-227)). Rejonder on Jurisdiction, © 92
 Guaracachi. © 392 (RLA-227)

= Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 92.

 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction. "93 (citing Brwarer Gani? © 201-228 (CLA-16); Société Générale. © 119 (CLA-
167): dhacteat et al. © S88 (CLA-124)1.

24

345018/2020/ppp

Ifa futility exception to an amicable settlement period does apply to Article 9 of the BIT, the

tg

Respondent argues that evidence of futility must be “compelling.” not presumed, and the

Claimant in this case has lailed to discharge its evidentiary burden.“

‘4. The Respondent claims it stood ready to negotiate an amicable settlement. It pomts to
correspondence from the Additional Secretary of State Government for West Bengal dated 7
January 2014 responding to a letter from the Claimant and requesting that KoPT substantively

engage with the Claimant’s concerns and provide a written note to that effect.

‘5. According to the Respondent. the letters cited by the Claimant and sent by the French
Ambassador prior to the Notification of Claim neither sought negotiations to resolve the

dispute, nor can they be construed as an attempt at amicable resolution by the Claimant. |

76. The Respondent characterizes the Claimant's Noufication of Claim as an “ultimatum.”
threatening arbitration in the absence of an immediate Written commitment by the Respondent

to address the Claimant's concerns. | *

c THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Tribunal begins with the proposition that Article 9, like all other treaty provisions, is to be
interpreted and applied in accordance with the “natural and ordinary meaning” of its terms, “in
the context in which they occur, If the relevant words in their natural and ordinary meaning
make sense in their context,” no further inquiry ts required.’ As the Parties agree, the relevant
context for construing any given passage in a treaty includes the words and sentences found in

close proximity to that passage, as well as other provisions of the same treaty which help

“4 Counter-Memorial. © 46.

* Counter-Memorial, © 37 (citing Letter dated 7 January 20}4 from M. Jha (State of Weet Benwal) to KoPT (C-
490) ).

* Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 90.
 Counter-Memorial, © 35
* Counter-Memorial, © 35: Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, € 87.

” The Arbitral Award of 34 duly 1989 (Guinea-Bissau s Senegais Judgrnent dated 12 November 1991. ICY
Reports 1991, p, 33, © 48 (RLA-39) ( citing Competence of the General Assembly for the Admission of a State to
the United Nations, Advisory Opinion, IC} Reports 1950, p. 8),

a4
-— +

345018/2020/ppp

iluminate its object and purpose! In accordance with Arucle 32 of the VCLT, only if the
textual approach required by Article 31 leaves a meaning “ambiguous or obscure.” or leads to a
result that is “martifest/y absurd or unreasonable,” may recourse be had to supplementary means
of interpretation, including the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its
conclusion. “! Even in these circumstances, “a decisive reason” (such as unmistakeable
evidence of the State Parties’ intentions from such supplementary materials) would be required
“[tjo warrant an interpretation other than that which ensues from the natural meanings of the

words” of a provision, *

7S. Applying this approach, the Tribunal first observes that the plain text of Article 9(1) does not
support the Respondent’s contention that the Treaty requires from the Claimant a particular
qualitative level of effort to negotiate, which could Support dismissal of an action for its failure
lo make such efforts. The Respondent contends that the word “shall” in Article 9(1) imposes
such a requirement, independent of anv alleged waiting period, so that even if a hypothetical

claimant had waited six months after a notification of dispute before initiating arbitration, a

tribunal still could dismiss the case on grounds that the claimant had made insufficient use of

the intervening period to try to resolve the dispute, '* But the word “shall” is not used in
Article 91) to describe a specific uction or process that is required (as in “shall consu/t’ “shall
negotiate” or “shall attempr to reach agreement’), much less specific conduct that is required
by a claimant in particular. Rather, the term. expressed in the passive tense, refers to a desired
guicome (“shall [...] be settled amicably”), and to the equal positions of both parties with

respect to that outcome (“shall [...] be settled amicably herween the two parties concerned’)

Moreover, completing the concept, the word “shall” is immediately qualified by the phrase “if

 

Hearing Transcript dated $ November 2015, at p. 14. lines 14-17) See aise Kilig, © 5.2.6 (RLA-220) (“Treaty
terms are Obviously not drafted in isolation, and their meaning can only be determined by considering the entre
treaty text, The context will include the remaining terms of the sentence and of the paragraph: the entire article at
issue, and the remainder of the treaty {...4.")

*! Article 32 of the VOLT ( emphasis added).

'° Conditions of Admission of a State to Membership in the United Nations. Advisory Opinion dated 28 May
2948, ICT Reports 1948, p. 63 (RLA-13),

“ Hearing Transeript dated § November 2015. at p. 5, lines |-12 (contending that consent to arbitrate exists
only when “three cumulative conditions have been met,” one of which is “a meaningtul effort to settle the
disputes amiably.” which is a distinct and independent precondition from compliance with any waiting period):
see alse Hearing Transcript dated 3 Navember 2015. at p. 59, lines 11-24,

™ Article 9(1) of the BIT | emphasis added)

26

v9

345018/2020/ppp

possible” (“shall, if possible, be settled amicably between the two parties concerned™).'** The
word “if is a conditional clause that introduces an element of uncertainty regarding the

prospects for settkement, and therefore of evaluation by the parties of those prospects.

79. In these circumstances, the Tribunal interprets the provision as indicating that both parties to a
dispute are expected to seek amicable settlement if and to the extent that they consider such an

outcome to be reasonably possible. While some good faith effort is implicit in evaluating this

possibility--a party might not have acted reasonably in concluding there 1s no possibility of

amicable settlement without any attempt whatsoever to explore that possibility through
dialogue-—the clause cannot be read as imposing a “best efforts” obligation, such that a tribunal!
would be justified later in dismissing claims on the basis that the effort by one party was
qualitatively not its “best."'" This conelusion is reinforced by the bilateral framing of the
clause (that a dispute “shall, if possible, be settled amicably fetvecn the two parties
concerned’), *" rather than a unilateral framing that might impose a particular objective
obligation of effort on the claimant but not on the respondent State. In amicable settlement, as

in classic dance, it takes two to tango.

80. Here, the facts demonstrate a considerable degree of effort by HBT, the French Ambassador.

and ultimately the Claimant to raise their concerns successively with KoPT, the Government of

West Bengal, the Ministry of Shipping, and various other government ministries and senior
officials. While the Respondent correctly notes that the Notification of Claim contained

peremptory language purporting to impose a two-week deadline on reply and suggesting that

 

© Article 9(1) of the BIT (emphasis added).

46 Although the decisions of prior arbitration tribunals have no binding or precedential ¢ffect, it ts instructive on
oceasion to refer to reasoning that is either analogous or distinct, particularly where the Parties have invoked
prior decisions in an effort to persuade this Tribunal to follow their approach. For the proposition above, for
example, the Tribunal’s conclusion is similar to that of the tribunals in Ambiente Ufficio SPA. and others v. The
Irgentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/O8/9, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility dated 8 February
2013, © 382-883 (concluding that “a direct and independent consequence” of the phrase “insofar as possible” 1s
that claimants will net breach ther duties if a “sufficient minimum amount of consultations was actually
conducted, or at least offered”). and Abaclar er al . © $54, 564 (RLA-194) (interpreting the phrase “if possible”
as not “referring not only to the techmcal possibility of settlemeni talks, but also the possibility, ie. the
likelyhood [sic]. of a positive result”), By contrast, the Tribunal 1s not persuaded by the dissent in Abaciar that
the clause carries with it a stronger obligation, akin to one requiring a demonstration of “best efforts.” dbactar er
al, Dissenting Opinion dated 28 October 2011, © 26 (RLA-382))

* Article 961) of the BIT Cemphasis added).

V0

345018/2020/ppp

suit otherwise was imminent, '“* the fact remains that the Claimant did not (le for arbitration for
four-and-a-half months, and that the correspondence both before and atier this Notification set
out the details of Claimant's concerns, the need for meaningful relief, requests for dialogue or
action, and the intention to pursue legal remedies if the actions complained of were not rectified,
Che recipients of this correspondence for the most part did not respond at all, and certainly did
nol respond with any offers of dialogue. In these circumstances, even if Article 9(1) were to be
construed as imposing an independent requirement that a claimant reasonably explore the
possibility of amicable settlement, the Tribunal has no difficulty concluding that the Claimant,
on its own and through its various agents, satisfied such an obligation of reasonable

engavement.

81. The question then turns to whether Article 9. read as a Whole, imposes a femporal precondition
to arbitration, in the form of a “waiting” or “cooling off” period. even if not all of that period
need be enyaged in active pursuit of amicable settlement. Certainly, waiting periods can
perform important functions independent of settlement overtures, including (as Respondent
contends) allowing the parties “an opportunity to carefully consider the dispute, including
Investigating the facts and the options available to each of them.”!*’ For these reasons. States
often expressly provide that arbitration may not be initiated until a specified number of months
after notification of a dispute. The question remains, however, whether France and India did so

In this case,

S2. For this proposition, the Respondent concedes that its interpretation is heavily reliant on the
“context” of Article 9 as a whole, rather than the ordinary meaning of any particular passage.'
This concession is necessary because neither Article 9(] ) {which addresses amicable settlement)
nor Article 9(3) (which addresses access to arbitration) refer to any particular period of time, to
be spent in amicable settlement discussions or in any other activity, prior to the commencement
of arbitration. Rather, the only reference to a period of time appears in Article 9(2), which

* Letter dated 11 November 2013 from J Sagar Associates to the Republic of India. pp. 1. 11-12 (C444)
 Counter-Memorial, © 15,

“ Hearing Transertpt dated 5 November 2015. at p. 4, lines 23-25 (“[t}he terms of Article 5 require an
interpretation heavily reliant on context to make sense of the provision and to establish consistency with their
context.”); and p. 48. lines 19-23 (explaining that Respondent's Mterpretavion rests on “a combination of textual

references and supplementary materials.” because “[itis probably generous te say it [Article 9] is nota model of
drafiing clarity)

28

J/

345018/2020/ppp

S
ada

hs

S

?.

‘ht

provides that any dispute “which has not been amicably settled within a period of six months
from written notification of a claim may be sumitted [sic] to international conciliation” pursuant
to the UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules. As noted above, however, the Respondent contends that
the broader context and object and purpose of Article 9 mandate a conclusion that a similar six-

month waiting pertod also ts required prior to submission of a claim to arbitration.

The Tribunal disagrees that such a conclusion can be drawn either from the text of Article 9 or
from its object and purpose as deduced from any language elsewhere in the BIT. Focusing first
an Article 9, the Tribunal finds it relevant that the provision contains two different temporal
references, in the context of two different types of proceedings. First, Article 9(2) provides that
“any dispute which has not been amicably settled within a period of six months from written
notification of a claim” may be submitted to conciliation if the parties so agree. Second, Article
%3) states that “the dispute may be referred to arbitration ar any time [...]° (emphasis added)
The ordinary meaning of “at any time” is exactly what it says, namely that there is no temporal
restriction on the commencement of’ arbitration proceedings, such as that expressed in the

content of conciliation

The conclusion is also supported by the transition language between Articles 9(2) and 9(3). The
Contracting Parties could have chosen no transition language to signal the relationship between
those provisions, or they could have chosen transition language to connote that the requirements
of those provisions were sequential or cumulative. Instead. they chose language that clearly
connotes the independence of Article 93) from the contents of Article 9(2), namely the
introductory words, “/nJotwithstanding paragraph 2 |.. |” (emphasis added). Taken in
conjunction with “at any ume,” the clear import of the “notwithstanding” language is that any
temporal precondition on invoking the mechanism offered in Article 9(2) does not apply to

invoking the different mechanism offered in Article 9/3),

The ordinary meaning of Article 9 is further buttressed by context drawn from the immediatels
following provision of the BIT. namely Article 10 on settlement of disputes between the
Contracting Parties. Structurally, Articles 9 and 10 of the BIT perform the same function.
namely delineating available mechanisms for resolution of” Treaty disputes. They follow
Articles | and 2, which respectively define the Treaty’s terms and scope, and Articles 3 through
5. which articulate the substantive standards of treatment that the Contracting Parties commit to

providing to each other's covered investors. The structure of the BIT sugwests that Articles 9

Ww

V0

345018/2020/ppp
SO

and 10 should be read in the context of each other in particular. In this case, Article 10(2)
provides that if a dispute between the two Contracting Parties “has not been settled within a
period of six months from the date on which the matter was raised by either Contracting Party, it
may be submitted at the request of either Contracting Party to an Arbitral Tribunal."'’' This is a
classic expression of a waiting or cooling off period. with a defined temporal precondition to
arbitration. It demonstrates that France and India not only knew how to impose such a
precondition to arbitration, but affirmatively chose to do so in the context of State-to-State
disputes in this very Treaty. The absence of any equivalent language in Article 9(3), and instead
the presence of the categorical language “at any time,” compels a conclusion that Article 9 does
not require any defined cooling-off period before commencement of investor-State arbitration

proceedings.

For these reasons, the Tribunal does not consider the ordinary meaning of Article 9 to be either
“ambiguous or obscure” within the meaning OF Article 32(a) of the VCLT. Nor is the Tribunal
able to accept the Respondent's contention that the ordinary meaning of Article 9 “leads to a
result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable,” within the meaning of Article 32(b) of the
VCLT.’* While it is certainly unusual for States to require a waiting period before a further
agreed resort to conciliation but not before a unilateral commencement of arbitration, a decision
to do so ts not “mamfestly” absurd or unreasonable. States conceivably might conclude that
there is a “need to lay the foundations for a conciliation effort by first having six months of
direct talks between the parties,” whereas. as the Claimant posits, arbitration “does not need to
build upon a period of direct negoulation between the parties.”'S? Or they may have other
reasons for distinguishing between the two mechanisms. It is not manifestly absurd for States to
dispense with a waiting period for arbitration. if they so wish: indeed, France and India
apparently each have done so. although rarely." The fact that they each have done so in
treaties with other States sugeests that in certain Instances, they consider direct resort to

arbitration, without any required Waiting period, to be acceptable. This conclusion is not

 

rrr

Article 10(2) of the BIT.

269 yew a r ae! t we 4 ° Ss 4 ss fs de . nat Ce
* Counter-Memortal, © 1S (contending that “it defies logic to contend that the drafters intended the pre-
requisites for conciliation to be more onerous than those for arbitration’).

” Response to Request, © 19

* According to the Respondent, India has one BIT (out of a total 77 BITs) that does not include a waiting
period. while France has six (out of a total 93) Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, @€ §|-82

“~

+()

0g

345018/2020/ppp

87.
88.
SY

rendered manifestly unreasonable simply because in a particular treaty, they may choose to
specily a different modality for an alternative dispute resolution procedure, namely resort to

formal conciliation pursuant to the UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules.

In any event, the Tribunal is not required to speculate on the motivations underlying a particular
treaty passage, so long as its meaning and effect is clear on its face. The Tribunal has found that

to be the case with respect to Article 9.

Nor does the Tribunal accept the Respondent's argument that reading Article 9(3) as allowing
an immediate launch of arbitration proceedings would strip Article 9(1) of effer utile. Even a
non-binding exhortation to explore amicable settlement serves potentially useful purposes,
encouraging the disputing parties to consider engaging in dialogue in circumstances where
otherwise they might not. Moreover. as the Tribunal already has noted, the Article 9(1) phrase
“shall, tf possible, be settled amicably” does imply some degree of effort by the parties to
evaluate the “possibjility|” of such amicable settlement, in the particular circumstances of their
dispute. While the Tribunal expresses some doubt that this possibility reasonably could be
evaluated without making any attempt at all to engage in dialogue, that is not the Situahion
before us. Unlike the facts of Murphy vy. Ecuador, tor example—where a claimant initiated
arbitration the day after sending its notice of dispute. notwithstanding a treaty requirement that
“six months have elapsed from the date on which the dispute arose” '**—here the evidence
suggests a far more extensive effort by the Claimant to engage responsible Indian officials in
dialogue, prior to the commencement of arbitration proceedings. Given these facts. the Tribunal
has no difficulty concluding that the Claimant's efforts complied with the spirit of Article 9¢ 1).

Indeed, those efforts suggest that Article 9(1) does retain effet utile, as an exhortation to explore

the reasonable possibility of settlement prior to commencing arbitration, even in the absence of

a mandatory waiting period prior to arbitration pursuant to Article 9(3)

For these reasons, the Tribunal sees no need to resort fo supplementary means of interpretation,
either to verify or to attempt to confirm the ordinary meaning of Article 9. However, since the

Parties have expended some effort in briefing potential inferences to be drawn both from the

 

 

* Counter-Memorial, © 19: Hearing Transcript dated § November 2015, at p. 49, lines 22-25, and p. 50, lines |

—

lurphy, © 96, see also Vurphy, © 135 (RLA-188),

4+U

345018/2020/ppp

90,

9].

French legislative materials and from other Indian and French BIT practice, the Tribunal briefly
addresses those arguments here. It does so with the understanding that State Parties to a treaty
are “presumed to have that intention that appears from the erdinary meaning of the terms used
by them” in the treaty text, and therefore that tribunal would require “decisive” evidence from
supplementary material to adopt “an interpretation other than that which ensues from the natural

meaning” of the treaty terms.!"”

Here, neither Party has submitted anv excerpts from the travaux preparatoires, the official
record of the negotiations between France and India, which might shed some light on the
evolution of these particular terms and the communications between the State Parties regarding
their respective or shared interpretation and intent. The Respondent instead relies on certain
documents that were generated in the course of the Subsequent ratification process in France.

The Tribunal notes as a threshold matter that “t]he view of one State does not make

International law, even less so when such a view is ascertained only by imdirect means of

interpretation [...] What is relevant 1s the intention which both parties had in signing the Treaty

| = pus

In any event, the French legislative materials are ambiguous and do not lead to an inescapable
conclusion. The Respondent relies on two documents submitted to the French legislature that
refer to the possibility of arbitration if amicable settlement has not been achieved after six
months.” For its part, the Claimant refers to another (purportedly “more detailed”) ' analysis
of the Treaty that states that “at any time, an appeal to arbitration is possible.”!"' In these
circumstances, where the interpretation of Article 9 by those briefing the French Senate appear
to have been inconsistent, no clear inference can be drawn about the intent of the French treaty

negouators, It goes without saying that these documents in any event tell us nothing about the

’ Conditions af Admission of ad State to Membership in the UN. ». 63 (RLA-13).

eS Sempra Energy International v- The Argentine Republic, CSIP) Case No. A RB/O2/16, Award dated 28
September 2007, © 385 (CLA-148).

Legislative Bull No, 231 transmitting the Treaty to the Senate by Foreign Ministry dated 2} January 1998 (R-
67), Report No. 1475 to the National Assembly dated 17 March 1999, p, 3 (CLA-173).

* Hearing Transeript dated 3 November 2015, at p. 108, lines 8-25. and p. 109, line |

"' Report No. 314 on the Proposal to Consent to the Agreement between the Government of the French
Republic and the Government of India on the mutual promotion and protection of investments. p. 5 (CLA-172).

32

345018/2020/ppp

92.

Q3

contemporaneous interpretations of /adte, the Respondent in this case. No materials have been

submitted with respect to India’s analysis or ratification of the BIT

In addition to the French legislative material, the Respondent invokes BIT practice in both
France and India, which (as noted above) almost always includes waiting periods prior to
arbitration, and in no other cases imposes waiting periods for conciliation and not for
arbitration.'” According to the Respondent, this practice is so consistent in both countries that
if they had truly intended to depart from it for the BIT between India and France, one would
expect them to have signaled this unambiguously. Absent clear evidence of a deliberate
deviation from longstanding common practice, the Respondent contends, one must assume that
the State Parties intended Article 9 to be interpreted consistently with other French and Indian
BITs, but simply emploved infelicitous drafting im this case!’ The Claimant draws the
opposite conclusion from the Respondent's survey of BIT practice. namely that “recourse to
other treaties 1s not helpful because the parties are free to agree to different terms in different

sad thd

treaties, which the Claimant suggests they did here. The Claimant contends that this only
can have been deliberate, since the State Parties plainly knew how to draft an express

precondition to arbitration when they wished to do so.'"

The positions of the Parties pertectly illustrate the limitations of relying toa greatly on

inferences drawn from the comparison of a subject BIT with the text of other BITs. As the
Parties’ arguments reveal, a departure from past practice generally can be spun by able
advocates to diametrically opposite effect, from one perspective that the incongruity must have
been inadvertent, and from the other that it must have been deliberate. The Tribunal is gratelul

to Professor Lowe OC for his candor in deseribing this conundrum, as follows:

It is a classic confrontation on the question of treaty law and almost all pleading
comes down to this. One side will say you have 100 treaties out there, they all
say the same thing and this one is different, therefore, this one must have meant
to say the same as all these say. Then their opponents come on and say you have

 

ie Rejoinder on Jurisdiction. ** S}-N3: Hearing Transeript dated 4 November 2015, at p 33. lines ]4-24 and p
: t
$4. line 1.

Hearing Transcript dated § November 2015. atp. $4. lines 2-5, p. 143. lines 21-28. and po 144. lines 1-5.
2 i |

~ Response to Request, © 21.

Reply on Jurisdiction, © 14.

ae
'
7

SL

345018/2020/ppp

100 treaties out here all saying the same thing and this one is different and,
therefore, the parties must have deliberately departed from the terms of it.

The fact is that neither of us has any evidence of what the parties intended or
thought when they were doing that. We have the treaty, we work with the treaty
and that is it.'°°

In the absence of any evidence about wAy particular Treaty language departs from that used in
other BITs, the Tribunal does not consider inferences to be particularly compelling either way.
Certainly they are not sufficiently compelling to question the ordinary meaning otherwise
apparent from Article 9°s text, which is further supported by contrast with the immediately

adjacent terms of Article 10.

94, The Tribunal thus concludes that. unlike the provisions of many other treaties, Article 9 does
hol Impose a waiting period, for purposes of amicable settlement or otherwise. before an
investor may resort to arbitration. Had it done so, the Tribunal! would have considered this to be
of jurisdictional and not merely procedural import.'°? States are free to condition their consent
to arbitration in any way they wish, and when they unnustakably have done so, it is not tor
tribunals to deem such requirements as mere! y Precatory, or to permit them to be sidestepped on
policy grounds that essentially substitute the tribunal's judgment for that of the Contracting

Parties."*" As explained in ST-4) Bulgaria,

In order for a claimant to benefit from the jurisdictional protection vranted by an
arbitration mechanism, there is a condition ratione voluntatis: the State must
have given its consent to such procedure, which allows a foreign investor to sue
the State directly at the international level. This consent is expressed broadly or
restrictively, with or without conditions of exhaustion of local remedies or
waiting periods, as allowing all claims or only certain claims. In other words, the
State's consent is given under certain conditions. Just as, for example, the
conditions of nationality must be fulfilled before an investor can have access to
rights under a BIT, the conditions Subject to which the State gives its consent

™ Hearing Transcript dated 5 November 20'S at p. 147, lines 3-14.

"The Tribunal thus rejects the Claimant's suggestion that amicable setilement periods are “not even a
Jurisdictional requirement.” Response to Request, © 16. As other tribunals have observed, the cases that have
dismissed such requirements as merely procedural, and therefore apparently capable of being disregarded
without consequence, do not source that distinction in any way from the realy text. See. ee, Giovanni
diemanni and others vo The ‘Argentine Republic, IOSID Case No. ARB/OVS. Decision on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility dated 17 November 2014. * 304 (agreeing in turn with the anal vsis in Ambiente Ufficio, © $72),

'™ Giovanni Alemanni, ©© 304-306: Kilte, © 6.2.3, 6.2.9 (RLA-220): Murphy, “ 141-142, 147-154 (RLA-188):
Enron © 88 (RLA-100): Fulip, © 71-72 (RLA-2173

49

345018/2020/ppp

must be fulfilled before a right to arbitration can arise. Such conditions are an
inherent part of the State’s given consent. In other words. if these conditions are
not fulfilled, there is indeed no consent. '*

~
~
s

The Tribunal also rejects the Claimant's suggestion that a mandatory waiting period can be
satishied post-hoc, by the running of the clock following a notice of arbitration and prior to a
inbunal’s decision on jurisdiction.'” While the ICJ*s jurisprudence on this issue is somewhat
inconsistent.’ the Tribunal agrees with the analysis in Tidip v Turkey that “[i]t would be to
rewrite the BIT and to confound its plain meaning to accept that a party may file its Request
Without notice and then perfect the breach after the arbitration commenced”! While the
Tribunal accepts that in any particular case this work-around may be tempting as an alternative

to dismissing claims in the knowledge that they simply can be refiled.'73 imposing such extra

efforts on a party that did nor observe realy requirements is preferable to the practical effect of

endorsing, as a matter of doctrine, a sw eeping end-run around express precondition to
arbitration. A pronouncement that mandatory waiting periods could be satisfied by the passave
of time after rather than before Instituling proceedings would create an exception that would
swallow the rule, given that in Virtually every case the required period will subsequently elapse

before the tribunal is constituted and the jurisdictional objections briefed for its consideration

%6. In the Tribunal’s view. the only basis for excusing noncompliance with a mandatory
precondition to arbitration could be the doctrine of futility, The Tribunal does not accept the

Respondent's suggestion that the doctrine ean never apply to excuse non-compliance with

 

™ ST-AD, © 336 (RLA-222).
~” Reply on Jurisdiction, © 25

"! Contrast, for evampic, Case Concerning the Arrest Warrant of id April 2000 (Democratic Republic of the
Congo v Belgium, Judgment dated 14 February 2002, ICJ Reports 2002, © 26 (RLA-351) (relerring to “settled
jurisprudence” under which the ICJ's jurisdicuon must be determined at the ume that the act instituting
proceedings was filed”), with Case Concerning Application of the Convention an the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia y. Serbia). Preliminary Objections, Judgment dated 1% November 2008, ICI
Reports 2008, ©€ 83, 87 (citing with approval the PCII’s decision in Mavrommatiy that certain jurisdictional!
requirements that were not satisfied at the ume of instituting legal proceedings could be met subsequently, and
Suggesting that “it is preferable except in special circumstances, to conclude that the condition has, from that
point on, been fulfilled [...] [i]t would not be in the interest of jusuce to oblige the Appheant. if it wishes te
pursue its claims, 10 initiate fresh proceedings.”)

© Tulip, at © Ol (RLA-217).

'™ See. e.g, Société Générale, © \84 (CLA-~167).

ae
‘yy

ae

345018/2020/ppp
- 97
98.

preconditions, unless the Treaty text itself allows for this possibility.'" The doctrine of futility
derives from jurisprudence addressing the international law requirement to exhaust local
remedies, and in that context, the [CJ has carved out a general exception in circumstances where
in reality no remedy is available or any attempt at invoking it would be futile. While the
preconditions to arbitration are different in the investment treaty contert--where venerally no
exhaustion of remedies requirement applies -there is no reason to assume that Contracting
aries intended to exclude any possible recourse to the doctrine of futility, simply by not
referring to that doctrine in the Treaty text. Indeed, numerous investment treaty tribunals have
considered the futility doctrine as potentially applicable to treaty-based preconditions to

arbitrate.”

Nonetheless, the doctrine imposes a considerable burden of proof on a claimant wishing to
Invoke it tO Excuse non-compliance with preconditions to arbitrate. A mere showing that the
steps a treaty requires to be taken prior to arbitration are wilikely to result In a Satisfactory
outcome for the investor would not satisfy a requirement of demonstrating that it was futile for
the investor even to try. Futility connotes a manifest waste of effort towards a self-evident, even
pre-ordained, lack of success, not simply that the effort faces significant hurdles or that the odds

are against success. Where to draw the line inevitably will be an issue of fact and will differ

from case to case. The Tribunal, however, agrees with the Respondent that the existence of

futility cannot be presumed, but rather it must be proven, based on substantial and c¢redible

evidence,

In the context of an express waiting period during which the parties are required to undertake

amicable settlement efforts, the doctrine of futility faces a particularly high threshold of proof.

[he issue in this context is not the unavailability of an alternate process or remedy as a matter of

law, but rather the purported patent unwillingness of the counterparty to negotiate im any

meaningful way. Such unwillingness may not be simply presumed, and a claimant that

 

'* Counter-Memorial, © 36: Rejoinder, € 95: Hearme Transcript dated 5 November 2015. at p. 66. lines | 1.13.

“See. e 2, Giovann Alemanni. © 310, 395-316: Ambiente Ufficio, (© 382-593: Kalig, © 7.9.1. 8.1.4 (RLA-
220); Teinver, © §26-129 (CLA-169),

CF

Auli, © 8.1.4 (RLA-220) (discussing treaty requirements of prior recourse to local courts, where the

doctrine of futility might excuse compliance if itis demonstrated that “recourse is not ay ailable to the state's
court or, ifavailable, the investor would not have been treated fairly before those courts’’)

36

49

345018/2020/ppp

YY.

proceeds immediately to arbitration without even attempting negotiations may find its later
futility defense rejected, on the ground that “[t}o determine whether negotiations would succeed

rs

or not, the parties must first initiate them.”'’ Similarly, a moderate delay in a respondent
State’s acknowledgment of a request for discussions may not satisfy the requirement of showing
futility, because such a delay may reflect realities other than unwillingness to engage in
dialogue, such as a respondent's effort to organize a response or to investigate the relevant facts
sufficiently for discussions to be meaningfully productive. In the Tribunal’s view futility
should not be seen as a “get out of jail free card” that excuses, post hoc, any and all rush to
arbitration in defiance of treaty language expressly requiring a defined time period for

discussions. An investor ignores such temporal requirements at its peril.

On the facts before us, the issue of futility would be a close call, if 1

 

ie Respondent's
interpretation of Article 9 as requiring a six-month waiting period had been adopted. The
Claimant did not rush to arbitrate, but rather sent repeated communications to Indian officials,
both before and afier its formal invocation of the BIT, none of which such officials effectivels
even acknowledged. Although the Claimant’s Notification of Claim on Tl November 2013
warned of an intent to commence arbitration in just two weeks, the Claimant nonetheless waited
roughly four-and-a-half months to commence these proceedings, during which the Respondent
conunued to be conspicuously silent. It is not clear why the Claimant tn these circumstances
could not have simply waited an additional six weeks before filing, to remove any doubt from
these proceedings.’ That said, the Respondent has presented no evidence suggesting that after
four-and-a-half months of effective silence in the wake of Claimant's invocation of the BIT. 1
was organizing any imminent and meaningful response. In these circumstances, the Tribunal
likely would have been inclined to find the futility doctrine satisfied. Because the ordinary
terms of Article 9 do not impose a temporal requirement with respect to amicable settlement

efforts, however, such a finding is not necessary to the result.

” Murphy, © 135 (RLA-185).

“*® See Reply on Junsdiction, © 20 (contending that “[i[n lieht of the Respondent's failure to engage with the
Claimant, the Clarmant /raed no choice but to issue the Notice of Arbitration on 31 March 2014." but not alleging
any particularly exigent circumstances that lefi it no choice, or that could have rendered waiting an additional six
weeks trreparably prejudicial) (emphasis added).

+0

345018/2020/ppp

100,
VI.

1d.
102,
103,

For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal hereby denies the Respondent's First Objection to

jurisdiction.

THE RESPONDENT'S SECOND OBJECTION: THE TRIBUNAL LACKS
JURISDICTION BECAUSE THE INVESTMENTS WERE MADE THROUGH A
COMPANY OF WHICH THE CLAIMANT OWNS LESS THAN 51 PERCENT

The Respondent’s Second Objection is that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione matertae
because Article 2(1) of the BIT excludes from the Treaty’s protection all indirect investments in
India that are made through another company “wherever located” that is not owned at least 51%
by a French company. In this case, the Claimant's investment in HBT was made indirectly
through ALBA, an Indian company in which the Claimant owns less than 51% of the shares,
The Respondent asserts that this is a fundamental impediment to jurisdiction, and it cannot be
cured by resort to the MFN clause in Article 5(1) of the BIT, because that clause does not apply
to broaden the scope of Article 2(1). Nor. in the Respondent's view, can a claim proceed on the
basis of the Claimant's direct investment in ALBA (rather than its indirect investment in HBT),
because this would constitute an end-run around the exclusion in Arucle 2(1), and in any event

is not the way the Claimant thus far has pleaded its case

By contrast, the Claimant contends that Article 2(1) 1s not an impediment to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction because it applies to indirect investments only when such indirect investments are
held through companies “outside of India.” and not through Indian companies such as ALBA. ig
In the alternative. the Claimant contends. the MFN clause in Article S(1) of the BIT would
render LDA’s claims within the scope of the Treaty and the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, because
other Indian BITs do not contain a comparable exclusion on indirect investments made through
companies in which the investor owns less than 51% of the shares. Finally, the Claimant
contends, jurisdiction exists in any event because it made direct Investments in India (through
ALBA and otherwise) that do not fall within the scope of any exclusion in Article 2(1), and the

Claimant’s claim can be viewed as one for harm to its direct investments.

As with the First Objection, the Tribunal begins by setting forth the core facts relevant to this

Objection, followed by a more detailed summary of the Parties’ respective positions. These

 

Statement of Claim. © 364

+O

345018/2020/ppp

positions are summarized with respect to the three issues embedded in the Objection, namely
whether: (i) Article 2(1) bars jurisdiction over claims by a French investor in India, if it
structures its relevant investment through an intermediate Indian company in which 1t owns less
than 31% of the shares: (ii) the Claimant can invoke the MFN clause in Article 35¢1) to import
more favorable provisions from other Indian BITs that do not contain similar minimum
ownership requirements for indirect investments; and (ii) whether the case can proceed in the
alternative on the basis of the Claimant's direct investment in ALBA, as a matter of treaty
interpretation and in light of the way the Claimant heretofore has characterized its clam, The

Tribunal’s analysis follows the summary of the Parties’ positions.
: ; |

in A. RELEVANT FACTS

104. On 13 November 2007, India organized and floated a global tender (the “Tender”) for the
operation and maintenance of mechanized dry bulk cargo handling equipment at the Berths ie
A consortium consisting of the Claimant’s Indian collaborator, ABG Infralogisucs (“ABG
Infra”), and its subsidiary, ABG Kolkata Container Terminals Private Limited (“ABG

Kolkata”), (the “Consortium”) was recognized as the preferred bidder on 16 April 2008. ys

105. Under clause 3.9 of the Tender, the Tender was valid for a period of six months from 28
February 2008.'°* After several extensions.’*’ the Consortium and KoPT signed a Letter of

Intent on 29 April 2009.'**

_ 106. That Letter of Intent required the Consortium to form a joint venture that would enter into the
contract with KoPT.'*S ALBA had been incorporated on 18 November 2008 as “ABG Bulk

Handling Private Limited,”'** a subsidiary of ABG Ports, itself a subsidiary of ABG Infra. In

 

“Pender No. Ad/Lquipping/2007-08 for Supply, Operauon and Maintenance of Different Cargo Handling
Fauipment at Berth No. 2 and 8 of Haldia Dock Complex, Kolkata Port Trust dated 16 October 2009 (C-1)

* Contract, pp. 789-792 (C-2).

= Tender, p. 35 (C-1).

SS See e.g., Statement of Claim, © 159, n.157 (citing C-65 to C-81).
‘ Contract, pp. 935-938 (C-2).

** Contract, p. 937,

11 was later renamed ABG-LDA Bulk Handling Private Limited, and finally assumed tls current name See
ALBA’s documents of incorporation (C-24).

39

+9

345018/2020/ppp

May 2009, HBT was incorporated as a special purpose vehicle, with ABG Infra and ABG
Kolkata holding 89% and 11% equity respectively.'*? On 21 July 2009, LDA and ABG Ports
executed a shareholders’ agreement under which: (a) LDA was allotted 96,078 newly issued
equity shares in ALBA, and ABG Ports was issued a further 90,000 equity shares in ALBA; and
(b) HBT issued additional equity shares to ALBA, bringing ALBA’s shareholding in HBT to
63%." Following the issue by HBT of preference shares to ALBA. ALBA is entitled to
98.78% of HBT’s profits.'*’ The Claimant illustrates the resulting ownership structure of these

companies as follows: '”’

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ss LDA [ — ABG Infra
| 01.96 89 ¥9 30.97
nee ' ¥ DO iciiaaciiniiaiesa
ABG Ports | . ABG Kandla ABG Kolkata
“1 Container
) 8.04
49% 51% 2 fh, 11%,
w ag 3
63%
we oe yp He
ALBA iin which ALBA has
OS. 78% share m the prohits)
107. On 16 October 2009, HBT and KoPT entered into the Contract. ”

 

*” See HBT's documents of incorporation (C-25),

** ALBA’s documents of incorporation (C-24); Statement of Claim, © 127.
* Preference Share Certificate (C-94),

* Statement of Claim, © 131,

“! Contract (C-2)

40)

345018/2020/ppp

B.

LOS,

109,

THE POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

I. Interpretation of the Minimum Ownership Requirement in Article 2(1) of the BIT

The Claimant's Position

For the Claimant, the minimum ownership requirement in Article 2(1) of the BIT only extends

to indirect investments in India made through third States.“ The Claimant's interpretation of

Article 2(1) of the BIT proceeds in two steps.’”? First, the phrase. “This Agreement shall apply
to any investment made by investors of cither Contracting Party in the area of the other
Contracting Party,” requires investments to have originated outside of India, not from within
India: the focus is on external and inbound, rather than domestic. investments.’ Second, the
subsequent clause, “including an indirect investment made through another company, wherever
located.” continues to refer to the process of the investment’s reaching India, and signals that
before that point, it may be routed through an intermediary company located anywhere
(“wherever"),(”° subject to the specified minimum ownership requirements. For the Claimant,
the second clause does not address the issue of how the investment may be further routed wishin
India, after becoming an investment in India; its reach is grammatically limited to the preceding
clause that it modifies, namely the first part of Article 2(1) of the BIT, which is discussing the
process of investing into India in the first place. Therefore, according to the Claimant, LDA‘s
investment in HBT through ALBA, an Indian company, does not fall foul of the restriction in

Article 2(1) of the BIT.

The Claimant argues that its interpretation of Article 2(1) of the BIT accords with the definition
of investment in Article 1(1)(b), which refers to “minority or indirect forms” of sharcholding in
companies constituted within India. The Claimant observes that since Article 2(1) does not
purport to impose a minimum shareholding requirement for direct investments in India, it would

be illogical to read it as applying to indirect investments in India routed through direct

'? Hearing Transcript dated 5 November 2015, at p. 97. lines 16-17.

* Response to Request, (4 37-40

“ Response to Request. © 38

* Response to Request. © 39,

4|

vu

345018/2020/ppp

110

investments in India.’”’ By contrast, the Claimant reasons, the provisions make more sense as
interpreted to apply to the routing of French investments through a third country before reaching
India: in respect of those third countries, the question otherwise nught arise whether a claim
should be brought through the third country’s BIT. which might contain different protections
than the BIT between France and India," According to the Claimant, Article 2(1) regulates
this situation by providing that if the French company owns 51° or more of the shares in the
third-country company through which the investment 1s routed, a claim can proceed under the
France-India BIT, but otherwise not.'” The logic of this view of Article 2(1) (as regulating
which of several potential BITs should apply to a claim against India) does not extend to a
situation like the present one, where L.DA did not route its investment through third countries.
but rather invested directly into a separate holding company in India (ALBA), which in turn

invested in HBT as well as in other Indian ventures.

The Claimant submits that at the time of the Treaty’s drafting and signature. the Contracting
Parties understood Article 2(1) of the BIT only to apply in this way, namely to impose
minimum ownership requirements on indirect investments routed through third States.'°° The
Claimant invokes Report No, 314 of the Foreign Relations Committee of the French Senate,
which was submitted to the French Senate as part of the BIT’s ratfication process. That Report

states:

As far as investments made through a company established in a third State are
concerned, these are covered by the Agreement [India- France BIT] only tf that
company is controlled to an extent of at least 51% by a French or Indian investor
(Article 2.1). Such a restriction does not feature in the other investment treaties
concluded by France.“

 

™* Response to Request, © 41.

'* Response to Request, © 42.

198 1

Response to Request, © 42,

“™ Response to Request, © 43 (eiting Report No. 314 on the Proposal to Consent to the Agreement between the
Government of the French Republic and the Government of India on the mutual promotion and protection of
investments dated 25 February 1998 (CLA-126. see aise CLA-172))

Response to Request. © 43 (citing Prench Senate Report No 314 (CLA-126) see aiso CLA-172)),

42

v1

345018/2020/ppp

1]

— 112,
113.

L,

The Claimant rebuts the Respondent's construction of Article 2(1) of the BIT as creating “an

1}

absurdity”*"' and making “no commercial sense.” *°? The former is because an investment in an
intermediate Indian company would fall within the scope of the Treaty in any event, as a direct
investment in India; *"* the latter is because the effect of the Respondent’s interpretation would
be to punish corporate structures “commensurate with the scale and complexity of the

investments [LDA] sought to make.”*""

The Respondent's Position

In the Respondent's view. the ordinary meaning of the language of Article 2(1) of the BIT in
light of its context. object, and purpose indicates that, of investments made through indirect
ownership, only those in which the corporate form is owned “to an extent of at least $1 percent”
are eligible for protection under the BIT. It argues that since the Claimant’s interest in HBT is
indirect,’ it is Subject to, but fails to satisfy, the majority Ownership requirement in Article

2(1), because the Claimant’s holdings in ALBA are limited to 49% of outstanding shares.

The Respondent emphasizes that the “ordinary meaning” of the phrase “wherever located” does

not place any limits on the geographical scope of the majority ownership condition on indirect

investments.“ [t notes that the equivalent phrase found in the French version of Article 2(1) of

the BIT, “om quelle soit situee” also translates to “wherever it may be located.’°°" The
Respondent also submits that under the plain and ordinary meaning of the clause, “investments
‘in the area of the other Contracting Party’ clearly include investments made trom within India

|...) [A] qualifying investment in shares under the Treaty can be made in India and from India

T Response to Request. © 41-42

“” Response to Request, © 44.

“°? Response to Request, © 41

? Response to Request, © 44

“ Respondent's Request, ) 17.

* Counter-Memorial, © 48-52. citing various dictionary definitions of “wherever” (RLA-65, RLA-243, RLA-
244, RLA-122, and RLA-178)

“” CountereMemorial, © 41.

VL

345018/2020/ppp

© 208

at the same time.’ lhe Respondent submits that the “ordinary meaning of the phrase

se Ee

‘company, wherever located” 1s clear and this has not really been contested by the Claimant.

l14. The Respondent argues that the context of Article 2(1) of the BIT supports its interpretation of

the provision.“!” Firstly, the Respondent submits that Article 1(1) of the BIT reveals the Treaty
drafiers’ choice to eschew geographical limitations (beyond nationality requirements) in
defining the scope of the Treaty. India notes that Article 1(1) of the BIT. which confirms that

“indirect forms [of ownership] in companies constituted in the territory of one Contracting

Party” are a qualifying investment.*'' imposes no limitations on either the geographical origin of

intermediary companies held by French investors, nor on the ownership of such companies,

of an intermediary company-~-the Respondent emphasizes that Article 2(1) of the BIT does not
introduce the sort of geographical qualifier, distinguishing between routing of investments
within versus outside the Contracting States. that the Claimant seeks to establish, Had they

intended to add a geographical carve-out, “they would have done so expressly?!”

115. Second, the Respondent notes that the first clause of Article 2(1) of the BIT extends the
applicability of the BIT to any investment made “in the area of the other Contracting Party")
It contrasts that clause and the geographical restrictions found in other bilateral investment
treaties concluded by India*'* with the minimum ownership requirement found in the second
half of Article 2(1) (including an indirect investment made through another company,
wherever located.” It asserts that the juxtaposition between the territorial terms used in the
first (“in the area of a Contracting Party”) and second section (“wherever located”) of Article

* Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 23 (Respondent's emphasis added)
~” Hearing Transcript dated $ November 2015, at p. Tt. lines 16-18
~” Counter-Memorial, © $3,

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 23.

 Counter-Memorial, © 86

~? Article 201) of the BIT

* Aruele | of the Kuwait-India BIT (CLA-118) This Agreement shall not apply to any indirect investments in
a Contracting State made through a company incorporated in a third state unless such company i Owned to an
extent of at least 31% or is controlled by investors of the other Contracting State."). See Counter-Memorial, © 87
nf ld,

* Arucle 2(1) of the BIT.

44

Vv

2(1) of the BIT “suggests strongly?’ that the minimum ownership requirement applies to

Indian intermediary companies as well as to intermediate companies in third jurisdictions,

Third, the Respondent considers the use of the word “Company” in Article 2(1) of the BIT to be
significant since it is the only time the defined term is used in an operational provision of the
Treaty.’ Noting its definition in Article 1(3) of the BIT as “any legal person constituted on the
territory of one Contract Party in accordance with the laws of that Party,” the Respondent
submits that it would be “absurd” to interpret Article 2(1), which incorporates the same term, as
excluding companies incorporated in a Contracting Party from its reach.!* Rather. the
Respondent contends. the majority ownership requirement extends to wil companies through

Which investments in India are indirectly held. =!"

The Respondent argues that the “object and purpose” of the Treaty support its interpretation of

Article 2(1) of the BIT. Referring to the Treaty’s preambular reference to the “promotion and
protection” of investments. the Respondent claims that “even under India's interpretation, the
treaty extends treaty protection to majority French owned indirect investments. thereby creating
a more favourable situation than existed without the treaty, thereby promoting investment.“**"

Citing Berschader v. Russia™! and Daimler » drgentina,~ the Respondent submits that the

Treaty’s object and purpose does not go further, to necessitate the protection of all forms of

investment under the Treaty.-*? It also considers that the “commercial sense” of the Treaty is

irrelevant to its interpretation,?~4

 

345018/2020/ppp
116.
117

© Counter-Memorial, © 47

v4 ~ . . : ee ‘ my pve p ow
“'” Hearing lranseript dated 5 November 2015. at p. 16, lines 20-28 and p. 17, lines 1-5

ats Hearing Transeript dated § November 201 Scat p. 17, lines 10-13,

“! Statement of Defense. © | 34),

“ Hearing Transcript dated § November 2015, a1 p. 17, lines 24-25 and p.i8, lines 1-3

*' Vladimir Berschader and Moise Berschader vy. The Russian Federation. SCC Case No. OS8O/2004, Award
dated 2] Apnl 2006 (RLA-122)

““ Daimler Financial Services AG v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No ARB/OS/1. Award dated 22

amen

August 2012 (RLA-209),

** Hearing Transcript dated 3 November 20135, at p. 18, lines 4-19,

“* Hearing Transeript dated 4 November 2OES. at p. 19. fines 6-6

45

04

345018/2020/ppp

[18. The Respondent rejects the Claimant's argument that the majority ownership requirement of

Arucle 2(1) of the BIT, when “properly construed,” apphes only to indirect investments held
through companies “outside of” India. In the Respondent's view, the Claimant's “absurdly
narrow”**" interpretation would require the Tribunal to interpret the terms “wherever located” to
mean “wherever located outside of India” or “in only some places where located.”""" The

Respondent asserts that such an interpretation is not compatible with the VOLT.

119. The Respondent rejects the Claimant's reliance upon Report No. 314 of the French Senate
Foreign Relations Committee as evidence that Article 2(1) of the BIT was understood to apply

~ only to “indirect investments made through companies in a third state? The Respondent
instead cites two other French documents. Legislative Bill No. 231 transmitting the Treaty to the

French Senate--” and Report No. 23 on Approval of the Treaty of the National Assembly

Foreign Relations Committee,” for the proposition that Article 2(1) of the BIT does not refer

only to third-country routing, but rather restricts the Tr ‘aly's protection. regardless of

Jurisdiction, to “indirect investments made by a company that is owned to an extent of at least

31% by investors of one of the ( ‘contracting Parties 77?!

23 The Applicability of the MEN Clause
lhe Claimant's Position

120. The Claimant submits that even if Article 2(1) were interpreted as barring claims based on
_ indirect ownership of investments such as Ils Investment in HBT, it would be entitled to invoke

the MFN elause in Article S(1) of the BIT to avoid this outcome, because otherwise the

~ See Statement of Claim, © 364 (emphasis in original)
°° Counter-Memorial. 4s

19> oe yg
~ Counter-Memorial, © 45.

xy rescue fy Dears aces N A? factaiin se. Pi Pi eidetua i ~ Se 3 " ;
~ Response to Request, © 43 (quoting French Senate Report No. 314. ¢¢ LA-126; see aise CLA-172))-
Kejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 29.

“** Legislative Bill No, 231 transmitting the Treaty to the Senate (R-67)

ows em i wD > * Sais tg) nk ple “Y.. tind ale » ? ‘ t 4 H a * c
Report No. 23 on Approval of the lreaty of the National Assembly Foreign Relations Committee (R-68)

' Respondent's Rejoinder (quoting R-67)

dh

99

345018/2020/ppp

Claimant would be deprived of its recourse to arbitration in circumstances under which

 

arbitration would remain open to qualified investors from other C contracting States

121. In the Claimant's view,?"' Article 5(1) permits it 10 benefit from other bilateral investment
treaties concluded by India that contain no minimum shareholding or contro) requirements for
indirect investments (as in the Germany-India BIT),=" The MEN clause also would permit the
Claimant to claim the benefit of other BITs in which a minimum shareholding requirement
applies to indirect shareholding, but is limited expressly to intermediate companies incorporated
in third states (such as the Kuwait-India BIT).° In either case, the Claimant submits that it
should be accorded treatment no less favorable than these other tnvestors, and therefore should
be permitted to proceed with its claim, notwithstanding any interpretation adopted with respect

to the minimum ownership requirement in Article 21).

122. The Claimant dismisses the Respondent's suggestion that its interpretation of Article $(1) would
allow the MEN clause to displace the BIT’s definition of a protected investment. The Claimant
contends that it is not attempting to expand or change the definition of “investment” in Article |

of the Treaty, but rather is inv coking the MPN clause in the context of its rights “

 

varding the
“operation, management, maintenance, use. enjoyment or disposal’” of investments that already

fall within the Treaty detinition,-”

The Respondent's Position

23. The Respondent cites, fuer alia, Société Generale 9 The Dominican Republic?” in support of

the proposition that MFN clauses apply “only to the treatment accorded to [a] defined

SS

*? Response to Request, € 45.
~** Statement of Claim, © 364

,_lbfeement between the Republic of India and the Federal Republic of Germany for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments dated 1() July 1995 (CLA-117)

    

** Amele | of the Agreement between the State af Suwat and the Republic of India for the | neouragement and
Reviprocal Protection of Investment dated 27 November 2001 (“Kuwait-India BIT’) (CLA-118)

 

* Response (o Request, © 46

‘ Counter-Memorial, 9 64-6N (citing bannessa Ventures » The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, WSID Case

No, ARBUAF 04/6, Award dated 16 Jani ary 2003, € 133 (RLA-214): Societe Generale. © 4] (CLA-861, HICEE

Bl wv The Slovak Republic, PCA Case No. 2009-1 1, Partial Award dated 23 Muay 2011. © 149 (RLA-192),
47

   

 

20

v1

345018/2020/ppp

ne 2 “* * epee eas op, . a . sar <*. ‘
investment.” not to “the definition of “investment” itself For the Respondent, MFN clauses

cannot apply to jurisdictional requirements:

Such a condition cannot be adulterated or attenuated t hrough the invocation of the
Treaty nght to receive MFN treatment, because that condition qualifies the very
aceess 1 the Treaty, In other words, satisfaction of Article 2(1)'s requirements 1s
a precondition to the enjoyment of the very ri ght io receive MFN treatment?"

124. While the Treaty’s detinition of an investment is not found in Article 2(1) of the BIT. the
Respondent contends that the requirements of Article 2¢1) of the BIT are Jurisdictional in
nature. It cites the tribunal's treatment of a hearly identical clause featured in Rafat Ali Rizvi \
Indonesia- to argue that Article 2(1) of the BIT’s minimum ownership requirement directly

a, relates to the scope of the Tribunal's Jurisdiction ratione materiae.

125. Accordingly, the Respondent submits that the lreaty’s MFN clause cannot circumvent Article
211) of the BIT, whose minimum ownership requirement excludes the Claimant's indirect

shareholding in HBT from coverage under the Treaty

a The Possibility of Proceeding on the Basis of LDA‘s Direct Investment in India
The Claimant's Position

126. The Claimant notes that regardless of how Article 21) is interpreted with respect to its indirect
investment in HBT, it indisputably also has made and continues to hold a direct investment in

iin India within the meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT. The Claimant urges the Tribunal to
consider that: (1) LDA, together with IS partner ABG Ports. owned 100% of shares outstanding

in ALBA, an Indian company. and LDA’s shares alone represent an INR 90,00,.00,.006
(approximately USD 20.65 million) equity stake:*! (ii) ALBA was specifically approved by the

Indian Finance Ministry's F oreign Investment Promotion Board (“FIPB") as an “Operating cum

Metal-Teeh Ltd v The Republic of Uzhekistan, \CSID Case No ARB/10/3, Award dated 4 October 2013. “145
(REA-224)).

~** Statement of Defense. * 140 (esting Société Générale, € 4| (CLA-86)),
ost ¢ ‘ounter- Memorial, "63 (emphasis in original)

™ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, €€ 44-46 (citing Rafat Ali Rizvi v The Republic of Indonesia, WSID Case No
ARB?t1/13. Award on Jurisdiction, dated 16 July 2013 (RLA-221})

“ Response to Request, © 27(b), Statement of Claim, © |27

4s

345018/2020/ppp

peony

owned a 63% stake in HBT, the special purpose vehicle established to perform the Contract:

(iv) LDA was “actively involved” in the management of both ALBA and HBT, nominating halt

of ALBA’Ss directors and exercising joint control over the HBT Board:’* and (vy) LDA has
significant technical/finaneial investments in, and liabilities arising from. the Projeet. “** In total,
LDA claims to have invested USD “42 million with an exposure to a further 7 million or so on
ALBA's debts.-"° Citing Bavindir » Pakistan 2” it argues that such an investment falls within
Arucle 1(1)’s definition of investment as “every Kind of asset,” including “moveable property
shares, debentures, rights” “* and employees, “” and satisfies even the “most demanding

definition of an Investment in the Safin test 72"!

-/. The Claimant characterizes its iny estment as both direct and indirect and regards the distinetion

between a direct and indirect investment as immaterial, It states:

The [only relevant] question is whether there was an “asset {. . | invested in the
area of the Contracting Party |. . .] in accordance with the laws of that
Contracting Party,” and of that there is no doubt.

The fact that an investment may be viewed simultaneously as both a direct
Investment in ALBA and as an indirect Investment in HBT is not material to the
claim [. .]. The Claimant is not a portfolio investor in India. ALBA and HBT
Were the legal entities through which the Claimant participated in the Project at
HDC?"

“~ FIPR Approval dated 16 March 2000 (C-49°7)

od

“ Response to Request, * 27(d). Statement of Claim, (© 123-124. 128
“™ Response to Request, © 27(e): Giidas Maire, © 14
* Response to Request, © 27(/)-2 7a),

“ Hearing Transcript. dated § November 2015, at p. 78, fines 12-12

Hearing Transcript, dated 5 November 20] S.atp. 91, fines 15.19 (cing Bavindir Insaat Turizm Ti ret

Sanayi AS. v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, SIP) Case No. ARB/03/29, Decision on Jurisdiction dated 14
November 2003, © 115 (CLA-13))

* Hearing Transcript dated S$ November 2015. a1 p. 79. lines 13-14

Hearing Transcript dated $ November 2015. at p. 92, lines 1-5

+8 oye ~ : 4 yas ms 22 : . ° yt Pas 'y y »

~" Hearing Transcript dated S November 2015. at p. 79, lines 18-23 (citing Salina’ Costruttor SPA. & ftalstrede
VPA v Kingdom of Moreceo, (CSIP) Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision an Jurisdiction dated 14 July 2001 (RLA-
77))

”’ Response to Request, © 30-3),

49

90

345018/2020/ppp

It also notes that a shareholder may pursue claims for its reflective loss when its subsidiary 1s
subjected to harm,.°*’ and points to Article 1¢1)(b) as expressly covering “minority or indirect

forms of interest.°“'

“8. The Claimant eriticizes the Respondent's reliance on HICEE vy. Slovakia.2% for the proposition
that restrictions on jurisdiction over indirect invesiment claims would be circumvented by
invocahion Of a direct investment to claim for the same injury, as “circular."-** and also argues
that the treaty in H/CEE is distinguishable from the present BIT. The Claimant notes that the
tribunal in H/CEE found “clear evidence of a concordance Of views of an agreement between

~ the states and parties to that treaty’? to exclude indirect Investment made through locally
incorporated subsidiaries, supported by an explanatory note to the lreaty. and also found
evidence of a “deliberate attempt to circumvent” such a restriction. The Claimant submits
that there is no comparable evidence in this case either of an express agreement by the
Contracting Parties to exclude jurisdiction in these circumstances. or of an allempted

circumvention of such agreement by the Claimant in this case **

The Respondent's Position

129. Relying on the decision of the tribunal in / HCEE” the Respondent insists that the Claimant's
losses from a “direct investment in the intermediary compans”” cannet confer Standing to
circumvent a minimum ownership requirement Imposed on all indirect shareholdings by clear

Treaty language **° Allowing such an oWnership interest to create jurisdiction for intermediary

ent

"See, ee, Hearing Transcript, dated § November 2015, at p. 83, lines 1-18

Hearing Transcript, dated 5 November 2015. at p. 94, lines 24-25 and p. 95, line |

™ HICEE (RLA-192),

* Hearing Transcript dated § November 2015. at p. 83, line 24

35th Hearng Transempt dated § November 2018. at p. 84. tines 18-20 | quoting JICEE, © 137,138 (RLA-192))
°” Hearing Transcript, dated 5 November 2015. at p. 59, Tine 6.

* Hearing Transcript, dated $ November 2015 at p. 89. fines 8.15

 HICEE, © 146-147 (RLA-192),

™ Reroinder on Jurisdiction, © 63.

345018/2020/ppp

companies by virtue of a claimant’s shareholding in a separate parent company would, in the

Respandent’s view, impermissibly deprive Article 2(1) of the BIT of effect“!

The Respondent rebuts the Claimant's attempt to distinguish CEE on the grounds that the
(realy in that case was accompanied by an express explanatory note agreed by the relevant State
Parties. It contends that the H/CEE tribunal's decision to foreclose a direct investment

reflective loss claim proceeded instead from reliance on the language of the relevant treaty.”

The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s effort to reframe its claim as involving harm to its direct
ownership interest in ALBA as too late in these proceedings.°* The Respondent notes that the
Claimant, in its various submissions to the Tribunal, ttself repeatedly characterized its
Investment in indirect investment terms. For example, the Claimant referred to its investment as
deriving from its “rights in relation to HBT and its “interest in” the Contract." The
Respondent contends that the Claimant has not presented any evidence of the diminution of the
value of LDA shares in ALBA. which would be required to proceed with a reflective loss
claim based on its direct investment. and invokes Postovd Banka v Greece*” to sugvest that a

=

claim may be rejected on that basis.

THE TRIBUNALS ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS

As with the First Objection, the Tribunal begins with the ordinary meaning of the Treaty text,
Arucle (1) sets forth a very broad definition of investment, as comprising “ev ery kind of asset
[...] invested in the area of the Contracting Party” in accordance with its laws. rhe provision
then states that this definition “in parucular but not exclusively includes” a list of specified

[ypes of assets, The ordinary meaning of the term “includes,” in this context. is that the items

Ara Vaeae ne nanAnannns ANE stdtinnsnisin —

Repoinder on Jurisdiction, € 26. Ss

“* Hearing Transeript dated § November 20] S, at p. 128, fines | 1-15

ti} Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 23-26

Sted

Resoinder on Jurisdiction, © 49 (citing Response to Request, © 3) )

“ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 52 (citing Nouce of Arbitration. © [.4 (C-420)),

Hearing Transcript dated § November 201 5, at p. 130, Hines 22-25- 3: p. PAT, lines 1-25: and at p. 132. fines 1-

23;

 Postova Banka, AS. and lsrakapual » The Hetlenic Republic, ICSID Case Na. ARB/| 3/8, Award dated 9
April 2015 (RLA-242)

5]

OU

345018/2020/ppp

on the list are a subset of the broader definition, and the phrase “not exclusively” confirms that
the identification of a subset is not intended to suggest that other types of assets, not so
identified, are intended to be excluded. Among the assets specifically wentified are shares and
other ilerests in Companies incorporated in the host State. and Article 1(1 1) makes clear that
both minority shareholdings and indirect Shareholdings quality as investments within the Treaty

detinition

133. The fact that a particular asset falls within the definition of the term “investment” does not
necessarily mean that it is a protected investment. States are free. if they wish. to extend treaty
protection to a subset, rather than to the full universe of potential investments. If they so
choose, such carve-outs can be reflected in lreaty provisions other than the one defining the
basic term “investment.” Indeed, the very function of Article 2 ofthe BIT, as its ttle indicates.

Is to delineate the “Scope of the Agreement.” a title which, in the Tribunal’s view. connotes the

Treaty’s jurisdictional reach. This reality reflects a threshold flaw in the Claimant's criticism of

the First Objection as impermissibly using Article 2¢1) to restrict the class of investments
purportedly intended to be protected through Article 1(1).°% Arguably, there would be no need
lor “scope” provisions at all in Investment treaties, if they were presumed to cover the tull range
of investments and investors covered in the initial definition sections. Accordingly, the
Tribunal considers that to determine the intended scope of the BIT. it should start with the
language of the provision that purports to delineate its reach. and iilerpret the terms of that

provision in line with the speerfied definitions, rather than the reverse.

134. Turning. then, to the specific text of Article 2(1), the Tribunal first observes that its initial
clause, if read in isolation, would seem to confirm the broadest possible scope Of protection,
Since it states that the Treaty “shall apply to ay investment made by investors of either
Contracting Party in the area of the other Contracting Party [....]” (emphasis added). What
follows is the word “including.” which is curious in this context, Ordinarily and as “includes”

is used in Article 11) -the word “including” would seen to connote that what follows will

8 See, €.g., Hearing Transcript dated 8 November 2015, at p. 80, lines 16-25 and p. ST. lines 1-2 (contending
that the object and purpose of the treaty 16 to promote and protect “investments” as defined in Article, which
~eovers every Kind of investment’): see aise Hearing Transerit dated S November 20} 5S. at p. 94, lines 24-25
und p. 95. lines 1-8 (objecting that “it makes no sense tO interpret Article 2(1) as implying into Article | a
condition [... | That would be a major limitation on the scope of Article |. by means ofan inference drawn from
Article 2."

ca
te

345018/2020/ppp

136.

simply be a subset of the broader category of “any investment.” confirmed by the first clause to
fall within the Treaty’s scope of application. A truly literal reading of Article 2(1), focused on
the word “including,” could thus suggest that it does not function as an exclusion clause at all,
[he outcome of that approach would be a conclusion that the provision’s specific reference to
the protection of one form of investment (“including an indirect investment made through
another company, wherever located, which is owned to an extent of at least 41 per cent by such
investors”) 1s simply informational and confirmatory, rather than operating to exclude from
[reaty coverage the corresponding category of indirect investments through companies owned

tO a lesser extent,

While the Claimant noted the possibility of this literal reading. it ultimately accepted as
common ground with the Respondent that Article 2(1) does function as a carve-out.°’ While it
may seem counter-intuitive to infer an exclusionary intent from the use of an inclusionary word,
that interpretative tool ts well established, as suggested by the Latin maxim expressio rites es!
exclusto alterius (ie, that the express mention of one or more things of a particular class may
be regarded as imphedly excluding others in that class). If Article 2(1) were not read in this
fashion, then little purpose would be served by the second part of the provision specifically
confirming the Treaty’s extension to the $1% owned entities: the first clause of the provision
already would confirm their coverage, since it applies to “any investment” and Article 1(1)
already includes indirect shareholdings within the definition of investment. In other words, the
only reason to specify that these parricudar forms of indirect shareholdings fall within the scope
of the BIT is to indicate that oer forms of indireet shareholdings do net. The Claimant
acknowledges as much, in stating that Article 2(1) “seeks to exclude from the protection of the
lreatv a particular class of indirect investment (that would otherwise qualify for protection

under Article 1( 19)?"

The question, of course, is how that class of indirect investment 1s defined. According to the

Clarmant, Article 2(1) as “properly construed” applies only to exclude a subset of indirect

 

™ Hearing Transeript, dated § November 2015, at p. 95, lines:9-17, and p. 96, lines 2-3; see also Hearing
Transcript, dated S$ November 2018 az p97, lines 15-16.

-” Response to Request, © 35,

O24

345018/2020/ppp

shareholdings in India “held through companies ouside of India?” The challenge the
Claimant faces is that Article 2(1) does not contain any such geographic limitation: to the
contrary, i employs the phrase “wherever located” to describe the intermediate companies,
which would seem to negate the overlay of any geographic restriction. The only textual analysts
that the Claimant offers to overcome the plain meaning of this term is an argument drawn from
the use of the word “Yn” in the first clause of Article 2(1), providing that the Treaty applies to
“any investment made by investors of either Contracting Party v7 the area of the other
Contracting Party” (emphasis added). As noted above. the Claimant construes “in” as meaning
“into” or “incoming from abroad.” and therefore suggests that the rest of the provision, dealing
with intermediate companies, is only addressing potential routing of mvestinents through third
countries “heyore the investment was made iv India,” or otherwise stated, “where the investment
has yet to enter into India.”** According to the Claimant, this reading renders “wherever
located” to mean routed through any “location outside India.” and “lolnly if the first part fof
Article 2(1) had contemplated an investment from India could it be said that ‘wherever located’
must also encompass a company in India.“* Based on this construction. the Claimant
suggests, the Tribunal could maintain literal adherence to the wording of the BIT (without
reaching further into object and purpose ot supplementary materials). and still reject the

Respondent's Second Objection.”

In the Tribunal’s view, however, this interpretation reads far more into the single word “in™ than
that small word reasonably can bear. Moreover, the Claimant’s construction of that word
potentially proves too much, since it would render the first part of Article 2(1) as essentially
limiting the scope of the Treaty’s protections “to any investment made by investors of either
Contracting Party [from outside the other Contracting Party coming into| the area of the other
Contracting Party [..,]/’—-but not (as the Claimant Says), tO Investments from within the host
State into other companies in the host State. This could mean that once the outside Investment

emters the host State. any further routing of it through local intermediate entities (even entities

 

~ Satement of Claim, © 364 (emphasis in oriwinal); see aye Response to Request. © 35 (comending that Article
4 % , oy reaesd 4 po ; $. “ ty See : ei ye She "4 oa : t "
-(1) “apples only to indirect investments held through wen-/idian imermediate companies} cemphasis added |

~” Response to Request. © 39 (emphasis in original),

~ Response to Request, © 39 (emphasis in original)

“Hearing Transenpt dated $ November 2015. at p. 70, limes 20-22.

S4

oo

345018/2020/ppp
138,
| 30
140)

. ‘ rs vb ate » +e . 578
that were wholly owned by the foreign investor, and. therefore clearly exceed the 31%
ownership threshold) might no longer be qualified for Treaty protection, since the subsequent

investment flows do not qualify as an investment coming fo the host State from outside.

By contrast, a more natural reading of the word “in” focuses on the ultimate destination of the
investment, ie., that protections extend to any investment by the foreign investor that ends up
wun the host State. This reading would make the first clause of Article 2¢1) neutral as
between investments directly into the vehicle and those routed indirectly into that vehicle
through intermediate entities. so long as at the end of that routing, the destination of the
Investment is within the host State. The funetion of the second clause of Article 2(1) is to cary e
out a subset of the latter category, namely for routings through intermediate entities over which
the foreign investor does not exercise majority (S10 or mere) control. The focus is squarely on
the extent of the foreign investor's stake in the intermediate vehicle. not on \ hether that vehicle
is located within or outside the host State. This construction restores to the phrase “wherever
located” its ordinary meaning (*wherever” denoting anvwhere in the world), rather than

IMposing On it a strained reading of “wherever located except within the host State.”

For these reasons, the Tribunal considers the ordinary meaning of Article 2(1) to be as the
Respondent posits, namely that it restricts the scope of Treaty protections to indirect
investments in which an investor from the other Contracting Party owns at least 51% of the
intermediate investment vehicle. wherever that vehicle may be located. The Tribunal does not
consider the phrase “wherever located” to be ambiguous, on its own or in the context of the rest
of Article 201), seo as to require resort to supplementary materials as the next step of a VCLT

analysis.

Nor does the Tribunal consider the ordinary meaning of Article 2(1) to be “manifestly absurd or
unreasonable,” within the meaning of VCLT Article 32(b). The Claimant argues that there is no
logical object or purpose in using Article 2(1) to penalize french Investors for channeling
Mmunority Investments through Indian holding companies. when the Treaty does not carve out
any equivalent majority ownership requirement for direct investments in India by the same
investors. The Claimant notes that 9 holding company structure allows a foreign direct investor

(to establish separate entities for multiple projects in India. a “common corporate arrangement

a
St

04

345018/2020/ppp

[that] is desirable from an organisational and financial perspective."""" According to the
Claimant, Article 2 “only makes practical sense if it operates not as a prohibition on investments
in the form of joint ventures with Indian partners.” but rather as a mechamsm to prevent the BIT
from being used to protect investments that in reality are majority owned by third country
nationals. which instead should be protected only through the treaty framework applicable to
those third countries.°”° The Claimant accepts, however. that this asserted “logic of the treaty”
requires “a reading in of something which is not in Article 2(1)" on its face.2” since thal
provision contains no reference to third countriés in Connection with its discussion of indirect

investments. ®

l41. The Respondent counters that there is nothing manifestly absurd about its reading of Article
2(1). In fact, the Respondent contends. that reading is consistent with what it claims to he
India’s “long-standing foreign investment pohey™ of considering an indirect investment to be
“foreign” only when it is made through an Indian company that is owned or controlled by non-
Indian residents, but not when ownership and control remains in the hands of Indian
residents." The Respondent refers to press notes from India’s Ministry of Commerce and
Industry regarding the method of calculating foreign investment in Indian companies.**’ For the

Claimant. these documents concern only “internal Indian regulatory reporting requirements

 

* Response to Request, © 44

** Hearing Transeript, dated § November 2015. at p. 94. lines 17-21; see alse p. 96, lines 3-) 8: and Response to
Request, © 4] .42

* Hearing Transeript dated 8 November 2013, at p. 97. fines 17-19,

~* In that sense, the BIT may be contrasted with India’s later treaty with Kuwait. whieh eapressly provides that
ii “shall not apply to any indirect investments ina Contracting State made through a compan incorporated wn a
third state unless such COMpany ts owned to an estent of at least 41% or ys controiled by investors of the other
Contracting State” (Article | of the Kuwait-lndia BIT (CLA-118) (emphasis addedi) The Claimant contends
that this essentially is what India must have intended to capture by the earher, less precise dratiing in the France-
Inca BIT. while the Respondent argues that the different language in the France-India BIT must be taken as
conmmotng different intent. The Tribunal ultimately does not put significant Weight on inferences drawn fron
comparison of the subject BIT with the later Kuwait-India BIT. for the reasons set forth above generally with
respect to such comparisons.

“” Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 38. Hearmg Transcript dated § November 2015. at page 20, lines 13-24

“ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction. * 8 & 1.44 (citing R-72, R-66, R-69. R-70). R-71, R-73, R-74. R78. R716 R-77,
R-78. R-79, and R-80); Hearing Transcript dated § November 2015. at page 21, lines 1-3,

JO

oo

345018/2020/ppp

}42.

designed for another purpose,” and do not purport to bear on the understanding of the relevant

BIT provisions.~*

The Tribunal does not consider a resort to the internal Indian regulatory documents to be either
necessary under a VCLT analysis. given the lack of ambiguity in the Treaty text, nor in any
event particularly probative of the intent of the BIT negoliators, The same is true for the
Parties’ respective citations to French legislative material. The Claimant relies on two reports,
one stating that “[a]s far as investments made through a company established in a third State are
concerned, these are covered by the Agreement only if that company is in control of at least
31% by a French or Indian investor. and the other indicating that “indirect investments,
made by a company established in a third State are covered by the agreement if the latter is
controlled of at least 51% by a French or Indian investor.*? The Respondent contends that

these descriptions of the BIT’s application to third-country routing of indirect investments do

 

not purport to limit Article 2(1)'s effects to that scenario. and instead are silent about any
impheations for indirect investments routed through host State companies in which French
investors hold minority interests." At the same time. the Respondent cites two different
French legislative documents which it contends are pot limited to the third-country scenario.
One states that “Article 2 specifies that the agreement applies to all investments. [...]. including
lo indirect investments made hy a company that is owned to an extent of at least $1 by
investors of one of the Contracting Parties.-"** The other provides that “a restriction has been
added related to indirect investments (Article 2). Indeed, indirect investments are covered by
the agreement only if it is controlled to an extent of at least S1% by a French or Indian
investor, ***

The coexistence of these four different French reports, generated within a short period of time

but containing different descriptions of Article 2(1), does not provide consistent or compelling

 

™ Hearing Transeript dated 5 November 2014. at p. 99. lines 2-

o

© French Senate Report No. 314, p.4 (CLA-126: see also CL A-172); Response to Request, © 43

“ Report No. 1475, p.4 (CLA-173).

™ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, © 29.

By

Leg

islative Bill No. 231 dated 2} January 1998 p. 2 (R-67): Rejonder on Jurisdiction, © 34-32

“6 National Assembly Commission on Foreign Affairs, Report No, 23 dated 17 March 1999, pp. U- 10 (R-68):
Keyomnder on Jurisdiction, © 33-34

oo

o/

345018/2020/ppp

evidence of France's intent with respect to that provision. The Tribunal thus agrees with

Professor Lowe QC’s observation that:

There is a wonderful symmetry in our submissions because our friends say that two
of the documents support their case and two are neutral. We. of course. can Sav
precisely the same thing about the documents: two of them support our case and
two are neutral. Ultimately, |... | isthey do not carry the tribunal very far at all,
particularly as they come from one side.”

I44. Whatever the French documents suggest about France's contemporaneous understanding of
Article 2(1), there is no evidence in the record that this understanding was shared either with o1

= by India. As noted above, neither Party has submitted any excerpts trom the sravaiy
préparatoires, nor does the record reflect any documentation from India’s own ratification

process.

I45. In the end, the Tribunal is left where it started, with the unambiguous phrase “wherever located”
In Article 2(1). In the absence of any | inguage in the Treaty to suggest a contrary reading of
this phrase-—and with no compelling evidence from supplementary material that the Contracting
Parties mutually intended it to mean something other than what it says-~the Tribunal must treat
the language they used in the provision as the “definitive guide” to their contemporaneous
intent.“** In consequence, the Tribunal finds that by virtue of Article 2(1), the Claimant may not

proceed under the BIT with a claim for harm to its indirect investment in HBT.

146, This conclusion requires the Tribunal next to examine the Claimant's attempt to invoke Article

— 3(1) of the BIT (the Most Favored Nation or “MEN™ provision) effectively to eliminate the
relevant restrictions on consent incorporated within Article 2(1). by positing an entitiement to

the “more favourable” treatment of indirect investments under the Ciermany-India or Kuwait-

India BITs.-*’ The Tribunal starts by observing that the scope and permissible use of MEN

clauses 1s one of the areas in investment treaty jurisprudence in which a consensus on approach

" Hearing Transcript dated 4 November 2015. at page 146, lines 20-25, and page 147, lines | -2.
” Daimler, © 164 (RLA~209)

Statement of Claim. © 364 (invoking the Germany-India BIT (CLA-117), which contains na minimum
shareholding requirement, and the Kuwait-India BIT (CLA-118). which excludes only indirect shareholdings
through minority interests in intern iediate compames incorporated in a “third country”): see aya Response to
Request. © 43-47, Reply on Jurisdiction, © 36

dS

345018/2020/ppp

‘

has not yet developed.“” While this debate takes various different forms and has various
different nuances, the issue presented in this case involves certain first principles: whether the
BITs MFN clause may be used to overcome express limits to the threshold scope of the BIT
itself, and thus to expand its jurisdiction ratione materiae. As to that question, the Tribunal has
no difficulty concluding that the answer is no. A provision delineating the “Scope of the
dereemem” as Article 2 by its own title does. functions as a gateway. Only investors and
investments that are entitled to pass through that gateway may then invoke the protections of the
Treaty’s other provisions. including both its provisions on substantive protection and its

provisions on dispute resolution.””' It would turn the whole notion of “scope” on its head to

first look to one of the BIT’s substantive protections—the entitlement by covered investors and
a investments to treatment no less favorable than that accorded to investors and investments from

third States—1o reason back to determine which investors or investments are entitled to
coverage in the first place.“ Stated otherwise, “one must fall within the scope of the treaty
[...] to be entitled to invoke the treaty protections, of which MFN treatment forms part. Pixs’

[OJne must be under the treaty to claim through the treaty 7°"

 

Shah

See generally European American Investment Bank AG (Austria; (EURAM) v. The Slavak Republic, PCA
Case No, 2010-17, Award on Jurisdiction dated 22 October 2012. 437-438

“! Cf EURAM, $ 446 (noting that dispute resolution clauses in BITs likewise function as “the gateway through
which the investor must pass in order to create an arbitration agreemem and confer jurisdicuon upon a tribunal to

_ hear its claims regarding breach of the standards of treatment to which 11 is entitled under the BIT. Applying an
MFN clause so as to alter the scope ef that arbitration provision is therefore a very different matter from
applying an MFN clause to the other provisions of the BIT’s legal régime which do not have the same dual
character.”)

“? See Rafat, | 221-222, 224, 228 (RLA-221) (rejecting use of an MEN clause to reach investments beyond
those covered by the defined “Scope of the Agreement,” because like treaty clauses defining the meaning of
“investment,” scope provisions “a condition that determines the scope, ratione materiac, of the treary”: as such,
it was “clearly a provision which stipulates a condition which must be fulfilled tor the treaty beneficiary to have
decess lo treaty protection.” including to the MFN clause itself).

3 Metal-Tech v. The Republic of Uzbekistan, © 143 (RLA-224) (emphasis in original), See alsa Vanessa
Ventures Lid v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, © 133 (RLA-214) (rejecting use of MFN clause to
“expand the category of investments” to which the Canada- Venezuela BIT applies, because the benefit of MFN
treatment could be asserted only “in respect of’ investments that are within the scope of [that BIT’s definition of
covered investments] to begin with"); Société Générale. © 4] (CLA-86) (rejecting similar arguments on the basis
that “[ejach treaty defines what it considers a protected investment and who is entitled to that protection,” and
the treaty’s MFN clause “applies only to the treatment accorded to such defined investment,” but not to the
threshold categorization of a protected investment itself). HICEE. © 149 (RLA-192) (rejecting use of MFN to
circumvent BIT’s applicability only to investments made “either directiy or through an investor of a third State,”
because while an MFN clause may “broaden the scope of the substantive protection granted to the eheible

59

345018/2020/ppp

147,

148,

149.

Here, the Claimant's indirect investment in HBT does not fall within the scope of covered
investments, because the Claimant chose to make that investment through an intermediate enuty
(ALBA) in which it held less than $1% of the shares. Had the Claimant negotiated a different
arrangement with its joint venture partner, so the Claimant maintained 51% rather than 49% of
the ALBA shares, then the investment structure would not have fallen afoul of the restriction in
Article 2(1). That did not happen, however, and the consequence is that this particular indirect
investment falls outside Article 2(1)'s express delineation of the “Scope of the Agreement.” In
these circumstances, it cannot be placed back wifi the scope of the Agreement by observing
that orher investments by the Claimant might be entitled to the benefits of Article 5(1), because

that provision extends protections generally to “investments.”

While it is true (as the Claimant notes) that Article 5(2) also extends MEN protection to
“investors.” °"* this general language falls far short of signaling an intention to allow such
investors the benefit of MFN treatment even with respect to their particular imvestments that are
excluded trom the Treaty’s scope under Article 2(1). In the Tribunal’s view. far clearer
language would be required in an MFN clause for it to function as a “wild card” that trumps
express exclusions from the “Scope of the Agreement.” In other words, where the Contracting
Parties have seen fit to exclude a particular investment from the scope of the BIT. it ts not for a
tribunal to rewrite the operative BIT clause, by reference to a different BIT protection (MFN

Ireatment) that is extended to other investments that eo fall within the treaty’s defined scope.

With this point established. the only remaining question is whether the Second Objection
disposes in its entrety of the Claimant's case, or whether a portion of that case may proceed on
a basis ofher than with respect to the Claimant's indireet investment in HBT. There is no
dispute, factually, that the Claimant made a direct investment in India in connection with its

acquisition of shares in ALBA?’ and the Claimant asserts that it also invested directly into

 

investments of eligible investors.” it could not “legitimately be used to broaden” the categories of such mvestors
OF Ivestinents themselvesi,

“* Hearing Transcript dated $ November 2018, at p. 100, Ines 8.8.

~~ Hearing Transeript dated 5 November 2015, at p. P24, lines 21-25 he Respondent stating. “[wle concede
that they have a direct investment in ALBA | |. So. there 18 no question about the existence of a direet
mvestrrent |... 17),

6)

og

345018/2020/ppp

HBT, including through the commitment of finance. personne! and know-how.°”" While the
Respondent contends that the latter catevories do not qualify as assets for purposes of Treaty
protection,*"" it does not dispute that the Claimant's direct cone of shares in ALBA
constitutes a qualifving investment in India, entitled to BIT protection.“”* It also accepts that the
BIT imposes no majority ownership restriction on the BIT’s coy erage ol direct investments. In
other words, it is common ground that the Claimant has Standing to pursue a properly framed

claim tor improper treatment of and Injury to its direct investment in ALBA.

I50. Where the Parties part ways, however. is whether such a direct investment claim may proceed

~ on the facts and pleadings in this case. \ccording to the Respondent, it may not do so, because
the Claimant has not alleged any rongdoing by India aimed at the Claimant's shareholding in

ALBA itself, so any claim pursued on the basis of harm to that direct investment sull essenually

would be predicated on State action in relation to HBT. the indirect investment. This is said to

be an impermissible end-run around Article 2¢])'s bar on asserting a claim squarely on the basis

of the indirect investment in HBT. In addition. the Respondent argues it ts too late in these
proceedings for the Claimant to reformulate its clams on the basis of its direct investment.

because that was not the formulation presented in its initial pleadings

ISI. The Tribunal accepts these objections only in part. It agrees with the Respondent that no

Jurisdiction would lie for a direet investment claim that is simply a restatement of the indirect

investment claim that is excluded from BIT protection under Arucle 2(1). In other words. in

general the Claimant cannot collapse the distinction between the ovo types of claims by simply

positing. with no economic analysis, that its 49% stake in ALBA entitles it automatically to

~ claim for 49% of whatever injury may have been sustained by HBT. On the other hand, if the
Claimant properly can frame an anaivicaily distinct claim, focused on alleged wrongdoing by

the Respondent that demonstrabl y injured the Claimant's interest in assets that it direc tly OWNS,

* Response to Request, @ 27-2s: Hearing Transcript dated 5 November 2015. at Pp 90. lines 6-25, and p. 91,
Ines 1-19,

~ Rejounder on Jurisdiction. 1.66

“Hearing Transeript dated $ November 2015, at p. 124, lines 21-25 and p. 128. line | (“We concede that |.)
that direet invesiment [in ALBA} is itself protected against acuen by the ie Sie toward that shareholding
investment, So there is no question about [..) the extension of the treaty fo profect that mvestment. The
question ts how far it protects such direct investments.)

|

345018/2020/ppp

such a claim in principle would not be barred under Article 2(1).°" Otherwise, the exclusion (in
the second part of that article) for minority stakes in indirect investments would completely
swallow the acceptance (in the first part of that article) that any other investments within the
definition of Article 1(1) are entitled to treaty protection, Including “minority” interests im direct
investments under Article 1(1)(. The Tribunal finds no evidence in the BIT that the

Contracting Parties intended to impose limits in this fashion on direct investment claims

Sst
hf

The Tribunal does not accept the Respondent's argument that the reverse is true, namely that

allowing a properly framed direct investment claim to proceed “renders Article 2¢1)

+300

meaningless.” It goes without saving that Article 2¢1) still has significant effect for investors

routing indirect investments through third countries, as those cannot possibly be reframed as
direct investinent claims. Moreover, even for indirect vestments routed through intermediate
entities in India, such as in this case. there are Significant differences (and arguably greater
hurdles) in the way such a “double reflective loss” claim would have to be proven, including

diter afia with respect to issues of causation and loss.

153. Nor is the Tribunal persuaded at this point to follow the approach in AUCEE v. Slovakia. where
the tribunal denied a request to re-plead claims in order to focus on alleged injury to a direct

investment. following a finding that the Contracting Parties had unmistakably intended to

Mating

The Tribunal offers no comment on whether there may be other Jurisdicuonal issues to be addressed.
meiuding with respect to the additional Objections pleaded by the Respondent and joined to the merits by the
Tribunal im its POD.

“ Rejoinder on Jurisdicuian, © 58

" See, e.g. ST-AD, © 282 (explaining that “an investor whose investment consists of shares cannot claim, for
example, that the assets of the company are its property and ask for compensation for imerference with these
assets. Such an investor can, however, claim for any loss of Value of jts shares resulting from an interference
with the assets or contracts of the company in which it owns the shares”) (RLA-222). As otherwise explained
by Professor Zachary Douglas, “| ajn action for a ‘direct injury’ is premised upon the third party having breached
an obligation owed directly to the shareholder rather than just to the company, whereas in an aetion for
‘reflective loss’ the shareholder is suing for the diminution of the value of its shares caused by dels of the third
party directed to the company itself. Reflective loss can be defined as ‘the diminution of the value of the shares
i... the loss of dividends [...| and all other payments which the shareholder may have obtained from the
company if it had not been deprived of its funds.’ Zachary Douglas, THE INTERNATIONAL LAW OF PNVESPMENT
CLAIMS (2009), p. 402 (RLA-160) (quotations omitted).

In tins case, the Claimant would need te focus even more squarely on issues of causation, because its claim IThay
be seen as one involving “dewhle reflective loss” ie. alleged injury te the Claimant resulting from ingury to its
minority (direct) shareholding in ALBA, flowing from harm tw ALBA'S interest in HBT The Respondent
comtends that the Claimant thus far bas net framed its proof as required under reflective loss jurisprudence,
Hearing Transcript dated 8 November 2015, at p. 130, line 22 through p. 132. line 5

62

‘i

345018/2020/ppp

exclude a particular form of indirect investment from BIT protection.’ The //CEE tribunal
ucknowledged that “[aJs the Tribunal has interpreted the Agreement, it plainly admits a
company like [the direct investment] as an investment in tts own right.” with “[t]he consequence
|...] that a claim under the Agreement would He Gin appropriate circumstances) in respect of

losses sustained by” the direct investment." The tribunal nonetheless concluded that for
jurisdiction to exist in that case, any such losses would have to have resulted from wrongful
“treament of the direct investment, net from mistreatment of the downstream indirect

investment causing injury upstream to the direct investment.“

154. The Respondent made a similar objection in this case, “” which the Claimant opposed inter alia
on the grounds that the objection was “about the meris of the case, the equivalent of a ‘motion
to dismiss’ or an application to ‘strike out’ the case at the preliminary stage, before a full
hearing" In PO2. the Tribunal joined Uhis objection to the merits, along with other objections
for which (unlike the Article 211) and Article 9 objections) the alleged jurisdictional flaws were
closely intertwined with issues of fact. In these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that it
would be premature to preclude a direct investment claim at the outset, without further bricting
on the facts (including as to which entity or entities the State action or “treatment” in this case
was directed), as well as on the proper boundaries between issues of loss causation and
jurisdiction. For present purposes, the Tribunal confines its observations to the consequences of

Articles 1(1) and 2(1). which is that where a treaty decidedly protects dees investments im its

 

“in HICEE, the relevant BIT defined as “investments” only assets invested directly or “through an investor ot
a third State.” The claimant alleged loss to a downstream investment that was channeled through a vehicle in the
respondent State, not through a third State ACER, © 48-49 (RLA-192), The Tribunal noted the existence o!
express Explanatory Notes confirming that while “[nJormally, investment protection agreements also cover
investments im the host country made by a |...] company’s subsidiary which ts already established in the host
country,” in this case one State Party “wishes to exclude the “sub-subsidiary” from the scope of this Agreement.”
and the other State Party “has consented tot” (CEE © 126 (quoting Explanatory Note) (RLA-192)

% HICKE © 147 (RLA-192)
™ BICKER © 147 (RLA-192)
“5 See Counter-Memeorial. © 162 (contending, as part of the Respondent's Fifth Obsection, that purisdichon eNists

proma facie oniy if the qualifying investment, in this case a shareholding interest, itse:t was the object of
allegedly unfawiul treatment)

© Response to Request, © $9. See alive Hearing Transcript dated $ November 2015, at p. $3, lines 1-24 (arguing
that the notion that claims cannot be brought for mjury “by acuon that is directed at another person [...] 1s based
on a fallacy. but more important, {...| [it] is essentially a question of the limits of Tiability and of remoteness

which is a merits question.” not an issue of the Tribunal’s “yurisdienen to hear that question”).

3

(Z

345018/2020/ppp

territory, claims alleging mjury to such direct investments as 4 consequence of State conduct are
not so manifestly flawed that they should be barred at the door, simply because the treats

excludes other types of claims alleging harm to certain categories of indirecr investments

185. The Tribunal further does not accept the Respondent's argument that it is simply too late in
these proceedings for the Claimant to seek to proceed on the basis of alleged harm to its direct
investment, While it ts true that the Claimant’s inital pleadings did not formulate the claim in
this way,’ they did clearly allege the factual predivate of a direct investment in India
Moreover, the Claimant made clear immediately after the Respondent's request for bifurcation
that if intended to proceed in the alternative on the basis of its direct investment, should the

Vie

Tribunal find jurisdiction to be lacking over its indirect investment claim Article 20 of the

UNCITRAL Rules permits amendment of claims absent undue prejudice.“ and those Rules
permit a inibunal to allow reformulations, with appropriate adjustments to the procedural
umetable, rather than dismissing a case outright and requiring it to be refiled with somewhat

31Gb

different emphasis. Proceeding in this fashion is particularly appropriate given. the

 

“Notification of Claim, © 6 (C-414) (alleging that India “has jeopardized and deprived LDA of its Investment
comprising Of its interest in the [Cortract}), Notece of Arbitration, © 1.4 (C420). (describing the dispute as
arismg out oF “India’s conduct in jeopardising and ultimately dispossessing LDA ef is Investment, comprising
of its interest in the [Contract]: Stuement of Clam, © 359-360 (alleging that “the Claimant holds an
Investment in India, in the form of an indirect shareholding in TIBI and “through its shareholding. the
Claimant holds partial rights (in the ratia 49051 as set out above) to money and claims for pertormance under the
Contract. Consequently, the Claimant's indireet shareholding of and rights in the Contract held by, HBT quality
as a protected investment in India’).

Wis

Response to Request, 32-33, 47. See alye Hearing Transcript dated 5 November 2013, at p. 92. lines 13-17
(“We are making no pretence that the clarmant went through and considered at the beginning every conceivable
formulation of tis case that it could have put forward in legal terms so that they could be there. It put the facts
out and puts its clanm out} [75

™ Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Rules reads: “During the course of the arbitral proceedings either party may
amend or supplement his claim or defence unless the arbitral tnbunal considers it inappropriate to allow such
amendment having regard to the delav in making i or prepudice to the ether party or any ether circumstances
t...)P

See eg. Methanex v United States, UNCITRAL Case. Partial Award dated 7 August 2002, © 79 (deciding
that the claimant's amended statement of claim. “as a whale, cannot withstand the USA's jurisdictional
challenge |... | but that it is possible that a fresh pleading from Methanex re-stating part of its existing case could

survive that challenge.” and therefore granting the claimant an opportunity to further amend its statement of

claim, based on Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Arhitration Rules)

o4

fo

345018/2020/ppp

Respondent’s concession that Article 2¢1) does not exclude jurisdiction over a properly framed claim

toa direct investment in India.’

[S6, [tis not clear to the Tribunal whether the Claimant considers its present Memorial (with supporting
Witness statements, expert reports and exhibits) adequate to support claims focused on harm to its
direct investment, or whether it would seek the opportunity to amend or supplement such a filing an
hight of the Tribunal’s ruling that such claim must be analytically distinct from one predicated on a

right to pursue a claim for harm to its indirect interest in HPT. The Tribunal invites the Claimant to

indicate, within thirty davs of this Decision, whether it intends to rest on its present submission, or

seeks an Opportunity to amend or supplement. The Tribunal recognizes that certain adjustments may
be required to the procedural schedule (including a deferral of the currently reserved hearing dates), in
_ order to provide adequate time to the Respondent to consider the implications of the Claimant's

decision and in particular any amended or supplemented Memorial.

er,
Vil. DISPOSITIF
IS7. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal unanimously:
A DISMISSES the Respondent's First Objection:
B. FINDS, with respect to the Respondent's Second Objection, that:
I, the Claimant may not proceed under Article 2(1) ef the Treaty with a claim with
respect to its indirect mvestment in HBT:
2. the Claimant may proceed under Article 201) of the Treaty with a claim with
respect to its direct investments in India:
erm,

C, INVITES the Claimant to notify the ‘Tribunal, the Respondent, and the PCA within thirty days
of this Decision, whether it intends to amend or supplement its present submissions, in light of

this Decision: and

1), DEFERS consideration of costs until a later = =ophase of — these proceedings.

 

Hearing Transenpt dated § November 2015, at p. | 24. lines 21-25 and p. 125, line |

Qs

(%

345018/2020/ppp

PLACE OF ARBITRATION: London, United Kingdom

DATED: 22 December 2014

 

Prof. Julian D.M. Lew QC Mr, John Christopher Thomas QC
Jean & kallich.
aed 3s
(Presiding Arbitrator)

66

‘9

