INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

LSG Building Solutions GmbH and others
v.

Romania

(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/19)

 

Procedural Order No. 3
Decision on Bifurcation

Members of the Tribunal
Juan Ferndndez-Armesto, President of the Tribunal
Pierre-Marie Dupuy, Arbitrator
O. Thomas Johnson, Jr., Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Aissatou Diop

Assistant to the Tribunal
Bianca McDonnell

 

October 9, 2019

LSG Building Solutions GbmH and others v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/19)

 

Procedural Order No. 3 — Decision on Bifurcation

Table of Contents

 

 

WHEREAS. 3

1. The Respondent ’s position ..........s.sssssssssssssssssssssssssessssesssssssssesssssessesessssesssseesesees 4
1 Criteria for bDifUrcatiOn oo... eeeseeeseeeseesestenestessstenesneneanenees 4
1.2 The EU Law Objection ..0.....c.c cece eee ceeeeeneeeeeeseeeeeeseeeeeeeneeeeeieee 5
1.3 The Multi-Party Objection... cece cece eeeeteeeeeneneeeeaeee 5
14 The Nationality Objection... ccc neces ee eeteteteeeneneneeeneee 6

2. The Claii ” positi 6
2.1 Criteria for bDifUrcatiOn oo... eeeseeeseeeseesestenestessstenesneneanenees 6
2.2 The EU Law Objection ..

 

2.3 The Multi-Party Objection

 

24 The Nationality Objection.
3. The Tribunal’s d

ery NN

LSG Building Solutions GbmH and others v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/19)

 

Procedural Order No. 3 — Decision on Bifurcation

WHEREAS

This arbitration arises between Claimants, LSG Building Solutions GmbH, Green
Source Consulting GmbH, Solluce Romania 1 B.V., Risen Energy Solar Project
GmbH, Core Value Investments GmbH & Co KG Gamma, Core Value Capital
GmbH, SC LJG Green Source Energy Beta SRL, Anina Pro Invest Ltd, Giust Ltd,
and Pressburg UK GmbH and Respondent, Romania [collectively, the “Parties”’].

On February 6, 2019 the Arbitral Tribunal received the European Commission’s
Application for Leave to Intervene as Non-Disputing Party [the “Commission’s
Application”).

On March 28, 2019 the Arbitral Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 [“PO No.
1”] and the Procedural Timetable attached as Annex B.

On May 13, 2019 the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Decision on the European
Commission’s Application to Intervene as a Non-Disputing Party as Procedural
Order No. 2, granting the European Commission’s request to file a written
submission as a non-disputing party on the European Union [“EU”] law issue.

On August 14, 2019 Romania submitted its Request for Bifurcation.

On September 11, 2019 Claimants submitted their Response to Romania’s Request
for Bifurcation.

On September 16, 2019 the Tribunal decided that a hearing on bifurcation would
not be necessary.

After carefully considering the Parties’ respective positions, the Arbitral Tribunal
issues the following Decision on Bifurcation.

LSG Building Solutions GbmH and others v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/19)

 

Procedural Order No. 3 — Decision on Bifurcation

Decision on Bifurcation

This Decision summarises the Respondent’s and the Claimants’ respective
positions (1. — 2.) and then the Tribunal renders its ruling (3.).

THE RESPONDENT’S POSITION

Romania asserts that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction on the basis of three grounds
[the “Jurisdictional Objections”):

- Art. 26 of the Energy Charter Treaty [“ECT”] does not apply to intra-EU
disputes [the “EU Law Objection”] (1.1.);

- Romania has not consented to the collective adjudication of Claimants’
claims in one arbitration [the “Multi-Party Objection”] (1.2.);

- Claimants Anina Pro Invest Ltd and Guist Ltd [“Anina” and “Guist”] are
owned and controlled by a Romanian national [the “Nationality Objection”)
(1.3.).

On these bases, Romania alleges that the proceeding should be bifurcated into two
phases: jurisdiction and merits.

CRITERIA FOR BIFURCATION

Respondent alleges that the Tribunal should apply the following criteria when
deciding whether to bifurcate!:

- Whether the issue to be bifurcated is sufficiently substantial (not frivolous or
vexatious);

- Whether the issue to be bifurcated, if upheld, may result in a material
reduction of the proceedings or clarification of the issues in dispute, leading
to a saving of time and costs; and

- Whether the issue to be bifurcated is not too intertwined with the merits of
the case that it renders bifurcation impractical and requires a prejudging of
the merits of the case.

Respondent states that the overall consideration should be of procedural economy
and efficiency.

' Request for Bifurcation, paras. 17; 15-34. Respondent avers that each Objection meets the requirements

for bifurcation.
? Request for Bifurcation, para. 14.

LSG Building Solutions GbmH and others v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/19)

 

1.2

1.3

Procedural Order No. 3 — Decision on Bifurcation

THE EU LAw OBJECTION

Romania alleges that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the dispute as the arbitral
clause in Art. 26 ECT is inapplicable to intra-EU disputes such as the case at hand,
as confirmed by?:

- The Decision rendered by the Court of Justice of the European Union
[“CJEU”] on 6 March 2018 in Slovak Republic v. Achmea BV [the “Achmea
Judgment”);

- The European Commission’s Communication of July 19, 2019;

- The political declaration signed by 22 EU Member States on January 15,
2019, addressing what they called the legal consequences of the CJEU’s
Achmea Judgment in relation to intra-EU BITs.

Respondent states that bifurcation is warranted because the EU Law Objection:
- Is neither vexatious nor frivolous‘;

- Tf upheld, would result in a finding that there is no valid arbitration agreement
between the Parties, resulting in the dismissal of Claimants’ complex claims
in their entirety>; and

- Can be decided without examining the merits of the dispute®.
THE MULTI-PARTY OBJECTION

According to Romania, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the dispute because
Romania has not consented to the collective adjudication of Claimants’ claims in
this arbitration. Claimants, comprised of ten different companies incorporated in
five different European countries, are attempting to jointly adjudicate separate and
distinct claims in relation to five different solar photovoltaic projects in Romania’.

However, Respondent argues that neither the ECT nor the ICSID Convention
provides for the collective adjudication of claims, and Respondent has not
consented to such collective adjudication®.

Further, Respondent says that the collective adjudication of such claims raises
antitrust concerns under EU and Romanian law, as it could lead to the exchange of

3 Request for Bifurcation, paras. 36 and 40.
+ Request for Bifurcation, para. 42.

5 Request for
© Request for Bifurcation, pai
7 Request for Bifurcation, pai

 
 
 
 

LSG Building Solutions GbmH and others v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/19)

 

1.4

20.

21.

22.

2.1

23.

Procedural Order No. 3 — Decision on Bifurcation

competitively sensitive information between the Claimants, which are competitors
in the EU market’.

Respondent avers that the Multi-Party Objection meets the requirements for
bifurcation as articulated in paragraph 12!°.

THE NATIONALITY OBJECTION

Romania’s final objection is based upon the Tribunal’s alleged lack of jurisdiction
over the two Claimants, Anina and Giust, as they are 100% controlled and owned
by a Romanian national Gheorge Catalin Liviu!'. Arbitrations may not be brought
against an investor’s state under Arts. 17 and 25 of the ECT and Art. 25 of the
ICSID Convention.

Respondent states that the Nationality Objection meets the criteria for bifurcation!”,
and if accepted, would dispose of the claims brought by these two Claimants, and

decrease the overall time and costs required to defend the claims'*.

THE CLAIMANTS’ POSITION

  

Claimants request the Tribunal to reject Romania’s request to bifurcate the
proceedings. Claimants argue that Romania is relying upon a lower standard for
bifurcation (2.1.), and in any case, all three Objections lack legal merit and fail to
fulfil the criteria necessary for bifurcation and should be dismissed (2.2.-2.5.).

CRITERIA FOR BIFURCATION

Claimants aver that, contrary to Respondent’s contention, bifurcation is the

exception and should only be considered when the following cumulative criteria are

met '*

- When the state’s objections to jurisdiction have a strong likelihood of success;

- When bifurcation would materially reduce the time and cost of the
proceeding, rather than result in an additional burden by creating another,

separate phase; and

- When issues of jurisdiction and merits are so distinct that consideration of the
former will not require briefing or evidence related to the latter.

° Request for Bifurcation, para. 75.

‘© Request for Bifurcation, paras. 76-81.

'! Request for Bifurcation, para. 82.

'? Request for Bifurcation, para. 88.

'S Request for Bifurcation, paras. 85-86.

'4 Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, para. 5, citing CL-141, para. 49.

LSG Building Solutions GbmH and others v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/19)

 

24.

2.2

25.

26.

2.3

27.

28.

29.

24

30.

Procedural Order No. 3 — Decision on Bifurcation

Claimants state that tribunals typically apply this test against an overarching
concern for procedural efficiency and the reduction of costs!>.

THE EU LAw OBJECTION

According to Claimants, the EU Law Objection fails to satisfy the first element in
the test for bifurcation as it is not substantial and does not have a strong likelihood
of success; the same objection has been unanimously rejected by all tribunals,
including at least 25 ECT tribunals that have issued decisions on the objection in
recent years (including 15 ECT tribunals post-Achmea)'®.

Claimants aver that all substantive arguments made by Respondent to support its
EU Law Objection, have been considered and rejected by prominent arbitrators!’.
The EU Law Objection is therefore very unlikely to succeed and, thus, bifurcation
would only result in delay and additional costs'*.

THE MULTI-PARTY OBJECTION

Claimants state that the proceedings should not be bifurcated on the basis of the
Multi-Party Objection, as it is not likely to succeed and result in the termination of
the arbitration at the jurisdictional phase.

Claimants argue that additional consent to arbitration with multiple parties is not
required under the ECT or the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules”’. ICSID
case law?! supports the proposition that the different Claimants must only meet the
express jurisdictional requirements of the ICSID Convention and the ECT for the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to be established”?.

Claimants additionally argue that acceptance of the Objection would lead to
redundancy, as it would force Claimants to divide their claims into ten separate
arbitrations”. Due to the significant overlap among the Claimants, no procedural
efficiency would be gained by accepting Romania’s position and requiring the
arbitration to be divided‘.

THE NATIONALITY OBJECTION

Finally, Claimants request that the Tribunal dismiss Respondent’s Nationality
Objection.

'5 Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, para. 14, citing CL-131 and CL-132.

16

Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, paras. 23-25 and cases cited therein.

'7 Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, paras. 27-50.

'8 Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, paras. 51-52.

'° Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, para. 53.

2 Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, para. 55.

2! Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, paras. 58-61, citing CL-154, CL-155 and CL-156.
» Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, para. 55.

3 Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, para. 55.

4 Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, para. 65.

LSG Building Solutions GbmH and others v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/19)

 

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

Procedural Order No. 3 — Decision on Bifurcation

Claimants say that both Anina and Giust are Cypriot nationals and are incorporated
in Cyprus, fulfilling the relevant test for nationality. Neither the ECT nor the ICSID
Convention permit the Tribunal to disregard the nationality of the Claimants and
consider the nationality of their shareholder, who is Romanian”.

Claimants state that the same objection has been consistently rejected by arbitral
tribunals”®, and the legal authority on which Romania relies to further this position
is not applicable in the present case”’.

Claimants outline that the Nationality Objection fails the second element of the
bifurcation standard because even if it was accepted by the Tribunal, it would not
lead to the dismissal of the entire case or result in the narrowing of the size or scope
of the arbitration. This is because Anina owns 50% of one of the two Frasinet plants,
while Giust owns 50% of the other Frasinet plant; the remaining 50% in each case
is owned by Claimant Pressburg, who would remain in the arbitration regardless.
There would, therefore, be no reduction in the number of investments or the
evidence and legal arguments related to those projects”*.

The Tribunal should therefore reject Romania’s final Objection”.
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

Romania requests the Tribunal to bifurcate the proceedings on the basis of three
objections:

- The EU Law Objection;
- The Multi-Party Objection; and
- The Nationality Objection.

The case law cited by the Parties shows that arbitral tribunals generally consider the
following three-factor test when deciding whether to grant bifurcation*’:

- Whether the jurisdictional objections raised are prima facie substantial;
- Whether the objection to jurisdiction, if granted, will result in a material

reduction of the proceedings at the next phase, or would dispose of all or
substantially all of the claims; and;

?5 Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, para. 72.

26

Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, paras. 73-83 and references cited therein.

27 Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, para. 85.
?8 Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, para. 86.
2? Claimant’s Response to Bifurcation, para. 86.
3° Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia, ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41, Procedural Order No. 2,
CL-141, para. 49; Glamis Gold Ltd. v. The United Sates of America, UNCITRAL Case, Procedural Order
No. 2 (revised) dated May 31, 2005, para. 12(c).

LSG Building Solutions GbmH and others v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/19)

 

37.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

Procedural Order No. 3 — Decision on Bifurcation

- Whether bifurcation is impractical, in that the jurisdictional issue is too
intertwined with the merits, making it very unlikely that there will be any
savings in time or cost.

After carefully analysing Romania’s Objections to jurisdiction in light of the above
criteria, and in the interests of procedural economy and efficiency, the Tribunal
decides not to bifurcate the proceedings for the reasons outlined below.

The EU Law Objection

Bearing in mind that the general relationship between EU law, the ECT and
investment arbitration is presently being analysed and reviewed in different fora,
the Tribunal is not convinced that bifurcation would lead to a material reduction of
the proceedings and a substantial saving in time and costs.

The Nationality Objection

The Nationality Objection is only brought against two out of the ten Claimants:
Anina and Giust. Both Anina and Giust are 50% owners of two different Frasinet
plants, with the remaining 50% of each plants owned by a different Claimant,
Pressburg*!.

Consequently, even if the Objection is eventually accepted by the Tribunal, it would
not lead to a reduction in the number of investments or the evidence and legal
arguments related to those projects; nor would it result in the dismissal of the entire
case, dispose of substantially all of the claims, or materially reduce the proceedings
at the merits phase.

The Multi-Party Objection

In regard to the Multi-Party Objection, Respondent avers that the same objection
has been regularly advanced as a ground for bifurcation and upheld by arbitral
tribunals**. To support its proposition Respondent refers to four cases, Abaclat and
Others v. The Argentine Republic, Ambiente Ufficio S.P.A. and Others v. The
Argentine Republic, Giovanni. Alemanni. and Others v. The Argentine
Republic and Erhas and Others v. Turkmenistan.

Abaclat and Others v. The Argentine Republic

In Abaclat the tribunal had to determine whether the respondent state had consented
to arbitration brought by 60,000 bondholders**. The tribunal affirmed the principle
of multi-party arbitration, stating that “it is difficult to conceive why and how the

3! Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 37-40.
* Request for Bifurcation, para. 78.
3 RL-28, para. 216.

LSG Building Solutions GbmH and others v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/19)

 

43.

44.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

Procedural Order No. 3 — Decision on Bifurcation

Tribunal could lose its jurisdiction where the number of Claimants outgrows a
certain threshold”**.

The tribunal concluded that*>:
“Tt would be contrary to the purpose of the treaty and to the spirit of ICSID,
to require in addition to the consent to ICSID arbitration in general, a
supplementary express consent to the form of such arbitration”.

The tribunal therefore dismissed the objection.

Ambiente Ufficio S.P.A. and Others v. The Argentine Republic

 

In Ambiente Ufficio the tribunal additionally affirmed the permissibility of multi-
party arbitration under the ICSID convention. The tribunal found multi-party
arbitrations to be “perfectly compatible”*© with the ICSID Convention and Rules,
reasoning that while Art. 25(1) of the ICSID Convention refers to

“a national of [a] Contracting State’ in the singular, nothing would force the
Tribunal to conclude that this wording could not also encompass a plurality of
individuals”*”.

The tribunal therefore dismissed the jurisdictional objection and concluded that**:
“multi-party arbitration is a generally accepted practice in ICSID arbitration...
[that] does not require any consent on the part of the respondent Government

beyond the general requirement of consent to arbitration”.

Gi i Alemanni_and Others v. The Argentine Republi

 

In Giovanni Alemanni and Others v. The Argentine Republic the tribunal’s Decision
on Jurisdiction and Admissibility firstly confirmed that the ICSID Convention does
not limit multiple claimants from bringing a single proceeding”:

“The Tribunal can see no reasonable basis for implying into the text as it
stands of Article 25(1) the additional words ‘but only one’”.

The Tribunal then analyzed whether Respondent had consented to multi-party
arbitration*’. The Tribunal decided that the key to link the respective investors is
the existence of a single dispute*!:

“In searching, therefore, for an element that more satisfactorily defines the
link that must exist between a group of claimants and between their claims, in

34 RL-28, para. 490.
35 RL-28, para. 490.
36 RL-29, para. 146.
57 RL-29, para. 130.
38 RL-29, para. 141.
8° RL-30, para. 271.
4° RL-30, para. 280.
41 RL-30, para. 292.

LSG Building Solutions GbmH and others v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/19)

 

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

Procedural Order No. 3 — Decision on Bifurcation

the absence of consent by the respondent to the hearing of their claims
together, the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that the answer lies in the
notion of a ‘dispute’. To go back to basics, the jurisdiction created by Article
25(1) of the ICSID Convention ‘extends to’ (which in context means, is
confined to) ‘any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment”.
The tribunal reasoned that for a ‘single dispute’ to exist, it is necessary for the
interests of both claimants’ and respondent's “to be in all essential respects identical
for all of those involved on that side of the dispute”*?.

The tribunal considered, however, that such an assessment could only be made at
the merits stage, since only then would it be in a position to consider whether the
actual rights of the claimants and the effects of Argentina’s conduct were
sufficiently similar to constitute a ‘single dispute’**.

Therefore, the tribunal decided that the substance of the jurisdictional issue was so
closely entwined with the substantive disagreement between the Parties, that it had
to be joined to the merits**.

(The case was eventually discontinued due to a lack of payment, prior to the award
on the merits was issued.)

Erhas and Others v. Turkmenistan

Respondent also refers to Erhas and Others v. Turkmenistan, in which an
UNCITRAL tribunal declined jurisdiction on the basis of the Respondent’ s lack of
consent to arbitrate with multiple claimants**. The tribunal declined jurisdiction
over 22 Turkish investors which claimed to have invested in 31 different projects
over a period of 20 years, and ranging across a variety of industries, including a
water bottling business, various factories and construction projects*® - a factual
situation quite different from that submitted by Claimants in the present arbitration.

The arbitrators acknowledged the claimants’ argument that tribunals have asserted
jurisdiction over investment treaty claims brought by groups of claimants where
there are certain common linkages between the various claims. However, the
tribunal saw no prior case where a tribunal had asserted jurisdiction in
circumstances where the claims, claimants and investments were unrelated*”:

“consent to arbitration in a treaty based context does not imply the acceptance
to the joint adjudication of entirely unrelated claims made by unrelated
claimants in the context of different and unrelated investments”.

2 RL-30, para. 292.
+3 RL-30, para. 293.
4 RL-30, para. 293.
4S RL-31,

46RL-31, para. 1.
47RL-31, p.5.

LSG Building Solutions GbmH and others v. Romania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/19)

 

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

Procedural Order No. 3 — Decision on Bifurcation

Moreover, there was no indication that Turkmenistan had consented to have such

disparate claims arbitrated in a single proceeding**.

KK

Analysis

The Tribunal finds, prima facie, the reasoning of Giovanni Alemanni and Others v.
The Argentine Republic to be relevant. As the tribunal in that case reasoned,
multiple claimants may be permitted to bring a single arbitration against a
respondent state, provided that such claimants are capable of proving that their
respective claims form a single dispute.

The Tribunal additionally agrees with the Alemanni tribunal that the determination
of the existence of a single dispute requires an in-depth analysis of the claims being
advanced by Claimants, an exercise which is closely intertwined with the
adjudication of the merits. It would therefore be inappropriate to bifurcate the
Multi-Party Objection into a separate jurisdictional phase.

Accordingly, the procedure established in Scenario A of the Procedural Timetable
will be followed, and the Tribunal will address the jurisdictional objections raised
by Respondent together with the merits. The Tribunal hereby reissues the
Procedural Timetable, attached as Annex B to PO No. 1.

ak oe ok
In summary, the Tribunal decides to:

(i) | Reject Respondent’s request for bifurcation;

(ii) Join the EU Law Objection, Multi-Party Objection and Nationality Objection
to the merits; and

(iii) Direct the Parties to follow the Procedural Timetable set out in Scenario A of
Annex B to PONo. 1.

Nusso_—

Juan Fernandez-Armesto
President of the Arbitral Tribunal
Date: October 9, 2019

8 RL-31, p.3.

