IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION
BEFORE A TRIBUNAL CONSTITUTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF LITHUANIA AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC
ON THE PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS
DATED 1 DECEMBER 1994
-and-

THE ARBITRATION RULES OF THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION
ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW 1976

PCA CASE NO. 2011-05

- between -

LUIGITERZO BOSCA

(the “Claimant’”)

-and-

THE REPUBLIC OF LITHUANIA

(the “Respondent,” and together with the Claimant, the “Parties”)

 

AWARD

 

Arbitral Tribunal
Hon. Marc Lalonde (Presiding Arbitrator)

Mr. Daniel Price
Prof. Brigitte Stern

17 May 2013

S

AE OOR >

seme

momnoa

VI.

Vil.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION. 1
The Parties

 

  

 

 

 

 

1
1. The Claimant 1
2. The Respond 1
Background of the Dispute 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
Cc c of the Proc

 

Constitution of the Tribunal
Procedural Order No. 1

 

 

Bifurcation Proc

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Respondent’s October 2011 Doc Production Request

Respondent’s December 2011 Request to Exclude Documents.

Resp 's May 2012 Di Production Request. 6
Additional Pre-Hearing Matters.

Hearing. 8
Post-Hearing issi 11
FACTUAL & LEGAL BACKGROUNDS.

Factual History & Backgr 12
Relevant Provisions from the Agreement .....

RELIEF REQUESTED 19
Claimant’s Request 19
R 's Request 19

 

THE TRIBUNAL’S CONSIDERATIONS

 

The Admissibility of the Claimant’s Claim
The Tribunal’s Jurisdiction over the Claimant’s Claim.
1. Attribution to the State.

2. Whether the Claimant made an “investment” under the Agreement.

 

 

3. Alleged termination of the Agreement..
Just and Fair Trez
Unjustified or Discrimi 'y Measures
National Treatment

 

Most-Favored-Nation Treatment

 

 

 

 

 

Expropriation 53
Damages and Quantum 55
1. Enti tod 55
2. Q 57
THE COSTS OF ARBITRATIO

 

DISPOSITIF 65

Agreement

Alita

Alita Commission

Amended Notice of
Arbitration/Statement of
Claim

Annulment Order or Order

Bosca SpA

Boslita

Claimant
Claimant’s Brief

Claimant’s Costs Application
Claimant’s Counter-
memorial/Reply

Claimant’s Memorial
Claimant’s Rejoinder
Executive Consortium (or

Consortium)

DCF

Decision on Bifurcation

FET

Hearing

IBA Rules

ICSID

PCA 91370

LIsT OF DEFINED TERMS

Agreement Between the Government of the Republic of Lithuania and the
Government of the Italian Republic on the Promotion and Protection of
Investments dated 1 December 1994

AB Alita, a Lithuanian alcoholic beverage production company privatized in
2004

Commission formed at the direction of the Seimas (Parliament of Lithuania)
to investigate possible corruption in the privatization of Alita

Claimant’s Amended Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim dated 21
February 2012
The SPF’s 14 October 2003 Order annulling the tender results and

cancelling the Claimant’s alleged investment

Bosca Societa per Azioni, an Italian wine production company of which the
Claimant formerly served as president

UAB Boslita ir Ko, a company incorporated in Lithuania in 1998 as the
vehicle for development of the Bosca brand in the region

Mr. Luigiterzo Bosca
Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief dated 16 November 2012
Claimant’s Costs Application dated 16 November 2012

Claimant’s Counter-memorial on Jurisdiction, Reply on Merits and
Damages dated 4 May 2012

Claimant’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, Merits and Damages dated 29 July
2011

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction dated 16 July 2012

Fourth-place bidder for Alita, a consortium comprised of a group of
directors of Alita when it was a State-owned company; it was awarded the
tender after the Claimant’s win was annulled

Discounted cash flow

The Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent's Request for Bifurcation dated 9
January 2012

Fair and equitable treatment

Hearing on Jurisdiction, Merits, and Damages, held from 3 September to 7
September 2012

International Bar Association Rules on the Taking of Evidence in
International Arbitration

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

ILC Articles on State
Responsibility

License Agreement

LTL

MEN

Notice of
Arbitration/Statement of

Claim

Option Agreement

Parties
PCA

Privatization Law

Protocol
PTC

Respondent

A ded
Statement on Costs

Respondent's Brief
Respondent’s Comments
Respondent’s Counter-
memorial

Respondent’s Memorial
Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder
Respondent’s Request to
Exclude

Respondent’s Statement on
Costs

Seimas

Service Agreement

PCA 91370

International Law Commission Articles on State Responsibility

License Agreement between Bosca SpA and Boslita dated 18 December
1997 (disputed)

Lithuanian litas

Most-favored-nation

Claimant's Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim dated 19 March 2010

Option Agreement between Loreta Skorupskiené and the Claimant dated 2
July 2002 (disputed)

The Claimant and the Respondent in this arbitration

Permanent Court of Arbitration

Law on Privatization of the State-Owned and Municipal Property of the
Republic of Lithuania, adopted on 4 November 1997, as last amended on 5
May 2002

Protocol to the Agreement

Public Tender Commission

The Republic of Lithuania

*s Amended on Costs dated 18 January 2013

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief dated 16 November 2012

Respondent’s Comments on the Claimant’s Costs Application dated 28
November 2012

Respondent’s Counter-memorial on Merits and Damages dated 23 March
2012

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction dated 30 October 2011

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, Rejoinder on Merits and Damages
dated 15 June 2012

Respondent's Request to Exclude from Evidence Certain Documents
Submitted by the Claimant dated 12 December 2011

Respondent’s Statement on Costs dated 16 November 2012

Lithuanian Parliament

Service Providing Agreement between the Claimant and Boslita dated 11
September 1999 (disputed)

iii

SPA

SPF

Tender Regulations

TIC

UNCITRAL Rules or Rules

US-Lithuania BIT

PCA 91370

Share Purchase Agreement for purchase of Alita, negotiated, but not signed,
between the Claimant and the SPF

Lithuanian State Property Fund responsible for overseeing privatizations
Regulations for the Privatization of State-Owned and Municipal Property by

Public Tender, adopted on 31 December 1997, as amended on 12 December
2002

 

Temporary Investigation Commission set up by the Seimas to investigate the
circumstances surrounding the Alita privatization

Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law, 15 December 1976

Treaty Between the Government of the United States of America and the
Government of the Republic of Lithuania for the Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investment, with Annex and Protocol, signed at
Washington on 14 January 1998

Dr. Alberro

Mr. Brazauskas

The Claimant

Mr. Césna
Dr. Cohen
Prof. Dolzer

Mr. Facchin

Mr. Feiferas
Mr. Kaczmarek

Mr. Malikénas

Prof. Mikelénas

Mr. MilaSauskas

Mr. Nosevit

Mr. Saladzius

Dr. Skorupskas

Mrs. Skorupskiené

Dr. Smaliukas

Prof. Stanikiinas

Prof. Volterra

PCA 91370

LIsT OF DRAMATIS PERSONAE

Dr. José Alberro, expert witness on damages for the Claimant

Mr. Algirdas Brazauskas, Lithuanian prime minister at the time of Alita
tender

Mr. Luigiterzo Bosca, natural person of Italy and alcoholic beverage
entrepreneur

Mr. Arvydas Césna, fact witness for the Claimant, shareholder of Boslita

Dr. Ariel Cohen, expert witness for the Claimant

Professor Rudolf Dolzer, expert witness for the Claimant

Mr. Flavio Facchin, representative of Banca del Gottardo on which the
Claimant relied for certain financial guarantees and representations in the
tender process

Mr. Artiras Feiferas, financial advisor to the Claimant’s legal team

Mr. Brent Kaczmarek, expert witness on damages for the Respondent

Mr. Antanas Malikénas, fact witness for the Respondent, former Chairman
of the PTC

Professor Valentinas Mikelénas, expert witness for the Claimant

Mr. Povilas MilaSauskas, fact witness for the Respondent, former Director
General of the SPF

Mr. Miroslav Nosevié, fact witness for the Respondent, former in-house
lawyer of the SPF

Mr. Jonas Saladzius, Lithuanian lawyer representing the Claimant in the
Alita tender

Dr. Gintaras Skorupskas, fact witness for the Claimant, the Claimant’s
representative in the Alita tender and the Managing Director of Boslita

Mrs. Loreta Skorupskiené, spouse of Dr. Skorupskas and shareholder of
Boslita who, according to the Claimant, allegedly concluded the Option
Agreement with the Claimant

Dr. Andrius Smaliukas, expert witness for the Respondent

Professor Rimantas Stanikiinas, expert witness for the Claimant

Professor Robert Volterra, expert witness for the Respondent

L

A.

INTRODUCTION

THE PARTIES

1. The Claimant

The Claimant in this matter is Mr. Luigiterzo Bosca, a natural person of Italy. The Claimant brings his
claims under the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Lithuania and the Government
of the Italian Republic on the Promotion and Protection of Investments dated | December 1994 (the
“Agreement”.

The Claimant is represented in this arbitration by Mr. Stuart H. Newberger and Mr. Ian A. Laird of
Crowell & Moring LLP, 1001 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20004, United States of
America, by Mr. Ramiinas Audzevitius of Motieka & Audzevicius, Gynéjy str. 4, LT — 01109 Vilnius,
Lithuania, by Mr. Allan Gerson of AG International Law, PLLC, 2131 S St. NW, Washington, DC
20008, United States of America, and formerly by Dr. Pieter Bekker also of Crowell & Moring LLP.

2. The Respondent
The Respondent is the Republic of Lithuania.
The Respondent is represented by Mrs. Vilija Vaitkuté Pavan and Mrs. Inga Martinkuté of LAWIN,

Jogailos 9/1, LT — 01116 Vilnius, Lithuania, and by Mr. José Rosell, Hughes Hubbard & Reed LLP, 8
Rue de Presbourg, 75116 Paris, France.

BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE

The dispute between the Parties arises from the Claimant’s participation in the privatization of one of
Lithuania’s leading beverage producers, AB Alita (“Alita”), in 2003.

 

The Claimant maintains that, in of the A t, the dent “ >
unjustifiably and unlawfully annulled the tender” that had been awarded to the Claimant in October
2003.'

The Respondent denies liability on both jurisdictional and substantive grounds. According to the
Respondent, the Claimant made no qualifying investment, depriving the Tribunal of jurisdiction over
the Claimant’s claim. Should the Tribunal conclude that it has jurisdiction, the Respondent contends
that the Respondent acted in accordance with the Agreement.

Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

A.

(COMMENCEMENT OF THE PROCEEDINGS

By a Notice of Arbitration dated 19 March 2010, the Claimant commenced arbitral proceedings against
the Respondent. The Notice of Arbitration also contains the Claimant's Statement of Claim in which
the Claimant alleges that the Respondent “caused substantial losses to [the Claimant] through
expropriatory, unlawful, unfair, and discriminatory treatment in relation to the privatization process and
illegal annulment of [the Claimant's] successful bid for [Alita], a leading Lithuanian beverage
producer.”

' Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 12.

? Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 1.

PCA 91370 1

9. The Claimant brings his claim pursuant to Article 9 of the Agreement and in accordance with Articles 3
and 18 of the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, 15
December 1976 (“UNCITRAL Rules” or “Rules”).

10. Article 9 of the Agreement provides a mechanism for dispute resolution:

1. Any dispute which may arise between one of the Contracting Parties and the investors
of the other Contracting Party on investments, including disputes relating to the amount of
compensation, shall be settled amicably, as far as possible.

GC.)

3. In the event that such dispute cannot be settled amicably within six months of the date
of the written application for settlement, the investor in question may submit at his choice
the dispute for settlement to:

GC.)

b) an ad hoc Arbitration Tribunal, in compliance with the Arbitration Regulations of the
UN Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL). The host Contracting Party
undertakes hereby to accept the reference to said arbitration.

B. CONSTITUTION OF THE TRIBUNAL

11. By letter dated 18 October 2010, the Claimant appointed Mr. Daniel M. Price, a national of the United
States of America, as arbitrator in the dispute.

12. By letter dated 16 November 2010, the Respondent appointed Professor Brigitte Stern, a national of
France, as arbitrator in the dispute.

13. The two Party-appointed arbitrators selected the Honorable Marc Lalonde, a national of Canada, to
serve as Presiding Arbitrator. The Presiding Arbitrator confirmed his acceptance of the appointment by
e-mail to the Parties dated 17 January 2011.

Cc. PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 1

14. On 27 January 2011, the Tribunal held a teleconference with the Parties on procedural matters.

15. By letter dated 7 February 2011, the Presiding Arbitrator summarized the matters discussed during the
27 January teleconference, noting the Respondent's intention to request bifurcation of the proceedings,
deciding certain procedural matters such as the seat of arbitration, and inviting the Parties to confer on
the topic of a submissions schedule.

16. By letter dated 15 March 2011, the Parties circulated a letter and draft Procedural Order No. 1
reflecting the terms on which they agreed and others to be left to the determination of the Tribunal.

17. On6 April 2011, the Presiding Arbitrator held a teleconference with the Parties on outstanding matters
surrounding the draft Procedural Order.

18. After a further exchange of views, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 on 14 April 2011.
Procedural Order No. | confirmed Stockholm, Sweden as the legal place of arbitration and English as
the language of the arbitration. It also provided for a preliminary phase of pleadings to allow the
Tribunal to consider a possible bifurcation of the proceedings. Further, Procedural Order No. 1 set
alternative timetables with or without bifurcation for the submission of written pleadings, document
requests, witness statements and expert reports, and for a hearing on merits and damages to be held at
the Peace Palace in The Hague should one be necessary. It specified that the International Bar

PCA 91370 2

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Association Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration (“IBA Rules”) would be
followed “as a guideline” in the proceedings.

  

By e-mails exchanged in April 2011, the Parties and the Tribunal agreed that deposits payable in
respect of this arbitration would be administered by the Permanent Court of Arbitration (“PCA”). By
letter dated 18 April 2011, the Presiding Arbitrator confirmed the use of the PCA as Registry.

On 28 April and 2 May 2011, the PCA acknowledged receipt of initial deposits of EUR 150,000 each
from the Claimant and the Respondent.

BIFURCATION PROCEEDINGS

On 7 March 2011, the Respondent submitted its Request for Bifurcation and Summary of Objections to
Jurisdiction.

On 29 July 2011, the Claimant submitted his Memorial on Jurisdiction, Merits and Damages
(“Claimant's Memorial”), accompanied by witness statements from the Claimant and Gintaras
Skorupskas, as well as expert reports from Rudolf Dolzer, Valentinas Mikelénas, Ariel Cohen, and José
Alberro.

On 30 October 2011, the Respondent filed its Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction (“Respondent’s
Memorial”), accompanied by witness statements from Miroslav Nosevié and Antanas Malikénas, and
expert reports from Robert Volterra and Andrius Smaliukas.

By letter dated 3 November 2011, the Claimant argued that there were “a number of serious
irregularities in Respondent's filing of 30 October 2011.” The Claimant contended that “it is clear from
this submission that Respondent's counsel, the LAWIN firm, has put itself in the untenable position of
necessitating that it resign from this arbitration, and that Respondent will need to withdraw three of the
four expert and witness statements provided in its filing.” In light of what he alleged as a lack of
impartiality on the part of the Respondent's witnesses and a conflict of interest on the part of the
LAWIN firm, the Claimant requested the Tribunal to (1) strike from the record of the case the expert
reports submitted by Dr. Smaliukas and Prof. Volterra; (2) strike from the record the witness statement
of Mr. Nosevié; and (3) ask the LAWIN law firm to withdraw from the arbitration as co-counsel to the
Respondent.

 

 

By letter dated 10 November 2011, the Respondent commented on the Claimant's letter of 3
November. It argued that the expert reports submitted by Dr. Smaliukas and Prof. Volterra and the
witness statement of Mr. Nosevié complied with the applicable procedural rules and therefore should be
considered by the Tribunal. It also contended that LAWIN properly exercised its duties as counsel.

By letter dated 11 November 2011, the Claimant remarked on the Respondent’s letter of the previous
day, reiterating his objections.

By e-mail dated 12 November 2011, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal strike from the record
the Claimant’s letter of 11 November and order the Claimant not to make any further submission

without the Tribunal’s prior permission.

On 18 November 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 addressing the matters in the
Claimant's letter of 3 November 2011, stating:

Ill. The Tribunal has given careful consideration to the views of each party on these matters
and rules as follows:

(a) The Experts’ Reports

(i) As to Professor Volterra, the fact that, for a few months in 2010, he was called upon to
advise the Government of Lithuania in connection with a completely unrelated matter

PCA 91370 3

cannot be a circumstance which would justify rejecting consideration of his expert's
opinion in the present case. Claimant's request in this regard is dismissed.

 

(ii) As to Dr. Smaliukas, Claimant’s request concerning his expert’s opinion is dismissed.
However, the Tribunal points out that, taking into account the fact that Dr. Smaliukas is a
partner in LAWIN, his appearance as expert, rather than counsel, in this case constitutes a
highly unusual circumstance and his particular situation will be one which the Tribunal will
very much bear in mind when considering his opinion.

(b) The Fact Witness

The Tribunal dismisses Claimant’s request concerning Mr. Miroslav Nosevié’s testimony.
Although it is not unheard of that a lawyer who is a member of a law firm acting in a case
would appear as a fact witness in that case, it is equally highly unusual. Consequently, all
the facts mentioned by Claimant and by Mr. Nosevié himself concerning his relationship
with LAWIN and with Respondent will be borne in mind by the Tribunal when determining
the weight it should attach to his written statement and his oral testimony before the
Tribunal.

  

 

(c) LAWIN

Claimant’s request concerning LAWIN is dismissed. The Tribunal does not believe that it
has the authority to rule on the interpretation to be given to the ethical rules applicable to
Lithuanian attorneys under Lithuanian law. The Tribunal does not believe either that the
UNCITRAL Rules grant it the authority to challenge the choice of counsel by a party.

29. On 28 November 2011, the Claimant submitted his Reply to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation and
Summary of Objections to Jurisdiction.

30. The Tribunal issued its Decision on Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation (“Decision on Bifurcation”)
on 9 January 2012, denying the Respondent's request for bifurcation.

E. RESPONDENT’S OCTOBER 2011 DOCUMENT PRODUCTION REQUEST

31. On 10 October 2011, the Respondent submitted a Request for Production of Original Documents and
Appointment of Independent Expert for Forensic Examination, in which it requested that the Tribunal
order the Claimant:

(1) (.. .) to present the evidences listed below, not later than 17 October 201 1:

a) original of the Option Agreement, dated 2 July 2002, a copy of which is provided by the
Claimant as Exhibit C-59 to its Memorial on Jurisdiction, Merits and Damages;

b) original of the Contract of Buying-Selling Shares, dated 25 September 1997, a copy of
which is provided by the Claimant as Exhibit C-57 to his Memorial on Jurisdiction, Merits
and Damages;

c) original of the Stock Purchase Agreement, dated 2 July 2002, a copy of which is
provided by the Claimant as Exhibit C-58 to his Memorial on Jurisdiction, Merits and
Damages;

d) original of the Service Providing Agreement, dated 11 September 1999, together with
the Act of Provided Services, dated 31 December 2009, copies of which are provided by the
Claimant as Exhibit C-24 to his Memorial on Jurisdiction, Merits and Damages; and

(2) to appoint the Swedish National Laboratory of Forensic Science (or other independent

forensic examination body, competent to report on the age of documents) as an independent
Tribunal-appointed expert to report on the question whether the original contracts requested

PCA 91370 4

32.

33.

34,

35.

36.

to produce were signed more than two years ago by the Claimant and whether the
signatures are genuine.

By letter dated 20 October 2011, the Claimant commented on the Respondent's Request for Production
of 10 October 2011, stating that he was unable to locate the original documents requested by the
Respondent and therefore it was unnecessary for the Tribunal to address the matter further. The
Claimant also asked that the Respondent be directed to “make all future requests for documents in
accordance with the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1.”

RESPONDENT’S DECEMBER 2011 REQUEST TO EXCLUDE DOCUMENTS

By letter dated 12 December 2011, the Respondent submitted a Request to Exclude from Evidence
Certain Documents submitted by the Claimant (“Respondent's Request to Exclude”), in which it asked
the Tribunal to exclude the following four documents from evidence, arguing that a refusal by the
Tribunal to do so would constitute a breach of fair and equitable treatment under the UNCITRAL
Rules: an Option Agreement dated 2 July 2002; a Contract of Buying-Selling Shares dated 25
September 1995; a Stock Purchase Agreement dated 2 July 2002; and a Service Providing Agreement
dated 11 September 1999, together with an Act of Provided Services dated 31 December 1999.

By letter dated 19 December 2011, the Claimant commented on the Respondent's Request to Exclude,
contending that the Respondent failed to establish grounds for exclusion and that it would be
“premature to respond” to the Request. The Claimant also argued that the Request to Exclude was made
in bad faith since the Respondent had recently relied on the same documents in a Lithuanian court.

On 23 December 2011, the Respondent submitted a reply to the Claimant’s letter of 19 December 2011.

The Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 on 3 January 2012 concerning the Respondent's Request to
Exclude. That Order provides in part as follows:

6. In accordance with Clause | of Procedural Order No. 1| the arbitration is conducted
under the UNCITRAL Rules, and the IBA Rules serve as a guideline.

7. Both the UNCITRAL Rules and the IBA Rules grant to the Tribunal considerable
discretion in addressing issues relating to evidence.

  

8. As mentioned by Respondent, Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules (Article 17(1) of
the 2010 revised text) requires the Tribunal to treat the parties with equality and to ensure
that each party is given a reasonable opportunity to present its case. Moreover, Article
25(6) of those Rules (Article 27(4) of the 2010 revised text) provides that “[t]he arbitral
tribunal shall determine the admissibility, relevance, materiality and weight of the evidence
offered.”

9. As to Article 9 of the IBA Rules, paragraph | repeats the same text as the UNCITRAL
Rules just quoted concerning the admissibility and assessment of evidence and, in
paragraph 2, it enumerates the reasons that a tribunal may invoke to exclude documents
from evidence, production or inspection.

  

10. In answer to a previous Request for Production of Documents by Respondent, Claimant
produced photocopies of the documents in question and indicated that it could not find the
originals of such documents. The Tribunal instructed Claimant to pursue its search for the
originals.

11. After a careful review of the arguments submitted by the Parties and exercising the
authority granted to it under the UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal is of the view that it
would be premature to rule on the admissibility and, if admissible, on the weight to be
attached to photocopies of the four documents mentioned above, in the absence of
originals. This is a matter that the Tribunal should decide, once it has had an evidentiary

  

PCA 91370 5

hearing and a full briefing, including Respondent’s rebuttal evidence and its cross-
examination of Claimant’s witnesses.

 

12. The Tribunal is also of the view that there is no need, at this stage, to addre:
of the reference to those documents by Respondent in parallel proceedings before
Lithuanian courts.

THEREFORE:
The Tribunal dismisses as premature Respondent’s Request to Exclude from Evidence
Certain Documents Submitted by Claimant, dated 12 December 2011.

 

37. At the Hearing on Jurisdiction, Merits, and Damages, held from 3 September to 7 September 2012
(“Hearing”), the Tribunal informed the Parties that it would admit the documents in question, while
bearing in mind that those in the record are copies only.’

G. RESPONDENT’S MAY 2012 DOCUMENT PRODUCTION REQUEST

38. On 18 May 2012, the Respondent submitted a Request for Production in which it requested that the
Tribunal order that the Claimant “and/or Mr. Gintaras Skorupskas, as a witness,” produce the following
documents related to the shares’ accounting documentation of UAB Boslita ir Ko (“Boslita”), a
company incorporated in Lithuania by the Claimant and Dr. Skorupskas in 1998 as the vehicle for
development of the Bosca brand in the region:

 

1. incase of material shares - a copy of the shareholders’ registration journal of Boslita for
the period of the registration of the company until now;

2. in case of dematerialized shares - a copy of the journal of transactions with Boslita
shares together with the copies of shareholders’ securities accounts for the period of the
registration of the company until now;

3. [a] copy of the shareholders’ lists (for the period of the registration of the company until
now) of Boslita:

4. [a] list of the shareholders who attended the shareholders’ meeting of Boslita held on 5
November 2001 (signed by the shareholders who then were present);

5. [a] list of the shareholders who attended the shareholders’ meeting of Boslita held on 30
June 2002 (signed by the shareholders who then were present).

39. After the Parties’ exchanged views in the form of a Redfern Schedule, the Tribunal issued Procedural
Order No. 4 dated 4 June 2012 in which it dismissed the Respondent's Request. The Tribunal
concluded that “UAB Boslita ir Ko is not a party to this case and the documents are not within the
Claimant's control. Moreover, the Claimant has stated that, at his request, Mr. Skorupskas and his staff
have carried out extensive searches for the Original Documents at Boslita’s premises.”

    

40. By letter dated 7 June 2012, the Respondent asked the Tribunal to reconsider its decisions regarding the
Respondent’s Request for Production of Documents 1, 2 and 3 in Procedural Order No. 4. The
Claimant commented on the Respondent’s 7 June 2012 letter on 11 June 2012.

41. On 13 June 2012, the Tribunal transmitted the following to the Parties:

The Tribunal, having considered the views of both Parties, finds that there has been no
misunderstanding of the Respondent’s Request.

As noted by the Parties and the Tribunal, the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in
International Arbitration serve as guidelines in this arbitration. Article 3(7) of these Rules

> Hearing Transcript 1329: 2-11.

PCA 91370 6

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

provides that the Tribunal “may order the Party to whom [a Request for Document
Production] is addressed to produce any requested Document in its possession, custody or
control as to which the Arbitral Tribunal determines that (i) the issues that the requesting
Party wishes to prove are relevant to the case and material to its outcome (. . .) .”

 

 

In the Tribunal’s view, as stated in Procedural Order No. 4, there is no point in the present
instance to asking the Claimant to again undertake a search for documents which are
outside his control at the UAB Boslita ir Ko premises where Boslita is not a party to this
dispute. The Respondent has not demonstrated how these documents are related to the
“alleged conclusion of the Option Agreement” or the Claimant's “[alleged] plans and
possibility to make any decisions regarding the Boslita’s merger with Alita” nor has it
stated why “only diligent investigation of the data” found in Requested Documents 1, 2, or
3 may “confirm or deny Claimant’s allegations.” The Tribunal finds that Requested
Documents 1, 2, and 3 lack sufficient relevance or materiality to warrant an additional
request to Dr. Skorupskas as the Respondent has not shown what facts or allegations each
document would establish, maintaining only that the documents are “of crucial
importance.”

For these reasons, the Tribunal dismisses the Respondent's request for reconsideration with
respect to Requested Documents 1, 2, and 3.

ADDITIONAL PRE-HEARING MATTERS

On 21 February 2012, the Claimant submitted an Amended Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim
and explanatory letter. The Amended Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim included four
amendments: (1) an updated date; (2) the inclusion of the Claimant's residences; (3) the removal of Dr.
Bekker as counsel; and (4) an update to the quantum to be consistent with the amount in the Claimant’s
Memorial dated 29 July 2011.

 

On 26 March 2012, the Respondent submitted its Counter-memorial on Merits and Damages
(“Respondent’s Counter-memorial”), accompanied by an expert report by Brent Kaczmarek and a
second expert report by Robert Volterra.

On 4 May 2012, the Claimant submitted his Counter-memorial on Jurisdiction, Reply on Merits and
Damages (“Claimant’s Counter-memorial/Reply”), accompanied by further witness statements from the
Claimant and Gintaras Skorupskas, as well as expert reports by José Alberro, Rudolf Dolzer, Valentinas
Mikelénas, and Rimantas Stanikiinas.

 

On 15 June 2012, the Respondent submitted its Reply on Jurisdiction, Rejoinder on Merits and
Damages (“Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder”), accompanied by witness statements from Antanas
Malikénas and Povilas Mila¥auskas, as well as a second expert report by Brent Kaczmarek.

On 5 July 2012, the PCA, on behalf of the Tribunal, requested an additional deposit of EUR 150,000
from each Party. The Claimant’s supplemental deposit was received on 31 July 2012. The Respondent’s
supplemental deposit was received on 5 August 2012.

The Claimant submitted his Rejoinder on Jurisdiction (“Claimant’s Rejoinder”) on 16 July 2012,
accompanied by witness statements from the Claimant, Gintaras Skorupskas, and Arvydas Césna.

In accordance with Paragraph 6.2 of Procedural Order No. 1, the Respondent submitted its Witnesses
and Experts Notification for the Hearing on 19 July 2012. In its Notification, the Respondent stated:

Since these proceedings have not been bifurcated, the Respondent considers that the place
of the hearing should be Stockholm (i.e., the place of arbitration as agreed in [Paragraph]
5(a) of the Protocol of the [Agreement] entered into by the Contracting Parties) for the
reasons indicated during the telephone conference on April 6, 2011 and notwithstanding the
conclusions reached by the Swedish Supreme Court in the RosInvest case of 2010.

PCA 91370 7

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

54,

55.

At the Tribunal’s invitation, the Claimant responded to the Respondent's Notification by letter dated 23
July 2012, objecting to the Respondent’s suggestion that the hearing be held in Stockholm and
referencing Paragraph 9.1 of Procedural Order No. | in which the Tribunal stated that the hearing on
the merits, if any, would be held at the Peace Palace in The Hague. The Claimant subsequently
submitted his Witnesses and Experts Notification on 30 July 2012.

On 8 August 2012, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5, stating:

1. The Tribunal has had an opportunity to review the Respondent’s Witnesses and Experts
Notification dated 19 July 2012 in which the Respondent requested that the forthcoming
hearing take place in Stockholm.

2. It is recognized by the Parties and the Tribunal that the seat of arbitration is Stockholm.

3. The Tribunal notes that, in its Procedural Order No. | of 14 April 2011, it has already
ruled, after having heard the Parties on the matter, that the hearing, if any, on Merits and
Damages would take place at the Peace Palace in The Hague, but that, if there were
bifurcation of the case, it would consider the Respondent’s request that the hearing on
jurisdiction be held in Stockholm. By its Decision of 9 January 2012 on the Respondent’s
Request for Bifurcation, the Tribunal has ruled that there should be no bifurcation.

4. In light of the above mentioned recent request by the Respondent, the Tribunal has once
again examined the situation. It has come to the conclusion that, at this stage of the process
and taking into account a number of logistical difficulties, it would not be appropriate to
modify its previous decision.

THEREFORE:
As previously decided, the forthcoming hearing shall take place at the Peace Palace, in The
Hague, from 3 to 8 September 2012.

HEARING

Pursuant to Paragraph 9.3 of Procedural Order No. 1, the Tribunal held a pre-hearing teleconference
with the Parties on 17 August 2012 to discuss organizational matters relating to the Hearing in The
Hague.

 

Following the teleconference, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6 on 22 August 2012 in which
it set out the agenda and schedule for the Hearing, the treatment of witnesses and experts as well as the
nature of their examination (in particular, that the experts would be examined in “conference” fashion),
and other logistical arrangements. The Tribunal also asked that the Respondent present Mr.
Milaauskas in person, rather than by video-conference as requested by the Respondent in its Witnesses
and Experts Notification.

 

By e-mail dated 23 August 2012, the Respondent asked that the Tribunal clarify its decision that
experts Dr. Cohen and Prof. Stanikiinas were not required to be present at the hearing, and that the
Tribunal give the Parties instructions with respect to the order of topics to be addressed in the “expert
witness conferences.”

By e-mail dated 24 August 2012, the Claimant commented on the Respondent’s 23 August 2012
communication, noting that Dr. Cohen and Prof. Stanikiinas had cancelled their plans to participate in
the Hearing and rejecting the Respondent's suggested progression of topics for questioning the experts.

By letter dated 24 August 2012, the Tribunal informed the Parties as follows:

With respect to Paragraph 4.1 [of Procedural Order No. 6], the Tribunal clarifies that it will
not infer from the Respondent's decision not to cross-examine Dr. Ariel Cohen and Prof.
Rimantas Stanikiinas that the Respondent accepts their statements or reports as accurate,
nor will the Tribunal infer that the Respondent does not contest their statements or reports.

PCA 91370 8

With respect to Paragraph 5.4 [of Procedural Order No. 6], the Tribunal finds that expert
conferencing need not follow a pre-determined subject-matter progression and leaves the
substantive structure of the experts’ cross examination to counsel. The Tribunal finds the
Claimant's suggested format appropriate:

- Presentation from Claimant's expert

- Presentation from Respondent’s expert

- Respondent's cross-examination of Claimant's expert, with flexibility to enable
“conferencing”

- Claimant’s cross-examination of Respondent's expert, with flexibility to enable
“conferencing”

This general format does not preclude the possibility for counsel for the Party that has
produced an expert to subsequently address questions to that expert, nor for the Tribunal to
do so at any time.

56. By e-mail dated 26 August 2012, the Claimant informed the Tribunal that his fact witness, Mr. Césna
would not attend the Hearing.

57. By e-mail dated 27 August 2012, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal disregard the witness
statement issued by Mr. Césna in accordance with Article 7.4 of the IBA Rules.

58. Following a teleconference held on 28 August 2012 between the Presiding Arbitrator and the Parties,
the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 7 dated 28 August 2012, providing an amended schedule of
examination of witnesses as follows:

1. Attendance of Mr. Artiiras Feiferas

1.1 The Claimant having clarified the reason for Mr. Feiferas’ attendance as a financial
advisor to the Claimant’s legal team and the Respondent having stated that it had no
objection to his presence in that role, the presence of Mr. Feiferas at the Hearing is
authorized in accordance with the agreement of the Parties.

2. Statement of Mr. Arvydas Césna

2.1 In view of the Claimant's notification that Mr. Arvydas Césna will not take part in the
forthcoming Hearing on Jurisdiction, Merits and Damages, and in accordance with Rule
4.7 of the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration which serve
as guidelines in this arbitration, the Tribunal has determined to not take into account Mr.
Césna’s witness statement tendered by the Claimant.

2.2 The Tribunal has noted the Claimant’s request to make a submission regarding Mr.
Césna’s witness statement at the Hearing.

59. From 3 September to 7 September 2012, the Hearing on Jurisdiction, Merits and Damages was held at
the Peace Palace in The Hague. The following persons were present:

 

Hon. Marc Lalonde
Mr. Daniel Price
Prof. Brigitte Stern

The Claimant
Mr. Luigiterzo Bosca
(Claimant)

Ms. Pia Bosca
(Claimant Representative)

PCA 91370 9

Mr. Stuart H. Newberger
Mr. Ian A. Laird

Ms. Claire Stockford
Ms. Ashley Riveira

Ms. Julia Cayre

Ms. Arlen Pyenson

Ms. Staci Gellman
(Crowell & Moring)

 

Mr. Ramiinas Audzevicius
Mr. Tomas Samulevicius
Mr. Rimantas Daujotas
(Motieka & Audzevicius)

Mr. Artiras Feiferas
(Financial Advisor)

The Respondent

Mrs. Vilija Vaitkuté Pavan
Mrs. Inga Martinkuté

Mr. Giedrius Stasevigius
Mrs. Giedré Cerniauske
Mr. Rapolas Kasparaviéius
(LAWIN)

   

Mr. José Rosell
(Hughes Hubbard & Reed LLP)

The Permanent Court of Arbitration
Ms. Kathleen Claussen
Ms. Yuka Fukunaga

Ms. Sarah Grimmer

Court reporters

Ms. Diana Burden
Ms. Susan McIntyre

60. During the Hearing, the fact witnesses were examined in the following order:
For the Claimant

Mr. Luigiterzo Bosca
Dr. Gintaras Skorupskas

For the Respondent
Mr. Miroslav Nosevié
Mr. Antanas Malikénas

Mr. Povilas MilaSauskas

61. | The experts made presentations and were cross-examined in a “conference” method in the following
order of pairs:

Prof. Valentinas Mikelénas
Dr. Andrius Smaliukas

PCA 91370 10

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

23.

Prof. Rudolf Dolzer
Prof. Robert Volterra

Dr. José Alberro
Mr. Brent Kaczmarek

Post-HEARING SUBMISSIONS

In response to an invitation made by the Tribunal during the Hearing, on 13 September 2012, the
Claimant submitted evidence to show that Boslita paid the Claimant approximately EUR 470,000 for
services provided by the Claimant under an alleged agreement the Claimant signed with Boslita in
1999.

On 4 October 2012, the Claimant submitted an Update to Dr. Alberro’s Second Expert Report as
requested by the Tribunal at the Hearing.

On the same day, the Parties jointly proposed that their costs submissions would “be submitted as
separate documents, simultaneously with the submission of the post-hearing briefs, on 16 November
2012” and that the costs would include: fees of the Tribunal; administrative costs; legal representation
fees; experts’ fees; and travel and accommodation expenses.

   

 

By letter dated 5 October 2012, the Tribunal approved the Parties’ joint proposal for their costs
submissions.

By e-mail dated 12 October 2012, the Parties submitted supplementary translations of the Lithuanian
and Italian versions of Articles 1(2), 3(2) and 12(2) of the Agreement, with comments, as requested by
the Tribunal at the Hearing.

On 18 October 2012, the PCA, on behalf of the Tribunal, requested an additional deposit of EUR
100,000 from each Party. On 13 December 2012 and 20 December 2012, the PCA acknowledged
receipt of supplemental deposits of EUR 100,000 from the Respondent and the Claimant respectively.

On 16 November 2012, the Parties transmitted to the Tribunal their respective post-hearing briefs and
costs submissions.

 

By e-mail dated 21 November 2012, the Respondent requested and was granted permission to comment
on the Claimant's Costs Application of 16 November 2012.

The Respondent subsequently submitted its comments on the Claimant’s Costs Application on 28
November 2012.

By letter dated 10 December 2012, the Claimant submitted a copy of a Decision of the Supreme Court
of Lithuania dated 5 December 2012 concerning the re-opening of the civil proceedings between the
State Property Fund of Lithuania and the Claimant in the Lithuanian courts.

On 7 January 2013, the Tribunal invited the Parties to amend their cost submissions to reflect the
December 2012 deposits that post-dated those submissions. On 18 January and 21 January 2013, the
Respondent and the Claimant transmitted to the Tribunal their respective amended cost submissions.

 

  

By letter dated 14 April 2013, the Claimant submitted a copy of a Ruling of the Constitutional Court of
Lithuania dated 2 April 2013 concerning the “compliance of Resolution No. 903 of the [Lithuanian
Government] ‘on consent to the agreement regarding the draft amendment to the purchase and sale
contract of the shares owned by the State in [Alita]’ of 16 July 2004 with the [Lithuanian Constitution]
and the [Law on Privatization of State-Owned and Municipal Property].”

* See paragraph 80, infra.

PCA 91370 1

il.

74.

75.

16.

77.

78.

79.

80.

FACTUAL & LEGAL BACKGROUNDS

The following summary is drawn from the Parties’ pleadings and is presented to give context to the
Claimant's alleged as well as the dent’s alleged vi s of the A t. The
Parties differ, however, with respect to the characterization of certain factual developments and their
positions as to the rel of those The Parties’ ing inter i of the
record are noted where applicable.

 

FACTUAL HIsTory & BACKGROUND

From 1988 to 2005, the Claimant served as president of his family’s Italian wine company known as
Bosca Societa per Azioni (“Bosca SpA”), a well-known producer of spumante, Italian sparkling wine.
The Claimant claims that the Bosca brand was popular in the Soviet Union until certain policy changes
in the mid-1980s prevented its import behind the Iron Curtain.’

In his pleadings and in his witness statements, the Claimant describes how, following the break-up of
the Soviet Union, Bosca SpA sought new avenues to bring its products to the region. The company
encountered difficulties after a period of initial success as the newly independent states developed strict
policies inhibiting imports.’

  

By 1996 and 1997, the Claimant, together with his local business partner, Dr. Gintaras Skorupskas,
focused on potential opportunities for Bosca SpA in Lithuania. They created the Lithuanian company
known as Boslita, producing almost exclusively Bosca SpA products.’

 

  

The Claimant maintains that he was personally involved in Boslita at several points in the company’s
history as detailed in the paragraphs that follow. Moreover, he argues that his transactions in the Baltic
States throughout this period were part of a plan to produce Bosca-branded sparkling wine in the region
and production capacity in Lithuania “as a launch pad” to regain prominence in other former Soviet
markets, including principally Russia.'”

Boslita, the first private alcohol company in Lithuania to be granted permission to produce alcohol up
to 22 degrees, went into operation in 1997, prompting the Claimant to negotiate a License Agreement
on 18 December 1997 (“License Agreement”), on behalf of Bosca SpA, to promote and sell the Bosca
brand in the region.'' Under the License Agreement, Boslita was licensed to produce Bosca products in
return for a five percent (5%) royalty.'?

According to the Claimant, from the time of Boslita’s inception, he worked closely with Dr. Skorupskas
to ensure its success. This relationship was “formalized” on 11 September 1999 when the Claimant
personally signed a Service Providing Agreement with Boslita (“Service Agreement”).'* In accordance
with the Service Agreement terms, the Claimant maintains he provided extensive and valuable “know-
how” to Boslita between 2000 and 2009.'* The Claimant submits he also entered into an Option
Agreement with Mrs. Loreta Skorupskiené on 2 July 2002 (“Option Agreement”) to purchase Mrs.

* Bosca First Witness Statement, paras. 5, 6, 27.

° Claimant’s Memorial, para. 40.

7 Claimant’s Memorial, para. 41.

* Claimant’s Memorial, para. 45. Bosca First Witness Statement, para. 36.

° Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 4.

‘© Claimant’s Brief, para. 23.

" Claimant’s Memorial, para. 127.

"? License Agreement, Exh. C-22, p. 3.
'S Service Agreement, Exhs. C-24/R-72.

' Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 45, 131. Service Agreement, Exhs. C-24/R-72, Item 3.

PCA 91370 12

81.

82.

83.

84.

 

Skorupskiené’s thirty percent (30%) shareholding in Boslita as of 25 September 1997.'° The
Respondent disputes the authenticity of the License Agreement, Service Agreement and the Option
Agreement. '°

In early February 2003, the Government of Lithuania announced that it would privatize four State-
owned alcoholic beverage production companies, one of which was Alita — a sparkling wine producer
established in 1963.'7 At the time, Alita was the market leader in the Lithuanian sparkling wine sector
with an eighty percent (80%) market share.'®

The State Property Fund (“SPF’) was the State entity responsible for carrying out all Lithuanian
privatizations at that time.'? Once the SPF’s company-specific privatization program would be
approved by the State’s Privatization Commission,” the SPF would make available for purchase a
package of public tender documents, as provided in the applicable Regulations for the Privatization of
State-Owned and Municipal Property by Public Tender (‘Tender Regulations”).”' Potential bidders
would purchase the package, and submit to the SPF a bid for participation in the public tender together
with supporting documents.”* The Public Tender Commission (“PTC”), a body established by the SPF,
would evaluate the submissions by the bidders in a closed meeting and select a winning bidder.”* After
the SPF approved the PTC’s selection, the winning bidder would be invited to negotiate the terms of a
draft share purchase agreement with the PTC.” After the draft share purchase agreement was agreed
between the PTC and the buyer, it had to be approved by the Privatization Commission and, if not
approved by the Privatization Commission, the SPF could call upon the Government of Lithuania to
make a final decision on the matter.”> Upon approval, the winning bidder would be invited to sign the
agreement.”

  

The Claimant was among the prospective bidders to obtain the tender informational documentation for
Alita, paying the requisite fee of LTL 5,000 in April 2003.7”

On 7 May 2003, the Claimant submitted his bid to the SPF, which included his application for
participation in the tender, proposals related to a draft Share Purchase Agreement (“SPA”), along with
the tender deposit fee of LTL 200,000.”* Three other bids were submitted.”? The PTC evaluated the four

 

'S Claimant’s Memorial, para. 133. Option Agreement, Exhs. C-59/R-55.
'© Respondent's Memorial, paras. 24, 27-31, 42, 54-57.

"’ Privatization Information Bulletin No. 4(276), Exhs. C-25/R-3. See also Claimant's Memorial, para. 47.

Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 13.

'8 Skorupskas First Witness Statement, p. 10. Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 324.

' Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 20. Claimant’s Counter-memorial, paras. 277-279. The Parties
dispute whether the SPF acted in a commercial capacity or as a state entity. See infra paras. 123-127.
Respondent's Counter-memorial, paras. 125-138. Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 222-234. Hearing

Transcript 111: 7-112: 9.
2° Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 20. Privatization Law, Exh. R-1, Art. 4.
2! Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, paras. 21-22. Tender Regulations, Exh. R-2.
? Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 23. Tender Regulations, Exh. R-2, Art. 13.
3 Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, paras. 24, 26. Tender Regulations, Exh. R-2, Arts. 32, 36.
** Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 26. Tender Regulations, Exh. R-2, Art. 38.
°5 Tender Regulations, Exh. R-2, Art. 46.
?© Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 27. Tender Regulations, Exh. R-2, Art. 45.
27 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 48.
?8 Claimant’s Memorial, para. 48.

?° Claimant’s Memorial, para. 72. *s Count ial, para. 13. Witness

PCA 91370 13

para.

85.

86.

87.

88.

bids” and thereafter selected the Claimant as the winning bidder.*' On 30 June 2003, the SPF approved
the Claimant's selection as the winning bidder.*”

The Claimant’s representative, Dr. Skorupskas, met with the SPF to negotiate certain terms of the SPA
on three occasions in July and August 2003.*? The Parties dispute the nature and content of the
negotiations over those weeks, including the extent of the Claimant’s disclosures.

According to the Claimant, three matters remained outstanding in the substance of the draft SPA by the
end of September 2003: (1) whether there was to be a single payment or two installments; (2) whether
the dispute settlement clause would name Stockholm or Paris as the place of arbitration; and (3) the
level of fines.* The Claimant contends that he was not willing to sign an agreement regarding which
negotiations were incomplete.** The Claimant also insists that he answered the enquiries of the SPF
during the course of the tender process and did not provide false statements about his business activities
in Lithuania.*°

 

In the Respondent's view, all essential terms of the draft SPA were already agreed at that time and only
a few technical points were left to be clarified at the time of initialing..’ The SPF repeatedly invited the
Claimant to initial the SPA, but the Claimant did not do so.** The Respondent also maintains that the
Claimant failed to disclose to the SPF his past commercial activities in Lithuania.*? According to the
Respondent, these issues explain the SPF’s understanding that the Claimant had no serious intention to
finalize the SPA.”

 

 

By letter dated 30 September 2003, the SPF notified the Claimant that if he did not initial the SPA by
10 October 2003, it would annul the results of the tender.*! Dr. Skorupskas replied to the SPF’s
correspondence, saying that the Claimant would not yet sign the SPA because (1) the Claimant believed
there were still outstanding issues to be agreed upon; (2) he was travelling on business; and (3) he was
in the process of reviewing the PTC’s suggestions as to those issues.” On 10 October 2003, the SPF
annulled the results of the tender.”*

* Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 24.

§' Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 31.

* Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 31. Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 15. Minutes No. 6
of the PTC, Exhs. C-31/R-25.

3 Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 32. Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 16.

* Claimant’s Memorial, para. 93. Hearing Transcript 48: 9 — 49: 15.

% Claimant’s Counter-memorial, para. 48.

* Claimant’s Counter-memorial, para. 15.

*” Respondent’s Memorial, para. 100. Hearing Transcript 114: 13 — 116: 19.

8 See, e.g., Letter from the member of the Public Tender Commission Judita Barkauskiené to Gintaras
Skorupskas, Exh. R-35. Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 126-127.

* Respondent’s Memorial, para. 55.

*° Respondent’s Memorial, para. 111.

*" Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 34. Respondent's Counter-memorial, para. 59. Copy of the
Letter from PTC Chairman Antanas Malikénas to Gintaras Skorupskas, dated 30 September 2003, Malikénas
Exh. 18. Letter from PTC Chairman Antanas Malikénas to Luigiterzo Bosca, dated 30 September 2003, Exh.

R-36.

* Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 34.

* Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 34. Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 59. Minutes No. 24
of the PTC, Exhs. C-48/R-38.

PCA 91370 14

89. Following the cancellation of the tender results, the second- and third-place bidders removed their bids
from consideration. ** Consequently, on 22 September 2003, the SPF proceeded to commence
negotiations with the fourth-place bidder, a consortium of directors and executives of Alita (“Executive
Consortium” or “Consortium”).”* After the Privatization Commission approved the award of the tender
to the Executive Consortium, the award was finalized on 6 January 2004."°

90. On 1 December 2003, the Lithuanian Prosecutor General’s Office sent a letter to the Anti-Corruption
Commission of the Lithuanian Parliament (“Seimas”), and to the Prime Minister’s Office, “warning of
the illegality of the actions of the Privatisation Commission and the SPF with respect to the Alita
tender.” On 2 December 2003, the Anti-Corruption Commission presented its opinion on the Alita
tender process to the then Prime Minister Mr. Algirdas Brazauskas who asked the SPF to review the
opinion and give the SPF’s own view to the Government.** In reply, the SPF denied the allegations
raised concerning its unlawfulness in the Alita matter.

 

  

91. The Claimant filed a civil claim against the SPF in the Vilnius District Court on 17 November 2003,
alleging that the SPF had “illegally terminated the negotiations for his purchase of the company under
Lithuanian law, and requesting payment of the losses he had sustained in connection with the tender
process.”*’ On 28 April 2005, the District Court found that the SPF’s actions in its negotiations had
been “ungrounded and unfair,” and awarded the Claimant his out-of-pocket expenses in connection
with the tender process.*!

92. The SPF appealed the decision of the Vilnius District Court to the, Court of Appeals.” On 28 December
2005, the Court of Appeals reversed the District Court’s holding.

93. The Claimant requested the Supreme Court of Lithuania to review the Court of Appeals’ decision.*+ On
10 October 2006, the Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Court of Appeals and reinstated the
decision of the District Court.

94. Shortly after the decision of the District Court was issued, the Seimas formed a Temporary
Investigation Commi n (“TIC”) to review the circumstances surrounding the Alita privatization.
After a year, the TIC issued its conclusions, determining that the decision to eliminate the Claimant
from the tender had been illegal and had caused damage to the Claimant. The TIC also concluded that
the decision to award the tender to the Executive Consortium was unlawful and cost the State “at least

 
  

* Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 37. Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 79-80. Letter of
the consortium of UAB Eugesta and UAB Vinvesta to the SPF, dated 14 October 2003, Exh. R-41.

+5 Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 37. Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 83.

*© Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 38. Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, para. 96. Protocol of the
PTC No. 29, Exh. R-116.

#7 Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 72, 89.
“8 Claimant’s Memorial, para. 72.
*° Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 72.

°° Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 41. Claimant’s Claim Application with Vilnius District Court,
Exh. R-91.

5! Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 41. Judgment of the Vilnius District Court, Civil Case No. 2-
673-43/05, Exh. C-1B.

* Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 45.
*3 Judgment of the Court of Appeals, Civil Case No. 2A-366/2005, Exh. C-1D.
* Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 45.

*5 Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 45. Judgment of the Supreme Court, Civil Case No. 3K-7-
470/2006, Exh. C-1E.

PCA 91370 15

LTL 34,150,000."°° The TIC recommended that the Seimas petition the Constitutional Court to
examine whether the tender award had violated the Constitution and other laws of Lithuania.

95. By letter dated 21 February 2007, the Claimant notified the Respondent of his intent to commence
arbitral proceedings if the Parties were unable to resolve their dispute amicably.

96. On 23 May 2007, the Constitutional Court ruled that the Government's approval of the sale of Alita to
the Executive Consortium was in violation of Article 16(1) of the Law on Privatization of State-Owned
and Municipal Property and Article 94(2) of the Lithuanian Constitution.”

97. According to the Claimant, around this time, the Lithuanian press reported that the former Prime
Minister and other Ministers were under scrutiny by the Attorney General for conduct surrounding the
Alita privatization.”

98. On 24 August 2009, a Lithuanian court pronounced Mr. Povilas MilaSauskas, former Director General
of the SPF, guilty under Article 228(1) of the Criminal Code of abusing his official position by illegally
eliminating the Claimant from the Alita tender process.*” On 22 December 2010, a Panel of Judges of
the Vilnius Regional Court reversed that decision and, on 7 June 2011, the Criminal Division of the
Supreme Court of Lithuania confirmed the decision of the Panel to the effect that Mr. MilaSauskas had
not committed a criminal act with the characteristics of crime or misdemeanor.”

 

 

99. On 1 March 2012, a Panel of Judges of the Civil Division of the Lithuanian Court of Appeal dismissed
a petition by the Respondent to reopen the civil court proceedings initiated by the Claimant against the
SPF.! The Supreme Court of Lithuania upheld the Panel’s dismissal on 5 December 2012.

  

B. RELEVANT PROVISIONS FROM THE AGREEMENT

100. Article 1 of the Agreement, entitled “Definitions,” states, in relevant part:
For the purposes of this Agreement:

1. The term “investment” shall be construed to mean any kind of property invested, before
or after the entry into force of this Agreement, by a natural or legal person of a Contracting
Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party, in conformity with the laws and
regulations of that Party, irrespective of the legal form chosen, as well as of the legal
framework. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the term “investment”
comprises in particular, but not exclusively:

a) movable and immovable property (. . .) ;

°° Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 52. Seimas of the Republic of Lithuania, “Resolution no. X-
922 regarding the conclusions of the ad hoc investigation commission of the Seimas formed for the
investigation of the circumstances of the privatization of Alita AB,” Exh. C-2.

57 Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 53. Article 16(1) provides that “negotiations on how to
improve the bids may be entered into with the potential buyer or potential buyers who have submitted the
highest bids and whose bids do not differ from each other by more than 15 percent.” Article 94(2) of the
Constitution requires the Government to execute the laws of Lithuania in accordance with their terms. Id.

 

°8 Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 55.
°° Judgment of the Supreme Court, Criminal Case No.2K-292/2011, Exhs. C-47/C-62/R-85.
© Judgment of the Supreme Court, Criminal Case No.2K-292/2011, Exhs. C-47/C-62/R-85.

®! Claimant’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 201-202, quoting Ruling of the Court of Appeal, Case No. 2-561/2012
on request of renewal of the civil procedure (1 March 2012).

Claimant's Letter to the Tribunal dated 10 December 2012, enclosing the Decision of the Supreme Court of
Lithuania of 5 December 2012.

PCA 91370 16

b) shares, debentures, equity holdings and any instruments of credit (. . .) ;
c) credits for sums of money or any financial service right (. . .) :

d) copyright, commercial trade marks, patents, industrial designs and other intellectual and
industrial property rights, know-how, trade secrets, trade names and goodwill;

e) any economic rights accruing by law or by contract and any license and franchise granted
in accordance with the provisions in force on economic activities, including the right to
prospect for, extract and exploit natural resources;

f) any increase in value of the original investment.

Any modification in the form of the investment does not imply a change in the nature
thereof.

 

2. The term “investor” shall be construed to mean any natural or legal person of a
Contracting Party investing in the territory of the other Contracting Party as well as the
foreign subsidiaries and affiliates and branches somehow controlled by the above natural
and legal persons.

   

3. The term “natural person,” in reference to either Contracting Party, shall be construed to
mean any natural person holding the nationality of that State in accordance with its laws.

101. Article 2, under which the Claimant seeks recovery, states:

1. Both Contracting Parties shall encourage investors of the other Contracting Party to
invest in their territory.

2. Both Contracting Parties shall at all times ensure just and fair treatment of the
investments of investors of the other Contracting Party. Both Contracting Parties shall
ensure that the management, maintenance, use, transformation, enjoyment or assignment of
the investments effected in their territory by investors of the other Contracting Party, as
well as companies and enterprises in which these investments have been effected, shall in
no way be subject to unjustified or discriminatory measures.

 

 

3. Each Contracting Party shall maintain in its territory a legal framework apt to guarantee
to investors the continuity of legal treatment, including the compliance, in good faith, of all
undertakings assumed with regard to each specific investor.

102. The Claimant also seeks relief under Article 3, entitled “National Treatment and the Most favored
Nation Clause,” which provides:

1. Both Contracting Parties, within the bounds of their own territory, shall offer investments
effected by, and the income accruing to, investors of the other Contracting Party no less
favorable treatment than that accorded to investments effected by, and income accruing to,
its own nationals or investors of Third States.

2. Should a more favorable treatment than the one foreseen in this Agreement be introduced
by internal laws or international obligations, this treatment will apply to investors of the
relevant Contracting Party also for the outstanding relations.

3. The provisions under, point | and 2 of this Article do not refer to the advantages and
privileges which one Contracting Party may grant to investors of Third States by virtue of
their membership of a Customs or Economic Union, of a Common Market, of a Free Trade
Area, of a regional or sut A it, of an i i i
Agreement or under Agreements signed in order to prevent double taxation or to facilitate
cross border trade.

PCA 91370 17

103.

Article 5, entitled “Nationalization or Expropriation,” and also a ground upon which the Claimant

brings his claim, states in relevant part:

Investments of investors of one of the Contracting Parties shall not be, “de jure” or “de
facto,” directly or indirectly, nationalized, expropriated, requisitioned or subjected to any
measures having an equivalent effect in the territory of the other Contracting Party, except
for public purposes or national interest and in exchange for immediate, full and effective
compensation, and on condition that these measures are taken on a non-discriminatory basis
and in conformity with all legal provisions, procedures and orders handed down by Courts
or Tribunals having jurisdiction.

 

104. The Protocol to the Agreement (“Protocol”) on which the Claimant relies provides in part:

PCA 91370

On signing the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Lithuania and the
Government of the Italian Republic on the Promotion and Protection of Investments, the
Contracting Parties also agreed to the following clauses, which shall be deemed to form an
integral part of the Agreement.

1. General Provision

This Agreement and all provisions thereof referred to “Investments”, provided they are
made in accordance with the legislation of the Contracting Party in which territory the
investment is made, apply as well to the following associated activities:

the organization, control, operation, maintenance and disposition of companies, branches,
agencies, offices, factories — or other facilities for the conduct of business; the making,
performance and enforcement of contracts; the acquisition, use, protection and disposition
of property of all kinds including intellectual property; the borrowing of funds; the
purchase, issuance, and sale of equity shares and other securities; and the purchase of
exchange for imports.

  

 

 

“Associated activities” also include, inter alia:

l the granting of franchises or rights under licenses:

Il) the receipt of registrations, licenses, permits and other approvals necessary for the
conduct of commercial activity which shall in any event be issued expeditiously,
as provided for in the legislation of the Contracting Parties;

 

 

II) G5
IV) =
Vv) the importation and installation of equipment necessary for the normal conduct of

business affairs, including, but not limited to, office equipment and automobiles,
and the export of any equipment and automobiles so imported;

VD the dissemination of commercial information;

VID the conduct of market studies;

VIII) the appointment of commercial representatives, including agents, consultants and
distributors (. . .) ; [and]

 

IX) the marketing of goods and services, including through internal distribution and
marketing systems, as well as by advertising and direct contact with nationals and
companies;

GC.)

5. With reference to Article 9

Under Article 9 (3)(b), arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the arbitration
standards of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), as

 

laid down in the UN General Assembly Resolution 31/98 of December 15, 1976 as well as
pursuant to the following provisions:

a) The Arbitration Tribunal shall be composed of three arbitrators; if they are not
nationals of either Contracting Party, they shall be nationals of States having
diplomatic relations with both Contracting Parti
The appointment of arbitrators, when necessary pursuant to the UNCITRAL
Rules, will be made by the President of the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm
Chamber, in his capacity as Appointing Authority. The arbitration will take place
in Stockholm, unless the two parties in the arbitration have agreed otherwise.

b) When delivering its decision, the Arbitration Tribunal shall in any case apply also
the provisions contained in this Agreement, as well as the principles of
international law recognized by the two Contracting Parties.

 

 

IV. RELIEF REQUESTED

A.

CLAIMANT’S REQUEST

105. The Claimant requests the Tribunal to:

(1) declare that it has jurisdiction over the dispute;

(2) declare that Lithuania has breached its obligations under the terms of the Agreement as
described in the Claimant’s Amended Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim and in
the Claimant’s Rejoinder;

(3) award monetary damages of not less than €207,971,000 in compensation for loss
sustained as a result of Lithuania’s measures;

(4) require Respondent to bear the costs and expenses of the arbitration, including fees and
expenses of counsel, experts, consultants and witnesses, and the fees and expenses of the
Tribunal, plus such further costs and expenses as the Tribunal may find are owed under
applicable law;

(5) award pre- and post-award interest at a rate to be determined by the Tribunal; and

(6) award such other relief that Counsel for Claimant may advise and that the Tribunal may
deem appropriate.

B. RESPONDENT’S REQUEST

106. The Respondent requests the Tribunal to:

8

(i) declare that the Claimant has breached the mandatory provisions of Article 3 of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, notwithstanding the submission of an Amended Notice of
Arbitration and Statement of Claim on 21 February 2012;

(ii) declare that Claimant has breached the procedural pre-arbitral requirements provided
for in Article 9 of the Agreement;

 

the claims of the Claimant in their entirety as time-barred;

As updated in the Claimant's Brief, paras. 1, 165.

© Amended Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 80. Claimant's Rejoinder, para. 277.

PCA 91370

19

Vv.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

(iv) declare that it has no jurisdiction over the Claimant's claim;

(v) render an award in favor of the Respondent and against the Claimant dismissing his
claim in its entirety and with prejudice;

(vi) order the Claimant to bear all costs of this arbitration, including in particular the
arbitrators’ fees and expenses, the costs and expenses of the counsels for the Parties,
witnesses’ expenses and the experts’ fees and costs; and

(vii) declare the Award as non-confidential and available in the public domain.®
THE TRIBUNAL’S CONSIDERATIONS

The following part summarizes the Parties’ arguments on jurisdiction, merits and damages. The
Tribunal has considered all of the Parties’ submissions and details only those most relevant for its
analysis here. The Tribunal’s considerations that follow address the factors determinative to its
decision.

The Tribunal refers to Article 9(3)(b) of the Agreement and Paragraph 5(b) of the Protocol which
mandate that the arbitration shall be conducted under the UNCITRAL Rules and that the Tribunal shall
apply the provisions contained in the Agreement as well as principles of international law recognized
by the two Contracting Parties. In interpreting the Agreement, the Tribunal looks to the rules embodied
in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. Reference is also made, where appropriate, to the
relevant provisions of Lithuanian law relating to the privatization process. While the Tribunal will
occasionally draw upon the decisions of other arbitral tribunals, it is acutely aware of the specific terms
of the Agreement that must be applied in the present case.

THE ADMISSIBILITY OF THE CLAIMANT’S CLAIM
The Respondent’s position

The Respondent makes three arguments that the Claimant's claim is inadmissible. First, the Respondent
submits that the Claimant's Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim was invalid under the
UNCITRAL Rules because it did not include the Claimant’s address. According to the Respondent,
Article 3(3)(b) of the Rules, which states that “[t]he notice of arbitration shall include (. . .) (b) [t]he
names and addresses of the parties,” requires that the Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim identify
the Claimant's address to be valid.°°

 

Second, the Respondent maintains that the Claimant’s claim is time-barred under the doctrine of
extinctive prescription which, according to the Respondent, provides that a claim is inadmissible when
it is delayed and such delay imparts actual prejudice to the Respondent.” The Respondent argues that
extinctive prescription dictates dismissal of a claim where, as here, (a) the Claimant's filing was
“unreasonably delayed” without justification; (b) the delay was due to the Claimant’s negligence; (c) a
clear record of the case does not exist because of the delay; and (d) to allow the delayed claim to be
tried on the merits would cause an unjust impairment of the Respondent's right to defend.

  

The Respondent’s position is that the Claimant’s claim was unreasonably delayed because he was
aware of the alleged breach as early as 2003 when the SPF decided to annul the tender results and

© Respondent's Brief, para. 168.

°° Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 163-166. Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 219-221.

°7 Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 210.

°8 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 147-162.

PCA 91370 20

because he did not challenge the SPF’s decision while he had the right to do so under Lithuanian law.”
Moreover, the Respondent asserts that the Claimant’s claim is time-barred due to a three-year statute of
limitations with respect to claims for compensation of damages under the Lithuanian Civil Code.” The
Claimant's delay is negligent according to the Respondent because the Claimant “failed to present any
valid reason for withholding his claim” until several years later.’’ The Respondent argues that there is
also a lack of clear record to the Parties’ dispute as there is no privatization agreement between the
Claimant and the Respondent and thus the Claimant bases his claim on pre-contractual events supported
only by witness statements.” Finally, the Respondent states that the delay creates an injustice by
preventing, it from preparing its defense insofar as relevant persons and related evidence are no longer
available.

 

112. Third, the Respondent argues that the Claimant failed to comply with the pre-arbitration requirements
provided for in the Agreement. The Respondent maintains that the Notice of Intent dated 21 February
2007 was not a “proper written application for dispute settlement in accordance with Article 9.3 of the
[Agreement]” and that the Claimant has not acted in good faith in his intention to settle the dispute
amicably before resorting to arbitration.” In the Respondent’s view, the Claimant failed to provide any
information on the nature or grounds of his claims thereby preventing the commencement of amicable
ions.”* The dent identifies made by ives of the Claimant that the

Claimant would “make a settlement offer” though he never did so.”°

113. Referring to Article 9(1) of the Agreement, which provides that disputes “shall be settled amicably, as
far as possible,” the Respondent maintains that prior amicable negotiations are mandatory before
proceeding to arbitration.”’ In this respect, the Respondent cites the Award on Jurisdiction in Murphy
International v. Ecuador and the Decision on Jurisdiction in Burlington Resources Inc. v. Ecuador, in
which each of those tribunals concluded that non-compliance with pre-arbitration requirements set
forward in the relevant treaty was sufficient to defeat the tribunal’s jurisdiction.”*

   

The Claimant's position

114. The Claimant objects to the Respondent's assertion that his Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim
did not comply with Article 3(3)(b) of the UNCITRAL Rules because it allegedly omitted his address.”
The Claimant contends that the Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim contained the address of his
counsel, which is sufficient to meet the Rules’ requirement.” Pointing to the Decision on Bifurcation,
the Claimant states that the Tribunal has already disposed of this issue by granting the Claimant
permission to amend his Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, and that the Claimant has amended

© Respondent’s Memorial, para. 151.

” Respondent’s Memorial, para. 152.

”' Respondent’s Memorial, para. 155.

” Respondent’s Memorial, para. 156.

* Respondent’s Memorial, para. 160.

™ Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 195.

* Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 197.

7° Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 199-202.
7” Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 203-204.

78 Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, para. 205, citing Murphy Exploration and Production Company International
v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/4, Award on Jurisdiction (15 December 2010), para. 154;
Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Decision on Jurisdiction (2
June 2010), para. 315.

” Claimant’s Memorial, para. 154, referring to Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 4.

8° Claimant’s Memorial, para. 154.

PCA 91370 21

his Notice/Statement accordingly.*' The Claimant also argues that the Respondent has not suffered, nor
is likely to suffer, any prejudice as a result of the omission or subsequent amendment.*?

115. With respect to the Respondent’s timeliness argument, although the Claimant agrees with the
Respondent's articulation of the test for extinctive prescription, the Claimant disagrees that the test is
satisfied here.*? First, the Claimant argues that a delay, if any, is not “unreasonable” because it was
caused by the Claimant’s efforts to try to reach an amicable settlement with the Respondent.** Second,
the Claimant argues that the Respondent has not provided evidence to substantiate that the alleged
delay was due to negligence on the part of the Claimant.** Third, the Claimant objects to the
Respondent's view that it lacks a clear record of the case, arguing that the Respondent should have been
able to obtain necessary witness statements and also have access to any other necessary information.*°
Fourth, the Claimant argues that the Respondent fails to prove that it has suffered prejudice due to the
delay.*” Finally, the Claimant submits that the applicable law in these proceedings is the Agreement and
Principles of international law, and that statutory limitations under Lithuanian law do not apply to his
claim.

116. The Claimant maintains that he has met all the pre-arbitration requirements of the Agreement and
objects to the Respondent’s assertion that the Notice of Intent was not in compliance with Article 9 of
the Agreement.* In the Claimant's view, Article 9 requires only filing an “application for settlement”
that confirms the existence of a dispute and notifies the host State of the investor’s intent to commence
arbitration. °° The Claimant contends that his Notice of Intent satisfied this requirement.°! Even
assuming that the Agreement required that a notice of intent include information about a settlement
offer, the Claimant argues that the absence of a settlement offer would not defeat the admissibility of
his claim.”? The Claimant adds that, in any event, the requirement is met in this arbitration because his
Notice of Intent referred to his settlement offer.”*

The Tribunal’s Decision

117. Turning first to the Respondent’s argument that the Claimant’s claim should be dismissed due to
deficiencies in his Notice of Intent and Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, the Tribunal finds that
the Claimant met the necessary requirements to bring a claim before the Tribunal. The Claimant
fulfilled his procedural obligations under the law applicable to this arbitration, namely, the Agreement
and principles of international law recognized by the two Contracting Parties,°* as well as the
requirements of the applicable Rules. The Tribunal acknowledges the Respondent’s view that Article 9
of the Agreement requires that disputes between an investor and a Contracting Party on investments
“shall be settled amicably, as far as possible,” but considers that the Claimant met his burden in this

 

8! Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 190-191, 194-195.
® Claimant’s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 192-193.
85 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 183.
 Claimant’s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 184-185.
85 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 186.

8© Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 187-188.
87 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 189.

88 Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 159-162.

®° Claimant’s Memorial, para. 156.

°° Claimant’s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 170-172.
°' Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 156-157.

°? Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 173-177.
°5 Claimant’s Memorial, para. 158.

** Protocol, para. 5(b).

PCA 91370 22

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

respect. The Claimant substantiated that he made an attempt to settle the Parties’ dispute prior to
commencing arbitral proceedings as evidenced by his Notice of Intent. The Tribunal is satisfied that the
Claimant met his obligations to attempt to settle the dispute amicably as required by Article 9.

The Tribunal refers in particular to the Claimant's discussion in his Notice of Arbitration of a letter he
sent to Prime Minister Algirdas Brazauskas and the Minister of Economy on 21 February 2007 in
which he thanked them for informing him that they would “make a settlement offer in connection with
the State Property Fund’s privatization of Alita” and invited them to “attempt to amicably resolve this
dispute through negotiation and consultation pursuant to Article 9 of the BIT.”** There followed during
the course of 2007 an exchange of several letters between the Parties, unsuccessful in resolving their
dispute.”° Moreover, Dr. Skorupskas testified that he had raised this matter with the Prime Minister and
other officials during the course of 2007 and subsequently.” In the Tribunal’s view, the Respondent has
not demonstrated that the Claimant acted in bad faith. Finally, the Tribunal notes that the obligation to
settle “amicably as far as possible” applies to both Parties and if, in the present case, the efforts at
settlement appear to have been somewhat lackadaisical on each side, the Tribunal, on the basis of the
evidence before it, is not inclined to put the blame on the Claimant only.

Neither is the Claimant’s claim barred for the omission of his personal address in his original Notice of
Arbitration/Statement of Claim. When appropriate, parties are afforded an opportunity to revise factual
or procedural deficiencies in their pleadings. The Tribunal discussed the omitted address in its Decision
on Bifurcation, following which the Claimant amended his Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim to
include his address.

The Tribunal is not convinced by the Respondent’s arguments that the Claimant’s claim should be
time-barred. Contrary to the Respondent’s assertion, the Claimant's claim is not subject to the
Lithuanian statute of limitations. In accordance with the Agreement, the Tribunal applies international
law, not Lithuanian domestic law, to these proceedings and there is no deadline prescribed by the
Agreement, Rules or general principles of international law. Moreover, there was no requirement under
the Agreement for the Claimant to initiate local proceedings against the SPF following the October
2003 Order annulling the tender results which removed the Claimant from the tender process
(“Annulment Order”). The Tribunal considers that the Respondent was not prejudiced in its ability to
respond to the Claimant's allegations due to any delay in the Claimant’s commencement of the
arbitration. The Claimant notified the Respondent of his intention to commence arbitration as early as
2007 when litigation in the Lithuanian courts relating to the Alita privatization was on-going. It was not
unreasonable, in the Tribunal’s view, to wait for those decisions to be rendered before undertaking a
separate proceeding in an international setting.

The Tribunal concludes therefore that the Claimant’s claim is admissible.

THE TRIBUNAL’S JURISDICTION OVER THE CLAIMANT’S CLAIM

 

 

In evaluating the sut of the Parties’ jurisd: stions, the Tribunal turns to Article 9 of the
Agreement which sets out the mechanism for dispute settlement between investors and the Contracting
Parties. Article 9 provides that an investor, as defined in Article | of the Agreement, may submit a
dispute “on investments” that he has with a Contracting Party to an ad hoc tribunal. The Tribunal first

 

°5 Notice of Arbitration/Statement of Claim, para. 58; Notice of Intent from Luigi Bosca to the Prime Minister,
Exh. C-1F.

°° Letter from the Ministry of Economy to Luigi Bosca, dated 24 April 2007, Exh. R-142; Letter from Luigi
Bosca to the Ministry of Economy, dated 7 June 2007, Exh. R-47; Letter from Luigi Bosca to the Ministry of
Economy, dated 20 June 2007, Exh. R-48; Letter from the SPF Director General Audrius Rudys to Motieka &
Audzevidius, dated 2 August 2007, Exh. R-49; Letter from Raminas Audzevitius to the SPF Director General
Audrius Rudys, dated 23 August 2007, Exh. R-143; Letter from the SPF Director General Audrius Rudys to
Moticka & Audzevicius, dated 23 August 2007, Exh. R-50; Letter from Ramiinas Audzevitius to the SPF
Director General Audrius Rudys, dated 27 September 2007, Exh. R-51; Letter from Ramiinas Audzeviéius to
the SPF Director General Audrius Rudys, dated 7 November 2007, Exh. R-53.

°7 Hearing Transcript 543: 6 — 545: 17, 546: 20 — 547: 10 (Dr. Skorupskas’ statement).

PCA 91370 23

123.

124.

125.

126.

1.

analyzes the Respondent’s contention that the actions regarding which the Claimant complains are not
attributable to the Lithuanian State before evaluating the presence of the other jurisdictional elements.

Attribution to the State
The Respondent's position

The Respondent asserts that the SPF, in annulling the tender results and entering into negotiations with
the Executive Consortium, acted not as an arm of the Lithuanian State but as an “ordinary commercial
party ducti i ”” The intains that the privatization of State-
owned property in Lithuania is a civil transaction governed by the Lithuanian Civil Code. It
distinguishes the circumstances here from those in Eureko v. Poland and Lemire v. Ukraine where the
actions of certain individuals were attributed to the respondent State by noting that the SPF director
who issued the Annulment Order was not a State official or minister of the Government, nor was he
instructed by a State official as so happened in those two ca: It is the Respondent's position that
the SPF acted iure gestionis rather than iure imperii and its actions cannot constitute a violation of the
Agreement.'*' Additionally, the Respondent submits that there was no interference by State officials
with the Alita tender process, as confirmed by several witnesses.

  

 

The Respondent argues that by bringing a claim concerning the work of the SPF, the Claimant intends
to elevate national law obligations to the level of international obligations and to extend the scope of the
A t's, igati as if the t ined an umbrella
clause, which it does not. 8 Thus, according to the Respondent, without having proven all the elements
of State responsibility for the actions of the SPF under the Agreement or international law more
generally, the Claimant cannot sustain his allegations.'*

The Claimant’s position

The Claimant submits that it is clear that privatization is an inherently sovereign act and that the entities
responsible for privatization of a State entity are government agencies engaged in sovereign acts.'°*
The Claimant asserts that the privatization of Alita was clearly a “sovereign act” involving at least two
Lithuanian State bodies: the SPF and the PTC.'°°

The Claimant further argues that the Respondent’s distinction between commercial and sovereign acts
made by entities associated with the State is misplaced.'”’ First, the Claimant submits that the
Respondent wrongly assumes that the distinction applies to all claims under international law; that is,

°8 Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 233.

°° Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 128.

'©9 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 134-138, citing Eureko B.V. v. Republic of Poland, UNCITRAL,
Partial Award (19 August 2005), [hereinafter Eureko v. Poland, Partial Award], paras. 218, 233; Joseph
Charles Lemire v. Ukraine, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/18, Award (28 March 2011) [hereinafter Lemire v.
Ukraine, Award].

‘1 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 125.

‘© Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 134, 183, 277. Hearing Transcript 660: 12 — 661: 8, 662: 1-17, 813:
23 —814: 4, 854: 5-24.

103

Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 139.

1 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 143.

105

Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 282.

1 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 272, 276-279.

‘07 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 272, 282.

PCA 91370 24

the Respondent is wrong in suggesting that, for all claims, an act of puissance publique is required to
establish a treaty breach. Rather, this principle applies only where a breach of contract forms the basis
of a claim, which is not the case in the present arbitration."

127. The Claimant comments that “economic interests” on the part of State actors involved in privatization
do not change the sovereign nature of their actions.’ Moreover, many arbitral tribunals evaluating
investment disputes have concluded that States can be liable for acts of their agencies or State-owned
enterprises in the context of a privatization.'"°

The Tribunal’s Decision

127. The Tribunal is of the view that the actions of the SPF and its related entities are attributable to the
State. According to Article 3.1 of the Law on the SPF, the SPF is a state enterprise, having a separate
legal personality, the object of which is to privatize State property. The Respondent relies on the
Lithuanian courts’ observation that the privatization process is governed by the Lithuanian Civil Code;
on this basis, the Respondent asserts that the SPF acted in a commercial capacity. The Tribunal
disagrees. The SPF is an entity empowered to exercise governmental authority, as described in Article 5
of the International Law Commission Articles on State Responsibility (the “ILC Articles on State
Responsibility”).''! Thus, the question before the Tribunal is whether the SPF was acting in a sovereign
capacity in the privatization process. While the privatization process is governed in part by the
Lithuanian Civil Code, as argued by Respondent, it is also controlled through the Law on Privatization,
the Regulations under it and even the Lithuanian Constitution. The evidence presented by both Parties
confirms that the privatization process is a governmental process, highly regulated by a series of
governmental decrees and rules, culminating in a multi-step State-approval process.''? The applicability
of the Civil Code to certain aspects of the SPF’s work does not change the governmental nature of the
acts adopted in the process of privatization.

 

128. Regardless of whether the Tribunal considers the SPF to have acted in a sovereign capacity, the SPF’s
actions were vetted and in this case approved by higher authorities that clearly acted in sovereign
capacities. The Privatization Regulations make clear that the Privatization Commission and, in the case
of its refusal, the Government itself could be called upon by the SPF to make a final decision on a
proposed SPA;'" the stamp of sovereign involvement could not be clearer. The Tribunal considers that
this administrative evaluation further reflects the governmental endorsement of the process. Here, the
Government acted at multiple steps, projecting its sovereign authority. !'*

 

 

129. Having established that the Claimant properly brings his claim against one of the Contracting Parties,
the Tribunal now turns to a second jurisdictional element: whether there is a dispute “on investments”
as set out in Article 9 of the Agreement.

18 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 274-275.

1 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 280.

"° Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 281.

"! Responsibility of States for International Wrongful Acts, UN Doc. A/RES/56/83, 12 December 2001.

"2 See, e.g., the Tender Regulations — a governmental decree issued as part of the Law on Privatization of State-
Owned and Municipal Property, Exh. R-2. Hearing Transcript 255: 23-24, 718: 1-23, 737: 1-3, 954: 6 - 955:
20. Following the announcement of the tender winner, the Government's discretion to cancel the privatization
transaction became subject to the specific limitations established in Article 63 of the Tender Regulations.
Claimant's Brief, para. 34.

"5 Tender Regulations, Exh. R-2, Arts. 45, 46, 48.

"4 The Tribunal notes also that in accordance with the ILC Articles on State Responsibility, “[c]onduct which is
not otherwise attributable to a State shall nevertheless be considered an act of that State under international
law if and to the extent that the State acknowledges and adopts the conduct in question as its own.” See
Article 11. In other words, where the State endorses the act, as here, the State is subject to international
responsibility under international law.

PCA 91370 25

2. Whether the Claimant made an “investment” under the Agreement

The Respondent's position

 

130. It is the Respondent’s position that the Claimant made no investment under the Agreement and that,
therefore, there is no dispute “on investments” under Article 9. Neither the Claimant's activities prior to
the Alita privatization nor his participation in the tender constitutes an “investment” as defined by
Article 1 of the Agreement. The Respondent also notes that the Parties have not concluded a contract
and that the Claimant has not contributed any of his own funds to the alleged investment.

(a) Activities prior to the Alita privatization

131. First, the Respondent submits that any activiti s, of Bosca SpA and those of the Claimant with or
through Boslita are irrelevant to the Alita tender.''* Even if these business activities were relevant, the
Respondent maintains that the Claimant’s and Bosca SpA’s alleged activities with Boslita do not
qualify as “investments” under the Agreement.'"°

   

132. In particular, the Respondent objects to the Claimant’s assertions that Bosca SpA “made a tangible and
substantial financial investment” through (1) the conclusion of the License Agreement, (2) Bosca SpA’s
acquisition of equipment for Boslita, or (3) Bosca SpA’s alleged minority shareholding. ''’ The
Respondent maintains that none of these constitutes “investments” under the Agreement. The
Respondent further objects that any of the activities of Bosca SpA can be attributed to the Claimant.'!*

133. According to the Respondent, the License Agreement that the Claimant alleges he signed in 1997 was
never registered with Lithuanian authorities as required by law, calling into question its validity.'"”
Moreover, the Respondent doubts in its pleadings that the License Agreement was put into effect as the
Claimant did not provide any admissible evidence that he was paid any royalties in accordance with the
terms of the License Agreement.'*” In any event, the Respondent maintains that the License Agreement
does not qualify as an investment under the Agreement and that the activities under the License
Agreement are attributable to Bosca SpA and not to the Claimant.'”"

 

 

 

134. The Respondent also contends that the equipment acquisition to which the Claimant refers as a
contribution of Bosca SpA to Boslita (and an investment) was a basic purchase agreement and not an
123
investment.

 

135. Finally, the Respondent submits that evidence regarding Bosca SpA’s shareholding in Boslita is
contradictory and unreliable to support the notion that Bosca SpA’s activities vis-a-vis Boslita
constitute an investment.’

 

136. Turning to the Claimant's activities in his personal capacity, the Respondent argues that the Option and
Service Agreements cannot by themselves constitute an “investment.” Beginning with the Service
Agreement, the Respondent maintains that it has justifiable doubts as to whether the Service Agreement
existed in 1999.'* Moreover, the Respondent contends that the alleged “transfer of know-how” as

115

Respondent's Memorial, paras. 22-25.
"6 Respondent’s Memorial, para. 25.
"7 Respondent’s Memorial, para. 32.
"8 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 27-28. Respondent’s Brief, para. 10.
"? Respondent’s Memorial, para. 33.
'20 Respondent’s Memorial, para. 37.
'2! Respondent’s Memorial, para. 40.
'22 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 32, 40.
'25 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 29-31.
'4 Respondent’s Memorial, para. 42. Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 151.

PCA 91370 26

outlined in the Service Agreement does not satisfy the necessary conditions of “investment.”'?° Insofar
as the Claimant argues that his work under the Service Agreement constitutes “associated activities” as
defined by the Protocol, the Respondent argues that “associated activities” must be connected with an
already existing investment of the Claimant, and the Claimant’s activities under the Service Agreement
are not so connected.’ In the Respondent’s view, the Service Agreement is “an ordinary contract for
the supply of services” rather than a protected investment.'”’ Further, the Respondent submits that the
Claimant's personal activities under the Service Agreement, if any, would not have been compatible
with his fiduciary duties to Bosca SpA.'* The Respondent also raises due process concerns with
respect to the evidence of payments made under the Service Agreement, stating that it was not
disclosed until the Hearing.'”° Finally, the Respondent points out that Prof. Dolzer, the Claimant's
expert, agreed at the Hearing that the Respondent did not interfere with the Claimant’s activities under
the Service Agreement.'”

 

137. With respect to the Option Agreement, the Respondent argues that it does not constitute an investment
under the Agreement because, first, the Option Agreement lacks certain features that are typical to an
investment, i.e., “duration, regularity of profit and return, risk, substantial commitment and contribution
to the host State’s development.”'*" Second, it does not contribute to the prosperity of both Contracting
Parties, contrary to the object and purpose of the Agreement.’ In any event, it is the Respondent's
position that the Option Agreement, if it is an authentic document from 2002, is null and void under
Lithuanian law.'** The Respondent notes that the Claimant agreed at the Hearing that he had paid no
consideration for rights under the Option Agreement nor had he exercised those rights.'**

(b) Continuous investment

138. The Respondent asserts that the Claimant’s participation in the Alita tender does not constitute a
“continuous investment” meeting the requirements of Article 1 of the Agreement. To begin, the
Respondent reasserts that the Claimant never provided any information regarding his prior commercial

enna : ‘ 135 .
activities in Lithuania when prompted by the SPF on several occasions to do so.” Further, any link
between the Claimant's participation in the Alita tender and his alleged activities prior to the tender is,
according to the Respondent, “speculative and distant.”!

(c) Participation in the privatization

139. Next, the Respondent rejects the Claimant’s premise that his participation in the tender, including
through the payment of fees related to the tender or any rights arising in the course of the tender
negotiations, constitutes an investment under the Agreement. With respect to the fees, the Respondent
states that the Claimant did not incur any costs for the Alita tender application fee of LTL 5,000 (EUR
1,448.10) nor for the deposit of LTL 200,000 (EUR 57,924) as these were paid by third parties outside

25 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 43-44, 46.

'26 Respondent’s Memorial, para. 43.

27 Respondent’s Memorial, para. 46. Respondent’s Brief, para. 16.

'28 Respondent’s Memorial, para. 45. Respondent’s Brief, para. 26.

2° Respondent's Brief, para. 22.

‘3° Respondent's Brief, para. 85. Hearing Transcript 1104: 16 — 1105: 17.

‘8! Respondent’s Memorial, para. 58, citing Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of
Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision on Jurisdiction (23 July 2001), [hereinafter Salini v.
Morocco, Decision on Jurisdiction], para. 52.

'32 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 55-59.

'3 Respondent’s Memorial, para. 54.

'4 Respondent's Brief, para. 11, citing Hearing Transcript 142: 14-20, 294: 2-4.

'5 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 65-67.

‘3° Respondent’s Memorial, para. 70.

PCA 91370 27

the control of the Claimant and have been reimbursed by the Respondent.'*’ The Respondent argues

that these expenses do not entail contribution, risk or duration, characteristics usually attributable to an
investment, and do not result in “economic rights accruing by law” as provided for in Article 1(1)(e) of
the Agreement.'** Likewise, the Respondent submits that the Claimant has not shown why the fee paid
to receive informational documents should be considered an investment.’

140. The Respondent also argues that the Claimant's transfer of his initial deposit constitutes neither
“shares” nor the “making of [a] contract[]” as defined by the Agreement.'*° In this regard, the
Respondent objects to the Claimant's allegation that the deposit “form[s] part of the total price to be
paid for shares,” arguing that under the Tender Regulations, the deposit could be set-off against the
price of the SPA only after the closure of the SPA.'“" Additionally, the Respondent maintains that under
Lithuanian law, the deposit paid by the Claimant was not a “payment” for Alita shares but rather
“security” in favor of the SPF.'*? The Respondent disputes the Claimant’s suggestion that, once the
Claimant was announced as the winning bidder, his deposit became a contribution to equity. According
to the Respondent, such a position is in diction with the Tender s; the
of the winner does not change the nature of the deposit.'**

 

 

 

 

141. With respect to any rights arising from the Claimant's participation, the Respondent contends that the
Claimant's expectations that the SPA would be finalized do not constitute “economic rights accruing by
law” because the “economic rights” are “implicitly restricted to the rights arising out of laws similar to
administrative permits, concessions, and licenses” and do not include the rights arising out of general
good faith duties in pre-contractual relations.'“* The Respondent argues that the statutory obligation to
negotiate in good faith does not create a right to demand that the other party conclude the contract.'**
Relatedly, the Respondent submits that statutory rights of a general nature enjoyed by the Claimant
during the negotiations do not qualify as “associated activities” under the Protocol because the phrase
“making (. . .) of contracts” must be understood to refer not to the conduct of contractual negotiations
but to the actual conclusion of binding contracts. ‘46 Even if they did, the Respondent maintains that the

ciated activities” under Paragraph 1 of the Protocol do not fall within the definition of

“investment” under Article 1(1) of the Agreement.'*”

 

 

142. The Respondent argues that the Claimant’s behavior, including his failure to cooperate with the SPF in
the last stage of finalization of the SPA, led the SPF to believe that the Claimant had no serious
intention to finalize the Alita deal.'“* The Respondent asserts that the SPF had the right to terminate the
Alita tender negotiations because the negotiations were not “advanced,” or, even if they were
“advanced,” it had an adequate reason for doing so on the basis of the Claimant’ s non-participation.'”

'57 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 22, 25, 72-73.
'8 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 77-79.

'° Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, para. 169.

'49 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 74-76.

'41 Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 170-174.

'2 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 80-82.

'45 Respondent's Brief, paras. 37-39.

‘4 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 84-85, 89-95. In the Respondent's view, the Claimant's expert oversimplifies
the meaning of “economic rights” by suggesting that they are rights connected with “economic process” or
“economic matters.” According to the Respondent, this interpretation is not supported by practice in
international investment arbitration. Respondent's Brief, para. 59. See Dolzer First Expert Report, para. 40
and Hearing Transcript 1041: 14 — 1042: 25.

'45 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 22, 25, 103-108.

‘4 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 22, 25, 86-88.

'47 Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 114-120, 186-188.
'48 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 22, 25, 141-146.

'4° Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 22, 25, 96-102.

PCA 91370 28

(d) Non-conformity with Lithuanian law and good faith

143. Finally, the Respondent submits that the Claimant’s business activity, if any, is not protected by the
Agreement since it is not in conformity with Lithuanian law.'*’ According to the Respondent, the
Claimant breached the obligation under the Lithuanian Civil Code to disclose information having
essential importance to the conclusion of the contract by failing to disclose information about his
relations with Boslita.'"! The Respondent submits that any rights obtained by the Claimant in breach of
Lithuanian law do not sat the requirements of Article 1(1) of the Agreement to constitute an
“investment,” thereby precluding the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the present claim.'**

 

144. As a general matter, the Respondent argues that the Claimant’s lack of good faith prevents him from
receiving any protection under international law.'**

(e) Relevance of Lithuanian court decisions

145. The Respondent submits that the decisions made by the Alita Commission (a Lithuanian parliamentary
commission set-up to analyze the Alita privatization), the Supreme Court of Lithuania, and the
Constitutional Court are not relevant to the question of whether the Claimant has ever made an
investment under the Agreement.'™ Findings of fact made by local authorities do not have precedential
value for an international investment tribunal.'** The Respondent also contends that, even if a tribunal
could rely on decisions made by local authorities, the Tribunal here should not do so “since the
Claimant himself disclosed serious deficiencies in the local proceedings.” '*° In particular, the
Respondent objects to the Tribunal’s consideration of the judgment of the Lithuanian Supreme Court
regarding the Alita tender process because the Court neither conducted a comprehensive examination of
the Claimant's activities nor analyzed certain issues pertinent to this arbitration.'*” According to the
Respondent, the Supreme Court's review was limited in these respects, just as it was limited to
reviewing the facts in the context of national law.'** The Respondent also argues that the findings by
the Alita Commission are not only “purely political” but also “absolutely non-binding,” as confirmed
by the Constitutional Court.'*?

 

 

 

 

146. It is the Respondent’s position that, by contrast, the Claimant selectively and intentionally avoids the
judgment of the Supreme Court of Lithuania of 7 June 2011 in the criminal case brought by prosecutors
against Mr. MilaSauskas (the former Director General of the SPF) because it was stated therein that the
SPF sought to act legally in the Alita tender.’

The Claimant's position

147. The Claimant argues that the present dispute concerns an “investment” in accordance with Article 9 of
the Agreement because his business activities constitute an “investment” as defined by the “broad and
non-exclusive” definition of Article 1.'°' According to the Claimant, the term “property invested” under

‘5° Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 22, 25.

'S! Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 189-192.

'S2 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 22, 25, 112-117.

'53 Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, para. 192.
'S4 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 168-170.

'S5 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 104.

'56 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 105-106.
'57 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 194-196.

'58 Respondent’s Memorial, para. 197.

‘59 Respondent’s Memorial, paras. 171-178.

‘© Respondent’s Memorial, para. 199.

'l Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 123.

PCA 91370 29

Article 1(1) of the Agreement refers to the “property the investor obtained in the host State.”'

Moreover, the Claimant submits that the phrase “economic right[s] conferred by law” under Article
1(1)(e) of the Agreement refers to a “meaningfully limited category of legal rights [under Lithuanian
law] that are economic in nature and which are capable of amounting to ‘property invested.’”
Acquisition of an investment is part of a larger progression which is protected in full regardless of
whether the investment has been acquired yet."

148. The Claimant cites Duke Energy v. Peru and Eureko to support his position that the question for the
Tribunal is not whether any one of the Claimant’s transactions, when viewed in isolation, is sufficient
to confer jurisdiction but whether the Claimant’s interest in concluding the acquisition of Alita, as
demonstrated through all of his activities, “‘forms an integral part of a transaction which qualifies as an
investment.’”!® Additionally, the Claimant argues that “Paragraph 1 of the Protocol expressly provides
that the protections in the Agreement apply to activities associated with investment” and that his
participation in the Alita tender aimed at expanding his existing investment in Lithuania clearly
constituted an “associated activity.”"™

  
  

(a) Activities prior to the Alita privatization

149. The Claimant first notes that, in light of the ordinary meaning of the term “investment” and the object
and purpose of the Agreement, “contributions capable of giving rise to a protected investment (. . -
include ‘[a]ny dedication of resources that has economic value, whether in the form of financial
obligations, services, technology, patents or technical assistance.’”"®’ It is the Claimant’s position that
his activities leading up to the Alita tender constitute an investment when taken together with the tender
participation, as they were characterized by “a commitment of resources of economic value to an
ongoing business venture and resulting in legal and economic rights”; “a long-term commitment to
Lithuania”; and “risk beyond that associated with an ordinary commercial transaction.”'® In particular,
the Claimant submits that the License Agreement, the Service Agreement, and the Option Agreement
serve as evidence of his personal continuous investment.’ The Claimant denies that he withheld any
information from the SPF regarding these prior commercial activities.”

 

 

 

150. With respect to the License Agreement with Boslita, the Claimant alleges that on 18 December 1997,
he signed it on behalf of Bosca SpA to promote and sell the Bosca brand in the Baltic States.'”'
According to the Claimant, the License Agreement confirms Boslita’s ownership of the Bosca
trademark in Lithuania, obliges Bosca SpA to provide Boslita with supervision and technical assistance,
and requires the Claimant to provide Boslita “with all necessary technical instructions, formulae,
processes and procedures” in exchange for royalties to be paid to Bosca SpA.'”” The Claimant states
that the License Agreement constitutes “a contribution of intellectual property in exchange for an
economic right to a share of Boslita’s profits”'”* bringing it within the meaning of an “investment.”

 

‘© Claimant's Brief, para. 13.

‘63 Claimant's Brief, paras. 17, 19.
‘+ Claimant's Brief, para. 83.

‘65 Claimant’s Rejoinder, paras. 139-147, citing Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. 1 Ltd. v.
Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/28, Decision on Jurisdiction (1 February 2006), paras. 91-92,
125; Eureko v. Poland, Partial Award, para. 145.

‘66 Claimant’ s Rejoinder, paras. 148-158.

‘7 Claimant's Rejoinder, paras. 168-171, quoting Romak S.A. v. Republic of Uzbekistan, PCA Case No. 2007-
07, UNCITRAL, Award (26 November 2009), para. 214.

‘68 Claimant’ s Rejoinder, para. 167.

‘©? Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 114-119.

Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 123. Hearing Transcript 481: 4-22.
! Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 127.

' Claimant's Memorial, para. 129.

3 Claimant’ s Rejoinder, para. 178, referring to the License Agreement, Exh. C-22.

PCA 91370 30

151. The Claimant contends that the fact that the License Agreement was not registered with Lithuanian
authorities does not affect its validity.’ In the Claimant's view, its existence is further evidenced by
the Agreement on Coordination of Debt between Bosca SpA and Boslita dated 11 July 2005, concluded
to address the non-payment of royalties due and owing under the License Agreement.'”°

152. Turning to the Service Agreement, the Claimant states that he signed it with Boslita in September 1999
and that, in accordance with its terms, he provided extensive and valuable “know-how” to Boslita.!”°
The Claimant cites the decisions rendered in CME v. Czech Republic, Bayindir v. Pakistan, and Bureau
Veritas v. Paraguay, arguing that “all forms of labor and in-kind contributions are equally capable of
giving rise to an investment subject to treaty protection in certain contexts” and that, therefore, the
services provided by the Claimant under the Service Agreement could give rise to a protected
investment for the purpose of the Agreement.'””

153. The Claimant further contends that ample corroborating evidence demonstrates the “blatant inaccuracy”
of the Respondent’s allegations as to the existence and authenticity of the Service Agreement.'’* The
Claimant contests the Respondent’s assertion that the Service Agreement would be incompatible with
the Claimant's fiduciary obligations to Bosca SpA, arguing that the provision on which the Respondent
relies from the Italian Civil Code does not apply to the situation in this arbitration.'” Finally, the
Claimant argues that he was paid by Boslita for the services he provided under the Service
Agreement.

154. The Claimant maintains that the Option Agreement represents the continuity of the Claimant's equity
interests in Boslita before and after the Alita tender.'*' According to the Claimant, Bosca SpA acquired
a thirty percent (30%) shareholding in Boslita in 1997, which, to avoid difficulties with the Competition
Council in the context of the forthcoming privatization of the state-owned alcoholic beverage
producers, it sold to Mrs. Skorupskiené on 2 July 2002;'* on the same day, the Claimant personally
entered into a five-year Option Agreement with Mrs. Skorupskiené.'*’ The Claimant argues that the
Option Agreement meets the definitions of both an “economic right” under the Agreement and an
“associated activity” under the Protocol.!

 

155. Where the Respondent relies on the criteria defining “investment” as set out by the International Centre
for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) tribunal in Salini v. Morocco, the Claimant accepts
that these criteria “may be considered in evaluating the existence of a relevant ‘investment’ for
purposes of a bilateral investment treaty as much as for purposes of the ICSID Convention,” but argues
that “such factors: (1) cannot and should not be substituted for a fulsome review of all the relevant

™ Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 124.
5 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 117.
6 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 131.

7 Claimant's Rejoinder, paras. 179-189, citing CME Czech Republic B.V. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL,
Partial Award (13 September 2001), para. 428; Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic
Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29, Decision on Jurisdiction (14 November 2005), para. 115;
Bureau Veritas, Inspection, Valuation, Assessment and Control, Bivac B.V. v. Republic of Paraguay, ICSID
Case No. ARB/07/9, Decision on Objection to Jurisdiction (29 May 2009), para. 99. Claimant's Brief, para.
62.

8 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 143-147.
Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 148.

'89 Claimant's Brief, paras. 110-111. At the request of the Tribunal, the Claimant submitted evidence of the
payments made under the Service Agreement after the Hearing. See para. 62 of this Award.

‘8! Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 129; Claimant’ s Rejoinder, paras. 172-176.
'82 Stock Purchase Agreement, Exhs. C-58/R-71.
'83 Option Agreement, Exhs. C-59/R-55.

'§4 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 135-137.

PCA 91370 31

facts, and (2) cannot and should not be imposed as requirements for the existence of a protected

investment under the Agreement.”'** The Claimant further argues that the Respondent's reliance on the
am A 186

Salini criteria disregards the plain terms of the Agreement.

(b) Continuous investment

156. The Claimant objects to the Respondent’s allegation that because the Claimant and Bosca SpA have
separate legal personalities and because the Claimant did not own or control Bosca SpA, the activities
of Bosca SpA are irrelevant to the question of jurisdiction in this case. *’ The Claimant submits that he
had control of Bosca SpA, his family company, as the president.'** The Claimant clarifies, however,
that he does not maintain that any of Bosca SpA’s interests with regard to Boslita constitute the
“investment at issue” in this arbitration or that they are otherwise sufficient to confer jurisdiction on the
Tribunal to hear this dispute.

 

 

 

157. The Claimant argues that Generation Ukraine vy. Ukraine, cited by the Respondent, should be
distinguished from the present case. According to the Claimant, in Generation Ukraine, the State
measures at issue prevented the purported investor from commencing operations in Ukraine; as a result,
the tribunal found there was no relevant investment. Here, however, the Claimant had business
operations in Lithuania prior to pursuing the Alita tender.'*° Thus, the Claimant argues an “overall
investment operation” had commenced.'*! The Claimant submits that the fact that his participation in
the Alita tender was “intimately related” to his pre-existing activities in the Lithuanian alcoholic

beverages sector was confirmed at the Hearing.'*

(c) Participation in the privatization

158. Second, the Claimant submits that his participation in the Alita tender in and of itself constitutes an
“investment” under the Agreement.'®? Arguing that a distinction should be drawn between payments
made by other bidders and the payment made by the successful bidder,'** the Claimant maintains that
his initial contribution of LTL 200,000 for participation in the Alita tender has all the characteristics of
an “investment” and of an “associated activity” because it would have formed part of the total price to
be paid for the shares of Alita had the Respondent not unlawfully terminated the tender. '°* The
Claimant also points out that his payment can be distinguished from the expenses involved in Mihaly v.
Sri Lanka, relied on by the Respondent because the expenses incurred by the investor in Mihaly were
not connected to the tender process, but rather were the expenses the investor accumulated through its
own development of the project.'”° Moreover, the Mihaly tribunal was careful to limit its decision to the
facts and noted that it was not concluding that all pre-contractual expenditures were barred from

 

'85 Claimant’ s Rejoinder, paras. 164-166, citing Salini v. Morocco, Decision on Jurisdiction.

'86 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 130-134, citing Salini v. Morocco, Decision on Jurisdiction, para.
52.

'87 Claimant’ s Rejoinder, paras. 124-125.
‘8 Claimant’ s Rejoinder, paras. 126-129, 131-132.
'89 Hearing Transcript 139: 25 — 140: 11.

19 Claimant's Rejoinder, paras. 159-161, citing Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, (CSID Case No. ARB/00/9,
Award (16 September 2003), [hereinafter Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine, Award].

‘1 Claimant’ s Rejoinder, para. 160.

'2 Hearing Transcript 339: 5 — 340: 2, 342: 12-17, 483: 20 -— 484: 11, 537: 2-11.
'3 Claimant's Memorial, para. 140.

'4 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 155.

'5 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 156.

16 Claimant’ s Rejoinder, para. 210.

PCA 91370 32

159.

160.

in other 17 ding the dent’s position that the deposit was not
attributable to the Claimant as an investment belonging to him because it was paid by a third party, the
Claimant contends that this detail is irrelevant as the payments were made “at the direction of the
Claimant.”

The Claimant submits that the negotiation of the SPA is clearly an activity covered by the Agreement
because the Protocol provides that all paragraphs referring to “investments” apply to “associated
activities” including the “making of contracts.”'”? The Claimant objects to the Respondent's argument
that the term “associated activit[y]” requires a pre-existing investment.” In any event, the Claimant
submits that the process of participating in the Alita tender should properly be interpreted as an activity
“associated” with the Service Agreement and other broader investment related activities that the
Claimant had in Lithuania.””’

In addition, the Claimant submits that his expectations that the negotiations of the SPA be concluded
and conducted in good faith grant him “economic rights” under Lithuanian law and therefore constitute
an investment.” The Claimant argues that the negotiations between the Claimant and the SPF had
reached “an advanced stage of ‘considerable progress,’” and that the Claimant had obtained a right
under Lithuanian law to expect that the SPA would be concluded for certain.”°* The Claimant argues
that the Respondent's allegation that “only ‘concessions’ or other rights in rem amount to ‘economic
rights’ for purposes of the Agreement” is “without support in any acceptable method of treaty

interpretation.”“™* The Claimant insists that he was willing to complete the negotiations.”">

(d) Non-conformity with Lithuanian law and good faith

161.

Citing the Court of Appeal of Lithuania’s rejection of a request by the Respondent to reopen the

previous proceedings related to the Alita privatization,”

the Claimant argues that he acted in good

faith and in conformity with Lithuanian law in the context of the Alita tender.””” In the Claimant’s view,
there is no evidence that either Dr. Skorupskas or the Claimant intentionally concealed anything from

the SPF with respect to the Alita tender.”

(e) Relevance of the Lithuanian court decisions

162. The Claimant takes the position that the decisions made by the Lithuanian courts are relevant to the
present arbitration because they validate the Claimant's claim regarding his allegedly illegal treatment

in the context of the Alita tender and identify those responsible for the damages caused to him.

'7 Claimant’s Rejoinder, paras. 208-209, quoting Mihaly International Corporation v. Democratic
Republic of Sri Lanka, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O0/2, Award (15 March 2002), paras. 48-49.

'8 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 158-159.
19 Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 124, 150.

2 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 165.

201 Claimant’ s Brief, para. 70.

22 Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 141-143. Claimant’s Brief, para. 48.
203 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 161-164. Claimant's Brief, para. 40.
2% Claimant’ s Rejoinder, paras. 201-205.

295 Claimant’ s Rejoinder, paras. 263-270.

20

Socialist

2° Ruling of the Court of Appeal of Lithuania, 1 March 2012, sec. IV, Exh. C-97. This ruling was upheld by the
Supreme Court of Lithuania. Ruling of the Supreme Court of Lithuania, 5 December 2012, submitted by the

Claimant on 10 December 2012. See para. 71 of this Award.
2°7 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 166-167.
298 Claimant’ s Rejoinder, para. 110. Claimant’s Brief, para. 123.

2 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 105. Claimant’s Counter-memorial, paras. 197-198.

PCA 91370 33

163.

164.

165.

166.

167.

The Tribunal’s Decision

The Tribunal will first comment on the relevance of Lithuanian court decisions concerning matters
related to the privatization process of Alita. The Respondent is right in arguing that, as discussed further
below, factual findings by local courts do not have precedential value for an international investment
tribunal and are not relevant to the question of whether the Claimant has made an investment within the
terms of the Agreement, a matter that in any event no Lithuanian court has been called upon to address.
However, their irrelevance in this respect does not mean that the Tribunal should completely ignore
those decisions, as if they had never occurred. In fact, the Respondent itself has not hesitated, as noted
in paragraph 146 of this Award, to refer to such a decision in support of its claim that the SPF sought to
act legally in the Alita tender. The Tribunal is clearly not bound by any local court judgment but it must
take them as facts which, together with other evidence submitted by the Parties, must be considered by
the Tribunal in determining, on the basis of the Agreement and international law, whether the Claimant
has made an investment and whether the Respondent has breached the Agreement. In reaching its
determination, the Tribunal need not rely on the findings of the Lithuanian courts, though it finds them
informative for understanding the domestic law provisions and their meaning and application to the
circumstances.

 

 

  

 

 

 

In its consideration of whether there is a “dispute (. . .) on investments” in the present proceedings, the
Tribunal observes that there is clearly a dispute between the Parties according to the plain meaning of
the term and that that dispute concerns the Respondent's retraction of the Claimant's winning bid in the
Alita tender process. The Parties have presented several arguments outlined above as to whether the
elements of the Alita tender process, and the Claimant’s other commercial activities in Lithuania,
constitute “investments” such that the dispute may be considered to be a “dispute (. . .) on investments”
giving the Tribunal jurisdiction according to the Agreement.

 

At the outset, the Tribunal observes that nothing in the Agreement distinguishes a dispute “on
investments” from one “arising out of or relating to” investments. The Agreement defines “investment”
in Article 1(1) as “any kind of property invested (. . .) by a natural or legal person of a Contracting
Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party.” The Tribunal concentrates on the meaning of
“investment” and its extension to associated activities as described in Paragraph | of the Protocol. As
noted by the legal experts for the Claimant and the Respondent, the Agreement, including its Protocol
which is “deemed to form an integral part of the Agreement,’”!” contains a very broad definition of
what constitutes an investment. Prof. Dolzer states that, “[t]he scope of the term ‘investment’ so defined
in the main text and the Protocol is unusually broad by any standard of investment law.” 7"! Prof.
Volterra opines that, “[a]lthough Article 1 of the BIT indeed contains a broad definition of
‘investment,’ and possibly the broadest, it is not ‘unusually broad.’”?!? The Tribunal does not believe
that there is a significant difference between an “unusually broad” and “possibly the broadest”
definition of “investment.”

   

 

For the reasons that follow, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimant made an investment in Lithuania
when he concluded and realized the Service Agreement. In the Tribunal’s view, winning the tender in
the Alita privatization and negotiating the SPA — the subject of the present dispute — was an associated
activity, as described in Paragraph | of the Protocol, subject to the same protection as any investment
falling within Article 1 of the Agreement. The Tribunal need not decide whether the Agreement allows
it to take jurisdiction over disputes concerning activities in advance of the establishment of an
investment since it finds that the Claimant had an investment at the relevant time and that the disputed
activity wa: ociated with it in such a way as to bring it under the protection of the Agreement’s
substantive provisions.

  

  

On the other hand, the Tribunal is of the view that the activities of Bosca SpA in Lithuania in the late
1990s including the License Agreement with Boslita and Bosca SpA’s minority shareholding between

219 Protocol, opening paragraph.

21! Dolzer First Expert Report, paras. 11-12, 41.

212

Volterra First Expert Report, para. 12.

PCA 91370 34

213

168.

169.

170.

171.

172.

1997 and 2002 did not constitute investments of the Claimant for purposes of this arbitration. Thus, the
Tribunal need only focus on the Claimant’s activities in his personal capacity.

In that context, it is clear that the Claimant was devoting resources to a commercial venture in
Lithuania with the expectation of profit as early as the time of the Service Agreement vis-a-vis Boslita.
The Tribunal considers that the Service Agreement is more than an “ordinary contract for the supply of
services” as the Respondent suggests.”!* Weighing the totality of the evidence submitted by the Parties,
such as the list of services the Claimant provided under that Service Agreement, his many trips to
Lithuania during the relevant time, his testimony and that of Dr. Skorupskas to that effect, the Tribunal
determines that the Service Agreement constituted an investment as defined in the Agreement and the
Protocol. Despite the difficulties highlighted by the Respondent concerning the execution, authenticity,
and realization of the Service Agreement, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant has substantiated his
contributions to Boslita under the Service Agreement as well as the payment he received in return for
his services, albeit only recently.”"* In particular, the Tribunal is left with no doubt that the Claimant
contributed considerable know-how to Boslita during the duration of the Service Agreement and know-
how is specifically mentioned in Article 1(1)(d) as one form of investment under the Agreement. The
Service Agreement had the necessary elements of contribution, risk and duration typically considered
basic characteristics of an investment.

  

 

 

  

 

On the other hand, the Tribunal is persuaded by the Respondent's argument that the Option Agreement
does not constitute an investment. In contrast with the Service Agreement where he was to receive
remuneration, the Claimant admitted that he paid no consideration for “rights” under the Option
Agreement nor had he exercised those rights at the time of the Option Agreement’s expiration in 2007.
Nothing in the Agreement, either in its definition of investment in Article | or in its definition of
associated activities under Paragraph | of the Protocol, would cover this Option Agreement under these
circumstances. In any event, no claim is made in connection with the Option Agreement. The
Tribunal’s only interest in that event is that it brings some support to the Claimant’s alleged desire to
expand his presence and activities in Lithuania during the period covered by the present dispute but it
has no bearing on the Tribunal’s conclusion on this point.

The Tribunal also agrees with the Respondent that the Claimant has not substantiated any argument that
the Respondent interfered with his Service Agreement investment. The Claimant's claim in the present
arbitration concerns only the Respondent’s treatment of the Claimant in the course of the Alita tender to
which the Tribunal now turns.

The Claimant's interest and participation in the Alita tender followed the establishment of the Boslita
brand in Lithuania through the License Agreement signed between Boslita and Bosca SpA in 1997 and
his own Service Agreement of 1999 with Boslita. Subsequently, the Claimant sought to expand the
venture, pursuing another opportunity to grow the presence of Bosca products in the Baltic States. To
do so, the Claimant embarked on the acquisition of Alita, making the required payments and preparing
appropriate materials until, having offered a purchase price about double those of the other bidders, he
was declared the winner of the tender and would thereafter negotiate the final terms of the SPA with the
State.

These activities gave the Claimant a solid foundation to build upon his investment through an
associated project. Looking to the Protocol to the Agreement, which includes among its provisions
examples of “associated activities” to be treated as investments, the Tribunal concludes that becoming
the tender winner and negotiating the SPA can be likened to “making [a] contract[].” Thus, the Tribunal
finds that these activities between the Claimant and the SPF constitute an “associated activit[y]”
granting the Tribunal jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claim. Applying for and winning the tender led
the Claimant to the contract-negotiating table. The Tribunal notes in particular that, when they were

Respondent’s Memorial, para. 51.

24 Only at the Hearing did the Tribunal hear for the first time that the Claimant was receiving payments under
the Service Agreement. Hearing Transcript 155: 25 — 159: 4. The Respondent has highlighted many

 

Howie Transcript 539: 22 - 540: 10. The Tribunal will address the Respondent’

repancies” with respect to the authenticity of the Service Agreement and when it was signed. See, e.g.,
s further arguments on the

 

evidentiary nature of the Service Agreement and others of the Claimant’s transactions again below. See para.
318 of this Award.

PCA 91370 35

terminated by the SPF, the negotiations were at an advanced stage in which only three terms remained
for discussion, two of them already agreed between the Parties’ representatives but still subject to
confirmation by the Claimant. In the Tribunal’s view, the culmination of the tender process announcing
the Claimant as the winner and commencing the negotiation of the SPA falls within the express terms
and intended meaning of an associated activity.

173. The Service Agreement did not need to contemplate the acquisition of Alita for the tender process to
constitute an associated activity. In the absence of an express definition of “associated,” the Tribunal
considers that activities are associated through their common purpose, aims, and operation. The
Claimant’s monetary contributions, despite their later reimbursement by the State following a decision
by the Supreme Court of Lithuania ordering such reimbursement, demonstrated the seriousness of
purpose the Claimant brought to the table; the status of those contributions, whether considered as a
down payment or otherwise, has no bearing on the characterization of the Claimant’s on-going
activities.

 

174. As to the Respondent's allegation that the Claimant has not contributed any of his own funds to the
alleged investment because the monetary contributions for the tender process were paid by third parties,
the Tribunal is satisfied that the Claimant has demonstrated that these sums were advanced at his
direction and on his own behalf.’'* That these sums were later reimbursed by the Respondent at the
order of the Supreme Court may be something to be considered by the Tribunal when assessing
damages but it does not change the fact that these amounts must be considered as having been made on
behalf of the Claimant; at no time during the negotiation process did the Respondent raise any question
in that regard.

 

 

175. Neither Party disputes that the Parties were in the process of negotiating a contract. Winning the tender
set the Claimant apart from the other bidders allowing him to commence the contract-making process.
The Respondent insists that the reference to “making [a] contract[]” means to include only the signature
of a contract surrounding its entry into force. The Tribunal is not convinced by this interpretation.
Rather, the Tribunal understands the term in its context in the Protocol, “the making, performance and
enforcement of contracts,” to be less restrictive than the Respondent proposes. Nothing in the
Agreement or in its Protocol suggests that the drafters intended “making” to be so limited.

   

176. As to the Respondent’s argument concerning the alleged failure of the Claimant to provide information
of essential importance, the Tribunal is satisfied by its analysis of the relevant documents produced by
the Parties and the testimony given at the Hearing that the Claimant responded adequately to the
Respondent’s queries at the time of his investment and did not intentionally conceal his business
activities.”! The Tribunal will further address this issue below.

 

  

177. Finally, there is the question whether the Claimant acquired an economic right accruing by law, as
mentioned under the definition of “investment” in Article 1(1)(e) of the Agreement. This question does
not concern any guarantee on the part of the Claimant that the SPA would be concluded; rather, it
concerns whether he had an investment under the terms of the Agreement by having a right to expect
that the Respondent would meet its good faith negotiation obligations. The Tribunal sees no need to

is issue given the Tribunal’s determination that the Claimant already had an investment and

that his participation in the negotiations also received protected status pursuant to the Agreement.

 

178. The Tribunal therefore concludes only that the Claimant made an investment under the Agreement in
the form of the Service Agreement and that his participation in the negotiations after winning the Alita
bidding process constituted an associated activity under the Protocol of the Agreement.

215 Bosca First Witness Statement, para. 43; Skorupskas First Witness Statement, para. 37; Cash Receipt No.
835856336, 1 April 2003, Exhs. C-27/R-45; Transaction details for initial contributions to AB Alita on behalf
of L. Bosca, 2 May 2003, Exhs. C-28/R-46.

216 Hearing Transcript 441: 25 — 442: 12.

   

PCA 91370 36

3. Alleged termination of the Agreement
The Respondent's position

179. The Respondent submits that, in light of concerns the Republic of Italy had as to the compatibility
between the Agreement and EU law and “being aware of the Claimant’s claim and possible abuse of
the [Agreement],” the Contracting Parties to the Agreement decided to terminate it upon the expiration
of its 15-year term, i.e., on 15 April 2012.7!”

The Claimant's position

180. The Claimant maintains that the documents offered by the Respondent on this point do not support its
argument and that the argument is frivolous.”!

The Tribunal’s Decision

181. The Tribunal is not persuaded that the Agreement was terminated on the basis of the evidence provided:
a Note Verbale to the Republic of Lithuania in which the Italian Republic merely sought the views of
the Republic of Lithuania.””” In its response, the Republic of Lithuania does not agree to annul the
Agreement, but rather reiterates the Agreements validity.”° In the Tribunal’s view, the Respondent's
assertion is undermined by the plain text of the correspondence between the Contracting Parties.

182. On the basis of all the above, the Tribunal concludes that it has jurisdiction over this dispute.
Cc. JUST AND FAIR TREATMENT

The Claimant’s position

183. In the Claimant’s view, the obligation on the Contracting Parties in the first sentence of Article 2(2) of
the Agreement to “ensure just and fair treatment of the investments of investors of the other Contracting
Party” should be construed in the same way as the obligation found in many bilateral investment
treaties to provide “fair and equitable treatment” (“FET”). The Claimant asserts that FET is under: ood
to incorporate a requirement that States act consistently with an investor's “legitimate expectations.’

 
 

184. The Claimant submits that the Respondent acted contrary to the Claimant’ s “legitimate expectations” in
violation of the first sentence of Article 2(2) in two related respects. ~~ First, the Claimant argues that
the Respondent violated domestic law and policy in its actions toward the Claimant thereby

2!7 Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 194.
218 Claimant’ s Rejoinder, para. 112.

21° Note Verbale from the Republic of Italy to the Republic of Lithuania, dated 21 August 2007, Exh. R-144.
Note Verbale from the Republic of Italy to the Republic of Lithuania, dated 1 February 2012, Exh. R-146.

22° Note Verbale from the Republic of Lithuania to the Republic of Italy, dated 30 March 2012, Exh. R-145.

71 Claimant's Memorial, paras. 165-166, 168, citing Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/04/01, Decision on Liability (25 August 2006) [hereinafter Total v. Argentina, Decision on Liability],
para. 106; Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. Republic of Lithuania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/0S/8, Award (11
September 2007) [hereinafter Parkerings v. Lithuania, Award], para. 277; MTD v. Chile, Award, para. 113;
Saluka Investments BV v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award (17 March 2006), [hereinafter Saluka
v. Czech Republic, Partial Award], paras. 297, 302.

22 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 163.

PCA 91370 37

undermining the Claimant's legitimate expectations formed on the basis of Lithuanian law.”* Second,

the Claimant asserts that the Respondent's lack of good faith in undertaking negotiations with the
Claimant constitutes an independent basis for its violation of the first sentence of Article 2(2).~ +

185. The Claimant first argues that his decision to participate in the Alita tender was premised on his
expectations arising from “the domestic legal framework; from the [G]overnment'’s stated policies; and
from the fundamental premise that the [Respondent would] deal with the investor and its investment
consistently, transparently and in good faith.”””* It is the Claimant's position that his expectations “were
subsequently destroyed by the cumulative actions” of the Respondent.””° The Claimant asserts that the
Respondent's violation of its own legal order is persuasive evidence that it acted with casual disregard
to the rule of law in violation of the first sentence of Article 2(2).”*” Turning to other sources, the
Claimant cites Eureko v. Poland, in which the tribunal stated that “[the respondent’s] arbitrary and
unlawful disregard for the extant strategy and policy (. . .) by necessity” violated an investor's
legitimate expectations of investment expansion.””

 

186. The Claimant distinguishes this case from cases that involve changes to the existing legislative
framework.” In the Claimant's view, the actions of the SPF during the Alita tender were political and
incompatible with the applicable Lithuanian law and regulations as well as the Lithuanian
Constitution.

187. Second, the Claimant argues that the SPF “unreasonably frustrated” his efforts to finalize the SPA, and
that the SPF “failed to ‘develop a workable cooperative solution’” with him in the negotiations,
demonstrating its bad faith. The Claimant refers to the statement made by the Lithuanian Supreme
Court that the SPF’s unlawful conduct had “undermined [the Claimant’s] reasonable trust and lawful
expectations that the agreement [would] be concluded.”?? The Claimant submits that the Respondent's
ex post facto “justification” for the termination of the negotiations (that the Claimant was unwilling to
participate) is unconvincing and in any event does not justify its breach of the FET obligation. °

188. According to the Claimant, FET protection extends to investors at a pre-contract stage.” Not only is a
contract not required for legitimate expectations to be formed, but some tribunals have concluded that,
under customary international law, FET is a quasi-contract protection.** The Claimant maintains that

23 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 175.
24 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 182.
25 Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 169-175. Claimant’s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 210.
26 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 175.

27 Claimant’s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 207, citing Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States of
America v. Italy), Judgment of 20 July 1989, 1989 I.C.J. Reports 15, para. 128.

8 Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 178-181, citing Eureko v. Poland, Partial Award, paras. 191, 196, 198, 207-208.

2° Claimant’s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 221-224, referring to Continental Casualty Co. v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Award (5 September 2008), paras. 132-147, 258.

259 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 176.

25! Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 182-185, citing PSEG Global Inc. and Konya Ilgin Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret
Limited Sirketi v. Republic of Turkey, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/5, Award (19 January 2007), [hereinafter
PSEG v. Turkey, Award], paras. 186, 242, 246.

232 Claimant’s Memorial, para. 188, quoting Supreme Court of Lithuania, Judgment (10 October 2006), Exh. C-
1E, p. 13.

233 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 219-220.
24 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 206, 208.

235 Claimant’s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 206, 208, citing Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. United States of America,
UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Award (8 June 2009), para. 767.

PCA 91370 38

189.

190.

191.

192.

since the SPA negotiations had advanced to such a stage that they could not have been terminated under
Lithuanian law, he had “legitimate expectations” that the contract would be concluded.”*

Moreover, legitimate expectations may arise not only from “specific assurances given to the investor”
but also, the Claimant argues, from “the prevailing legal framework at the time of investment.” "In
any event, the Respondent did make “specific commitments,” through the Law on Privatization of
State-Owned and Municipal Property and its accompanying Regulations as well as the Alita
Information Memorandum, that “it would obey the rule of law in the process of privatizing Alita.”?**

Finally, the Claimant objects to the Respondent's allegation that the Claimant did not act in good faith
by not providing the Respondent with information requested by the SPF and that the Claimant could not
form legitimate expectations as a result.’ The Claimant contends that he “responded fully and
completely” to the questions asked by the Respondent in the tender process, and that the Respondent
was well aware of his business activities including his relationship to Boslita.*“°

 

The Respondent's position

Adopting the Claimant’s argument that the Agreement intended to import the FET standard of
“legitimate expectations,” the Respondent submits that the Claimant could not have had any legitimate
expectations permitting recovery under the Agreement. It asserts that any expectation on the part of the
Claimant that the SPA would be concluded based on the announcement of the Claimant as the tender
winner cannot be described as objective, reasonable and legitimate and would not give rise to a claim
under the Agreement.™“' In the Respondent's view, the SPA negotiations did not create any specific
rights that could justify legitimate expectations, nor did the general legal framework surrounding the
tender process create such expectations.“

The Respondent argues that legitimate expectations must be based on “a specific assurance or a
promise of a State””* and that no specific assurances were given here with respect to the conclusion of
the SPA.” The Claimant’s pre-contractual right was “neither specific nor explicit or enforceable
enough to generate legitimate expectations.”**” The Respondent differentiates the Tecmed v. Mexico
case, in which the tribunal found that the State violated the investor’s legitimate expectations, on the
basis that, there, the investor had the necessary permit to invest which gave rise to its expectations,
whereas no legitimate expectations had arisen here through the negotiation process. ™“° In the
Respondent’ 's view, the Claimant gained only “the right to be invited to negotiate the SPA prior to other
bidders.”

 

256 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 209. Claimant’s Memorial paras. 100-101.

257 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 210-216, quoting Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona
S.A., and Interagua Servicios Integrales del Agua S.A. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/17,
Decision on Liability (30 July 2010), para. 203.

238 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 216-217.

25° Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 225.

9 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 226-229.

4! Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 156-159.

242

243

Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, para. 237.

Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, para. 158.

4 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 159-166.

45 Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 239-240, 243-248.

46 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 167-168. Respondent's Brief, para. 96. Técnicas Medioambientales
Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award (29 May 2003), [hereinafter
Tecmed v. Mexico, Award].

47 Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 250.

PCA 91370 39

193. The Respondent claims that the Claimant failed to provide information regarding Bosca SpA’s
shareholding in Boslita during the Alita tender despite the SPF’s numerous requests and that such
failure to cooperate “plainly conflicts with the duty of good faith.”*“* In effect, the Claimant's
concealment of his relations with Boslita precludes his “legitimate expectations” argument. ~”
Moreover, the Respondent points to the following facts: (1) the Claimant failed to provide evidence of
his ability to pay for Alita’s shares; (2) the Claimant ignored the inquiries sent from the SPF to him and
his representatives; (3) the Claimant failed to express his disagreements, if any, to the SPF; and (4) the
Claimant failed to show up to initial the draft SPA despite several requests and warnings by the
Lithuanian authorities.”

 

 

194. Even if the tender created legitimate expectations on the part of the Claimant, the Respondent maintains
that only a “blatant disregard” of the applicable tender rules violates the FET standard and that the
SPF’s decision to annul the Alita tender results was not a “blatant disregard” of the rules.”*! The
Respondent submits that the SPE’ s decision to terminate the negotiations was based on the Claimant's
conduct during the negotiations.”

The Tribunal’s Decision

195. The Tribunal will begin with the following preliminary comments.

196. The expression “just and fair treatment” is used in the first sentence of Article 2(2) of the Agreement
but, as the Parties have accepted, there is no reason to consider that it has a different meaning from “fair
and equitable treatment” found in many investment treaties and arbitral awards. Thus, the Tribunal will
treat “just and fair treatment” as having the same meaning as FET. The same conclusion has been
reached in a number of awards addressing similar terms

 

197. Secondly, it is worth repeating that the Tribunal is not bound by the conclusions of the Alita
Commission. Other than the occasional reference, in light of the political nature of that Commission,
the Tribunal will not consider the Commission’s conclusions in reaching the Tribunal’s decision.

  

198. Nor is the Tribunal bound by the decisions of the Lithuanian courts on the subject, as discussed above,
even though due deference should be given to such decisions, particularly when they interpret
Lithuanian law. In the Helnan v. Egypt case,” the arbitral tribunal stated that, when a tribunal is
considering an issue of domestic law previously ruled upon by a domestic court, the tribunal “will
accept the findings of local courts as long as no deficiencies, in procedure or substance, are shown in
regard to the local proceedings which are of a nature of rendering these deficiencies unacceptable from
the viewpoint of international law, such as in the case of a denial of justice.” No such inappropriate
conduct by the local courts has been alleged in the present case; the Lithuanian courts appear to have
applied high standards of judicial propriety in each of their judgments.

 

   

199. Thirdly, the Tribunal is called upon to address the issues raised by the present dispute under the
provisions of the Agreement, international law and, where the Agreement refers to local laws,
Lithuanian law. For this reason, a breach of the privatization process under domestic law does not,
without further analysis, constitute a breach of the Agreement. The Tribunal has to base its conclusions

 

48 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 174-175. Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 252-255.
Respondent's Brief, para. 87.

aad *s Counter- ial, para. 176. d i para. 254, dent’s Brief,

paras. 87-90, citing expert testimony found at Hearing Transcript 967: 6-14, 1099: 4-17.

259 Respondent's Brief, para. 103.

25! Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 257.

252 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 169, 177-183. Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 260-262.

253

Total v. Argentina, Decision on Liability, para. 106; Parkerings v. Lithuania, Award, para. 277.

254 Helnan International Hotels v. Arab Republic of Egypt, (CSID Case No. ARB/05/19, Award (3 July 2008),
para. 106.

PCA 91370 40

200.

201.

202.

203.

204.

255

on the substantive provisions of that Agreement. As stated in Article 3 of the ILC Articles on State
Responsibility, “[t]he characterization of an act of a State as internationally wrongful is governed by
international law. Such characterization is not affected by the characterization of the same act as lawful
by internal law.”*** The ad hoc committee in the Vivendi case put it this way: “[a] state may breach a
treaty without breaching a contract, and vice versa.”**°

Finally, in the same way, the decision of the Supreme Court of Lithuania of 7 June 2011 to the effect
that the former Director General of the SPF, Mr. MilaSauskas, was not guilty of a criminal act does not
rule out the possibility that the Respondent, through the SPF, breached the Agreement. As stated by the
Supreme Court, “[a]buse of office is a premeditated crime” involving intent to abuse one’s office and
knowledge that one’s actions “might cause huge damages to the State.”**” In analyzing whether a State
or one of its agents breached a substantive provision of an investment agreement, an arbitral Tribunal
does not refer to the same criteria as those that apply in domestic criminal law.

  

Upon review of the evidence and submissions produced by the Parties, the Tribunal concludes that, in
the present instance, the Respondent has breached its obligation of just and fair treatment contained in
the Agreement.

The breach in question here is not a breach of a contract (which the Claimant himself recognizes never
came into existence)*** between the Claimant and the SPF. It rather results from the breach of the
Claimant's rights by virtue of the Respondent's conduct in the privatization of Alita including when
viewed in the context of the relevant provisions of the Lithuanian Civil Code (particularly Articles
6.159 and 6.163) and of the Law on Privatization of the State-Owned and Municipal Property of the
Republic of Lithuania (“Privatization Law”) and Tender Regulations (particularly Articles 20-21 of the
Law” and Articles 38-60 of the Regulations).

After having been declared the winning bidder of the privatization of Alita on 26 June 2003,” the
Claimant was entitled to good faith negotiations” toward an SPA with the SPF, carried out according
to law. In his bid of 7 May 2003," the Claimant, who offered by far the highest price for the purchase
of Alita, also proposed three terms which differed from those of the standard SPA issued to bidders by
the SPF.” He wished to pay the purchase price in two installments rather than one lump sum, to name
Paris as the place of arbitration rather than Lithuania, and to see the penalties for breach of the SPA.
reduced from one hundred percent (100%) to one percent (1%) of the purchase price. From the moment
of the bid’s acceptance, the Parties were bound by the provisions of the Civil Code to pursue their
negotiations in good faith.

The Tribunal finds telling that, when accepting the Claimant’s bid on 26 June 2003, the PTC approved
his bid without expressing any reservation while it was surely aware of the conditions the Claimant had
introduced in his bid. On that occasion, the PTC decided “[a]s a result of the assessment of the tenders

Responsibility of States for International Wrongful Acts, UN Doc. A/RES/56/83, 12 December 2001.

256 Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment (3 July 2002), para. 95.

257 Judgment of the Supreme Court, Criminal Case No. 2K-292/2011, Exhs. C-47/C-62/R-85, p. 5.

258 Claimant’ s Brief, para. 41.

°° Privatization Law, Exh. R-1.

26 Tender Regulations, Exh. R-2.
?6! Minutes No. 6 of the PTC, Exhs. C-31/R-25.
2? Article 6.163 of the Civil Code, Exh. RLA-36.

263

Draft SPA provided by the Claimant, Exh. R-13.

24 Standard draft Share Sale and Purchase Agreement, Exh. R-8; Draft SPA provided by the Claimant, Exh. R-

PCA 91370 41

205.

206.

207.

208.

209.

210.

and their respective specifications and clarifications delivered by the buyers (. . .) , to recognise
Luigiterzo Bosca the winner of the public tender for privatisation of (. . .) Alita.”?

Similarly, in its letter of 30 June 2003 to Dr. Skorupskas announcing the winner of the public tender,”°°
the SPF simply invited him to a meeting for “preparation of the draft agreement on sale-purchase of the
shares (. . .) ,” without any indication that the conditions noted by the Claimant in his bid could be an
obstacle to the conclusion of the SPA.

The minutes of the subsequent meeting of the PTC on 8 July 2003 with the Claimant, Dr. Skorupskas
and Jonas SaladZius, a Lithuanian lawyer representing the Claimant, indicate that it was decided that
“the Buyer and the representatives of the State Property Fund deal with the issues raised during the
sitting and inform the other side about possible resolution and results thereof.”?°’ But, according to the
minutes, the only issue raised on that occasion relating to the conditions put forward by the Claimant in
his bid concerned the Claimant’s intention to make the payment of the purchase price in two
installments; he appears to have been asked merely if his intentions had changed in that respect and told
that, if not, a bank guarantee would be required. The other matters addressed during the 8 July meeting
dealt with the aim to reach an agreement by early August, the timing of a shareholders’ meeting of
Alita, the advisability for the Claimant to submit a notification to the Competition Council and the
issuance of a press release.

While the draft SPA subsequently transmitted to the Claimant by the SPF did not include the conditions
laid out by the Claimant, one would have expected that, if these conditions were matters that the
Respondent could not accept, the Respondent would either have rejected the Claimant's bid or, at least,
indicated that these three conditions were matters of concern that should be the subject of further
negotiations.

Again, according to the minutes of a meeting between representatives of the Claimant and the PTC on
11 July 2003, only the Claimant’s method of payment, an update of the information about Alita and the
Claimant's ion of for the C ion Council were di a8

The Parties have advised the Tribunal that negotiations took place during the course of the summer but
it is only in the minutes of the 26 August 2003 meeting between the PTC and representatives of the
Claimant (these representatives refused to sign the minutes alleging that they were inaccurate) that the
issue of the fines and the place of arbitration are mentioned.” It appears to have been stated on that
occasion that the PTC “disagreed to reduce the fines stipulated in the draft agreement presented to the
Buyer.”?”” On the other hand, the Claimant's representatives indicated that they would consider the
possibility of satisfying the purchase price in a single payment and the Respondent agreed to consider
the Claimant's proposal that the place of arbitration be Paris.

Assuming that the minutes of 26 August 2003 constitute a reasonable summary of the discussions
which took place and even accepting the reservations expressed in that respect by the Claimant’s
representatives, it would be fair to conclude that, by that time, the only point of significant
disagreement between the Parties had to do with the issue of fines which remained unresolved at the
time of the annulment of the Claimant’s tender on 14 October 2003.

In his witness statement commenting on a meeting of 8 September 2003 with Dr. Skorupskas and Mr.
Saladzius, Mr. Nosevié alleges that, on that occasion, “all unresolved issues were closed and the draft
SPA in the Lithuanian language, which provided for payment of the whole purchase price in one

°65 Minutes No. 6 of the PTC, Exhs. C-31/R-25.

266 Announcement of the Winner of the Public Tender sent by PTC Chairman Antanas Malikénas to Gintaras
Skorupskas, Exhs. C-32/R-26.

°67 Minutes No. 10 of the PTC, Exhs. C-44/R-29.

268 Minutes No. 11 of the PTC, Exhs. C-45/R-30.
26° Minutes No. 20 of the PTC, Exhs. C-46/R-32.
27° Minutes No. 20 of the PTC, Exhs. C-46/R-32.

PCA 91370 42

instalment, was finally coordinated.””’' It is interesting to note that, in the minutes, no mention is made
of the issue of fines, an issue that was clearly much more contentious and important to each Party than
whether the payment of the purchase price was to occur in one or two installments.

212. Both Parties recognize that there was no obligation on either of them to eventually sign an SPA which
did not meet the conditions each of them had set out. However, once the Claimant had been selected as
the winner of the tender, both were bound by the Lithuanian Civil Code to carry out negotiations
toward an SPA in good faith”? and the Claimant had legitimate expectations that, if the SPF abided by
the Privatization Act and the Tender Regulations, he would eventually initial an SPA. He could further
expect that that signed SPA would then be subject to confirmation by the PTC and, if the PTC refused
such confirmation, the SPF could then refer the matter to the Government for a final decision.”” The
SPF was thus under an obligation to pursue the negotiations through the process established under the
Regulations; this obligation implied that the SPF needed to propose final terms, after having sought the
input of the Claimant on the outstanding issues, and to have the result recorded in the minutes of
negotiations, thus formally concluding the negotiations on the basis of those terms. The Claimant’s
limited communication during this period did not relieve the SPF of its legal obligations in this respect.

213. Unfortunately, the PTC and the SPF decided to short-circuit the privatization process. On 10 October
2003, the PTC proposed to the SPF “to cancel the results of the public tender and to adopt respective
decisions regarding the further course of privatization of AB Alita,”?”* even though the PTC was made
aware that there were still outstanding issues to be finalized. On 14 October, the SPF issued the
Annulment Order, annulling the award of the tender on the basis of the Claimant's failure to initial the
draft SPA and authorizing the PTC “to conduct negotiations with the second place winner of the public
tender.”

  

214. The Lithuanian Supreme Court, reviewing many of the same facts as in the present case, concluded in
its 2006 judgment, that “the negotiations for the preparation of the draft [SPA] for initialling were
disrupted due to unlawful actions of the [PTC] and that the [Claimant] was eliminated from the
negotiations without a sufficient reason (without reaching agreement on the payment procedure). Such
behavior on the part of the [PTC] undermined the [Claimant's] reasonable trust and lawful expectations
that the [SPA would] be concluded.”?”° The Supreme Court then ruled that the SPF “exercised its right
to annul the results (. . .) in an inappropriate and unfair manner” and that “the actions of the [PTC] were
unjustified and unfair.”

215. It would be conceivable for the Tribunal to conclude nonetheless that the failure by the PTC and the
SPF to fully abide by the procedure set in the Privatization Law and the Tender Regulations, while
illegal under Lithuanian law, does not give rise to a breach of “just and fair treatment” or of the FET
standard. A procedural illegality does not inevitably result in a breach of the substantive provisions of
an investment treaty under international law. Evaluating whether there has been a breach of the FET
standard requires a fact-specific analysis; on these facts, the Tribunal concludes a violation must entail
more than a simple procedural misstep.

216. However, a number of circumstantial events from September 2003 to the end of that year lead the
Tribunal to conclude that it is faced with more than a mere procedural error.

217. There is, first of all, a letter of 2 September 2003 from the SPF inviting the Claimant to initial the draft
SPA on 4 September and acknowledging that “a few non-material items of the agreement remained for

27! Nosevié Witness Statement, para. 48.

2? Articles 1.5, 6.4, 6.158 and 6.163 of the Civil Code, Exh. RLA-36.
73 Decree 1502, Article 46 of the Tender Regulations, Exh. R-2.
24 Minutes No. 24 of the PTC, Exhs. C-48/R38, p. 2.

275 Annulment Order, Exhs. C-37/R-39.
276 Judgment of the Supreme Court, Civil Case No. 3K-7-470/2006, Exh. C-1E, p. 13.

277 Judgment of the Supreme Court, Civil Case No. 3K-7-470/2006, Exh. C-1E, p. 14.

PCA 91370 B

218.

219.

220.

coordination.”?”* While it is true that, according to the draft SPA sent to the SPF on the Claimant's
behalf on 28 August 2003 by Mr. Saladzius, the Respondent appeared willing to move the place of
arbitration to Stockholm and the Claimant was ready to pay the purchase price in a single payment, (the
negotiators for each side still needed confirmation from their principals), there still remained the issue
of the fines that could be imposed in case of a breach of the SPA investment undertaking. All three
conditions had been made part of the Claimant’s bid, declared by the PTC to be the winner of the public
tender, and remained present in his application materials when that action was approved by the SPF on
30 June 2003.

 

Even though it was recognized by both sides that there remained matters to be negotiated, the Claimant
had legitimate expectations that none of the conditions he had set in his bid would be insurmountable
obstacles to the conclusion of the SPA. The same conclusion was reached by the Supreme Court of
Lithuania when it declared in its 10 October 2006 judgment that “the principle of good faith requires
that any negotiations in which considerable progress has been reached are not disrupted without a
sufficient reason. The ibition on di of. in which le progress has been
reached is explained by the fact that, in such negotiations, a party has reasonable grounds for believing
that the intentions of the other party are serious and that the agreement will be concluded for certain.”
As mentioned above, if the Respondent’s representatives had severe reservations concerning the
conditions attached to the Claimant's bid, they should, at least, have made them clear when approving
the Claimant's bid. While the issues of the arbitration venue and the method of payment appeared to be
nearing resolution by the end of August, it is more than strange for the SPF to state in its 2 September
2003 letter that only “a few non-material items of the agreement remained for coordination.” In an
earlier email of 25 July 2003 to Mr. SaladZius, Mr. Nosevié had simply stated: “the decision on the
sizes of amounts/penalties/interest payable on delay will be made by the representatives of the
Commission of the Public Tender.””*’ And it is only in the minutes (contested by the Claimant's
representatives) of a 26 August 2003 meeting between the PTC and the Claimant's representatives that
the first indication that the PTC “disagreed to reduce the fines stipulated in the draft agreement
presented to the Buyer” appears.”*! The Claimant was fully entitled up to that time to assume that his
condition on fines would be either accepted or reasonably compromised. On 2 September 2003, a letter
was sent to the Claimant inviting him to initial two days later a draft SPA which contained no change at
all by the Respondent to the 100% level of fines.

Then, there is the meeting of 8 September 2003, between the then Prime Minister, Mr. Brazauskas, and
the Director General of the SPF, Mr. MilaSauskas, along with the head of the State security department
and the police commissioner. On the occasion of that meeting, according to the minutes, Mr.
Brazauskas instructed the SPF to submit a certificate prepared by officers of the national law
enforcement authorities concerning the Claimant's reliability as an investor.’*? Nonetheless, Mr.
MilaSauskas testified that the meeting was about the economic impact of the Alita privatization and its
consequences for Lithuania.” It is unusual, to say the least, that, taking into account the alleged
objective of the meeting, the participants should be the head of the security service and the police
commissioner and not officials of departments dealing with economic matters.

The very next day, the SPF sent a letter to Dr. Skorupskas requesting information concerning the
Claimant's shareholding in Bosca SpA and the Claimant’s and Bosca SpA’s shareholding in “Boslita ir
Co. and Boslita.” There followed a series of repeated requests to Dr. Skorupskas concerning Bosca
SpA.

278 | etter from PTC Chairman Antanas Malikénas to Gintaras Skorupskas, Exh. R-33.

29 Judgment of the Supreme Court, Civil Case No. 3K-7-470/2006, Exh. C-1E, p. 13.

289 E-mail from Miroslav Nosevié to Jonas Saladzius along with draft SPA, as an attachment thereto, Exh. R-121.

28! Minutes No. 20 of the PTC, Exhs. C-46/R-32, p. 2.

282 Media Article: Aldona Jankauskiené, Buyer of Alita Did Not Succeed in Appeasing the Mayor of Alytus,
LIETUVOS RYTAS, Exh. C-133; E-mail from the PTC member Judita Barkauskiené to Gintaras Skorupskas,

dated 15 September 2003, Exh. R-92; Media Article: Algirdas Brazauskas Does Not Like the Privatisation of
Alita but Takes No Responsibility, Exh. C-5 and Hearing Transcript 852: 13-23.

283 Hearing Transcript 881: 5-25.

PCA 91370 44

221. On 10 September 2003, a meeting took place between the Claimant, Dr. Skorupskas, Mr. SaladZius and
Mr. MilaSauskas. On that occasion, the Claimant stated that there remained open issues in the
negotiations. Mr. MilaSauskas made no attempt to insist that the Claimant initial the draft SPA nor did
he raise the question of the relations between Bosca SpA and Boslita or with the Claimant's tender.
According to Dr. Skorupskas’ testimony, it was agreed that “we have to carry on with the negotiations
and to finalize a few outstanding issues.”?** There is some disagreement between the versions of events
as reported by the Claimant and Dr. Skorupskas, on the one hand, and Mr. MilaSauskas,”** on the other.
However, on the basis of the evidence submitted to the Tribunal, including the protocols for witness
interrogations of Dr. Skorupskas and Mr. SaladiZius taken in the course of Lithuanian court proceedings
in 2007 and 2009,"** the Tribunal is satisfied that the versions given by the Claimant and his colleagues
are more reliable.

 

222. Then, on 30 September, the SPF sent a letter to the Claimant (which he says he received only on 7
October) inviting him again to initial the SPA, under threat of annulment of the tender results if he did
not do so by 10 October 2003.

223. Apart from the above events, no steps appear to have been taken by the SPF to make any further
progress in the negotiations during September and early October, in spite of the very significant price
premium in the Claimant's bid compared to the other three bids.

224. On 8 October, Mr. Flavio Facchin of Banca del Gottardo, one of the banks used by the Claimant in
connection with his tender for Alita, wrote to Mr. MilaSauskas to remind him that there were
unresolved issues and that the negotiations were not complete. That letter followed previous phone
conversations between these two persons at the end of September.

 

225. The Tribunal has already referred to the 10 October decision of the PTC and the Annulment Order of
the SPF of 14 October 2003.

226. Strangely enough, on the very same day as the SPF’s Annulment Order, the second and the third
competing bidders jointly notified the PTC that they were no longer interested in participating in the
further public tender for Alita, stating they had each found other opportunities for their capital.?*’

227. On 17 October, the Director General of the SPF wrote to the Claimant, formally informing him that the
SPF had annulled the tender results on the basis of the Claimant's failure to initial the SPA.**

228. Finally, on 21 October, notwithstanding that the bid by the Executive Consortium did not meet the
requirement (of both the Privatization Law and Tender Regulations) that negotiations with a second
place bidder could only be initiated if the other bid was no more than fifteen percent (15%) lower than
the rejected first bid,” the PTC recognized the fourth place bidder (which had suddenly moved to the

?84 Hearing Transcript 550: 6-11. First Bosca Witness Statement, para. 67. Third Bosca Witness Statement,
paras. 7-13. Third Skorupskas Witness Statement, para. 10.

285 MilaSauskas Witness Statement, paras. 6-8.

286 Record of Interrogation of Witness Gintaras Skorupskas, Exh. C-120; Media Article: Bosca is Sure of the
Prospects of Alita, Bosca First Witness Statement, Exh. 24; Testimony of Gintaras Skorupskas in Criminal
Case No. 1-544-119/2009 (excerpt), Exh. R-93.

?87 In his Memorial (para. 72), the Claimant mentions that, on 1 October 2003, the two bidders “communicated to

the SPF and to the Privatisation Commission in writing about their further decision concerning participation
in the privatisation of Alita.” However, the Claimant has not produced any document in that regard. The
information seems to have been taken from the “Conclusions of the Ad Hoc Investigation Commission of the
Seimas Formed for the Investigation of the Circumstances of Privatisation of Alita” which mentions that
event but which also does not produce any document in support of that statement. Exh. C-2, p. 3.

288 | etter from the SPF Director General Povilas MilaSauskas to Luigi Bosca, dated 17 October 2003, Exhs. C-

38/R-40; Protocol of the PTC No. 28, 6 November 2003, Exh. R-115; Minutes No. 20 of the PTC, Exhs. C-
46/R-32. Bosca First Witness Statement, para. 76.

 

289 Article 16, paragraph 1 of the Law and Article 35 of the Tender Regulations, Exh. R-2.

PCA 91370 45

second place)—the Consortium composed of members of the Alita management—as the winner of the
tender and opened negotiations with it. On 10 November, an SPA was initialed and sent to the PTC
which approved it on 27 November. That agreement contained some minor modifications to the issue of
fines, in spite of the previous position of the SPF toward the Claimant to the effect that the matter was
non-negotiable.””” Alita was sold for 73.4 percent of the price offered by the Claimant.

229. After having sought legal guidance, the SPF was advised on 24 November that “considerable grounds
exist to believe that the actions of the State Property Fund may qualify as non-complying with the
provisions of the Regulations” under the Privatization Law;””' the memorandum added however that
“the actions of the Property Fund (. . .) in this particular case may be subject to the provisions of the
Civil Code which regulate extreme necessity.”

230. On 27 November 2003, the PTC approved the Executive Consortium’s draft SPA.

231. On 1 December, the Prosecutor General’s Office sent a letter to the Anti-Corruption Commission of the
Seimas and the Government, challenging the legality of the agreement made with the Consortium.”

232. On 2 December, the Anti-Corruption Commission sent a letter on the same subject to the Prime
Minister who immediately requested the advice of the SPF; on 5 December, the SPF answered,
rejecting the doubts raised concerning the legality of the actions of the SPF.”**

233. Finally, on 24 December 2003, the Government approved the draft SPA with the Consortium and on 6
January 2004, that agreement was signed.

234. Following a petition of 23 November 2006 from the Seimas to the Constitutional Court, that Court
ruled on 23 May 2007 that the 24 December 2003 approval by the Government of the sale of Alita to
the Consortium was “in conflict with Item 2 of Article 94 of the Constitution and with the constitutional
principle of a state under the rule of law.” It also ruled that the Government approval “was in conflict
with the provision (. . .) of Paragraph | (. . .) of Article 16” of the Privatization Law.”

235. The Tribunal wishes to stress that, in its consideration of “just and fair treatment,” it is not called upon
to rule on any of the actions of the Lithuanian authorities subsequent to the annulment of the Claimant’s
bid in October 2003, and that its conclusion to the effect that the Claimant was not accorded just and
fair treatment is independent of the events subsequent to the Annulment Order of 14 October 2003.
These events nonetheless comfort the Tribunal in its decision that the actions of the Respondent vis-a-
vis the Claimant during September and October 2003 constituted a breach of Article 2(2) of the
Agreement concerning just and fair treatment and that the Respondent is liable for the damages
resulting from such behavior. The legitimate and reasonable expectations of the Claimant resulting
from his selection as the winning bidder were illegally frustrated by the Respondent’s authorities.”°°

2° Protocol of the PTC No. 28, 6 November 2003, Exh. R-115. Minutes No. 20 of the PTC, 26 August 2003,
Exhs. C-46/R-32. Respondent's Counter-memorial, paras. 71-72, 315. Respondent's Reply, paras. 63, 261,
294, 355-356.

2°! Tegal opinion from the law firm Anicas, Okincic and Partners, regarding the actions of the State Property
Fund in the privatisation of a block of shares of Alita AB by open tender procedure, Exh. C-40, p. 4.

?°. | egal opinion from the law firm Anicas, Okincic and Partners, regarding the actions of the State Property
Fund in the privatization of a block of shares of Alita AB by open tender procedure, Exh. C-40, p. 7 and
Article 6.253 of the Civil Code, Exh. RLA-36.

?°3 | etter from the Prosecutor General’s Office regarding the privatization of Alita AB, 1 December 2003, Exh.

C42.

24 Seimas of the Republic of Lithuania, “Resolution no. X-922 regarding the conclusions of the ad hoc
investigation commission of the Seimas formed for the investigation of the circumstances of the privatization
of Alita AB,” Exh. C-2, p. 4.

Judgment of the Constitutional Court, Case No. 70/06, Exh. C-1C, in fine.

  

295

2° Saluka v. Czech Republic, Partial Award, para. 302, where legitimate expectations are considered as the
“dominant element” of the FET standard; Tecmed v. Mexico, Award, para. 154; see also Rumeli Telekom A.S.

PCA 91370 46

D.

UNJUSTIFIED OR DISCRIMINATORY MEASURES

The Claimant's position

236.

237.

238.

The Claimant also maintains that the Respondent subjected the transformation, use, and enjoyment of
the Claimant’s investment to unjustified and discriminatory measures in violation of the first sentence
of Article 2(2) of the Agreement by dis ing him from the tender and proceeding to execute the SPA
with a more politically connected local investor, the Executive Consortium.”” In interpreting the phrase
“unjustified or discriminatory measures,” the Claimant points to the more commonly used terms

“arbitrary or discriminatory measures” and “unreasonable or discriminatory measures” found in other
bilateral investment treaties.” The Claimant submits that “arbitrariness” is regularly construed to refer
to an abuse of authority or abuse of discretion, as defined under customary international law, on the part
of a respondent State.”

 

It is the Claimant’s position that the SPF abused its authority by dismissing his bid and ending
negotiations before the SPA could be finalized and by failing to afford the Claimant due process.”

According to the Claimant, the SPF, the Claimant's representative, and Mr. Malikénas were all in
agreement that the SPA had not been fully and finally negotiated when the tender result was
cancelled.” The Claimant rejects the Respondent's justifications that the negotiations were terminated
due to his lack of cooperation, stating that not only was he willing to participate and that his
representatives readily participated on his behalf, but that he also demonstrated he had access to ample
funds.*” Rather, the Claimant argues, the SPF did not do what it could do, in good faith, to complete
the negotiation of the SPA with the Claimant.*’ The Claimant also points to the fact that the SPA
negotiations froze after Mr. MilaSauskas met with Prime Minister Brazauskas on 8 September 2003.°°*

The Claimant further contends that the SPF’s conduct during the tender negotiations process was
discriminatory because it dismissed the Claimant from the tender process without any reasonable
justification.*” In the Claimant’s view, the Respondent’s conclusion of an SPA with the Executive
Consortium on the basis of what it asserts were its local political connections is not only arbitrary but
also overtly discriminatory.*°° The Claimant also argues that the SPF’s actions in respect of the
Executive Consortium reveal the illegitimate nature of the SPF’s motivations that constitutes an
independent basis for concluding that its actions were arbitrary.*”’ The Claimant asserts that, in the
absence of any reasonable justification for selecting the last place bidder, the SPF’s failure to maintain
adequate or appropriate records during the tender process further supports the Claimant’s position that
the SPF acted with bias."

   

 

and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/16,
Award (29 July 2008), para. 609.

?°7 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 163.

?°8 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 190.

2° Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 195-197.

3 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 200.

*! Claimant's Brief, para. 130.

302

Claimant's Brief, para. 126.

*°3 Claimant's Brief, para. 133.

* Claimant's Brief, paras. 141-142.

305

Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 212. Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 231-233.

36 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 215.

7 Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 204-205.

*°8 Claimant's Memorial, paras. 213-214, quoting Supreme Court of Lithuania, Judgment (10 October 2006),
Exh. C-1E, p. 13.

PCA 91370 47

The Respondent's position

239.

240.

241.

242.

The Respondent argues that the SPF’s decision to close negotiations and award the tender to the
Executive Consortium was objective and reasonable and made in light of its “commercial interests,”
that is, to maximize the benefit on the transaction “since the arrangement of a new public tender could
have resulted in [a lower share price.]”*'° According to the Respondent, the SPF annulled the
Claimant’s win of the tender on the basis that the Claimant neglected to provide evidence of having
sufficient financial support to complete the transaction, refused to cooperate in the negotiations, refused
to allow his representative to initial the agreed terms of the SPA on his behalf, and failed to initial the
draft SPA by the deadline set by the SPF.’

It is the Respondent's position that the SPF’s decision to negotiate with the Executive Consortium was
a responsible business choice. By law, the SPF had to complete the Alita privatization by the beginning
of 2004 and the Executive Consortium was the only bid that remained. The SPF sought professional
legal advice on the matter and was advised to select the Executive Consortium rather than open a new
tender.

To evaluate whether a measure is discriminatory toward a foreign investor, the Respondent looks to the
standard adopted by the tribunal in Saluka v. Czech Republic. There, according to the Respondent, the
tribunal concluded that a respondent State must provide a rational justification for any differential
treatment.*!* Here, the Respondent maintains that the SPF was justified by the business and legal
circumstances at the time to select the Executive Consortium when it believed the Claimant was unable
or unwilling to conclude the SPA.

Finally, the Respondent contends that the Claimant has not proven any discriminatory intent on the part
of the SPF or any other entity.*!

The Tribunal’s Decision

243.

244.

3

ie

245.

Article 2(2) of the Agreement provides in its first sentence that “(b)oth Contracting Parties shall at all
times ensure just and fair treatment of the investments of investors of the other Contracting Party.” The
second sentence adds that “management, maintenance, use, transformation, enjoyment or assignment of
the investments effected in their territory by investors of the other Contracting Party, (. . .) shall in no
way be subject to unjustified or discriminatory measures.”

In light of its conclusion above based on the just and fair treatment clause in the first sentence of Article
2(2), the Tribunal does not consider it necessary to decide whether the Respondent violated the

Agreement under the second sentence. Any additional breach is not relevant unless it leads to additional
damages, which it would not do here.

NATIONAL TREATMENT
Claimant’s position

The Claimant submits that the Respondent violated Article 3(1) of the Agreement by affording his
investment less favorable treatment than it afforded that of the Executive Consortium when it granted

*° Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 184-193. Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 267-271.

3! Respondent's Brief, para. 114.

3"! Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 178.

3!2 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, para. 82.

313

Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 191, citing Saluka v. Czech Republic, Partial Award, para. 460.

34 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 213.

PCA 91370 48

the Consortium the tender after previously having awarded it to the Claimant.*!*

that this difference in treatment constitutes a denial of national treatment under the Agreement.

The Claimant argues
316

246. Citing Pope & Talbot v. Canada, the Claimant maintains that once a claimant has “made a prima facie
showing of less favorable treatment, the respondent State must ‘justify’ the difference by showing that
the treatment has been implemented pursuant to a rational, non-discriminatory government policy.”*"”
Other arbitral tribunals have likewise concluded that differences in treatment are presumptive violations
of national treatment obligations but the presumption may be rebutted by the State if it “produces
sufficient evidence that the treatment in question has a reasonable basis in rational, non-discriminatory
government policies.”*'*

 

247. Arguing that the construction of Article 3(1) does not require the Tribunal to evaluate the likeness of
circumstances between the relevant comparators as some tribunals have done under different treaties,
the Claimant asserts that the Respondent violated its national treatment obligation when it accorded less
favorable treatment to the Claimant's objectively superior bid than to the bid of the Executive
Consortium, a domestic comparator.*'? Upon comparison, however, the Claimant maintains that he was
similarly situated to the Executive Consortium.”

248. The Claimant argues that the Respondent has not presented a legitimate reason for treating his
investment differently than it treated the domestic investor’s bid. The reasons given by the Respondent
in the domestic litigations were rejected by the Supreme Court, by the Alita Commission, and by the
Constitutional Court.

249. Finally, in the Claimant's view, Article 3(1) of the Agreement provides an obligation to afford national
treatment not only to “investments” but also to “activities associated with those investments” as set out
in Paragraph 1 of the Protocol.” Thus, according to the Claimant, not only does his tender payment
fall within the scope of Article 3(1), but so does his participation in the negotiations surrounding the
SPA, which qualifies under the Protocol as an activity undertaken in furtherance of his pre-existing
investments in Lithuania.”*

The Respondent's position

250. The Respondent objects to the Claimant's assertion that the Respondent violated the “national treatment
clause” of Article 3(1), arguing that (1) the clause does not apply to the Claimant’s participation in the

315 Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 221, 248.

3! Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 240-241. Claimant’s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 247-248, quoting Marvin
Roy Feldman Karpa v. United Mexican States, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1, Award (16 December 2002),
para. 169.

3'7 Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 229-231, citing Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Government of Canada,
UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Interim Award (26 June 2000), paras. 78-79.

318 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 244.
3! Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 240, 247.

*° Claimant’s Memorial, para. 251. Claimant’s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 245, referring to Pope & Talbot
Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Award on the Merits of Phase 2 (10 April 2001),
[hereinafter Pope & Talbot v. Canada, Award], para. 78; S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada,
UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Partial Award (13 November 2000), para. 248; Champion Trading Company and
Ameritrade International, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/9, Award (27 October
2006), para. 130.

*! Claimant’s Memorial, para. 249.

*2 Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 225-226. Claimant’s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 241-243.

*3 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 227.

PCA 91370 49

Alita tender and (2) even if the clause were applicable, the Claimant failed to prove that his
participation was subject to less favorable treatment than a similarly situated domestic investor.*”*

251. First, the Respondent submits that the national treatment obligation under Article 3(1) does not apply to
the Claimant’s participation in the Alita tender because the Claimant did not make an investment as
defined by the Agreement. Article 3(1) does not envisage protection for the pre-contractual stage of a
planned investment.*° The Respondent argues that “making (. . .) of contracts” under the list of
associated activities qualifying as investments named in the Protocol refers to a “right accruing from [a]
signed and binding contract” and not the contract negotiation process.*”* In any event, the Respondent
maintains that the Claimant has failed to establish that it was “making [a] contract.”*”

 

252. Second, the Respondent submits that, even if Article 3(1) is applicable, the Claimant's claim still fails
because the Claimant and the Consortium were not similarly situated and therefore cannot be
compared. Referring to the analyses of other arbitral tribunals reviewing national treatment claims, the
Respondent maintains that a similarly situated domestic comparator must be produced to be successful
with a national treatment claim.*”* Here, in the Respondent's view, the Consortium was not situated
similarly to the Claimant because the Consortium provided proof of sufficient funding as required with
its bid and | proposed providing its payment in one installment, making it a “safer” bid than the
Claimant's.

253. In the Respondent's view, the Claimant was granted “not less, but more favorable treatment than the
Consortium” in that the Claimant was declared the winner of the tender.**” The Claimant did not follow
through with the necessary steps to finalize the SPA and secure his acquisition.**' The Respondent also
submits that the Claimant's allegations that the SPF was more flexible in negotiations with the

Consortium than it was in those with the Claimant are not supported by the facts.*™*

 

 

254. The Respondent maintains that, as the tribunal in Noble Ventures v. Romania found, to prevail on a
national treatment claim, the Claimant must show that the measure taken by the Respondent was
“directed specifically (. . .) by reason of [the Claimant's] nationality.”*** According to the Respondent,
the SPF terminated the negotiations based on “rational policy considerations” and did not have any
intentions to harm the Claimant.***

The Tribunal’s Decision

255. In light of its conclusion above based on the just and fair treatment clause, the Tribunal does not find it
necessary to reach a determination concerning the Parties’ arguments on national treatment. The
Claimant would not in any event be entitled to greater relief than for the Respondent's breach of the just
and fair treatment clause discussed above; accordingly, the Tribunal will not examine the alleged
breach of the national treatment clause.

*4 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, para. 195.

*5 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 197-200.
+26 Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, para. 281.

*7 Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, para. 284.

*8 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 201.

*2° Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 202-204.
589 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 206-207.
3! Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 209.

332

? Respondent's Brief, paras. 110-111.

83 Respondent's Counter-memorial, para. 212, citing Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/O1/11, Award (12 October 2005), para. 180.

54 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 211, 213-214. Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 290-292, 294.

PCA 91370 50

342

256.

257.

258.

259.

MOst-FAVORED-NATION TREATMENT
The Claimant's position

As an alternative to his argument under Article 3(1) of the Agreement, the Claimant submits that the
Respondent violated Article 3(2)’s most-favored-nation (“MFN”) treatment obligation by failing to
extend to the Claimant the same treatment it is obligated to afford to United States investors with regard
to new investments under Article II of the Treaty Between the Government of the United States of
America and the Government of the Republic of Lithuania for the Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investment (“US-Lithuania BIT”).**°

According to the Claimant, Articles II(1) and 11(3)(b) of the US-Lithuania BIT provide more favorable
treatment than the present Agreement in that the US-Lithuania BIT explicitly prohibits discriminatory
measures during the pre-establishment phase of an investment.** Specifically, the Claimant contends
that the Respondent violated its obligations under Articles I[(2) and II(3)(b) of the US-Lithuania BIT
incorporated through Article 3(2) of the Agreement by “‘screen[ing]’ Mr. Bosca’s attempted
acquisition of Alita on the basis of his nationality,” “apply[ing] criteria applicable to that acquisition on
a less favorable basis than those applied to the Executive Consortium,” and “impair[ing] the acquisition
of Alita with arbitrary and discriminatory measures.”**”

The Claimant asserts that he is not seeking to alter the definition of “investment” under the Agreement
through the use of the US-Lithuania BIT; rather, he seeks to expand the application of its substantive
protections under the present Agreement’s MEN clause, relying on the decisions in Pope & Talbot v.
Canada and MTD y. Chile which concluded that the relevant MFN clauses supported expanded
protection for the investors.*** The Claimant argues that the MFN clause extends the scope of a right
already conferred by the Agreement by pointing to the treatment of the “investor” rather than an
“investment.”*” Accordingly, the Claimant maintains that the definition of “investor” is not predicated
on the meaning of “investment.” For example, Article 2(1) of the Agreement requires that both
Contracting Parties “encourage investors of the other Contracting Party to invest in their territory.” This
provision confirms, the Claimant contends, that the definition of the term “investor” was not intended
to entail the characteristic of having an “investment.”

 

 

 
 
 

The Claimant argues that the Respondent's allegation that the dispute settlement provision of the
Agreement is “incompatible” with the operation of the MFN clause rests on a false premise that
disputes “on investments” and those “arising out of or relating to” investments are not equivalent.“
According to the Claimant, a dispute “on investments” can exist regardless of whether the investment
has been fully acquired by a claimant.*” Likewise, the Claimant submits that the definition of
“investor” under Article 1(2) of the Agreement includes “any legal or natural persons that are engaged

 

385 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 221.

386 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 258. Claimant's Brief, para. 94.

37 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 269.

38 Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 262-263, citing Pope & Talbot v. Canada, Award, para. 117; MTD v. Chile,
Decision on Annulment (21 March 2007), para. 18.

%° Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 253.

4 Claimant's Brief, para. 81. The Claimant notes, in an aside, that all three languages of the original Agreement
are authentic, though the English text governs where there is any dispute. On this basis, the Claimant finds it
unnecessary to discuss the meaning of the relevant provisions in those other languages; nevertheless, the
Claimant maintains that its position is d by all three of the A it and
briefly upon their respective significances. Claimant’ s Brief, paras. 86-88.

 

1 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 253.

Claimant's Brief, para. 103.

PCA 91370 51

260.

262.

263.

in contributing something of value to the host State in the expectation of future profit or gain” and does
not require that the investor's investment be fully formed or acquired.**

The Respondent's position

The Respondent objects to the Claimant’s assertion that the Respondent violated the MFN obligation
under Article 3(2) of the Agreement, arguing that MFN treatment under the Agreement does not extend
to the pt phase of because the A it does not ize p for
pre-establishment investments.** In the absence of an investment, the MFN clause does not enable the
Claimant to seek a remedy at all.“ Rather, the Respondent asserts that the Claimant is seeking to
subvert the limits of protection in the Agreement and extend the jurisdiction of the Tribunal beyond the
scope of the Agreement to the Claimant’s pre-contractual conduct.

 

The Respondent argues, first, that the MFN clause in Article 3(2) cannot create a “distinct and novel
right” unrelated to the Agreement™° nor extend protection under another treaty to beneficiaries not
otherwise entitled to protection under the governing treaty.’ The Respondent elaborates on the
implications of Article 3(2)’s reference to “investors” rather than “investments” by pointing to the
definition of “investor” in the Agreement as an individual who is “investing” — meaning, according to
the Respondent, already investing and continuing to invest, i.e., with an investment.“* According to the
Respondent, the deliberate phrasing of Article 3 implies the Contracting Parties’ intention to exclude
the pre-establishment stage of investment from the ambit of protection of the MFN unlike in the US-
Lithuania BIT.”

 

The Respondent submits that the application of the MFN here would be incompatible with the dispute
settlement provision of the Agreement which provides for the jurisdiction of a tribunal only over
disputes “on investments.”**° The Respondent points to the Claimant’s statement that he “does not
contest the notion that ‘[t]he existence of an investment, as defined in Article 1(1) of the Agreement, is
a prerequisite to the submission of a dispute.””**! The Respondent also maintains that if the Contracting
Parties had intended to deviate from customary international law to extend the substantive standards of
the Agreement, the Contracting Parties would have explicitly so provided in the Agreement as in the
US-Lithuania BIT.**?

 

The Respondent argues that in any event it did not violate the MFN clause because it did not fail to
accord the Claimant national treatment vis-a-vis the Claimant's activities in Lithuania.***

8 Claimant's Brief, para. 89.

4 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 217.
5 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 218.

© Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 220-222. Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 302.

7 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 223-228. Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, para. 303.

48 Respondent's Brief, para. 125, citing Hearing Transcript 1047: 15 — 1048: 10. The Respondent asserts that its
reading is supported by a translation of the Italian version of the Agreement. Respondent's Brief, para. 125.

¥° Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 229-230.

59 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 231-234. Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 306-307.
5! Respondent's Brief, para. 118, quoting Claimant’s Memorial, para. 255.

2 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 235-237. Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 307.

3 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, para. 238.

PCA 91370 52

The Tribunal’s Decision

264. The Tribunal has already ruled that the Service Agreement constituted an investment of the Claimant
under the Agreement and that his accepted bid for Alita was an associated activity under the Protocol to
the Agreement which should be considered part of his investment. Therefore, the Tribunal does not find
it necessary to carry out an analysis concerning the added value of the Agreement’s MFN clause in this
respect, all the more since any conclusion in that regard would not lead to awarding additional
damages.

G. _ EXPROPRIATION
The Claimant's position

265. The Claimant argues that “expropriation” includes not only a measure that deprives an investor of the
value of his investment but also a measure that deprives the investor of a discrete right having
economic value — a right that is associated with, but separable from, the investor’s overall investment,
such as the Claimant's right to conclude a contract.** In the Claimant’s view, his case presents a
“classic case of direct expropriation” in violation of Article 5 of the Agreement because the SPF
deprived him of his right to conclude a contract for the purchase of Alita and negatively affected the
value of his investment in Lithuania.**°

266. The Claimant observes that Article 5 of the Agreement requires the Respondent not to take any
measures that would deprive the Claimant of the value of his investment “unless such measures were:
(1) undertaken in the public interest; (2) accompanied by payment of full and effective compensation;
(3) non-discriminatory; and (4) in accordance with law.”*°° The Claimant submits that none of the
cumulative requirements under Article 5(1) were met here.**” First, the Claimant points to the fact that
the Alita Commission determined that the Respondent’s conduct during the tender harmed the public
interest of Lithuania.** Second, the Claimant argues that the Respondent’s expropriatory measures in
the context of the tender were undertaken in violation of its own domestic laws, as confirmed by
Lithuania’s highest national courts.** Third, the Claimant argues that the Respondent’s conduct was
“blatantly discriminatory.”* Fourth, the Claimant contends that the Respondent did not provide him
with “immediate, full and effective” compensation.*!

 

  

267. In particular, the Claimant submits that the Respondent violated Article 5 by appropriating his right to
conclude the SPA for the purchase of Alita, an economic right accruing by law.*” He analogizes to the
circumstances in the case of Eureko v. Poland in which the tribunal concluded that the respondent State
had violated the expropriation clause of the Dutch-Polish bilateral investment treaty by “refusing to
conduct an IPO after it had committed to the claimant that it would do so.”** The Claimant contends

54 Claimant's Memorial, paras. 281-286, citing Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award (30 April 2004) [hereinafter Waste Management v. Mexico, Award], paras. 162-
163, 168.

55 Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 287-291. Claimant’s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 267.
$6 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 271.

357 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 293.

388 Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 294-298.

5° Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 299-302.

3 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 303.

*! Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 304.

© Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 274.

*6 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 279, quoting Eureko v. Poland, Partial Award, para. 240.

PCA 91370 53

268.

269.

270.

271.

272.

that the economic right he had acquired under Lithuanian law for compensation was “akin to
concessions, permits and licenses.”**

In the Claimant's view, this case can be distinguished from Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine on which
the Respondent relies. In its award, the tribunal found no expropriation despite the existence of several
contracts. Here, the Claimant contends, he has shown “what his investment was, what his rights were
under Lithuanian law, as well as the way in which the [Respondent] interfered with those rights.
whereas Generation Ukraine was unable to substantiate these critical features in the presentation of its
case.

 

The Respondent's position

The Respondent rejects the Claimant's contention that the SPF’s decision to annul the Alita tender
results and to conclude the SPA with the Executive Consortium constitutes expropriation.*°° The

Respondent submits that Article 5 of the Agreement has no application here.” Rather, the Respondent
claims that “expropriation” as intended under Article 5 requires “a strong interference with clearly
defined contract rights’*** whereas the Respondent argues that the Claimant has acquired no “economic
right” under the Agreement.* The Claimant's alleged right to conclude the contract, if any, does not
constitute an object of expropriation according to the Respondent because it cannot be an object of a
commercial transaction, has no monetary value, and lacks “clarity and explicitness of the parties’
mutual obligations.”*””

In addition, the Respondent argues that the Claimant's expectations, if any, that the SPA would be
concluded cannot constitute an object of expropriation until such expectations are transformed into
legally binding contractual rights.*”' In the Respondent’s view, parties negotiating a contract have only
“rights of procedural nature arising out of general statutory duties of good faith” which cannot be
equated with “rights arising out of governmental agreements or administrative decisions granting valid,
explicit proprietary rights.”*”*

The Respondent cites the award in Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine to support its assertion that the
denial of rights arising out of contractual relations may not amount to expropriation of future
commercial return.*” The Respondent maintains that it is even more speculative to claim that the denial
of pre-contractual rights amounts to expropriation.*”

With respect to the termination of negotiations, the Respondent submits that “neither tangible nor
intangible property was transferred to the State or to the other parties.”°” In this regard, the Respondent

 

*¢ Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 256-260.

*65 Claimant's Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 261-263, citing Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine, Award, paras.
18.1-18.4, 20.26-20.27, 20.31-20.32.

366 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, para. 240.

*°7 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, para. 241.

*8 Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 314-316, quoting PSEG v. Turkey, Award, para. 279.

© Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 243-244.

 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 245-252, quoting PSEG v. Turkey, Award, para. 279; PSEG v.
Turkey, Decision on Jurisdiction (4 June 2004), para. 103.

*”" Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 257-261. Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 332.

*” Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 309-313.

*3 Respondent's Counter-memorial, para. 253, quoting Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine, Award, para. 20.27.
Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, paras, 319-323.

*4 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 254-256.

375

Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, para. 265.

PCA 91370 54

comments that the SPF’s decision to negotiate with the Executive Consortium was “a separate decision
and a separate procedure” from its decision to withdraw from the negotiations with the Claimant and
cannot constitute an expropriation.*”° Moreover, the Respondent argues that the termination of the
negotiations did not affect the overall economic value of the Claimant's alleged activities in
Lithuania.*””

The Tribunal’s Decision

273. As set out above, the Tribunal finds no reason to scrutinize whether the factual record supports a
finding of liability under other provisions of the Agreement including Article 5 as alleged by Claimant
and contested by the Respondent in light of the Tribunal’s determination that the Respondent breached
the Agreement’s just and fair treatment clause. Any additional breach is not relevant unless it leads to
additional damages, which it would not do here.

H. DAMAGES AND QUANTUM

274. The Tribunal will take up the Parties’ arguments on damages and on quantum together after their
presentation below.

1. Entitlement to damages
The Claimant's position

275. The Claimant claims that he is entitled to damages of EUR 207,971,000 including interest, as of 7

September 2012.°”

276. The Claimant submits that the issue of damages in this case is governed by the Agreement and by
principles of customary international law.*”? The Claimant argues that, through the Agreement’s MFN
clause, he is entitled to the most favorable damages permitted under international law principles
applicable to Lithuania.**° Relying on the Chorzéw Factory case, the Claimant submits that he is
entitled to monetary damages equivalent to the benefit of the bargain he would have had received if the
Respondent had not wrongfully expropriated his investment.**' According to the Claimant, but for the
unlawful actions of the Respondent, the SPA would have been concluded and the Claimant would have
acquired at least 83.77 percent of the Alita shares by early 2004.**?

277. The Claimant objects to the Respondent’s assertion that he is not entitled to damages in connection with
the “un-concluded contract,”*** arguing that he seeks a remedy not for a breach of a contract but for the
+ Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, para. 328.
*”7 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 268-275. Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 330.

*8 Claimant's Brief, paras. 1, 165. In the Claimant's Memorial, the Claimant submitted that he was entitled to
damages of EUR 229,836,000. Claimant’s Memorial, para. 335. The Claimant later lowered this total in
response to the Respondent's criticism that the Claimant’s original calculation did not take into account that
“the sales and distribution costs should be considered to be a function of sales.” Claimant’s Counter-
memorial/Reply, paras. 323, 332-333.

*” Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 306-307.
389 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 310.

38! Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 311-312, quoting The Factory at Chorzéw (Germany v. Poland), Judgment
(Claim for Indemnity) (Merits) of 13 September 1928, 1928 P.C.LJ. (ser. A) No. 17, para. 125. Claimant's
Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 284.

382 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 287, 290.

383 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 293, quoting Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 284-298.

PCA 91370 55

deprivation of his investment.*** The Claimant further submits that the ILC Articles on State
Responsibility require that “compensation shall cover any financially assessable damage including loss
of profits insofar as it is established.” *** Thus, the Claimant argues that the Respondent must
compensate him for all damages he suffered as a result of the Respondent's illegal conduct.**°

 

278. The Claimant also disputes the Respondent's argument that the Claimant’s damages have “no causal
link with the alleged breaches” of the Agreement because the SPA “would not have been concluded
anyway.”**” The Claimant maintains that the SPA would have been concluded but for the Respondent's
arbitrary and discriminatory conduct.*** There were no intervening causes or factors precipitating the
termination of negotiations, nor did the Claimant have any intention to break off negotiations; further,
the financing of the purchase price had been secured.**” The Claimant maintains that there is no basis to
support the Respondent’s position that the competition authorities would have rejected the acquisition
of Alita by the Claimant or his proposed subsequent acquisition of Boslita.*” Even if the Tribunal were
to determine that it lacks conclusive evidence to find that the Claimant would have acquired Alita and
managed it profitably in the absence of the SPF’s wrongful conduct, according to the Claimant the “loss
of a specific and substantial chance” to do so is compensable under international law.

  

The Respondent's position

279. The Respondent submits that, even assuming arguendo that the Respondent breached its international
obligations, the Claimant cannot claim damages.*”” Were the Tribunal to conclude that damages were
warranted, the Respondent argues that the Claimant has received adequate remedy through Lithuanian
national courts, ** that is, reimbursement for the direct damages associated with the terminated
negotiations in the amount of LTL 1,733,584.99 (or EUR 502,081).°**

280. In the Respondent's view, the Claimant's claim for damages is “disproportional” to the value of his
alleged investment and constitutes a “manifest abuse” of the Agreement.*”* The Respondent suggests
that the claimed damages, if granted, would have an “obvious and strong negative impact” on the
Respondent's economy that should be taken into consideration in the assessment of the damages.*”°

281. The Respondent argues that awarding compensation to the Claimant for lost profits would be “ aay
speculative and uncertain” since no contract was concluded between the Claimant and the SPF.**
Chorzéw Factory principle relied upon by the Claimant applies to breaches involving

  

384 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 295-296.

385 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 315.

386 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 317.

387 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 294, quoting Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 303-332.
388 Claimant's Brief, paras. 51-56.

+89 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 302-306.

3° Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 311-313.

°°! Claimant's Brief, paras. 57, 60.

+? Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, para. 279.

398 *s Counter- ial, para. 194. *s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 273-276.
34 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, para. 280.

*°5 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 280-283, citing Himpurna California Energy Ltd. y. PT (Persero)

Perusahaan Listruik Negara (PLN), UNCITRAL, Final Award (4 May 1999); Tecmed v. Mexico, Award,
para. 186. Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 340-342.

3° Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 339-341.

*°7 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 285-288. Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 343-346, 468-483.
Respondent's Brief, para. 134.

PCA 91370 56

producing asset[s],” unlike here.*** The Respondent contends that the Claimant could at best seek
recovery of direct damages, which have already been awarded by Lithuanian courts.*”? Moreover, the
Respondent suggests that the UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts provide for
recovery of direct expenses and the lost opportunity to conclude another contract but not lost profit.”
According to the Respondent, under Lithuanian law, the Claimant would not have been indemnified for
lost profit.“°

282. It is the Respondent’s position that the Claimant fails to demonstrate any causal link between his
claimed damages and the Respondent’s allegedly wrongful action.” The Respondent argues that the
Claimant did not demonstrate his willingness and/or ability to conclude the SPA negotiations, and that,
even if the SPF had not terminated the negotiations, the Claimant would have never signed the SPA.“”*
The Respondent further objects to the amount of claimed damages, arguing that it was not and could
not have been aware at the moment of the termination of the negotiations that the Claimant could have
suffered such damages.** The Claimant failed to mitigate damages in the tender process by not
requesting an injunction or seeking an annulment of the agreement between the SPF and the Executive
Consortium.“”°

283. With respect to the Claimant’s alleged plan to acquire and merge Boslita with Alita, the Respondent
submits that the Claimant would have been prevented from acquiring Alita under the Lithuanian laws
on competition in light of his alleged interest in Boslita and the dominant position of Alita in the
relevant market.“°° The Respondent argues that the merger would contravene Lithuania’s Explanations
on Market Definition and Horizontal Guidelines which provide direction to the Lithuanian competition
authority. “"’ In the Respondent’s view, the Lithuanian State Competition and Consumer Rights
Protection Authority would have blocked the merger “and, thus, cost synergies resulting from the
merger should not be considered.”*°*

2. Quantum
The Claimant’s position

284. Turning more specifically to the calculation of damages, the Claimant argues that the date of the
unlawful act and the date of the forthcoming award should be used to carry out the necessary
calculations of the damages owing to him.*” The Claimant names 14 October 2003, the date on which
he was removed from the Alita tender negotiations, as the date of the unlawful act.“””

+8 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, para. 289.
°° Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 290-294, 298.

4 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 295-298, quoting Commentary on the UNIDROIT Principles of
International Commercial Contracts 1994, Article 2.1.15, p. 51.

#9! Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 299-301.

+2 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 304-305.

*°3 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 314-315. Respondent’s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 349-358, 361-362,
365-367.

+4 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 329-332. Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 372-373.

+95 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 333-335. Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 464-467.
#96 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 316-328.

+°7 Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 406-425.

#98 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 352-359.

+9 Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 318-319.

+ Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 319.

PCA 91370 57

285. The Claimant submits that the commonly used discounted cash flow (“DCF”) method is the most
appropriate method to determine the fair market value of the Claimant's investment.*"' In applying the
DCF method, the Claimant argues that “post-act events” may be taken into consideration in the case of
unlawful expropriation or other breaches of the Agreement, and that, even if an “ex ante projection”
based on the data prior to 2003 were used, the amount of the Claimant’s damages would in fact be
greater than the amount calculated in consideration of “post-act events.”*"?

286. The Claimant submits that his damages include the value of Alita and the proceeds of the Alita business
he would have received.*'* Based on his expert report, the Claimant submits that the present value of
Alita is LTL 400,339,000.""* According to the Claimant, his damages also include, but are not limited
to: (1) “the lost synergies that would have resulted from combining the Boslita and Alita businesses,
such as increased buying power, reduction in overheads, costs of raw materials and other inputs,
increased distribution capacity, increased export capacity, increased goodwill in the former USSR
countries and increased margins;” (2) the lost opportunity to expand existing operations; and (3) loss of
the subsequent increase in market value of the company, lost profits, and loss of market share."?

287. The Claimant contends that, in addition, he is entitled to compound interest of 2.8 percent on the
amount of the damages calculated above beginning on the date of the Respondent’s wrongful act, i.e.,
14 October 2003.4"

The Respondent's position

288. The Respondent objects to the Claimant’s use of the DCF method to calculate his alleged damages,
arguing that the DCF method is used to estimate future free cash flows of “income-earning assets” and
is not appropriate to calculate the value of a “free-standing right to conclude a contract.”*"”

289. Even if the DCF method is employed, the Respondent maintains that the Claimant's expert incorrectly
relies on the financial performance of Alita after the privatization in his calculation.*'® As a primary
matter, the Claimant’s expert wrongly calculates the value of Alita rather than that of Alita’s shares.*””
Other calculation choices made by the expert contribute to an overstatement of the Claimant's alleged
damages. For example, the Respondent disputes the value of the alleged “synergies” resulting from the
proposed merger of Boslita and Alita, arguing that the Claimant's business plans are “highly
speculative,” and that numerous legal obstacles would have prevented the Claimant from executing the
merger.”° The Respondent argues that the Claimant's tion that he would have exported his
products to Russia is based on “uncertain and speculative” assumptions.*”! Further, in the Respondent's
view, the Claimant incorrectly adds back corporate income taxes deducted in assessing his suffered
damages to his valuation.”

 

 

#! Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 322-323, citing, inter alia, Lemire v. Ukraine, Award, paras. 219, 227; Tecmed
v. Mexico, Award, paras. 185-186.

*"2 Claimant’ s Counter-memorial/Reply, paras. 325-326.

+3 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 321.

#4 Claimant’ s Memorial, para. 327. Claimant’s Brief, paras. 155-156.
*!5 Claimant’s Memorial, para. 321. The Claimant subtracts the purchase price he would have paid for Alita,
adds taxes and converts Lithuanian litas to Euro. Claimant’s Memorial, para. 325.

#16 Claimant’ s Memorial, paras. 332-333. Claimant’s Counter-memorial/Reply, para. 332.

*"7 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 345.

+18 Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, paras. 347-351.

+" Respondent's Brief, paras. 144-146.

#2 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 353-359. Respondent’ s Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 369-371, 374-375.

#1 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 360-362. Respondent's Reply/Rejoinder, paras. 460-463.

422 *s Counter- ial, para. 369. *s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 506.

PCA 91370 58

290.

291.

292.

293.

294.

423

The Respondent disagrees with the Claimant’s calculation of interest for three reasons. First, the
Respondent argues that the Claimant cannot calculate interest on lost profits as of the day of the alleged
breach because such an approach would lead the Claimant to unjust enrichment by allowing him to earn
interest on profits yet to be received if the Claimant had acquired Alita.*”* Second, the Claimant cannot
calculate interest on both the lost profits and the income-earning capital; this calculation contravenes
Article 36 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility and would provide the Claimant with double
recovery.*** Third, the Respondent contends that the Claimant cannot seek recovery of interest on the
loss of profit in connection with what he has never invested because this recovery too would provide
the Claimant with double recovery: having saved the money he would have paid to acquire Alita, the
Claimant cannot be put in a more favorable position than the one he would have been in had he in fact
acquired Alita.”?*

The Tribunal’s Decision on Damages and Quantum

Based on the comparatively very large price offered by the Claimant, he had legitimate expectations
that the Respondent would approve the SPA with the conditions contained in his bid. But the Tribunal
does not agree with the Claimant's statement that “Mr. Bosca’s acquisition of Alita was a certainty.”*?°

 

First of all, there is no certainty that the Claimant would have accepted the condition on fines set by the
SPF in the draft SPA. The Claimant, even at the time of his testimony at the hearing, never confirmed
that he would have been ready to accept anything significantly different from the condition he had set
or that he would have been willing to compromise on the basis of the very minor adjustments
subsequently granted to the Consortium.’ It is worth noting that in the Lithuanian proceedings the
Claimant initiated before the Vilnius District Court on 17 November 2003, the Claimant stated that,
although he was to reaching a it the diti set out in his bid
“formed an integral part of the Tender Bid that [the] State Property had accepted, therefore, they could
not have been altered without Luigiterzo Bosca’s approval.” *”* Further, he noted that he “adhered to the
position that penalty amounts set forth in his Tender Bid and his proposals regarding draft Contract
attached thereto should be reflected in the final draft Contract.”*”

 

 

It is not out of possibility, bearing the very strong reservations of the Claimant concerning the issue of
fines, that he might, in the end, have decided to walk away from the deal, even at the cost of losing the
payments he had already made.

As far as the Respondent is concerned, it could well have held to its guns (as it did), notwithstanding
the great financial superiority of the Claimant’s bid. The PTC or the Government might have
considered that, in light of the refusal of the Claimant to accept the provision on fines, he could not be
trusted to abide by the conditions set out in the SPA and the Lithuanian laws and regulations and that it
would be preferable to call for a new tender. This is an option that the SPF’s advisor, Suprema,
considered before finally opting to try to negotiate with the fourth place bidder (who had suddenly
become the second place bidder). It is not inconceivable either that, for whatever reason, (even after
having received the Consortium’s bid), the Government might by then have changed its mind and

Respondent’ s Counter-memorial, para. 364.

4 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, paras. 365-366.

425

*s Counter- ial, para. 367. ”s Reply/Rejoinder, para. 530.

 

#6 Claimant's Brief, para. 151.

7 Hearing Transcript 383: 17-21 (Mr. Bosca’s testimony: “I wanted to negotiate something about the amount of

the

fine, or a cap on the fine, or something which could make me a little more confident. This was the main

reason, and they kept saying no, no, no.”).

#8 Claimant’ s Claim Application with Vilnius District Court, Exh. R-91, pp. 3, 7.

#9 Claimant’ s Claim Application with Vilnius District Court, Exh. R-91, pp. 3, 7.

PCA 91370 59

295.

296.

297.

298.

299.

300.

301.

decided to cancel the privatization of Alita, reimburse the bidder and keep it as a State-owned company,
at least for a certain period, before putting it again on the market.

The Tribunal has taken notice of the unchallenged testimony of the former Chairman of the
Competition Council, Prof. Rimantas Stanikiinas, to the effect that the Council would have approved
the Claimant’s purchase of Alita, especially taking into account the fact that, with the entry of Lithuania
into the European Union, Alita’s geographic market had expanded and encompassed the whole EU.
However, the Tribunal is not convinced that the Council would not have imposed some restrictions on
the transaction once it would have been made aware of the Service Agreement between the Claimant
and Boslita, the Option Agreement between the Claimant and Mrs. Skorupskiené on thirty percent
(30%) of the shares of Boslita and the Claimant’s plan for combining the activities of Boslita and Alita
in 2004. It remains an open question whether the Claimant would have proceeded with the purchase of
Alita if such restrictions had been imposed, since they would most likely have had an impact on the
expected rate of return of the Claimant’s investment.

The Tribunal’s view is that the outcome of the process was by no means certain and the Parties
themselves have recognized that, even after the declaration that the Claimant was the winning bidder,
they were still in pre-contractual negotiations.*””

The Tribunal’s conclusion is that the Claimant is entitled to compensation for lost opportunity resulting
from the failure of the SPF to respect the legal rules which governed it in the negotiations of the SPA
with the winning bidder who had legitimate expectations that the negotiations would be carried out in
accordance with law and that the SPA could be successfully concluded.

The Claimant called upon a valuation expert, Dr. José Alberro, to estimate the damages the Claimant
suffered. Dr. Alberro estimated damages of EUR 205,996,000 as of 1 May 2012.**! As to the Claimant
himself, his claim for pre-tax damages as of 7 September 2012 was set at EUR 207,971,000.*

For its part, the Respondent retained the services of Mr. Brent Kaczmarek who argued that Dr.
Alberro’s methodology contained several flaws which rendered his conclusions “unsound and
unreliable.”**

Without questioning the quality of the analysis contained in these two reports, it should be noted that
Dr. Alberro was instructed to evaluate the damages resulting from the annulment of the Claimant’s
successful bid as well as the denial of the Claimant’s right to receive the benefits associated with the
ownership of Alita.*"* In the Tribunal’s view, these two assumptions are distinguishable. While the first
is legitimate in the present case, the Tribunal does not agree that the Annulment Order of the SPF opens
the door to a claim for damages (lost profits) that could have been claimed had the SPA been
concluded. The only sustainable claim in the present case is one for lost opportunity in a pre-contractual
situation.

    

The Claimant, in pre-contractual negotiations, is only entitled to recover direct damages (monies paid to
the Respondent in the privatization process and costs incurred in this case). Lost profits based on the
assumption of an agreed SPA are much too remote and speculative. The Respondent has provided
sufficient arbitral and doctrinal support for that position.“

+59 Claimant's Brief, para. 41. Respondent's Brief, para. 40.

+5! Alberro Second Expert Report, p. 4.

+52 Claimant’ s Brief, para. 164.

433

Kaczmarek Expert Report, p. 14.

“4 A lberro First Expert Report, p. 4.

435

Among others, PSEG v. Turkey, Award, paras. 312-313; Metalclad v. Mexico, Award, paras. 120-121;

Zachary Douglas, The International Law of Investment Claims (Cambridge University Press, 2009), para.

288.

PCA 91370 60

302.

303.

VI.

304.

305.

306.

307.

The Claimant has already been reimbursed (albeit belatedly) by the Respondent for the amounts paid to
the Respondent on his behalf as well as the direct costs incurred, following the decision of the Supreme
Court of Lithuania in 2006. Though the Claimant is not entitled to double recovery, the Lithuanian
courts were not called upon to rule on the Respondent's liability under the Agreement, a matter which
is under the responsibility of this Tribunal.

The Tribunal concludes that the Respondent breached the Agreement and should indemnify the

Claimant; however, the Claimant has already been reimbursed for the monies he paid to the

Respondent. The only question that remains is the amount of costs incurred by the Claimant in
with the present ings that should be rei d by the

THE COSTS OF ARBITRATION
The Claimant's position

The Claimant submits that, under Articles 40(1) and 40(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal has
broad discretion to allocate costs, taking into account the circumstances of the case.**° The Claimant
requests that the Tribunal order the Respondent to pay all fees and costs in light of the Claimant’s
success in the Lithuanian courts, his attempt to settle with the Respondent, and what the Claimant has
alleged as the Respondent’s bad faith conduct.**”

The Claimant claims as his costs EUR 4,580,421.21 (USD 5,824,822.17), made up of EUR
3,504,113.78 (USD 4,456,014.43) in attorneys’ fees, EUR 516,608.36 (USD 657,197.62) in expert
witness’ fees, EUR 81,396.85 (USD 103,498.24) in other reasonable and necessary fees and costs, and
EUR 78,302.22 (USD 99,547.06) in travel and accommodation costs associated with hearing
preparation and attendance, as well as EUR 400,000 in case deposits requested by the Tribunal.***

  

The Respondent's position

According to the Respondent, its costs amount to EUR 890,230.27*” consisting of (1) case deposits of
EUR 400,000;*° (2) EUR 306,830 in expert fees;**' and (3) EUR 183,400.27 in legal representation
fees.

On 28 November 2012, the Respondent submitted Comments on the Claimant’s Costs Application,
which raised five objections to that Application. First, it argued that the Claimant should not be
awarded costs incurred prior to 19 March 2010, the date of the initiation of this arbitration, because he
failed to negotiate a possible settlement.*** Second, the counsel costs of the two law firms retained by
the Claimant do not meet the test of reasonableness and proportionality, taking into account the level of
expertise of the Claimant’s counsel.“ Third, the issues raised by the Claimant in his Costs Application
concerning the relevance of national court decisions and those relating to counsel for the Respondent
cannot support the awarding of costs against the Respondent.“ Fourth, the Claimant is responsible for

486 Claimant’ s Costs Application, para. 9. Claimant’s Amended Costs Application, para. 7.

+57 Claimant’ s Costs Application, paras. 1, 18. Claimant’s Amended Costs Application, paras. 1, 13-14.

+38 Claimant’s Amended Costs Application, paras. 3, 15-18.

+ Respondent’s Amended Statement on Costs, para. 3.

#9 Respondent’s Amended Statement on Costs, para. 4.

#1 Respondent’s Amended Statement on Costs, para. 6.

442

443

Respondent’s Amended Statement on Costs, para. 7.

Respondent’s Comments, para. 5.

*4 Respondent’s Comments, paras. 6, 9.

+5 Respondent’s Comments, para. 10.

PCA 91370 61

308.

309.

310.

312.

313.

314.

abuse of process by having submitted at least four documents that he has not shown to be authentic: the
Option Agreement,*“* the Contract for Buying-Selling Shares,“ the Stock Purchase Agreement of 2
July 2002" and the Service Agreement.*”” Fifth, the Claimant resorted to abuse of process by waiting
until his Post-Hearing Brief to submit a clear and explicit statement of his position, thus depriving the
Respondent the opportunity for further rebuttal.”

  

The Tribunal’s Decision

Both the Claimant and the Respondent have submitted proper documentation in support of their claims
for costs.

Before ruling on costs, the Tribunal will address the arguments raised by each Party.

As to the Claimant, the fact that the he prevailed in the Lithuanian courts has been well established and
the Tribunal has addressed above the import of these decisions; such decisions by domestic courts are
irrelevant for the purpose of determining the allocation of costs in an international arbitration. The
Claimant has raised new claims under the basis of the Agreement and international law, which was his
full right, and the Respondent was entitled to defend itself against such claims.

 

As to the argument that the Claimant attempted, without success, to settle with the Respondent, the
Tribunal has received little, and somewhat contradictory, evidence in that regard. In its view, the
Tribunal has not obtained enough evidence to conclude that any Party behaved improperly or
negligently in that respect. The steps taken by either side in that regard were too tentative and vague to
justify any conclusion as to costs in the present arbitration.

As to the conduct of the LAWIN law firm and some of its members in this case, the Tribunal has
already addressed this issue in its Procedural Order No. 2 and ruled that it “did not believe that it has
the authority to rule on the interpretation to be given to the ethical rules applicable to Lithuanian
attorneys under Lithuanian law.” As to the fact that one of the LAWIN partners, Dr. Smaliukas (whose
wife is also a partner and counsel in this case), was produced as a legal expert witness and that one of
its senior associates, Mr. Nosevié, was produced as a fact witness has also been addressed in that Order.
The Tribunal ruled that such a procedure was highly unusual and that it would bear these circumstances
in mind when addressing the issues raised by the Parties. The evidence provided by these two witnesses
has had no noticeable influence on the conclusions reached by the Tribunal, either on law or on facts.
As to the case of Mr. Giedrius Stasevidius, another partner who appeared in this case, the issue raised in
his respect had to do with his previous role as counsel to Suprema, a consulting firm which advised the
SPF during the Alita tender negotiation process; in the Claimant’s view, Mr. Stasevicius’ active role in
the Hearing underscored his conflicting duties to his client and to the Tribunal. However, as with the
other members of the LAWIN law firm mentioned above, this is clearly a matter coming under the
Lithuanian professional ethical rules and cannot have a bearing on the issue of costs.

As to the Respondent’s arguments, the Tribunal answers them as follows.

As to the first concerning the period during which costs can be eligible for payment, the Tribunal does
not see a valid reason to reject any cost incurred by the Claimant prior to the initiation of this arbitration
on 19 March 2010 so long as the claimed costs are related to the present arbitration and fully justified.
In his Costs Application, the Claimant specifies that he is submitting costs he incurred during the
arbitration proceedings. They appear to include only those incurred after the six-month negotiation
period ending in August (or early September) 2007, which post-dates most of the local proceedings.
The Tribunal has dealt above with the argument based on the alleged settlement negotiations.

 

+6 Option Agreement, Exhs. C-59/R-55.
“7 Contract of Buying Selling Shares Ivasauskas Bosca SpA, Exhs. C-57/R-70.
#8 Stock Purchase Agreement Skorupskiené Bosca SpA, Exhs. C-58/R-71.

*° Service Agreement, Exhs. C-24/R-72. Respondent’s Comments, para. 11.

459 Respondent’s Comments, para. 13.

PCA 91370 62

315.

316.

317.

318.

319.

320.

321.

322.

323.

324.

Secondly, there is clearly a large differential between the Claimant’s and the Respondent’s legal costs.
The Respondent chose to rely principally on a Lithuanian law firm (EUR 142,866.87) which it retains
in other matters and only marginally on the foreign law firm it retained (EUR 40,533.40). Moreover,
there is little doubt that the Respondent could rely on the contribution of its officials in various
departments to support the work of its external counsel, with no apparent cost attributed to this case.
The Claimant was in a very different situation. He selected, as was his right, an international law firm
which played a prominent role in this case and was seconded by a Lithuanian law firm.

It is not the task of the Tribunal to determine the choice of counsel for the Parties; the Tribunal does not
see anything inappropriate or abnormal in the strategy chosen in that regard by the Claimant.
Furthermore, taking into account the nature of the case and all it involved, the Tribunal does not find
the costs claimed to be out of proportion when compared to those claimed in other cases of a similar
nature.

Thirdly, the Tribunal has already addressed the issue of the relevance of the national courts’ decisions
and the challenges to counsel for the Respondent. The Tribunal does not find the Claimant’s arguments
in that regard frivolous or inappropriate and they cannot be considered as an abuse of process.

Fourthly, the Tribunal does not consider either as an abuse of process the fact that the Claimant could
not produce authentic texts of the documents mentioned above. The Tribunal is of the view that the
copies produced and the testimonies of the relevant witnesses in that respect allowed the Tribunal to
rely on the content of those documents.

Finally, the Tribunal cannot find an abuse of process in the content of the Claimant's Post-Hearing
Brief. The “clear and explicit explanation of his position” which, the Respondent says, came out only in
the Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief seems to the Tribunal to flow naturally from the written and oral
evidence previously submitted by the Parties. The Respondent has provided no evidence to support its
contention in that regard. Furthermore, if the Respondent felt that the Claimant had taken a position in
his Post-Hearing Brief which was new, it was always open to the Respondent to apply to the Tribunal
for an authorization to answer that new position, which the Respondent has not done.

Having disposed of the arguments raised by each Party in relation to costs, the Tribunal will
concentrate on the reasons which guide it in its decision. The authority of the Tribunal in matters of
fees and costs is dealt with in Articles 38, 40(1) and 40(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

Article 40(1) provides:

Except as provided in paragraph 2, the costs of arbitration shall in principle be borne by the
unsuccessful party. However, the arbitral tribunal may apportion each of such costs
between the parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into account
the circumstances of the case.

As to Article 40(2), it reads:

With respect to the costs of the legal representation and assistance referred to in article 38,
paragraph (e), the arbitral tribunal, taking into account the circumstances of the case, shall
be free to determine which party shall bear such costs or may apportion such costs between
the parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable.

Article 38 leaves open the meaning of “assistance” in the context of “the costs of legal representation
and assistance.”

 

The Claimant has been successful on the issues of admissibility, jurisdiction and liability and on the
principle of damages. The Tribunal sees no reason not to follow the general principle enunciated in
Article 40(1); the costs of arbitration in this case should be borne by the Respondent as detailed in the
following paragraphs.

 
 
 

  

The Tribunal fixes the costs of arbitration as follows, plus interest as determined below:

PCA 91370 63

- As per Article 38(a) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the fees of the Tribunal members amount to EUR
484,326.52, i.e., The Hon. Marc Lalonde’s fees total EUR 250,736.92, Mr. Daniel Price’s fees
total EUR 100,500.00, and Prof. Brigitte Stern’s fees total EUR 133,089.60.

- As per Article 38(b)-(c) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the remaining costs expended from the Parties’
case deposit for the Tribunal members’ travel and other assistance rendered by the PCA and
service-providers in the course of these proceedings total EUR 199,245.27.

 

The Tribunal will treat the Parties’ expert witness costs, as well as the travel and accommodation costs
of each Party, as part of the costs of legal representation and assistance under Article 38(e) per the
discussion below; thus, the Tribunal need not approve any additional witness-related costs, nor have the
Parties enumerated any, pursuant to Article 38(d). Finally, in reference to Article 38(f), the Tribunal
notes that no costs were incurred by any appointing authority in this matter nor by the Secretary-
General of the PCA.

 

325. Together, the costs of arbitration referenced above as falling within Article 38(a-c) of the UNCITRAL
Rules amount to EUR 683,571.79 plus interest as determined below, and shall be borne by the
Respondent in full, in accordance with Article 40(1). Thus, the Respondent shall pay the Claimant half
this amount (or EUR 341,785.90) and the PCA shall reimburse the Parties in equal parts the amount
that remains in the case deposit (EUR 116,428.21, or EUR 58,214.10 to each Party).

 

326. As to the costs of legal representation and tance under Article 38(e) and Article 40(2), although the
Tribunal has ruled that the Claimant's damages be very substantially reduced from his claim for EUR
207,971,000, the Claimant is the successful Party in light of the breach committed by the Respondent.
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant may generally recover the costs of his legal
representation from the Respondent.

327. The Tribunal is also mindful, however, that not all the Claimant’s expert reports were relevant or useful
to the Tribunal’s analysis. For instance, the expert report authored by Dr. Ariel Cohen submitted by the
Claimant did not make any meaningful contribution to the Tribunal’s analysis. In addition, while
prevailing on the principle of damages, the Claimant has failed to obtain anything approaching his
claim in that respect. Thus, the Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent, in addition to supporting its
own costs, should bear most of the Claimant's costs, excepting twenty percent (20%). The Respondent
should bear eighty percent (80%) of the legal representation and assistance costs incurred by the
Claimant which totalled EUR 4,180,421.21 (thus, 80% of Claimant’s total legal fees amounts to EUR
3,344,336.97) plus interest as determined below.

 

328. Interest on the amount awarded to the Claimant shall run from the date of this Award and be set at the
Euro Interbank Offered Rate (Euribor) three-month rate in effect on the date of this Award, plus two,
percent (2%) compounded semi-annually from the date of this Award.

(The rest of this page is left intentionally blank.)

PCA 91370 64

VIL. DISPOSITIF

329. The Tribunal therefore unanimously decides and awards as follows:

(a) The Claimant’s claim is admissible and the objections raised by the Respondent in that respect are
dismissed.

(b) The Tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute.

(c) The Respondent has breached its obligation to grant just and fair treatment to the Claimant, under
the first sentence of Article 2(2) of the Agreement.

(&) In light of its decision concerning just and fair treatment and of the fact that any further breach
would not, in this case, lead to additional damages, the Tribunal does not deem it necessary to
rule on the other alleged breaches of the Agreement raised by the Claimant.

(©) The Claimant is only entitled to recover direct damages (monies paid to the Respondent in the
privatization process of Alita and costs incurred in this case).

(f) The Claimant has already been reimbursed by the Respondent for the amounts paid to it on behalf of
the Claimant in the privatization process of Alita.

(g) The Respondent shall bear the costs of arbitration in this case expended from the case deposit in the
amount of EUR 683,571.79 plus interest as determined below.

(h) The Respondent shall pay to the Claimant eighty percent (80%) of the costs of legal representation
and assistance incurred by him which totalled EUR 4,180,421.21 (80% of which amounts to
EUR 3,344,336.97) plus interest as determined below.

(i) Interest on the amount awarded to the Claimant shall run from the date of this Award and be set at

the Euro Interbank Offered Rate (Euribor) three-month rate in effect on the date of this Award,
plus two percent (2%) compounded semi-annually from the date of this Award.

Stockholm, Sweden Date: 1+ May 2013

Prof. Brigitte Stern Mr, Daniel Price
UA Zz bude

   

  

Co-arbitrator Co-arbitrator

 

‘The Hon. Marc Lalonde
Presiding Arbitrator

PCA 91370 65

