CITATION: The Russia Federation v. Luxtona Limited, 2019 ONSC 4503
COURT FILE NO.: CV-17-11772-CL
DATE: 20191213

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO
RE: The Russia Federation, Applicant

AND:

Luxtona Limited, Respondent
BEFORE: Penny J.
COUNSEL: John Terry, Miriam Seers and Emily Sherkey for the Applicant

Lincoln Caylor, Ranjan K. Agarwal and S. Bandali for the Respondent
HEARD: October 23, 2019

ENDORSEMENT.

Overview and Issues
[1] This case involves a dispute between Luxtona Limited, as a former shareholder of Yukos
(an energy company), and The Russia Federation, which is alleged to have violated certain
provisions of the Energy Charter Treaty relating to the protection of investments, including
Luxtona’s investment in Yukos.
[2] A Russian government representative signed the Treaty but the draft law that would have
ratified the Treaty was never passed. Under Article 45(1) of the Treaty, Russia undertook to apply
the Treaty provisionally “to the extent that” such provisional application was “not inconsistent

with” Russia’s Constitution, laws and regulations.

[3] Luxtona has invoked Article 45(1) of the Treaty to allege that Russia provisionally agreed
to apply the Treaty in its entirety, including the arbitration provision set out in Article 26. Luxtona
claims damages of approximately USDS701 million for alleged breaches of the Treaty.

[4] Russia disagrees that it provisionally agreed to apply the Treaty’s arbitration clause and
argues that arbitration of this claim is inconsistent with Russian law.

[5] Reserving all rights, Russia participated in the appointment of an arbitral tribunal
(comprised of nationals of Italy, Costa Rica and the United States) in compliance with the
competence-competence principal. The arbitral tribunal was “seated” in Toronto, Ontario.

[6] One of the central issues turns on Russian law: whether or not the provisional application
of the Treaty, in particular the arbitration provision, is “not inconsistent with” Russian law. Both
sides put forward extensive expert evidence on relevant Russian law. In a lengthy interim award,
the arbitral tribunal held that it had jurisdiction to hear Luxtona’s claims. This application is

- Page 2 -

brought by Russia under Articles 16(3) and 34(2) of the UNCITRAL Model Law on International
Arbitration (enacted in Ontario by Schedule 2 of the International Commercial Arbitration Act,
2017, S.O. 2017, c. 2, Sched. 5). The application seeks to set aside the tribunal’s interim award.

[7] In support of its application, Russia filed new expert evidence on Russian law. Luxtona
objected to this evidence being admitted. Dunphy J. was assigned to hear this application.
Accordingly, in advance of the hearing, at the request of the parties Justice Dunphy heard
Luxtona’s motion to exclude Russia’s new evidence. Relying on Article 16(3) of the Model Law,
as interpreted in Canadian and foreign courts, Dunphy J. held that Russia was permitted to file new
evidence as of right.

[8] Due to changes in judicial assignments, Dunphy J. left the Commercial List and the
application was assigned to me. I was asked to decide a further evidentiary question resulting from
the new evidence filed. In the course of the hearing on that issue, I questioned the legal basis for
the filing of new evidence in the first place. Not being satisfied with the answer, I directed that
the issue of admissibility of the new evidence be re-argued before me. That re-argument took
place on October 23, 2019.

[9] There are two basic issues:

qd) do I, as the judge assigned to hear Russia’s application, have the jurisdiction to
change a prior evidentiary ruling by a judge who will no longer be hearing the
application; and, if so, in what circumstances may I make a different ruling? and

(2) should new evidence be admitted in the circumstances?!
[10] _ For the reasons that foliow I conclude:

O) that I have the authority to reconsider the prior interlocutory ruling of a judge
concerning the admissibility of evidence in a matter for which I am the hearing
judge; and

(2) a party to a challenge of the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal under Articles 16 and
34 of the Model Law may not file fresh evidence as of right but must obtain leave
to do so by providing a reasonable explanation for why new evidence is necessary,

' It should be noted that the applicant does not seek to file new evidence under the test for fresh evidence articulated
in R. v. Palmer, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 759. That test has four components: (1) the evidence should generally not be admitted
if, by due diligence, it could have been adduced at trial; (2) the evidence must be relevant in the sense that it bears
upon a decisive or potentially decisive issue in the trial; (3) the evidence must be credible in the sense that it is
reasonably capable of belief; and (4) the evidence must be such that if believed it could reasonably, when taken with
the other evidence adduced at trial, be expected to have affected the result. The applicant concedes that it would not
meet this test or any variant of the test. Rather, the applicant argues that a review of jurisdiction under Articles 16 and
34 of the Model Law is a trial de novo and that new evidence may be filed as of right.

- Page 3 -

including why that evidence was not, or could not have been, put before the tribunal
in the first place.

Analysis
Issue 1: Revisiting the Earlier Evidentiary Ruling

[11] Counsel for Russia argues that my power to diverge from the earlier ruling of Dunphy J. is
limited to circumstances where “the circumstances that were present at the time the order was
made have materially changed.” A change, to be material, must relate to a matter that justified the
making of the order in the first place, R. v. Adams, 1995 Carswell Alta 733 para 31.

[12] This case and others that had followed it, however, do not deal with the circumstance
where, in effect, an interlocutory ruling on the admissibility of evidence in a civil case is made by
one judge and the “trial” judge feels the need to revisit the matter.

[13] Even assuming the “material change” requirement applies to an interlocutory ruling on
admissibility in a civil case, R. v. R.V , 2018 ONCA 547 (C.A.); rev'd on other grounds 2019 SCC
41, supports my view. In this case, the anticipated trial judge made a ruling about the scope of
cross-examination in a sexual assault case. That judge declared herself unable to continue with
the trial. Another judged assumed carriage. The accused immediately asked the second judge to
revisit the earlier ruling. The trial judge declined to do so, considering the early judge’s ruling
was binding on him.

[14] The Court of Appeal found that the earlier ruling was not binding on the trial judge.
Acknowledging the general rule requiring material change, the court went on to observe that there
are many circumstances that might qualify for “material change” including misunderstandings,
being unaware of relevant evidence and correcting a decision made in error (para. 103).”

[15] | Counsel for Russia also submits that the issue should not be revisited because, in reliance
upon the earlier ruling of Dunphy J., the parties have incurred expense in responding to and cross-
examining on the new evidence. The broader circumstances of how the new evidence came about
will be reviewed in greater detail below. I will only say that the force of this argument is
significantly undermined by the fact that, on Russia’s theory of the court’s role in a review of
jurisdiction under Article 16(3) of the Model Law and the admission of new evidence as of right,
the entire process and hearing before the tribunal, conducted at much greater expense, is also
rendered somewhat superfluous.

[16] _ It seems to me axiomatic that a trial or hearing judge should not decide a case on the basis

of evidence which he or she believes was incorrectly admitted by an interlocutory ruling of
different judge. For this reason, I conclude that I have the authority to revisit the earlier evidentiary

> The SCC did not disagree with any of this.

- Page 4 -

ruling to satisfy myself that it was correct and, if I conclude that it was not correct, to make a
different ruling.

Issue 2: Should New Evidence Be Admitted in the Circumstances?

Background and Positions

[17] Under the direction of the Tribunal, the parties spent over 16 months engaged in the process
of pleading, evidence gathering, disclosure and trial of the preliminary issues raised by Russia’s
jurisdictional objections:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

@

GO

@

the Tribunal set out the procedural timetable for the arbitration and the procedure
for disclosure and submission of pleadings and evidence;

Russia filed its Memorial on jurisdiction in October 2014. This Memorial included
77 factual exhibits, 111 legal authorities and an expert report from Professor
Asoskov (with a further 70 exhibits);

Luxtona filed its Counter-Memorial on jurisdiction in February 2015. Luxtona’s
Counter-Memorial included 43 factual exhibits, 62 legal authorities, an expert
report from Professor Willems (with a further seven exhibits), an expert report from
Professor Stephan (with a further 24 exhibits) and a witness statement from Mr.
Misamore;

in March 2015, the parties submitted requests that the Tribunal order the production
of documents;

in April 2015, the Tribunal issued its decision on the document requests, granting
certain requests and denying others;

in May 2015, the parties confirmed their availability in January 2016 for the hearing
on jurisdiction;

in June 2015, Russia filed its Reply on Jurisdiction. Russia’s Reply included 94
factual exhibits, 143 legal authorities, another expert report from Professor
Asoskov (with a further 65 exhibits) and an expert report from Professor Tjittes
(with an additional 22 exhibits);

Luxtona filed its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction in October 2015. Luxtona’s Rejoinder
included 29 factual exhibits, 28 legal authorities, an expert report from Dr. Epstein
(with a further five exhibits), a second expert report from Professor Willems (with
a further 13 exhibits), a second expert report from Professor Stephan (with nine
further exhibits) and a second witness statement from Mr. Misamore;

in total, Russia and Luxtona filed approximately 700 exhibits, eight expert reports,
two fact witness statements and approximately 530 pages of submissions;

 

@

(k)

@

(m)

(n)

- Page 5 -

the hearing was held over five days in January 2016 in London, United Kingdom.
There were five witnesses, all of whom testified before the Tribunal: Misamore, a
fact witness; and four expert witnesses (Stephan, Willems, Asoskov and Tjittes);

Luxtona was represented by five lawyers associated with the London office of
Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher LLP. Russia was represented by eight lawyers associated
with the London office of Debevoise & Plimpton LLP. These counsel had great
expertise and experience in international arbitration;

there were three objections raised by Russia to the Tribunal’ s jurisdiction: (1) the
provisional application of the arbitration provision of the Treaty is inconsistent with
Russian law; (2) Russia is entitled to deny Luxtona the benefits of the Treaty; and
(3) Luxtona did not make a qualifying “investment” under the Treaty;

on March 22, 2017, the Tribunal issued a 146 page interim award in which the
Tribunal unanimously dismissed Russia’s first and second objections. The
Tribunal deferred its decision on the third objection; and

although costs were not finally determined (due to the deferral of the Tribunal’s
decision on the third issue), I was advised that the cost submissions were in the
order of approximately $7 million for Luxtona and approximately $8 million for
Russia.

[18] In April 2017, Russia applied to the Ontario Superior Court of Justice in Toronto to set
aside the interim award under Articles 16 and 34 of the Model Law. Russia seeks to set aside the
interim award on the basis that the Tribunal wrongly decided Russia’s first two objections.

[19] In addition to material filed before the tribunal, Russia filed:

(a)

(b)

expert reports from Professors Avtonomov and Marochkin (who did not file expert
reports or appear before the Tribunal) and

a number of documents not filed before the Tribunal.

[20] _ According to counsel for Luxtona, the additional evidence falls into six categories:

qd)

(2)

(3)

(4)

documents that existed before the arbitration that relate factual findings made by
the Tribunal based on the record that Russia presented;

documents that Russia withheld from the Tribunal on grounds of privilege/state
secrecy;

documents that Russia attempted to file late in the arbitration in which the Tribunal
deemed inadmissible;

documents related to issues in separate proceedings, not the subject of the
arbitration;

- Page 6 -

(5) pre-existing fact documents and legal authorities that Russia had access to and
chose not to raise during the arbitration to support its argument; and

(6) new fact documents and legal authorities that Russia obtained after the arbitration.

[21]  Luxtona objected to the filing of this evidence, which lead to the hearing before Dunphy
J., discussed above.

[22] _ Russia argues that as the evidence before the Tribunal developed, one of the key issues was
how the Russian constitutional principle of hierarchy of norms applied in the case of a
provisionally applied treaty. This issue was addressed only in reply reports. Russia says that the
Tribunal concluded that Professor Asoskov’s opinion did not make clear how the hierarchy of legal
acts relates to the specific manner of provisional application and decided to rely on its own reading
of Russian case law and executive decisions. The Tribunal relied on Resolution 8-P of the Russian
Constitutional Court but did not refer to a lower court ruling that gave rise to Resolution 8-P which
was “not available” at the time the Tribunal made its decision.

[23]  Russia’s argument goes on to explain that Professor Avtonomov’s expert evidence (the
new evidence) “responds to these incorrect findings” of the Tribunal. It “explains why the
tribunal’s determinations of Russian constitutional law are incorrect.” Professor Avtonomov’s
evidence addresses how the hierarchy of norms applies to the situation of provisional application
and provides evidence about the executive decisions on which the Tribunal relied. Among other
things, his evidence explains why the Tribunal’s conclusion that “an unratified treaty being
provisionally applied supplants inconsistent provisions of domestic law” is incorrect and contrary
to the constitutional principles, the separation of powers and the hierarchy of norms. He also
maintains that the Tribunal was “also incorrect” to conclude that the provisional application of the
Treaty is not inconsistent with Russian federal statutes on the basis that its ratification may not
have required amending other legislation, since it is ratification by the Federal Assembly that
would have elevated the Treaty to the same level as federal statutes in the hierarchy of norms.
Professor Avtonomov explains why the Constitutional Court’s Resolution 8-P does not support
the Tribunal’s conclusion that an unratified treaty being provisionally applied “supplants”
inconsistent provisions of domestic law.

[24] Russia argues that Professor Marochkin’s evidence addresses statutory interpretation
arguments that were before the Tribunal “to a limited extent,” but evolved “following the hearing
in response to positions asserted by Professor Stephan in reports submitted to the Hague Court of
Appeal” in a different case. Russia submits that because Luxtona is likely to adopt the same
position in this application as the complainant in the Hague Court of Appeal case is taking, Russia
seeks to provide the Court with evidence necessary to address this issue.

Analysis

Ontario’s Model Law

[25] _ Article 16 adopts the important principle that it is initially and primarily for the arbitral
tribunal itself to determine whether it has jurisdiction, subject to ultimate court control. Paragraph

(1) grants the arbitral tribunal the power to rule on its own jurisdiction, including any objections
with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement. This power, referred to as

- Page 7 -

the competence-competence principal, is an essential and widely accepted feature of modern
international arbitration.

[26] _ If the arbitral tribunal rules, as a preliminary question, that it has jurisdiction, any party
may request the court of the “seat” (in this case Toronto) to decide the matter and the decision of
the court is subject to no appeal.

[27] Article 16 of the Model Law provides:

(1) The arbitral tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction, including any objections
with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement. For that
purpose, an arbitration clause which forms part of a contract shall be treated as an
agreement independent of the other terms of the contract. A decision by the arbitral
tribunal that the contract is null and void shall not entail ipso jure the invalidity of
the arbitration clause.

(2) A plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall be raised not
later than the submission of the statement of defence. A party is not precluded from
raising such a plea by the fact that he has appointed, or participated in the
appointment of, an arbitrator. A plea that the arbitral tribunal is exceeding the scope
of its authority shall be raised as soon as the matter alleged to be beyond the scope
of its authority is raised during the arbitral proceedings. The arbitral tribunal may,
in either case, admit a later plea if it considers the delay justified.

(3) The arbitral tribunal may rule on a plea referred to in paragraph (2) of this article
either as a preliminary question or in an award on the merits. If the arbitral tribunal
rules as a preliminary question that it has jurisdiction, any party may request, within
thirty days after having received notice of that ruling, the court specified in article
6 to decide the matter, which decision shall be subject to no appeal; while such a
request is pending, the arbitral tribunal may continue the arbitral proceedings and
make an award.

[28] _ Under Article 34 of the Model law, recourse to the court must be brought by way of
application to set aside the award. The applicant bears the burden of proof. And, the applicant
must establish that the agreement was not valid, deals with a dispute not falling within the terms
of the submission or contains a decision on matters beyond the scope of the submission to
arbitration.

[29] Article 34 provides, in relevant part:
(1) Recourse to a court against an arbitral award may be made only by an
application for setting aside in accordance with paragraphs (2) and (3) of this
article.

(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the court specified in Article 6 only if:

(a) the party making the application furnishes proof that:

- Page 8 -

(i) a party to the arbitration agreement referred to in article 7 was under
some incapacity; or the said agreement is not valid under the law to which
the parties have subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law
of this State; or

(iii) the award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within
the terms of the submission to arbitration, or contains decisions on matters
beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration, provided that, if the
decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from those
not so submitted, only that part of the award which contains decisions on
matters not submitted to arbitration may be set aside.

Judicial Precedent

[30] The starting point for consideration of Articles 16 and 34 of the Model Law in Canada is
the decision of the Court of Appeal for Ontario in United Mexican States v. Cargill Inc., 2011
ONCA 622. The issue before the court was the standard of review by a court on an application to
challenge jurisdiction under Article 34(2) of the Model Law.

[31] In the course of its analysis, the Court of Appeal considered the decision of the UK
Supreme Court in Dhalla Real Estate and Tourism Holding Company v. Pakistan, [2010] UKSC
46, which concerned s. 103(2)(b) of the 1996 Act/Article V 1(a) of the New York Convention. The
Supreme Court held that when the issue is initial consent to arbitration, the court must determine
for itself whether or not the objecting party actually consented. The objecting party has the burden
of proof, which it may seek to discharge as it sees fit. In making its determination, the court may
have regard to the reasoning and findings of the alleged arbitral tribunal, if they are helpful, but it
is neither bound nor restricted by them. The Court of Appeal observed that the UK Supreme
Court’s approach was to address the issue de novo but concluded this approach was “a variant of
applying the correctness standard.”

[32] | The Court of Appeal found that, in a challenge to jurisdiction under the Model Law, the
standard of review is correctness: the tribunal had to be correct in its determination that it had the

ability to make the decision it made. The court’s reasons establish four clarifying principles:

(1) in hearing an application to set aside an arbitral decision for lack of jurisdiction the
court is performing a review of the decision;

(2) the onus is on the party challenging the award;

(3) the court must be satisfied that the challenge raises a “true question of jurisdiction”;
but once that criterion is satisfied,

(4) the tribunal has to be correct in its assumption of jurisdiction and it is up to the
reviewing court to determine, without deference, whether it was.

- Page 9 -

[33] The Court of Appeal’s conclusion Cargill is consistent with the approach of the U.S.
Federal Court of Appeal, Third Circuit, in China Minmetals Materials Imp & Exp Co. Ltd. v. Chi
Mei Corp. 334 F. 3d 274 (2003).

[34] The issue of what constitutes the “record” for this review, and in what circumstances it
could include fresh evidence, however, did not come up in Cargill. There is in fact no case in
Canada dealing with this issue.

 

[35] Russia cited a decision of the British Columbia Superior Court in Tanzanian Goldfields
Companyy. East Africa Metals Inc., 2018 BCSC 1511. This was a case involving alleged bias on
the part of the arbitrator. Russia relies on this case to support its argument that a new record is
permissible under a challenge to the arbitrator under the Model Law. I cannot agree.

[36] | In Tanzanian Goldfields there was an ongoing hearing before the arbitrator. In the course
of the arbitration, the petitioner raised the issue of arbitrator bias. There was a hearing before the
arbitrator to consider the allegation of bias. The arbitrator declined to recuse himself. The
petitioner brought application before the BCSC to have the arbitrator’s decision overturned. The
petitioner sought to put before the court additional material that was not specifically referred to
during the recusal motion. The BCSC held that it was appropriate to “have access to the entire
record regardless of whether particular portions of the record were put to the arbitrator at the initial
recusal hearing.” The reference in this decision to the “entire record” is, however, not a reference
to fresh evidence. It is a reference to the totality of material that was already before the arbitrator
on the arbitration, as distinct from the material that was referred to by the petitioner in its
submissions during the recusal motion. Tanzanian Goldfields has no application to the
circumstances or the issue before the Court in this case.

[37] _ Russia also relies on a number of cases from other jurisdictions which have admitted new
evidence in a court challenge to an arbitral tribunal’s findings on jurisdiction. All of these
authorities at least stand for the proposition that no deference is owed to an arbitral tribunal’s
findings on jurisdiction, be it factual or legal, and that the reviewing court must decide for itself
whether the tribunal had or did not have the requisite jurisdiction.

[38] This is not the issue in dispute on this motion however. Standard of review is a separate
question from the format of the review itself. One does not necessarily dictate the other, Ford v.
Toronto (City), 2012 ONCJ 92. In other words, the standard of review involving correctness, no
deference and the reviewing court deciding for itself the question of jurisdiction, does not
necessarily result in the conclusion that fresh evidence may be filed as of right. The issue on this
motion is a narrow one — may parties to a challenge of an arbitral tribunal’s award on jurisdiction
under Articles 16 and 34 of the Model Law file new evidence on the review as of right? Or, as
Luxtona maintains, must the party seeking to adduce new evidence on an Article 16/34 application
in Ontario demonstrate that the new evidence meets the test articulated in R. v. Palmer, or some
appropriate variant of this test?

[39] Some of the authorities relied on by Russia deal with circumstances where it is clear new
evidence would be admitted under widely recognized principles of attomment/non-attendance
(where, for example, the issue of jurisdiction is addressed in substance for the first time in the
context of enforcement proceedings). In these cases, the party challenging jurisdiction has not

- Page 10 -

participated in the earlier proceedings but is entitled to do so in defence of enforcement of the
arbitral award including challenging the jurisdiction of the arbitrator. In such cases, that party’s
evidence is, by definition, “new” and is admitted because natural justice requires it Other
authorities deal with circumstances where a Palmer- like test clearly has been met. Thus, for
example, in IMC Aviation Solutions Pty Ltd. v. Altain Khuder LLC (2011) 282 ALR 717 (SCV -
CA), the new evidence put before the reviewing court related to circumstances which arose after
the arbitral award had been made.

[40] It cannot be denied, however, that there remains a body of law, almost all of which
emanates from the London Commercial Court in charter party cases, which takes the view that,
under s. 67 of the U.K. Arbitration Act (which is not based on the Model Law), a challenge to
arbitral jurisdiction in the London Commercial Court is a trial de novo, in which the parties are at
liberty to advance whatever evidence they deem appropriate and is otherwise admissible,
regardless of the procedures followed, the evidence filed or the issues raised before the arbitral
tribunal itself.

 

[41] I will deal with two or three of these cases in order to explore the basis upon which a
number of judges of the London Commercial Court take this view. I will then consider how the
reasoning in these cases lines up with applications under Articles 16 and 34 of the Model Law and
the reasoning of the Court of Appeal for Ontario in Cargill.

[42] In Electrosteel Castings Ltd. vy. Scan-Trans Shipping & Chartering Sdn Bhd, (2002]
EWHC 1993 (Comm), Gross J. considered a challenge under s. 67 of the UK Arbitration Act to
an arbitrator’s ruling as to jurisdiction. Gross J. concluded that a court challenge to jurisdiction
involved a rehearing rather than a simple review. He then turned to the question of whether the
evidence on the rehearing should be confined to that adduced before the arbitrator. Both parties
sought to adduce such evidence (there is no indication that this issue was seriously in dispute).
Gross J. found the evidence on the rehearing was not so restricted for two reasons. First, there
was no provision (in the UK Arbitration Act) restricting the introduction of additional evidence
on the rehearing. Second, he relied on the decision of Colman J. in Kalmneft JSC v. Glencore
International AG, [2001] EWHC QB 461. In Kalmneft, however, it also seems that the question
of whether to admit new evidence on a s. 67 challenge was not a disputed issue resolved by the
court. Gross J. also qualified his conclusion with the observation that “nothing said here should
encourage parties to seek two evidentiary bites of the cherry in disputes as to the jurisdiction of
arbitrators, not least because (1) evidence introduced late in the day may well attract a degree of
scepticism and (2) the court has ample power to address such matters when dealing with costs.”

[43] In People’s Insurance Company of China, Hebei Branch vy. Vysanthi Shipping Co. Ltd.;
The Joanna V, [2003] EWHC 1655 (Comm), Thomas J. held that the court’s duty on a challenge
to jurisdiction is to rehear the matter. The party challenging the jurisdiction of the arbitrator is
entitled to adduce such evidence as it considers necessary to show that the arbitrator has no
jurisdiction. The court, he found, is not in any way bound or limited to the findings made in the

3 This appears to have been the case, for example in Dhalla Real Estate and Tourism Holding Company v. Pakistan,
[2010] UKSC 46.

- Page 11 -

award or to the evidence adduced before the arbitrator, it does not review the decision of the
arbitrator but makes its own decision on the evidence before it.

[44] In Central Trading & Imports Ltd. v Fioralba Shipping Company; The Kalisti, [2014]
EWHC 2397 (Comm), Males J. summarized the relevant case law under s. 67 of the UK
Arbitration Act and concluded that, in general, a party is entitled to adduce evidence in a s. 67
challenge which was not before the arbitrator. He went on to say that the admission of new
evidence is subject to the control of the court but, speaking generally, the court will not normally
exclude evidence which is relevant and admissible. A s. 67 challenge is no different from other
contested applications where the court has to determine disputed questions of fact and/or law.
Males J. explained his reasoning in this way. A challenge to arbitral jurisdiction is a full judicial
determination on evidence. It is, in general, up to the parties to determine the evidence on which
they wish to rely and that evidence is not limited to whatever evidence was before the arbitrator.
There is no unfettered discretion to exclude evidence on the ground that it may cause prejudice to
the other side.

[45] | The decisions of the London Commercial Court are not universally of this view however.
Contrary opinions have been advanced in Ranko Group v Antarctic Maritime SA, The Robin,
[1988] LMLN 492 and in Primetrade AG v The Ythan Ltd., [2005] EWHC 2399 (Comm). In the
latter case, Aikens J. held that while there is no statutory limitation on adducing new evidence in
s. 67 challenges, they are rehearings, not a completely fresh start as if there had been no previous
challenge to the jurisdiction of the arbitrator. A party must, so far as possible, bring forward all
its evidence at the hearing before the arbitrator. Anyone seeking to admit new evidence must, he
held, seek leave of the court before doing so.

[46] | There are no appellate decisions on this issue in the UK. The UK Supreme Court in Dallah,
supra, did not address the matter of new evidence on the court challenge.

[47] | The UK is not a Model Law jurisdiction. To further support its position, therefore, Russia
cites decisions from courts in jurisdictions which, like Canada, have adopted the Model Law. In
particular, Russia relies on a decision of the High Court of Singapore in Insigma Technology Co.
Ltd. y. Alstom Technology Ltd. , [2008] SGHC 134. There, Prakash J., citing a UK text, Jurisdiction
and Arbitration Agreements and their Enforcement, concluded that the court’s jurisdiction is an
original jurisdiction, not limited to reviewing for error but involving a rehearing including, if
necessary, the calling of witnesses already heard by the tribunal. The court, she said, echoing the
words of the London Commercial Court, should not be in a worse position to make the assessment
than the tribunal. Strictly speaking, this case does address the admission of “new” evidence.

[48] In amore recent decision, however, the Singapore High Court concluded that new evidence
should not be admitted on the review of a tribunal’s jurisdiction without leave, which should only
be granted on the basis of a Palmer-like test. Leow J. held in Government of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic v. Sanum Investment Ltd., [2015] SGHC 15, that a party does not have a full,
unconditional power to adduce fresh evidence at will on a challenge brought to a tribunal’s
jurisdiction. He applied a “modified” approach to the test for fresh evidence on appeal:

(1) the party seeking to admit the evidence must demonstrate sufficiently strong reasons
why the evidence was not adduced at the arbitration hearing;

- Page 12 -

(2) the evidence if admitted would probably have an important influence on the result; and
(3) the evidence is apparently credible, though it need not be incontrovertible.

[49] On appeal, the Court of Appeal of the Republic of Singapore ([2016] SGCA 57, at para.
27) held that the standard test in Ladd v. Marshall applied (Ladd v. Marshall is the UK equivalent,
adopted in Singapore, to Canada's R. v. Palmer). That test is: 1) the evidence could not have been
obtained using reasonable diligence; 2) the evidence would probably have an important influence
on the case; and 3) the evidence must be apparently credible.

The UK is not a Model Law Jurisdiction

[50] The UK Arbitration Act governs challenges to a tribunal’ s jurisdiction. The UK legislation,
however, is not based on and differs in material respects from the Model Law embodied in
Ontario’s International Commercial Arbitration Act, 2017, 8.0. 2017, c. 2, Sch 5.

[51] | That said, the UK Arbitration Act recognizes the principle of competence-competence (s.
30). The UK Arbitration Act grants the court the authority to “determine any questions as to the
substantive jurisdiction of the tribunal” (s. 32). Section 67 of the Arbitration Act, as noted above,
allows a party to apply to the court to challenge any award of an arbitral tribunal “as to its
substantive jurisdiction.” These provisions are all substantially similar to provisions in the Model
Law.

[52] | Unlike the Model Law, however, an appeal lies from the UK court’s decision under s. 67
(challenge to substantive jurisdiction) with leave. Under the Model Law there is no appeal from
the court’s decision under Articles 16 and 34 (see s. 11 of the International Commercial
Arbitration Act, supra).

[53] Section 68 of the UK legislation also provides for an additional, entirely different, ground
of challenge. This ground for challenge is said to be on the basis of “serious irregularity” affecting
the tribunal, the proceedings or the award. There is no provision of comparable scope in the Model
Law granting a basis to challenge the award of an arbitral tribunal. Under the UK Arbitration Act,
an appeal also lies from the court’s decision on any question of law, with leave (s. 69).

[54] Thus, while there are some similar provisions in the UK Arbitration Act and Ontario’s
Model Law, there are also some differences. And, while these differences are not dispositive of,
for example, the applicability of the London Commercial Court’s views of the admissibility of
new evidence on a jurisdictional challenge, they offer insight into a significant difference in
emphasis and scope for court intervention in the decisions of arbitral tribunals between the two
statutory regimes.

[55] The fact that the London Commercial Court’s decisions on this issue stem from the
application of a legislative regime which differs materially from Ontario’s Model Law, therefore,
requires that these decisions, and the underlying reasoning behind these decisions, be scrutinized
with care before being adopted as the law of Ontario, notwithstanding the London Commercial
Court’s unquestioned status, experience and expertise in the adjudication of complex international
commercial disputes.

- Page 13 -

[56] lam also mindful of the fact that UK courts have a history of international maritime law
and dispute adjudication unparalleled in the modem world. This history and depth of experience
likewise suggests that the UK could be considered differently situated when analyzing the meaning
and intent of Ontario’s Model Law and the scope of the hearing to challenge a tribunal’s
jurisdiction.

The UK Approach js not Consistent with Cargill

[57] In Cargill, our Court of Appeal carefully delineated an important, but narrow, role for court
intervention under Articles 16 and 34 of the Model Law. In a jurisdictional challenge, the court
must exercise care to ensure that the issue in the challenge characterized as “jurisdictional” is, in
fact, an issue of “true” jurisdiction. (There is no question in this case that what we are dealing
with is an issue of “true” jurisdiction.)

[58] | The Court of Appeal also very clearly described what the court is doing on a jurisdictional
challenge under the Model Law as a “review.” On a true jurisdictional challenge, it is a review on
correctness, without any deference, in which the court must come to its own conclusion on whether
the tribunal had jurisdiction, but a “review” nevertheless. This is a profoundly different approach
from that propounded by the cases from the London Commercial Court, which generally describe
the court’s role on a challenge under s. 67 of the UK Arbitration Act as a trial de novo.

[59] The decision of the Court of Appeal for Ontario is binding on me; the decisions of the
London Commercial Court are not.

The UK Approach Undermines the Competence-Competence Principle

[60] Giving effect to the competence-competence principal requires that parties to an arbitration,
where jurisdiction is challenged, have strong incentives to bring forward, to the extent possible,
all of their evidence at the hearing before the tribunal. Here, the fresh expert evidence, prepared
with the benefit of hindsight and knowing the tribunal’s decision, is specifically directed at
attacking the reasons of the tribunal to show why it was wrong. The evidence, therefore, is quite
explicitly seeking to shore up or bolster the jurisdictional case which Russia lost at the tribunal.

[61] If parties can adduce fresh evidence at will, both parties to the jurisdictional challenge will
have an incentive, knowing what the tribunal’s decision now is, to file new evidence providing
further support for their position and why the tribunal was right or wrong in its determination.
This, it seems to me, will result in such evidence being routinely filed and the court routinely
conducting a trial de novo on jurisdiction. This will have the further result that the record put
before the court will routinely be materially different than that put before the tribunal. The tribunal,
in that scenario, will not have, as Article 16(1) requires, the ability to “rule on its own jurisdiction
including any objections with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitral agreement” [my
emphasis].

[62] I do not believe this is what the Legislature had in mind when it enacted the International
Commercial Arbitration Act, 2017 or what the Court of Appeal for Ontario had in mind when it
decided, in Cargill, that the court hearing a challenge to the tribunal's jurisdiction must, without
deference, apply the standard of correctness and decide the question of jurisdiction for itself.
Given the care taken by the Court of Appeal in Cargill to support the integrity of the arbitration

- Page 14 -

process, it would seem a strange result that the losing party could, on a jurisdictional review by
the court, effectively replace or substantially amend the record it put before the tribunal and
proceed with its jurisdictional challenge to the court on the basis of entirely different evidence.

When New Evidence May be Admitted

 

[63] This is not to say, obviously, that new evidence could never be admitted or that the parties
are necessarily bound by the evidence put before, or the evidentiary rulings of, the tribunal whose
jurisdiction is being challenged.

[64] _ In this case, there has been a robust process, with full opportunity to advance each side’s
evidence and arguments and to confront and challenge the evidence and arguments of the other
side. Both parties were well represented by experienced counsel before an expert tribunal. There
was a lengthy hearing. The fairness of that hearing is not in question. On the basis of that robust
process, the tribunal rendered a lengthy and detailed decision.

[65] | What I am saying is that in such a case, a party proposing to file new evidence ought to
have to advance some reasonable explanation for why new evidence is necessary, including why
that evidence was not or could not have been tendered in the first place, and that, in the absence of
a sufficient explanation, fresh evidence ought not to be admitted.

[66] The test in R. v. Palmer was cited earlier in these reasons. It is a test which is well known
and understood. It has been accepted and applied in countless situations. It has been applied in
contexts other than just appeals, including applications for judicial review, D.D.S. Investments Ltd.
v. Toronto (City), 2010 ONSC 1393 at para 55. The Palmer test has been adapted where necessary;
for example, to set slightly different standards to accommodate different applications and
circumstances.

[67] _ Underlying the Palmer test are significant policy concerns involving order, finality and the
integrity of the adjudicative process. Order and finality are said to be “essential” to the integrity
of the adjudicative process. Both order and finality concerns are founded on the assumption that
the parties are putting their “‘best foot forward” during the hearing at first instance. The process is
structured so that the issue of jurisdiction is first heard by the trier of fact (trial court or tribunal)
and then by the court on the correctness of the tribunal’s decision. It is inconsistent with order and
finality that the court, in an appeal or review, would routinely receive an augmented evidentiary
record whenever the parties, with the benefit of hindsight and now knowing the result, felt like it,
R.v. M. (P.S.), 1992, 77C.C.C. (3d) 402 (Ont. C.A.) at p- 411; Iroquois Falls Power Corp. v.
Ontario Electricity Financial Corp., 2016 ONCA 271 at para. 49.

[68] There is no reason why these underlying policy objectives are any less applicable in the
context of an application to set aside an arbitral tribunal’s award on jurisdiction under Articles 16
and 34 of the Model Law.

Conclusion
[69] _ For these reasons I conclude that fresh evidence in an application to set aside an arbitral

tribunal’s award on jurisdiction under Articles 16 and 34 of the Model Law may not be introduced
as of right. A party seeking to adduce fresh evidence in this circumstance must show that:

- Page 15 -

1) the evidence could not have been obtained using reasonable diligence;
2) the evidence would probably have an important influence on the case;
3) the evidence must be apparently credible; and

4) the evidence must be such that if believed it could reasonably, when taken with the other
evidence adduced at the hearing, be expected to have affected the result.

[70] Russia has not attempted to justify admission of its fresh evidence under any of these four
requirements. Accordingly, Russia’s new evidence is not admissible in its application to review
the correctness of the arbitral tribunal’s award on jurisdiction.

Costs

[71] | A party seeking costs shall do so by filing a brief written submission, not to exceed three
typed double-spaced pages, together with the bill of costs. Party responding to such a request shall

also file the bill of costs it would have filed had it been seeking costs, together with a brief written
submission of no more than three typed double-spaced pages.

Penny J.

Date: December 13, 2019

