INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
1818 H STREET, NW | WASHINGTON, DC 20433 | USA

TELEPHONE +1 (202) 458 1534 | FACSIMILE +1 (202) 522 2615
WWW.WORLDBANK.ORG/ICSID

CERTIFICATE

 

MAKAE Evrore SARL
v.

KINGDOM OF SAUDI ARABIA

(ICSID CasE No. ARB/17/42)

I hereby certify that the attached document is a true copy of the Tribunal’s Award dated
August 30, 2021.

 
    

2 => a
Ket Sf

Meg Kinnear

Secretary-General

Washington, D.C., August 30, 2021

 

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between

MAKAE Evrore SARL

Claimant

and

KINGDOM OF SAUDI ARABIA

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/17/42

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. John R. Crook, President of the Tribunal
Dr. Karim Hafez, Arbitrator
Ms. Vera van Houtte, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Jara Minguez Almeida

Date of dispatch to the Parties: August 30, 2021

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing MAKAE Europe SARL:

Ms. Catherine Amirfar

Ms. Natalie L. Reid

Ms. Ina C. Popova

Ms. Julianne J. Marley

Ms. Aasiya F. M. Glover
Ms. Sol Czerwonko
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
919 Third Avenue

New York, NY 10022
United States of America

and

Ms. Fanny Gauthier
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
4 place de l’Opéra

75002 Paris

France

Representing the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia:

Ms. Ank Santens

Mr. Jonathan Abi Rached
Ms. Hala Redwan

White & Case LLP

1221 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020-1095
United States of America

and

Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny
Mr. Chad Farrell

White & Case LLP

701 Thirteenth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20005
United States of America

and

Mr. Samy Markbaoui
Ms. Anais Harlé
White & Case LLP
19, Place Vendéme
75001 Paris

France

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

 

Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY,

 

Ill. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

 

IV. THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS AND REQUESTS FOR RELIEF ..........c0cccscssessesesteseeseseeteseeees
V. JURISDICTION

A. The Parties’ Positions

 

 

The relevant treaty PrOViSiONns ...c.cccccceccees este te sete see ests cscs ee eeceeeseseeseeeenenenenes
(1) The Respondent’s Position
a. First Jurisdictional Objection: absence of jurisdiction ratione personae.
b. Second Jurisdictional Objection: absence of jurisdiction ratione materiae..
(2) The Claimant’s Position
a. First Jurisdictional Objection: absence of jurisdiction ratione personae......
b. Second Jurisdictional Objection: absence of jurisdiction ratione materiae..
B. The Tribunal’s Analysis

Establishing de facto control

 

a
b. Required evidence: Tribunal’s analysis and decision ...........c.ccseeeeeeeeeees

c. Elements of de facto control

 

 

 

d. Proof of de facto control: the Tribunal’s analysis and decision .............00+
VI. COSTS
A. The Claimant’s Costs Submissions ........0....c:cccsessesseessessesseseesesseesessessessesassnseneeneeseese
B. The Respondent’s Costs Submissions. .........:.cccceeeeeseeeeseeeeseeeseeeseeeseeeseeseeeeseenees
C. The Tribunal’s Decision on Costs .........c:ccecsecsessessecseeseessseeseeseeseesessessessssnsenseneeneesess
Vil. AWARD
ANNEX A
ANNEX B

 

 
 

24
29

 

33

 

38
51
51
53
55
60
64
65

TABLE OF SELECTED DEFINED TERMS / DEFINED TERMS

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings 2006

 

Agreement between the Government of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Government
of the French Republic Concerning the

 

 

 

 

 

 

BIT Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments which entered into force on March
18, 2004
CL] Claimant’s Legal Authority
Cr Claimant’s Exhibit
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits dated
Cl. Mem. December 19, 2018
Claimant’s Post Hearing Submission dated
Cl. PHS April 28, 2021
Claimant’s Counter Memorial on Jurisdiction
Cl. C-Mem. dated January 10, 2020
Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction dated
Cl. Rej. September 9, 2020

 

Cl. Costs Sub.

Claimant’s Submission on Costs dated May
12, 2021

 

 

Hearing

 

Hearing on Jurisdiction held from February 22
to 26, 2021

 

iii

 

 

ICSID Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated March 18, 1965

 

ICSID or the Centre

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

 

Respondent’s Exhibit

 

 

 

R-[#]

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction dated
Resp. Mem. September 6, 2019

Respondent’s Post Hearing Submission dated
Resp. PHS April 28, 2021

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction dated May
Resp. Reply 22, 2020

 

Resp. Costs Sub.

Respondent’s Submission on Costs dated May
12, 2021

 

RL-[#]

Respondent’s Legal Authority

 

Tr. Day [#] [Speaker(s)] [page:line]

Transcript of the Hearing

 

 

Tribunal

 

Arbitral tribunal constituted on May 4, 2018

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the Agreement between the
Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Government of the French Republic
Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments which entered
into force on March 18, 2004 (the “BIT” or the “Treaty”) and the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, which

entered into force on October 14, 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

The claimant is MAKAE Europe SARL (“MAKAE Europe” or the “Claimant”), a French
limited liability company (société a responsabilité limitée) established on January 10, 2000
and registered with the Commercial and Companies Register of the Commercial Court in
Créteil, France on April 7, 2000 under registration number 429 176 431 R.C.S. CRETEIL!
as a company incorporated under the laws of France. Mr. Muhammad Ayed Khamis
Alenezi is the founder, general manager (gérant), and Authorized Representative of

MAKAE Europe.”
The respondent is the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (“Kingdom” or the “Respondent”).

The Claimant and the Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The Parties’

representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

This dispute relates to the Claimant’s allegations that, beginning in 2001 and continuing
thereafter, the Respondent took a variety of measures that injured the Claimant’s
investment in various retail and restaurant businesses in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in
breach of multiple obligations under the Treaty. /nter alia, the Claimant alleges that these
measures culminated in the effective destruction and indirect expropriation of its

investment in breach of the Treaty.

"Cl. Mem. para. 14.
2 Cl. Mem. para. 14.

IL.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On October 17, 2017, ICSID received a request for arbitration dated October 17, 2017 from
MAKAE Europe against the Kingdom (the “Request”).

On November 8, 2017, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request, as
supplemented by the Claimant on November 3, 2017, in accordance with Article 36(3) of
the ICSID Convention and notified the Parties of the registration. In the Notice of
Registration, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute an arbitral
tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Rule 7(d) of ICSID’s Rules of Procedure

for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings.

The Parties agreed to constitute the Tribunal in accordance with Article 37(2)(a) of the
ICSID Convention as follows: the Tribunal would consist of three arbitrators, one to be
appointed by each Party and the third, presiding arbitrator to be appointed by agreement of

the Parties.

The Tribunal is composed of Professor John Crook, a national of the United States of
America, President, appointed by agreement of the Parties; Ms. Vera van Houtte, a national
of Belgium, appointed by the Claimant; and Dr. Karim Hafez, a national of Egypt,
appointed by the Respondent.

On May 4, 2018, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules
of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”), notified the Parties that
all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore
deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms. Jara Minguez Almeida, ICSID Legal

Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1), the Tribunal held a first session with the

Parties on June 25, 2018 by teleconference.

Following the first session, on July 3, 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1
recording the agreement of the Parties on procedural matters and the decision of the

Tribunal on disputed issues. Procedural Order No. | provides, inter alia, that the applicable

Arbitration Rules would be those in effect from April 10, 2006 and that the procedural
language would be English. Procedural Order No. | also sets out the agreed schedule for
the proceedings, including alternative schedules should bifurcation be asked and the

proceedings be bifurcated (or not).

On September 6, 2018, the Claimant filed a Request for Provisional Measures, together
with Exhibits C-023A and C-023B (resubmitted) and Exhibits C-034 through C-051; Legal
Authorities CL-005 through CL-032; and the Expert Report of Mr. Ian Edge dated
September 6, 2018.

Following exchanges between the Parties, on September 25, 2018, the Tribunal set forth
the procedural timetable concerning the Request for Provisional Measures; by agreement
of the Parties, the procedural timetable was modified on October 8, 2018. In accordance

with this timetable, the Parties made the following submissions:

a

On September 28, 2018, the Respondent filed a Response to the Claimant’s Request
for Provisional Measures, together with Exhibits R-003 (resubmitted) and R-009
through R-038; and Legal Authorities RL-001 through RL-011.

b

On October 18, 2018, the Claimant filed a Reply on Provisional Measures together with
Exhibits C-052 through C-058; Legal Authorities CL-033 through CL-041; and the
Second Expert Report of Mr. Ian Edge dated October 18, 2018.

c

On November 7, 2018, the Respondent filed a Rejoinder on Provisional Measures,
together with Exhibits R-003 (resubmitted), R-017 (resubmitted) and R-039 through
R-056; and Legal Authorities RL-012 through RL-014.

On November 1, 2018, the Tribunal adopted the Parties’ agreed adjusted procedural
calendar modifying the deadlines set out in Annex A of Procedural Order No. 1 and
confirmed its availability for the new dates for the hearing on the merits in the alternative

agendas.

Between November 5, 2018 and December 11, 2018, the Parties sent several updates to the

Tribunal concerning developments in the proceedings being held in the Kingdom that gave

20.

21.

22.

rise to the Request for Provisional Measures. By letter dated December 14, 2018, the
Claimant confirmed having received a decision in these proceedings which changed the
circumstances that gave rise to its Request for Provisional Measures. In its letter, the
Claimant stated that “[o]n this basis, [the Claimant] does not ask the Tribunal to take any
action on its Request [...]. If that situation changes, [the Claimant] will apprise the Tribunal

immediately.”

Pursuant to the procedural calendar established in Procedural Order No. 1, on December
19, 2018, the Claimant filed a Memorial on the Merits (“Memorial on the Merits”), together
with Exhibits C-062 through C-363; Legal Authorities CL-042 through CL-119; the
Witness Statement of Mr. Muhammad Ayed Khamis Alenezi dated December 19, 2018;
and the Expert Report of Mr. Robert Sherwin dated December 19, 2018.

On February 15, 2019, the Respondent filed a Statement of Jurisdictional Objections and
Request for Bifurcation, together with Exhibits R-013 (resubmitted) and R-063 through R-
088; and Legal Authorities RL-015 through RL-066.

On March 29, 2019, the Claimant filed an Opposition to the Respondent’s Request for
Bifurcation, together with Legal Authorities CL-120 through CL-129.

On April 19, 2019, the Respondent filed a Reply on Request for Bifurcation together with
Legal Authorities RL-038 (resubmitted) and RL-067 through RL-7S.

The Claimant filed a Rejoinder on Request for Bifurcation together with Legal Authorities

CL-130 through CL-135 on May 10, 2019.

On June 5, 2019, the Tribunal issued a decision partially granting the Respondent’s request
to address the objections to jurisdiction as a preliminary question (the “Decision on
Bifurcation”).? The Tribunal decided to address the Respondent’s objections concerning
jurisdiction ratione personae and jurisdiction ratione materiae as preliminary questions. It

joined the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction ratione temporis and several other

3 Decision on Bifurcation dated June 5, 2019 (Annex A).

23.

24.

25.

26.

objections which the Respondent did not ask to have determined as preliminary questions

to the merits.

In accordance with the applicable schedule, on September 7, 2019, the Respondent filed a
Memorial on Jurisdiction (the “Memorial”), together with Exhibits R-089 through R-150;
Exhibits R-063, R-065, R-068, R-071, R-081, R-087 and R-088 (resubmitted); Legal
Authorities RL-076 through RL-113; the Legal Opinion of Professor Frangois-Xavier
Lucas dated September 5, 2019; and the Legal Opinion of Mr. Fahad Al Arfaj dated
September 6, 2019.

On January 10, 2020, the Claimant filed a Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (the “Counter-
Memorial), together with Exhibits C-364 to C-444 and Exhibits C-001, C-022, C-026, C-
080 and C-100 (resubmitted); Legal Authorities CL-136 to CL-275; Second Witness
Statement of Mr. Muhammad Ayed Khamis Alenezi dated January 10, 2020; the Legal
Opinion of Professor Bruno Dondero dated January 10, 2020; and the Expert Report of Dr.
Ali Almihdar dated January 10, 2020.

On March 3, 2020, the Respondent filed a request to amend the agreed procedural schedule
to add a document production process addressing seventeen categories of requested
documents. After reviewing the Parties’ positions - the Claimant’s opposition of March 16,
2020, and the Respondent’s e-mail of March 17, 2020 -, the Tribunal denied the request
on March 30, 2020.

On May 22, 2020, the Respondent filed a Reply on Preliminary Objections (the “Reply”)
and a separate Application for Security for Costs (“the Application”). The Application
requested the Tribunal to order the Respondent to post security in the amount of USD 8.5
million, plus the Respondent’s share of the estimated costs of arbitration, to secure “any
award of costs that the Tribunal may make in favor of Respondent in its award [...] on
Respondent’s bifurcated preliminary objections” and to do so within 15 days, under pain
of discontinuance of the claim in case of non-compliance.‘ The Reply and Application were

accompanied by Exhibits R-156 to R-212; Exhibits R-66, R-67, R-87, R-88, R-115, R-151,

4 Decision on Security for Costs dated November 19, 2020 (Annex B).

5

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

and R-152 (resubmitted); Legal Authorities RL-115 to RL-190; Legal Authorities RL-38,
RL-71, and RL-95 (resubmitted); the Second Legal Opinion of Mr. Fahad N. Al Arfaj dated
May 22, 2020; and the Second Legal Opinion of Professor Francgois-Xavier Lucas dated
May 22, 2020.

On May 29, 2020, after all supporting documents to the Application were uploaded to Box
and made available to the Claimant and the Tribunal, the Tribunal invited the Claimant’s

comments on the procedure and schedule to address the Application.

On June 4, 2020, in accordance with the Tribunal’s directions, the Claimant informed the
Tribunal that the Parties had agreed a briefing schedule to address the Application. The
Respondent confirmed the Parties’ agreement on June 5, 2020. By email dated June 8,
2020, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it approved the Parties’ agreed briefing

schedule for the Application.

On July 2, 2020, the Claimant filed its Opposition to the Application together with Exhibits
C-445 and C-446 and Legal Authorities CL-276 to CL-299.

On July 17, 2020, the Respondent filed its Reply on Security for Costs together with
Exhibits R-213 to R-215, Legal Authorities RL-191 to RL-210 and Legal Authorities RL-
38, RL-175, and RL-184 (resubmitted).

On July 31, 2020, the Claimant filed its Rejoinder on Security for Costs together with Legal
Authorities CL-300 to CL-309.

On September 9, 2020, the Claimant filed a Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections to
Jurisdiction together with Exhibits C-447 to C-500; Legal Authorities CL-310 to CL-338;
Legal Authority CL-218 (resubmitted); the Expert Rebuttal Report of Mr. Robert Sherwin,
dated September 9, 2020; the Second Expert Report by Dr. Ali Almihdar, dated September
9, 2020; and the Second Expert Report of Professor Bruno Dondero dated September 8,
2020.

On November 19, 2020, the Tribunal issued a decision on Security for Costs denying the

Application.

On December 17, 2020, the Tribunal held a pre-hearing organizational meeting with the
Parties by video conference. After the meeting, by letter dated December 21, 2020, the
Tribunal provided the Parties with directions concerning the organization of the hearing on

Jurisdiction and invited them to further confer on certain matters.

On February 17, 2021 the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 concerning the

organization of the Hearing.

A Hearing on Jurisdiction was held from February 22, 2021 to February 26, 2021 by video
conference (“Hearing on Jurisdiction”). In addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the
Secretary of the Tribunal, the following individuals were present at the Hearing on

Jurisdiction:

For the Claimant:

Ms. Catherine Amirfar Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Ms. Ina C. Popova Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Ms. Julianne J. Marley Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Ms. Aasiya F. M. Glover Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Ms. Fanny Gauthier Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Ms. Sol Czerwonko Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Mr. Robert U. Hess Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Ms. Céline Lefebvre Debevoise & Plimpton LLP

Mr. Muhammad Ayed Khamis Alenezi MAKAE Europe SARL

For the Respondent:

Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny White & Case
Ms. Ank Santens White & Case
Mr. Michael Garcia White & Case
Mr. Samy Markbaoui White & Case
Mr. Chad Farrell White & Case
Ms. Anais Harle White & Case
Mr. Jonathan Abi Rached White & Case
Ms. Hala Redwan White & Case
Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Duhaim Ministry of Commerce
Mr. Bader Abdulmohsen Al-Haddab Ministry of Commerce
Mr. Ibrahim Alnahd Ministry of Commerce
Mr. Ahmed Al-Mansour Ministry of Commerce
Mr. Ahmed Abdelhamid Ministry of Commerce
Mr. Ahmed Almoghem Ministry of Commerce

37.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

Court Reporters:

Mr. David Kasdan B&B Reporters
Ms. Dawn Larson B&B Reporters
Interpreters:

Mr. Samy Bouayad

Mr. Adnane Ettayebi

Ms. Sarah Rossi

Ms. Gabrielle Baudry-Delanghe
Mr. Manuel Malherbe

During the Hearing, the following persons were examined:

On behalf of the Claimant:
Mr. Muhammad Ayed Khamis Alenezi Witness

Prof. Bruno Dondero Expert
Dr. Ali Almihdar Expert
Mr. Robert Sherwin Expert

On behalf of the Respondent:

Mr. Fahad Alarfaj Expert
Prof. Frangois-Xavier Lucas Expert

On March 1, 2021, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 concerning the post-hearing
deadlines that had been decided at the end of the Hearing on Jurisdiction after consultation

with the Parties.
The Parties filed simultaneous post-hearing submissions on April 28, 2021.
The Parties filed their submissions on costs on May 12, 2021

The proceeding was closed on August 30, 2021.

Ill.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The Claimant is a French limited liability company (société @ responsabilité limitée)
established in January 2000* that avers that it controlled an extensive retail and restaurant
business in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia that brought “popular international brands to
consumers in the Kingdom.” The investment in the Kingdom was part of a network of
similar retail and restaurant establishments in several Gulf States developed by Mr.
Muhammad Ayed Khamis Alenezi, a national of Kuwait and the Claimant’s founder,
general manager (gérant), and Authorized Representative.’ Mr. Alenezi owns 49% of the
Claimant; his two sons Youssof and Ayed own respectively 26% and 25%.° Both were

minor children in 2000 when the Claimant was created.

The Claimant states that it was established in France by Mr. Alenezi “to spearhead the
strategic expansion and coordinated operation of a retail and restaurant business bringing
popular international brands to consumers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia [...] and

throughout the Gulf.””

The retail and restaurant business in the Kingdom was carried on by MAKAE Trading
Establishment, a corporation incorporated in the Kingdom. Mr. Alenezi owned 100% of

the shares in MAKAE Trading Establishment.'°

According to the Clamant, by mid-2000, the business of MAKAE Trading Establishment

in the Kingdom was going well and was poised for great success:

Through its local Saudi affiliate, MAKAE secured the necessary
approvals to operate its outlets in cities across the Kingdom, signed
leases with malls eager to fill their floors with the brand-focused
stores that would attract and retain customers, hired scores of
employees, and opened dozens of stores. By mid-2001, MAKAE had
entered into agreements with a significant number of international

5 Cl. Mem. para. 14.

© Cl. Mem. para. 2.

7 Cl. Mem. para. 14.

* Cl. Mem. para. 14.
°C. Mem. para. 2.

© Alenezi 1 WS para. 8.

46.

47.

48.

brands to secure exclusive licensing rights for MAKAE, including at
least 60 that specifically included rights in the Saudi market {...]'"

However, beginning in August 2001, in a series of events that are at issue in the merits of
the claim, MAKAE Trading Establishment’s business in Saudi Arabia took a serious turn
for the worse. On August 16, 2001, representatives of the Respondent’s Ministry of
Commerce and Industry acted to close its stores and restaurants in the Kingdom.

Thereafter, the Claimant alleges, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry:

on its own authority and through directing or enlisting other Saudi
organs—systematically dismantled MAKAE’s operations in the
Kingdom: twice closing its stores, denying licenses and
registrations, blocking imports, seizing and selling inventory,
detaining and threatening employees, subjecting the local MAKAE
entity and its senior personnel to trumped-up allegations pursued
through inquiries and sham proceedings conducted by Ministry
officials, severing its business and banking relationships, and
deliberately destroying the goodwill the business had developed.'”

Mr. Alenezi unsuccessfully sought relief, inter alia through Saudi Arabia’s Board of
Grievances. The Claimant states that the Board, “confirmed that there was no valid
justification for the Ministry’s actions, ordered the stores re-opened, and overturned the
denials of licenses and registrations.”!? However, the Board’s orders were not honored, and
MAKAE Trading Establishment was unable to resume operations. The Claimant states that
“[b]y the end of 2005, with MAKAE unable to monetize the valuable licensing, franchise,
and distribution rights in its brands portfolio, its investment was rendered essentially

worthless.”!*

The Claimant contends that, in addition to the measures directed against MAKAE Trading
Establishment, Mr. Alenezi personally was made the subject of “a campaign of

persecution.” Jnter alia, the Claimant alleges that Mr. Alenezi has been:

"CL. Mem. para. 3.
"2.Cl. Mem. para. 5.
3 Cl. Mem. para. 5.
4 Cl. Mem. para. 5.

IV.

49.

50.

[s]tranded in Saudi Arabia for the last 12 years separated from his
family, his reputation and his finances have been destroyed, as the
Ministry pursued untrue and inflammatory accusations against him,
imposed a fine and a prison sentence in farcical proceedings of
which he had no notice, publicly shamed him, detained him at the
border, and then imprisoned him without notice or an opportunity
to challenge the basis for his detention.'*

THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS AND REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

The Claimant maintains that the course of events briefly described above resulted in
multiple violations of the BIT by the Respondent. In particular, the Respondent is alleged

to have:

-- violated the obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment under Article 2(1) of the

Treaty;!°
-- breached the non-impairment obligation under Article 2(2);'7

-- expropriated the investment through “a complete destruction of value for which it has

never compensated MAKAE” contrary to its obligation under Article 4(2);!*
-- failed to provide full and complete protection and security contrary to Article 4(1);'? and

-- breached the national treatment and most-favored-nation treatment requirements of

Article 3(1) and 3(2) of the Treaty.”°

The Claimant accordingly seeks compensation for its losses attributed to the Respondent’s
conduct plus pre-award interest, together calculated as of the date of its Memorial to have

totaled USD 570.6 million.”!

SEL.

ec.
"CL
BCL
PCL
Cl.
Cl.

  

. Mem. para. 9.

Mem. para. 10.
Mem. para. 11.
Mem. para. 12.
Mem. para. 278.

S51. The Respondent denies that it has violated the Treaty or that any compensation is due.

Vv. JURISDICTION

52. As noted, the Respondent lodged preliminary objections to jurisdiction ratione personae,
ratione materiae and ratione temporis; it also identified several other objections that it did
not regard as appropriate for preliminary determination. In its June 2019 Decision on
Bifurcation, the Tribunal decided to address the Respondent’s objections concerning
jurisdiction ratione personae and ratione materiae as preliminary questions. The
Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction ratione temporis and the other objections it

identified were joined to the merits.””

A. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
The relevant treaty provisions

53. The Parties dispute whether the Claimant satisfies the Treaty’s definition of “investor.” As

relevant here, Article 1(2) of the Treaty defines “investor” as:

toute personne morale constituée sur le territoire de l'une des
Parties contractantes, conformément @ la législation de celle-ci, y
possédant son siége social {...].>

(1) The Respondent’s Position
a. First Jurisdictional Objection: absence of jurisdiction ratione personae

54. The Respondent maintains that the Claimant does not qualify as an investor for purposes
of the Treaty and advances two lines of argument. It first contends that the Claimant is not
constituted in conformity with French law and is in fact a “fictitious” company as that
concept is known in French law. Second, the Respondent maintains that the Claimant does

not have its siége social in France.

2 Supra, para. 22.

3 In the Claimant’s translation: “any legal entity constituted on the territory of one Contracting Party in accordance
with its laws, and having its head office on the territory of that Party [...].” Cl. Mem. para. 104.

12

55.

56.

57.

(i) — Constitution in accordance with French Law
Citing the opinion of Professor Frangois-Xavier Lucas, its expert on French law, the
Respondent contends that the Claimant does not satisfy the requirements of Article 1832
of the French Civil Code and was not constituted in accordance with French law. The
Respondent and Professor Lucas emphasize three factors in this regard: the absence of
affectio societatis, that is, the legally required intention of the Claimant’s incorporators
(Mr. Alenezi and his two minor sons) to “become partners and behave as such;”™* the

9925

“absence of any corporate life”*’ evidenced by failure to convene shareholders’ meetings

and to prepare and file required annual accounts; and “the absence of a common

7926

enterprise,”’° contending that the Claimant’s evidence did not prove that it actually carried

on real economic activity.?’

The Respondent and its expert therefore conclude that a French judge confronted by the
Claimant’s circumstances “would infer from this that the Company is fictitious, and had
been so from the moment of its constitution and, of course, even more so since 2002.75 A.
company subject to being found fictitious for failure to comply with required elements of
the French Civil Code would not, in the Respondent’s submission, be constituted in

accordance with French law.”

The Respondent dismisses as irrelevant the Claimant’s contrary arguments that a fictitious
SARL retains legal personality and can bring litigation in French courts, and that corporate
registration is conclusive proof that a company was constituted in accordance with French
law. As to the first argument, the fact that a fictitious company can bring litigation does
not remedy the deficiencies that render it fictitious. As to the second, the Respondent urges
that constitution and registration are legally distinct under French law. The fact of

registration — which the Respondent characterizes as an essentially ministerial act — does

> Day 3 p. 580:6-7 (Prof, Lucas).

°8 Day 3 p. 581:17 (Prof. Lucas).

2 Day 3 p. 582:7-10 (Prof. Lucas).

27 Day 3 pp. 585:22-587:5 (Prof Lucas).
28 Day 3 p. 587:9-12 (Prof. Lucas).

2° Resp. PHS paras. 13-14.

58.

59.

60.

61.

not satisfy the Treaty’s requirement that an entity be constituted in accordance with French

law. *°

(ii) Claimant had no Siége Social in France
In its second line of argument, the Respondent maintains that the Claimant did not show
that its siége social was in France as Article 1(2) of the Treaty requires. For the Respondent,
the term siége social and the corresponding term in the equally authentic Arabic text of the
Treaty (magar ra ‘issi) must be interpreted in accordance with the interpretive principles of
Articles 31-33 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (VCLT).*! The relevant
principles include (a) that terms must be understood to have the same meaning in both of

a treaty’s authentic languages, and (b) effet utile.

As to (a), the Respondent understands siége social to have one or another of two generally
accepted meanings: either to mean “registered office” or to mean “the place of management
of the company, the company’s head office.” However, the Respondent understands the
term used in the equally authentic Arabic language version of the Treaty (magar ra ‘issi) to
convey only a single meaning, the idea of “head office.” As Article 33(3) of the VCLT
requires that both of the equally authentic texts of a treaty have the same meaning, the only
common meaning in the French and Arabic texts is “place of management” or “head

office.”*

The Respondent contends that the Parties’ treaty practice confirms its understanding, citing
the terminology used in the Kingdom’s other treaties concluded in English and Arabic,
where magar ra‘issi is translated as “head office”, as well as France’s English language
translation of its model bilateral investment treaty, which also translates siége social as

“head office.”

The Respondent next draws upon the interpretive principle of effet utile, highlighting the

Treaty’s separate requirements that a claimant both be constituted in accordance with

3 Resp. PHS paras. 15-18.
3! RL-16, Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1155 U.N.T.S. 331, May 23, 1963 (“VCLT’).

> Res;

 

. Mem., paras. 43-45.

33 Resp. PHS paras. 25-27.

62.

63.

 

8 Resp. PHS pa
57 Res

 

French law and have its siége social in France. The Respondent views these as distinct
requirements that must be interpreted so as to give meaning to both. It contends in this
regard that being constituted in accordance with French law entails compliance with
specified legal formalities, including establishing a registered office. However, if, as the
Claimant contends, siége social means only having a registered office in France, the
Treaty’s separate requirement of constitution in accordance with French law has no
significance, contrary to the principle that each of a treaty’s terms must be understood to

have meaning.**

Hence, the requirement that the Claimant have its siége social in France necessarily
involves more than merely having a registered office. That something more, in the
Respondent’s view, is that the Claimant must show that it had its place of effective
management in France.*> The Respondent dismisses the Claimant’s argument that other
investment tribunals have interpreted siége social to mean registered office, contending
that the cited decisions follow from specific factors not presented here.*° The Respondent
also finds support for its position in Article 9 of the ILC’s Draft Articles on Diplomatic
Protection, which provides that where a company controlled by foreign nationals does not
have substantial business in the State of incorporation, its nationality is that of the State

where the seat of effective management is located.*”

The Respondent maintains that MAKAE Europe never had a place of effective
management in France, arguing that the evidence shows that legally-required elements of
corporate governance, such as the convening of shareholders’ assemblies, were not
observed. In the Respondent’s view, the evidence is not sufficient to prove that MAKAE

Europe “ever had an office in France from which the company could be managed.”?*

. PHS para. 27.
. PHS paras. 28-29.
30-31.
33.

  
 
    

. PHS pai

38 Resp. PHS paras. 35-36.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

* Resp. PHS pa
* Resp. PHS pai
. PHS para. 43 and fn 96.

4 Res

 

Instead, if MAKAE Europe had a place of effective management, it was in Kuwait, not

France.?

Third, the Respondent contends that the Claimant is not a covered investor because, even
if a registered office satisfies the Treaty’s siége social requirement, a claimant must
nevertheless maintain attributes of nationality and connection with its home State. The
Respondent insists that the Claimant failed to do so, and in particular had no office or other

connection with France when the arbitration was commenced.“°

b. Second Jurisdictional Objection: absence of jurisdiction ratione materiae

(i) | There was no covered investment
In addition to denying that the Claimant is a qualifying investor under the Treaty, the
Respondent maintains that there was no covered investment. It first contends in this regard
that the Claimant did not own or control an investment in the Kingdom, and second, that if

it did, its control would have been in violation of Saudi Law.

During the proceedings, the Claimant made clear that it did not assert any ownership
interest in the investment and predicated its case on its control. Accordingly, the Parties’
arguments on the Respondent’s first objection focused on the Claimant’s contention that it

controlled the investment.

For the Respondent, the ordinary meaning of control conveys notions such as power,
mastery or domination of the investment, all necessarily extending to issues such as a
business’s financing and operation. Further, control cannot be proved by testimonial

evidence alone, but must also be confirmed by contemporaneous documentary evidence. *!

In addition, for the Respondent, the concept of control “presupposes the claimant’s

42,

expectation of an economic return from the investment.”** The Respondent observes in this

regard that “control usually lies with the owner,” and that in prior cases finding control

 

7.
4.

 

* Resp. PHS para. 44.

69.

70.

71.

 

absent ownership, other factors such as voting or contractual rights provided alternative
mechanisms of contro1.** The Respondent disputes the Claimant’s reliance on the NAFTA
case of S.D. Myers v Canada, contending, inter alia, that the evidence in that case showed
the pervasive exercise of control by the claimant in a situation where the claimant and the

investment shared common ownership. “+

The Respondent rejects the arguments of the Claimant and its expert Mr. Sherwin that in
the restaurant and retail businesses, control over brand and product acquisition confers
control over an investment. Citing a celebrated restaurant as a hypothetical illustration, the
Respondent observes that, while a chefs cuisine may be key to the restaurant’s value, the
owner nevertheless controls it through exercise of ultimate decision-making power over

matters such as financing and the commitment of resources.*>

The Respondent insists that the Claimant here did not exercise control over the investment.
Instead, “Mr. Alenezi and his Gulf entities (MAKAE International, Top Ten, and MAKAE
Trading Establishment), who together owned the Saudi business, controlled its day-to-day
operation and made all the key decisions concerning the business [...].”4° The Respondent
points out that the Claimant had no involvement in either the funding or daily operations
of the investment; the Respondent also disputes Mr. Alenezi’s testimony that the Claimant
expected at some future time to receive a percentage of the profits of other MAKAE

companies.*”

Accepting for purposes of argument the Claimant’s contention that determining strategy
might amount to control, the Respondent concludes that the evidence did not show that
MAKAE Europe had anything more than a business facilitation role and did not determine
strategy for the MAKAE Group or the investment. The Respondent emphasizes in this

regard the absence of documentary evidence showing that the Claimant directed strategy,

. PHS para. 45.
. PHS paras. 46-47.

  

. PHS para. 50.

47 Resp. PHS para. 51.

72.

73.

74.

75.

+8 Resp.
* Resp.
5° Resp.
5! Resp.

as well as evidence showing that the duties of the Claimant’s two employees in France

involved placing orders and other limited administrative tasks, not strategy.**

Pointing out that the Claimant was inactive by the end of 2002, the Respondent rejects the
Claimant’s reliance on brand agreements concluded in 2005 and 2006 as evidence that the
Claimant was “the hub” of the MAKAE companies’ retail business. For the Respondent
the reality is that the investment was controlled by Mr. Alenezi and his company in Kuwait,

MAKAE International, not by the Claimant.’?

(ii) The Claimant’s control of the investment would violate Saudi law
In the Respondent’s view, the Claimant’s claimed control of the investment in Saudi Arabia
would violate the host country’s legislation, in particular the Foreign Capital Investment
Law of 1979 and its similar successor, the Foreign Investment Law of 2000. The
Respondent emphasizes that the Claimant, a French company, is owned by three Kuwaiti
nationals, which in the Respondent’s view make it a foreign investor contrary to the

applicable Saudi legislation.©”

The Respondent first disputes the Claimant’s contention that the investment was authorized
because its owners (Mr. Alenezi and his sons) are Kuwaitis entitled to the same treatment
as Saudi nationals under the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) legal regime. It contends
that the Claimant’s argument distorts the relevant provision of the GCC Unified Economic
Agreement (1981). The Respondent understands the 1981 Agreement to be “an agreement
to agree” in the future on implementing principles to be applied in specified areas. It is not
an immediately applicable guarantee of equal treatment of all GCC nationals in all

respects.*!

The Respondent rejects in this regard the Claimant’s contention that a 2003 ruling in Mr.
Alenezi’s favor by the Saudi Arabia’s Board of Grievances shows that the Kingdom’s

judges directly applied the 1981 GCC Agreement and did so “on the basis of guidance from

PHS para. 52.

 

PHS para. 60.

76.

77.

78.

2 Idem.

the GCC Secretary-General.” In the Respondent’s understanding, the 2003 ruling involved
application of the then-existing GCC Retail Trade Rules to Mr. Alenezi individually as a
GCC national. It was not a finding that the Agreement operated directly to allow GCC
nationals to invest in retail trade in Saudi Arabia.” The Respondent adds that the Board of
Grievances was not aware of any investment by the Claimant in Mr. Alenezi’s business in

the Kingdom, urging that the Board’s decision is irrelevant on that ground as well.*

Second, the Respondent maintains that the Claimant (as opposed to Mr. Alenezi) does not
qualify for exemption under the implementing rules in the retail sector, the GCC Retail
Trade Rules. These apply only where natural persons who are GCC citizens control a retail
business in the Kingdom, while the Claimant is registered in France and is not a GCC
citizen.4 The principle of equal treatment reflected in the 1981 treaty as implemented in
the Retail Trade Rules applies only to GCC natural persons and to legal persons fully
owned by GCC citizens. In the Respondent’s view, this “presuppose[s] that the legal person

is a GCC-registered entity,”°> but the Claimant is French.

The Respondent also refers to the Claimant’s claim to have contributed to the investment
the time, effort and expertise of Mr. Alenezi (acting as Claimant’s gérant) and of the
Claimant’s two employees. In the Respondent’s view, this constituted a contribution of
foreign capital that is subject to the requirements of the 2000 Foreign Investment Law
under the broad scope of the Law’s broad definition. The Respondent argues in this regard
that the prohibitions of the law are not limited to those who own assets in the Kingdom,

but extends as well to those who control them.°°

The Respondent adds that, because the Claimant did not comply with the Foreign
Investment Law by controlling the investment without satisfying the applicable legal

requirements, it also violated the Kingdom’s anti-concealment legislation.*’

59 Resp. PHS para. 65.
549! Alarfaj Legal Opinion, paras. 58-59.

55 Resp. PHS par:
56 Resp. PHS pi

61.
62-63.

 

 

57 Resp. PHS para. 64.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

 
 

(iii) The Claimant never invested in the Kingdom
Finally, the Respondent maintains that the Claimant did not itself “make” the investment,
which it understands to be a requirement under the Treaty, pointing to the Treaty’s

language referring to “investments made.”

In the Respondent’s understanding, the Treaty requires some form of active relationship
between an investor and the investment that involves the commitment of resources in
anticipation of an economic return. There is no such relationship here, as the evidence does
not show that the Claimant contributed resources or expected any financial return.** The
Respondent disputes the Claimant’s arguments that the activities of its two French
employees contributed to the investment, or that Mr. Alenezi made the required
contribution acting in his role as the Claimant’s gérant. It also contends that there is no
evidence, aside from Mr. Alenezi’s testimony at the hearing, which it disputes, that the

Claimant had any expectation of economic return from the investment.*?

The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s argument that this objection was waived because it
was not raised at an earlier stage of the proceedings, arguing that an ICSID Tribunal is
bound to ascertain its jurisdiction at any stage, so long as a party arguing in favor of

jurisdiction has full opportunity to respond if an objection is raised.
(2) The Claimant’s Position
The Claimant maintains that it is a protected investor with a protected investment, and that
the Tribunal has jurisdiction.
a. First Jurisdictional Objection: absence of jurisdiction ratione personae

(i) The Claimant is a protected investor

The Claimant urges that it is a legal entity constituted as a limited liability company
(SARL) in France in accordance with French law, and so is “constituée sur le territoire de

l'une des Parties” as the Treaty requires. For the Claimant, the meaning of this requirement

sp. PHS paras. 70-73.

© Resp. PHS para. 67.

20

84.

85.

86.

61 Cl. PHS par

is a question of treaty interpretation. Under the normal canons of interpretation, the
ordinary meaning of the Treaty’s requirement is simply that the Claimant is a legal person
constituted in the territory of France.°! It points to the evidence of both Parties’ French law
experts to the effect that the Claimant was and remains a French SARL that was legally
constituted as a matter of French law when its articles of association were signed. The
Claimant was subsequently registered on the French Companies Register, thereby
acquiring enduring legal personality and demonstrating that the competent French

authorities found that it met the relevant legal requirements. ©

The Claimant dismisses the Respondent’s contrary argument that a French court might find
it to be “fictitious” because of factors such as a lack of corporate activity such as the
convening of meetings of shareholders. It contends that fictitiousness under French law is
irrelevant to whether a company was properly constituted and has continuing legal
personality. Fictitiousness is instead a narrow feature of French insolvency law that does
not affect an entity’s existence or legal personality but can sometimes operate to pierce the
corporate veil and expand creditors’ rights. It has no bearing on whether the entity was

constituted in France as the Treaty requires.®

Noting the very few identified cases in which French courts have considered and applied
the doctrine of fictitiousness, the Claimant observes that, even if the doctrine is thought to
be relevant, the Respondent has a heavy burden to show that the Claimant is fictitious. It

has not met this burden and cannot do so.

In the Claimant’s view, a French judge would consider multiple factors in assessing a claim
of fictitiousness. Hence, the Respondent’s contention that a single factor, the supposed lack
of common intent by Mr. Alenezi and his sons to run a company at all, does not show
fictitiousness. In any case, Mr. Alenezi’s testimony, and the physical reality of the Claimant

— with written articles of association, premises, employees, suppliers, and several years of

  

© Cl. PHS paras. 7, 9-11.
© Cl. PHS para. 13.

21

87.

88.

89.

operation — disprove the claim that the Claimant had no existence.® In this regard, the
Claimant urges that the Respondent’s attacks on the sufficiency of the documentary
evidence do not overcome the evidence that is in the record. This shows that the Claimant
did in fact operate as intended and in a manner that the Claimant’s expert, Mr. Sherwin

found consistent with its expected role in the group of Mr. Alenezi’s companies.

The Claimant observes that the opinion of the Respondent’s French law expert, Professor
Lucas, regarding the Claimant’s supposed lack of corporate activity was based on facts he
was instructed to assume and on his assumption that French rules of civil procedure
dictated that he should ignore Mr. Alenezi's testimony. When asked for his opinion
regarding the facts as the Claimant understood them, he testified that the requirements for
fictitiousness would not be met and that the Tribunal could find that Article 1(2) of the
Treaty was satisfied.©’ Professor Lucas also observed that a company in the Claimant’s
position retained the capacity to seek damages, even if it was otherwise not able to conduct

business.

Accordingly, the Claimant concludes that it meets the Treaty’s requirement that a claimant

be a French entity constituted in conformity with French law.

(ii) The Claimant's siége social is in France
As to the Treaty’s requirement that a claimant’s siége social be located in the territory of a
Party, the Claimant argues that siége social is an international law concept the application
of which is informed by relevant national law. Here, both Parties’ French law experts
agreed that under French law, the siége social of an SARL is presumed to be that indicated
in its articles of association. Accordingly, the Claimant’s siége social is as indicated in its
articles of association and registered by the French authorities at an address in Saint-Maur-

des-Fossés in the Paris suburbs. The Claimant views this as dispositive, urging that under

 

© Cl. PHS paras. 17-18.
8 Cl. PHS para. 19.

22

90.

91.

92.

93.

© Cl. PHS par

French law, no particular level of business activity is required and that a French company

retains its siége social until it is dissolved.

For the Claimant, its activities in France proved the correctness of the French law
presumption that its siége social is at its registered seat. Citing Mr. Alenezi’s testimony,

the Claimant urges that it conducted substantial business from its French office.”

The Claimant dismisses the Respondent’s argument that the interpretive principle of effet
utile requires that the Treaty be interpreted to impose an additional requirement in
determining siége social, such that the seat must also be the place of an enterprise’s
effective management. It views this argument as logically flawed, urging that the Treaty
imposes separate and distinct requirements under international law (having the siége social
in the territory of a Party) and under domestic law (being constituted under the law of that
Party). The Respondent’s argument wrongly conflates these distinct requirements.’! In any
case, the Claimant would meet an “effective management” test, which investment tribunals
have found to be easily met even in situations involving little economic activity. Here, the
evidence shows that the Claimant carried on substantial activities in France and was

managed in France.”

The Claimant rejects as “misguided” the Respondent’s contention that its siége social was
in Kuwait or Saudi Arabia, urging that the physical location of an entity’s manager or
gérant is irrelevant. Moreover, in this case, Mr. Alenezi remains in Saudi Arabia due to the
Respondent’s unlawful actions against the Claimant.” The Claimant also finds
contradictory the Respondent’s argument that it was a “sham” and “fictitious,” as under

French law, a company must have a siége social in order to be declared fictitious.”

Finally, the Claimant disputes the Respondent’s contention that it lost its status as a French

company — and its legal capacity to initiate this arbitration — after it ceased operations and

 

s. 20-21.

7 Cl. PHS para. 22.
7 Cl. PHS para. 24.

 

73 Cl. PHS para. 26.
74 Cl. PHS para. 27.

23

94.

95.

96.

75 Cl, PHS par

closed its office in France. The Claimant points out that it continues to exist as a French
SARL and that its siége social accordingly remains in France. The Claimant distinguishes
the majority opinion in CEAC v. Montenegro cited by the Respondent as factually unrelated
to this case, recalling that it retains a registered office and that it conducted substantial

business in France before the office was forced to close. >

The Claimant rejects as “nonsensical, even perverse” the Respondent’s argument that it
lacks capacity to bring its claim because it did not continuously engage in business activity
prior to doing so. It urges that its operations in France were brought to a halt by the
Respondent’s misconduct; the Respondent should not benefit from a “heads I win, tails you
lose” argument allowing it to invoke the consequences of its own misconduct as a bar to
jurisdiction. The Treaty does not require continuous business activity to establish
jurisdiction, and the pernicious effect of the Respondent’s argument shows why one cannot
read in this extratextual requirement. Citing Barcelona Traction and the views of both
Parties’ French law experts, the Claimant insists that it retains full capacity to assert its

legal claims. 7°

b. Second Jurisdictional Objection: absence of jurisdiction ratione materiae
(i) — The Claimant controlled the investment
In the Claimant’s understanding, the Parties agree “that (7) de facto control satisfies Article
1(1); (ii) the ‘Treaty does not define’ or limit control; (iii) international law also does not
define control; and (iv) consistent with the VCLT, the ‘ordinary meaning’ of ‘control’ is
functional: to influence, have power over, direct, supervise, command, master, dominate,

or watch over, another.”””

The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s contention that de facto control requires proof that
a claimant has some legal interest in the investment and an expectation of revenues or some
other financial benefit. It believes that an economic benefit requirement would be met in

this situation in any case, citing Mr. Alenezi’s testimony that the Claimant eventually

 

 

7 Cl. PHS paras. 29-30.
7 Cl. PHS para. 31.

24

97.

98.

99.

expected to receive royalties from other MAKAE companies as a percentage of the services
and the brands used in their operations. However, the Claimant denies that it is necessary
to show a legal or financial interest to establish de facto control, arguing that the

Respondent’s position incorrectly conflates de facto and de jure control.”®

The Respondent’s argument is said to disregard the Treaty’s explicit distinction between
ownership and control as alternative bases for jurisdiction. For the Claimant, the ordinary
meaning of control does not entail any requirement of a legal interest or expectation of
profit or contribution of capital, and such an additional requirement cannot be read into the
Treaty. The claim that de facto control requires some legal interest also conflicts with
multiple tribunals’ conclusions that “control” is a broad and flexible concept and that

control in fact is sufficient.”

Citing the evidence of its expert witness Mr. Sherwin, the
Claimant adds that the Respondent’s position is inconsistent with industry practice,
observing that in some groups of companies, a small entity that does not own other
companies in the group may nevertheless exercise control by providing the group’s

strategic direction.*”

The Claimant disputes the relevance of the cases cited by the Respondent in support of its
arguments, noting that in Thunderbird v. Mexico and Vacuum Salt v. Ghana, the entities
alleging control both had ownership interests in the entity involved. Hence, the issue of
control without ownership did not arise. In S.D. Myers v. Canada, the same family owned
all of the relevant entities, a situation similar to that presented here. Moreover, the Myers

tribunal found de facto control based on the testimony of the claimant’s executive.*!

Citing the evidence of Mr. Alenezi and Mr. Sherwin, the Claimant urges that in the
restaurant and retail businesses, brand and product acquisition strategies play a crucial role
and are the central drivers of a business’s activities and value. Control over these matters
therefore entails control of the business, although such control may be indirect and perhaps

not exclusive. The fact that other entities in a corporate family may carry out operational

78 Cl. PHS para. 32.

” Cl. PHS par

   

33.

8 Cl. PHS para. 34.
81 Cl. PHS para. 35.

25

functions does not alter the central importance of brand and product selection in controlling
the corporate family’s fortunes. Operational functions such as funding, marketing, daily
management, human resources and the like exist to carry out decisions made elsewhere,
and do not show control. The Claimant points to the analysis in Vacuum Salt, where the
tribunal considered whether an individual with important operational functions who was
alleged to exercise control actually was able to steer and affect the fortunes of the
enterprise, finding that he could not. The Claimant submits that here it could do so because

of its central role in selecting and acquiring products and brands.*?

100. The Claimant emphasizes the distinction between a company’s strategy and the various
operations involved in carrying out that strategy, a distinction said to refute the
Respondent’s arguments comparing the relative size and operational capacity of the
Claimant with other larger MAKAE companies. The Claimant recalls in this regard Mr.
Alenezi’s testimony that other MAKAE companies’ operational activities were determined

by the Claimant’s strategic activities “which it directed from the day it was constituted.”*

101. The Claimant denies that proof of de facto control involves some different or heightened
standard of proof, urging that the documentary and testimonial evidence in the record
demonstrates its control of the investment. It cites evidence regarding the activities of its
gérant, Mr. Alenezi and of its two employees said to show the Claimant’s physical
existence and operations in France and to disprove the Respondent’s denials.** The
Claimant refers to Mr. Alenezi’s testimony that he assigned responsibility for managing all
of MAKAE’s authorized brands to the Claimant’s two employees; that Ms. Lemercier
handled brand relationships and joined him in brand negotiations; and that Mr. Tibari
“directed brand relationships and strategy.” The Claimant also rejects the Respondent’s
contention that the two employees’ work experience and initial titles were inconsistent with

their claimed management roles. *°

 

* Cl. PHS paras. 41-43.
85 Cl. PHS para. 44.

26

102.

103.

104.

The Claimant insists that it was the only entity with a strategic role in the MAKAE group
of companies, and that it performed this role from the day it was constituted until it was
destroyed. In this regard, the Claimant urges that the fact that it was in a “ramp up” phase
did not mean that it did not control the investment. The Claimant views as irrelevant the
facts that Mr. Alenezi paid its expenses or that it did not have a written strategic plan, citing
the testimony of Mr. Sherwin and Mr. Alenezi that private retail businesses frequently do

not create such documents.*®

The Claimant denies that MAKAE International, Mr. Alenezi’s much larger operating
company in Kuwait, controlled brand and product selection. It disputes the significance of
evidence cited by the Respondent, such as documents signed by Mr. Alenezi as “Chairman
& Managing Director” (the title he used as head of the MAKAE Group) and not as the
Claimant’s gérant, and documents originating from MAKAE International directing action
by the Claimant’s employees. The Claimant also recalls Mr. Alenezi’s explanation that
brand agreements were signed by MAKAE International and Top Ten (both Kuwaiti

entities), and not by MAKAE Europe, in order to acquire rights in GCC countries.*”

The Claimant also denies that Mr. Alenezi personally, and not the Claimant, controlled the
investment. It refers to Mr. Alenezi’s testimony to the effect that in making brand and
product selection decisions, he acted as MAKAE Europe’s gérant, as one of several hats
he concurrently wore as the owner and manager of every entity in the MAKAE group of
companies. In this regard, “his brand and product acquisition strategies cannot be separated
from the entity he used to direct that strategy.”** Further, after the Claimant ceased
operations in France in 2002, “Mr. Alenezi continued to act on MAKAE Europe’s behalf,
as he had always done, to pursue the company’s strategic function, negotiating new

opportunities with investors in Saudi Arabia [...].”*?

86 Cl. PHS para. 48.
87 Cl. PHS para. 46.
88 Cl. PHS para. 47.
8 Cl. PHS para. 49.

27

105.

106.

107.

108.

% Cl. PHS par

(ii) The Claimant’s control was in accordance with Saudi law
The Claimant maintains that it controlled the investment in Saudi Arabia and claims no
ownership. In this regard, it understands both Parties’ experts on Saudi law to agree that
the Foreign Investment Law does not govern control, a term that does not appear in the
Law or its implementing regulations. Further, as the Anti-Concealment Law applies to
conduct violating the Foreign Investment Law, it is not relevant where there is no violation

of the Foreign Investment Law.”

The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s Saudi law expert’s conclusion that it is subject to
the Foreign Investment Law, noting that the expert cited no authority for his opinion.
Further, he based his analysis and conclusion on an inaccurate text of the law obtained
from an unknown source that omitted key words, rather than using an accurate text readily
available from an official government source. And, he cited no authority for his contention
that transfers of intangible skills and knowledge are a form of investment covered by the

law. 7!

In the Claimant’s view, even if it owned the investment, its actions did not violate Saudi
Arabia’s legislation. It points to the Investment Law’s definition of “Foreign Investors,”
which are defined as entities “whose partners are not all Saudi” and urges that both Parties’
experts agree that GCC citizens are treated as Saudi citizens for this purpose. As it is
undisputed that Mr. Alenezi and his sons are GCC nationals, the Investment Law does not
apply to the Claimant’s investment. The Claimant disputes the Respondent’s contrary
argument that it is a French national for purposes of the Investment Law, arguing that the
Respondent’s expert relied upon an inaccurate text of the law in formulating this argument,
and that the expert acknowledged at the hearing that ownership, not place of incorporation,

is controlling.””

Finally, the Claimant rejects the Respondent’s argument that the GCC framework of

national treatment for GCC nationals had to be implemented through regulations,

 

 

°1 Cl. PHS paras. 51-53.
°2 Cl. PHS paras. 54-56.

28

maintaining that the 1981 GCC agreement had direct application. In any event, by 2000,
the principle of equal treatment of GCC citizens was secured inside the Kingdom by a 1996
Council of Ministers Resolution adopting the GCC’s Retail Rules, which confirmed
national treatment of GCC nationals in the retail sector. The Claimant emphasizes in this
regard the 2003 decision by the Kingdom’s Board of Grievances in an appeal by Mr.
Alenezi, in which it decided, concerning the investment at issue in this case, that Mr.

Alenezi was entitled to treatment in the retail sector as a Saudi national.>

B. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

109. At this stage, the Tribunal must decide whether it has jurisdiction under the Treaty to
proceed to the merits of the Claimant’s claims. There can only be jurisdiction if the claims
fall within the limits of the Respondent’s consent to jurisdiction reflected in Article 1 of
the Treaty. /nter alia, there must be a qualifying investor. There must be a covered
investment. The investment must be owned or controlled by the investor. Such ownership
or control must be in conformity with the Respondent’s legislation. If any of these
requirements is not met, the claim is not within the scope of the Respondent’s consent to

jurisdiction, and the Tribunal cannot proceed.

110. The Respondent raises multiple objections to jurisdiction. It contends that the Claimant is
not a qualifying investor, that it does not control the investment, that its claimed control
was not in conformity with the Respondent’s legislation, and that, indeed, the Claimant did
not make an investment within the meaning of the Treaty. In their written pleadings and at
the Hearing, the Parties have devoted vigorous advocacy to each of the Respondent’s
objections. Should the Respondent prevail on any one of them, the Tribunal can go no

further and the case must be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.

111. A decision by the Tribunal accepting any one of the Respondent’s several objections to
jurisdiction means that the case cannot go forward. Such a decision also makes it

unnecessary for the Tribunal to decide other disputed jurisdictional issues. In the interests

°3 Cl. PHS paras. 57-58.

29

112.

113.

114.

115.

of judicial economy, the Tribunal has chosen to address first the Respondent’s objection

that the Claimant did not control the investment.

Article 1(1) of the Treaty states: “Le terme ‘investissement’ désigne tous les avoirs de toute
nature, tels que les biens, droits et revenus, détenus ou contrélés par un investisseur de
lune des Parties contractantes sur le territoire de l’autre Partie contractante [...)”*

(emphasis added).

The Claimant contends that it satisfies Article 1(1) because at relevant times, it controlled
an investment in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. It confirms in this regard that it does not
have any ownership interest in the investment, and instead predicates its claim to
jurisdiction solely on its de facto control: “[f]or the record, it has never been disputed that
MAKAE has no ownership interest in any of MAKAE Trading Establishment, MAKAE
International, or Top Ten. That fact has no effect on the jurisdiction of this Tribunal; this

Treaty does not require ownership.”

The Respondent denies that Article 1(1) is satisfied, disputing the Claimant’s contention

that it controlled an investment in the Kingdom.

As the Perenco tribunal observed, there is an “absence of detailed general or conventional
tules of international law governing the organisation, operation, management and control
of an enterprise.”*° The Parties agree that international law does not define “control,” and
that the meaning of the Treaty requirement must be determined in accordance with the
customary international law rules of treaty interpretation. They also agree that these are
reflected in Article 31 of the VCLT, which emphasizes the ordinary meaning of a treaty’s

terms in their context.”

° C-017 (“The term ‘investment’ shall refer to all assets of any nature, such as property, rights and returns, owned or
controlled by an investor of one of the Contracting Parties in the territory of the other Contracting Party [...].”)

95 Cl. C-Mem. para. 88.

°© CL-246, Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Remaining Issues
of Jurisdiction and on Liability of September 12, 2014 (“Perenco”), para. 522.

°7 Under VCLT Article. 31(1), “A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to
be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.” Under Article 31(2),
“The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise [...] the text, including its preamble and
annexes [...].”

30

116. Citing standard dictionary definitions, both Parties offered similar conceptions of the
ordinary meaning of the term “control.” In the Claimant’s view, “consistent with the
VCLT, the ‘ordinary meaning’ of ‘control’ is functional: to influence, have power over,
direct, supervise, command, master, dominate, or watch over, another.””* For the
Respondent, “[t]he Parties agree that the ordinary meaning of the term control is as is found
in the dictionary definition, and that the definition of control of a business is to exercise
‘restraining or directing influence over’ that business or to have ‘power,’ ‘mastery,’

‘direction,’ or ‘domination’ over it.”°”

117. Referring to several of the same prior awards,'” the Parties agree that the Treaty’s control
requirement can be satisfied by proof of de facto control. In the Claimant’s understanding,
“[t]he Parties agree that (i) de facto control satisfies Article 1(1).”!°! The Respondent
agrees, observing that “[s]ome tribunals have observed that whether an investor controls
s102

an investment may be assessed as a matter of fact.

a. Establishing de facto control

118. The Tribunal agrees that for purposes of the Treaty, control can be de facto. Further, given
the nature of de facto control, a tribunal must assess claims of such control on the basis of
the facts and evidence involved in the particular situation. However, while the Parties agree
that control can be de facto and that determining de facto control is fact-based, they
disagree regarding two issues: (a) the character or weight of the evidence required to prove

de facto control, and (b) whether a claimant must demonstrate that it has decision-making

°8 Cl. PHS para. 31.

°° Resp. PHS para. 43.

100 RL-85, International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation v. The United Mexican States, UNCITRAL, Award of
January 26, 2006 (“Thunderbird”), para. 106 (“[iJnterpreted in accordance with its ordinary meaning, control can be
exercised in various manners [...] a showing of effective or “de facto” control is, in the Tribunal’s view, sufficient”);
CL-104, Bernard Friedrich Arnd Riidiger von Pezold et. al. v. Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15,
Award of July 28, 2015 (“von Pezold”), para. 324 (“Control of a company may be factual or effective (“de facto”) as
well as legal[.]”); RL-75, Italba Corporation v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9, Award of
March 22, 2019 (“‘Italba”), para. 254 (“determinations as to whether an investor controls an enterprise will involve
factual situations that must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis”).

‘1 Cl, PHS para. 31.

102

 

 

Resp. Mem. para. 89.

31

119.

3 Resp. PHS p

authority over the allegedly controlled investment, combined with some form of ownership

or other economic interest involving an expectation of financial return.

The nature of the evidence: the Respondent’s position. As to the first issue, the Respondent

maintains that proof of de facto control “cannot be established without reliable evidence

[...] testimony alone is not sufficient, but some contemporaneous document evidencing

control is needed.”!°> The Respondent cites several tribunal awards said to show the

rigorous character of the evidence needed to prove de facto control, and in particular, that

“absent legal control deriving from ownership rights or other legal means, control over an

asset can be established only through tangible evidence of such factual contro

1.77104

The Respondent points out that the B-Mex v. Mexico tribunal’s finding of control was
based on the “converging testimony by multiple witnesses,” reinforced by
contemporaneous documents, including notarized minutes of shareholder meetings and

several agreements.!

It recalls that in /talba v. Uruguay, “the claimant failed to establish that it controlled
the investment as the evidence presented made no actual references to the claimant.”!°°
It notes the /talba tribunal’s detailed assessment of the evidence in the case, including
its conclusion that “for certain allegations there was no evidence in the record,” while

on other issues the only evidence was the statements of two individuals that the tribunal

 

found insufficient to prove control.!”

The Respondent cites the tribunal’s assessment in Thunderbird v. Mexico that proof of

de facto control “must be established beyond any reasonable doubt,”!®* a standard that

43 fn 96.

 

'4 Resp, Reply. para. 183.

105

Resp. Reply para. 187.

106 Resp, Mem. para. 94.

107 Resp. Reply para. 186.
08 Resp. Mem. para. 92, quoting Thunderbird, (RL-85), para. 107

32

120.

121.

122.

unusually could be met in that case where the record included both witness testimony

and extensive documentary evidence.!”

e In support of its view that proof of de facto control must be “exacting”, the Respondent

rol 10

recalls Vacuum Salt vy. Ghana’s''® observation that “a total absence of [ownership

interest] virtually preclude[s] the existence of [...] control.”!!!

The Claimant’s position. The Claimant denies that proof of de facto control requires any
different standard or heightened weight of evidence, emphasizing the absence of support

for the Respondent’s contention in the plain meaning of the Treaty’s text.

In the Claimant’s view, the more exacting standards of proof that the Respondent finds in
the Vacuum Salt and Thunderbird awards — that a showing of de facto control “should be
exacting,” or even “established beyond a reasonable doubt”— involve “‘a standard of proof
rarely, if ever, used outside the criminal context in certain domestic legal systems, and far
more demanding that the preponderance-of-the-evidence or balance-of-probabilities

112 The Claimant denies the

standard generally applied in international arbitration.
relevance of the Vacuum Salt Award, urging that the issue there was whether there was
“foreign control” for purposes of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, not the existence of

de facto control for purposes of jurisdiction under an investment treaty.!!>

b. Required evidence: Tribunal’s analysis and decision

The Tribunal sees no basis in the Treaty’s language or any other relevant factors that would
justify deviating from the normal principles dealing with proof of disputed facts in
international investment arbitration. As the von Pezold tribunal observed, “[i]n general, the
standard of proof applied in international arbitration is that a claim must be proven on the

‘balance of probabilities’ [...] [t]he Tribunal does not consider there is any reason to depart

109 Resp, Reply para. 187.

0 RL-17, Vacuum Salt Products Ltd v. Republic of Ghana, ICSID Case No. ARB/92/1, Award of February 16, 1994,
(“Vacuum Salt’) para. 53.

111 Resp. Mem. para. 89, quoting Vacuum Salt, (RL-17), para. 44.
12 Cl. C-Mem. para. 97 (footnotes omitted).
113 C], C-Mem. para. 100.

33

from standard practice and both Parties must prove their claims on the balance of

probabilities.”!'*

123. However, the Tribunal also recalls that under Rule 34 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules
applicable in this case, it is the judge of the probative value of any evidence adduced. Given
the fact-intensive nature of determining de facto control, as the B-Mex tribunal observed,
such determinations “will typically, and logically, present a greater evidentiary
challenge.”!!> As will be considered infra, the evidence in this case presents particular

challenges of assessment.

c. Elements of de facto control

124. The second disputed issue bearing upon proof of de facto control is whether a claimant
must show that it has decision-making authority combined with some form of economic

interest.

125. The Respondent’s Position. The Respondent maintains that de facto control requires that a
claimant exercise decision-making authority over key aspects of an investment and have
some ownership, expectation of revenues, or comparable economic interest in the
investment. For the Respondent, “a person lacking the power to determine the key
decisions relating to a business cannot be said to control that business.”!'° Further, “[t]he
jurisprudence is clear that control also presupposes the claimant’s expectation of an

economic return from the investment.”!!7

126. The Respondent refers to prior awards that in its view show that claimants must have both
powers of direction and economic interests in an investment in order to prove control. It

cites, inter alia:

e Thunderbird v. Mexico: The Respondent highlights that the claimant in Thunderbird

owned approximately 40% of each of the three entities whose control was at issue,

"4 CL-104, von Pezold Award, paras. 177-178.

"5 CL-145, B-Mex, LLC and others v. United Mexican States, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/16/3, Partial Award dated
July 19, 2019 (“B-Mex Partial Award”), para. 220.

416 Resp. PHS para. 43.
117 Resp. PHS para. 44.

 

34

and “had the ability to exercise a significant influence” on the entities’ decision-
making and “was [...] the consistent driving force behind” the endeavor in Mexico.!'®
The evidence of control “included evidence establishing that Thunderbird held a
minority share interest in that business, in addition to evidence showing that it also
had entered into multiple agreements with the other stakeholders entitling it to control

the operation of the business.”!!?

Aguas del Tunari: The Respondent points to the Aguas del Tunari tribunal’s
assessment that an entity “may be said to control another entity [...] if that entity
possesses the legal capacity to control the other entity.”!”° Further, an entity’s “legal
capacity [to control another] is to be ascertained with reference to the percentage of

shares held.”!”!

von Pezold: v. Zimbabwe: The Respondent notes that the tribunal’s finding of control
“was informed by” evidence showing that the claimants held a 50% shareholding
interest in the business and had entered into a management agreement with the

remaining shareholders. '2*

B-Mex v. Mexico: The Respondent observes that the B-Mex tribunal found control of
a business where the claimants held a significant minority shareholding interest that
enabled them to veto any proposed shareholder resolutions, and had also entered into
multiple agreements with the other stakeholders allowing them to recoup the business’

monthly net profit.'??

124

In Vacuum Salt,'** a case involving assessing “foreign control” under the ICSID

Convention, the Respondent points to the tribunal’s assessment that “the smaller the

48 Resp, Reply para. 197, quoting Thunderbird para. 107.

419 Resp. PHS p

45.

 

20 Resp. Mem. para. 86, fn 246.
"21 Resp. Mem. para. 86, fn 247.

'22 Resp. PHS p

45.

 

23 Resp, PHS para. 45.
24 RL-17, Vacuum Salt Award para. 43.

35

127.

128.

129.

percentage of voting shares held by the asserted source of [...] control, the more one

must look to other elements bearing on that issue.”!?>

The Claimant’s position. The Claimant denies that proof of indirect control requires some
legal interest in the investment and an expectation of revenues or other similar economic
interest. As to the second element — an expectation of economic return — the Claimant
maintains that it expected eventually to receive royalties from other MAKAE companies
for its services.!° More fundamentally, however, the Claimant denies that proof of de facto
control requires some legal interest in the investment. In the Claimant’s view, this
contention conflicts with the ordinary meaning of control, erases the Treaty’s recognition
of ownership or control of an investment as alternative bases of jurisdiction, and disregards
“a long line of tribunal decisions” holding that control “can be exercised in different ways

beyond a ‘legal interest’.”!?”

Citing the evidence of its expert Mr. Sherwin, the Claimant urges that in modern corporate
practice, a group of companies may include an entity that does not have ownership interests
in other companies in the group or formal powers of direction, but that nevertheless makes
strategic decisions that steer the direction of, and indeed control, the group. The Claimant
submits that it served this function in the MAKAE group of companies and, in particular,

in respect of the investment in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

The Claimant, citing the evidence of Mr. Alenezi and Mr. Sherwin, emphasizes what it

 

sees as the critical role of brand acquisition and product selection in the investment’s retail

apparel and restaurant businesses in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. For the Claimant:

[I]n the fashion retail and restaurant industries, de facto control
manifests in control over the brand and product acquisition
strategies: ‘the core set of strategies that drive the overall business.’
As Mr. Sherwin and Mr. Alenezi both explained, the entity ‘that puts
together the product and brand-acquisition strategy in these
industries would be the primary driver of value for the overall
group’ and ‘determine[s] what other things will be done by the

25 Resp. Mem. para. 89, fn 255.
26 Cl, PHS para. 32.
27 Cl, PHS para. 33.

36

company, what they will do in terms of setting up the stores, how
they will engage in selling and marketing. "'*

130. | The Claimant acknowledges that other entities in the MAKAE Group actually carried out
the group’s retail and restaurant operations in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, but insists that
“[f]inding that one entity directs the value of the business does not negate other entities’
control over operational decisions [...] If an entity ‘drive[s] the overall strategy’ and
‘determine[s] what other things will be done by the company,’ it controls the

investment.”!”° In this regard,

[I]n the retail sector, issues of funding, revenues, day-to-day
management of retail stores, human_resources, marketing,
employees, and payments are not determinative of control. As Mr.
Sherwin testified, these operational concerns are the results of
choices about how to structure the operations of a group of retail
companies; they are not evidence of strategic decision-making
about business value.'°°

131. The Claimant disputes the Respondent’s reliance on the Thunderbird and Vacuum Salt
awards, noting, inter alia, that in both, the claimant owned interests in the relevant entity,
so the question of control without ownership was not presented.'*! The Claimant cites as

the more correct approach to determining de facto control the award in S.D. Myers v.

132

Canada,'** where the tribunal found that the US claimant satisfied NAFTA’s jurisdictional

requirement of direct or indirect control of the Canadian company at issue on the basis of
an executive’s testimony. “Recognizing the fact-specific nature of the question, the tribunal
did not ask for evidence of an expectation of revenues but credited the testimony of

claimant’s executive, who testified that ‘he exercised control on behalf of the Claimant

entity."

"28 Cl. PHS para. 37 (footnotes omitted).

29 Cl, PHS para. 38.

130 Cl]. PHS para. 39 (footnotes omitted).

31 C], PHS para. 35.

132 RL-78, S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Partial Award dated November 13, 2000 (“Myers
Award”), paras. 228-232.

133 C], PHS para. 35.

37

132.

133.

134.

135.

136.

d. Proof of de facto control: the Tribunal’s analysis and decision

The Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s contention that proof of de facto control
requires a claimant to demonstrate some ownership or other form of economic interest in
an investment. The Treaty clearly establishes ownership or control as alternative bases of
jurisdiction. The contention that control requires ownership or other form of economic
interest disregards this distinction, and conflicts with the ordinary meaning of the Treaty’s

words.

The Claimant’s contention that there can be de facto control in circumstances where the
allegedly controlling entity does not have clear powers of direction or supervision over

another controlled entity poses more difficult issues.

The heart of the Claimant’s case for de facto control is its contention that in situations such
as the MAKAE retail and restaurant businesses in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, brand and
product acquisition drive a retailer’s overall strategy, making the Claimant’s activities in
France “critical to the success of the entire group, including the Saudi entity.”!*4 Hence,
the Claimant contends, the role of MAKAE Europe SARL in identifying the brands and
products to be offered to customers in Saudi Arabia gave it de facto control of the

investment.

The Tribunal’s task is to interpret the words of the Treaty: what does it mean for an
investment to be “controlled”? The Tribunal accepts that the conception of control
advanced by the Claimant, while unusual in the context of international investment law,
does correspond to some of the ordinary dictionary meanings of “control” advanced by the
Parties. There can be de facto control where the evidence establishes that a small and
specialized component of a corporate family performs a role or roles that determine the

overall character and direction of an enterprise.

In this regard, Mr. Sherwin pointed to several major international concerns in consumer,
fashion and luxury goods businesses where a small entity within a much larger corporate

family fundamentally shapes the definition, direction, and activities of the larger family.

134 24 Sherwin Expert Report para. 9.

38

137.

138.

139.

140.

These small entities exercise significant direction over much larger corporate assemblages
by identifying suppliers or goods, identifying rapidly evolving customer tastes, or by
themselves designing products that lead or respond to developing tastes and trends. Mr.
Sherwin identified as relevant examples, inter alia, the central roles of a 700-person design
team in the 176,000 person Inditex fashion retail business and Chanel S.A.’s internal design

capabilities and brand development in the overall success of Chanel’s brand.!?°

The Tribunal accepts that, in appropriate circumstances, the Claimant’s core proposition
may hold true. The question is whether the evidence here establishes to the necessary
degree that the Claimant played this role in relation to its claimed investment in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. This requires close analysis of the evidence regarding the

Claimant’s characteristics and activities.

Assessing the evidence: Mr. Sherwin and Mr. Alenezi. Mr. Sherwin makes clear that he has
no personal knowledge of the Claimant or its activities and bases his testimony regarding
the Claimant on documents and information he was provided by counsel. He adds that
“where I have relied on certain facts from the record in the course of my analysis, I have
been instructed by counsel to accept the facts presented by Claimant as true.”!*°
Accordingly, Mr. Sherwin’s testimony does not assist the Tribunal insofar as it concerns

the nature and extent of the Claimant’s actual activities.

The most important evidence supporting the Claimant’s argument for de facto control is
thus the testimony of Mr. Alenezi in his two substantial witness statements and in several

hours of cross-examination and Tribunal questions at the Hearing.

Mr. Alenezi stated in this regard that the Claimant “handled development and execution of
the broader retail strategy, including by acquiring brands, managing brand and purchasing
strategy, and ordering products for the various Gulf markets, including Saudi Arabia.”!*”

These activities, he indicated, were

135.90 Sherwin WS paras. 16-17.
136 95 Sherwin WS para. 3.
157 90 Alenezi WS para. 21.

39

critical to the decision-making around the Gulf operations
generally, and the investment in Saudi Arabia specifically. Two
major components of this were planning the overall brand strategy
in order to manage MAKAE’s expansion and growth in different
Gulf markets, and planning the acquisition strategy to sustain that
growth. These elements are the heart of creating a successful retail
enterprise. You could have all the other elements in place, such as
great locations and staff, but the key to a successful retail business
in the Gulf, especially in Saudi Arabia, was to have the right fashion
brands—and in Saudi Arabia, that meant French and other
European or American fashion brands. MAKAE, as a French
company located in France, was a critical part of that strategy,
since it gave companies who owned these international brands a
critical level of comfort to do business with MAKAE, and on that
basis, MAKAE built up a substantial international brand portfolio
well-tailored to the Saudi retail market.'°8

141. At the Hearing, Mr. Alenezi stated that, from the time the Claimant was constituted
(presumably on January 10, 2000, when its articles of association were established!*’), it
“took control over the MAKAE Group’s general brand strategy to drive our further

expansion plans.”'“° He added in this regard:

A. [T]he function of MAKAE Europe, as we said, is a strategic
function. It will manage the Local Entities in its capacity as the
strategic pushing the--implementing the brand strategies to the
companies in the Gulf, in the GCC. That is its aim, and it started
Day 1. Of course it started Day 1."!

142. Without wishing to impugn Mr. Alenezi’s recollection or understanding of events that
occurred many years ago, it is the case that he and his sons are the sole owners of the
Claimant. He has a potentially substantial personal interest in the outcome of this

arbitration, in which the Claimant seeks in its Memorial a pre-interest award of USD 156.4

138 90 Alenezi WS para. 9.
59 C081, Articles of Association.
440 Day 2 pp. 449:21 — 450:1 (Mr. Alenezi).

'41 Day 2 p. 448:10-15 (Mr. Alenezi).

 

40

million, calculated as of the date of that Memorial.'*? He owns 49% of the Claimant’s

shares, and his sons Youssof and Ayed own the remainder, 26% and 25% respectively.'47

  

143. Given this situation, and the need for each ICSID claimant to present sufficient evidence

to prove matters essential to its claim, the Tribunal has carefully considered the evidence

of record in addition to Mr. Alenezi’s testimony.

144. The Claimant did not offer witnesses other than Mr. Alenezi with personal knowledge of
the activities said to show de facto control of the investment. Proof of the Claimant’s case
faces other challenges. Important events bearing on the claim of de facto control took place
two decades ago, and the Claimant reports that efforts to recover or reconstitute bank
statements and other missing documentation have not been successful. In this regard, Mr.

Alenezi states that he has:

not been able to retrieve most of MAKAE’s company records. In July
2002, right after Sylvie had left MAKAE, at my request she provided
a full set of MAKAE’s original company records to Ralf
Christensen, a business colleague who was planning a trip to the
Gulf and had agreed to bring me these documents [...] [T]hese
included MAKAE’s bank documents, as well as legal and tax
documents, labor documents, invoices, records of expenses, FedEx
receipts and documents related to the Société des Centres
Commerciaux, a business partner. Unfortunately, he never
conveyed all of the documents to me in 2002, a fact which I did not
discover until years later when I actually looked through them.'4

145. The Claimant’s premises. The available documents show that the Claimant’s physical
presence in France was modest. From January 2000 until about July 2002, it leased a small
pre-furnished office of just 17 square meters located in a business center in St. Maur des

Fosses, in the south-eastern suburbs of Paris.'*> Although the size of the premises is not in

‘2 Cl. Mem. para. 275. The Claimant’s May 2021 Submission on Costs later described its claimed costs of almost

USD 9.85 million as “less than 2.4% of the damages sought.” Cl. Costs Sub. para. 16. This suggests that as of May
2021, the Claimant assessed its total claim to be on the order of USD 410 million. In its May 2021 Submission on
Costs, the Respondent refers to “a claim estimated to be in excess of USD 1.5 billion in compensation.” Resp. Costs
Sub. para. 11. The basis for the Respondent’s estimate is not indicated.

143 18 Alenezi WS para. 7.

144 94 Alenezi WS para. 17 (footnote omitted).

145 Exhibit C-384 (Lease of Rue de Rocroy office).

 
     

  

 

 

4l

146.

147.

itself indicative of the control exercised from there, the Tribunal finds the modest scale of
these premises difficult to reconcile with the Claimant’s contention that, throughout this
period, it was the nerve center of the extensive network of MAKAE retail and restaurant
businesses in Saudi Arabia and throughout the Gulf capable of giving the international
European and US partners of the MAKAE Group the “critical level of comfort” necessary
to do business with it. The size and character of the premises seem more indicative of a
modest European outpost created to assist with billing and payment issues, visit schedules,
ocean shipping arrangements, and the like for MAKAE International and other MAKAE

companies with business in Europe.

The Claimant's employees: Ms. Lemercier. The Claimant had at most just two employees
in France. For the first fifteen months of its activities, there was just one, Ms. Sylvie
Lemercier, a certified accountant. Ms. Lemercier previously worked part-time handling
accounting and administration for a small cosmetic business and was the only person

considered for her position by Mr. Alenezi.'#°

Ms. Lemercier’s January 10, 2000 employment contract provided for a modest salary and
described her position as “administrative and accounting manager.”'*’ Despite the title on
her contract, at the Hearing, Mr. Alenezi stated that from January 2000 until April 2001,
Ms. Lemercier managed the brand and product acquisition strategy for the entire MAKAE
Group, and that during this fifteen-month period, “Sylvie was responsible for everything,
all the brands we handled [...] she handled everything.”'** He later reaffirmed this

contention:

Q. But it’s your testimony that from January 2000 until April 2001,
Ms. Lemercier, by herself, was able to manage the brand and
acquisition--product acquisition strategy for the MAKAE Group;
correct?

A. Yes. Correct.\”

446 Day 2 p. 325:2-4 (Mr. Alenezi); id. at pp. 322:20-323:9.
47 Exhibit C-382, Ms. Lemercier contract.

48 Day 2, p. 481:1-3 (Mr. Alenezi).

49 Day 2, p. 471:20-22; p. 472:1-3 (Mr. Alenezi).

42

148.

149.

150.

However, the Tribunal was not directed to evidence in the record showing that Ms.
Lemercier identified or initiated contacts with suppliers, identified products, or made
decisions regarding product selection or ordering. Instead, the available evidence indicates
that she managed the Claimant’s small office, handled routine issues involving shipments
and payments to vendors for the several MAKAE businesses in the Gulf, and answered
routine questions from persons in MAKAE International and other MAKAE companies.!°°
Only a portion of her activity concerned the businesses in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.!>!
She also made hotel arrangements for Mr. Alenezi and accompanied him on visits to

suppliers in order to provide French interpretation.

For some period in the latter months of 2001, Ms. Lemercier was absent from the office on
maternity leave.'*? However, when asked about the absence of a key employee during this

period, Mr. Alenezi did not recall her absence.!*3

Mr. Tibari. Ms. Lemercier was the Claimant’s only employee in France for the first half of
its roughly 30 months of operation. The second person, Mr. Youness Tibari, concluded a
contract on March 31, 2001 for a position as “manager Europe Operations” on a document
captioned “MAKAE International” (the principal MAKAE company, located in Kuwait)
and signed by Mr. Alenezi’s secretary on behalf of the “Chairman & MD.” These were the
titles used by Mr. Alenezi for his entities other than the Claimant, for which his title was

Gérant (“Manager”). When questioned that Mr. Tibari’s employment contract appeared to

'50 £.¢., Exhibit C-401 (arranging payment for architectural services for a mall in Bahrain); Exhibit C-402 (delay a
decorator’s trip to Bahrain); Exhibit C-398 (April 2001 fax from MAKAE International to Ms. Lemercier requesting
shipping documents for three shipments that had arrived in Qatar); Exhibit C-399 (supplier’s invoice for merchandise
for boutique in Dubai).

'S!_£.¢., Exhibit C-410 (Oct. 2001 e-mail to Mr. Boksmati regarding failure to pick up a summer delivery in a Saudi
port; Ms. Lemercier notes lack of news, asking “Does Makae exist?”); Exhibit C-392 (September 2000 fax from Mr.
Boksmati inquiring about dispatch of “Morgan decoration works of Al Naser Center); Exhibit C-395 (handwritten fax
from Ms. Lemercier to “Azzan” asking “so what kind of meat is it possible to send in Middle East 2”); Exhibit C-396
(March 12, 2001 fax from Ms. Lemercier transmitting confirmation of a furniture shipment.)

152 Exhibit C-411 (Pay slip for December 2001, showing maternity leave for the month); Exhibit C-410 (October 2001

e-mail).

'S3 Day 2, p. 422:16-18; p. 423:4-15 (Mr. Alenezi).

43

151.

152.

153.

be with MAKAE International, a Kuwaiti company, and not with the Claimant, Mr. Alenezi

dismissed this as unimportant and “only convenience.”!*+

Although somewhat larger than Ms. Lemercier’s, Mr. Tibari’s salary again appears modest
for a person said to occupy a critical management position. Further, it appears that
throughout his association with the Claimant, he did not reside in or near Paris but in

Villefranche-sur-Cher, approximately 200 kilometers south of the Claimant’s office.!°°

The evidence indicates that Mr. Tibari did have some direct contacts with suppliers. In

cross-examination, Mr. Alenezi described his role in expansive terms:

Mr. Tibari was responsible for the strategic brand development,
from the starting point to the end. The starting point is searching for
the brands, approaching the brands and companies, discussing with
them the possibility of MAKAE taking the exclusivity in the Middle
East, and then organizing the orders and then all the rest of chain
of responsibilities. '°°

 

However, the documentary evidence suggests that Mr. Tibari had limited independent
authority, instead generally acting under the direction of Mr. Alenezi or others in MAKAE
International or other MAKAE companies. Thus, Mr. Tibari’s July 1, 2001 e-mail to “Mr.
Mohamed” at the e-mail address for MAKAE International in Kuwait asks the recipient to
“please advise me on the order processing” for winter orders for several brands, concluding
“T am awaiting for your instruction[s] as well as if you planned to send me in [G]reece or
[G]ermany for other brands [...].”!>7 (“Mr. Mohamed” was likely Mr. Alenezi, although
this is not stated in the document.) Regardless of the recipient’s identity, the e-mail shows
that Mr. Tibari could not place major orders without authorization and that the
authorization was to come from someone at MAKAE International, not from MAKAE

Europe.

154 Day 2 p. 401:8 (Mr. Alenezi).

155 Day 2 p. 409:8-10 (Mr. Alenezi); Exhibit C-397 (April 13, 2001 Y. Tibari’s fax to supplier asking for
correspondence to be sent to him at his Villefranche-sur-Cher address).

156 Day 2 p. 533:3-9 (Mr. Alenezi).

157 Exhibit C-383.

44

154.

155.

156.

The evidence also indicates that Ms. Lemercier and Mr. Tibari devoted substantial efforts
to responding to routine suppliers’ inquiries'** or to routine requests or instructions from
MAKAE International and other MAKAE companies, and not to providing any sort of
independent strategic direction. Thus, for example, a June 2001 fax to Mr. Tibari from
MAKAE International’s Operations Manager instructs him to prepare to go to Hamburg
“for ordering of S. oliver as discussed in my meeting with you.” The message continues,
“[w]e will send you the budget and details for ordering.” !° While the tenor of this message
may have reflected the extent that Ms. Lemercier and Mr. Tibari were still in a learning
phase and not yet familiar with Middle Eastern taste and fashion, it confirms that control

over brand strategy had not shifted to MAKAE Europe as of June 2001.

Ms. Lemercier’s and Mr. Tibari’s limited authority and scope of action are spelled out in
an eleven-page April 25, 2001 fax on MAKAE International letterhead addressed to
“Sylvie/Younis” and defining their responsibilities. This fax does not show that either had
a significant role in determining brands or products or otherwise determining the strategic
direction of the investment in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The fax, signed for Mr.
Alenezi by his secretary, gave Ms. Lemercier and Mr. Tibari no control over ordering. It
instead directed them to “set up appointment and plan schedule for main orders to be done
by Divisional, Retail and Brand Managers concerned [...]” and to “[a]ssist Divisional,
Retail & Brand Managers in the ordering.” It continued that “[iJt is strictly not permitted

to make any order or reorder without the official approval of the concerned manager.”!°

As to marketing, Ms. Lemercier and Mr. Tibari were directed to “[o]btain all available
marketing materials from suppliers and send to relevant managers.” With regard to product
development, they were to “[s]end details of fair [sic] in France and Europe to Chairman’s
office,” and “[v]isit some selective fair.” They were instructed to “use email more,” “do

not use mobile phone, unless it is very necessary and urgent,” to “[u]se metro in general,”

158 Exhibit C-146 (July 2, 2001 fax from Mr. Tibari responding to supplier’s inquiry regarding a purchase of sunglasses
and the amount pending).

159 Exhibit C-142 (June 4, 2001 fax, from El Idrissi to Y. Tibari).
100 Exhibit C-136 (April 25, 2001 fax from Mr. Alenezi to Sylvie Lemercier and Y. Tibari).

45

157.

158.

159.

to immediately introduce a “punching machine” (evidently a time clock), and to “[rJeduce

the cost of the office in any possible ways.”!*!

Read in its entirety, Mr. Alenezi’s April 25, 2001 fax conveys the clear impression that
Ms. Lemercier’s and Mr. Tibari’s duties were narrow and largely administrative. Its
contents and tone (“use metro in general, reduce the cost of the office in any possible
ways”) are at variance with the idea that the Claimant’s operation in France was at the
center of developing new premium suppliers, taking the pulse of rapidly changing fashions,
or otherwise providing strategic direction or critical services amounting to de facto control

of the MAKAE interests in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Mr. Alenezi’s role. The third person involved in the Claimant’s activities was of course Mr.
Alenezi, the Claimant’s gérant. The record shows that he was active in developing and
maintaining contacts with European suppliers, negotiating licenses and other contracts, and
in following fashion trends. However, none of the MAKAE Group’s licenses or contracts
with suppliers were concluded by or in the name of MAKAE Europe SARL. The Claimant
explained this on the basis that “the brand agreements were signed by MAKAE
International and Top Ten because, by signing through a GCC entity, he could register the
rights in GCC countries.”!®? Nevertheless, the evidence does not show that Mr. Alenezi
ever negotiated or contracted while holding himself out as the Claimant’s gérant. Indeed,
Mr. Alenezi acknowledged on cross-examination that there are no documents of record

showing that he negotiated in his capacity as the Claimant’s gérant.!°

Even after the incorporation of MAKAE Europe, Mr. Alenezi appeared to prefer operating
as Chairman and Managing Director of MAKAE International or of the entire MAKAE
Group, rather than emphasizing his role in MAKAE Europe and pushing MAKAE Europe
into the foreground. Yet, if MAKAE Europe was (or was to become) not only the hub of

the group but its controlling entity, this should have been visible both internally and outside

161 Exhibit C-136 (April 25, 2001 fax from Mr. Alenezi to Sylvie Lemercier and Y. Tibari).
1 Cl, PHS para. 46.
'63 Day 2 p. 504:17-20 (Mr. Alenezi).

46

160.

161.

162.

of the MAKAE Group. The Tribunal was not guided to a single document in support of

the “vision” about which Mr. Alenezi testified.

In this regard, the record indicates that Mr. Alenezi did not pay particular attention, or give
weight, to the Claimant’s separate existence as a French company. In cross-examination,
he was unaware of, and seemingly unconcerned about, his statutory obligations as gérant
of the Claimant as a French company. He acknowledged that he did not call required annual
shareholder meetings,'** was “not aware of” the details of mandatory corporate filing

165

requirements, leaving it “for Sylvie to do, and was “not aware of” statutory

requirements to prepare annual financial statements, explaining again that “[tJhis is part of

Sylvie’s job to do.”!°

Even if the Tribunal accepts that Mr. Alenezi’s signatures on a number of documents as
Chairman and Managing Director “evidence his informal role over the whole MAKAE
group of companies” and that when acting for MAKAE International he did so as

“Managing Director only”,!®”

the Tribunal remains at a loss for any documents showing
that Mr. Alenezi also acted as gérant of MAKAE Europe. There are no documents showing
that the control which he exercised over the group was MAKAE Europe’s and not his own
as the group’s owner. It is difficult to give credence to Mr. Alenezi’s denial that he
personally controlled the investment and to his testimony that “his brand and product
acquisition activities cannot be separated from the entity he used to direct that strategy,”!°*
when there is not a single document showing that he acted -- either within the MAKAE
Group or externally in his contacts with third parties -- on behalf and in the name of

MAKAE Europe.

Instead, the evidence shows that the MAKAE group of companies is effectively an

extension of Mr. Alenezi; indeed, as counsel explained at the Hearing, “the name

64 Day 2 p. 345:9-15 (Mr. Alenezi).

"65 Day 2 p. 340-7, 12-13 (Mr. Alenezi).
166 Day 2, p. 343:9 (Mr. Alenezi).

"7 Cl, PHS para. 46.

468 Cl, PHS para. 47.

47

‘MAKAB’ stands for the initials of his name.”!©? Mr. Alenezi holds large (generally 100%)
interests in the multiple entities making up the group and emphasized in his evidence that
he “wore the top managerial hat” in each of his companies.'”? In cross-examination, he
emphasized the degree to which his companies operated as an integrated group: “It’s the
company. It is one group. It is complementing each other. It’s the same company, same

owner, same manager.”!7!

163. Mr. Alenezi stated that as the dominant individual in each of his companies, he wore
multiple “hats”, changing from one to another as circumstances warranted, and sometimes

wearing multiple hats, including when making strategic decisions for the group overall:

Q. So, your testimony here is that when making strategic
decisions related to the Company’s operations and overall business
plan of MAKAE Group, you did this wearing your hat as gérant of
MAKAE Europe?

A. No. I have two hats in that case. In fact, I have five hats
because I’m looking into overall direction and strategy of the whole
group as a whole. So, I’m looking at everything in this context.
We're talking about overall business plan. It means the overall
business plan of MAKAE, MAKAE Group.‘

164. Had Mr. Alenezi visibly and consistently acted as the gérant of MAKAE Europe following
its incorporation in 2000, and had he subsequently directed the MAKAE Group in that
capacity (including consistent public use of his title and letterhead as gérant of MAKAE
Europe in dealing with his own companies and their employees and with third parties such
as the European and international brands) he might have more convincingly argued -- on
the basis of Mr. Sherwin’s theory -- that MAKAE Europe controlled the investment in
Saudi Arabia after 2000. He did not do so. Instead, the evidence shows that Mr. Alenezi,
as owner and manager of all of the companies in the MAKAE Group, directed the Group’s

fortunes, including the investment in Saudi Arabia, and not the Claimant.

16 Day 1 p. 21:20-21 (Ms. Amirfar).

190 Day 2 p. 317:5-7 (Mr. Alenezi).

"1 Day 2 p. 371:12-17 (Mr. Alenezi); Id. p. 455:3-6 (Mr. Alenezi).
12 Day 2 p. 498:5-15 (Mr. Alenezi).

48

165.

166.

167.

168.

In this regard, none of the documents produced concerning the post-2004 period refer to
MAKAE Europe. They show only that business partners were prepared to work with
MAKAE Trading and/or with Mr. Alenezi personally.!” There is no indication of any plan
or intention to transfer these contacts to MAKAE Europe, and Mr. Alenezi could not rely

on his business partners’ willingness to consent to any such future transfers.

Further, had Mr. Alenezi’s intended to assign his contacts and know-how for branding and
marketing to MAKAE Europe, or to use that know-how on behalf of MAKAE Europe to
make it the controlling entity of the MAKAE Group, he would at least have kept MAKAE
Europe administratively “alive” by not allowing its registration in the French Commercial
Register to lapse. However, the evidence shows that on January 5, 2004, the clerk recorded
termination of MAKAE Europe’s activities at its registered address, and the next day
entered into the Register a notice of termination, the company not having brought its
situation into conformity with the law within three months as legally required.'”4 Even if
Mr. Alenezi’s personal circumstances at the time prevented his travel to France, there was
no reason why Ms Lemercier could not have handled the administrative formalities with

the French registry, as she had done when MAKAE Europe was incorporated.

The Tribunal’s conclusions regarding de facto control. Mr. Alenezi’s testimony regarding
his role as the controlling personality setting “overall direction and strategy for the whole
group” of MAKAE companies is difficult to reconcile with the Claimant’s contention that

it exercised de facto control over the investment in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

While Mr. Alenezi may have had significant plans and ambitions for the Claimant’s future,
it was never more than a small component in his larger group of companies. During its
roughly two-and-a-half years of operation in France, the Claimant was, at best, in a nascent
state, as the Claimant indeed acknowledges: “by August 2001, when Saudi Arabia first
shut down the stores, MAKAE Europe had not yet fully developed its operational funding,

1" Exhibits C-207, C-208, C-212; Exhibits C- 215 to C-222; Exhibits C-225 to C-233
1 Exhibit C-214.

49

169.

170.

171.

172.

accounting, marketing, and human resources activities, or formalized consistent use of

stationery, emails, and titles.”!”°

The Tribunal is not persuaded of the Claimant’s contention that Mr. Alenezi could not
realize his vision for MAKAE Europe because the Respondent destroyed the MAKAE
Group during the Claimant’s ‘ramp-up phase’ and before it could mature in the way Mr.
Alenezi envisaged. The Tribunal has not been pointed to evidence corroborating that a
transfer to MAKAE Europe of Mr. Alenezi’s responsibility for the MAKAE’s Group’s
branding and strategic decision-making was being organized or would occur at any future
time. Nor is there evidence confirming that “MAKAE Europe continued to control the
investment until it was completely destroyed, by the end of 2005” or that Mr. Alenezi
“continued to act on MAKAE Europe’s behalf [...] to pursue the company’s strategic
function, negotiating new opportunities with investors in Saudi Arabia [...].”!”° The
evidence shows that Mr. Alenezi continued to act, but not that he did so “on MAKAE

Europe’s behalf.”

The Claimant might in the future have fulfilled the ambitions described by Mr. Alenezi and
Mr. Sherwin. It might have become the creative control center of the MAKAE businesses
in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and elsewhere. It did not do so. Instead, the evidence
indicates that for the roughly two-and-a-half years the Claimant had a physical presence in
France, its activities were modest and limited in scope and that it did not take over Mr.
Alenezi’s significant role in developing and managing relationships with premium brands

or in determining brands and products for sale.

The Tribunal concludes that the evidence does not establish that the Claimant exercised de
facto control over the investment at any relevant time. Accordingly, the requirements of

Article 1(1) of the Treaty defining an investment are not met.

177

As indicated supra,'’’ the Tribunal’s decision that the Claimant has not proved that it

controlled the claimed investment means that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction and that its

"75 C] PHS para.40.
"76 Cl, PHS para. 49.
7 Para. 111.

50

VI.

173.

174.

175.

176.

claim must be dismissed. Accordingly, it is not necessary or an efficient use of resources
for the Tribunal to consider how it might rule upon the many other disputed jurisdictional

issues. As the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction, no further decisions are required as to these.

COSTS

THE CLAIMANT’S COSTS SUBMISSIONS

In its May 12, 2021 submission on costs, the Claimant contends that the Respondent should

bear the costs of the arbitration and fully reimburse it for its costs.

Citing Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention and investment treaty jurisprudence, the
Claimant observes that the Tribunal has broad discretion to allocate costs. It submits that
in doing so, the Tribunal should be guided by (a) the Parties’ relative success on their
claims and defenses, (b) their procedural conduct throughout the arbitration, and (c) the

reasonableness of the claimed costs.!78

Relative Success on Claims and Defenses. Concerning the first factor, the Claimant
observes that “the general rule is that a prevailing party should be reimbursed the costs it
incurred in defending itself,”!”? and that it “prevailed on all interim applications and
expects to defeat Saudi Arabi’s jurisdictional objections.”'*? It maintains in this regard that
it “is entitled to an award of costs if it prevails on the bifurcated preliminary objections to
jurisdiction ratione personae and ratione materiae. Responding to [the two bifurcated]

objections accounts for USD 7.7 million of [the Claimants] costs.”!*!

As to the several interim applications in the case, the Claimant contends that it prevailed
in its request for provisional measures related to Mr. Alenezi’s personal situation in Saudi
Arabia, as it “ultimately prevailed in obtaining Saudi Arabia’s representation that Mr.

Alenezi would not be imprisoned by Saudi authorities without first presenting him with the

18 Cl, Costs Sub. paras. 4-6.
"9 Cl, Costs Sub. para. 4.
'89 Cl, Costs Sub. II. A.

'S! Cl, Costs Sub. para. 7.

Sl

177.

178.

179.

180.

182 Cl Cos

opportunity to pay” a disputed judgment. According to the Claimant, this representation
allowed it to request the Tribunal to suspend further proceedings on the provisional
measures request. The Claimant contends that the Respondent was recalcitrant in providing
this assurance, leading to extensive and unnecessary proceedings resulting in “wasted

costs” to the Claimant of USD 1 million. '*?

The Claimant next contends that it partially defeated the Respondent’s request for
bifurcation of four jurisdictional objections, as the Tribunal bifurcated only two while
leaving the others for the merits. The Claimant accordingly seeks half of the costs it

incurred in this phase, USD 205,796.00.!83

Finally, the Claimant contends that it prevailed against both the Respondent’s request for
Security for Costs, accounting for USD 472,020.00 of its claimed costs, and the
Respondent’s request to add a document production process, amounting to an additional

USD 64,298.00.'*4

Conduct in the Proceedings. Concerning the second factor, the Claimant maintains that the
Respondent’s conduct caused it to incur costs that were substantially higher than necessary.
The Claimant cites the Respondent’s document production request, which was rejected by
the Tribunal and was made notwithstanding a prior agreement that such a process was
unnecessary, as well as its request for security for costs, made three years after the case

began.!8°

Reasonableness of Claimed Costs. The Claimant contends that its claimed costs of USD

9,847,897.00 are “eminently reasonable, both in the abstract and in the circumstances of

186

this case, and exclude counsel and expert costs incurred in connection with the merits

 

s. Sub. para. 8.

83 CL, Costs Sub. para. 9.

84 Cl, Costs Sub. paras. 10-11.
'85 Cl, Costs Sub. paras. 11-12.
'86 Cl, Costs Sub. para. 13.

52

181.

182.

183.

184.

phase.'*” The Claimant adds that the claimed costs are less than 2.4% of the damages

sought. !88

Interest. Finally, the Claimant contends that it should receive interest on any costs awarded
and not promptly paid at the LIBOR rate at the date of award for six-month US dollar
denominated deposits, compounded semi-annually.'*? In anticipation of the termination of
LIBOR, the Claimant proposes that the Tribunal specify a fixed rate of 2.19%, equal to the

LIBOR rate as of the notional date of May 11, 2021 plus two percent.'”

Accordingly, the Claimant claims a total of USD 9,847,897.10 for its legal and other costs,
including USD 350,000.00 in advances made to ICSID. Excluding the USD 350,000.00 in
advances to ICSID (considered separately infra), these total USD 9,497,897. 10, constituted

as follows:
Attorney’s fees: USD 8,555,901.65
Witness and expert fees: USD 552,445.15
Administrative costs: USD 389,550.30
TOTAL: USD 9,497,897.10

THE RESPONDENT’S COSTS SUBMISSIONS.

In its Submission on Costs, the Respondent contends that the Claimant should bear all the
costs and expenses of these proceedings, including the Respondent’s legal fees and

expenses.

Citing Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, Article 28(2) of the ICSID Arbitration

Rules, and investment arbitration jurisprudence, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal

 

19 Cl, Costs Sub. para. 19.

53

185.

186.

187.

1 Resp.

has broad discretion to allocate costs absent agreement otherwise by the parties. It observes
that ICSID tribunals have often applied the principle of “loser pays,” which it finds
particularly appropriate where claims are dismissed for lack of jurisdiction and where a

party makes an unfounded application for provisional measures.'?!

The Respondent urges the Tribunal to apply the “loser pays” principle in this case. It
contends that the Claimant’s claim of jurisdiction was fundamentally flawed,'? and that
its presentation of its claims and its unwarranted request for provisional measures

“unnecessarily increased the complexity and costs of this arbitration.”!°

The Respondent urges in this regard that, notwithstanding the weakness of the Claimant’s
jurisdictional claim, it was obliged to mount a defense, given the allegations of serious
misconduct and a claim estimated to exceed USD 1.5 billion.!° The Respondent maintains
that the Claimant’s request for provisional measures was “entirely unnecessary,” but
caused it to incur costs of USD 1.4 million before the application was withdrawn.!°° It adds
that the Claimant’s conduct of its case needlessly complicated the issues in dispute and

otherwise caused unnecessary effort and expense.!°°

The Respondent contends that its costs are reasonable in light of the amount claimed, the
complexity of the case, and the Claimant’s conduct of the case. It claims a total of USD
11,012,039.00, including USD 350,000.00 in advances on fees and costs paid to ICSID.
Again excluding the USD 350,000.00 in advances to ICSID, these total USD
10,662,039.00, composed as follows:

Attorney’s fees: USD 10,093,500.00
Witness and expert fees: USD 435,653.00
Administrative costs: USD 132,886.00

Costs Sub. paras. 4-7.

2 Resp.

3 Resp,
4 Resp,
5 Resp,

9 Resp.

Costs Sub. para. 9.

Costs Sub. para. 10.
Costs Sub. para. 11.
Costs Sub. para. 12.
Costs Sub. para. 13.

54

188.

189.

190.

191.

 
 

TOTAL: USD 10,662,039.00

The Respondent also seeks interest on the claimed amounts if payment is not made within
30 days “at a rate of US dollar-denominated six-month LIBOR plus 2 compounded semi-

annually” until the date of payment.!°”

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON COSTS

As the Parties observe, Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as
the parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the
parties in connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how
and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members
of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the
Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.

As the Parties agree, this provision gives the Tribunal broad discretion to allocate all costs
of the arbitration between the Parties, including attorney’s fees and other costs. Both Parties
also urge that the Tribunal allocate costs on the same basis: the principle that the costs of
the prevailing party should be paid by the losing party, frequently referred to as “costs

follow the event.” !°*

Thus, both Parties regard “costs follow the event” as appropriate in the circumstances of
the case. The Tribunal agrees that this principle, which is increasingly being applied by
tribunals in international investment cases,!° provides an appropriate framework for
allocating costs in this case. The Tribunal notes in this regard the proposed new ICSID

Arbitration Rule 52, which would provide for a tribunal allocating costs to consider “the

sts Sub. para. 16.
ub. para. 90; Resp. Costs Sub. paras. 7-9.

% Cl, Costs Sub. fns, 2-3 and cases cited; Resp. Costs Sub. para. 7.

55

outcome of the proceeding or any part of it,” as well as the parties’ conduct, the complexity

of the issues, and the reasonableness of the costs claimed.2°°

192. In addition to advocating application of “costs follow the event,” each Party advances
arguments urging the Tribunal to allocate costs in its favor on account of conduct by the
other Party said to be wasteful, unnecessary, or otherwise warranting an allocation more
favorable to the complaining Party. The Tribunal is not persuaded. This has been a
vigorously contested proceeding in which each Party was represented by capable and
energetic counsel. Each Party was entitled to put forward what it regarded as its best case.
Each did so, but at the same time each cooperated fully with the Tribunal’s Orders and
requests. The Tribunal does not see in either Party’s actions any reason to modify

application of “costs follow the event.”

193. The Parties have also identified the reasonableness of the costs incurred as a relevant factor
in apportioning costs. Both Parties have incurred and claimed quite substantial costs,
reflecting the multiple issues in dispute and the intensity and energy each brought to the
case. The amounts claimed by each Party are broadly similar, as are their staffing levels,
expert’s fees, and other expenditures. Particularly given the multiplicity of issues and the
similarity of each Party’s claimed costs, the Tribunal again sees no basis to modify

application of “costs follow the event.”

194. As explained supra, the Tribunal has decided that it does not have jurisdiction, because the
Claimant does not satisfy the Treaty’s requirement that it control the investment.
Accordingly, the Respondent has prevailed on the central issue in the case. It should
therefore be compensated for its costs, subject to adjustments involving certain costs

related to preliminary issues on which it did not prevail.

195. The Respondent’s total claim for its fees and costs for the arbitration is USD
11,012,039.00, including an advance to ICSID of USD 350,000.00 in respect of ICSID’S

fees and costs. The amount advanced to ICSID is separately addressed infra. Deducting

200 RL-188, ICSID, Proposals for Amendment of the ICSID Rules, Working Paper #4, February 2020, pp. 57-58,
Arbitration Rule 52.

56

this amount, the Tribunal decides that the balance of USD 10,662,039.00 must be further

adjusted as follows:

e Each Party incurred substantial costs in connection with the Claimant’s request for
provisional measures; the Respondent states that it incurred such costs of
USD 1,408,070.00. The Respondent contends that the request was “entirely
unnecessary”! and seeks full reimbursement of these costs. As matters developed, it
ultimately was not necessary for the Tribunal to rule on the Claimant’s request.
However, Tribunal does not believe that it was unnecessary or unreasonable for the
Claimant to make the request in the circumstances at the time. It accordingly decides
that the Respondent should be compensated for half of its claimed costs,

USD 704,035.00.

e Both Parties incurred costs in addressing the Respondent’s request that the Tribunal
bifurcate and decide as preliminary issues its objections to jurisdiction ratione
personae, ratione materiae, and ratione temporis. The Tribunal ordered bifurcation of
the first two,” and has now decided the case in the Respondent’s favor on the basis
of the ratione materiae objection. The Claimant calculated its total costs in the
bifurcation proceedings as USD 411,592.49.00, but claimed only half of this amount
on the ground that it succeeded in only half of its objections to bifurcation.?°? The
Respondent did not separately state its costs related to bifurcation, but the Tribunal

views the Claimant’s total as a reasonable indication of the Respondent’s likely costs.

e The Respondent prevailed in the bifurcation proceeding to the extent that the Tribunal

upheld two of its three objections. 7 As the third objection failed, the Respondent

21 Resp. Costs Sub. para. 12.

22 Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation, June 5, 2019.

263 Cl. Costs Sub. para. 15.

24 In calculating its success, the Claimant apparently includes the “Other Preliminary and Jurisdictional Objections”
which the Respondent listed in its Statement of Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation of February 15,
2019 (paras. 82-86). However, the Respondent did not seek bifurcation of these additional objections, and the Claimant
did not deal with them in its Opposition and Rejoinder of Bifurcation, except to reinforce its argument that all of the
Respondent’s objections were intertwined with the merits. The Tribunal did not address the additional objections in
its Decision on Bifurcation.

 

 

s7

196.

197.

198.

should not be compensated for the associated costs, which the Tribunal estimates to
have been USD 137,000.00. The Respondent’s reimbursed costs should be reduced by

this amount.

The Tribunal denied the Respondent’s request for provisional measures requiring the
Claimant to post security for a possible future award of costs. The Claimant calculated
its costs in responding to the Respondent’s request as USD 472,020.32. As the
Claimant prevailed on this issue, the total awarded to the Respondent should be

reduced by this amount.

The Tribunal also denied the Respondent’s request to add a documents production
process to the agreed schedule. The Claimant calculated its costs in responding to this
request to be USD 64,298.00. As the Claimant prevailed on this issue, the costs to be

awarded to the Respondent should also be reduced by this amount.

Accordingly, the Respondent is awarded USD 9,284,686.00 in respect of its costs and
expenses incurred in this case, calculated as follows: USD 10,662,039.00, minus USD
704,035.00, minus USD 137,000.00, minus USD 472,020.00, minus USD 64,298.00.

In addition, the Respondent claims USD 350,000.00 for its advance to ICSID in respect of
the costs of the arbitration, including the Tribunal’s fees and expenses, ICSID’s
administrative fees, and direct expenses. As the Respondent is the prevailing party in the
arbitration, the Tribunal decides that it should also recover the full amount of its share of

the costs of arbitration.

The costs of the arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, ICSID’s

administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to (in USD):

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses

Prof. John R. Crook 132,976.38
Dr. Karim Hafez 93,819.26
Ms. Vera van Houtte 95,175.42

58

199.

200.

201.

202.

205

ICSID’s administrative fees 168,000.00

Direct expenses 97,344.76
Total 587,315.82

The above costs have been paid out of the advances made by the Parties in equal parts.?°°

As a result, each Party’s share of the costs of arbitration amounts to USD 293,657.91.

Accordingly, the Tribunal decides that the Claimant must pay to the Respondent the sum
of USD 9,284,686.00 as compensation for the Respondent’s legal fees and expenses, plus
the amount of the expended portion of the Respondent’s advance to ICSID USD
293,657.91, for a total of USD 9,578,343.91.

Both Parties asked the Tribunal to award compound interest, beginning to accrue if
payment is not made within a thirty-day grace period. For its part, the Claimant noted the
impending discontinuance of LIBOR, and accordingly suggested a rate equivalent to six-
month US dollar LIBOR plus 2 determined as of a proxy date of May 11, 2021. This
resulted in a suggested rate of 2.19%, compounded semi-annually.2°° The Respondent
similarly proposed interest “at a rate of US dollar-denominated six-month LIBOR plus 2

compounded semi-annually running until the date of payment.”?°”

The Tribunal notes the Parties’ very similar requests that the Tribunal award interest at a
rate reflecting six-month dollar-denominated LIBOR plus two, compounded semi-
annually, with a thirty-day grace period. Given the Parties’ requests and the impending
discontinuance of LIBOR, the Tribunal decides to award interest at the fixed rate of 2.16%
interest to begin to accrue on unpaid amounts thirty days after the date of the Tribunal’s

Award.

The remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Parties in proportion to the payments that they advanced to ICSID.

206 Cl, PHS para. 19.
207 Resp. PHS para. 16.

59

VIL.

203.

AWARD
For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal decides as follows:

(a) To uphold the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on
the ground that MAKAE Europe SARL does not control an investment in the Kingdom
and therefore is not an investor for the purposes of Article 1 of the Treaty between the
Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Government of the French

Republic Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments.
(b) To declare that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to settle the dispute between the Parties.

(c) To order the Claimant to pay to the Respondent the sum of USD 9,284,686.00 in respect
of the Respondent’s legal and expert fees and expenses incurred in this arbitration, plus
the Respondent’s share of the costs of the arbitration, including the Tribunal’s fees and
expenses, ICSID’s administrative fees, and direct expenses, in the amount of USD

293,657.91, for a total of USD 9,578,343.91.

(d) To order that interest shall begin to accrue on the amounts awarded to the Respondent
if not paid within 30 days, at a rate of notionally 2.16% compounded semi-annually

until the date of payment.

(e) All other requests for relief are dismissed.

60

 

Ms. Vera van Houtte
Arbitrator

 

Date: Qs. os . 2. \ Date:

Prof. John R. Crook
President of the Tribunal

Date:

Dr. Karim Hafez Ms. Vera van Houtte
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: Date: | Aaqual 222)

Prof. John R. Crook
President of the Tribunal

Date:

 

Dr. Karim Hafez Ms. Vera van Houtte
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: Date:

\, 032 .
: a”
io | : ( rey K
Prof. John R. Crook
President of the Tribunal

Date:

slusust 17, Jo2|

