INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the annulment proceeding between

MALICorP LIMITED
APPLICANT

and

ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
RESPONDENT

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/18

 

DECISION ON THE APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT OF MALICORP LIMITED

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Stanimir Alexandrov
Dr. Eduardo Silva Romero
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda (President)

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Paul-Jean Le Cannu

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: July 3, 2013

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Representation of the Parties
Representing Applicant

Maitre Christian Brémond

Maitre Yassin Tageldin Yassin

c/o Maitre Christian Brémond
Brémond, Vaisse, Rambert & Associés
Paris, France

Representing Respondent

H.E. Mr. Mohamed El-Shiekh, President
Counselor Mahmoud El Khrashy
Counselor Mohamed Khalaf

Counselor Amr Arafa

Counselor Fatma Khalifa

Counselor Rime Hendy

Counselor Lela Kassem

Egyptian State Lawsuits Authority
Cairo, Egypt

Professor Dr. Ahmed Sadek El Kosheri
Kosheri, Rashed & Riad Law Firm
Cairo, Egypt

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited
Table of Contents
|. Introduction and Procedural History 5
Il. Overview of the Positi of the Parties 9

Ill. The Applicable Legal Framework: Article 52 of the ICSID Convention.
A. Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure
B. Failure to State R
C. Manifest excess of powers

 

 

 

IV. Serious Departure From a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. Apr ’s Position
B. Respondent’s Position
C. The Committee’s ysi:

V. Failure To State 35
A. First Alleged Contradicti 35
B. Alleged Contradicti 39
C. Third Alleged Contradicti 43

VI. Manifest Excess of Powers. 45
A. Apr ’s Position 45
B. Respondent’s Position 47
C. The Committee’s ysi: 49

Vil. Costs 52

VIII. Decision 54

 

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 

Application

Applicant’s Application for Annulment dated
June 1, 2011

 

Annul. Tr. [E./F.], Dec. [6/7], [page:line]

Transcript in [English/French] of the December
[6/7], 2012, Hearing on the Application for
Annulment

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

 

Arb. Tr., [page:line]

Transcript of the April 19-20, 2010, Hearing on
Jurisdiction and the Merits in the Arbitration
Proceeding

 

BIT

Agreement between the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the Government of the Arab
Republic of Egypt for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments of June 11, 1975

 

Counter-Memorial

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial of June 5,
2012

 

Exh. [A-] [R-] [DA-]

Exhibit [Applicant] [Respondent] [Annulment
Application]

 

ICSID Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated March 18, 1965

 

ICSID or the Centre

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

 

Malicorp’s PowerPoint Presentation

Malicorp’s PowerPoint Presentation submitted
on November 27, 2012, in the Annulment
Proceeding

 

 

 

 

 

Memorial Applicant's Memorial of March 5, 2012
Rejoinder Respondent's Rejoinder of October 5, 2012
Reply Applicant’s Reply of August 1, 2012
Report Report on the Telephone Conference on the

 

Organization of the Hearing of November 6,
2012

 

 

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Introduction and Procedural History

1. On June 1, 2011, Malicorp Limited, a company incorporated under the laws of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (“Malicorp,” “Applicant,” or “Claimant’), filed
an Application for Annulment (the “Application”) with the Secretary-General of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”).
Malicorp sought annulment of the award rendered on February 7, 2011, in ICSID Case
No. ARB/08/18 between the Arab Republic of Egypt (“Egypt” or “Respondent” or the
“Republic”) and Malicorp (the “Award”). The Application was submitted within the time
period provided for by Article 52(2) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID Convention’).

2. The dispute arose under the Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt
for the Promotion and Protection of Investments of June 11, 1975 (the “BIT’).' It related
to the termination of a “Build-Operate-Transfer” contract, entered into by Egypt, then
represented by the Egyptian Civil Aviation Authority, and Malicorp, for the construction,
management, operation and transfer of the Ras Sudr International Airport (the
“Contract’).”

3. The Award summarized as follows the views of Malicorp and Egypt (collectively, the
“Parties”) as to why the Contract was terminated:

According to the Claimant, the Contract was terminated for
reasons connected to national security (Claim. 23.07.2009, no. III-
2, p. 12; Claim. 23.10.2009, no. Ill-2, p. 15; Respond. 08.01.2010,
no. 133). That being so, such termination entitled it to
compensation for the damage caused by unfair treatment and the
expropriation of its investment (Respond. 08.01.2010, no. 151;
Respond. 01.07.2009, no. 27).

According to the Respondent, the Contract was terminated for a
reason contained in the Contract itself. Malicorp had allegedly
produced false documents, had not fulfilled its obligation to set up
an Egyptian company, had failed to provide the necessary
guarantees and had failed to properly perform the Concession

' See Award, para. 74.
? See Award, paras. 15 and 33.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Contract (Respond. 08.01.2010, no. 133; Respond. 01.07.2009,
no. 27).°
4. While Applicant argued that Egypt had acted in violation of the BIT’s provisions on fair and
equitable treatment and expropriation,* Respondent contended that “Malicorp’s claim
should be rejected, promptly as an improper attempt to use BIT rights to profit from its own
fraud and negligence and its own failure to perform the Concession Contract.”®

5. In its Award, the Tribunal, comprised of Professor Pierre Tercier (a national of
Switzerland) (presiding), Professor Luiz Olavo Baptista (a national of Brazil), and Mr.
Pierre-Yves Tschanz (a national of Switzerland), decided, inter alia, that:

it had jurisdiction to rule on Applicant's claims;° and

(ii

“[...] the reasons on which the Respondent relied in order to bring the Contract to
an end appear[ed] serious and adequate; the termination, justified in fact and in
law, could not be interpreted as an expropriatory measure.””

(iii) Therefore, Applicant's submissions based on “the principle of compensation for
expropriation [were] rejected.”®

6. As indicated above, Malicorp filed its Application on June 1, 2011.

7. On June 13, 2011, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application and notified
the Parties of the registration in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 50(2)(a) and (b).

8. On July 8, 2011, an ad hoc Committee composed of Mr. Stanimir Alexandrov (a national
of Bulgaria), Dr. Eduardo Silva Romero (a national of Colombia and France), and Dr.
Andrés Rigo Sureda (a national of Spain), as President, was constituted. Ms. Aurélia
Antonietti was designated to serve as Secretary of the Committee (the “Secretary’).

5 Award, para. 33.

* See Award, para. 121.

5 Award, paras. 84, 94, and 121.
® See Award, para. 120, p. 47.

” Award, para. 143.

® Award, para. 143, p. 47.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

9. On December 5, 2011, the Committee held a first session with the Parties. It was agreed
inter alia that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be those in effect from April 10,
2006.° The Parties confirmed that the Committee had been properly constituted and had
No objections with regard to the declarations by its Members."° The Parties also agreed
on a number of other procedural matters reflected in the Minutes of the First Session (the
“Minutes of the First Session”), including the procedural language. The Parties and the
Committee thus agreed that:

Each party may file its submissions, including correspondence,
and plead in French or English without the need for translation.
Documents filed in French or English shall not be accompanied by
a translation. Documents originally written in a language other
than French or English must be translated into French or English.
The verbatim transcripts of the hearings shall be in French and
English.

The procedural orders and the decision shall be given in French
and English. As in the arbitration proceeding, the authentic
language shall be French. It is specified that the Committee may
refer in its decision to positions expressed by the Parties in French
or English or to legal instruments in English without the need for
translation into the other language.

The Centre shall correspond in French or English without
translation.

The Parties agree that the minutes of this session shall be drawn
up in French and English. '"

10. The French and English versions of the Minutes of the First Session signed by the

President of the Committee and the Secretary were circulated to the Parties on January 9,
2012.

11. On March 5, 2012, Applicant submitted its Memorial (the “Memorial”) requesting the
annulment of the Award.

12. On June 4, 2012, Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial (the “Counter-Memorial”),
dated June 5, 2012.

° See Minutes of the First Session of the Annulment Proceeding, held on December 5, 2011, para. 5
(;Minutes of the First Session”).

See Minutes of the First Session, para. 1.
"' Minutes of the First Session, para. 7.

20.

21.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited
On August 1, 2012, Applicant submitted its Reply (the “Reply”).

On October 3, 2012, the Centre informed the Parties that Mr. Paul-Jean Le Cannu would
henceforth replace Ms. Aurélia Antonietti as Secretary of the Committee.

On the same day, Respondent submitted its Rejoinder (the “Rejoinder”), dated October 5,
2012.

On November 6, 2012, the President of the Committee held a pre-hearing telephone
conference with the Parties and the Secretary. The Parties agreed during the conference
that PowerPoint presentations should be exchanged one week prior to the hearing if the
Committee wished for such presentations to be made available. The President indicated
that the Committee would revert to the Parties very soon to let them know whether it did
wish for PowerPoint presentations to be made available." On November 7, 2012, the
Secretary circulated a Report on the Telephone Conference on the Organization of the
Hearing of November 6, 2012 (the “Report”) to the Parties.

By email from the Centre of November 12, 2012, the Committee informed the Parties that
they could use PowerPoint presentations if they so wished. While the Committee did not
consider it essential that PowerPoint presentations be submitted, it requested that the
Parties exchange their presentations within the time limit agreed at the pre-hearing
telephone conference, if the Parties did contemplate using such presentations.

By email of November 27, 2012, Applicant submitted an electronic copy of its PowerPoint
presentation (“Malicorp’s PowerPoint Presentation”), in accordance with paragraph 4 of
the Report.

On December 6 and 7, 2012, a hearing was held at the World Bank’s offices in Paris,
France.

On March 19, 2013, the Committee closed the proceeding.

The ad hoc Committee considers necessary to review briefly the history of the
proceedings before the Tribunal and the related contractual arbitration. Malicorp filed a

'? See Report on the Telephone Conference on the Organization of the Hearing of November 6, 2012,
para. 4.

22.

23.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

request for arbitration with the Cairo Regional Centre for International Commercial
Arbitration (“CRCICA”) on April 20, 2004.'° The proceedings were between Malicorp as
claimant and three respondents (the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Egyptian Holding
Company for Aviation, and the Egyptian Airport Company).'* The CRCICA Tribunal was
formed in May 2004"° and issued its award on March 7, 2006.'° It held that: (i) the
arbitration agreement in the Contract was binding on the Republic; (ii) the Republic had
been the victim of a fundamental error in signing the Contract in that it believed that
Malicorp had a capital of £100 million; therefore (iii) the Contract was void; and (iv)
respondents were ordered to reimburse Malicorp for certain costs in the amount of $14.8
million.'” The Tribunal found that the CRCICA Award was dispositive as far as Applicant’s
contract claims were concerned, while it retained jurisdiction over the BIT (i.e.
international) claims. '®

Overview of the Positions of the Parties

Applicant requests that the Award be annulled under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention
on the grounds that: (i) there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure; (ii) the award failed to state the reasons on which it is based; and (iii) the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers. '®

Applicant reviews the facts of the dispute, the previous proceedings, and the arguments
submitted to the Tribunal by the Parties.?? On that basis, Applicant argues that the
Tribunal (i) violated the principe du contradictoire by allowing Respondent, over
Applicant's objections, to submit a hard copy of its PowerPoint slides to the Arbitral
Tribunal during the April 20, 2011 hearing while denying Applicant the opportunity to file
its dossier de plaidoirie;”' (ii) contradicted itself on several occasions in the Award thereby
failing to state reasons;” and (iii) manifestly exceeded its powers by failing to apply the

8 See Award, para. 44.
‘4 See Award, para. 44.
'S See Award, para. 45.
'S See Award, para. 58.
” See Award, para. 58.

19

"8 See Award, para. 103.
See Memorial, p. 2.

2° See Memorial, Chapters I-II. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 4:22 — 14:29.
2" See Memorial Chapter Ill. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 14:30 — 29:29.
?2 See Memorial, Chapter IV. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 29:39 — 38:7.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

proper law and by unduly relying on a prior CRCICA Award on the same matter to reach
its decision.”°

After reviewing the structure and content of the Award,** Respondent contends that: (i)
granting Applicant's claims would require the Committee to exceed the limits of its
mandate by reviewing the facts of the case and the merits of the Award; (ii) the use of
modern methods such as PowerPoint Presentations in support of oral arguments does not
per se constitute a departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, let alone a serious
one;** (iii) the Tribunal neither failed to state reasons nor exceeded its powers because it
rightfully considered that the contract issues addressed before the CRCICA Tribunal were
res judicata and thus were not to be adjudicated de novo;’ and (iv) the Tribunal’s
mandate was limited to ruling on Applicant’s expropriation claim under the BIT.”®

The Committee will first consider the legal framework applicable in this case before turning
to a more detailed review of the Parties’ arguments.

The Applicable Legal Framework: Article 52 of the ICSID Convention

Article 52 of the ICSID Convention provides for the annulment of an award on the five
specific grounds listed in its first paragraph. In the instant case, and as already noted,
Applicant invokes three of the five grounds: serious departure from a fundamental
procedural rule, failure to state reasons, and manifest excess of powers. The Committee
will now consider the legal framework applicable to each of the grounds in the order in
which Applicant raised them.

A. Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

Adherence to proper procedures is of utmost importance because it ensures the
“preservation of the integrity and legitimacy of the arbitration process.”*° Accordingly, the

?8 See Memorial, Chapter V. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 38:9 — 46:32.
24 See Counter-Memorial, paras. 8-40.
25 See Counter-Memorial, paras. 1-7, 97. See also Rejoinder, para. 2.

2

® See Counter-Memorial, paras. 41-71. See also Annul. Tr. E., Dec. 6, 29:19 — 31:15; Annul. Tr. F., Dec.

6, 47:13 — 48:28.

2” See Counter-Memorial, paras. 16-30. See also Annul. Tr. E., Dec. 6, 31:16 — 33:3, 34:1 — 42:2.
28 See Counter-Memorial, paras. 77-79. See also Annul. Tr. E., Dec. 6, 24:11 — 25:6.

°° Christoph Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY 979 (2009) (2d Ed.).

10

28.

29.

30.

31.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

ICSID Convention provides for annulment of an award where “there has been a serious
930

departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.
For an award to be annulled on this ground, it must meet two tests: (i) there must be a
violation of a “fundamental rule of procedure”; and (ii) the departure from that rule must be
“serious.”*' As is clear on the face of this provision, both criteria are mandatory.**

By referring to “fundamental rule[s] of procedure,” the drafters of the Convention intended
to restrict annulment on this ground to violations of those principles that are essential to a
fair hearing.®? This is because, no matter how serious, a violation of a non-fundamental
rule would not call into question the validity of an award and thus should not result in
annulment.** Examples of such fundamental principles include the requirement that “both
Parties must be heard and that there must be an adequate opportunity for rebuttal.”°°

The Wena ad hoc Committee further interpreted the requirement that the procedural
rule(s) in question be “fundamental” as referring “to a set of minimal standards of
procedure to be respected as a matter of international law.”*° Thus, the key question in
annulment proceedings with respect to this ground is whether the procedure allegedly
violated falls within the category of fundamental rules necessary to ensure a full and fair
hearing.

Applicant submits that the Award should be annulled because the Tribunal violated the
principe du contradictoire, which it defines as the concept that “chaque partie bénéficie
des mémes droits et des mémes obligations.”*” According to Malicorp, this includes the
concept of “égalité des armes.”*® In support of its claim, Applicant quotes the Fraport ad

3° ICSID Convention Art. 52(1)(d).

31 ICSID Convention Art. 52(1)(d).

%° See Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 980.

8° See Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 980.

** See Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 980.

°° Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 980 (citing HISTORY OF THE ICSID CONVENTION, Vol. II, p. 480).
°° Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (\CSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on Annulment,
February 5, 2002, para. 57 (“Wena Annulment Decision”).

57 Memorial, p. 44.

38 Memorial, p. 44.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

hoc Committee, which held that the “right to present one's case” is a fundamental rule for
the purposes of annulment proceedings under Article 52(1)(d).°°

32. Respondent does not specifically disagree with the claim that the principe du
contradictoire is a fundamental rule of procedure. Its argument, instead, is that the
alleged violation of this rule, if any, was not sufficiently serious to merit annulment in this

case.”

33. The second requirement for an award to be annulled due to a “departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure” is that the violation be considered “serious.”*' The ad hoc
Committee in MINE stated:

In order to constitute a ground for annulment the departure from a
“fundamental rule of procedure” must be serious. The Committee
considers that this establishes both quantitative and qualitative
criteria: the departure must be substantial and be such as to
deprive a party of the benefit or protection which the rule was
intended to provide.”

34. Relying on this definition, the Wena ad hoc Committee further concluded:

In order to be a “serious” departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure, the violation of such a rule must have caused the
Tribunal to reach a result substantially different from what it would
have awarded had such a rule been observed.“°

35. Both Parties highlight this requirement. Applicant does so by stating that “‘/'inobservation
grave’ est nécessairement une violation consciente qui engendre des conséquences.”“*

Respondent relies on the MINE standard as set out by the Continental Casualty ad hoc

3° Memorial, p. 44, quoting Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25), Decision on Annulment, December 23, 2010, para. 202 (citations omitted)
“Fraport Annulment Decision”).

° See Counter-Memorial, para. 53.

* ICSID Convention Art. 52(1)(d).

* maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v. Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No.
ARB/84/4), Decision on Annulment, December 22, 1989, para. 5.05 (“MINE Annulment Decision”).

“8 Wena Annulment Decision, para. 58.

“4 Memorial, p. 42 (emphasis in original).

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Committee that, to be serious, the departure must cause a substantially different result or
45

must “deprive a party of the benefit or protection which the rule was intended to provide.

36. The Committee notes that the Parties agree on the substance of the principe du
contradictoire and on the fact that it is a rule of procedure that ensures equality of the
parties in an adversarial proceeding. The Committee further notes that this principle is
closely related to the right to be heard. This right of parties to present their case has been
recognized as part of that “set of minimal standards” considered fundamental for a fair
hearing.*© The Committee thus concludes that the principe du contradictoire is a
fundamental rule of procedure.

37. The Committee also concludes that, to be serious, the departure from the procedural rule
must have the consequences set out by the ad hoc Committees in MINE, Wena, and
Continental Casualty. It is also the Committee’s view that the assessment of the
seriousness criterion above should always be made on a case-by-case basis.

B. Failure to State Reasons

38. An award can also be annulled if it “has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.”“”
This ground for annulment is rooted in the understanding that “[a] statement of the
reasons for a judicial decision is widely regarded to be a pre-requisite for an orderly
administration of justice.”*® This requirement is so fundamental that it cannot be waived:

A statement of reasons is a valuable element of the arbitration
process. The Committee has noted that the Committee of Legal
Experts, which was to advise the Executive Directors of the World
Rank on the draft Convention, by a vote of 28 to 3 rejected a
proposal which would allow the Parties to dispense with the
requirement of a reasoned award (History of the Convention, Vol.
Il, p. 816). A waiver of the requirement in an arbitration agreement
would therefore not bar a party from seeking an annulment for
failure of an award to state reasons.*®

“© Counter-Memorial, para. 43, quoting Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/9), Decision on Annulment, September 16, 2011, paras. 95-96 (“Continental Casualty Annulment
Decision”).

*© See Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 987-91.

4 ICSID Convention Art. 52(1)(e)

“8 Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 996.

48 MINE Annulment Decision, para. 5.10. See also Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 996.

13

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

39. The fundamental nature of this requirement does not mean, however, that it is an onerous
one. In fact, “[t]he duty to state reasons refers only to a minimum requirement.” As
stated by the ad hoc Committee in MINE:

In the Committee’s view, the requirement to state reasons is
satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow how the
tribunal proceeded from Point A. to Point B. and eventually to its
conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of law. This
minimum requirement is in particular not satisfied by either
contradictory or frivolous reasons.*"

40. Relying on this reasoning, the Wena ad hoc Committee added:

The ground for annulment of Article 52(1)(e) does not allow any
review of the challenged Award which would lead the ad hoc
Committee to reconsider whether the reasons underlying the
Tribunal’s decisions were appropriate or not, convincing or not.
As stated by the ad hoc Committee in MINE, this ground for
annulment refers to a “minimum requirement” only. This
requirement is based on the Tribunal’s duty to identify, and to let
the Parties know, the factual and legal premises leading the
Tribunal to its decision. If such sequence of reasons has been
given by the Tribunal, there is no room left for a request for
annulment under Article 52(1)(e).°2

41. In this case, Applicant claims that the Tribunal failed to state reasons because it
contradicted itself.®* It is accepted that “contradictory reasons amount to a failure to state
reasons” and thus can be grounds for annulment under Art. 52(1)(e).°* For instance, the
ad hoc Committee in Kiéckner | stated:

As for “contradiction of reasons,” it is in principle appropriate to
bring this notion under the category “failure to state reasons” for
the very simple reason that two genuinely contradictory reasons
cancel each other out. Hence the failure to state reasons. The
arbitrator's obligation to state reasons which are not contradictory
must therefore be accepted.

5° Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 997.

5 MINE Annulment Decision, para. 5.09.

52 Wena Annulment Decision, para. 79.

°° See Memorial, Chapter IV.

54 Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 1011.

8° Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others v. United Republic of Cameroon and Société Camerounaise
des Engrais (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2), Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, para. 116 (“Ki6ckner
Annulment Decision”) (italics in original).

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

42. Thus, although an award may be annulled based on contradictory reasoning, applicants
face a high burden to prove that different parts of the tribunal’s analysis are so
contradictory as to cancel each other out entirely. The Kiédckner | ad hoc Committee, for
instance, went on to reject the annulment petition in so far as it was based on allegedly
contradictory reasons because:

In reality, the two reasons are not contradictory, despite certain
ambiguities in language. In neither case is the decision based on
the existence or non-existence of the result, a deception, or on its
possibility or impossibility. The complaint must therefore be
rejected.°*

43. Ad hoc committees have urged caution when considering annulment on this ground. The
Vivendi | ad hoc Committee, for example, emphasized that the contradictions must be
“genuine” and recommended restraint for all committees considering annulment on this
basis:

[A]nnulment under Article 52(1)(e) should only occur in a clear
case. This entails two conditions: first, the failure to state reasons
must leave the decision on a particular point essentially lacking in
any expressed rationale; and second, that point must itself be
necessary to the tribunal’s decision. It is frequently said that
contradictory reasons cancel each other out, and indeed, if
reasons are genuinely contradictory so they might. However,
tribunals must often struggle to balance conflicting considerations,
and an ad hoc committee should be careful not to discern
contradiction when what is actually expressed in a tribunal’s
reasons could more truly be said to be but a reflection of such
conflicting considerations.”

44. Likewise, the CDC ad hoc Committee urged that:

In construing awards, as in construing statutes and legal
instruments generally, one necessarily should construe the
language in issue, whenever possible, in a way that results in
consistency . . .°

58 Kléckner Annulment Decision, para. 123.

a Compahia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. (Formerly Compagnie générale des
eaux) v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, para. 65
(; Vivendi | Annulment Decision”).

® CDC Group ple v. Republic of Seychelles (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision on Annulment, June
29, 2005, para. 81 (“CDC Annulment Decision’).

45.

46.

47.

48.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Thus, when dealing with an annulment request based on an alleged failure to state
reasons, an ad hoc committee must look beyond what may, at a first glance, appear to be
a contradiction and seek to follow the logic and the reasoning of the award. In other
words, an award must be upheld unless the logic is so contradictory as to be “as useful as
no reasons at all.”®°

Respondent does not dispute the fact that contradictory reasoning may lead to annulment,
but strongly disagrees with Applicant’s contention that the Tribunal “erred by formulating

three ‘contradictory motifs.”

C. Manifest excess of powers

Applicant's third and last basis for seeking annulment is that the Tribunal allegedly
exceeded its powers. Under the ICSID Convention, an arbitral award may be annulled if

“the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers.”*"

The most significant excess of
powers, and the one at issue in this case, occurs when the Tribunal exceeds the limits of
its jurisdiction. This may be the case where a tribunal “exercises a jurisdiction which it
does not have under the relevant agreement or treaty and the ICSID Convention, read
together, but also if it fails to exercise a jurisdiction which it possesses under those
instruments.”® This is because ‘i]t is not within the tribunal’s powers to refuse to decide

a dispute or part of a dispute that meets all jurisdictional requirements of Art. 25.”°

Moreover, “[t]here is widespread agreement that a failure to apply the proper law may
amount to an excess of powers by the tribunal.”®° In their interpretation of this ground for
annulment, ad hoc committees concur in that “a Tribunal’s complete failure to apply the
proper law or acting ex aequo et bono without agreement of the Parties to do so as

°° Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 1011.
® Counter-Memorial, paras. 75-76.

62

5" ICSID Convention Art. 52(1)(b).
See Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 938.

® Vivendi | Annulment Decision, para. 86.
° Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 947.
°° Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 955.

49.

50.

51.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

required by the ICSID Convention could constitute a manifest excess of powers.”® In the
words of the Soufraki ad hoc committee:

[O]ne must also consider that a tribunal goes beyond the scope of

its power if it does not respect the law applicable to the substance

of the arbitration under the ICSID Convention. It is widely

recognized in ICSID jurisprudence that failure to apply the

applicable law constitutes an excess of power. The relevant

provisions of the applicable law are constitutive elements of the

Parties’ agreement to arbitrate and constitute part of the definition

of the tribunal’s mandate.*”
Incorrect interpretation of the law, however, does not normally rise to the level of an
excess of powers.® As the Soufraki ad hoc Committee noted, “ICSID ad hoc committees
have commonly been quite clear . . . that a distinction must be made between the failure
to apply the proper law, which can result in annulment, and an error in the application of

the law, which is not a ground for annulment.”®

Allowing annulment committees to
overturn incorrect applications of the law was specifically rejected by the drafters of the
ICSID Convention because some delegates feared that this would call into question the
finality of awards.” Incorrect application of the law is thus not a basis for annulment
except in the most egregious cases where such misapplication “is of such a nature or
degree as to constitute objectively (regardless of the Tribunal’s actual or presumed
intentions) its effective non-application.””’

The ICSID Convention requires that an excess of power be “manifest” in order to qualify
for annulment. Annulment committees have differed somewhat in interpreting the
meaning of this term.

Some, such as the Repsol ad hoc Committee, have found that “exceeding one’s powers is
‘manifest’ when it is ‘obvious by itself simply by reading the Award, that is, even prior toa

°° Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, para. 94. See also Schreuer,
THE ICSID CONVENTION at 938.

°” Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7), Decision on
Annulment, June 5, 2007, para. 45 (“Soufraki Annulment Decision”).

°° See Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 956, 959-964.

69

Soufraki Annulment Decision, para. 85.

”° See Antonio Parra, THE HISTORY OF ICSID 87 (2012).
'Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1), Resubmitted
Case: Decision on Annulment, December 3, 1992, para. 7.19.

17

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

detailed examination of its contents.””? The Wena ad hoc Committee likewise understood
“manifest” to imply that the excess should be obvious or evident:

The excess of power must be self-evident rather than the product
of elaborate interpretations one way or the other. When the latter
happens the excess of power is no longer manifest.’°

Following suit, the CDC ad hoc Committee held that:

[I]f a Tribunal exceeds its powers, the excess must be plain on its
face for annulment to be an available remedy. Any excess
apparent in a Tribunal’s conduct, if susceptible of argument “one
way or the other,” is not manifest.”

52. Others, such as Vivendi |, have concluded that a tribunal has manifestly exceeded its
powers if the excess of powers has clear and serious consequences:

[T]he Committee concludes that the Tribunal exceeded its powers
in the sense of Article 52(1)(b), in that the Tribunal, having
jurisdiction over the Tucuman claims, failed to decide those
claims. Given the clear and serious implications of that decision
for Claimants in terms of Article 8(2) of the BIT, and the
surrounding circumstances, the Committee can only conclude that
that excess of powers was manifest.’®

53. The Soufraki ad hoc committee found that both approaches had merit and should apply:

[A] strict opposition between two different meanings of “manifest”
— either “obvious” or “serious” — is an unnecessary debate. It
seems to this Committee that a manifest excess of power implies
that the excess of power should at once be textually obvious and
substantively serious.”

54. Applicant agrees with the standard as set out above. It cites the Sempra ad hoc
Committee (‘[an excess of power] must be quite evident without the need to engage in an

” Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador) (ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/10), Decision on Annulment, January 8, 2007, para. 36 (emphasis in original).

”° Wena Annulment Decision, para. 25.

4 CDC Annulment Decision, para. 41.

*8 Vivendi | Annulment Decision, para. 115.

’8 Soufraki Annulment Decision, para. 40.

55.

56.

57.

IV.

58.

59.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

elaborate analysis of the text of the Award”), and concludes that “pour étre manifeste,
“77

l'excés de pouvoirs [sic] ne doit pas étre discutable.
Respondent likewise agrees with the legal standard, but accuses Applicant of seeking
appellate review of the Tribunal’s decision in violation of the limited scope of annulment
proceedings.”® In support of this proposition, Egypt cites the ad hoc Committee in
Compagnie d’Exploitation du Chemin de Fer Transgabonais:

Le Comité tient ... a insister férmement [sic] sur le fait que

Pannulation n’est certainement pas un moyen selon lequel une

partie a une procédure d’arbitrage peut chercher a renverser des

éléments de fond de la sentence arbitrale qui lui déplaisent.”°
The Committee concurs with the Soufraki Annulment Decision and understands “manifest”
to mean both obvious and serious. The Committee does not believe that these two terms
are inconsistent to the extent that what has serious and substantial implications is also
clear and obvious.

Having set out the legal framework applicable in this case, the Committee next turns to
Applicant's specific claims.

Serious Departure From a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

The Parties’ respective positions on the alleged serious departure from a fundamental rule
of procedure are summarized below.

A. Applicant's Position

Applicant argues that the Tribunal violated the principe du contradictoire, thus seriously
departing from a fundamental rule of procedure within the meaning of Article 52(1)(d) of
the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 50(1)(iii).°°

77 Memorial, p.107, quoting Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic (\CSID Case No.
ARB/02/16), Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2010, para. 123.

”8 See Counter-Memorial, paras. 4-5.

”° Counter-Memorial, para. 5 quoting Compagnie d'Exploitation du Chemin de Fer Transgabonais v.

a

Gabonese Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/04/5), Decision on Annulment, May 11, 2010, para. 19.
° See Memorial, p. 2.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

60. According to Applicant, a “serious departure” is a deliberate violation that entails
consequences.®' A “fundamental rule of procedure,” meanwhile, is one that goes to the
essence of the procedure.” Without such a rule, equal right of access to a judge or an
arbitrator would not be guaranteed.®* Applicant further argues that the principe du
contradictoire is universally seen as a fundamental rule of procedure™ and applies to
ICSID proceedings.®° Relying on the ad hoc committee’s decision in the Fraport case,
Applicant further argues that:

Le principe du contradictoire ne se résume pas a la prise en
compte par les membres du Tribunal arbitral de l’argumentation
de chacune des parties.

Le principe du contradictoire va bien au-dela, puisqu’il suppose
que chaque partie bénéficie des mémes droits et des mémes
obligations et ce, dans le moindre détail, afin qu’aucune des
parties ne puisse prendre un avantage sur l’autre.®°

61. Applicant contends that by admitting into evidence the PowerPoint slides used by
Respondent at the April 2011 hearing and yet refusing to admit Applicant's dossier de
plaidoirie, the Tribunal violated the principe du contradictoire, which includes the principle
of equality of arms.°”

62. Applicant’s concerns regarding the admission of the PowerPoint slides are twofold. First,
Malicorp argues that the slides and the dossier are equivalent advocacy documents, so
that the Tribunal should have accepted both or neither.® According to Applicant,
admitting the PowerPoint slides but not the dossier was a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure because it gave Respondent an additional opportunity to
present its arguments. Applicant claims that this is a clear violation of the right to equality
of arms.®°

®' See Memorial, p. 42.

& See Memorial, p. 42.

®3 See Memorial, pp. 41-42.

®4 See Application, p. 4. See also Memorial, p. 43.

®5 See Application, p. 4. See also Memorial, p. 43. Applicant refers to ICSID Arbitration Rules 29-38
which in its view are designed to uphold the principe du contradictoire.

8 Application, p. 5 (citing Fraport Annulment Decision, para. 202). See also Memorial, p. 44; Annul. Tr.
F., Dec. 6, 16:1 — 16:5.

®” See Memorial, p. 44. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 18:15 — 18:31.

®8 See Application, pp. 9-10. See also Memorial, pp. 49 and 71.

°° See Memorial, pp. 49-50.

20

63.

64.

65.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Second, Applicant also objects to the admission of the slides because it believes that they
were intended to mislead the Tribunal with regard to a key document, and that the
arbitrators were in fact confused by them.°° At issue specifically is slide 42, entitled “The

Articles of Association of Malicorp.”®'

This slide shows two excerpts of scanned
documents: (i) the signature block of a Mrs. M. JEYA, Registrar of Companies, showing
that the document was executed at Companies House in Cardiff on September 15, 1999;
and (ii) a single sentence, “5) The Company's share capital is £100 million divided into
one million shares of £100 each.”® The slide cites the source of the images as pages 91

and 94 of Respondent's second exhibit.

According to Applicant, this slide presents purposefully truncated quotations meant to
deceive the Tribunal and lead it to conclude that the two excerpts originate from the same
document. The error, in Applicant’s view, was the Tribunal’s mistaken conclusion that
Malicorp’s Articles of Association, as attested by the Registrar, Mrs. M. Jeya, stated that
the company’s share capital was £100 million.®* In reality, there were two separate
documents. The paragraph with the signature of the Registrar was extracted from the
“Certificate of Registration,” which does not make any reference to Malicorp’s capital; the
reference to the company’s share capital came from a different, unsigned document that
does not specifically refer to Malicorp.°® Applicant refers to the combination of these
extracts from two different documents on a single slide as “montages photocopiques.”*”

Malicorp focuses on slide 42 because of the critical importance of this document for the
Tribunal’s decision in this case. At issue is what happened between the Parties on
January 3, 2000.% Both sides agree that a meeting took place between them on that
day.®° Applicant contends that it did not provide any document setting out its share capital

°° See Application, pp. 39-40. See also Memorial, pp. 83-84.

*" Closing Submission of Respondent (PowerPoint presentation), Exh. DA-23, slide 42.

® Closing Submission of Respondent (PowerPoint presentation), Exh. DA-23, slide 42.

°8 See Memorial, pp. 73-74. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 24:8 — 24:15; Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 7, 9:48 —

10:41.

° See Memorial, pp. 73-74.

°° See Memorial, pp. 73-74. See also Malicorp’s PowerPoint Presentation, slides 25-29, 46, 132-133.

°° See Memorial, pp. 73-74.

” See Memorial, p. 72. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 24:8 — 24:15. See also Malicorp’s PowerPoint
Presentation, slide 46.

%® See Memorial, p. 6.

°° See Memorial, p. 6. See also Counter-Memorial, para. 33 (citing Award, paras. 134-136).

21

66.

67.

68.

100
101
102

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

on that day and that any such document produced by Egypt was a forgery.’ Applicant
focuses on these alleged deceptions because it argues that the Tribunal ultimately found
against Malicorp by relying on a forged document that was presented as genuine through
those “montages.”"”'

Applicant insists that it repeatedly drew the Tribunal’s attention to Respondent's
procedural maneuvers during the arbitral proceeding and that it objected on numerous
occasions to the admission of the PowerPoint slides. '°* In addition, Applicant points to its
numerous letters to the Tribunal in which it highlighted the various “montages
photocopiques” contained in Respondent’s PowerPoint presentation." However,
according to Applicant, the Tribunal neither addressed nor took into account these
objections in the Award. '°*

Applicant claims that the admission of Respondent's PowerPoint slides gave it an undue
advantage by granting it an additional opportunity to convince the Tribunal, thus violating

° Malicorp argues that this placed it at a procedural
1,108

the principle of equality of arms.'®
disadvantage, thus deeply undermining its trust in the Tribunal

Applicant further argues that if the Committee finds that the principe du contradictoire was
violated, it need not consider whether the Tribunals’ outcome would have been different
had the slides not been admitted.'” This is because, according to Malicorp,
“[l/inobservation grave’ est nécessairement une violation consciente qui engendre des
conséquences. II ne peut y avoir d’inobservation grave sans conséquence concréte.”'® In
support of this proposition, Applicant refers to the case law of the European Court of
Human Rights, according to which, where there was a violation of the principle of equality
of arms or the principe du contradictoire, the Court held the State liable, regardless of the

See Memorial, p. 89. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 21:9 — 22:26.
See Reply, pp.16-18
See Memorial, Chapter Ill-3.2. See also Reply, pp. 13-14.

‘8 See Application, pp. 30-37. See also Memorial, pp. 51-52, 71-80. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 27:7

-2

tho:
104

105
106
107
108

7:12. Applicant argues that its letter of May 25, 2010, was held to be admissible by the Tribunal while
se of May 26, June 14 and July 2, 2010, were not (Application, p. 38; Memorial, p. 81.).

See Application, p. 37. See also Memorial, pp. 80-81.

See Application, pp.9-10. See also Memorial, pp. 49-50.

See Memorial, p. 45.

See Memorial, p. 42. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 29:5 — 29:11.

Memorial, p. 42.

22

69.

70.

71.

72.

109

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

consequences of this violation.‘

Citing the Rumeli annulment decision, Applicant also
argues that the Committee clearly has no discretion to decline to annul the Award
because the principe du contradictoire is absolute and its violation in this case is

flagrant. ''°

Applicant claims further prejudice resulting from having been forced to respond to
Respondent's request for the admission of the slides at the hearing without preparation. '"'
Applicant asserts that it was unprepared to defend itself against Respondent’s sudden
request and thus was not given the chance to properly plead its case, which once again
violated the principe du contradictoire.'*

Applicant finally contends that Respondent’s suggestion that it should have requested a
revision of the Award is surprising since the relevant facts, namely the “montages” meant
to deceive the Tribunal, were discovered during the arbitral proceeding, so that they were

not new evidence that might have led to a different result on revision. '"°

B. Respondent's Position

Respondent submits that Applicant aims its attack at “the ways and means used by the
Parties in pleading their case,” and not at the Tribunal’s Award.''* Respondent further
contends that such an approach is inconsistent with the limited and extraordinary nature of
annulment, which is designed to “assure compliance with fundamental requirements of
due process without interfering in the merits of the Arbitral Tribunal’s ruling as stated in its
Award.”"'®

Relying on the decision rendered in Continental Casualty Co. v. Argentina, Respondent
defines the concept of serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure and
emphasizes, inter alia, that in order to be “serious,” a departure from a rule of procedure

See Reply pp.11-12. See also Niderdést-Huber v. Switzerland, 104/1995/610/698, Council of Europe:

European Court of Human Rights, February 18, 1997. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 29:18 — 29:27.

10

Memorial, Chapter, III-5.3, citing Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri

A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16), Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the
Application for Annulment of March 25, 2010, para. 75. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 29:14 — 29:20.
"See Application, pp. 38-39. See also Memorial, pp. 81-82.

112
113
114
115

See Application, pp. 38-39. See also Memorial, pp. 81-82.
See Reply, p. 14.

Counter-Memorial, para. 42.

Counter-Memorial, para. 44.

23

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

“must have caused the Tribunal to reach a result substantially different from what it would

have awarded has [sic] such a rule been observed,” or must have been “such as to

deprive a party of the benefit or protection which the rule was intended to provide.”'"®

73. Respondent also distinguishes this case from the award in Fraport, which was annulled
because of the “Tribunal’s failure to permit the parties to make a fresh submission to it in
the light of the new material introduced during the period after the closing of the
proceeding [...].”""”

because it merely relates to “an incident that took place throughout the oral hearing due to

Respondent affirms that the present case can be distinguished

the difference in the methods of pleading [...],” that is pleading with or without electronic
visual aids such as PowerPoint presentations.'’® Respondent emphasizes that when
ICSID inquired whether counsel would make PowerPoint presentations at the hearing,
counsel for Malicorp responded that he would not while counsel for Egypt indicated that
he would.''? This put Applicant on notice that opposing counsel planned to use visual
aids in the form of a PowerPoint presentation at the hearing. '”°

74. In addition, Respondent clarifies that it did not file any new documents after the hearing. "*'
Rather, it submitted printed copies of a presentation that had already been made before
the Tribunal during the hearing and which contained only previously admitted
documents.'”? Respondent argues that allowing one party to use PowerPoint slides while
the other does not is not per se a departure from the rule of equal treatment of the Parties
and right to be heard as long as the other party was given the chance to comment and

raise objections.'** Moreover, Applicant was given an equal opportunity to present its own

PowerPoint presentation or to use other visual aids, but decided against it. '**

"S Gounter-Memorial, para. 43 (citing Continental Casualty Annulment Decision, para. 96) (emphasis in

original). See also Rejoinder, para. 21.

"” Gounter-Memorial, para. 60.

"8 Counter-Memorial, para. 50.

"8 See Counter-Memorial, para. 52.

12 See Counter-Memorial, para. 52.

1) See Counter-Memorial, paras. 51 and 61.

‘22 See Counter-Memorial, para. 61. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 47:28 — 48:13.
"83 See Rejoinder, para. 19.

‘24 See Counter-Memorial, para. 52. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 47:19 — 47:27.

24

75.

76.

77.

78.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Respondent also rejects Applicant’s allegations that it submitted truncated or falsified
documents during the proceedings in order to mislead the Tribunal.'*° According to
Respondent, had Applicant's accusations had the slightest degree of veracity, it should
have filed a request for revision upon obtaining proof of fraud or falsification.‘
Respondent claims that there is no proof to this day that the document presented at the
January 3, 2000 meeting has been forged. '*”

Respondent further insists that Malicorp ignores the Tribunal’s statement at paragraph 86
of the Award that “[dJjurant cette procédure les Parties ont eu amplement l'occasion
d’exposer leurs moyens par écrit et oralement. A l'audience des 19 et 20 avril 2012, elles
ont confirmé qu’elles n’avaient aucune objection a formuler a l’encontre de la procédure
qui avait été suivie (cf. Transcript F 19/20.04.2010, p. 82 1.6 ss. et 29 ss).”"® Respondent
also points out that Applicant made no formal request for a new round of pleadings before
the Award was rendered." According to Respondent, “a simple ‘protest’, either oral or
written, even if repeated hundred times, does not amount from Egypt's point of view to a
formal request that generates the need to issue a given formal decision by the ICSID
Arbitral Tribunal.”"%°

On the basis of ICSID Arbitration Rule 27, Respondent argues that Applicant waived its
claim of alleged violation of the principe du contradictoire:

[A] party that has failed to protest against a perceived procedural

irregularity before the tribunal is precluded from claiming that this

irregularity constituted a serious departure from a fundamental

rule of procedure for purpose of annulment. '*"
Respondent submits that, in any event, Applicant has not proven that the Tribunal would
have reached a substantially different result were it not for the alleged violation.’
According to Respondent, the Tribunal carefully separated the “contract claims,” already
decided by the CRCICA Award of March 7, 2006, and the “treaty claims,” i.e. those to be

"25 See Counter-Memorial, para. 55.
"26 See Counter-Memorial, para. 55.
'®? See Rejoinder, para. 16.

"28 Counter-Memorial, para. 58

12
13

® See Counter-Memorial, paras. 52 and 61.
° Rejoinder, para. 11.

‘8! Counter-Memorial, para. 62 (citing Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 995). See also Rejoinder,

ara. 24.
% See Counter-Memorial, paras. 62-63.

25

79.

80.

81.

82.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

decided under the BIT, such as expropriation.'** According to Egypt, in part because the
Tribunal’s mandate was rather narrow given that the contract claims had already been
decided, there is no indication that the Tribunal would have reached a substantially
different result had the PowerPoint slides not been admitted into the record. '** In the view
of Respondent, the admission of Malicorp’s dossier de plaidoirie would likewise not have
substantially changed the Tribunal’s conclusions because arguably it would not have
added new material to the record."

Respondent concludes that Malicorp’s decision not to use a PowerPoint presentation “was
its own choice, and consequently it has to bear the consequences thereof without trying to
use its negative attitude to imply that the Tribunal departed from the equality of treatment
between the two Parties.”'*° Respondent therefore submits that Applicant’s petition for
annulment of the Award for a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure
must be rejected. '*”

C. The Committee’s Analysis

The Committee will first turn to the question whether the Tribunal departed from a
fundamental rule of procedure. Only if it so finds will the Committee consider whether
such departure was serious.

Applicant contends that the Tribunal breached the fundamental principle of equality of
arms (principe du contradictoire) by admitting into the record the set of slides presented at
the hearing by Respondent while denying Applicant's request to also admit its dossier de
plaidoirie. "°°

Egypt responds that there was no due process violation because its PowerPoint slides did
not introduce new evidence into the record and thus there was not “rupture de l’égalité

des armes.”'°

‘83 See Counter-Memorial, para. 64.

13

“ See Counter-Memorial, paras. 13 and 67. See also Rejoinder, para. 13.

'S See Rejoinder, para. 25.
‘86 Counter-Memorial, para. 69.

13

” See Counter-Memorial, para. 71.

188 See Memorial, p. 44.
*8° See Counter-Memorial, paras. 51 and 61.

26

83,

84.

85.

140
141

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

. In deciding whether the Tribunal violated the principe du contradictoire, it is useful to

review the exchanges between the Parties on this point to understand the context in which
the Tribunal made its decisions.

1. Timeline of Relevant Events

On March 10, 2010, the Secretary of the Tribunal wrote to the Parties to enquire, inter alia,
whether they would be using PowerPoint presentations during the hearing. “° By letter of
March 24, 2010, counsel for Respondent indicated that he would use a PowerPoint
presentation during the hearing.'“' The next day, counsel for Malicorp indicated that he
would not do so.'*

PowerPoint presentation at the hearing during a March 29, 2010, conference call between

Respondent's counsel once again confirmed his intent to use a

the Parties and the President of the Tribunal. '*

Respondent used a PowerPoint presentation as planned during the hearing in Paris on
April 19-20, 2010. Towards the end of the last day of the hearing, Counsel for
Respondent, Mr. Webster, asked whether a copy of his presentation could be admitted.
The following exchange took place:

. 32 Me Webster.- Non, pas du tout. Je voulais juste proposer de donner le PowerPoint avec
. 33 les diapositives a supprimer. Je le donne a tout le monde en méme temps...

. 34 Me Brémond.- Non, Monsieur le Président.

. 35 J'ai posé la question et j'ai demandé a Me Webster d’étre présent quand je vous posais
. 36 la question hier. J’ai bien demandé si un dossier de plaidoirie était remis au Tribunal.

. 87 Tout le monde m’a dit : non, pas de dossier de plaidoirie. Vous le remettez, bien

. 88 entendu, si vous voulez, aux dames qui ont pris votre plaidoirie -comme nous l’'avons

. 39 fait pour ce qui nous concerne-, mais je ne vois pas que cela puisse étre remis au

- 40 Tribunal. Nous-mémes n’avons donc pas prévu de le remettre parce que vous m’avez

- 41 répondu négativement hier.

. 1 Me Webster.- Je suis désolé, je ne suis pas d’accord. Vous avez demandé s'il y avait un
dossier de plaidoirie. Si mes souvenirs sont bons, le Tribunal a répondu : il n’y a pas de
dossier de plaidoirie, mais il y a un PowerPoint. Et nous avons fait un PowerPoint,

c'est absolument habituel. Nous avons systématiquement suivi le PowerPoint et nous
avons supprimé, parce que je n’avais pas le temps, tout ce qu’il y avait 4 supprimer. J’ai
méme pris sur mon temps le temps de lire ce qu’il y avait dans le PowerPoint. Mais je
crois que c’était présenté de cette fagon, cela a pris pas mal de travail, c’était organisé

NOORWN

See Letter from the Secretary of the Tribunal to the Parties, March 10, 2010, p. 10, Exh. DA-04.
See Letter from Thomas H. Webster to Secretary of the Tribunal, March 24, 2010, para. 4, Exh. DA-

06.

"2 See Letter from Christian Brémond to Secretary of the Tribunal, March 25, 2010, para. 4, Exh. DA-5.
"43 See Minutes of the phone conference between the President and the Parties, March 29, 2010, p. 2,
Exh. DA-7.

27

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

.8 comme cela.

-9 Me Brémond.- Monsieur le Président, peut-on revenir en arriére une seconde ? Lorsque
. 10 nous avons eu la conférence téléphonique le 29 mars, vous vous étes fait préciser par les
. 11 avocats qu'il n’y aurait plus de documents produits, et Me Webster a dit : il y aura une

. 12 présentation PowerPoint. Il y a eu une présentation PowerPoint. Il n’était pas prévu une
. 13 remise du PowerPoint. J’ai, moi aussi, un dossier de plaidoirie que j'ai fait, qui est

. 14 énorme, avec quantité de documents. J’ai pris la précaution de vous poser la question

. 15 hier pour qu'il n’y ait pas de doute. Je pense qu’il n’y avait pas de doute hier qu'il n’y

. 16 avait pas de documents remis au Tribunal arbitral.

. 17 M. le Président.- Je crois que nous sommes en présence a la fin, mais c’est trés bien,

. 18 d'un probléme d’interprétation qui est en partie lié a la position prise par le Tribunal

- 19 arbitral.

. 20 ll est exact que lors de la conférence téléphonique, il a été dit qu'il n'y aurait pas de

. 21 nouveaux documents. II est exact également qu’il a été précisé par Me Webster -j‘ai

. 22 posé la question aux deux et vous aviez dit non- qu’il utiliserait une présentation

. 23 PowerPoint.

. 24 Maintenant, la question est celle de savoir si un dossier de plaidoirie avec cotes ala

. 25 francaise équivaut a une présentation PowerPoint ou non, si ce sont deux choses

26 différentes.

. 27 Pour ne pas ternir le bel esprit de cette audience, je vous propose de garder au Tribunal
. 28 l'occasion de se décider a ce sujet. Il est vrai qu’en pratique, la présentation PowerPoint
. 29 qui est faite est accompagnée en général de la remise simultanée du document, en tout
. 30 cas dans la pratique qui a été la mienne.

. 31 Je comprends les hésitations qui sont formulées du cété de la Demanderesse. Je me

. 32 propose, tranquillement, avec mes deux coarbitres -je suis peut-étre responsable en

. 33 partie du malentendu-, que l'on vous réponde gentiment. On aura le temps pour le faire
. 34 tranquillement.

. 35 Me Brémond.- Merci, Monsieur le Président.

. 36 Me Webster.- Merci, Monsieur le Président. '*

86. On April 22, 2010, the Secretary of the Tribunal wrote to the Parties:

Le Tribunal, aprés délibération, me charge de vous indiquer que,
selon la pratique usuelle en matiére d’arbitrage, la présentation
PowerPoint de Me Webster est admise au dossier. Cependant et
afin de s’assurer que celle-ci ne comprend pas de nouveaux
documents et ne dépasse pas la plaidoirie de Me Webster, la
partie défenderesse est priée d’en adresser une copie a la partie
demanderesse et une copie par avance au Président (par
Vintermédiaire du Centre) qui s’assurera que les conditions en
sont remplies. Une fois établi que ce document ne contient aucun
nouvel élément, il sera distribué & tous les membres du Tribunal
arbitral.'*°

87. On May 18, 2010, the President communicated to the Parties the following:

“4 Arb. Tr., 83-84, Exh. DA-8.
“5 | etter from the Tribunal's Secretary to the Parties, April 22, 2010, Exh. DA-9.

28

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Ainsi que je m’y étais engagé, j'ai vérifié le contenu de la
présentation Powerpoint en rapport avec les transcripts. La
version proposée ne sort pas du cadre fixé, aprés qu’ont été
supprimés, a la demande du Tribunal arbitral, les passages qui en
excédaient le cadre.

En conséquence, rien ne s’oppose a ce gue la_présentation
Powerpoint soit transmise 4 mes co-arbitres. “

88. On May 25, 2010, Counsel for Applicant, Me Yassin, addressed a letter to the Tribunal on
the application of Egyptian law and on the issue of the truncated and allegedly misleading
slide for the first time. According to Me Yassin, the letter was necessary because:

[L]a lecture des transcripts des audiences de 19 et 20 avril 2010
ainsi que celle des “Power Ponts” [sic] remis par la Défenderesse
au Tribunal Arbitral nous aménent a vouloir confirmer certains
concepts du droit égyptien, applicable sur le Contrat de
Concession objet du litige; concepts qui avaient toutefois été
exposés dans les plaidoiries de la Demanderesse.

Or d'un coté, les transcripts n’ont probablement pas donné une
idée assez précise que complete [sic] de ces concepts juridiques
admis en droit égyptien.

D’autre part, les “Power Points” remis nous semblent comporter
une certaine manipulation des textes et des concepts de ce méme
droit égyptien, de telle sorte que nous pensons devoir éclaircir
cette ambigilité pour éviter tout malentendu sur les régles que le
Tribunal appliquera sur le présent arbitrage...

89. The next day, Applicant filed another letter with the Tribunal, this time from Me Brémond,
once again highlighting the issue of the misleading documents:

Ces prémisses étant rappelés, la société MALICORP souligne
qu'elle a eu a se plaindre dans ses mémoires auprés du Tribunal
de ce que des citations qui étaient effectuées par la
REPUBLIQUE ARABE D'EGYPTE dans ses propres mémoires
étaient tronquées, sans qu'un signe typographique mentionne le
ou les passages supprimés.

Cette pratique inusuelle, contraire aux régles habituellement
pratiquées, avait provoqué la méfiance des Avocats de la société
MALICORP, raison pour laquelle je m'étais prémuni de tout dépédt
de document entre les mains des Arbitres postérieurement aux

“6 | etter from the President to the Parties, May 18, 2010, Exh. DA-10.
‘47 etter from Applicant to the Tribunal, May 25, 2010, p. 2, Exh. DA-15.

29

90.

91.

149
150

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

mémoires, en posant des questions précises au Président du
Tribunal Arbitral le 29 mars et en réitérant a l'issue de la premiére
audience le 19 avril.

J'ai donc été particulierement désagréablement surpris de
constater qu'il avait été envisagé la remise des slides Power Point
établis par Maitre WEBSTER, alors que ces slides concrétisent
des montages photocopiques, des citations extraites de leur
contexte ol certains passages sont supprimés, des photocopies
opportunément mal faites de certains documents, etc.

On June 1, 2010, Respondent’s counsel objected to the letters of Messrs. Yassin and
Brémond. In his letter, Respondent complained that the Tribunal had not provided for
post-hearing submissions and thus that Applicant’s letters were not proper.‘
Respondent went on to say that Applicant had been on notice that it would use a
PowerPoint presentation since the March 29, 2010, telephone conference, that the
presentation included only previously admitted documents, and that the slides had been
deemed admitted by the President on April 22, 2010, thus closing the matter.'®° Finally,
Respondent noted that Me Brémond had not objected to the contents of the slides prior to
the Tribunal’s decision to admit them. '*"

In his June 14, 2010, reply, Me Brémond wrote, inter alia, that he had not objected to the
admission of any slides during the hearing because he did not know what Respondent
would argue and did not have the time to respond adequately:

[...] je ne vois pas non plus au nom de quel principe mon Confrére
veut nous empécher de soulever telle réplique a ce que nous
avons entendu [...] lors de sa propre réplique dans laquelle il [Me
Webster] a ajouté des réponses que nous ne connaissions pas et
qu'il nous a fallu analyser, ce que nous n'avons pu faire dans les
quelques secondes entre le moment ou il a terminé et le moment
ou le Président nous a demandé si nous avions quelque chose a
ajouter.'®

* | etter from Applicant to the Tribunal, May 26, 2010, pp. 1-2, Exh. DA-13.
See Letter from Respondent to Tribunal, June 1, 2010, para. 1, Exh. DA-16.
See Letter from Respondent to Tribunal, June 1, 2010, paras. 3- 5.

'' See Letter from Respondent to Tribunal, June 1, 2010, para. 6.
*82 | etter from Claimant to Tribunal, June 14, 2010, p. 1, Exh. DA-17.

30

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

On June 17, 2010, the Tribunal rejected Claimant’s request to reconsider its decision to
admit the PowerPoint slides. '®* It reminded the Parties that no post-hearing briefs were to
be filed and held that it did not consider the slides to be a post-hearing submission. '**

The Tribunal invited Respondent’s counsel to reply to Me Yassin’s letter of May 25, 2010,
which Mr. Webster did on June 28, 2010.'®° In that letter, Respondent argued that
Applicant's opposition to the admission of the slides was not genuine and was nothing
more than “a last-minute attempt to invent a new argument.” '%

On July 2, 2010, Me Brémond objected to the Tribunal’s June 17 decision to reject his
request for further pleadings, once again arguing that he had not had the chance to
properly object to the slides at the hearing because of time constraints. '°”

On July 6, 2010, the Tribunal acknowledged that it had received a new request from
Applicant to revisit its prior decision to admit the slides. It asked Respondent to weigh in
on whether further briefing should be ordered.'** In its response, Egypt made its views
quite clear: “Malicorp’s problem is not with the procedure. Malicorp’s problem is with the

substance.”'°°

2. Analysis

During the hearing of April 19-20, 2010, the President of the Tribunal stated that it was
customary for printed copies of PowerPoint slides used at the hearing to be admitted into
the record." The Committee agrees. Printed copies of slides or visual aids used at the
hearing are routinely submitted to tribunals for ease of reference, provided they contain
only information that is already in the record. There is no reason to believe that such
printed copies would unduly influence the Tribunal or have any persuasive impact beyond
the effect of the initial presentation. This is especially true given that the President
ensured that slides not shown to the Tribunal because of the time constraints of the

‘83 Cited in Letter from Claimant to Tribunal, July 2, 2010, p. 1, Exh. DA-19.
‘84 See Letter from Claimant to Tribunal, July 2, 2010, Exh. DA-19.

‘85 See Letter from Respondent to Tribunal, June 28, 2010, Exh. DA-18.

‘86 | etter from Respondent to Tribunal, June 28, 2010, para. 48, Exh. DA-18.
‘8? See Letter from Claimant to Tribunal, July 2, 2010, p. 3, Exh. DA-19.

158

See Letter from President of the Tribunal to the Parties, July 6, 2010, p. 1, Exh. DA-21.

'8° | etter from Respondent to Tribunal, July 12, 2010, para. 28, Exh. DA-22.
19 Arb. Tr., 84:28-30 (“ll est vrai qu’en pratique, la présentation PowerPoint qui est faite est accompagnée
en général de la remise simultanée de ce document.”).

31

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

hearing were deleted prior to Counsel's submission of the hard copies of the
PowerPoint.'®' The admission of the PowerPoint slides was simply meant to facilitate the
Tribunal’s work in preparing the Award.

97. Because the President properly ensured that the PowerPoint presentation only contained
previously admitted evidence,'® the Committee is satisfied that Respondent was not
given an unfair advantage by the admission of the printed copies of the slides into the
record after the hearing.

98. Applicant’s claim that its dossier de plaidoirie should also have been admitted does not
advance its argument for annulment. Unlike a PowerPoint presentation, a dossier de
plaidoirie is not meant to be a visual aid. Its purpose is to assist counsel in making his or
her presentation.

99. Moreover, while a PowerPoint presentation is a visual aid that only includes previously
admitted documents, the Tribunal had no way of knowing what was in Me Brémond’s

®8 Indeed, Me Brémond himself referred to his dossier as voluminous.’ The

dossier.
Committee thus finds that it was well within the Tribunal’s discretion to admit Me
Webster's PowerPoint slides, which it had already seen, while refusing to admit Me
Brémond’s dossier de plaidoirie. It is undisputed that both Parties had the opportunity to
use visual aids during the hearing. Applicant chose not to do so; it cannot complain now

that it was placed at a disadvantage because of the choice it made.

100. Applicant further claims that the presentation should not have been admitted because it
contained truncated and misleading documents. As previously discussed in Section A
above, Applicant objects specifically to slide 42, entitled “The Articles of Association of
Malicorp.” This is because the slide shows two excerpts of scanned documents: (i) the

‘8 Letter from the President of the Tribunal to the Parties, May 18, 2010, Exh. DA-10 (“La version
proposée ne sort pas du cadre fixé, aprés qu’ont été supprimés, a la demande du Tribunal arbitral, les
passages qui en excédaient le cadre.”).

See Letter from the Tribunal’s Secretary to the Parties, April 22, 2010, Exh. DA-9. See also Letter from
the President of the Tribunal to the Parties, May 18, 2010, Exh. DA-10.
"88 See Respondent's Letter to the Tribunal, July 12, 2010, para. 22, Exh. DA-22 (“More generally, the
Respondent's Power Point contains no new documents. All documents were submitted with the
res memorials. Therefore, as regards the documents, there can be no issue as to due
rocess.”
Res Arb. a 84:13-14 (“J’ai, moi aussi, un dossier de plaidoirie que j’ai fait, qui est énorme, avec quantité
de documents.” ").

32

10

102.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

signature block of a Mrs. M. JEYA, Registrar of Companies, showing that the document
was executed at Companies House in Cardiff on September 15, 1999; and (ii) a single
sentence, “5) The Company’s share capital is £100 million divided into one million shares
of £100 each.” The slide cites as the source of the images pages 91 and 94 of
Respondent’s Exhibit R2. Applicant argues that this presentation could have led the
Tribunal to conclude that the two excerpts came from the same document, while in fact
the signature was extracted from the “Certificate of Registration,” which does not make
any reference to Malicorp’s capital, and the second sentence came from an unsigned
document that does not specifically refer to Malicorp."° Applicant refers to the

combination of these two documents on a single slide as a “montage photocopique.”'*”

. The Committee agrees that one might be confused by placing the excerpts from two

separate documents on a single slide. It is the Committee’s view, however, that the
confusion arises out of the fact that what was designated as Exhibit R2 included many
different documents. Respondent displayed on one slide excerpts from Exhibit R2 and
properly indicated the source as Exhibit R2. Applicant is correct that Respondent did not
indicate that the excerpts came from two different documents. However, the Tribunal and
the Parties must have been well aware that Exhibit R2 contained multiple documents (and
Claimant never raised any objection to such designation). Respondent also clearly
indicated the page numbers where the relevant excerpts could be found in Exhibit R2.
Whether the Tribunal or Claimant nonetheless mistakenly concluded that the two excerpts
came from the same document is a matter of fact that is beyond the scope of an
annulment review.

Applicant's counsel also argues that the Tribunal should not have admitted Respondent's
PowerPoint presentation because Me Brémond could not react swiftly enough during the
hearing to properly register his objections to the slide. The Committee appreciates the
pressure on counsel and the time constraints of an oral hearing. However, counsel’s
failure to react or object quickly does not result in a departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure. Further, Applicant had known well in advance of the hearing that Respondent

*85 Closing Submission of Respondent (PowerPoint presentation), slide 42, Exh. DA-23.

°8 See Memorial, pp. 73-74.

‘8? See Memorial, pp. 73-74.

33

10:

105.

>

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

would use a PowerPoint presentation. There is, however, no record of Applicant asking
for an advance copy of the slides.

. The Committee likewise finds no ground for annulment on the basis that the Tribunal did

not properly address Applicant’s grievances because there is no reference in the Award to
the post-hearing correspondence of the Parties with respect to the slides. The
correspondence itself makes it clear that the Tribunal carefully considered the positions of
the Parties when making the decision to admit the slides. That the Tribunal did not
discuss in the Award the correspondence with respect to the slides does not detract from
this conclusion. Given the extensive correspondence between the Parties and the
Tribunal after the hearing, the Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal took into account
Applicant's arguments.

Further, Applicant's request that the Committee second guess the Tribunal’s conclusion to
admit the PowerPoint presentation but not the dossier de plaidoirie is well outside of the
Committee’s mandate in an annulment proceeding. The concern of the Committee is the
integrity of the process and whether the Parties had equal opportunity to present their
case. The Committee is satisfied that the integrity of the process was preserved in this
case. The Committee concludes that the Tribunal heard Applicant’s objections, gave each
Party a chance to fully explain its position, and ensured that no new evidence was placed
into the record by virtue of admitting the slides.

Therefore, the Committee holds that no departure from a fundamental rule of procedure
occurred in this case. Having reached that conclusion, there is no need for the Committee
to address Applicant’s allegation that the departure from a fundamental rule of procedure
is prejudicial per se and mandates annulment. Similarly, there is no need for the
Committee to consider Respondent's argument that Applicant waived its right to object to
the slides by failing to make “any formal request to exclude Maitre Webster's Slides from

the record of the oral hearing.”"®*

*68 Counter-Memorial, para. 54.

34

Vv.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Failure To State Reasons

106.

107.

108.

169

Applicant contends that the Tribunal engaged in contradictory reasoning, which amounts
to a failure to state reasons.'®* Applicant points to three contradictions in the Tribunal’s
reasoning and argues that they amount to a failure to state reasons within the meaning of
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 50(1)(iii).'”° Respondent
sees no contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning.

A. Eirst Alleged Contradiction

1. Applicant's Position

According to Applicant, the Tribunal made a contradictory finding with respect to certain
financial information Egypt claims to have received from Malicorp’s representatives. '’' As
described above in the discussion of the PowerPoint presentation, one of the central
issues in this case was whether, during the January 3, 2000 meeting, Egypt received a
document setting out Malicorp’s capital." In Malicorp’s submission, this document was
crucial for the Tribunal’s analysis. '”*

Applicant asserts that the minutes of the January 3, 2000 meeting were not signed and no
annex was included.'” It is therefore very difficult, if not impossible, to know exactly what
happened during the meeting or which documents, if any, Respondent received.’ The
document Egypt claims to have received stated that Malicorp’s “share capital is £100
million divided into one million shares of £100 each.”'”® Applicant argues that there is no
evidence that it was Malicorp that gave this document to Egypt, and that the document
submitted by Egypt in the arbitration was forged. '””

See Memorial, Chapter IV.

'° See Application, pp. 45-54. See also Memorial, pp. 93-103.

”" See Memorial, pp. 93-99. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 31:16 — 35:4.
"2 See Memorial, p. 94 (quoting Award, para. 135).

3 See Memorial, p. 95.

174
175

See Memorial, p. 96.
See Memorial, p. 96.

® Award, para. 135. See also Closing Submission of Respondent (PowerPoint presentation), Slide 42,
Exh. DA-23.
” See Memorial, p. 96.

35

109.

110.

111.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Applicant further argues that the Tribunal made contradictory findings relating to this
document, on the one hand, deciding that it could not establish “l’authenticité du

0178

document incriminé, while, on the other hand, concluding that this document had

sufficiently misled Respondent so as to justify Respondent's rescission of the Contract.'”°

In Applicant's opinion, the Tribunal had three options: it could have concluded that
Malicorp never gave the document to Egypt, that the document was forged, or that it did
not have enough information and should have taken affirmative steps to obtain more
evidence on this issue." According to Applicant, the Tribunal’s finding that the
authenticity of the key document could not be established (because “[m]éme s'il existe de
sérieux indices, ils ne sont pas suffisants pour aboutir a une claire conclusion d'une

9181
)

importance aussi capitale’ cannot be reconciled with its ultimate decision that “le motif

principal avancé par la Défenderesse dans sa lettre d’annulation du Contrat avait un

182
In

fondement suffisant et autorisait la Défenderesse a se départir du Contrat.
Applicant's view, this represents an obvious contradiction; either (1) the document is
authentic and capable of supporting Respondent's argument that it rescinded the Contract
because it was misled, or (2) it is unknown whether the document is authentic, and thus
Respondent cannot credibly rely on it."®° Applicant thus argues that the Tribunal

contradicted itself by finding both (1) and (2).

2. Respondent's Position

Respondent argues that the MINE,'® Vivendi I,'°° and Continental Casualty’

annulment
decisions support the position that failure to state reasons should only be a ground for

annulment where a tribunal does not state any reason for reaching its decision, not where

"8 Memorial, pp. 96-97 (citing Award, para. 136).

”° See Memorial, pp. 97-98 (citing Award, para. 136).

189 See Memorial, pp. 95-99.
‘8! Memorial, pp. 94-95 (citing Award, para. 135).

‘© Memorial, pp. 94-95 (citing Award, para. 137).
°° See Memorial, pp. 98-99.

‘84 MINE Annulment Decision.
*5 Vivendi | Annulment Decision.
*88 Continental Casualty Annulment Decision.

36

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

it simply does not state convincing reasons.'®” Respondent further relies on the holding of
the Continental Casualty ad hoc Committee, which stated:

[F]or genuinely contradictory reasons to cancel each other out,
they must be such as to be incapable of standing together on any
reasonable reading of the decision. . . .

In cases where it is merely arguable whether there is a
contradiction or inconsistency in the tribunal's reasoning, it is not
for an annulment committee to resolve that argument. Nor is it the
role of an annulment committee to express its own view on
whether or not the reasons given by the tribunal are logical or
rational or correct. '®

112. In Respondent's view, the Tribunal did not base any of its conclusions regarding the
termination of the Contract on the contested document.'®® According to Respondent, the
Tribunal’s reasoning was concerned with the “inter-relationship between the CRCICA
arbitration proceedings and the ICSID proceedings.”'® Respondent explains that:

What the ICSID Tribunal did in its Award of February 7th, 2011,
was in final analysis taking into consideration the outcome of the
CRCICA arbitral proceeding, and undertook its mission under the
BIT to decide that no expropriation was undertaken by the Host
State in the exercise of its sovereign power, but simply a
termination of a contract which lead to compensation by the
proper forum contractually agreed upon by the Parties themselves
to adjudicate their contractual disputes, and which has to be
recognized as such. '*'

113. Respondent considers the above reasoning to be perfectly sound. '°?

3. The Committee’s Analysis

114. The first alleged contradiction relates to the principal reason put forward by Respondent
for its decision to rescind the Contract: the fact that “it had allegedly been misled by the

submission of inaccurate documents concerning Claimant's financial capacities.” '*

‘8? See Counter-Memorial, para. 74. See also Rejoinder, para. 26.

*88 Continental Casualty Annulment Decision, para. 103.

189 See Counter-Memorial, para. 77.

180 Rejoinder, para. 28. See also Counter-Memorial, para. 79; Annul. Tr. E. Dec. 6, 38:15 — 38:23.
'' Rejoinder, para. 29.

'% See Rejoinder, para. 32.

‘88 Award, para. 131 (emphasis in original).

37

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

115. The Tribunal noted that the call for tender documents specifically required the submission
of documents stating the “qualitative of finance and the issued capital.”"** The Tribunal
next looked at the Memorandum of Association Applicant submitted as part of its bid for
the Contract. That document showed that Malicorp’s capital was £1,000 divided into
1,000 shares of £1 each. Malicorp was then asked to attend a meeting with Respondent
to answer a number of questions, including “the details of the capital (issued and
licensed).”"°°

116. Next, the Tribunal noted that the minutes of that January 3, 2000 meeting recorded that
Applicant was a British company “with its capital of one hundred million Sterling pounds
according to the attached commercial register which was reviewed by the Committee’s
members.” The Tribunal observed that “the statement would have been correct if it had
made it clear that it referred not to the issued and paid-up capital as stated in the
question, but to the authorised capital, which is obviously meaningless as long as the
sources of financing of this capital are not given.”'"”

117. The Tribunal went on to analyze the key document allegedly given to Egypt by
representatives of Malicorp during the meeting. It found that this document was “allegedly
an extract made on 15 September 1999 of the ‘Register of companies for England and
Wales,’ certifying that the company had been incorporated on 6 August 1997.”'%® Item
number 5 in that document stated: “The Company's share capital is £100 million divided
into one million shares of £100 each.”'®? The Tribunal noted that “[nJowhere does the text
make it clear which type of capital this is.”*°° Previously, the Tribunal had referred to the
meaning of the term “capital”: “In practice, it could be said that in business dealings, the
mention of ‘capital’ refers at least to capital that is subscribed if not paid-up, and not

merely to authorised capital, this being only a measure prior to subscription.”2""

‘4 Award, para. 132 (emphasis in original).

*85 Award, para. 134.

‘86 Minutes of the January 3, 2000 meeting, as quoted in the Award, para. 134.
‘87 award, para. 134.

‘88 Award, para. 135 (emphasis in original).

‘88 Award, para. 135 (emphasis in original).

209 Award, para. 135.

291 award, para. 134 (emphasis in original).

38

118.

119.

120.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Apparently, the Tribunal did not believe it necessary to determine “the authenticity of the
suspect document” in order to reach its decision.” Instead, it first decided that,
regardless of the exact knowledge gained by Respondent during the January 3, 2000
meeting, “the nature and content of the information supplied to the Respondent by
Malicorp’s representatives was such as to give rise to an essential mistake.”*°° Next, the
Tribunal found that the financial strength of Malicorp was of utmost importance given the
large scale of the project: “for a project as monumental as that of the Ras Sudr airport,
knowing whether the company awarded the project is an empty shell or a company with
exceptional resources is obviously fundamental.”*°* Finally, The Tribunal concluded that:

In these circumstances, . . . the principal reason given by

the Respondent in its letter rescinding the Contract was

sufficiently well founded, and gave the Respondent the

right to withdraw from the Contract.
In sum, the Tribunal made findings of fact that did not depend on the authenticity of the
disputed document. To reach its factual conclusions, the Tribunal had to balance
conflicting considerations submitted by the Parties. Whether these findings of fact are
correct or not is outside the scope of the Committee’s review. That Applicant disagrees
with the factual findings and legal analysis of the Tribunal is not sufficient to annul the
Award. Applicant must persuade the Committee that the Tribunal failed to state any
reasons for its conclusions or that the Tribunal’s reasons are so contradictory as to cancel
each other. Applicant has not met that standard. Whether the Committee would follow
the same logic or reach the same conclusion in this case is of no consequence. The
Committee thus holds that Applicant’s first alleged contradiction does not constitute
sufficient basis for annulment.

B. Second Alleged Contradiction

1. Applicant's Position

Applicant argues that the Tribunal also contradicted itself in paragraph 141 of the Award,
where it stated that Malicorp had failed to prove that it took the necessary steps to

202 Award, para. 136.
203 Award, para. 136.
204 Award, para. 136.
205 Award, para. 137.

39

121.

122.

123.

124.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

establish a local Egyptian company as required under the Contract.?°° Applicant claims
that this statement is in direct contradiction with the Tribunal’s prior findings in paragraphs
17 through 29 of the Award that Malicorp had in fact taken a number of concrete steps to
set up the company.”

Applicant also asserts that the Tribunal’s failure to understand Malicorp’s position on this
issue is explained by “l'absence de travail du Tribunal Arbitral sur les piéces produites.”*%
Finally, Applicant claims that the Tribunal “invented” its reasoning instead of reviewing

Malicorp’s exhibits.2°°

2. Respondent's Position

According to Respondent, there is no contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning on this
point.2"°

prevented the due incorporation of the local entity subject to [Egypt's] Investment Law,

It was enough for the Tribunal to indicate that “there were multiple reasons which

and the blame cannot be exclusively attributed to either party.”?""

Respondent argues that Applicant ignores the distinction between the treaty claim — i.e.
expropriation — at stake in this case and the contract claims already decided by the
CRCICA Tribunal.”? Respondent also notes that Applicant has not acknowledged the
fact that the Tribunal was justified to decline jurisdiction to adjudicate the factual and legal
arguments pertaining to the Contract’s termination that had already been decided in the
CRCICA arbitration.?"*

3. The Committee’s Analysis

The second alleged contradiction refers to the grounds for termination of the Contract
based on the non-performance by Applicant. The Committee first observes that, according
to the Tribunal, “[e]ven if the answer to the previous question [regarding Malicorp’s
financial status] is enough in itself to enable it to rule on the submissions before it, the

°°8 See Application, pp. 50-52; Memorial, pp. 99-102. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 35:5 — 36:39.
°°7 See Application, p. 50. See also Memorial, p. 99.

208 Memorial, p. 102.

209 See Reply, pp. 20-21.

"0 See Counter-Memorial, para. 84.

2" Counter-Memorial, para. 83. See also Annul. Tr. E., Dec. 6, 38:24 — 39:22.

212 See Counter-Memorial, p. 77

*'8 See Rejoinder, para. 32.

40

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Arbitral Tribunal deems it appropriate, out of an excess of caution, to briefly review
these.”*"* Thus the Tribunal considered the non-performance of the Contract by Applicant
only subsidiarily and could have decided the dispute without ruling on that question.
Therefore, even if the Committee were to agree with Applicant's argument, an annulment
of this part of the Award would not affect the rest of the Award and the outcome of the
arbitration.

125. Nevertheless, for the sake of completeness, the Committee will proceed to review whether
the Tribunal contradicted itself in its analysis of the grounds invoked by Respondent to
terminate the Contract. Applicant considers contradictory the reasoning of the Tribunal in
paragraph 141 of the Award and the findings of fact in paragraphs 17-29. Paragraph 141
in relevant part reads as follows:

The fact remains, though, that at no time has the Claimant
attempted to persuade the Arbitral Tribunal that it actually did, at
the outset, take the significant legal, financial and most of all
technical steps required to launch such a project. The delays in
taking the first steps and the absence of any practical progress,
especially where the potential partners were concerned, could well
have added to the doubts and concerns of the Egyptian
authorities. At no time, in fact, has the Claimant attempted to show
that this last criticism was unfounded. . . .

126. In paragraphs 17 to 29 of the Award, the Tribunal started by pointing out that “[uJnder the
Contract, Malicorp had to take a number of measures quickly.”*'® The Tribunal also noted
that at an unknown date, Applicant instructed a major accounting firm to take the
necessary steps for setting up the company.’ The Tribunal listed the numerous notices
of Respondent reminding Applicant of its obligation to set up the company and provide
bank guarantees.?"”

127. After reviewing all of the evidence, the Tribunal was not persuaded that Applicant had
taken the necessary steps as required under the Contract. This is a factual determination
to be made by the Tribunal and it is not the Committee’s role to review that determination.

214 Award, para. 138.

2'5 Award, para. 17.

26 See Award, para. 17.

2'7 See Award, paras. 18-33.

4

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

128. Applicant also claims that the Tribunal failed to adequately consider two of its exhibits,
namely a letter dated May 2000 from the Intelligence Service National Security stating that
it did not object to Malicorp’s proposed project and another dated July 22, 2001, in which
the General Authority for Investment and Free Zones (GAFI), citing national security
concerns, refused to grant Malicorp permission to build the airport.2° Malicorp thus
claims that the Tribunal did not make every effort to understand its position.*"° There are
several difficulties with Applicant's argument. First, Applicant cannot reliably demonstrate
that the Tribunal did not consider those exhibits. Second, whether the Tribunal
“adequately” considered the exhibits is a matter of fact-finding within the discretion of the
Tribunal and beyond the scope of this Committee’s review. Third, this argument does not
assert any contradictory reasoning; it relates to an alleged failure to consider specific
documents.

129. Applicant further contends that the following sentence is contradictory: “Il est possible que
la demande ait été par la suite retardée par les atermoiements de la Défenderesse, mais
cette situation, si elle est avérée, n’est intervenue que tardivement dans le processus de
résiliation, alors que le projet vacillait déja.”2° Applicant affirms that the motivation of the
Tribunal is “pure invention” and explains that the project did not progress precisely
because of the procrastination of Respondent.”*'

130. It will be useful to consider the whole paragraph from which this sentence has been
extracted. The following reasoning of the Tribunal precedes the allegedly contradictory
sentence:

The first obligation concerned the setting up of the Egyptian
company. It is not disputed that the incorporation did not take
place in the time allowed. One primary reason is that the Claimant
delayed in taking the necessary steps to set it up. Admittedly, for
the Respondent, the incorporation of that company was critical.
First, because the Contract had also been entered into in the
name of the company to be formed (see above, no. 15); next, and
most of all, because it had to show sufficient financial capacity to

218 See Memorial, p. 101.
"9 See Memorial, p. 101.
29 Award, para. 140. (English version of the Award: “It is possible that the application was delayed by the
Respondent's own procrastination, but that situation, while clearly the case, arose only later during the
process of termination, by which time the project was already faltering.”)

See Memorial, p. 99.

42

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

guarantee the solidity and reliability of the operation. The capital
was subscribed by Malicorp, which, however, had not yet
significantly increased its own capital.”

131. The Tribunal then went on to find that:

It is possible that the application was delayed by the Respondent's
own procrastination, but that situation, while clearly the case,
arose only later during the process of termination, by which time
the project was already faltering.””°
132. The Committee does not find these two conclusions — that Applicant breached its duties to
incorporate the Egyptian company from the beginning and that Respondent also delayed
matters — to be contradictory, let alone to cancel each other out.

C. Third Alleged Contradiction

1. Applicant's Position

133. Applicant's third claim of alleged contradiction relates to the Tribunal’s rejection of
Malicorp’s request for compensation for expropriation. The Tribunal concluded that
Respondent had not expropriated Malicorp’s property.”** The Award notes that the

CRCICA Tribunal had similarly dismissed Applicant's expropriation claim, but had
nonetheless awarded it some damages, finding that “Respondent must bear part of the
costs and damages its decision generated for the Claimant.”*° The ICSID Tribunal,
however, refused to award damages. Applicant calls attention to the Tribunal’s reasoning
in doing so: that “[e]ven if [the CRCICA Tribunal’s damages] argument does not seem
unreasonable, it is outside the scope of these proceedings, as the Claimant has not
formally made any additional submissions on the subject.”*°

134. Applicant finds the following contradiction: (1) it was denied damages because it did not
make any submissions on damages; and (2) it was denied the opportunity to make such
submissions because the Tribunal had decided that claims for damages would be heard

22 award, para. 140 (first sub-paragraph, emphasis in original).
223 Award, para. 140.

224 See Award, para. 143.

225 Award, para. 143.

226 Award, para. 143.

43

135.

137.

2
2

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

and decided at a second phase of the arbitration if liability was established.”” Applicant
thus argues that the Tribunal’s decision-making process was arbitrary and contradictory
because it prevented Applicant from pleading damages while at the same time holding it
against Applicant that it had not done so.

Applicant thus concludes that:

Il n’est donc pas possible, sauf a contredire le cadre dans lequel
le Tribunal a voulu que les parties déposent leur mémoire et
plaident, de reprocher a la société MALICORP de n’avoir pas
conclu a une indemnisation partielle, dés lors que le quantum
devait relever d’une seconde phase de la procédure arbitrale, et
que le Tribunal n’a pas spécialement interrogé les parties de ce
chef.

2. Respondent's Position

. According to Respondent, the alleged contradiction ignores two fundamental factors: (i)

the only cause of action that would have given rise to Egypt’s responsibility under the BIT
is expropriation so that once this claim is dismissed, there was no other cause of action
under which to award damages, and (ii) the Tribunal indicated that the CRCICA Award
which dealt with the “contract claims” and awarded partial compensation to Applicant was
res judicata and Applicant explicitly requested that such partial compensation be taken
into consideration by the Tribunal to prevent double recovery.” Respondent finds no
contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning arising out of a decision to divide the arbitration
proceeding into two phases and not following through with the compensation phase once
all substantive claims were dismissed.?°°

It is Respondent's view that, in the final analysis, the Committee must establish whether it
is impossible to understand the decision of the Tribunal, and none of the alleged
contradictions raised by Applicant passes this test.?*"

27 See Memorial, pp. 102-04. See also Transcript of the First Session, July 31, 2009, para. 80.
28 Memorial, p. 104. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 36:40 — 37:44.
8 See Counter-Memorial, para. 86. See also Annul. Tr. E., Dec. 6, 39:23 — 41:6.

289 See Rejoinder, para. 33. See also Annul. Tr. E., Dec. 6, 41:7 — 41:18.
°31 See Rejoinder, paras. 31-33.

44

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited
3. The Committee’s Analysis

138. The Committee finds no contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning. It was within the
discretion of the Tribunal to bifurcate the proceedings and hear jurisdiction and liability
first, while hearing damages at a second phase, if necessary. It is thus obvious that if
Claimant lost on liability, as it did, there would be no opportunity to put forward claims and
arguments on damages.

139. The Tribunal concluded that “Claimant's submissions based on the principle of

compensation for expropriation are rejected.”*?

By dismissing Applicant’s substantive
claim, the Tribunal never reached the damages phase. Thus, the Tribunal never heard
Claimant’s arguments on damages because it found no violation of the BIT, for which
compensation would be owed. Whatever the conclusions of the CRCICA Tribunal were
with respect to liability for breach of the Contract and contractual damages, the BIT
Tribunal could not have awarded any damages to Malicorp in the BIT arbitration because
it found no violation of the BIT.

140. In sum, having considered and rejected each of the contradictions alleged by Applicant in
support of its allegation that the Tribunal failed to state reasons, the Committee concludes
that there is no basis for annulment for failure to state reasons.

VI. Manifest Excess of Powers

A. Applicant's Position

141. According to Applicant, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its power by failing to apply the
proper law — i.e. Egyptian law and the terms of the Contract.*° Applicant refers to the
following statement in the Award:

The first question, therefore, is whether the Republic had the right
to discharge itself from the Contract pursuant to the private law
rules governing it (see above, no. 93). If that is the case, it is
unnecessary to examine whether the Respondent also took a
measure under its public powers (“measures [sic] de puissance
publique’), not as a party to the Contract but as a State, the
effectiveness and conformity with the Agreement [the BIT] of

282 Award, para. 143.

45

142.

14

a

144.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

which would have to be examined. Indeed, the rescission of the
Contract would not leave any subsisting breach of the umbrella
clause nor, moreover, in the absence of a protected investment, of
other clauses of the Agreement.?*

Applicant argues that the Tribunal examined the facts and decided on the issues of law in
a subjective manner and without any reference to the provisions of the Contract or
Egyptian law. According to Applicant, the reference to the law of the Contract is not
sufficient by itself “&a supporter la totalité du raisonnement dés lors que celui-ci suppose
que le droit égyptien autorise, dans de telles circonstances, l'invocation d’un vice du

»238 Applicant asserts that the Tribunal should have invoked specific

consentement.
provisions of Egyptian law to reach its conclusions.

. Applicant further argues that the Tribunal exceeded its powers when it applied a sanction

that is not permitted by Egyptian contract law. The Tribunal determined that the
misunderstanding, on the basis of which Respondent proceeded with the Contract after
the January 3, 2000 meeting, was sufficient ground for the subsequent rescission of the
Contract.”*” However, Applicant claims that the Tribunal did not have the power to reach
such conclusion because, under Egyptian law, this may only be done by a competent
court within three years from the date on which the grounds for rescission became known.
Applicant contends that Respondent never requested a court to rule on the validity of the
Contract and that the three years had expired. Applicant concludes that the Tribunal
exceeded its powers under Egyptian law.

Applicant also considers that the Tribunal exceeded its powers when it determined that
Respondent had the right to terminate the Contract on grounds of non-performance.
According to Applicant, under Egyptian law, only a judge may decide the rescission of a
contract on grounds of non-performance not foreseen in the contract.”° Applicant argues
that, since the Contract did not include any clause related to the grounds advanced by
Respondent to terminate the Contract, Respondent was obliged to request a competent

 

?83 See Memorial, Chapter V.
294 Award, para. 126.
285 Memorial, p. 109.

236

See Memorial, p. 109. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 39:46 — 41:20.

°37 See Award, para. 137.
288 See Memorial, p. 110. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 42:34 — 45:23.
289 See Memorial, p. 109. See also Annul. Tr. F., Dec. 6, 45:38 — 45:46.

46

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

court, in this case the CRCICA Tribunal, to terminate the Contract pursuant to Article 147
of the Egyptian Civil Code. Applicant alleges that Respondent did not comply with Article
147 and terminated the Contract unilaterally in violation of that provision.

145. According to Applicant, the Tribunal determined that Malicorp’s non-performance was
sufficient to justify Egypt’s rescission of the Contract without examining Egyptian law.
Malicorp admits that the Tribunal identified the correct law, but argues that in fact it did not
apply that law, which constitutes a manifest excess of powers.™°

146. Applicant invokes as an example of the Tribunal’s failure to apply Egyptian law the fact
that the Tribunal did not know what concept to apply: annulment, rescission, or
invalidation of the Contract. Applicant claims that the Tribunal used the term “départir’
because:

[Les arbitres] n'ont pas concrétement vérifié le contenu du droit
égyptien, et ne savaient donc pas quel terme appliquer,
‘annulation’, “résolution” ou “résiliation’, a \'acte par lequel la
REPUBLIQUE ARABE D’EGYPTE avait décidé le 12 aott 2001
de rompre les relations contractuelles avec la_ société
MALICORP, d’autant que les diverses correspondances de la
REPUBLIQUE ARABE D’EGYPTE ont utilisés les trois
concepts.”*"

147. Applicant concludes that the Tribunal simply “made up” Egyptian law in reaching its
decision:

[D]és lors que les Arbitres ont déclaré vouloir appliquer le droit
interne égyptien, et n’ont vérifié ni le droit pour une partie de
rompre unilatéralement le contrat, ni l'incidence du manquement
de la partie rompant le contrat a exécuter ses propres obligations,
ni les conséquences d'une rupture non judiciairement prononcée,
les Arbitres ont inventé la loi égyptienne, et ont nécessairement
statué par voie d’excés de pouvoir.**

B. Respondent's Position

148. Respondent recalls in its Counter-Memorial that the Tribunal was only competent to
consider treaty claims and that international law is the applicable law for such claims.

240 See Memorial, p. 109.
24’ Reply, p. 24 (emphasis in original).
22 Reply, p. 24.

47

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Further, the contractual dispute was resolved by the CRCICA Tribunal, is res judicata, and
was recognized as such by the Tribunal.*° It is thus Respondent's contention that the
Tribunal deliberately chose to avoid using domestic law concepts, and

within the exercise of its controlling power in appreciating what
took place, the Tribunal use the wording “départir du contrat’ in its
process of analyzing the measure which took place to evaluate to
what extent this measure can be considered justifiable from an
International Law point of view; i.e. whether or not the termination
would or would not amount to an “expropriation” engaging the
State responsibility and requiring indemnification for a violation of
an international obligation arising under the Egypt/United Kingdom
BIT.

149. According to Respondent, what Applicant is requesting amounts to

a tacit request calling the ICSID Tribunal to act as a Court of
Appeal revising what the CRCICA Arbitration decided in
application of the domestic legal system it was entrusted to apply,
and at the same time explicitly requesting the Ad hoc Committee
to re-arbitrate the case through a new trial focusing on Malicorp’s
own points of view in its pleadings in front of the two previous
jurisdictions, and at the same time to substitute the International
Law applicable to the “Expropriation Claim” by a selective reading
of the Egyptian Civil Law which is claimed accordingly to acquire
legal standing to be considered the “applicable law” governing
“Treaty Claims”, in contradiction to all established precedents
since AAPL/Sri Lanka.*°

150. In its Rejoinder, Respondent emphasizes that, pursuant to Article 42 of the ICSID
Convention, the law to be applied is the law agreed between the Parties with

the compelling result that it is absolutely clear that MALICORP
filed its case in front of the ICSID Tribunal in reliance on the BIT
between Egypt and the United Kingdom, which absolutely means
the applicability of the rules contained in that Treaty creating
international law obligations on the Host State of the investment
(in our case Egypt), and [sic] necessarily recognizing the
international liability of Egypt in case the ICSID Tribunal declared
itself competent and decides [sic] that a given treaty obligation has
been violated.7“°

28 See Counter-Memorial, para. 95.

244 Counter-Memorial, para. 95.
245 Counter-Memorial, para. 97.
248 Rejoinder, para. 37. See also Annul. Tr. E., Dec. 6, 42:3 — 42:18.

48

151.

152.

153.

154.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

According to Respondent, the Committee has to approach its task with caution by

distinguishing primarily failure to apply the applicable law as a

ground for annulment and misinterpretation of the applicable law

as a ground for appeal, and at the same time by ensuring that the

misapplication of the Law once identified should be so egregious

as to constitute, in practice, non-application of the proper law.*“”
Respondent argues that the Tribunal stated it was applying Egyptian law and that,
therefore, the inquiry should stop there.““° According to Respondent, there is no reason to
believe that the Tribunal would identify the proper applicable law only to proceed to apply
a different law.“° Respondent concludes that Applicant's manifest excess of powers
claim must necessarily fail because the Committee is not empowered to review whether
the Tribunal correctly applied Egyptian law.7°°

Respondent concludes that it is impossible to envision the annulment of the Award when
Applicant has been unable to establish any failure to apply the relevant rules governing
the international liability of Egypt for violation of its obligations under the BIT."

C. The Committee’s Analysis

The Committee agrees that it is not within its mandate to review whether the Tribunal
correctly applied Egyptian law. However, the Committee cannot agree with Respondent's
argument that the Tribunal’s statement that it was applying Egyptian law is dispositive.
The Committee must proceed to verify whether indeed the Tribunal applied Egyptian law.
This is because it is possible that a tribunal would state that it is applying one law while in
fact applying another. In this case, the Committee must examine whether the Tribunal
identified Egyptian law as the proper law but went on to apply some other law instead.
This is in fact the crux of Applicant's argument. Applicant asserts that even though the
Tribunal identified Egyptian law as the proper law and claimed to apply it, it in fact did not

247 Rejoinder, para. 40.

248 See Counter-Memorial, para. 97.
249 See Counter-Memorial, para. 97.
259 See Counter-Memorial, para. 97.
*51 See Rejoinder, para. 42.

49

156.

157.

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

do so because its legal analysis does not refer to any provisions of Egyptian law or
jurisprudence.”

. Once the Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal in fact applied the proper law, however,

the Committee need not examine whether the Tribunal applied that law correctly. As the
Soufraki ad hoc Committee stated, it would be sufficient if the Tribunal in its Award
“strive[d] in good faith to apply [Egyptian] law as it would have been applied by [Egyptian]

courts.”25%

As set forth below, the Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal applied
Egyptian law in good faith by relying on the analysis of Egyptian law in the CRCICA

Award.

The Tribunal had before it two types of claims based on the same facts: contractual
claims and treaty claims. The Tribunal decided the treaty claims, i.e., the claims for
violation of the BIT, by applying international law. There is no dispute between the parties
that the Tribunal applied the proper law with respect to the BIT claims. However, to
decide the BIT claims, the Tribunal had to decide a critical question: whether the Contract
was properly rescinded. To resolve that question, the Tribunal had to interpret and apply
Egyptian law. The Tribunal correctly identified Egyptian law as the proper law to be
applied; the matter in dispute is whether the Tribunal actually applied it.

The same question — whether the Contract was rescinded in compliance with Egyptian law
— had already been heard and resolved by the CRCICA Tribunal. There is no
disagreement between the Parties that the CRCICA Tribunal resolved that question by
applying Egyptian law. It was therefore perfectly reasonable for the BIT Tribunal to rely
on, and accept, the CRCICA Tribunal’s analysis and conclusions. By doing so, the
Tribunal in fact applied Egyptian law without performing de novo the entire review and
analysis of Egyptian law performed by the CRCICA Tribunal.

. The Tribunal relied on the analysis and conclusions of the CRCICA Tribunal with caution.

It stated that it was not its task to rule on the validity of the CRCICA Award. The Tribunal
noted that Applicant had waived “any attempt to have the award set aside, but has
accepted its conclusions and is seeking to have it compulsorily enforced. The fact that, to

282 See Memorial, Chapter V-1.
283 See Soufraki Annulment Decision, paras. 99, 101-02. See also Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at

963.

50

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

date, it has not been successful before a national court does nothing to change that.”***

On the other hand, the Tribunal referred to the fact that Respondent challenged the
CRCICA Award:

[...] in the CRCICA arbitration proceedings [Respondent] firmly
opposed arbitration as provided for in the Contract, a procedure
whose validity it disputed; it appealed the decision of the CRCICA
Arbitral Tribunal finding it had jurisdiction and won the case before
the Egyptian state courts on first appeal, though that is the subject
of a review currently (apparently) still pending before the Supreme
Court (see above, no. 59).

The inevitable conclusion, therefore, is that by such attitude
Respondent has rejected recourse to the avenues provided for in
the Contract. For the Arbitral Tribunal, this raises a degree of
uncertainty concerning the outcome of the commercial procedure,
which makes it acceptable for the party claiming to have been
injured to use the remedies afforded by the Agreement. There can
be no question, on the other hand, of reopening the commercial
proceedings.”

159. The Tribunal, therefore, did not simply adopt the conclusions of the CRCICA Tribunal. It
examined the CRCICA Tribunal’s analysis, identified the questions arising under Egyptian
law, reviewed the CRCICA Tribunal’s conclusions and, on that basis, reached its own
conclusions:

The first question with respect to the first two grounds is whether
the Contract was validly entered into, whether it was void from the
outset because the circumstances in which it was concluded
contravened the principle of good faith, or whether it was capable
of being rescinded because of a defect in consent, namely
misrepresentation or mistake. The answer depends, in the first
place, on the rules applicable to it, in this case Egyptian civil law.

As has been seen (see above, no. 44 et seq.), these issues have
already been examined and decided in the CRCICA arbitration
proceedings instituted by the Claimant pursuant to the arbitration
clause in the Contract. In its award of 7 March 2006, the CRCICA
Arbitral Tribunal held, in particular, that there was no proof of
forgery or fraud, but that it had, on the other hand, been
established that Respondent had entered into the Contract while
labouring under a mistake, and that, therefore, it had the right to
discharge itself from it. That said, since it bore part of the

°54 award, para 103 d).
*55 award, para 103 d).

51

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

responsibility for that mistake, it was only fair that it should be
made to bear part of the costs incurred by Applicant.

Having decided not to re-examine that decision, this Arbitral
Tribunal could have limited itself to basing its ruling on the said
decision. However, as has been seen (see above, no. 59) the
Respondent refuses to submit to that decision or to accept its
conclusions. The uncertainty that persists, therefore, justifies the
Arbitral Tribunal in verifying, as a matter ancillary to the
guarantees offered by the Agreement [the BIT], that, even if that
award were to be set aside, the conclusions arrived at by this
Arbitral Tribunal would be no different from those of the CRCICA
Arbitral Tribunal. The fact is that, if the only conclusion to be
drawn is that there were sufficient grounds for rescinding the
Contract, there would be nothing left to protect.7°°

160. There is thus no question that the Tribunal applied Egyptian law in deciding whether the
Contract was properly rescinded. The Tribunal followed the analysis of the CRCICA
Tribunal, which undoubtedly also applied Egyptian law. It was fully within the Tribunal’s
power and discretion to rely on the CRCICA Award and accept its interpretation of the
applicable Egyptian law. Whether the Tribunal should have subjected specific provisions
of Egyptian law to closer scrutiny and analysis, or whether the Tribunal should have
invoked and examined different provisions of Egyptian law, is not a question that should
be dealt with in an annulment proceeding. The Committee thus concludes that the
Tribunal applied the proper law and finds no errors committed by the Tribunal in that

context that were “so egregious as to amount to a failure to apply the proper law.”2°”

Costs

 

161. Each Party has pleaded that the fees and expenses of its legal representation, those of
the Committee members and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre be
borne by the other Party. Under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule
47(1)(j) read together with Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 53,
the Committee has discretion in deciding the apportionment of fees and expenses of the
parties, the fees and expenses of the members of the Committee and the charges for the
use of the facilities of the Centre.

258 Award, para. 130.
287 Soufraki Annulment Decision, paras. 99, 101-02. See also Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION at 963.

52

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

162. In the circumstances of this case, the Committee considers that each of the Parties shall
bear its own costs for legal representation and expenses and that Applicant shall bear the
fees and expenses of the members of the Committee and the charges for use of the
facilities of the Centre**, the exact amount of which shall be subsequently notified by the

Centre.7°°

°58 Dr. Eduardo Silva Romero is of the view that, given that the Annulment Application was groundless,
Applicant should have been ordered by the Committee to bear the entirety of Respondent's costs incurred
as a result of the annulment proceedings.

°° The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed financial statement of the case account
as soon as the account has been finalized.

53

Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited

Vill. Decision

163. In light of the foregoing, the Committee rejects in its entirety Malicorp’s Application for
Annulment and declines to annul the Award.

The Ad Hoc Committee

[Signed] [Signed]
Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov Dr. Eduardo Silva Romero
Member Member
Date: [June 17, 2013] Date: [June 24, 2013]
[Signed]

Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda
President
Date: [June 28, 2013]

54

