Neutral Citation Number: [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm
Case No: 2012 Folio 284
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
COMMERCIAL COURT
Royal Courts of Justice
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL
Date: 19/02/2015

 

Before :
THE HON MR JUSTICE WALKER

IN AN ARBITRATION CLAIM BETWEEN :

MALICORP LIMITED Claimant
-and -
(1) GOVERNMENT of the ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
(2) EGYPTIAN HOLDING COMPANY FOR AVIATION
(3) EGYPTIAN AIRPORTS COMPANY Defendants

Mr Subir Karmakar, of Saunders Law Ltd, solicitors for the Claimant, appeared for
the Claimant, to the extent described in section A of the judgment within.
Mr Ali Malek QC and Mr Richard Brent, instructed by Gibson & Co, appeared for the
Defendants.

Hearing date: 16 September 2014; written submissions were received during the period 26
September to 24 October 2014.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Judgment
The Hon Mr Justice Walker:
[Table of Contents]
A. Introduction 2
B. Background to the Cairo award 5
C. The findings in the Cairo award 14
D. Effects of the 2012 Cairo Court of Appeal decision ...........ccccccscesesseeeneseeteseeeseeeseeeseenes 15
E. Egypt’s inability to present its case 17
EL. Overview 17
E2. Relevant legal principles 18
E3. The tribunal’s reasoning as to reMedy.........cceccesesseseeseseeesteseseeseseeseseeseseesssneseseenesneness 18

 

E4. Analysis: a basis that was neither pleaded nor argued?

FE. Egypt’s other grounds for setting aside
G. Conclusion

 

 

A. Introduction

1. This case concerns an arbitration (“the Cairo arbitration”) brought by Malicorp Ltd
(“Malicorp”, a company registered in England & Wales). Malicorp had made a bid in

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

response to an Egyptian government invitation to tender for the design and
construction of a new airport at Ras Sudr on the Red Sea coast, along with the
operation of the airport for a period of 41 years. That bid had been successful, and in
consequence Malicorp eventually entered into a written contract with “the
Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt, represented by the Civil Aviation
Authority”. I shall refer to the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt as “the
Republic”. The written contract was signed on 4 November 2000. I shall refer to it as
“the concession contract”.

Article 21.3 of the concession contract contained provisions for the resolution of
disputes. It provided that initially an amicable procedure was to be followed. As
regards disputes which could not be settled amicably it provided for arbitration under
the auspices of the Cairo Regional Centre for International Commercial Arbitration
(‘the Cairo Centre”). I shall refer to article 21.3 as “the arbitration clause”.

In April 2004 Malicorp invoked the arbitration clause by submitting a request for
arbitration to the Cairo Centre, and appointing as its arbitrator Dr Abdel Hamid El
Ahdab. In due course the respondents to the arbitration appointed Dr Hatem Ali Labib
Gabr as their arbitrator. Dr El] Ahdab and Dr Gabr nominated Professor Bernardo M
Cremades as president of the arbitral tribunal.

A purported arbitration award in favour of Malicorp was rendered in Cairo on 7
March 2006. It had been signed in Madrid on that day by Dr El Ahdab and Professor
Cremades. It attached a letter from Dr Gabr dated 27 February 2006 explaining his
reasons for concluding that a 2006 Administrative Court decision, described further
below, required him to suspend his participation as an arbitrator.

For convenience only, and without any implication as to their true status, I refer below
to the purported award as “the Cairo award”, to the two arbitrators who signed it as
“the truncated tribunal”, and to the three appointed arbitrators as “the full tribunal”.
The Cairo award found that the Republic was obliged to pay Malicorp a sum in
United States dollars (“$”) of $10m for loss of profits and $4,773,497 for costs and
expenses, together with interest thereon at the rate of 4% p.a. from 28 April 2004 to
the date of payment.

In the present proceedings Malicorp as claimant seeks to enforce the Cairo award
against the Republic, which was the first respondent in the arbitration and is the first
defendant in the present proceedings. Malicorp’s claim in the arbitration had also
been made against the second and third defendants in the present enforcement
proceedings (‘the Holding Company” and “the Airports Company” respectively).
They were the successors to the Civil Aviation Authority, and in that capacity were
the second and third respondents in the arbitration. However, the truncated tribunal
found that they were not parties to the concession contract, and it dismissed the claims
by Malicorp against them. For convenience references below to “Egypt” are, unless
the context otherwise requires, references to the three defendants.

Separately from, or linked to, the arbitration, there have been proceedings which
include:

Page 2

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

qd) a decision (“the 2006 Administrative Court decision”) on 19 February 2006 of
the Judicial Administrative court of the Egyptian Council of State, setting
aside the arbitration clause and suspending the Cairo arbitration;

(2) a decision (“the Paris 2008 decision”) of the Paris Court of Appeal on 19 June
2008, upheld by the Cour de Cassation on 23 June 2010, refusing to enforce
the Cairo award in France;

(3) a decision (“the ICSID 2011 decision”) of an arbitral tribunal of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“the ICSID
Centre”) sent to the parties on 7 February 2011, rejecting a claim by Malicorp
for expropriation and holding that Egypt’s actions could not be considered a
form of expropriation under international law; and

(4) a decision (‘the 2012 Cairo Court of Appeal decision”) of the Cairo Court of
Appeal on 5 December 2012, currently under appeal to the Egyptian Court of
Cassation, setting aside the Cairo award.

The present application by Malicorp for permission to enforce the Cairo award in
England & Wales pursuant to section 101(2) Arbitration Act 1996 (“the 1996 Act”)
was made without notice in accordance with CPR 62.18. It came before Flaux J for
consideration on the papers. By order dated 29 February 2012 (“the enforcement
order”) he granted permission, reserving to the defendants a right to apply to set the
enforcement order aside.

The present judgment deals with Egypt’s application to set aside the grant of
permission to enforce. That application was fixed for hearing over four days from 15
to 18 September 2014 inclusive. Monday 15 September 2014 was a reading day. At
the outset of Tuesday 16 September 2014 Mr Karmakar of Saunders Law Ltd
appeared on behalf of Malicorp. He stated that his instructions to appear were limited
to the making of oral submissions in support of an application dated 12 September
2014 by Malicorp seeking an adjournment of the hearing.

For reasons given in my ruling on 16 September 2014 I refused the adjournment
application. In summary, the adjournment application asserted that Malicorp, which
had already had the benefit of substantial advice from leading and junior counsel,
needed more time in order to put in place funding needed in order to brief counsel to
attend the hearing. I refused the application because I considered that the hearing
could continue without injustice to Malicorp, and that in all the circumstances the
interests of justice would be best served by allowing the hearing to continue. In
particular, it seemed to me that, if the hearing proceeded, case management directions
could, in the first instance, enable the court to identify issues which Mr Karmakar on
behalf of Malicorp would be adequately qualified to deal with. The court would then
hear argument on those issues. Further directions could then be given depending upon
whether the court’s conclusions on those issues in themselves had the consequence
that the Cairo award could not be enforced here. I added that it weighed with me
strongly that Malicorp was in a position where it could have ensured that it would be
represented by leading counsel under a conditional fee arrangement and appeared to
have thrown that opportunity away without good reason.

Page 3

11.

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

After my ruling Mr Karmakar received further instructions from his client to remain
in court. Accordingly he remained in court during the course of oral submissions by
Mr Malek QC and by Mr Brent on behalf of Egypt, and during oral evidence by Dr
Mohamed Badran, who was called by Mr Brent as an expert witness on Egyptian law.
Egypt’s case was completed that afternoon and I reserved judgment. On occasion Mr
Karmakar intervened during the course of the oral submissions, but he did not at any
stage during the afternoon suggest that his client wished for him to make more general
oral submissions on its behalf.

On the evening of 16 September 2014 Mr Karmakar sent an email to my clerk,
referring to a “draft incomplete version” of Malicorp’s skeleton argument which had
been supplied the previous day. In his email Mr Karmakar said that he intended to
serve the remaining portions of that skeleton argument the following day unless “Mr
Justice Walker decides that it is no longer necessary”. My clerk replied that my
preferred course would be for Malicorp to lodge written submissions in response to
Egypt’s written and oral submissions, and that Egypt should then lodge written
submissions in reply.

The parties agreed to adopt my preferred course. They also agreed on a timetable,
eventually revised so that Malicorp served (1) written submissions dated 26
September 2014 (“Malicorp’s September submissions”) in reply to Egypt’s skeleton
argument and (2) written submissions dated 17 October 2014 (“Malicorp’s October
submissions”) in reply to Egypt’s oral submissions. Egypt lodged written submissions
in reply dated 24 October 2014 (“Egypt’s reply”).

It is common ground that the Cairo award is a New York Convention award, with the
result that enforcement may only be refused if the case falls within s 103(2) to 103(4)
of the 1996 Act. Egypt asserts that there are four independent grounds for holding that
the case does indeed fall within those provisions. After reflecting on the oral and
written submissions I consider that:

qd) on each of the first two of Egypt’s grounds, Egypt is right to say that the case
falls within s 103(2), and that in so far as I have any discretion in the matter, I
should exercise it so as not to enforce the Cairo award;

(2) as to the first of Egypt’s grounds, Egypt’s set aside application succeeds
because the Cairo award has been set aside by the 2012 Cairo Court of Appeal
decision (see section D below);

(3) as to the second of Egypt’s grounds, Egypt’s set aside application also and
independently succeeds because as a matter of fact the Cairo award granted
remedies to Malicorp on a basis which was neither pleaded nor argued (see
section E below);

(4) in these circumstances I need not consider an issue estoppel argument relied on
by Egypt as an alternative way of advancing its second ground, nor need I
consider the third and fourth grounds relied on by Egypt, and in the
circumstances of the present case it is undesirable that I should do so.

Thus the result is that the enforcement order must be set aside. My detailed reasons
are set out in sections D and E below. In sections B and C below I summarise the

Page 4

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

background to the Cairo award and what was said in the Cairo award. In section F
below I discuss the position in relation to other grounds advanced by Egypt in support
of the application.

B. Background to the Cairo award

16. Section VI of the Cairo award, comprising paragraphs 18 to 33, dealt with the factual
background. I set out relevant extracts below, adding sub-paragraph numbers in
square brackets for convenience:

§18.- The Claimant was incorporated pursuant to English law
on August 6, 1997. Its share capital on incorporation was “...
£1000 divided into 1000 shares of £1 each’, and its object was
stated to be to “... carry on business as a general commercial
company”. Its paid-up capital on incorporation was £2. The
changes to its capital, and the confusion between its authorised
and paid-up capital are a central issue in this case.

§19.- [19.1] The Egyptian Civil Aviation Authority
announced the tender for a new Airport of Ras Sudr, and made
available the tender documents in August 1999. On October 1,
1999 the Claimant submitted an offer in response to the tender.
The tender was signed on behalf of the Claimant by “Staff
Major General Mahmoud Shakir Ibrahim, General Director’. It
was accompanied by a first demand guarantee to the amount of
one million Egyptian pounds by MISR Bank in Cairo on behalf
of “Mr Sayed Hanafi Mahmoud...for the construction of an
International Airport in Ras Sudr’, and addressed to the
Egyptian General Civil Aviation Authority ... it is not clear
what documentation accompanied the bid, and in particular
whether the Claimant presented an extract from the Companies
Register in England and Wales in order to confirm its objects
and capital.

[19.2] The Claimant was invited to appear before a
committee presided by the President of the Civil Aviation
Sector, Mr. Mamdouh Mohamed Heshmat. The meeting took
place on January 3, 2000 and the letter of invitation set out a
list of six matters which the Claimant was expected to clarify.
The Claimant was represented at this meeting by General
Mahmoud Shakir Ibraim (or Ibrahim). The first question related
to the details of the Claimant’s ‘issued and licensed’ capital.
The Minutes of this meeting record the response as follows.

Upon their question concerning the first point: details
of the capital he [i.e.,General Mahmoud Shakir Ibraim]
responded by the following: “The Original Company
with which the contracting shall be concluded and

Page 5

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

which submitted the offer is the British company
Malicorp Ltd, a company established under the British
law and its residence is in London with its capital of
one hundred million Sterling pounds according to the
attached commercial register which was reviewed by
the Committee ‘s members.

[19.3] The Respondents state that the Claimant produced at
this meeting an extract from the register of Companies House,
Cardiff, in respect of Malicorp Limited, dated September 15,
1999. The object of Malicorp Limited was stated in this extract
to be “to build, develop and operate the Ras Sudr Airport and
to develop associated sites for industrial and tourist purposes.”
In respect of capital this extract stated:

The company’s share capital is £100 million divided
into one million shares of £100 each.

[19.4] Mr Heshmat confirmed in his oral evidence that he
was appointed to head a committee to review the two bids, and
that a meeting was arranged to clarify certain aspects of
Malicorp’s bid. General Shakir Ibraim was the only person who
attended on behalf of Malicorp, and he [i.e., General Ibraim]
told the Committee that Malicorp’s “paid-up” capital was £100
million, and presented a commercial register issued in the
United Kingdom to support this statement regarding the paid-
up capital. This document was scrutinised by the reviewing
committee.

[19.5] The Claimant’s evidence, by contrast, was quite
explicit that the intention always was to finance the project
from outside sources. ...

§20.- [20.1] On February 8, 2000 the Chairman of the
Egyptian Civil Aviation Authority advised the Claimant that its
offer had been selected for the construction of the Ras Sudr
Airport, adding that “all the previous procedure of the brochure
of terms, the Authority’s specifications, your offer and all
Minutes in relation to the operation shall be considered an
integral part of the contract which shall be concluded in this
respect.”

[20.2] A preliminary contract or heads of agreement was
signed on May 28, 2000 between the Arab Republic of Egypt,
represented by the General Authority for Civil Aviation on one
part, and the Claimant on the other part. This Heads of
Agreement consisted of eight articles, and anticipated further
investigation and negotiation between the parties of
professional, technical, legal and scheduling matters leading to
a detailed contract.

Page 6

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

§21.- The Concession Contract was executed on November
4, 2000 by the Government of the Republic of Egypt
represented by the Egyptian Civil Aviation Authority, as
Concessor, and Malicorp Limited and Ras Sudr International
Airport Ltd (a company to be formed) as Concessionaire. ...

§23.- On January 17, 2001 an application was submitted in
Egypt to establish a company pursuant to Law N°8 of 1997 (on
investment guarantees and incentives) “to build, manage,
utilize and transfer Ras Sidr International Airport”. Its three
shareholders included Malicorp Ltd, which was going to hold
9,800,000 of the 10,000,000 shares to a value of 10,000,000
Egyptian pounds. The same document stated that the “Sources
of Financing” will be “Capital LE 100,000,000, Loans LE
150,000,000” giving a total of L.E. 250,000,000.

§24.- [24.1] Between the signing of the contract on
November 4, 2000 and February 18, 2001 the Egyptian Civil
Aviation Authority sent three notices to the Claimant regarding
its contractual obligations to increase the bank guarantee to two
million Egyptian pounds (clause 23.1.7) and to incorporate an
Egyptian Company (clause 23.1.6). ...

[24.3] On April 18, 2001 the Claimant wrote to the Egyptian
Authority for Civil Aviation advising that the documents
relating to the establishment of the Egyptian company
according to Law N°8 of 1997 had been submitted and “we are
expecting the approval of the Investment Authority to finalise
the formalities.” ...

§26.- On April 28, 2000 the Claimant wrote to the Egyptian
Holding Company for Civil Aviation requesting “approval to
commence procedures for delivering the airport site’. The
letter went on to advise that the Claimant was “still following
the procedures of registration of the Egyptian Company, [but]
we cannot overcome the routine and the procedures followed
by the Investment Authority...”. The response from the
Egyptian Holding Company for Civil Aviation on May 5, 2001
was that the delivery procedures for the airport site could not
commence “unless the Concessionaire Company is published
and notifies us with the registration and publication documents,
according to the applicable regulations and law ...”

§27.- [27.1] By letter dated May 30, 2001 the Egyptian
Holding Company for Aviation first expressed serious concern

Page 7

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

in writing regarding Claimant’s “seriousness” and the
truthfulness of information provided to Egyptian authorities. ...

[27.2] There followed correspondence as the Claimant
sought to expedite the formation of the Egyptian Company and
the transfer of the Airport site, writing to the Investment and
Free Zones Authority, to the Egyptian Holding Company for
Aviation, the Minister of Transportation, the Prime Minister
and to the President of the Republic. The Claimant wrote to the
Egyptian Holding Company for Civil Aviation on June 13, 201
seeking extra time to obtain exceptional approvals of the Prime
Minister and the Minister of Transport. It also wrote to the
Minister of Transportation on June 28, 2001 ...

[27.3] On July 21, 2001 there was a meeting of a Special
Commission for the Ras Sudr Airport. This Special
Commission was chaired by the Minister of Transport and was
composed of senior Egyptian officials and legal counsel in the
aviation and tourism sectors, as well as representatives of
National Security and the Investment and Free Zones
Authority. There was extensive discussion of the background
and problems with the Concession Contract. ...

[27.4] The meeting concluded with a decision to rescind the
Concession Contract and call the letters of guarantee:

Based _on_the above the Commission adopted _the
resolution:

1. To notify the Egyptian Holding Company for
Aviation and Malicorp a letter from the Investment
Authority informing about the non-approval on the
formation of such company due to the rejection of the
security on the formation.

2. When the above-mentioned letter in paragraph (1)
will be served to the Holding Company, the procedure
of rescinding the contract and the cashing of the letter
of guarantee will take place.

3. To be prepared to face the legal consequences
resulting from the cancellation and the seizing of the
letter of guarantee.

§28.- [28.1] On July 25, 2001 the two bank guarantees
provided by or on behalf of the Claimant in respect of the
Concession Contract were called in the name of the Egyptian
Civil Aviation Authority. By letter dated July 28, 2001 the
State Security Organism of Investigation formally advised the
Public Authority for Investment that it did not approve the

Page 8

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

Claimant for the establishment of Ras Sudr Airport. No reasons
were given by the Security Organisation for this decision.

[28.2] The Egyptian Holding Company for Aviation gave
notice to Malicorp of the cancellation of the Concession
Contract by letter dated August 12, 2001:

To/ Malicorp Company
Greeting,

In reference to the Agreement signed with you about
the construction and management of the Ras Sudr
Airport on B.O.T basis, and notwithstanding the
consecutive warnings sent on December 2000, January
2001 and the final notice dated 18/2/2001 for not
completing the formation documents of the Egyptian
company according to law number 8/97 and for not
sending a draft on the execution of the project, and for
not amending the letters of guarantee to become
definitive, and after granting you another extension
until 28/2/2001; and,

Whereas the Company has submitted to the
commission documents which authenticity is dubious,
inciting the Commission to send you a letter dated
30/5/2001 to submit true and authentic documents and
granting you a period of time until 30/6/2001 extended
until 31/7/2001; and,

Whereas the Company has submitted to the security
authorities untrue documents concerning the names of
the partners in the British company; and

Whereas the Company was not able to form an
Egyptian Company according to the Egyptian laws
until 3/2/2001 as provided in the Agreement, in
addition to others contraventions committed by the
company; and,

Whereas your lack of seriousness has been established
from the signature of the Agreement on 4/11/2001 up
to now, resulting in the non-starting of the project until
today...

Based on the above, it has been decided to cancel the
agreement and seize the letter of guarantee, reserving
the right to claim punitive damages for the prejudice
incurred by the holding company and the Egyptian
Government resulting from the non-starting with the
execution of one of the vital and important projects

Page 9

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

included in the planning of the Government for the
development of the economy.»

[28.3] The Claimant responded in a letter dated August 13,
2001. The Claimant stated that the Egyptian Holding Company
for Aviation was a private law entity without the power to
unilaterally terminate the Concession Contract. The Claimant
went on to rebut statements regarding the presentation of plans,
the submission of dubious documents, and the alleged
presentation of false documents concerning “the names of the
partners on the British company”. It stated that the delay in
forming the Egyptian Company lay with the Investment
Authority (and therefore indirectly with the Arab Republic of
Egypt) and not with the Claimant, and denied any lack of
seriousness. It added further reasons why there was no right to
cancel the Concession Contract and concluded as follows:

We hereby inform you that the issuance of your
decision to annul the Contract and is null and does not
concern the Company nor affect it, it is an internal
matter that concerns you solely and does not affect the
Company concerning the Contract ratified by the
Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt which is
currently in force until now, and by considering your
decision as null and void according to the contract and
law, requesting the Government to deliver the airport
site in order to start with the execution in the interest
of the Company and of the Government.

§29.- The cancellation of the Concession Contract by the
Concessor was subsequently confirmed in two letters. The first
letter, signed by Pilot Mamdouh Mohamed Heshmat as Chief
Executive of the “Egyptian Authority for the Control of
Aviation” was dated September 4, 2001. The second letter (in
similar terms to the first) dated September 28, 2001 and signed
by the Minister of Transport read as follows:

«Greetings,

In reference to the Agreement signed by both parties,
relating to the construction and management of the
Ras Sudr Airport on B.O.T basis, and despite putting
you on notice many times through the Egyptian
Aviation Holding Company to complete the documents
required to the formation of the Egyptian Company
which will receive the site of the project and start the
execution in accordance with law number 8/1997 on
the guarantee and protection of the investments, and
law number 3/1997 related to granting the concession
of public utilities for building, managing and
exploiting the airports and runways, but that your

Page 10

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

company has failed to execute the prerequisite and did
not complete the formalities of formation of the
Egyptian Company which should have been
accomplished by 3/2/2001 in, accordance with the
Agreement, which indicates your lack of seriousness in
the execution of the entire Agreement entered into
between the parties on 4/11/2000. We confirm the
cancellation of the Agreement which was notified to
you previously by the Egyptian Aviation Holding
Company and the Egyptian Commission for the
Control of the Civil Aviation and the seizing of the two
letters of guarantee, reserving all and any other rights.
>

§30.- On April 20, 2004 the Claimant commenced this
arbitration by filing its Request for Arbitration. The relief
claimed in its Memorial of Claim dated February 19, 2005 was
quantified in its Rejoinder on Claim dated July 26, 2005 as
follows:

Ll. Expenses in the amount of USD 12,416,574 (twelve
million four hundred and_ sixteen thousand five
hundred and seventy four USD).

2. The value of the liquidated letters of Guarantee in
the amount of USD 564,069 (Five hundred and sixty
four thousand sixty nine USD).

3. Loss of profits in the amount of USD 500,000,000
(Five hundred million USD).

4. Damages in the amount of 1 (one) million USD to
compensate the claimant for the moral damages.

5. Interest on the amounts claimed at the legal rate.

6. All costs and expenses caused by the present
arbitration proceedings and any consequences thereof,
including but not limited to the Cairo Regional
Center’s administrative expenses, fees and expenses of
arbitrators, experts, witnesses and attorneys at an
amount to be determined later on.

§31.- [31.1] The Rejoinder of the Arab Republic of Egypt
dated September 21, 2005 contained the following request for
relief to the Arbitral Tribunal:

Egypt respectfully requests that this Tribunal:

Page 11

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

i) rule as a preliminary question that it does not
have jurisdiction to rule on the claims made by
Malicorp, and if this Tribunal finds that it has
jurisdiction; Egypt respectfully requests that this
Tribunal:

rule that the claims made by Malicorp are
entirely not admissible in opposition to the Egyptian
Minister of Transportation and the Egyptian Minister
of civil Aviation, and if this Tribunal finds that the
claims made by Malicorp are admissible as regards
both of the aforementioned Egyptian Ministers; Egypt
respectfully requests that this Tribunal:

reject the claims made by Malicorp in its
entirety; and

ii) in all events order Malicorp to reimburse all of
the costs that Egypt has incurred in connection with
these proceedings.

[31.2] In its Post-Hearing Submission the Arab Republic of
Egypt also requested the termination and discontinuance of this
arbitration pursuant to Article 45 of arbitration Law N° 27 of
1994.

[31.3] The Rejoinder of the Egyptian Holding Company for
Aviation and the Egyptian Airport Company dated September
21, 2005 requested the Arbitral Tribunal to rule as follows:

Main Principal Request:

1. The Third & Fourth Respondents adhere to and hold
the substantial pleas related to the Public Order that
have been raised by them in their Memorandum of
Defense of 21.5.2005 pertaining to the non jurisdiction
and nullity in addition to all the pleas mentioned
therein.

2. After determination of all the substantial pleas
pertaining to the Public Order, we pray the Arbitral
Tribunal to dismiss the Claimant’s case entirely i.e. to
reject the claim of indemnity for the absence of its
elements of fault and damage and the causal
relationship between them and to obligate the
Claimant with all the expenses and fees of the present
arbitration.

Auxiliary Request:

Page 12

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

1. To suspend the arbitral case in implementation of
Article (46) of the Arbitration Law No. 27 of the year
1994, until the determination of the Felonies Case No.
327/2004 (Inclusive Public Funds), as “The Tribunal
will keep the matter under review”.

2. In case of non responding to the previous request by
the Arbitral Tribunal, then the Third and Fourth
Respondents pray the permission to start and proceed
upon the forgery challenging of  Malicorp’s
commercial register and other documents that had
been submitted by the Claimant according to the
Article No. (49) and subsequent articles of the
Egyptian Evidence Law.»

§32.- On July 15, 2004 the Minister of Civil Aviation
complained to the Public Prosecutor of fraudulent practices by
the Claimant and officials of the Egyptian Authority for Civil
Aviation. On August 17, 2005 the Public Prosecutor submitted
an Order of Referral to the Court of Felonies in Cairo,
including a supporting Memorandum of Facts produced by the
Public Prosecutor dated July 13, 2005. The Order of Referral
alleges various illegal and fraudulent acts on the part of persons
connected with the Claimant as well as certain Egyptian
officials involved in the review of the Claimant’s bid.

§33.- [33.1] The accused include various Egyptian
officials. They also include five “partners” in Malicorp,
accused of colluding with the accused Egyptian officials in the
execution of their illegal acts, and of cooperating with an
unknown person in order to forge Malicorp’s commercial
register No. 3415415 “through simulating and changing by
agreeing with an unknown person to prepare and forge the
abovementioned document...and thus the unknown person has
edited in the forged document that the capital of the company
is one hundred million sterling pounds, and this was contrary
to fact ...”

[33.2] There is also an accusation against three of the
accused of ‘attempting to turn a forged fact to be correct’ by
attending before the committee of evaluation of the bid on
January 3, 2000 “on behalf of Malicorp Limited..., and alleging
that the capital of the said company amounts to one hundred
million pounds sterling, and supported such allegation by
submitting the forged commercial register.”

Page 13

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

C. The findings in the Cairo award
17. In sections VII to IX the Cairo award discussed the principal issues between the
parties. I begin by listing, with the addition of letters in square brackets for ease of
reference, those dealt with in section VII:
(1) Procedural issues as to:
[1a] the proper parties to the arbitration (paragraphs 35-38);

[1b] the time period for the arbitration (paragraphs 39-42);

[1c] whether Malicorp was lawfully represented before the
arbitral tribunal (paragraphs 43-46);

[1d] whether prior recourse was duly made to alternative
means of dispute resolution (paragraph 47).

(2) Issues as to jurisdiction/consent to arbitrate:
[2a] domestic rules concerning administrative contracts;

[2b] the effect of a decision of the Egyptian Administrative
Judiciary Court; and

[2c] a requirement for approval by the Council of State
(paragraphs 48-60).

(3) Jurisdiction: the significance of the United Kingdom-
Egypt Bilateral Investment Treaty (paragraphs 61-64).

(4) Breach/Annulment of the concession contract:
[4a] whether the Republic was a party to the concession
contract (paragraphs 65 to 67), and retention by the Republic
of the power to cancel the concession contract (paragraph

68);

[4b] the reasons why the concession contract was in fact
cancelled by the Republic (paragraphs 69 and 70);

[4c] Egypt’s submissions that the concession contract was
void as having been concluded as a result of “fraudulent
artifices” (paragraphs 71 and 72);

[4d] findings as to “essential mistake” (paragraph 73);

[4e] consequences under Egyptian Civil Code art 142
(paragraph 74);

Page 14

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

[4f] principles concerning suspension of arbitral proceedings
pending the resolution of criminal proceedings (paragraphs
75-71);

[4g] whether it was necessary to make a decision on forgery
or other criminal acts alleged (paragraph 78);

[4h] decision not to exercise discretion to suspend the
arbitral proceedings pending the resolution of criminal
proceedings (paragraph 79).

18. Section VIII dealt with damages (paragraphs 80-87). Section IX dealt with costs
(paragraphs 88-91).

19. Section X was headed “Award”. It set out findings which included:

[X.]3. The Concession Contract is an administrative contract in
Egyptian domestic law. It is also an international contract
involving a State party, and is subject to the principles
applicable to such contracts;

[x.]4. The Concession Contract was void for mistake. The
Arbitral Tribunal also recognises that Arab Republic of Egypt
had the power to cancel the Concession Contract, and did so on
August 12, 2001;

[X.]5. In lieu of reinstatement to its original position prior to
the Concession Contract, the Arab Republic of Egypt shall pay
to the Claimant the amount of FOURTEEN MILLION SEVEN
HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-THREE THOUSAND AND
FOUR HUNDRED AND NINETY SEVEN United States
Dollars ($US14,773,497) by way of damages;

D. Effects of the 2012 Cairo Court of Appeal decision

20. As noted above, a challenge to the 2012 Cairo Court of Appeal decision is pending
before the Egyptian Court of Cassation. It is elementary, and Malicorp has identified
no ground for disputing, that under relevant principles of private international law this
court must nevertheless treat the 2012 Cairo Court of Appeal decision judgment as
final.

21. Egypt’s primary assertion is that I should proceed on the basis that the 2012 Cairo
Court of Appeal decision has the effect without more that there is no award. Reliance
is placed in this regard on alleged principles expounded in van den Berg,
“Enforcement of Arbitral Awards Annulled in Russia, (2010) Journal of International
Arbitration vol 27(2), However, I do not need to decide whether the alleged principles
are right. For present purposes I proceed on two assumptions. They are:

Page 15,

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

qd) that the word “may” in s 103(2) of the 1996 Act confers a discretion on this
court to enforce an award even though the award has been set aside by a
decision (“the set aside decision’’) of a court constituting a competent authority
within s 103(2)(f); and

(2) it would not be right to exercise that discretion if, applying general principles
of English private international law, the set aside decision was one which this
court would give effect to.

This approach, which I would describe as “the preferred approach”, is supported by
the discussion in Dicey, Morris & Collins, 15" edition, at Rules 50-5 and paragraph
16-148. It was adopted by Simon J in Yukos Capital S.a.r.L v OJS Oil Company
Rosneft [2014] EWHC 2188 (Comm) at paragraph 20. On this basis I should give
effect to the 2012 Cairo Court of Appeal decision unless it offends “basic principles
of honesty, natural justice and domestic concepts of public policy”.

Malicorp has not explicitly contended that the preferred approach is wrong. There are
passages in the September and October submissions opposing a course under which
this court would be “deferring to the supervisory court’. If those passages are
intended to advocate an approach which differs from the preferred approach, then it
seems to me that, for the reasons identified in Dicey, Morris & Collins, they go too
far.

Thus the only question becomes whether the set aside decision was one which this
court would give effect to. In this regard Malicorp objects that the decision should not
be given effect to because (1) it was tainted by bias, (2) it was contrary to natural
justice and the Egyptian Court deliberately misapplied relevant Egyptian law and (3)
the grounds on which it set aside the Cairo award were wrong and misconceived.

Malicorp’s objection (3) can be dealt with shortly. As observed by Egypt, an assertion
that a foreign judgment is “wrong” is not a sufficient basis to refuse to recognise it.
When considering whether to recognise a foreign judgment this court acknowledges
that the determination of foreign law is a matter for the foreign court. Thus evidence
relied on by Malicorp that the 2012 Cairo Court of Appeal decision is wrong does not
address the relevant issues. As Egypt points out, there is no suggestion in that
evidence that the 2012 Cairo Court of Appeal decision is perverse. Allegations that
there was a failure “to take account of” Malicorp’s submissions merely because those
submissions were not repeated in the judgment, or that the judgment gave reasons
which were “insufficient and contradictory” do not assist Malicorp in this regard.

As to objections (1) and (2), the detailed matters relied on are in my view insufficient
to make good these complaints. The central assertion made by Malicorp is that the
judges responsible for the 2012 Cairo Court of Appeal decision were guilty of pro-
government bias. Such a claim cannot be accepted by this court without positive and
cogent evidence: see Altimo Holdings and Investment Ltd v Kyrgz Mobil Tel Ltd
[2011] UKPC 7, para 97 and Yukos Capital S.a.r.L v OJS Oil Company Rosneft (No
2) [2012] EWCA Civ 855 para 73. A report of Professor Stilt is relied on by Malicorp
as providing the necessary evidence. While I do not criticise Professor Stilt, I have no
doubt that the evidence she has been able to assemble does not approach the high
level of cogency that is required. It does not go beyond generalised, anecdotal
material. In so far as Malicorp places reliance on a newspaper report concerning the

Page 16

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

team working on behalf of the government, the report does not on its face say that the
relevant judges were part of the team, and there is no apparent basis to think that this
was implied by the report. Reference is made by Malicorp to a letter from the
President of the Cairo Court of Appeal to the Public Prosecutor concerning
suspension of the Cairo arbitration while criminal proceedings were on foot, but in so
far as complaint is made about this letter nothing in the letter is identified to support
any such complaint.

27. I add a particular comment in so far as Malicorp relies upon a claim that the Cairo
Court of Appeal judges who handed down judgment were not on strike during a
constitutional dispute between then President Morsi and some of the judiciary. In my
view this claim, even if true, could not possibly warrant the serious allegation made.

28. The preferred approach which I have described above applies, in the present context,
well established principles as to the recognition of foreign judgments. It does not
seem to me that they leave room, as a matter of discretion, to give effect to the Cairo
award once it is established, as here, that a set aside decision of the supervisory court
meets the tests for recognition. If, however, there were such a further discretion I
would not exercise it in favour of Malicorp. In so far as Malicorp relies on comments
in the ICSID 2011 decision which are said to be supportive of Malicorp’s case on the
merits, I observe that the ICSID 2011 decision was concerned only with jurisdiction
and whether there had been expropriation. In so far as Malicorp suggests that the
present case should be adjourned to await the outcome of its appeal to the Court of
Cassation, I do not consider that there is good reason to depart from the normal
approach under which the 2012 Cairo Court of Appeal decision is, unless and until
overturned by the Court of Cassation, treated as a final decision.

E. Egypt’s inability to present its case

E1. Overview

29. Under the 1996 Act section 103(2)(c) will apply so as to permit a refusal to enforce
where those against whom the award is invoked prove that they were not given proper
notice of the appointment of the arbitrator or of the arbitration proceedings or were
otherwise unable to present their case.

30. Egypt puts its case in this regard in two alternative ways. The first is that the Paris
2008 decision gives rise to an issue estoppel on the point. For reasons given in section
F below I do not consider it necessary or desirable to examine this alternative in the
present judgment. The second, which I deal with in the remainder of this section, is
that in any event the factual material before the court demonstrates that Egypt were
unable to present their case within the meaning of s 103(2)(c).

E2. Relevant legal principles
31. There can in my view be no doubt that a grant of remedies on a basis which was
neither pleaded nor argued will be capable of falling with this subsection. Nor can

there be any doubt that under principles of English private international law the test as
to ability of the party to present its case involves an application of relevant English

Page 17

32.

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

principles as opposed to those of Egypt or anywhere else: see Cukurova Holdings AS
v Sonera Holding BV [2014] UKPC 15, para 32.

Malicorp asserts that the “character of the decision-making body, the kind of decision
it has to make and the statutory or other framework in which it operates” have to be
taken into account when considering if the procedure adopted was fair and in
compliance with the requirements of natural justice. I accept that relevant English
principles require consideration of these matters. I do not accept, however, that the
applicable arbitration procedures in the present case called for any lessening of the
essential need for Egypt to have notice of the basis on which the tribunal would grant
any remedy and approach the quantification of any monetary award. Nor can I accept
that there is anything arbitrary in requiring, before permitting enforcement here, that
the foreign arbitral procedure respected this essential need.

E3. The tribunal’s reasoning as to remedy

33.

It is common ground, and indeed the truncated tribunal recognised in paragraph 64 of
the Cairo award, that Malicorp requested compensation only for breaches of the
concession contract. The Cairo award, however, rejected that request. On the contrary,
it accepted Egypt’s contention that the concession contract had been validly avoided.
This appears from paragraphs 68 to 70 of the award:

§68.- The Concession Contract was expressly subject to ‘revision’ by the
Council of State (Article 24). The introduction (page 9, ‘General’) of the
Concession Contract recognised that it was subject to a feasibility study and “may
be cancelled if the relevant Feasibility Study shows the Airport Project and
Annexed Projects cannot be carried out in a sound economic manner’. Further,
the Concession Contract was expressly subject to the Laws No 3 and No 8 of
1997, and Article 5 of Law No 3 of 1997 requires a decree from the Council of
Ministers “upon a proposition by the competent minister concerning granting the
concession, defining its terms and provisions, or amending them...”. The
Claimant has not demonstrated that any such decree was ever promulgated in
respect of the Concession Contract. Accordingly, the Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied
that the Concession Contract, although binding on Egypt, was not unconditionally
effective, and Egypt retained the power to cancel the Concession Contract.

§69.- The evidence satisfies the Arbitral Tribunal that the Concession
Contract was in fact cancelled by Egypt for a combination of reasons, including:
(i) concerns regarding the delay in incorporating the mandatory Egyptian
subsidiary, and doubts regarding the accuracy or authenticity of information
provided for this purpose; (ii) concerns regarding the identity of the shareholders
and associates of the Claimant and its proposed Egyptian subsidiary; (iii) a
perceived lack of professionalism (‘seriousness’) and suitability of the Claimant
for a project of this nature arising from delays and the problems in the provision
of information; (iv) that the Claimant had failed to comply with its obligations
under the Concession Contract.

§70.- The Republic of Egypt also submitted that the Concession Contract

could be cancelled because of the breaches of contract of the Claimant (exceptio
non adimpleti contractus) and for breach of good faith. The Arbitral Tribunal is

Page 18

34.

High Court Approved Judgment:
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

not required to enter into these arguments in detail in light of its other decisions in
this award, particularly regarding mistake.

The truncated tribunal then went on to state in paragraphs 71 to 74:

§71.- The Respondents submit that the Concession
Contract is void for the “fraudulent artifices which led to the
conclusion of a contract, and [which] were of such gravity
that, but for them, the contracting party would not have
concluded the contract’. (Post-Hearing Submission of the
Egyptian Holding Company for Aviation and the Egyptian
Airports Company, paragraph 230). The allegations of fraud
relate to the capital of the Claimant, and include a serious
allegation that a forged ‘commercial register’ of the
Claimant company, fraudulently misrepresenting its capital,
was used to obtain the Concession Contract. The Arbitral
Tribunal has reviewed exhaustive submissions of the Parties
on this question. It notes that these allegations of fraud in
relation to this contract were not relied upon at the time of
the termination of the Concession Contract and were not
raised until after this arbitration was commenced.

§72.- [72.1] The importance of the capital of the
Claimant, the incorporation of the Egyptian subsidiary and
the approval of the Investment Authority arises from certain
provisions of Law No 8 for 1997. Article 4 of the Law
provides as follows:

Article (4)

The competent administrative department shall
undertake revising the contract of the companies
articles. and memoranda of association. It
should be indicated in the contract of
establishment and by-laws the names of the
contracting parties, the legal form of the
company, its name, the subject of its activity, its
duration, its capital, the share of contribution of
the Egyptian and non Egyptian parties, the
means of subscription therein and the partners
rights and obligations must be stated in the
articles and memoranda of association. And the
preliminary contracts and the articles of
association of the joint stock companies and the
limited partnerships shall be prepared
according to the forms of which a decree from
the council of ministers shall be promulgated.

Page 19

Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

The signatures on the companies contract must
be authenticated, whatever be their legal form in
return of an authentication fee...

And the license for the association of companies
shall be issued from the competent
administrative department, according to the
provisions of this law and shall have the right in
its benefits. And these companies shall have the
legal person from the date of their entry in the
commercial register. And the articles of
association of the company and its memorandum
of association shall be published according to
the rules and procedures which the executive
statutes of this law shall define.

And the above provisions shall apply to each
amendment of the company’s system.

[72.2] Article 4 has strict and detailed requirements
relating to the revision of the articles and memorandum of
the articles and memorandum of association, the corporate
activities, its capital, the share and contribution of Egyptian
and non-Egyptian parties, the means of subscription, and the
authentication of signatures. However, by contrast, Law No
3 of 1997, the law most directly connected with the
construction and management of airports, does not contain
any explicit requirements relating to the capital of an
investor. In fact, Article 1 of Law No 3 of 1997, by
providing that airport concessions may be granted to
Egyptian or foreign investors “whether natural or juridical
persons” suggests there is no mandatory capital
requirements.

§73.- [73.1] The issue here was the method of financing
of the project. The Claimant considered that the capital
requirements were satisfied, at least provisionally, by
increasing the authorised capital to £100 million. Whether
this capital was subscribed and issued, or finance was
arranged from alternative sources, was an issue that might be
addressed during the performance of the Concession
Contract. By contrast, the Egyptian officials considered this
to be an important substantive requirement at the outset.

[73.2] The different perceptions of this issue led to
confusion. The Claimant was casual in the presentation of its
documentation and in response to questions, and did not
distinguish between authorised (and not paid) and issued
(paid-up) capital. The Egyptian officials for their part, in an
issue of this importance, could have made further
independent inquiries. The different importance referred to

Page 20

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

above given to the capital requirements of investors in Laws
No 3 and 8 of 1997 may have contributed to these distinct
perceptions.

[73.3] The Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied that the Arab
Republic of Egypt committed an essential mistake in
entering into the Concession Contract in that it believed that
the registered and paid-up capital of the Claimant was £100
million. Further, it is satisfied that the Claimant could have,
and should have, detected this mistake, and that the mistake
is of such gravity that had it not been committed the Arab
Republic of Egypt would not have entered into the
Concession Contract.

[73.4] Article 120 and 121 of the Civil Code provide for
essential mistake. These Articles read as follows:

Art. 120 - A party to a contract may demand the
avoidance of the contract if he committed an
essential mistake, if the other party committed
the same mistake or had knowledge thereof, or
could have easily detected the mistake.

Art. 121 — A mistake is an essential mistake
when its gravity is of such a degree that if it had
not been committed, the party who was
mistaken, would not have concluded the
contract.

The mistake is deemed to be essential more
particularly:

(a) when it has a bearing on the quality of the
thing, which the parties have considered
essential or which must be deemed essential,
taking into consideration the circumstances
surrounding the contract and the good faith that
should prevail in business relationships.

(b) when it has a bearing on the identity or on
one of the qualities of the person with whom the
contract is entered into, if this identity or this
quality was the principal factor in the conclusion
of the contract.

[73.5.] The responsibility for this mistake rests
primarily with the Claimant for the ambiguous information it
provided in circumstances when it should have realised the
importance of the issue of paid up capital to the Egyptian
officials. However, there is also some responsibility of the
Egyptian officials in failing to clarify the importance of this

Page 21

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

issue or to make independent inquiries. The Arbitral
Tribunal assesses the respective responsibility of the Parties
as ninety percent with the Claimant and ten percent with the
Respondent.

§74.- [74.1] The Arbitral Tribunal therefore declares the
Concession Contract is void for mistake. The consequences
are described in Articles 138-144 to the Egyptian Civil Code
and particularly Article 142 which reads as follows:

Art. 142 — When a contract is void or annulled,
the parties are reinstated in their position prior
to the contract. If such reinstatement is
impossible, damages equivalent to the loss may
be awarded.

[74.2] The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the Concession
Contract contains express provisions for compensation in the
event of cancellation of the Contract by the Republic of
Egypt (see Article 19.1.3). However, as the Arbitral Tribunal
has found that the Concession Contract is void for mistake it
considers that the damages should be calculated in
accordance with Article 142 of the Civil Code on the basis of
damages in lieu of reinstatement.

E4. Analysis: a basis that was neither pleaded nor argued?

35.

36.

37.

As can be seen from section E3 above, the truncated tribunal did not rule on Egypt’s
claim that it was entitled to avoid the concession contract for fraud. Instead it held that
it was sufficient to rule that there had been an “essential mistake”. It was on that
footing that the truncated tribunal then proceeded to grant damages to Malicorp — but
not to Egypt. For this purpose the truncated tribunal relied on a power under art 142
of the Egyptian Civil Code to award damages where a contract is void or annulled,
and reinstatement of the parties to their position prior to the contract is impossible.

On the face of the award there is no suggestion that Malicorp ever claimed damages
under article 142. Nor has Malicorp identified anything in writing which makes such a
claim. Nor does the transcript record any indication during the course of the hearing
that anyone had in mind an award of damages under that article. As to what Malicorp
sought, right up to the time of the award, the truncated tribunal made the position
clear in paragraph 64: Malicorp’s claim was for compensation only for breaches of
the concession contract.

Malicorp has relied on a passage in the transcript as indicating that the Chairman was
asking Egypt what their view would be if the arbitral tribunal, without seeking to
prejudge any issue, were to find that there was no proven evidence of fraud or forgery
and that what they simply found instead was that there had been a misrepresentation. I
am prepared to accept that this question is similar to asking what the position would

Page 22

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

be if there had been an error but no fraud. What it does not show, however, is that
Egypt had any notice of a proposal to award damages under article 142.

There is also a suggestion by Malicorp that the transcript is unreliable and that they
should be permitted to supplement it by relying on a witness statement of Mr Frederic
Soliman, a member of Malicorp’s legal team at the hearing. In response Egypt has
advanced a number of criticisms of the witness statement. In large part, however, I
need not examine these criticisms, and I consider it undesirable to do so. For present
purposes I can assume that, with an exception identified below, what is said in the
witness statement is accurate.

Mr Soliman’s statement draws attention to an opinion of Mr Yassin dated 12
September 2005. That opinion was relied on by Malicorp in the course of the Cairo
arbitration. It discusses entitlement under Egyptian law to annul a contract both for
significant error and for fraud. The opinion specifically cites articles 120, 125, 138,
139 and 140 of the Egyptian Civil Code. It does not cite any article subsequent to
article 140, and in particular does not cite article 142. There is a suggestion by Mr
Soliman that the opinion set out how relevant issues were covered under articles 120
to 142 of the Egyptian Civil Code, but in stating that Mr Yassin’s opinion went
beyond article 140 Mr Soliman is plainly mistaken.

Mr Soliman adds in paragraph 17 of his statement that Malicorp’s counsel referred at
the hearing to article 141. This takes matters no further. Nowhere in Mr Soliman’s
statement is there any identification by him of any specific occasion when, during the
course of the Cairo arbitration, there was a suggestion that article 142 had any
relevance or might give rise to any award of damages against Egypt.

In these circumstances I have no doubt whatsoever that the award of damages under
article 142 must have been a complete surprise to Egypt. So, too, must have been the
basis upon which such an award was made — apportioning to the Republic 10%
responsibility for the relevant mistake, and allowing as the major part of the award a
substantial sum for loss of profit. It would have been astonishing, if there had been
any suggestion that this was in contemplation, that Egypt would fail to protest that the
tribunal ought to make a finding on its case on fraud rather than allocate responsibility
on the footing of a good faith mistake on the part of Malicorp. It would similarly have
been astonishing, if there had been any suggestion that damages in place of
reinstatement were contemplated, that Egypt would fail to protest that such damages
could not properly incorporate an element for loss of profit. There were undoubtedly
strong arguments for Egypt to advance in these respects among others. The notion
that, in the absence of any mention of these matters, Egypt could and should have
anticipated the basis of proceeding adopted in the Cairo award, is to my mind
manifestly repugnant to elementary principles of fairness.

The failure of the tribunal to ensure that Egypt had warning of these matters can only
constitute a serious breach of natural justice. In so far as I have any discretion to
enforce the award despite that breach, I decline to do so: the breach is too serious, and
the consequences for Egypt are too grave. It is suggested that the hearing be
reconvened so that Mr Soliman can give evidence and be cross-examined. I decline to
take this course: for the reasons given above, Mr Soliman’s statement cannot assist
Malicorp.

Page 23,

High Court Approved Judgment: Malicorp Ltd v Egypt [2015] EWHC 361 (Comm)
Mr Justice Walker, 19 February 2015

F. Egypt’s other grounds for setting aside

43. My conclusions in each of sections D and E above have the consequence that it is not
necessary to consider either Egypt’s alternative case based on issue estoppel in
relation to inability to present its case, or Egypt’s third and fourth grounds for
resisting enforcement. In my view the issues which would or might fall for
consideration on those matters are not necessarily straightforward, and are best left to
be dealt with in a context where they would be determinative of the outcome.

G Conclusion

44. For the reasons given above I grant Egypt’s application to set aside the order for
enforcement of the Cairo award.

Page 24

