INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between

MARFIN INVESTMENT GROUP HOLDINGS S.A., ALEXANDROS BAKATSELOS AND
OTHERS

Claimants

and

REPUBLIC OF CyPRUS

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/13/27

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Bernard Hanotiau, President
David A. O. Edward QC, Arbitrator
Daniel M. Price, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Martina Polasek

Assistant to the Tribunal
Tuliana Iancu

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 26 July 2018

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Marfin Investment Group Holdings Representing the Republic of Cyprus:
S.A., Alexandros Bakatselos and others:

Professor Jan Paulsson Mr. Bruce Macaulay
Mr. Luke Sobota Mr. David Herlihy
Mr. Joshua Simmons Mr. Christopher Lillywhite
Three Crowns Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &
3000 K Street, N.W., Suite 101 Flom (UK) LLP
Washington, D.C. 20007-5109 40 Bank St
United States of America London E14 SDS
United Kingdom
and
and
Dr. Georgios Petrochilos
Mr. Motohiro Maeda Mr. Demetris L. Araouzos
Mr. Michail Risvas Chrysses Demetriades & Co, LLC
Mr. Michail Dekastros 13 Karaiskakis Street
Dr. Ryan Manton 3032 Limassol
Three Crowns Republic of Cyprus
104 avenue des Champs-Elysées
75008 Paris

French Republic
and

Dr. Tariq Baloch
Mr. Mark Wassouf
3 Verulam Buildings
Gray's Inn

London WCIR SNT
United Kingdom

and

Dr. Fotios Karatzenis

Marfin Investment Group Holdings S.A.
67, Thisseos Avenue

Nea Erithrea

14671 Kifissia

Hellenic Republic

IL.
Ml.

VI.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

THE PARTIES. 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 4
THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF.......

THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

A. Dramatis personae

B. Claimants’ i in Laiki

Cc. The debt crisis

D. 2010: the first signs of Laiki’s liquidity crisis ................

E. The first half of 2011: Laiki’s liquidity crisis begins ......

F. The first ions for PSI.

G. 27 September 2011: Laiki begins receiving Emergency Liquidity Assistance. a

H. — The removal of Messrs. V poulos and Boul 55

L Changes in Laiki’s management and the Bank’s efforts to recapitalize

J. Laiki’s i

K. — Changes in Laiki’s and Cyprus’ iations with the Troika 85

L. _Laiki’s i 87

M. The BoC 95

N. The disputes in Cypriot courts... «+100

APPLICABLE LEGAL FRAMEWORK, 106

JURISDICTION. 111

A. *s position 111
1. Objection No. 1: The Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction because the BIT has been Terminated
or Superseded by Later EU Treaties
2. Objection No. 2: The Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction over Claimants’ Investment that is
Domestic to Greece 1

B. — Claimants’ position 118
1. Objection No. 1: The Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction because the BIT has been Terminated
or Superseded by Later EU Treaties 20
2. Objection No. 2: The Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction over Claimants’ Investment that is
Domestic to Greece 1

C. The Tribunal’s analysis 126

 

ion because the BIT has been

 

1. Objection No. 1: Whether the Tribunal Lacks Jurisdi

Terminated or Superseded by Later EU Treatie: 26

 

2. Objection No. 2: The Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction over Claimants’ Investment that is
Domestic to Greece

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

VIL ATTRIBUTION 139
A. — Claimants’ position B9
B. ’s position 143
C. The Tribunal’s analysi 149
VIII. CLAIMANTS’ ADVERSE INFERENCES APPLICATION «ssssvsssssesesserssscnscsssenseseeereenceseseeee 150,
A. — Claimants’ position 156
BR dent’s position 161
C. The Tribunal’s analysi 166
IX. WHETHER RESPONDENT EXPROPRIATED CLAIMANTS’ INVESTMENT vssvsssersssneeveseeee 167,
A. — Claimants’ position 167
B. P s position 181

 

C. The Tribunal's analysi
1. Whether there was a plan to nationalize the Bank ........:cccecreeeeeeen
2. Cyprus’ response to PSI+

3. The removal of

 

 

 

 

 

 

4, Laiki’s
X. WHETHER RESPONDENT BREACHED THE FAIR AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT
STANDARD. 277
A. — Claimants’ position 217
B. Respondent's position 290
C. The Tribunal’s analysis 308

 

1. Whether Cyprus’ response to PSI+ breached the FET standard

 

  

2. Whether Cyprus shunned Laiki’s November 201! recapitalization pla

3. Whether Cyprus failed to quell rumors about Laiki

4. — Whether the removal of Claimants-led management breached the FET standard ......312
5. Whether the management of Laiki post-December 2011 breached the FET standard 313
6. Whether Cyprus intentionally deterred private investment in Laiki in breach of the FET

standard 314

7. Whether Cyprus discriminated against Claimants’ investment .....

 

8. Whether Cyprus breached the FET standard through a failure to provide due process to
323

 

 

 

 

 

Claimants’ i
XL WHETHER RESPONDENT FAILED TO GRANT CLAIMANTS FULL PROTECTION AND
SECURITY. 332
A. Claimants’ position. 332
B. Jent’s position 334
C. The Tribuna!’s analysis 335
XII. WHETHER RESPONDENT DISCRIMINATED AGAINST CLAIMANTS’ INVESTMENT ...339

A. — Claimants’ position
B: s position.

C. — The Tribunal’s analysis

XIII. WHETHER RESPONDENT BREACHED ITS UNILATERAL DECLARATIONS...

A. — Claimants’ position.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B. OR dent's position.
C, — The Tribunal's analysis

XIV, DAMAGES 346
A. Claimants’ position 346
B. f 's position 349
C. The Tribunal’s analysis 353

XV. COSTS 353
A. — Claimants’ position is
B. Respondent's position 357
C. — The Tribunal's analysis 361

XVI. DECISION 363

 

L THE PARTIES

1. The present dispute has been submitted to arbitration under the auspices of the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID") on the basis of the Agreement
between the Government of the Hellenic Republic and the Government of the Republic of
Cyprus, signed on 30 March 1992 and which entered into force on 26 February 1993! (the
“BIT” or the “Treaty”).

CLAIMANTS
2. Marfin Investment Group Holdings Société Anonyme (“MIG”) is a limited company
holding and managing investments, having its registered seat and headquarters at 67

Thisscos Avenue, 14671 Kifissia, Greece, and registered with the General Commercial
Registry under No. 3467301000 (formerly S.A. reg. no. 16836/06/B/88/06);”

3. Moschopoulos, Nikiforos is a Greek national, residing at a= =a

4. Rigas, Matthaios is a Greek national, residing 1

5. Topouzoglou, Efstathios is a Greek national, residing at zane

6. Vgenopoulos, Andreas is a Greek national, residing ot Sa

1s Bakatsclos, Alexandros is a Greck national, residing ea ea aS)

' Exhibit C-1.

? Certificate of registration of Marfin Investment Group Holdings S.A., 9 April 2013 (Exhibit C-2.A).

) Civil registry certificate, 19 July 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-9.A).

* Civil registry certificate, 3 July 1995 (with English translation of extract) (Exhibit C-10.A).

° Civil registry certificate, 30 August 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-11.A).

© Civil registry certificate, 18 July 2006 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-8.A), Mr. Vgcnopoulos passed away
during the pendency of these proceedings (Sve, Claimants’ Email to the Tribunal, 7 November 2016).

* Civil registry certificate, 23 July 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-12.A). Mr, Bakatsclos passed away
during the pendency of these proceedings (See, Claimants” Letter to the Tribunal, 17 October 2016).

1

 

16.

Bakatselos, Georgios is a Greek national, residing at (is
Bakatselos, Nikolaos is a Greek national, residin (iii
Bakatselou, Polytimi is a Greek national, residing at (i

Delfini Holdings Société Anonyme (“Delfini S.A.”) is a company having its registered seat
and headi ters at 8 Dodekani Str., 54626 Th loniki, Greece, and regi with
the Registry of Sociétés Anonymes under No. 15254/62/B87/0074 and General
Commercial Registry under No. 057923904000; "!

Theocharaki, Anna-Maria is a Greck national, residing at

Theocharaki, Despina is a Greek national, residing at (a)

Theocharaki, Marina is a Greek national, residing a CSS ee

Theocharakis, Nikolaos is a Greek national, residing at (i

Theocharakis, Vasileios is a Greek national, residing a

Chevellas Cars and Machinery Commercial and Industrial Société Anonyme (“Chevellas
S.A.”) is a company having its registered scat and headquarters at 76 Kifissou Ave., [2132

* Civil registry certificate, 23 July 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-14.A).

° Civil registry certificate, 23 July 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-15.A),

© Civil registry certificate, 23 July 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-13.A). The Bakatselos Claimants
(Bakatsclos, Georgios, Bakatsclos, Nikolas and Bakatsclou, Polytimi) are appearing on their own behalf and as
testamentary successors to Bakatselos, Alexandros, who passed away in August 2016.

"' Certificate of registration of Delfini Holdings S.A., 24 July 2013 (Exhibit C-3.A.).

"2 Civil registry certificate, 30 August 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-16.A).

'' Civil registry certificate, 30 August 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-17.A).

' Civil registry certificate, 30 August 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-18.A).

'S Civil registry certificate, 30 August 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-19.A).

% Civil registry certificate, 30 August 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-20.A).

2

20.

Petisteri, Greece, and registered with the General Commercial Registry under No.
001724101000;"”

Lion Hellas Commercial and Industrial Société Anonyme (“Lion Hellas S.A.”) is a
company having its registered scat and headquarters at 138-140 Kifissou Ave., 12131
Peristeri, Greece, and registered with the Registry of Sociétés Anonymes under No.
16678/01/B/88/109;"*

Nik I Theocharakis Société Anonyme, Commercial Touristic Construction and Industrial
Car, Tyres and Parts Company (“Nik I Theocharakis S.A.”) is a company having its
tegistered seat and headquarters at 169 Athinon Ave., 10447 Athens, Greece, and
registered with the General Commercial Registry under No. 044315007000;'?

and
Theodomi Industrial C ion Société Anonyme (“Theodomi S.A.”) is a p

having its registered seat and headquarters at 138-140 Kifissou Ave., 12131 Peristeri,
Greece, and registered with the General Commercial Registry under No. 121760101 000,”

 

 

collectively referred to as “Claimants”,

21. Claimants are represented in this arbitration by their duly authorized attorneys and counsel
mentioned at page (i) above.

RESPONDENT

22. Respondent is the Republic of Cyprus (“Cyprus” or “Respondent”).

23. Respondent is represented in this arbitration by its duly authorized attorneys and counsel
mentioned at page (i) above.

24. Claimants and Respondent are jointly referred to as the “Parties” and individually as a

“Party”,

7 Certificate of registration of Chevellas S.A., 2 September 2013 (Exhibit C-4.A.)

'* Announcement of registration of Lion Hellas SA in the Registry of Sociétés Anonymes (Limited Companies), 10
February 1988, published in the Official Gazette of 16 February 1988, and Announcement of registration in the
Registry of Sociétés Anonymes of data of Lion Hellas SA, 16 July 2012, published in the Official Gazette of 20 July
2012 (Exhibit C-5.A1),

'° Certificate of registration of Nik I Theocharakis SA, 30 August 2013 (Exhibit C-7.A).

® Certificate of registration of Theadomi SA, 30 August 2013 (Exhibit C-6.A).

3

Ill. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF
178. Claimants request that the Tribunal:

“(a) DECLARE that Cyprus has breached the Treaty;

(b) ORDER Cyprus to compensate the Claimants for its breaches of the Treaty, in the
aggregate principal amount of €1,041.1 million, plus interest accruing from 26 October
2011 to the date of full and effective payment of compensation;

(c) ORDER Cyprus to compensate MIG, in the amount of €50 million, and Mr
Vgcnopoulos, in the amount of €10 million, for the moral and reputational harm caused by
Cyprus’ breaches of the Treaty;

(d) ORDER Cyprus to pay the costs incurred by MIG and Mr Vgenopoulos in defending
against and responding to the proceedings and investigations instituted or preserved by
Cyprus;

(e) ORDER Cyprus to make a formal and unqualified apology to Mr Vgenopoulos, MIG
and MIG's staff, for the unjustified, vexatious and oppressive proceedings, including
decisions, orders and other acts of the Cypriot courts and administrative authorities;

(f) ORDER Cyprus to pay all of the costs and expenses of this arbitration, including the
fees and expenses of the Tribunal, the fees and expenses of any experts appointed by the

23

Tribunal and the Claimants, the fees and expenses of the Claimants’ legal representation
in respect of this arbitration, and any other costs of this arbitration; and

(g) AWARD such other relief as the Tribunal considers appropriate.”

179. For its part, Respondent requests that the Tribunal render an award:

“(a) declaring that it lacks jurisdiction to determine the claims presented in the Claimants’
Request for Arbitration, Memorial and Reply;

(b) in the alternative, rejecting all of the Claimants’ claims on the merits;

(c) in the further alternative, declaring that the Claimants have failed to prove any loss and
are not entitled to any compensation or damages;

(d) directing the Claimants, on a joint and several basis, to pay all costs of and associated
with this arbitration including Cyprus’s attorneys’ fees and expenses, experts’ fees and
expenses, witnesses’ expenses, and the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the Centre,
together with interest (including pre- and post-award interest) on all such costs so awarded;
and

(e) granting such other relief as the Tribunal considers appropriate.”**

IV, THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE

180. The dispute concerns a series of events surrounding the failure of the second largest bank
in Cyprus, Marfin Popular Bank.

A. Dramatis personac

181. | Marfin Popular Bank Public Co. Ltd. (“Laiki”, the “Bank” or “MPB”) was onc of Cyprus’
two systemic banks and the second largest bank in the country. It was founded in 1901 as
a local savings bank in Limassol, Cyprus. Laiki had a commercial presence in Cyprus, the
United Kingdom, Australia, Serbia and Greece. Before 4 December 20067° and after 28
February 2012,” the Bank operated under the name Cyprus Popular Bank.

34 Reply, at 387.

25 Rejoinder, at 547.
2 Certificate of Change on Name, 4 December 2006 (Exhibit C-0099).
27 MPB, BoD Minutes, 28 February 2012 (Exhubit C-0339).

24

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

187,

188.

189.

190.

191.

192.

 

MIG is an i ional ii holding Pi Pp d in Greece, with

headquarters in Athens and listed on the Athens Stock Exchange. Before 18 April 2007,
MIG was named Marfin Financial Group Holdings (“MFG”).”®

Marfin Egnatia Bank (“MEB”) was the result of a merger between Egnatia Bank, Marfin
Bank and Laiki Hellas. MEB was Laiki’s Greek subsidiary until 31 March 2011. From |
April 2011, MEB became a branch of Laiki in Greece.

The Dubai Financial Group (“DFG”) was the majority shareholder in Laiki with an 18.69%
stake in the Bank as of 24 March 2011.79

The CBC is the Cypriot independent regulatory body responsible for the supervision and
licensing of banks.°°

The Cyprus Sccurities and Exchange Commission (‘‘CySEC”) is the Cypriot authority
empowered to exercise effective supervision so as to ensure investor protection and the

healthy development of the securities market.*!

The Bank of Cyprus (the “BoC”) was one of Cyprus’ two systemic banks and the largest
bank in the country.

Andreas Vgenopoulos was the Non-Executive Chairman of Laiki’s Board of Directors
from February 2010 until November 2011. At all times relevant to this arbitration, Mr.
Vgenopoulos was the Chairman of the Board of MIG.**

Efthimios Bouloutas was the Chief Executive Officer of Laiki between 14 February 2008
and 5 December 2011. Since 10 January 2012, Mr. Bouloutas has been the Chief Executive
Officer of MIG.*°

Athanasios Orphanides was the Governor of the CBC from May 2007 until May 2012.

Panicos Demetriades was the Governor of the CBC beginning in May 2012.

Demetris Christofias was the President of Cyprus during the period 2008-2013.

28 MIG, Annual Report, 2007 (Exhibit C-0101).

2° MPB, Annual Report, 2010 (Exhibit C-0166).

3° CBC Laws of 2002-2007 (Exhibit CL-0143).

3" Law Regulating the Structure, Responsibilities, Powers, Organisation of the Sccuritics and Exchange Commission
and other related issues, 2009-2015 (Exhibit RL-0091).

32 Vgenopoulos First Witness Statement, at 1.

» Bouloutas First Witness Statement, at 1.

25

193. Nikos Anastasiades has been the President of Cyprus since 28 February 2013.

194, Kikis Kazamias was Minister of Finance of Cyprus during the period August 201 1-March
2012.

195. Vassos Shiarly was the Minister of Finance of Cyprus during the period March 2012-
February 2013.

|
il

wn

V. APPLICABLE LEGAL FRAMEWORK

511. The Tribunal considers it useful, before any presentation of the Parties’ respective
positions, to quote below the legal provisions invoked by the Parties and which are relevant
to the Tribunal’s analysis.

512. The Preamble to the ICSID Convention reads in relevant part as follows:

“Bearing in mind the possibility that from time to time disputes may arise in connection
with such investment between Contracting States and nationals of other Contracting States;

Recognizing that while such disputes would usually be subject to national legal processes,
international methods of settlement may be appropriate in certain cases;

Attaching particular importance to the availability of facilities for international
conciliation or arbitration to which Contracting States and nationals of other Contracting
States may submit such disputes if they so desire;

Lo]

Recognizing that mutual consent by the parties to submit such disputes to conciliation or
to arbitration through such facilitics constitutes a binding agreement which requires in
particular that due i ion be given to any of conciliators, and that
any arbitral award be complied with”.

513. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, which is found within Chapter II entitled
“Jurisdiction of the Centre”, provides in relevant part:

514.

515.

516.

517.

“d) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of
an , between a Cr ‘ing State (or any ion of agency of a
Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre, When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.”

Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, which is found within Chapter IV, Section 3
entitled “Powers and Functions of the Tribunal”, provides:

“The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as may be agreed
by the parties, In the absence of such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the law of the
Contracting State party to the dispute (including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such
tules of international law as may be applicable”.

Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention, in Chapter V, Section 6 entitled “Recognition and
Enforcement of the Award” provides:

“The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to any appeal or to any
other remedy except those provided for in this Convention. Each party shall abide by and
comply with the terms of the award except to the extent that enforcement shall have been
stayed pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention.”

Article 54(1) of the ICSID Convention reads:

“Each Contracting State shall recognize an award rendered pursuant to this Convention as
binding and enforce the pecuniary obligations imposed by that award within its territories
as if it were a final judgment of a court in that State. A Contracting State with a federal
constitution may enforce such an award in or through its federal courts and may provide
that such courts shall treat the award as if it were a final judgment of the courts of a
constituent state.”

Article 1 of the BIT (“Definitions”) reads:

“For the purposes of this Agreement:
1. “Investment” means every kind of assct and in particular, though not exclusively,
includes:

a) movable and immovable property and any other property rights such as mortgages, liens
or pledges,

b) shares in and stock and debentures of a company and any other form of participation in
a company,

c) claims to moncy or any other contractual claim having financial value,

d) intellectual property rights, goodwill, technological processes and know how,

107

c) business concessions conferred by law or under contract, including concessions to
explore, cultivate, extract or exploit natural resources,

f) goods, which on the basis of a financial lease are placed at the disposal of a lessee in the
territory of the Contracting Party in accordance with the latter's laws and regulations,

2. “Returns” means the amount yielded by an investment and in particular, though not
exclusively, includes profit, interest, capital gains, dividends, goodwill, royaltics and other
fees.

3. “Investor” shall comprise with regard to either Contracting Party:

a) natural persons having the nationality of that Contracting Party in accordance with its
law,

b) legal persons constituted in accordance with the law of that Contracting Party and having
their seat within its territory.

4. “Territory” means in respect of cither Contracting Party, the territory under its
sovereignty as well as the territorial sea and submarine areas, over which that Contracting
Party exercises, in ity with i i law, ign rights or jurisdiction.”

518. Article 2 of the Treaty (“Promotion and Protection of Investments”) reads:

“1, Each Contracting Party promotes in its territory, investments by investors of the other
Contracting Party and admits such investments in accordance with its legislation and its
policy regarding foreign investments.

2. Investments by investors of a Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting
Party shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment and full protection and
security, Each Contracting Party shall ensure that the management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment or disposal, in its territory, of investments by investors of the other Contracting
Party, are not impeded in any way by unjustifiable or discriminatory measures.

3. A possible change in the form in which the investments have been made does not affect
their substance as investments, provided that such a change does not contradict the laws,
regulations and the policy regarding foreign investments of the relevant Contracting Party.

4. Returns from investments and, in cases of approved re-investments, the income ensuing
therefrom enjoy the same protection as initial investments.”

519. Article 3 of the Treaty (“Most Favoured Nation and National Treatment Provisions”)
stipulates:

“Y. Neither Contracting Party shall subject investments in its territory owned in whole or
in part by investors of the other Contracting Party to treatment less favourable than that
which it accords to investments of its own investors or to investments of investors of any
third State.

108

2. Neither Contracting Party shall subject investors of the other Contracting Party, as
regards their activity in connection with investments in its territory, to treatment less
favourable than that which it accords to its own investors or to investors of any third State.

3. Such treatment shall not relate to privileges or advantages which either Contracting Party
accords to investors of any third State:

a) on account of its membership of, or association with, a customs or economic union, a
common market, a free trade area or similar institutions.

b) on the basis of any double taxation agreement or other agreements regarding matters of
taxation.

4. Each Contracting Party has the right to maintain, in accordance with its laws, regulations
and ils policy regarding foreign investments, exceptions from the national treatment of
paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.”

 

520. Article 4 of the Treaty (“Expropriation”) provides:

“Investments by investors of either Contracting Party shall not be expropriated,
nationalised, or subjected to any other measure which would be tantamount to
expropriation or nationalisation in the territory of the other Contracting Party except under
the following conditions:

a) the measures are taken in the public interest and under due process of law,
b) the measures are clear and non-discriminatory,

c) the measures are accompanied by provisions for the payment of prompt, adequate and
effective compensation. Such compensation shall be equivalent to the market value of the
investment affected immediately before the date on which the measures, mentioned in this
paragraph, were taken or made publicly known.

Compensation shall be paid immediately after the completion of legal procedure for
expropriation and shall be transferred in freely convertible currency. If the Contracting
Party delays payment of compensation, it is liable to pay interest calculated on the basis of
the 6-month London Interbank Offered Rate for the relevant currency. The extent of
compensation is subject to review under due process of law.”

521. Article 9 of the Treaty (“Settlement of dispute between an Investor and a Host State”)
reads:

“1. Any dispute between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party
ing it or the expropriation or nationalization of an i shall, as
far as possible, be settled by the disputing parties in an amicable way.

 

2. If such dispute cannot be settled within six months from the date cither party requested
amicable settlement, the investor concerned may submit the dispute cither:

109

- to the competent Court of the Contracting Party, or

- to the “International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes” which was
founded by the “Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
National [sic] of other States, opened for signature on March 18 1965 [sic].

With this Agreement, the Contracting Parties declare that they accept this arbitration
procedure.

3. The arbitral award is binding and not subject to recourse other than what is provided for
in the aforementioned convention. The award is to be enforced in accordance with national
law.

4, During the arbitration or the enforcement procedure, the Contracting Party involved in

the dispute shall not raise the objection that the investor of the other Contracting Party has
received compensation under an insurance contract in respect of all or part of the damage.”

522. Article 59 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (the “VCLT”) reads:

“I. A treaty shall be considered as terminated if all the parties to it conclude a later treaty
relating to the same subject-matter and:

(a) It appears from the later treaty or is otherwise established that the parties intended that
the matter should by governed by that treaty; or

(b) The provisions of the later treaty are so far incompatible with those of the earlier one
that the two treaties are not capable of being applicd at the same time.

2. The earlier treaty shall be considered as only suspended in operation if it appears from

the later treaty or is otherwise established that such was the intention of the parties.”
[emphasis added]

523. Article 30 of the VCLT provides:

“1. Subject to Article 103 of the Charter of the United Nations, the rights and obligations
of State parties to successive treaties relating to the same subject-matter shall be determined
in accordance with the following paragraphs.

2. When a treaty specifies that it is subject to, or that it is not to be considered as
incompatible with, an earlier or later treaty, the provisions of that other treaty prevail.

3. When all parties to the carlier treaty are parties also to the later treaty but the earlier
treaty is not terminated or suspended in operation under article 59, the earlier treaty applies
only to the extent that its provisions are compatible with those of the later treaty.

4. When the parties to the later treaty do not include all the partics to the earlier one:

(a) as between States parties to both treaties the same rule applies as in paragraph 3;

110

(b) as between a State party to both treaties and a State party to only onc of the treaties, the
treaty to which both States are parties governs their mutual rights and obligations.

5. Paragraph 4 is without prejudice to article 41, or to any question of the termination or
suspension of the operation of a treaty under article 60 or to any question of responsibility
which may arise for a State from the conclusion or application of a treaty the provisions of
which are incompatible with its obligations towards another State under another treaty.”
[emphasis added]

VI.

SB BS
«
e
|
an
g
5
2
°
z

M1 .

576.

577.

578.

579.

580.

The Tribunal’s analysis

Before examining whether the jurisdictional conditions included in the Treaty and the
ICSID Convention are satisfied, the Tribunal will first analyze whether Respondent's
jurisdictional objections have any merit.

Objection No. 1: Whether the Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction because the BIT has been
Terminated or Superseded by Later EU Treaties

The Tribunal has taken note of the Parties’ arguments put forward in favor of upholding or
denying jurisdiction as a result of the succession in time between the BIT and the EU
treaties. The Tribunal has noted in particular the Parties’ helpful submissions concerning
the impact of the CJEU’s judgment in Achmea on the question of jurisdiction.

At the outset, the Tribunal dismisses Claimants’ argument pursuant to which Respondent
is estopped from raising this objection due to its decision to permit Laiki to invoke the
same Treaty in the arbitration against Greece. The Tribunal is of the view that Respondent’s
jurisdictional objection raises important issues of public international law that may not
properly be waived. Further, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(2), the Tribunal may
on its own initiative examine the question of its own jurisdiction, including whether the
BIT has been terminated or superseded by later EU treaties.

Having carefully considered the Parties’ arguments and the evidence before it, the Tribunal
has reached the lusion that R dent's jurisdi must be dismissed.
The Tribunal will explain its finding in more detail in the paragraphs below.

The Parties appear to agree that the Achmea judgment is not strictly binding upon this
Tribunal."°° As correctly pointed out by Claimants, the Tribunal is called upon to apply the
provisions of the Treaty and customary international law in order to determine if

dent has ional obli; The Tribunal’s reasoning and
decision in this Award are in fact based on the BIT and applicable principles of customary
international law. In reaching its ultimate conclusions, the Tribunal has not examined and,
more importantly, has not applied principles of EU law. The Tribunal nevertheless
observes that, pursuant to Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, second sentence, the law
of Cyprus and public international law are both applicable to this dispute.

its i

#9 C-Ach, at 13; R-Ach, at 33.

126

581.

582.

583.

584.

585.

586.

587.

The Tribunal further observes that the CJEU based its judgment exclusively on EU law.
The CJEU did not examine the issues of the intra-EU BITs’ possible termination or
inapplicability as a result of the application of rules of international law. These analyses
are to be carried out on the basis of the facts of each individual case, by arbitral tribunals
seized with claims for breaches of these treatics.

In the case before the Tribunal, it is not disputed by the Parties that the Treaty has not been
terminated by Greece or Cyprus pursuant to Article 12 of the Treaty. As of the date of the
present Award, neither Contracting Party to the BIT has notified the other of its intent to
be freed from its obligations thereunder.

Instead, Respondent focuses its jurisdictional objection on the question of the application
of successive treaties in time. In so doing, Respondent argues that cither the BIT has been
terminated pursuant to the terms of Article 59 of the VCLT, or that the arbitration clause
included in Article 9(2) of the Treaty has been displaced by the TFEU pursuant to Article
30 of the VCLT. Both Claimants and Respondent agree that it is these provisions of the
VCLT that will provide the answer to the question of whether the Treaty and/or the
arbitration clause still produce effects and whether the Tribunal still has jurisdiction. “”

The Tribunal finds that neither Article 59, nor Article 30 of the VCLT applics in this case.

The Tribunal notes that both Article 59 and Article 30 of the VCLT apply only when the
two successive treaties (in this case, the BIT and the EU treaties) relate to the “same
subject-matter”.

The Parties debate whether this condition is satisfied in connection with the Treaty and the
TFEU, as modified by the Treaty of Lisbon. Claimants contend that the condition can only
be satisfied if the overall objective of the successive treaties is identical and if the treaties
share a degree of general compatibility, while Respondent is of the view that such a
definition is too narrow and thal the Tribunal should instead determine whether there is
any operational or purposive conflict between the treatics. In particular, Respondent
considers that the test is met if either (i) certain facts attract the application of both treaties
or (ii) the treaty provisions cannot be applied together without offending a provision or the
object and purpose of one of the treaties.

The Tribunal, similarly to the EURAM v. Slovakia tribunal,“"! considers that a good faith
interpretation of Articles 59 and 30 of the VCLT, in accordance with the ordinary meaning

+ C-Ach, at 6; R-Ach, at 24,
‘4! European American Investment Bank AG (Austria) v. Slovak Republic (PCA Case No. 2010-17), Award on
Jurisdiction, 22 October 2012 (Exhibit RL-0190) (*EURAM v. Slovakia”)

127

588.

589.

of the terms employed, seen in their context and in light of the object and purpose of the
VCLT, does not support the conclusion that two successive treaties deal with the same
subject-matter if they may apply simultaneously to the same set of facts. Two different
treaties (for instance, a treaty on trade and a treaty on labor rights) may apply
simultancously to the same set of facts without them having the same subject matter.
Further, if two treaties have the same goal (for instance, reducing atmospheric pollution)
but approach the achievement of that goal from two different perspectives (for instance, by
banning the use of certain types of fuels and by regulating the use of fertilizers), the treaties
do not have the same subject-matter. The Tribunal also considers that Respondent conflates
the question of whether treaties have the same subject-matter with the question of whether
treaties are compatible with each other. For purposes of an analysis under Articles 59 and
30 of the VCLT, these are distinct inquiries and the question of compatibility only arises if
and when it has been determined that the treaties have the same subject-matter. This
Tribunal agrees with the EURAM vy. Slovakia tribunal that the subject-matter of a treaty
refers to the issues with which its constituent provisions deal, its topic or substance.*

Tuming now to the question of whether the Treaty and the EU treaties have the same
subject-matter, the Tribunal finds that they do not. Morcover, the Tribunal sces no reason
to depart from consistent case law finding that intra-EU BITs and the EU treaties deal with
different subject matters.

The Tribunal, similarly to the Oostergetel v. Slovakia and EURAM v. Slovakia tribunals,
considers that the EU treaties’ objective is to create a common market between the Member
States, whereas the objective of BITs (including the Treaty) is to provide for specific
guarantees in order to encourage the international flows of investment into particular
States. Further, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the substantive protections afforded to a
foreign investor under the Treaty are comparable or of the same nature as those offered
under the EU treaties. As the Eureko v. Slovakia tribunal concluded, the protections
afforded by BITs under the FET standard are not exhausted by the existing EU law
provisions prohibiting discrimination. Further, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the
Treaty’s FET dard is ive with the fund 1 EU freed or that EU law
specifically forbids treatment that is not fair and equitable. In any event, Respondent has
not carried its burden of making this demonstration. Further, while EU law may condition
expropriatory takings to public interest and fair compensation requirements, Respondent
has not established that it offers comparable protections to those available under the Treaty
in the case of indirect expropriations, or that it applies to “every kind of asset”. In any
event, the Tribunal is not convinced that the relevant provisions of EU law guaranteeing

42 id. at 172.
48 See, Eureko v. Slovakia, at 247-263; Eastem Sugar v. The Czech Republic, at 159-164; Oostergetel v. Slovakia
Decision on Jurisdiction, at 74-79, EURAM vy. Slovakia, at 178-184.

128

590.

591.

592.

“4 See, Eureko v. Slovakia, at 250-262,

the fundamental freedoms or prohibiting discrimination have the same topic or substance
as the substantive protections offered under the Treaty.“ Their potential simultancous
application to the same set of facts is not, as demonstrated above, conclusive proof that the
BIT and the EU treaties have the same subject matter.

Further, the Tribunal is not persuaded that this conclusion is affected by the entry into force
of the Treaty of Lisbon and, with it, the extension of the European Union’s competence to
cover FDI. The Tribunal docs not question the European Union’s capacity to enter into
international trade agreements in its own name, as it has done in the case of the CETA or
the more recent trade agreements concluded with Singapore and Vietnam. However, the
Tribunal understands that this competence extends to the conclusion of agreements
between the European Union as a whole and third States. In other words, this competence
does not appear to concern intra-EU investments, where the rules of the Internal Market
continue to govern. The Tribunal therefore does not consider that the entry into force of
the Treaty of Lisbon produced the result that the EU treaties and, in particular, the TFEU,
have the same subject-matter as intra-EU BITs morc generally, or the Treaty in particular.

Consequently, the Tribunal finds that, since the Treaty and the EU treaties do not have the
same subject-matter, neither Article 59, nor Article 30 of the VCLT apply to this case.
Respondent’s arguments pertaining to the alleged intent of Cyprus and Greece to terminate
the BIT, or to the purported incompatibility between the Treaty and its various provisions
and EU law, do not thus require further examination by the Tribunal.

The Tribunal recalls in this context that its jurisdiction derives not only from the Treaty,
but also from the ICSID Convention. It is thus the Tribunal’ 'S duty to give effect to this
legal i and, in particular, to one of its blished in Article
25(1), second sentence: “[w]hen the parties have given their consent, no party may
withdraw that consent unilaterally”. This principle is also referred to in the Report of the
Executive Directors:

 

11. The present Convention would offer international methods of scttlement designed to
take account of the special characteristics of the disputes covered, as well as of the parties
to whom it would apply. It would provide facilities for conciliation and arbitration by
specially qualified persons of independent judgment carried out according to rules known
and accepted in advance by the parties concerned. In particular, it would ensure that once
aovernment or investor had given consent to conciliation or arbitration under the auspices
of the Centre, such consent could not be unilaterally withdrawn.

(1

 

129

593.

594,

595.

596.

23. Consent of the parties is the comerstone of the jurisdiction of the Centre. Consent to
jurisdiction must be in writing and once given cannot be withdrawn unilaterally (Article
25(1)).” [emphasis added]

In the case of Respondent, consent to arbitration under the ICSID Convention was given
through its offer to arbitrate disputes with Greek investors included in Article 9 of the
Treaty. This standing offer to arbitrate implies not only Cyprus’ willingness to take part in
arbitral proceedings under the auspices of the ICSID Convention, but also its commitment
to give effect to any ensuing award as if it were a final judgment of its national courts, as
per Articles 53(1) and 54(1) of the Convention. Further, pursuant to the unambiguous terms
of the ICSID Convention’s Article 25(1), once this consent has been given and has been
accepted by an investor through the initiation of arbitral proceedings, this consent may not
be wi il ly by R di icularly by implication. The Tribunal
considers that the principle of legal certainty entitles investors to legitimately rely upon a
State’s written consent to arbitrate disputes as long as that consent has not been withdrawn
through the proper procedures included in the underlying treaty.

 

The Tribunal notes in this regard that Article 12 of the Treaty establishes a clear procedure
that Greece and Cyprus must follow if they want to be released from their obligations under
the BIT. Article 65 of the VCLT likewise sets up a procedure if a party to a treaty invokes
“a ground for impeaching the validity of a treaty, terminating it, withdrawing from it or
suspending its operation”. In the view of the Tribunal, these provisions clearly establish
that, if seeking to be released from their BIT obligations, both Cyprus and Greece must
follow specific procedures that are intended to ensure compliance with the principle of
legal certainty. There can be no implied termination or invalidation of the Treaty to the
detriment of investors who legitimately relied upon the Treaty’s protections.

Respondent refers to the Eureko v. Slovakia award as support for its contention that,
following the entry into force of the EU treaties and, now, the issuance of the Achmea
judgment, the arbitration clause in the Treaty must be deemed to have been displaced by
EU law pursuant to Article 30(3) of the VCLT. The Tribunal cannot endorse this
conclusion. As mentioned above, Article 30 of the VCLT does not apply in the present
case, since the Treaty and the EU treaties do not have the same subject-matter. Further, the
section of the Eureko v. Slovakia award cited by Respondent contains an observation made
by that tribunal obiter. In other words, it does not form part of that tribunal’s reasoning
and, in any event, that reasoning is not binding upon this Tribunal.

The Tribunal has taken note of the Parties’ arguments with respect to the difficulties that
may arise if and when this Award is presented for enforcement. It may well be correct that
the enforcement of the present Award will give rise to problems in the territories of the EU
Member States. However, the jurisdiction of this Tribunal is not determined by the various

130

597.

598.

599,

600.

601.

national rules goveming the enforceability of arbitral awards, but by this Treaty and
international law. It will be up to the courts at the enforcement stage to draw the necessary
consequences from the Achmea judgment and their national laws with respect to the
enforceability of this Award.

For the reasons identified above, the Tribunal finds that the Treaty remains in force and the
arbitration clause included in Article 9 of the Treaty continues to be applicable. Therefore,
R d is hereby di

s juri

Objection No. 2: The Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction over Claimants’ Investment that is
Domestic to Greece

After having carefully examined the Parties’ submissions on this point, the Tribunal finds
that Respondent’s objection lacks legal merit.

The Tribunal notes that Respondent docs not dispute that Claimants’ ownership of shares
in Laiki, a bank with its seat in Cyprus, is a protected investment under the Treaty pursuant
to Article I(1)b) (“every kind of asset and in particular ... b) shares in and stock and
debentures of a company and any other form of participation in a company”). Respondent
does not appear to dispute, moreover, that the location of Laiki’s seat in Cyprus satisfies
the territoriality condition included in Articles 2 through 4 of the Treaty.

What Respondent is arguing is that the satisfaction of these conditions is not sufficient to
grant the Tribunal jurisdiction over some of the claims made by Claimants. In
Respondent’s view, the Tribunal also needs to verify the location of Claimants’
investments and only uphold jurisdiction over those investments that were not located in
Greece.

The Tribunal finds no support in the Treaty for Respondent’s interpretation. Respondent is
conflating Claimants’ investment (their shares in Laiki, a Cypriot bank) with the
investments made by Laiki itself. In this respect, Articles 2 through 4 of the Treaty refer to
“investments” — as that term is defined in Article (1) of the BIT — “in [the host State's]
territory” (Article 2(1)), to “investments ... in the territory of the other Contracting Party”
(Article 2(2)), “investments in its territory” (Article 3(1) and (2)) and to “[i]nvestments by
investors of either Contracting Party ... in the territory of the other Contracting Party”
(Article 4). In other words, pursuant to the express terms of the Treaty, it is the
“investment” itself that must be located in the territory of Cyprus, i.e., the shares must be
in a company with its seat in Cyprus. The Treaty does not require that Laiki’s investments
also be located in Cyprus.

131

602.

603.

604.

605.

606.

607.

608.

The Tribunal recalls in this context that, pursuant to a well-cstablished principle of
international law, shareholders are distinct from the companies in which they hold shares.
As a corollary, shareholders do not have rights over a company’s assets. In other words,
the fact that Laiki invested in States other than Cyprus is irrelevant for purposes of this
Tribunal’s jurisdiction, as Laiki’s shareholders are not deemed thereby to have invested
outside the territory of Cyprus.

For these reasons, the Tribunal hereby dismisses Respondent's jurisdictional objection.

§

Having dismissed Respondent's jurisdictional objections, the Tribunal will analyze below
whether the jurisdictional conditions included in the ICSID Convention and the Treaty are
satisfied.

The Tribunal recalls that, pursuant to Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention:

“(L) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of
an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the partics to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.”

First, the Tribunal finds that the present dispute is a “legal dispute”, as per Article 25(1) of
the ICSID Convention. Claimants are alleging, and Respondent is disputing, that Cyprus
breached several provisions of the Treaty and international law and should pay damages as
a result.

Second, the Tribunal notes that the dispute opposes Cyprus, a Contracting State to both the
ICSID Convention and the Treaty, and Claimants, nationals of Greece, another Contracting
State to the ICSID Convention and the Treaty.

In this respect, the Tribunal observes that Article 1(3) of the Treaty defines “investors” as:

“3. ‘Investor’ shall comprise with regard to cither Contracting Party:

a) natural persons having the nationality of that Contracting Party in accordance with its
law,

b) legal persons constituted in accordance with the law of that Contracting Party and having,
their seat within its territory.”

132

609. Article 25(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

“(2) ‘National of another Contracting State’ means:

(a) any natural person who had the nationality of a Contracting State other than the
State party to the dispute on the date on which the partics consented to submit such
dispute to conciliation or arbitration as well as on the date on which the request
was registered pursuant to paragraph (3) of Article 28 or paragraph (3) of Article
36, but does not include any person who on either date also had the nationality of
the Contracting State party to the dispute; and

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State other than the
State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit such
dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any juridical person which had the
nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute on that date and which,
because of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a national
of another Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention.”

610. Six of the Claimants (MIG, Delfini S.A., Chevellas S.A., Lion Hellas S.A., Nik I
Theocharakis S.A. and Theodomi S.A.) are legal persons constituted in Greece and with
their seat located in Greece. They therefore meet the requirements of Article 1(3)b) of the

Treaty.

611. In addition, these Claimants meet the requirements of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention:

MIG was constituted in Greece 10 March 1988 and remained incorporated in
Greece on 9 September 2013, the date of the filing of the Request for Arbitration
(“the date on which the parties consented to submit such dispute to ...
arbitration”);

Delfini S.A. was constituted in Greece in 1987 and remained incorporated in
Greece on the date of the filing of the Request for Arbitration;#4°

Chevellas S.A. was constituted in Greece in 1994 and remained incorporated in
Greece on the date of the filing of the Request for Arbitration;“4”

Lion Hellas S.A. was constituted in Greece on 12 February 1988 and remained
incorporated in Greece on the date of the filing of the Request for Arbitration;**

“45 Certificate of registration of Marfin Investment Group Holdings S.A., 9 April 2013 (Exhibit C-2.A).
“6 Certificate of registration of Delfini Holdings S.A. 24 July 2013 (Exhibit C-3.A).

+47 Certificate of registration of Chevellas S..
+4® Announcement of registration of Lion He

 

September 2013 (Exhibit C-4.A).
SA in the Registry of Sociétés Anonymes (Limited Companics), 10

 

February 1988, published in the Official Gazette of 16 February 1988, and Announcement of registration in the

Registry of So

 

é1és Anonymes of data of Lion Hellas SA, 16 July 2012, published in the Official Gazette of 20 July

2012 (Exhibit C-5.A1)

133

— NikI Theocharakis S.A. was constituted in Greece on 17 March 1966 and remained
incorporated in Greece on the date of the filing of the Request for Arbitration;“?
and

— Theodomi S.A. was constituted in Greece in 1994 and remained incorporated in
Greece on the date of the filing of the Request for Arbitration.*°°

612, The remaining thirteen Claimants (Andreas Vgenopoulos, Alexandros Bakatselos,
Georgios Bakatselos, Nikolaos Bakatselos, Polytimi Bakatselou, Nikiforos Moschopoul
Matthaios Rigas, Anna-Maria Theocharaki, Despina Theocharaki, Marina Theocharaki
Nikolaos Theocharakis, Vasileios Theocharakis and Efstathios Topouzoglou) are natural
persons and Greek nationals.**' Claimants possessed Greek nationality at the time the
Request for Arbitration was filed.

 

613. The Tribunal notes that Messrs. Alexandros Bakatselos and Andreas Vgenopoulos passed
away during the pendency of the arbitral proceedings.*** Claimants represented before this
Tribunal that the claims of these Claimants are continued for the benefit of their successors.
According to Claimants, Mr. Alexandros Bakatselos is succeeded in this claim, by way of
testamentary succession, by

vit regard to Mr. Vgenopoulos, Claimants

represented that

614. The Tribunal observes that Claimants have not provided any evidence in support of their
submissions above. Moreover, Claimants have not requested the replacement of Messrs.
Alexandros Bakatselos and Andreas Vgenopoulos as Parties to this arbitration with their
successors. For these reasons, the Tribunal must find that Messrs. Alexandros Bakatsclos

+ Certificate of registration of Nik I Theocharakis SA, 30 August 2013 (Exhibit C-7.A).

45 Certificate of registration of Theodomi SA, 30 August 2013 (Exhibit C-6,A).

+51 See, Civil registry certificate, 19 July 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-9.A); Civil registry certificate, 3
July 1995 (with English translation of extract) (Exhibit C-10.A); Civil registry certificate, 30 August 2013 (with
English translation) (Exhibit C-11.A); Civil registry certificate, 18 July 2006 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-
8.A); Civil registry certificate, 23 July 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-12.A); Civil registry certificate, 23
July 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-14.A); Civil registry certificate, 23 July 2013 (with English translation)
(Exhibit C-15.A); Civil registry certificate, 23 July 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-13.A); Certificate of
registration of Delfini Holdings S.A., 24 July 2013 (Exhibit C-3.A); Civil registry certificate, 30 August 2013 (with
English translation) (Exhibit C-16.A); Civil registry certificate, 30 August 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-
17.A); Civil registry certificate, 30 August 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-18.A); Civil registry certificate,
30 August 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-19.A); Civil registry certificate, 30 August 2013 (with English
translation) (Exhibit C-20.A).

482 See, Claimants’ Letter to the Tribunal, 17 October 2016; Claimants’ Email to the Tribunal, 7 November 2016.

453 Claimants’ Letter to the Tribunal, 13 April 2017, p. 2.

454 Id.

134

615.

616.

617.

618.

619.

and Andreas Vgenopoulos do not meet the requirements of Article 1(3)a) of the Treaty and
Article 25(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention. Their claims are therefore dismissed.

The Tribunal further notes that Messrs. Topouzoglou and Rigas requested that the arbitral
proceedings be discontinued in their regard. The Tribunal recalls that, following
Respondent’s objection and pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 44, on 3 March 2017, the
Tribunal dismissed this request.

The Tribunal therefore finds that Georgios Bakatselos, Nikolas Bakatselos, Polytimi
Bakatselou, Nikiforos Moschopoulos, Matthaios Rigas, Anna-Maria Theocharaki, Despina
Theocharaki, Marina Theocharaki, Nikolaos Theocharakis, Vasileios Theocharakis and
Efstathios Topouzoglou satisfy the requirements of Article 1(3)a) of the Treaty and Article
25(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention.

Third, the Tribunal holds that Claimants made an investment, consisting of shares in Laiki,
which mects the requirements of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and of Article 1(1)
of the BIT, the latter providing that:

” means every kind of asset_and_in_parti though not

includes:

a) movable and immovable property and any other property rights such as mortgages, liens
or pledges,

b) shares in and stock and debentures of a company and any other form of participation in
a company,

c) claims to money or any other contractual claim having financial value,

d) intellectual property rights, goodwill, technological processes and know how,

¢) business concessions conferred by law or under contract, including concessions to
explore, cultivate, extract or exploit natural resources,

1) goods, which on the basis of a financial lease are placed at the disposal of a lessee in the
territory of the Contracting Party in accordance with the latter's laws and regulations.”
[emphasis added]

 

In this respect, the Tribunal finds that, between 2007 and 2011, MIG purchased
152,910,580 shares in Laiki.> MIG owned these shares at the time when the alleged
breaches of the Treaty began and continues to own them to this day.

Delfini Holdings S.A. owned al the time of the relevant events and currently owns
1,512,057 shares in Laiki.4%

*5 “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements — 48, Shareholders with more than 5% of share capital", Laiki
Bank Group, Annual Report, 2011, p 157 (extract) (Exhibit C-0002.B.5); Kaczmarek First Expert Report, at 44.

* Statement of shares held by Delfini Maritime and Touristic Companies SA, issued by Axon Securities SA, 23 July
2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-0003,B.1); Kaczmarek First Expert Report, Appendix 5.1.

135

620. Chevellas S.A. owned at the time of the relevant events and currently owns 1,006,621
shares in Laiki.‘*”

621. Lion Hellas S.A. owned at the time of the relevant events and currently owns 327,675

shares in Laiki.4%*

622. Teodomi S.A. owned at the time of the relevant events and currently owns 5,937,282 shares
in Laiki.?
623. Nik I Theocharakis S.A. owned at the time of the relevant events and currently owns

3,938,514 shares in Laiki.*®

624. Nikiforos Moschopoulos owned at the time of the relevant events and currently owns
1,369,620 shares in Laiki.*'

 

625. Matthaios Rigas submitted as evid of his sharcholding in Laiki several order
confirmation slips attesting that a company called wns
9,273,701 shares in Laiki, as well as evidence that the totality of the shares in QD

ee Th Tribunal deems this evidence sufficient to

demonstrate that Mr. Rigas indirectly owns 9,273,701 shares in Laiki. The Tribunal

487 Ownership of Shares in Laiki; Statements of shares held by Chevellas SA, issued by Egnatia Finance and
Investment Bank of Greece, 30 July 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-0004.B); Kaczmarek First Expert
Report, Appendix 5.1.

“58 Ownership of Shares in Laiki: Statements of shares held by Lion Hellas SA, issued by Egnatia Finance and
Investment Bank of Greece, 30 July 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-0005.B); Kaczmarek First Expert
Report, Appendix 5.1.

+5 Ownership of Shares in Laiki: Statements of shares held by Tcodomi SA, issued by Egnatia Finance, 30 July 2013;
Statements of shares held by Teodomi SA, issued by Investment Bank of Greece, 30 July 2013 and 31 December 2012
(with English translation) (Exhibit C-0006.B); Kaczmarck First Expert Report, Appendix 5.1.

46° Ownership of Shares in Laiki: Statements of shares held by Nik | Theocharakis, issued by Egnatia Finance and by
Investment Bank of Greece, 30 July 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-0007.B), Kaczmarek First Expert
Report, Appendix 5.1.

#61 Share (ransaction slips issued by Investment Bank of Greece, 4 September 2006 to 9 January 2007 (with English
translation) (Exhibit C-0009.B.1); Letter from Piraeus Bank (N. Chatjioannou) to N. Moschopoulos confirming
sharcholding, 9 August 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-0009.B.2); Kaczmarck First Expert Report,
Appendix 5.1.

46? Share transaction slips issued by Investment Bank of Greece, 9 to 18 February 2011 (Exhibit C-0010.B.1),

 

considers that, absent explicit language in the Treaty, its protections extend to investments
made both directly and indirectly. Consequently, Mr. Rigas’ indirect ownership of shares
in Laiki satisfies the requirements of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and Article
1(1) of the BIT.

626. Efstathios Topouzoglou owned at the time of the relevant events and currently owns
1,750,000 shares in Laiki.*“*

627. Polytimi Bakatselou owned at the time of the relevant events and currently owns 1,555,847
shares in Laiki.*%

628. Georgios Bakatselos owned at the time of the relevant events and currently owns 51,592
shares in Laiki.4%

629. Nikolaos Baktselos owned at the time of the relevant events and currently owns 51,592
shares in Laiki.*®”

630. Anna Maria Theocharaki directly owned at the time of the relevant events and currently
directly owns 1,343,276 shares in Laiki.* Ms. Theocharaki also owns 30% of the shares
in Gi. company holding 15,329,975 shares in Laiki.*?

631. Despina Theocharaki directly owned at the time of the relevant events and currently
directly owns 1,343,268 shares in Laiki.4”° Ms. Theocharaki also owns 10% of the shares
in’ ja company holding 15,329,975 shares in Laiki.*7!

“6! Share transaction slips issued by Investment Bank of Greece, 9 and 10 February 2011 (with English translation)
(Exhibit C-0011.B.1); E-mail from Cyprus Popular Bank (L. Batis) to E. Topouzoglou, confirming shareholding, 20
August 2013 (with English translation) (Exlubit C-0011.B.2), Kaczmarek First Expert Report, Appendix 5.1.

“5 Ownership of Shares in Laiki: Statement of shares issued by Axon Securities, 23 July 2013 (with English
translation) (Exhibit C-0013.B); Kaczmarck First Expert Report, Appendix 5.1.

“% Ownership of Shares in Laiki: Statement of shares issued by Axon Sccuritics, 23 July 2013 (with English
translation) (Exhibit C-0014.B); Kaczmarek First Expert Report, Appendix 5.1.

41 Ownership of Shares in Laiki: Statement of shares issued by Axon Sccurities, 23 July 2013 (with English
ranslation) (Exhibit C-0015.B); Kaczmarck First Expert Report, Appendix 5.1.

468 Ownership of shares held by A. M. Theocharaki: Statements of shares issued by Egnatia Finance and Investment
Bank of Greece, 30 July 2013 (with English transtation) (Exhibit C-0016.B.1); Kaczmarck First Expert Report,
Appendix 5.1.

4

  

 

 

 

632.

633.

634.

636.

637.

Marina Theocharaki directly owned at the time of the relevant events and currently directly
owns 381,593 shares in Laiki."”? Ms. Theocharaki also owns 30% of the shares in QD
Ja company holding 15,329,975 shares in Laiki.*”*

Nikolaos Theocharakis owned at the time of the relevant events and currently owns
1,666,843 shares in Laiki.‘74

Vasileios Theocharakis directly owned at the time of the relevant events and currently
directly owns 2,370,266 shares in Laiki.4”* Mr. Theocharakis also owns 30% of the shares
in (EE: company holding 15,329,975 shares in Laiki.47

Fourth, the Tribunal finds that the dispute currently before it arises directly out of
Claimants’ investment, i.e., their shareholding in Laiki.

Fifth, the Tribunal holds that the Parties to this dispute consented to submit it to ICSID
arbitration: Cyprus, by its offer to arbitrate such disputes included in Article 9 of the Treaty,
and Claimants, by filing the Request for Arbitration with ICSID.

Finally, the Tribunal considers that Claimants have complied with the requirement,
included in Article 9(2) of the Treaty, to seek to negotiate with Cyprus an amicable
settlement of their dispute. In this respect, MIG notified Respondent of its claims on 23
January 2013, while the remaining Claimants did so on 14 and 25 June 2013. It is not
disputed that the six-month deadline provided in Article 9(2) of the BIT had expired with

  

** Ownership of Shares in Laiki: Statements of share transactions, issued by Pegasus Securities SA, 26 July 2013
(with English translation of extract) (Exhibit C-0019.B); Kaczmarek First Expert Report, Appendix 5.1.

  
 

+S Ownership of shares held by V. Theocharakis: Statements of shares issued by Egnatia Finance and Investment
Bank of Greece, 30 July 2013 (with English translation) (Exhibit C-0020.B.1); Kaczmarek First Expert Report,
Appendix 5.1

re

 

respect to MIG’s claims at the time of the filing of the Request for Arbitration (9 September
2013). The Tribunal finds that, in light of Respondent’s lack of engagement with the other
Claimants’ notices of dispute, the requirement of Article 9(2) is also satisfied in their
regard.

638, For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that it has jurisdiction to hear the present dispute.

s
>
3
3
Zz
e
¢
a
°
2

   

139

Cc. The Tribunal’s analysis

670. At the outset, the Tribunal notes the Parties’ agreement that the conduct of the Cyprus State
organs is attributable to Respondent pursuant to ILC Article 4, which reads:

“I. The conduct of any State organ shall be considered an act of that State under
international law, whether the organ exercises legislative, executive, judicial or any other
functions, whatever position it holds in the organization of the State, and whatever its
character as an organ of the central Government or of a territorial unit of the State.

2. An organ includes any person or entity which has that status in accordance with the
internal law of the State.”5*

671. The Tribunal agrees with Claimants that such organs include: the President of the Republic,
the Attorney General and the Deputy Attorney General, the CBC, the CySEC, the Cypriot
courts, the Minister of Finance and the Cypriot Parliament. Consequently, any and all acts
committed by these organs are attributable to Respondent pursuant to ILC Article 4,

672. Before examining the Parties’ arguments with respect to the possible attribution to
Respondent of the acts and omissions of Laiki, its Board of Directors or of its Special

    

54 Intemational Law Commission, “Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts with
commentaries” [2001 -II(2)] Yearbook of the International Law Commission 30 (Exhibit CL-0082).

149

673.

674.

Administrator, the Tribunal wishes to clarify at the outset the test applicable under ILC
Article 8 in order to attribute to a State the conduct of a private entity.

The Tribunal recalls that ILC Article 8 reads:

“The conduct of a person or group of persons shall be considered an act of a State under
international law if the person or group of persons i is in fact acting on the instructions of,
or under the direction or control of, that State in carrying out the conduct.” [

added]

The Tribunal agrees with the Hamester y. Ghana tribunal that a “very demanding
threshold” must be met for purposes of attribution under ILC Article 8, requiring “both
general control of the State over the entity, and specific control of the State over the
particular act in question”.°>> This has been clearly established by International Court of
Justice (the “ICJ”) in the Nicaragua v. United States case.*** In the Genocide case, the ICJ
made the following clarifications with respect to the test applicable under ILC Article 8:

“399. This provision must be understood in the light of the Court's jurisprudence on the
subject, particularly that of the 1986 Judgment in the case concerning Military and
Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America)
referred to above (paragraph 391). In that Judgment the Court, as noted above, after having
rejected the argument that the contras were to be equated with organs of the United States
because they were ‘completely dependent’ on it, added that the responsibility of the
Respondent could still arise if it were proved that it had itself ‘directed or enforced the
perpetration of the acts contrary to human rights and humanitarian law alleged by the
applicant State’ (C.J. Reports 1986, p. 64, para. 115); this led to the following significant
conclusion:

‘For this conduct to give rise to legal responsibility of the United States, it would
in principle have to be proved that that State had effective control of the military
or_paramulitary operations in the course of which the alleged violations were
committed.’ (/bid., p. 65.)

400. The test thus formulated differs in two respects from the test — described above —
to determine whether a person or entity may be cquated with a State organ even if not
having that status under internal law. First, in this context it is not necessary to show that
the persons who performed the acts alleged to have violated international law were in
general in a of ‘compl dence’ on the State; it has to be
proved that they acted in accordance ith that State's instructions or under its ‘effective
control’, It mu must however be shown that this ‘effective control’ was exercised, or that the
State’s ii were given, in respect of cach tion in which the alleged viol

25 Hamester v. Ghana, at 179,
5 Case Concerning Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v United States of
America) [1986] ICJ Reports 14 htip://www.icj-cij.ore/ (Exhibit CL-0110) (“Nicaragua v. United States”).

150

675.

676.

occurred, not generally in respect of the overall actions taken by the persons or groups of
persons having committed the violations.”**” [emphasis added}

The Tribunal notes that arbitral jurisprudence has consistently upheld the standard set by
the ICJ.°8 The Tribunal sees no reason to depart from this jurisprudence constante.

In the paragraphs below, the Tribunal will analyze the substance of Claimants’ arguments
on attribution, beginning with the conduct of Laiki and its Board, and then tuming to the
conduct of the Special Administrator of Laiki.

Laiki and its Board of Directors

677.

678.

679.

680.

681.

After having considered both Parties’ arguments and the evidence in the record, the
Tribunal has come to the conclusion that Laiki’s conduct during the relevant period in this
arbitration cannot be attributed to Respondent pursuant to ILC Article 8.

On a preliminary basis, the Tribunal notes that Claimants challenge the following acts
carried out by Laiki’s management, which they contend are attributable to Cyprus: (i) the
commencement of an excessive number of audits designed to find fault with the Bouloutas-
led management; (ii) the excessive reliance on external consultants and reluctance to make
decisions; (iii) the failure to manage existing loans; (iv) the taking of unreasonable
provisions on existing loans; (v) the failure to attract private investors to the Bank; and (vi)
the failure to spin-off Laiki’s Greek operations.°?

However, Claimants have not demonstrated with evidence that these specific acts that they
challenge were directed or controlled by Respondent. The evidence put forward by
Claimants attempts to show Respondent’s overall control over Laiki, but does not contain
instructions or directions emanating from the Cypriot Government that Laiki and/or its
Board of Directors adopt a specific conduct. For this reason alone, Claimants’ case on
attribution under ILC Article 8 must fail.

Nevertheless, even if the Tribunal were to adopt a less stringent test for attribution under
ILC Article 8 - a test which this Tribunal does not endorse — this would not assist
Claimants’ case.

First, the Tribunal finds that the record does not support Claimants’ contention that Cyprus
directed or controlled the conduct of Laiki during the period December 2011 — June 2012.

$37 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and

Herzegov

1a v Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, 26 February 2007, at 399, 400, 1.C.J. Reports 2007 (Exhibit RL~

 

0012) (the "Genocide case”).
558 See, Jan de Nul v. Egypt, at 173; Hamester v. Ghana, at 198; White Industries v. India, at 8.1.10, 8.1.18.
59 See, Reply, at 270-304.

151

682. The Tribunal recalls that, during this period of time, the Bank remained under private
ownership and under the general control of its shareholders and of its Board of Directors.
At least formally, the State’s role was confined to that of ensuring regulatory supervision.
The exercise of this supervision led to the removal of Messrs. Vgenopoulos and Bouloutas.

683. The Tribunal considers that the evidence in the record does not support the conclusion that
the CBC or other agencies of the Cypriot Government directed or controlled the conduct
of Laiki and/or of its Board of Directors in choosing their replacements.

684. In particular, at the Board of Directors meeting of 12 December 2011, Mr. Sarris was
elected as Non-Executive Director by nine votes to two, with Messrs. Hiliadakis and Foros
voting against the proposal. Mr. Kounnis, affiliated with Claimants, and Mr. Fadel Al Ali
of the DFG voted in favor. At the same meeting of the Board of Directors, following a
proposal by Mr, Mylonas, Mr. Sarris was also clected as the Chairman of the Board
beginning with | January 2012 by nine votes to two. Messrs. Kounnis and Ali voted in
favor of the proposal. In other words, both appointments enjoyed the support of the
overwhelming majority of the members of Laiki’s Board.

685. The Tribunal understands that the clection of Mr. Sarris by the Board of Directors followed
a recommendation made by the Governor of the CBC.*#! However, the Tribunal is not
persuaded that the Board of Directors had no choice but to vote in favor of this
recommendation or that, in other words, the Bank was directed or instructed by the CBC
to elect Mr. Sarris. The evidence in the record certainly does not support such an inference.
To the Tribunal, it is not sufficient for the Board of Directors to elect an executive who
enjoyed the trust of the regulator in order to establish attribution under ILC Article 8. The
Tribunal considers that, to the contrary, such a decision was not surprising at a time of
considerable financial difficulty, when obtaining the continued financial support of the
CBC through ELA was deemed crucial for the Bank’s survival. The Tribunal also recalls
that this appointment followed the removal of two senior managers of the Bank by the
CBC. Consequently, the Tribunal finds that Laiki’s Board of Directors acted in what it
perceived was the Bank’s best interest when it appointed a Chairman of the Board that the
Governor of the CBC trusted. For this reason, the Tribunal concludes that the record docs

 

“” MPB, BoD Minutes, 12 December 2011 (Exhibit C-0307),

‘4" See, Testimony of M. Sarris before the Pikis Commission, 25 July 2013 (Exhibit C-0670), A. Orphanides,
Statement before the Pikis Commission, 23 August 2013 (Exhibit C-0619), The Tribunal places less weight on the
accuracy of the testimony of Mr. Patsalides, who testified before the Pikis Commission that Mr. Sarris was appointed
by the Governor of the CBC (Testimony of C. Patsalides before the Pikis Commission, 19 April 2013 (Exhibit C-
0671). The Tribunal considers that this testimony is inaccurate, as the Governor of the CBC did not have the authority
to make such an appointment, and, more importantly, since the Minutes of Laiki’s Board of Directors meeting clearly
show that the appointment was made by the Board following a voting procedure (MPB, BoD Minutes, 12 December
2011 (Exhibit C-0307).

 

152

not support Claimants’ argument that Respondent directed and controlled Laiki with regard
to the appointment of Mr. Sarris.

686. Further, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the replacement of other directors or senior
managers of the Bank was conducted pursuant to any instructions from the CBC or from
the Cypriot Government. In Section [X.C.3 below, the Tribunal has explained that these
replacements were made by the Board of Directors following what appears to be a normal
voting procedure, The record also disproves Claimants’ contention that Messrs. Foros and
Kounnis were sidelined after these replacements. To the contrary, they kept their senior
positions until June 2012 and were involved in a number of key decisions of the Bank.*4?
Certainly, the evidence proffered by Claimants is not sufficient to show a degree of
interference from Respondent that would establish attribution on the basis of ILC Article
8.

687. The Tribunal further finds that any coordination in strategies between Laiki and Cyprus as
regards the financial crisis likewise does not support Claimants’ contention that
Respondent had complete control over the Bank. The Tribunal recalls that, in November
2011, Laiki (then under the Bouloutas management) had inquired with the Ministry of
Finance about the possibility that the Government guarantee a proposed share capital
increase pursuant to the then draft Management of Financial Crises Law. In January
2012, the Bank’s Board began considering a recapitalization plan and engaged consultants
in order to determine the extent of the Bank’s financial needs. The recapitalization plan
was then submitted to the CBC with a view to obtaining financial assistance from the State
for the purpose of recapitalization.** Contemporaneous evidence dating from this time
shows that the Bank was consistently following up on a plan to obtain Government
financial support for the recapitalization. Beginning with March 2012, the Bank began
discussing with the Government the various options available for recapitalization. During
this time, the consistent response of the Government was that it would intervene only as a
last resort, and only to the extent that the Bank had not succeeded in attracting private
capital.45 The record shows that, to the extent there was any coordination in strategies
between Laiki and Cyprus, this was duc to the Bank’s interest in obtaining the State’s
support for its upcoming recapitalization. Respondent’s demonstrable reluctance to commit

*? See, MPB, Board Minutes, 17 January 2012 (Exhibit C-0321); MPB, BoD Minutes, 29 May 2012 (Exhibit R-
0174); MPB, BoD Written Resolution, 7 March 2012 (Exhibit R-0151); MPB, BoD Minutes, 2 April 2012 (Exhibit
R-0470),; MPB, BoD Minutes, 7 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0163).

5 Letter from MPB (E. Bouloutas) to the Ministry of Finance (K. Kazamias), 22 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0289).
54 MPB, Board Minutes, 17 January 2012 (Exhibit C-0321); MPB, BoD Minutes, 8 February 2012 (Exhibit C-0332);
MPB, BoD Minutes, 28 February 2012 (Exhibit C-0339).

“5 See, Email from C. Stylianides to A, Trokkos and the Governor of the CBC, 5 March 2012 (Exhibit C-0788);
Letter from PwC to MPB (M. Sarris), 20 March 2012 (Exhibit C-0348); Letter from Laiki (C.
Stylianides) to the Ministry of Finance (K. Kazamias) and the CBC (A. Orphanides), 21 March 2012 (Exhibit R-
0464); Letter from Laiki (C. Stylianides) to the Minisiry of Finance (V. Shiarly), 11 April 2012 (Exhibit R-0159),

153

 

688.

689.

690.

691.

funds to the Bank prior to the exhaustion of other funding avenues is irreconcilable, in the
view of the Tribunal, with Claimants’ contention that Respondent controlled the minutiae
of the Bank’s recapitalization strategy.

The Tribunal considers that the evidence relied upon by Claimants to show otherwise docs
not assist its case. The email written by the Bank to ADIA in February 2012 in order to
inquire about a possible partnership does not demonstrate that the Government was
controlling the Bank’s response to the financial crisis.*“° In this letter, Mr. Sarris attempted
to persuade the Abu Dhabi investor that the Bank had become more financially stable as a
result of a change in strategy that benefitted from the Government's endorsement. In other
words, this email was part and parcel of the Bank’s efforts to obtain the support of the
Government for its recapitalization. Nothing in the letter shows that the Government had
issued directions to Laiki with respect to its recapitalization strategy.

Likewise unhelpful is the email sent by Mr. Sarris to the Prime Minister of Greece in order
to obtain access to the HFSF.*4” Contrary to Claimants’ reading of this document, Mr.
Sarris did not urge the Greek Prime Minister to consider the interests of Cyprus when

Laiki’s application, but was pting to p de the Greek Government that
it should favorably consider the Bank’s application for HFSF funding. Indeed, the email
only refers to Laiki’s precarious financial condition and the measures being considered in
order to improve it:

“Attached please find emails I sent to Poul [sic] Thomsen and Marco Buti. The situation
for Laiki Bank is becoming critical. We will likely proceed with some kind of underwriting
cum warrants and put option, but under current conditions some sort of managing the
downside risk of the Greek portfolio remains critical,

1 would be grateful for your views. These are extraordinary times calling for the best in
collaboration between Greece and Cyprus.”5"*

Second, the Tribunal finds that the record does not support Claimants’ contention that
Cyprus directed and controlled the conduct of Laiki during the period June 2012 — March
2013, i.¢., after the Bank was recapitalized and the Cypriot Government became its largest
shareholder.

At the outset, the Tribunal recalls that the mere ownership of shares in Laiki by the Cypriot
Government, along with the powers that this ownership entails, does not establish
attribution under ILC Article 8. Claimants remain bound by the obligation to demonstrate

“4 Letter from MPB (M. Sarris) to Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (A. Khaldi) regarding the latter's interest in a
possible partnership, || February 2012 (Exhibit R-0142).
7 Letter from M. Sarris to G. Chardouvelis, 12 May 2012 (Exhibit C-0359).

oid,

154

692.

693.

that the challenged conduct was carried out under the instructions, direction or control of
Cyprus:

“Questions arise with respect to the conduct of companies or enterprises which are State-
owned and If such i act i i with the i 1
obligations of the State concerned the question arises whether such conduct is attributable
to the State. In discussing this issue it is necessary to recall that international law
acknowledges the general separateness of corporate entities at the national level, except in
those cases where the ‘corporate veil’ is a mere device or a vehicle for fraud or evasion. The
fact that the State initially establishes a corporate entity. whether by a special law or
otherwise, is not a sufficient basis for the attribution to the State of the subsequent conduct
of that entity. Since corporate entities, although owned b in that sense subject to the
control of the State, are considered to be separate, prima facie their conduct in carrying out
their_activitics is not attributable to the State unless they are exercising clements of
governmental authority within the meaning of article 5. [...] On the other hand, where there
was evidence that the corporation was exercising public powers, or that the State was using
its ownership interest in or control _of a corporation specifically in order to achieve a
particular result, the conduct in question has been attributed to the State.” [internal
citations omitted] [emphasis added]

In other words, Cyprus’ ownership of 84% of Laiki’s share capital is not, in and of itself,
sufficient to establish attribution for purposes of ILC Article 8. Claimants’ reference to the
Banking Law or the Underwriting Decree, which establish Respondent's powers as
majority shareholder and underwriter of Laiki’s recapitalization, likewise are not sufficient
to demonstrate that Respondent “was using its ownership interest in or control of [Laiki]
specifically in order to achieve a specific result’. Claimants have not put forward
evidence showing that, during this period of time, Respondent directed and controlled the
challenged conduct of the Bank.

The Tribunal notes that, in any event, in Section X.C below, the Tribunal has found that
the challenged acts do not constitute a breach of the Treaty, so the question of attribution
to Respondent of Laiki’s acts post-dating June 2012 on the basis of ILC Article 8 docs not
need to be addressed in more detail hereunder.

The Special Administrator of Laiki

694.

In Section X.C below, the Tribunal has found that Respondent did not breach the provisions
of the Treaty through its conduct in the various administrative, civil and criminal
proceedings initiated against Claimants. For this reason, and in the spirit of judicial

5 James Crawford, The International Law Commission’s Articles on State Responsibility: Introduction, Text and
Commentaries (CUP: 2002), p. 112 (Exhibit RL-0216).
Id.

155

economy, the Tribunal does not consider it necessary to analyze here the possible
attribution to Cyprus of the acts and omissions of Laiki’s Special Administrator.

VIII. CLAIMANTS’ ADVERSE INFERENCES APPLICATION

 

The Tribunal’s analysis

In Sections IX-XIII below, the Tribunal has found that the evidentiary record supports the

lowing Lusi (i) Mr. Vgenopoulos’ resi ion following pressure from the CBC
and the CBC’s removal of Mr. Bouloutas were based on objective reasons and were the
culmination of a lengthy process through which the regulator attempted to persuade the
Bank’s management to take corrective actions in order to address the Bank's financial
crisis; (ii) Cyprus did not set out to nationalize Laiki and such purported intent did not
inform its strategy during the Eurozone Summit; (iii) Cyprus did engage with Claimants’
various recapitalization proposals circulated in the spring of 2012 and was not interested
in obtaining majority ownership of Laiki; and (iv) in March 2013, Cyprus decided to
resolve Laiki and save the BoC.

The Tribunal will not reiterate here the bases for these findings. For purposes of the present
analysis, it is sufficient for the Tribunal to refer to these conclusions and, accordingly, hold
that the record only supports onc of Claimants’ requested inferences, namely that, in March
2013, Cyprus decided to resolve Laiki and save the BoC.

 

732. The Tribunal further dismisses Claimants’ request for an adverse inference that Cyprus
failed to repay the recapitalization bond. First, the Tribunal notes that Claimants do not
base their request on an argument that Respondent has failed to comply with a direction of
the Tribunal to produce documents evidencing the payment of the recapitalization bond.
Second, and more importantly, the evidence in the record and publicly available
information referred to by Respondent shows that Cyprus repaid the recapitalization bond
in instalments, with EUR 950 million being repaid in the third quarter of 2014 and further
payments being made in 2015.°%*

*

WHETHER RESPONDENT EXPROPRIATED CLAIMANTS’ INVESTMENT

‘|

54 IMF Country Report No. 13-293 (exit RX-0216); BoC Announcement, “Group Financial Results for the nine
months ended 30 September 201. November 2014 (Exhibit C-0554); www.stockwatch.com.cy.

 

167

9

The Tribunal’s analysis
822. Article 4 of the Treaty (“Expropriation”) provides:

“Investments by investors of cither Contracting Party shall not be expropriated,
nationalised, or subjected to any other measure which would be tantamount to
expropriation or nationalisation in the territory of the other Contracting Party except under
the following conditions:

a) the measures are taken in the public interest and under due process of law,

b) the measures are clear and non-discriminatory,

c) the measures are accompanied by provisions for the payment of prompt, adequate and
effective compensation. Such compensation shall be equivalent to the market value of the
investment affected immediately before the date on which the measures, mentioned in this

paragraph, were taken or made publicly known.

Compensation shall be paid immediately after the completion of legal procedure for
expropriation and shall be transferred in freely convertible currency. If the Contracting

 

199

823.

824,

825.

Party delays payment of compensation, it is liable to pay interest calculated on the basis of
the 6-month London Interbank Offered Rate for the relevant currency. The extent of
compensation is subject to review under due process of law.”

In the view of the Tribunal, in order for the challenged measures to fall under the sphere of
application of Article 4 of the Treaty, it is necessary to establish that the measures deprived
Claimants of the economic usc and enjoyment of their rights.’ In other words, the
interference with Claimants’ property rights has to be sufficiently restrictive to support a
conclusion that the property was substantially taken from them.

The Parties do not dispute and the Tribunal considers it to be uncontroversial that
expropriations can occur not only by means of a single, direct, expropriatory act, but also
by means of a series of acts which, individually, do not deprive the investor of its
investment, but which, when taken together and analyzed over the course of a period of
time, produce such an effect. In the words of the Metalclad y. Mexico tribunal:

“[E]xpropriation [...] includes not only open, deliberate and acknowledged takings of
property, such as outright seizure or formal or obligatory transfer of title in favour of the
host State, but also covert or incidental interference with the use of property which has the
effect of depriving the owner, in whole or in significant part, of the use or reasonably-to-
be-expected economic benefit of property even if not necessarily to the obvious benefit of
the host State,””*?

The Tribunal notes Claimants’ position, pursuant to which the alleged expropriation of
their investment “was not the result of a single event, but instead was a ‘creeping
expropriation’ — that is, a series of measures forming a composite expropriatory act’”**
beginning with Cyprus’ response to PSI+, continuing with the removal of Messrs.
Vgenopoulos and Bouloutas, as well as of several Greek managers, and culminating with
the dilution of their sharcholding in the Bank following Laiki’s recapitalization.”
Respondent counters that the only protected investments were Claimants’ rights derived
from their shareholding in the Bank, which were not in any way affected by the challenged
measures. Respondent adds that, in any event, in removing Messrs. Vgcnopoulos and
Bouloutas from their posts and recapitalizing Laiki, Cyprus acted in the legitimate exercise
of the State’s police powers and the challenged conduct cannot give rise to an expropriation
claim. Claimants dispute that the conditions for the application of the police powers
doctrine are met in the present case.

782 See, Vivendi II, at 7.5.29.

75) Metalclad v. Mexico, at 103

154 Reply, at 69.

755 In their post-hearing submission, Claimants also argued that “[tJhe removal and replacement of Laiki’s Chairman
and CEO standing alone constitute{d] expropriatory acts in breach of Article 4 of the Treaty” (C-PHS, at 18),

200

826.

828.

829.

830.

The Tribunal iders that the ic harm q to the di y
application of generally applicable regulations adopted in order to protect the public
welfare do not constitute a compensable taking, provided that the measure was taken in
good faith, complied with due process and was proportionate to the aim sought to be

achieved.

In this respect, the Tribunal notes that Article 4 of the Treaty is drafted in broad terms and
does not include any exception for the exercise of a State’s regulatory powers. However,
the provisions of the Treaty must be interpreted in accordance with Article 31(3)(c) of the
VCLT, i.c., in light of “[a]ny relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
between the parties”. These rules include customary international law.

While every application of a regulation that causes some economic damage to an investor
could be seen as giving rise to a duty to compensate, under customary international law, a
distinction exists between the reasonable bona fide exercise of police powers, which does
not amount to a compensable taking, and indirect expropriation. The Tribunal thus aligns
itself with the long line of arbitral awards” finding that the characterization of a measure
as expropriatory depends on the nature and purpose of the State's action. In this respect,
“[i]t is ... established in international law that States are not liable to pay compensation to
a foreign investor when, in the normal exercise of their regulatory powers, they adopt in a
non-discriminatory manner bona fide regulations that are aimed at the general welfare”.75”
The Tribunal further subscribes to the view that, “in order for a State’s action in exercise
of regulatory powers not to constitute indirect expropriation, the action has to comply with
certain conditions. Among those most commonly mentioned are that the action must be
taken bona fide for the purpose of protecting the public welfare, must be non-

discriminatory and proportionate”.”5*

After having carefully examined the facts of this case, the Tribunal has reached the
conclusion that the measures challenged by Claimants, either cumulatively or individually,
do not constitute a compensable taking. The Tribunal is not persuaded that Respondent was
motivated by the intent to nationalize Laiki or that it acted in furtherance of a plan to obtain
control over the Bank. In actuality, Laiki was in a precarious financial condition and the
State had no incentive to take control over it. Further, Cyprus’ refusal to renegotiate PSI+
and to opt out of the EBA capital exercise, as well as its reluctance to seek prompt
international financial assistance from the Troika, were not motivated by intent to cause
financial harm to Laiki in order to facilitate its eventual expropriation, but by the desire to

756 See, Saluka v. Czech Republic, Tecmed v. Mexico, de Levy v. Levi, Invesmart v. Czech Republic, Philip Morris
v. Uruguay.

757 Saluka v. Czech Republic, at 255.

758 Philip Morris v. Uruguay, at 305.

201

831.

832.

833.

834.

avoid the conditionality that would automatically attach to any financial assistance program
from the Troika (1.). The Tribunal also finds that the removal of Messrs. Vgenopoulos and
Bouloutas from the management of Laiki (2.) and the Bank’s recapitalization (3.) were
non-discriminatory, proportional measures taken in good faith in the exercise of Cyprus’
regulatory powers in the pursuit of a legitimate public policy objective — the protection of
the health of Cyprus’ financial system during a time of profound economic crisis,

The Tribunal will address cach onc of these conclusions in more detail below.

Whether there was a plan to nationalize the Bank

The crux of Claimants’ expropriation case rests on its allegation that Cyprus conceived and
executed a plan to nationalize the Bank by taking advantage of the Eurozone crisis and the
PSI+ program. However, Claimants have not put forward any convincing reason, backed
up by evidence, which could explain why Cyprus would want to take control over the Bank.
It is not at all clear to the Tribunal, and Claimants have failed to establish, what Respondent
stood to gain by nationalizing the Bank. The Tribunal finds that, to the contrary, the record
demonstrates that Laiki was in a very difficult financial position and bringing it under State
control would have harmed the interests of Respondent.

First, the record establishes that Laiki was heavily exposed to GGBs. The Tribunal does
not take any position on the reasonableness of Laiki’s decision to invest in these
instruments and to continue holding them for as long as it did. This is immaterial. What is
relevant is that, in November 2010, Laiki’s GGB portfolio was valued at EUR 2.9 billion
and that the Bank decided not to unload the GGBs when the possibility to do so was offered
by Cyprus, deeming that the risk posed by these instruments was too remote. ®? As it was
ultimately revealed, that assessment was incorrect and, in the summer of 2011, Laiki
announced that it intended to participate in the PSI program with GGBs worth EUR 2.6
billion in nominal value.” In other words, Laiki acknowledged that losses would have to
be recorded with respect to its GGB portfolio.

Second, the record establishes that the quality of Laiki’s loan portfolio was particularly
poor. In effect, even Laiki’s Internal Audit Report for 2010 noted the “unusually high
percentage of non-repayment of loans”.’*' Beginning with August 2010, in correspondence
with Laiki, the CBC began raising concerns with regard to a series of loans granted by the
Bank for the purchase of shares during MIG's share capital increase in June and July

789 Extraordinary General Meeting of MPB, 18 November 2010 (Exhibit R-0413).
© MPB BoD Minutes, 30 August 2011 (Exhibit C-0256).
%l Laiki, Audit Committee Minutes, 20 April 2011 (Exhibit R-0422).

202

835.

836.

2007.’ Those concerns were reiterated during the first half of 2011 and were later laid out
in more detail in the CBC’s supervisory on-site audit report with respect to MEB.” The
Tribunal considers that the concerns raised by the regulator in its supervisory on-site audit
of MEB showed the very serious nature of the problems faced by the Bank. In particular,
the Bank's practices of granting loans with “balloon payments”, of taking insufficient
collateral, coupled with the often inadequate assessment of borrowers’ repayment ability
and the low interest charged created significant pressure on the Bank’s liquidity and assets.
The Tribunal finds it particularly significant that, among the “balloon payment” loans with
low pricing and inadequate security, one can find the loans granted for the purpose of
purchasing shares during MIG’s share capital increase. Even more worrying was the fact
that a considerable proportion of these loans had matured in July 2010 without having been
repaid. As the CBC explained in its report, the poor quality of these loans demanded the
taking of substantial provisions, of about EUR 500 million, amount which could be
increased by more than EUR 200 million over the course of 2012. In its response to the
regulator, despite contesting other findings in the report, Laiki acknowledged that the
taking of such provisions was necessary.” As it was later revealed, the provisions
demanded by the CBC were ultimately not sufficient: subsequent due diligence by
Houlihan Lokey established that Laiki needed to record increased provisions between EUR
1.52 billion and EUR 2.199 billion for the full year 2011 for its Greek portfolio.”

Third, the CBC’s on-site supervisory audit report also highlighted other areas of grave
concern that affected the performance and operations of the Bank, such as the significant
concentration of deposits and numcrous instances of preferential treatment afforded to a
number of customers to the detriment of the interests of the Bank. Of note were the
relationship with MIG and the undisclosed legal assistance offered by the law firm of Mr.
Vgenopoulos in exchange for income from shipping loans. A further reason for concern
was Laiki’s failure to timely respond to the regulator’s concerns. Indeed, it was only after
two months had elapsed since the release of the audit report and after the CBC had given
the Bank a firm deadline, that Laiki eventually submitted its answer.

In the Tribunals view, in its letter dated 27 October 201 1,” Laiki did not offer convincing
responses to the regulator's concerns. In particular, Laiki disputed that it had not adequately
assessed the repayment ability of borrowers or that balloon payment loans were not
accompanied by adequate security. Laiki even argued that the extension of the loans

7 Letter from the CBC (K.S, Poullis) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 3 August 2010 (Exhibit C-0837).

7 Letter from the CBC (K.S. Poullis) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 9 November 2010 (E:

 

'-0839); Letter from the

CBC (K.S. Poullis) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 8 April 2011 (Exhibit C-0841);

etter from the CBC (K.S. Poullis) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 24 August 2011 (Exhibit

C-0255).
74 Letter from MPB (E. Bouloutas) to the CBC (K.S. Poullis), 27 October 2011 (Exhibit R-01 13).
768 Houlihan Lokey, “Project Midas ~ Final Due Diligence Report”, 24 February 2012 (Exhibit R-0147).
766 Letter from MPB (E. Bouloutas) to the CBC (K.S. Poullis), 27 October 2011 (Exhibit R-01 13).

203

837.

838.

839,

granted for the purchase of MIG shares, which had not been repaid at maturity, did not
denote the borrowers’ inability to pay, but an extension of the “initial investment
duration”.”°” Equally unconvincingly, Laiki attempted to argue that its internal documents
“inadvertently” showed that the entirety of its shipping loans cases had been assigned to
Vgenopoulos & Partners.

Fourth, at the time of the alleged expropriatory conduct, the Bank was increasingly relying
on ELA, drawing EUR 2.5 billion in order to be able to comply with the regulatory liquidity
requirements.” Claimants have not offered a satisfactory explanation why Respondent,
‘on the one hand, would support the Bank with ever increasing liquidity assistance, and at
the same time, would wish to harm the Bank through PSI+ in order to facilitate its eventual
nationalization.

On these bases, the Tribunal concludes that Claimants have not demonstrated with
convincing evidence that Respondent would have benefitted from its purported plan to
nationalize Laiki, As will be demonstrated in more detail below, the Tribunal finds that
Claimants have also failed to establish that Respond da plan to nationalize the
Bank. To the contrary, the evidence in the record demonstrates that Respondent’s conduct
can be better understood by a desire to avoid the conditionality that attached to any
international financial assistance program from the Troika rather than by a desire to harm
Laiki in order to bring it under State control.

 

Claimants rely upon the following key pieces of evidence in support of their argument that
Cyprus had a plan to nationalize Laiki: (i) the Cabinet minutes dated 25 October 2011, on
the eve of the Eurozone summit of 26 October 201 1;7 (ii) Mr. Kazamias’ testimony at the
hearing; (iii) the Secret Report; and (iv) Mr. Vgenopoulos’ note to DFG dated 12 December
2011.7” The Tribunal will address each one of these pieces of evidence and will explain
why, in its view, they do not support Claimants’ contention of an overarching communist
plot to obtain control over the Bank.

The Cabinet minutes and Mr. Kazamias'’ testimony at the hearing

840.

7 Id.

Afier having carefully examined the Cabinet minutes of 25 October 2011, the Tribunal has
reached the conclusion that a fair reading of the document docs not support a finding that
the Cypriot Government was discussing a plan to nationalize the Bank. In the Tribunal’s
view, the minutes only reflect a discussion of the options available to the Government

7* Laiki, ELA Operations with Central Bank of Cyprus (Exhibit R-0277).
9 Minutes of the Meeting of the Council of Ministers, CM 36/201 1, 25 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0269).
7 Email from A. Vgenopoulos to F. Al Ali, 12 December 2011 (Exhibit C-0771).

204

under the then draft of the Management of Financial Crises Law for intervention in troubled
banks upon the latter's request.

841. In this respect, the Tribunal notes that, at the request of the Minister of Finance at the time,
Mr. Kikis Kazamias, the draft of the Management of Financial Crises Law was discussed
with priority in Cabinet. The Minister of Finance explained that the approval of the law
was urgent so that the Government could quickly assist distressed banks. The minutes
record the Minister of Finance informing the President on the extent of the Cypriot banks’
exposure to Greek debt, as well as on the risk that a default of the banks could activate the
State’s obligation to guarantee insured deposits, a risk for which the State was not prepared:

“Minister of Finance: [...] 1 would suggest that matters under no. 2, 3 and 4 pre-occupy us
today and if you wish, due to some community obligations existing, I will see whether from
a management point of view, we could not deposit it. If, god forbid, something happens in
the week in between, at Icast we would have it approved in order to submit it to the House
of Representatives where a discussion may be made and any amendment thereof, if
anything arises [...]

President of the Republic: [...] This issue does not refer explicitly to Cyprus, it refers to
Greece and it has to do with the side effects of the Greek debt.

Minister of Finance: Indeed but to our banks as well.

President of the Republic: In any case, will our banks pull through even if we approve it?
Minister of Finance: We will be ready to intervene immediately.”””! [emphasis added]

“Minister of Finance: The matter under number 2 is the Management of Financial Crises.
There must be immediate action for safeguarding the financial stability. There should be
an institutional and legal framework, such that our State would be in a position, in case the
need arises — this is why we said we should be prepared —to intervene and support the
financial system. [...] would like to remind that under the present circumstances, the Stat
is a guarantor to all depositors for the deposits they have in financial institutions, up to
€100.000 [sic] in cach bank,”””* [emphasis added]

  

“Minister of Education and Culture; My question is the following: how is the plain
depositor, the plain citizen, safeguarded if the Council of Ministers does not take this
Decision, although it will do so? J want to understand this clearly.

Minister of Finance: As regards the depositor, he is not safeguarded when the bank
collapses and from then on, this comes which will safeguard him, that is, he will apply
Icgally also against the guarantor who is the State which secures a maximum amount of
€100.000. [...] We are talking about wild things, there is no such case, that is, the presence
of the State as a guarantor, in my opinion, only exists in theory under the existing
circumstances.

President of the Republic: Kikis, when the state gives the bank €2 billion, it’s assumed that
that’s the amount needed, let’s say that the bank will continue its normal business.
Therefore, the people are guaranteed, The problem is to find the money. We will appeal to
the European Central Bank to get a loan.

™ Minutes of the Meeting of the Council of Ministers, CM 36/2011, 25 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0269), pp. 2, 3.

Id. p. 6

205

842.

843.

844.

Minister of Finance: We have already engaged into informal contacts with the special fund,

what we all hear as the EFSF.

President of the Republic: We are not alone, in any case. We are in the least miserable

situation. There are others who are much worse.

Minister of Finance: We are in the worst situation in terms of percentages. based on our

size and the engagement of our banks in the Greek market and the Greek Government
nds. But in terms of absolute numbers, there are others who sleep less than_us.”””

{emphasis added]

During the Cabinet meeting, the Minister of Finance also reported to the President about
the resistance encountered within the banking sector with respect to the draft of the
Management of Financial Crises Law:

“Minister of Finance: A campaign has already begun against these bills by a specific bank.
You should know that.

President of the Republic: | realize what is happening, it’s about Marfin Laiki, the State
cannot subsidize any gentleman or any bank. There are countries that have nationalized the
banks, because they could not provide other guarantees.

Minister of Finance: If it is not passed, President, it is as if we are doing a favor to the
specific individual, I answer this matter because it was raised. The first one to be relieved
if we do not pass it, will be the specific individual”.””

 

During the hearing, Mr. Kazamias clarified that the bank which had voiced its opposition
against the draft law was Laiki and that the specific individual referenced in the meeting
was Mr. Vgenopoulos. Mr. Kazamias testified that Mr. Vgenopoulos was opposed to any
State intervention in the banks on the terms of the draft law:

“Q [...] Who is the specific individual at Marfin Laiki Bank who will be relieved if the
state docs not pass a law that allows for intervention in banks?
A. It’s Mr Vgenopoulos.”””*

The Tribunal has decided to accept this testimony as it is corroborated by other evidence
in the record. Indeed, the record evidences that a vigorous debate took place in the Cypriot
Parliament concerning the terms of the draft law, and that a number of comments and
observations in that regard were made by the Association of Cyprus Banks, of which Laiki
was a member. These comments illustrate that, while the Association of Cyprus Banks
generally supported the adoption of this legislation, it was concerned with the precise terms
of the State intervention and sought to ensure the protection of shareholders’ interests.'”°

™ Id. pp. 9, 10.

dp. 4

75 Tr., Day 2, 158: 12-16

7 See, Minutes of the House of Representatives, 14 December 2011 (Exhibit C-0310); Letter from the ACB (M.
Kammas) to the Ministry of Finance (C. Patsalides), 25 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0268)

206

845.

846.

847.

During the hearing, Mr. Kazamias was also taken to the section in the Cabinet minutes
wherein the President and the Minister of Finance discussed the possi i
the banks as a result of the application of the new law. Because the import of this discussion
is the subject of considerable debate, the Tribunal considers it useful to render below the
entirety of the exchange on the matter between the Minister of Finance and the President.

 

The exchange begins with the Minister of Finance presenting the options available under
the draft law for State intervention in failing banks: the granting of Government loans, the
provision of Government guarantees, the provision of capital funds “against the acquisition
of equal participation in the hip of banks, the p of banking assets
and the acquisition of a part or all of the issued capital. The Minister of Finance explained
that these modalities for State intervention were largely based on existing legislation in
other EU Member States:

“President of the Republic: Kikis, there is no need to explain to us for the need, explain to
us the conditions of this story. How do we support the banks and under what conditions
the State supports the banks? Or our own State will support the banks, if there is any need?
Minister of Finance: The proposed legislation provides the Council of Minister [sic] with
the power for immediate action, In what ways? It may | grant government loans to financial

ions or provide gt for b g or provide capital funds
against the acquisition of equal participation in the ownership structure of such institutions,
Or buy assets or acquire part or all of their issued share capital, The contradictions which

exist, which you should have in mind, are mainly in this last power granted to the State to
demand the acquisition of part or all of the issued share capital,

President of the Republic: But this is how the entire world operates.

Minister of Finance: Exactly, because this is what is done in the entire world, we also adopt
all these which we are being prepared by all the States of the Eurozone and not only, so
that we are prepared from then onwards.”””’ {emphasis added]

 

Following the Minister of Financc’s introduction, the President intervened in order to
discuss the implications of a significant State investment in a failing bank:

“President of the Republic: We need to ‘sell’ this thing to the common people. The common
people will tell you, ‘You’re not helping me but you give a €2 billion assistance to a bank.
And you will tell him: ‘I'm helping this bank based on certain prerequisites and | might
even come to the point where I may even buy it, essentially I will nationalize it’.

Minister of Finance: Yes, itis essentially, nationalisation. The management leaves, you put
those that you deem fit to represent you hoping to save it because they say that wherever
the State is involved, there is no positive result. Some fear that they will be completely
expelled and this is the most normal thing because essentially, those who led the situation
to that direction with their tolerance or their choices cannot have the trust of the State. We
are talking about more than a billion,

President of the Republic: Will the ‘protectors’ of the banks, Nicolas and Averof, accept
this point?

 

7 Minutes of the Meeting of the Council of Ministers, CM 36/2011, 25 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0269), pp. 6, 7.

207

848.

849.

Minister of Finance: I told you that, already, since yesterday afternoon, huge efforts are
made in all directions. | consider now, that they will apply to all the political party
directions in order to convince by relative arguments according to whom they speak to, at
least this last point should be deleted.

Minister of Interior: One clarification. At paragraph 4(a){iii) ‘The provision of capital
against the acquisition of equal participation in the ownership structure’, alright, the (v)
may be full acquisition. Does (iii) imply that it can participate?

Minister of Finance: This is when you put a percentage, but if you put a percentage, if this
percentage is small, you appreciate that you cannot have control. We may, however, deem
that with a smaller participation we may save it, however, in this way, you will have the
percentage which any shareholder may have,

Minister of Interior: Therefore, there is no difference with part acquisition?

Minister of Finance: No.”’” [emphasis added]

 

   

In the view of the Tribunal, the exchange rendered above does not evidence the intent to
nationalize Cypriot banks, including Laiki, by removing top management, as was alleged
by Claimants. The exchange referred to the situation in which the State would be called by
a distressed bank to support it with a significant investment (the example being discussed
is a EUR | or 2 billion investment), in exchange for which the State would obtain majority
or full ownership of the bank and appoint new management. The Tribunal notes in this
respect that both the President and the Minister of Finance referred in their interventions
to capital injections of more than EUR 1 or 2 billion.

The Tribunal recalls here that Mr. Kazamias was questioned at the hearing with respect to
the choice of the term “nationalization” to describe State intervention. The Tribunal does
not find that Mr. Kazamias’ testimony with respect to the use of the term in the sense of
“statification” was particularly enlightening. Nevertheless, the Tribunal notes that Mr.
Kazamias is not a lawyer, which can suggest that the usage of the term “nationalization”
should be viewed with at least some circumspection. The Tribunal is morcover satisfied by
reading the entirety of the minutes of the Cabinet meeting that the usage of the term
“nationalization” was not in its strict legal sense. In light of the particular situation
discussed by the President and the Minister of Finance, i.c., State support for a distressed
bank, in an amount exceeding EUR 1/2 billion, the Tribunal finds that the discussion did
not refer to outright nationalizations, or expropriations, but to the change in the ownership
structure of a bank as a result of State intervention. This injection of funds would have
followed from a request from the distressed bank itself, and not on account of a unilateral
decision by the relevant State authorities. It is also noteworthy to point out that, at the time,
no Cypriot bank, including Laiki, had requested or obtained State support. In November
2012, during the Bouloutas management, Laiki made inquiries regarding the possibility to
obtain State support under the Management of Financial Crises Law. The Bank filed a

™ Id, pp.7, 8.

850.

851.

852.

853.

formal request for support on 2 May 2012.”” For its part, the BoC made such a request on
29 June 2012.7"

The fact that the Cypriot Government was considering obtaining a stake in the banks in
exchange for financial intervention, and not an outright nationalization, is also supported
by the exchange with the Minister of Interior during the Cabinet meeting. In this exchange,
the Minister of Finance confirmed that, when the State did not put up significant funds, the
State would not obtain control.

The Tribunal also notes that the Minister of Finance also stated during the same meeting:

“Minister of Finance: | should tell you that even now -this concerns also the first matter —
the first effort which is being made is the pressure on the banks themselves to increase their

capital base either with the existing shareholders or by finding new ones. The second effort
is the intervention of the State wherever is needed.””*! [emphasis added}

When questioned by the Tribunal at the hearing with regard to his reference in the minutes
to “huge efforts” made “in all directions”, Mr. Kazamias clarified that he was referring to
the lobbying for the removal of the provision empowering the State to remove management
subsequent to its intervention:

“MR PRICE: [...] The President is asking you about particular individuals in the political
opposition, and you are offering him assurance of some sort that ‘huge efforts are made in
all directions’. Are these efforts by you? Were you talking to politicians in the Greek
Parliament?

A. No, I’m not trying to reassure the President. On the contrary, I am informing him about
the fact that there was a lobby consisting of political personalities aiming not to include in
the new legislation this right of the government to change the management, et cetera, in
case, of course, the state was called upon to intervene.

It was not a reassurance. I was simply informing the President that this bank lobby was
trying to influence politicians in order to delete this provision during the discussion of the
new bill that the government would submit.

So I was not reassuring him. To the contrary, | was informing the President about the
movements that unfortunately were taking place. Actually, the position of various members
of the Parliament and of the banks’ association, testified to this.”78

  

Minister Kazamias was asked several times during the hearing whether the Cabinet was
considering at its 25 October 2011 mecting the removal of Messrs. Vgenopoulos and

79 See, Letter from MPB (E. Bouloutas) to the Ministry of Finance (K. Kazamias), 22 November 2011 (Exhibit C-
0289); Letter from Laiki (C. Stylianides) to the CBC (P. Demetriades), 8 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0476).

70 Letter from BoC (A. Artemis) to the CBC (P. Demetriades), 29 June 2012 (Exhibit R-0494),

78! Minutes of the Meeting of the Council of Ministers, CM 36/2011, 25 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0269), pp. 11, 12

2 Tr., Day 2, 178: 5.

 

5; 179: 1-5,
209

854.

855.

Bouloutas.’*? Even though the Tribunal has reservations as to the reliability of Mr.
Kazamias’ evidence, after assessing the totality of his testimony on the subject matter of
the Cabinet meeting of 25 October 2011, and comparing it to the content of the Cabinet
minutes that are contemporaneous to these events, the Tribunal is persuaded that the
di in Cabinet ding the removal of in assisted banks did not
concern Laiki or any Cypriot bank in particular, but any future bank that would require
State assistance under the terms of the then draft Management of Financial Crises Law.
Mr. Kazamias’ testimony at the hearing was consistent with the declarations made during
the Cabinet meeting that offering substantial State intervention, in the realm of EUR 1-2
billion, could not be explained to Cypriot taxpayers if the Government did not subsequently
to its intervention replace the previous management with people having the trust of the
State.

While the Tribunal considers that Mr. Kazamias’ testimony on this issue is credible, seeing
as it is corroborated by documentary evidence contemporancous to the relevant events, the
same conclusion does not apply with regard to his declarations made during the hearing
that he lacked prior knowledge with regard to Mr. Orphanides’ intent to remove Messrs.
Vgenopoulos and Bouloutas. The Tribunal considers that it strains credulity to believe that
the Minister of Finance, at a time of grave economic and political turmoil for the country,
was not being kept abreast by the Governor of the CBC with regard to his intention to
remove top management of onc of the two systemic banks in the country. Nevertheless, the
Tribunal does not infer from this advance knowledge the existence of an elaborate plan to
nationalize the Bank. In the Tribunal’s view, Mr. Kazamias’ lack of opposition to the
decision of the CBC Governor to proceed with the removals cannot be equated with the
existence of a conspiracy to expropriate the Bank between two top officials in the country.
The Tribunal will give additional observations with regard to the removals of Messrs.
Vgenopoulos and Bouloutas in the Section IX.C.3 below.

For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that the Cabinet minutes and Mr. Kazamias’ testimony
at the hearing do not support a finding of an overarching plan to nationalize Laiki.

The Secret Report

856.

857.

Another key picce of evidence relied upon by Claimants as support for their contention that
Respondent had a plan to nationalize the Bank is the so-called Secret Report.

The Tribunal notes that the Secret Report was prepared at the request of President
Anastasiades, the successor of President Christofias. Indeed, the document opens with a

™ Tr, Day 2, 159: 12-18, 24, 25; 160; 1, 2, 6-25; 161: 1-25; 162: 1-8; 170: 1-21; 171:20-25; 172: 2-14, 20-25; 173:

1-3.

210

858.

859.

860.

861.

statement that “[t]his study [was] carried out following the instructions by the President of
the Republic of Cyprus, Nicos Anastasiades with the aim of tracking down the causes
which led the Cypriot economy to the brink of cotlapse”.”**

Regardless of its official character however, after having examined its contents, the
Tribunal has decided that the Secret Report has low probative value.

In this respect, the Tribunal observes that the Secret Report makes the bold claim that
“Kazamias had prepared, on behalf of the government, a plan for nationalizing Laiki Bank
and worked together with the CBC Governor Orphanides, for its implementation”.”*> As
support for this claim, the Secret Report refers to the drafting process for the Management
of Financial Crises Law, which involved both Minister Kazamias and CBC officials, to the
minutes of the Cabinet meeting of 25 October 2011 and the 2011 CBC Annual Report.7#°

On this evidentiary predicate, the Secret Report reaches a second conclusion:

“The next day (26.10.2012), Christofias attended the Council summit and agreed without
any objection to the Greek debt haircut, knowing that the banks in Cyprus would need
additional capital, however, this he might idered as an ity to nationalize Laiki
bank,”787 [emphasis added]

The Tribunal has already determined that the Cabinet minutes of 25 October 2011 do not
evidence the intent of the Cypriot Government to nationalize the banks in general or Laiki,
in particular, Additionally, the Tribunal finds nothing objectionable in the participation, by
the CBC, in the drafting process of the Management of Financial Crises Law. As a result,
and on the same basis, the Tribunal has decided not to accept the findings of the Secret
Report with respect to the existence of a plan to nationalize Laiki.

Mr. Vgenopoulos’ 12 December 2011 note to DFG

862.

The Tribunal is not persuaded that Mr. Vgenopoulos’ email to DFG, dated 12 December
2011,” is in any way capable of demonstrating that the Cypriot Government intended to
nationalize the Bank. It is not disputed that Mr. Vgenopoulos, a witness in this arbitration,
held the view that the Cypriot Government was intent on expropriating Laiki. However,
the impressions of Mr. Vgenopoulos at the time, however well intended they may have
been, cannot attest to the intent of the Government of Cyprus.

™ Secret Report, p. 1,

8S Id

6 Id., pp. 7-10,
™ Id. p.10.
8 Email from A. Vgenopoulos to F. Al Ali, 12 December 2011 (Exhibit C-0771)

211

863.

864.

865.

866.

867.

For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that the evidentiary record does not support a
‘lusion that R d necived and then da plan to nationalize the Bank.

 

In light of Claimants’ position that it was the pursuit of the plan to nationalize the Bank
that connects the seemingly disparate acts challenged in this arbitration into a composite
act that breaches the Treaty, and of the Tribunal’s finding that the record does not support
a finding that such a plan ever existed, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent’s acts do
not constitute a composite act that is capable of breaching the Treaty’s Article 4.

However, that is not the end of the analysis. In the sections that follow, the Tribunal will
examine individually each one of the acts challenged by Claimants.

The Tribunal will address the question of whether Cyprus’ failure to seek an exemption
from PSI+, to negotiate better terms at PSI+, to opt out of the EBA recommendation or to
seck Troika support for its banking sector immediately following the Eurozone summit
could be seen as expropriatory.

Cyprus’ response to PSI+

Claimants’ case with respect to PSI+ is connected with their submissions that Cyprus
intended to nationalize Laiki and that this intent was established at the latest upon the
meeting of the Cabinet on 25 October 2011. The Tribunal has already found that the
Cabinet minutes do not support a finding that Respondent intended to nationalize Laiki.
However, during the hearing, Claimants clarified that Cyprus’ lack of response to PSI+
represents in and of itself a breach of the Treaty due to the failure to follow the “rules of
the road” established at the Eurozone summit:

“MR PRICE: You have asserted that one of the elements of your composite breach theory,
as you’ve just elaborated here, was the failure of Cyprus to seek to get a better deal in PSI+;
correct?

DR PETROCHILOS: To seek any form of mitigation or support.

[J]

MR PRICE: Here’s my question: what if they had sought better terms of the haircut, but
failed?

DR PETROCHILOS: It’s an excellent question.

MR PRICE: Would we have a breach of treaty?

DR PETROCHILOS: We probably would not.

bel

MR PRICE: So your argument is: it was legally obligated by the BIT to seek and obtain
[EFSF] support for its banks?

DR PETROCHILOS: If so required, and in the context it was required.

MR PRICE: So it was not open to Cyprus to say: *You know what? I don’t want the
conditionality, not worth it?”

 

212

868.

869.

870.

871.

DR PETROCHILOS: Not in terms of the rules of the road for the Eurozone. It went out of
the reservation.

SIR DAVID: Excuse me. To what extent are you relying on the motive for which this was
done; in other words, that this step was not taken because the true intention was to
nationalise Laiki?

DR PETROCHILOS: Thank you, sir. We are relying on the motive only in the sense that
it explains the conduct. The conduct that is problematic is how Cyprus fails to recapitalise
the bank in the way that the Eurozone decision provides it will do it. We call that the
‘rulebook’. So that is the offensive conduct, and it’s our third factual submission.

It is not a political claim: it is a legal claim. The investors have certain legitimate
expectations, and Cyprus has certain obligations.””*”

The Tribunal notes that Claimants’ clarifications pertain to the issue of whether
Respondent frustrated their legitimate expectations, an analysis more properly made when
secking to determine whether Cyprus breached Article 2 of the Treaty. However, since an
investor’s legitimate expectations are also relevant within the framework of an
expropriation analysis, the Tribunal will examine in the paragraphs below whether the lack
of any attempt by Cyprus to negotiate a better outcome for the State and/or its banking
system at the Eurozone summit was expropriatory.

The Tribunal wishes to emphasize at the outset that any such analysis will be limited in
scope:

“[A] tribunal does not have an open-ended mandate to second-guess government
decision-making. Governments have to make many potentially controversial choices. In
doing so, they may appear to have made mistakes, to have misjudged the facts, proceeded
on the basis of a misguided economic or sociological theory, placed too much emphasis on
some social values over others and adopted solutions that are ultimately ineffective or
counterproductive, The ordinary remedy, if there were one, for errors in modern
governments is through internal political and legal processes, including elections.”

 

The Tribunal endorses this view. It is not up to an arbitral tribunal constituted under an
investment treaty to sit in judgment over difficult political and policy decisions made by a
State, parti ly where those decisions involved an and weighing of multiple
conflicting interests and were made based on continuously developing threats to the safety
and soundness of the financial system. Unless the measure at issue is shown to be arbitrary,
capricious and unrelated to a rational policy, or manifestly lacking even-handedness, a

tribunal should not intervene.

The Tribunal is persuaded that, in the case before it, Cyprus faced one such difficult
political decision on the occasion of the Eurozone summit.

™® Tr., Day 1, 54: 14-18; 55: 14-18; 60: 14-25; 61: 1-10.
™ SD. Myers, Inc. v The Government of Canada (UNCITRAL) First Partial Award, 13 November 2000, at 261
(Exhibit CL-0165) (“S.D. Myers v. Canada”).

213

872.

At the time, Eurozone leaders were attempting to find consensus at a very difficult turning
point for the continent, when the possibility of Greece’s disorderly default and an exit from
the Eurozone were discussed and, possibly, when the future of the entire Eurozone was at
stake, The Tribunal has found particularly enlightening the follow passages from the
Metrick-Landau First Expert Report describing the events surrounding the Eurozone
summit:

“167. The 21 July 2011 announcement failed to calm financial markets, however, as the
summer was marked by significant market volatility and continued increases in Greek CDS
prices. This market volatility reflected at least in part the strong disagreement that persisted
between Eurozone countries regarding the policy response to the crisis. France and
Germany disagreed over the proper crisis management mechanism.

tl

168. [...] France, together with a few other Eurozone countries, favored a very powerful
fund that could massively intervene to stabilize government bond markets. That so called
‘big bazooka’ approach was discreetly supported by the US and United Kingdom. [...]

169. Germany, together with another group of countries, was adamantly opposed to this
approach. Their opposition grew even stronger when France floated the idea of creating
new Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) to finance an expanded mechanism. [...]

170. The other main area of disagreement within the Eurozone related to the nature of
macroeconomic adjustment measures that countries such as Greece, Italy, and Ireland were
expected to adopt to gain international financial assistance. [..,] Countries such as Greece
and Italy resisted the need for painful austerity measures, however, in part because of
concerns about the effects of austerity on economies that were already in deep recessions.
[...] On 5 August 2011, the ECB President and the Governor of the Bank of Italy sent a
letter to the Italian Prime Minister that was subsequently leaked to the public. This letter
outlined in very harsh terms the adjustment measures requested by the ECB, which were a
condition for the ECB to continue supporting the stability of the Italian government bond
market through massive purchases of government bonds. [...]

 

171. [twas in this context that EU and Eurozone Icaders held summit meetings in Brussels
on 26 October 2011. [...]

172. Of all the decisions announced that day, only the two last ones (the PSI+ and the bank
recapitalization) truly reflected a broad consensus among European policy makers and
would be implemented effectively, The awkward compromise on the EFSF would collapse
a few days later at the Cannes Summit, and changes in the governments of Grecce and Italy
would be necessary for the economic reforms to take place.

173. [...] On 31 October 2011, Prime Minister Papandrcou announced a referendum that

took everybody, including the Eurozone leaders, by surprise. Many were outraged as the
move threatened to compromise the whole effort to restore calm to financial markets.

214

873.

174, The Italian Prime Minister faced similar difficulties, as the reform package negotiated
with the ECB was encountering strong resistance in the Italian Parliament, and there was a
distinct possibility that he would lose a vote of confidence. Spreads in sovereign bond
markets in Italy once again increased [...].

175. The Cannes G20 Summit, chaired by the French President, opened on 3 November
2011. [...] Prime Minister Papandreou was invited to explain his referendum proposal and
faced open hostility and sub d that the Jum had been led.
On 9 November, he resigned as Prime Minister and a technocratic government was
appointed under the new Prime Minister, Lucas Papademos, a former ECB Vice President,
to implement the Troika program.

176, Similar treatment was accorded to Italian Prime Minister Berlusconi. [...] On 11
November, the {talian Senate adopted the reform package after ‘weeks of bitter political
fights’. On 12 November, Mr. Berlusconi resigned as Prime Minister and was replaced by
Mr. Monti, who headed up a technocratic government.

177. At Cannes, the discussion about the financial support mechanism also resumed. The
US and French Presidents joined forces, pressuring Germany to accept the SDR plan.
Subsequent accounts of the meeting corroborated rumors about the tense atmosphere. [...]

178. [...] [NJo agreement was reached on expanding the EFSF financing mechanism.
These plans were never revived or successfully implemented.

179, In sum, in less than two weeks, the Eurozone leaders forced the Greek government to
give up its projected referendum, leading to the collapse of the coalition government and
the resignation of the Prime Minister. They also pressured Italy, the third largest economy
in the Eurozone, to accept a very strict adjustment program that led to the resignation of
the Prime Minister. They went through a very contentious G20 Summit in Cannes where
Europe had been lectured by other advanced and emerging economies on its inability to
manage the crisis. [...] Massive political uncertainty was hanging over the future of
macroeconomic policies in the Eurozone. One element on which there seemed to broad
[sic] consensus was the strategy for strengthening the banking system by recapitalizing
banks.””” [internal citations omitted]

As the evidence has made clear, in terms of percentages, Cyprus’ economy, heavily reliant
on its banking sector, was the most exposed to Greece out of all the Eurozone economies.
It was therefore in Cyprus’ interest to seek to minimize any impact. Nevertheless, a failure
to reach an agreement that would have restructured the Greek debt risked leading to a
disorderly default of Greece with even more disastrous implications for Cyprus.’* In such
a scenario, not only would the economic consequences have been much worse, but also
Cyprus could have alienated its European partners in the process. In other words, there
were no easy choices for Cyprus on the occasion of the Eurozone summit. Additionally,
the Tribunal notes that the agreement reached at the Eurozone summit was a political

™! Metrick-Landau First Expert Report, at 167-179,
™ See, Morrison: “Yes, a disorderly default by Greece would have been catastrophic for the whole of Europe,
including Cyprus” (Tr., Day 3, 10:22, 23).

215

874.

875.

876.

877.

direction, not a source of binding obligations. A potential veto by Cyprus would have had
a dubious effectiveness.’

The Tribunal therefore finds nothing arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable in Cyprus’ lack
of attempt to negotiate for itsclf cither an exemption or a mitigation of the PSI+ program.

Equally, the Tribunal is not persuaded that Cyprus acted arbitrarily in not negotiating an
exemption from the EBA capital exercise, as suggested by Claimants. The Parties have
offered the conflicting testimonies of Prof. Morrison, on the one hand, and Professors
Landau and Metrick, on the other. While Prof. Morrison took the view that Laiki’s weak
capital position was public knowledge and had already been factored in by the markets,
Prof. Landau expressed the opinion that a failure to announce prompt compliance with the
EBA recommendation would have sent a signal of weakness to the markets and would have
triggered a bank run. The Tribunal is not in a position and is not mandated by the Treaty to
decide whether or not Cyprus’ decision to not seck an exemption from the EBA capital
exercise was the best course of action to be taken under the circumstances. What matters
is that BITs do not hold States to an obligation to act following international best practices.
Morcover, it is not at all clear to the Tribunal which of the two options would have been in
line with such practices, particularly considering that the only country to have sought such
an exemption was Greece. In light of these considerations, the Tribunal finds that Cyprus’
decision to follow the EBA recommendation was not arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable.

This holds all the more true for Cyprus’ decision not to apply immediately for financial
assistance from the EFSF. It is not debated by the Parties and it is clear from the record
that applying for such assistance would have required Cyprus to enter into a conditionality
program that entailed the reduction of its public expenses through painful austerity
measures. In other words, Cyprus had to make a political decision and choose whether to
protect its banking sector immediately through Troika assistance, with the attendant
stabilization of its banking system but at enormous costs to its citizens, or to protect its
citizens from unpopular and difficult public spending cuts and attempt to find alternative
solutions for its banks, The Tribunal finds nothing unreasonable, arbitrary or capricious in
Cyprus’ decision not to seek EFSF funding immediately. It is certainly not up to the
Tribunal to decide how the Cypriot Government should have elected to spend public funds.

Further, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the “rules of the road” referred to by Claimants
represent binding legal obligations, sceing as they were incorporated in the Eurozone
Summit statement, which is a political document. In any event, as will be demonstrated in
more detail in Section X.C.6 below, Cyprus in effect did follow the principles laid out in
the Eurozone Summit statement.

™ Sec, Morrison First Expert Report, at 135.

216

878. For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that Cyprus’ response to PSI+ was not expropriatory
and did not breach Article 4 of the Treaty.

3. The removal of management

879. The heart of Claimants’ expropriation claim is their allegation that the removal of Messrs.
Vgenopoulos and Bouloutas by the CBC represented the means through which Cyprus
obtained the de facto control over Laiki and prepared it for the formal nationalization in
June 2012. Respondent objects to this characterization of the CBC’s decision, arguing
instead that Cyprus acted in the legitimate exercise of the State’s police powers. The
Tribunal finds no Treaty or factual basis in the record that could prompt it to second-guess
the CBC’s decision to remove management.

The removal of Mr. Vgenopoulos

880. The Tribunal observes that the Parties dispute whether Mr. Vgenopoulos was removed by
the CBC or resigned of his own volition.

881. The Tribunal considers that the evidence in the record unequivocally demonstrates that Mr.
Vgenopoulos stepped down following a request from the CBC. In fact, the former
Governor of the CBC declared in no uncertain terms before a Parliamentary Committee in
2016:

“It was not me who brought Mr Vgenopoulos in Cyprus. I did not provide cover to him
[but instead] | ousted him when I could, using the Jaw.””™ [emphasis added]

882. However, the analysis does not end there. Indeed, whatever misgivings Mr. Vgenopoulos
may have had before stepping down from Laiki’s Board of Directors and from his position
of Non-Executive Chairman, on 4 November 2011, he took a conscious decision to tender
his resignation. Had Mr. Vgénopoulos wished to resist the pressure of the CBC, he would
have been within his rights to refuse to resign and force the CBC to initiate a formal, written
process for this removal, as Mr. Bouloutas in fact did a few weeks later.

883. Claimants argue that Mr. Vgenopoulos’ resignation was due to the pressure applied by Mr.
Orphanides on members of Laiki’s Board of Directors and shareholders. The Tribunal

™“Orphanides: | ousted Vgenopoulos from Cyprus when I could”, Fileleftheras, 6 September 2016 (Exhibit C-083 1);
See also, “Frontal attack by Orphanides”, ANTI, 30 April 2012 (Exhibit C-0353); Interview of A Orphanides, available
at htipy/wwiw. youtube conv watch?yv="PWRhLZySG- 19, 30 Aprit 2012 (Exhibit C-0354).

 

217

884.

885.

886.

887.

considers that that may well have been the case. Nevertheless, it does not amount to a
breach of the Treaty.

First, the CBC was within its rights to request the removal of Mr. Vgenopoulos. Section
30 of the Banking Law explicitly conferred this power upon the regulator.

Second, the evidence in the record does not support a finding that the CBC abused its power
when it ousted Mr. Vgenopoulos. Claimants have not put forward any evidence from any
individual in direct contact with the CBC, whom the CBC purportedly asked to have Mr.
Vgcenopoulos removed. Claimants arguc that the CBC uscd the threat of withdrawing ELA
so as to force Mr. Vgenopoulos to step down. However, this is not supported by the record.
In effect, the evidence relied upon by Claimants in support of this argument is the following
statement by Mr. David:

“Nevertheless, in the immediate future we anticipated that we could not continue
functioning in the way that we had been unless market conditions dramatically improved.
During this period we updated the CBC almost daily on our position, as the CBC had asked
us to do in light of the economic circumstances. | alerted the CBC on several occasions
that they should be ready to provide ELA to us, because there was an increasingly high
probability that Laiki would need it on account of the massive deposit flight. In a telephone
conversation in mid-2011. Mr Poullis, who was the Senior Manager of the Division for
Regulation and Supervision of Banking Institutions, told me that the CBC would not be
prepared to provide funds to Laiki. Instead, he told me mockingly, Laiki should look to Mr
Vgenopoulos and his friends to put some of their own money into the bank.” emphasis
added]

The Tribunal observes that Mr. David is referring to a conversation having allegedly taken
place in the middle of 2011, before the CBC actually took any decision to support Laiki
through ELA (“the CBC would not be prepared to provide funds to Laiki”). Whatever
conversation Mr. David may have had with Mr. Poullis, the record establishes that the CBC
did in fact provide Laiki with ELA upon its request, and that this happened a few months
after this conversation, on 27 September 2011. This form of support continued to be offered
to the Bank up until it was decided that it would be placed in resolution. In any event, Mr.
David has not appeared before the Tribunal at the hearing for questioning and the Tribunal
was not satisfied with the reasons invoked for his decision not to appear. As a result, the
Tribunal has decided that Mr. David’s testimony is not corroborated by the evidence in the
record and has low probative value.

Further, had the CBC somehow pressured Laiki’s Board or shareholders to remove Mr.
Vgenopoulos, they could have refused to be co-opted. Indeed, after Mr. Orphanides
removed Mr. i a i Board req i Mr. Orphanides to id

5 David First Witness Statement, at 30.

218

888.

invoking their support for the former Chief Executive Officer. It is unclear from the record
if the members of the Board and/or the shareholders contacted by Mr. Orphanides shared
his concerns with regard to Mr. Vgenopoulos. What is clear is that these members of the
Board and/or shareholders did not officially request Mr. Orphanides to re-evaluate his
views with regard to Mr. Vgenopoulos.

For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that the resignation of Mr. Vgenopoulos, whether as
a result of formal pressure or of his personal decision not to oppose the wishes of the CBC,
does not form part of any expropriatory conduct by Respondent.

The “Cypriotization”’ of Laiki

889.

890.

891.

The Tribunal finds no support in the record for Claimants’ contention that Cyprus removed
a number of Claimants-affiliated directors and senior managers, and replaced them with
Cypriot nationals that were unqualified for their jobs. In effect, the record shows that the
Bank, through its constituent internal organs, elected the new members of the Board and
senior management. Had the Bank deemed them to be unqualified, it was at liberty to elect
other representatives.

More precisely, Mr. Christos Stylianides, one of the two Deputy CEOs of the Bank
(together with Mr. Kounnis) prior to Mr. Bouloutas’ removal, was elected as CEO by the
Board of Directors of the Bank on 5 December 2011. Even if Claimants were correct that
Mr. Orphanides had met with Mr. Stylianides in order to “handpick”””* him as successor
to Mr. Bouloutas, what is ultimately relevant is that the unanimous Board of Directors
elected him as CEO. This included Messrs. Foros and Theocharakis (affiliated with
Claimants) and Mr. Fadel Al Ali, the representative of Laiki’s largest sharcholder, DFG.
In other words, Mr. Stylianides was the preferred choice of the Bank.”” The Tribunal
considers that it is not surprising that, at a time of grave financial difficulty, when obtaining
the continued financial support of the CBC through ELA was deemed crucial for the
Bank’s survival, Laiki’s Board of Directors appointed a CEO that the Govemor of the CBC
trusted.

Further, on 12 December 2011, the Board of Directors of Laiki elected Messrs. Michael
Sarris and Chris Pavlou as Non-Executive Directors by nine votes to two, with Messrs.
Hiliadakis and Foros voting against the proposal. Mr. Kounnis, affiliated with Claimants,
and Mr. Fadel Al Ali voted in favor of the proposal. At the same meeting, Mr. Mylonas,
the then Chairman of the Board, recommended the election of Mr. Sarris as the new

786 C-PHS, at 45.
77 MPB, BoD Minutes, 5 December 2011 (Exhibit R-0129).

219

892.

893.

894.

Chairman of the Board from | January 2012. Mr. Sarris was elected by nine votes to two.
Again, Messrs. Kounnis and Al Ali voted in favor of the proposal.”**

It is true that some directors and managers affiliated with Claimants no longer served on
the Board. However, the record shows that this was due to their voluntary decision to
resign. In effect, the Board of Directors of Laiki met on 17 January 2012 inter alia in order
to decide the constitution of the new Board, of Board Committees and of the Group
Executive Committee. The minutes of the meeting record that Messrs. Mageiras,
K is and C inides had dered their resignati which required the
appointment of successors. At the same mecting, Messrs. Lysandrou and Mylonas were
elected as Vice Chairmen of the Board. ”°

 

 

Messrs. Foros and Kounnis, affiliated with Claimants, kept their senior positions in the
Bank until June 2012. The Tribunal finds no support in the record for Claimants’ contention
that its representatives were sidelined. In effect, Mr. Foros was appointed to Laiki’s
Nomination Ci ittee and Risk M Cc ittee in May 2012.* Mr. Foros also
signed a number of decisions taken by the Board, such as approving Laiki’s participation
in PSI+,®°! the appointment of advisors®*”? and the submission of a request to the Cypriot
Government for the underwriting of its share issue.*® In any event, the Tribunal considers
it unlikely that, if the removals had been dictated by Cyprus, as Claimants allege, any
director affiliated with Claimants would have been allowed to remain on the Board.

For all these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that there is no factual support for Claimants’
contention that Respondent followed a policy of “Cypriotization” of Laiki’s Board of
Directors and senior management.

The removal of Mr. Bouloutas

895.

896.

After having carefully examined the record and the Parties’ submissions, the Tribunal has
reached the conclusion that Respondent’s removal of Mr. Bouloutas was carried out in the
legitimate exercise of Cyprus’ police powers and was not expropriatory.

Before setting out the reasons for its decision, the Tribunal will first establish the proper
standard of review that is applicable to the analysis of the CBC’s actions.

™* MPB, BoD Minutes, 12 December 2011 (Exhibit C-0307).

7° MPB, Board Minutes, 17 January 2012 (Exhibit C-0321).

©" MPB, BoD Minutes, 29 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0174),

*°! MPB, BoD Written Resolution, 7 March 2012 (Exhibit R-0151).
*2 MPB, BoD Minutes, 2 April 2012 (Exhibit R-0470).

*©3 MPB, BoD Minutes, 7 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0163).

220

897.

898.

899.

900.

901.

In this respect, the Tribunal notes with approval the Jnvesmart v. Czech Republic tribunal’s
ruling with respect to a banking regulator’s decision to revoke a bank’s license:

“A decision to revoke a bank’s licence, which takes place within a detailed national legal
framework that includes administrative and judicial remedies, is not reviewed at the
international law level for its ‘correctness’, but rather for whether it offends the more basic
requirements of international law. Numerous tribunals have held that when testing
regulatory decisions against international law standards, the regulators’ right and duty to
regulate must not be subjected to undue second-guessing by international tribunals.
Tribunals need not be satisfied that they would have madc precisely the same decision as
the regulator in order for them to uphold such decisions.”*™ [emphasis added]

 

The Tribunal aligns itself with the finding of the Saluka v. Czech Republic tribunal that a
banking regulator’s decision to place a bank in forced administration is entitled to some
discretion and that “[i]n the absence of clear and compelling evidence” that the bank
regulator had “erred or acted otherwise improperly in reaching its decision”, a tribunal must
accept the reasons given by the regulator for its decision.*°’ It cannot therefore be that this
Tribunal is tasked to determine whether the CBC’s decision to remove Mr. Bouloutas from
his post as CEO was correct.

The Tribunal must also be mindful of the fact that a central bank acts as a regulator of a
highly technical and sophisticated economic sector, that it has intimate knowledge of the
underlying data and is best placed to assess whether one course of action is preferable to
another. It is not up to the Tribunal to substitute its judgment on the advisability of
measures taken by the CBC, so a certain level of deference to the judgment of the banking
regulator must indeed exist.

Nevertheless, the Tribunal considers that such deference must not impede its task to verify
whether international law was complied with, If there is any evidence that a decision taken
by a regulator was abusive, did not afford duc process or was a pretense of form designed
to conceal improper ends, a tribunal must find a breach of international law.

In the paragraphs below, the Tribunal will set out the reasons for its findings that the
removal of Mr. Bouloutas was an exercise of regulatory powers (i) taken in order to protect
the public welfare (ii), a proportionate (iv) and non-discriminatory measure taken in good
faith (iii).

8° Invesmart v. Czech Republic, at 501.
®5 Saluka v. Czech Republic, at 272, 273.

221

@

902.

An exercise of regulatory powers

The Banking Law relied upon by the CBC when it removed Mr. Bouloutas is a statute of

general application, which predated Claimants’ investment in Lai

follows:

 

. Its Section 30 reads as

“30. (1) The Central Bank may take all or any of the following measures where a bank fails
to comply with any of the provisions of this Law, or of any Regulation issued undcr this
Law or with the conditions of its licence, or in the opinion of the Central Bank the liquidity
and character of its assets have been impaired or there is a risk that the ability of the bank
to meet promptly its obligations may be impaired, or where this is considered necessary
for the safeguarding of the interests of depositors or creditors —

(a) require the bank forthwith to take such action as the Central Bank may consider
necessary to rectify the matter or to restrict the operations of a bank by imposing
conditions on its licence as it thinks desirable;

(b) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (a) above, impose conditions under
this section and in particular:

@)

(i)

(iii)

(iv)

)
(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(&)

require the bank to take certain steps or to refrain from adopting or
pursuing a particular course of action or to restrict the scope of its business
in a particular way;

impose limitations on the bank on the acceptance of deposits, the granting
of credit or the making of investments;

prohibit the bank from soliciting deposits, cither generally or from
specified persons or class of persons;

prohibit the bank from entering into any other transaction or class of
transactions,

require the removal of any director, chief executive or manager of a bank,

oblige the bank to hold own funds in excess of the minimum level laid
down pursuant to the provisions of section 21;

require the reinforcement of the arrangements, processes, mechanisms and
strategies of the bank implemented to comply with subsections (2) and (3)
of section 19 and section I9A;

to require the bank to apply a specific provisioning policy or treatment of
assets in terms of capital requirements;

restrict or limit the business, operations or network of banks; and

require the reduction of the risk inherent in the activities, products and
systems of banks.

222

903.

(ii)

904.

905.

906.

Lal

(2) The Central Bank shall, before taking any measure under paragraph (a) or (b) of
subsection (1), furnish a report to the bank inviting its comments thereon within a specified
period which should not be less than three days from the date of the delivery of the
report,"8%

While the removal of Mr. Bouloutas was not a regulatory measure having general
application, it was carried out pursuant to one such regulation. In the view of the Tribunal,
this fact alone invites the applicability of the police powers doctrine, subject of course to
the other conditions being met. In other words, the Tribunal does not find the distinction
drawn by Claimants between on the one hand generally applicable regulations, and on the
other hand, the application of those regulations to a specific set of facts, to be significant
as far as the application of the police powers doctrine goes. The Tribunal notes that this is
consistent with arbitral practice. In Saluka v. Czech Republic, the challenged measure was
the act of placing a bank under forced administration pursuant to the banking laws of the
Czech Republic. In /nvesmart v. Czech Republic, the tribunal assessed the compliance with
the applicable treaty of a decision to revoke a bank's license. In de Levi v. Peru, at issue
was the intervention of the banking regulatory authority which resulted in the dissolution
and liquidation of a bank.

 

Taken in order to protect the public welfare

Further, the Tribunal considers that the CBC’s intervention was taken in order to protect
the public welfare.

In this respect, the Tribunal finds that Section 30 of the Banking Law is a bona fide
regulation aimed at protecting the public welfare, i.e., the health and optimal operation of
the banking system in Cyprus, the protection of depositors and clients, and ultimately, the
protection of taxpayers. This is explicitly spelled out in the text of the provision. Indeed,
Section 30 applies to situations in which there is “a risk that the ability of the bank to meet
promptly its obligations may be impaired, or where this is considered necessary for the
safeguarding of the interests of depositors or creditors”.

As was acknowledged by Prof. Morrison in his expert testimony, many States have similar
regulations on their books: according to a World Bank survey of 143 countries, 92% of all
jurisdictions conferred the power to suspend or to remove managers upon the relevant
authorities.”

“© Republic of Cyprus, Banking Laws of 1997-2013 (Exhibit CL-0138).

“7 Morrison First Expert Report, at 233, referring to Martin Cihac, As! Demirgu-Kunt, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria
& Amin Mohseni-Cheraghlou, Bank Regulation and Supervision around the World — A Crisis Update 4 (The World
Bank, Policy Research Working Paper No. 6286, Dec. 2012).

223

907.

908.

(iti)

909.

910.

911.

912.

The Tribunal also observes that, in his decision ordering the removal of Mr. Bouloutas, the
CBC did in fact refer to the objectives of the Banking Law, i-e., protecting the banking
system and the interests of depositors. In particular, after invoking management’s
imprudent loan policy, the Bank’s continuing failure to comply with minimum liquidity
requirements, its continued reliance on ELA and managements failure to take remedial
measures, the Governor of the CBC decided to remove Mr. Bouloutas:

“In view of what is mentioned above and, particularly, in consideration of the on-going
risk of further deterioration of the liquidity situation, in order to secure the interests of the
depositors, the Central Bank, in accordance with article 30(1) of the Banking Law 1997 to
(No. 2) 2011 [...]."** [emphasis added]

  

The Tribunal acknowledges that Claimants dispute that the CBC did in fact act in the
pursuit of the legitimate public welfare objectives it invoked in its decision. The Tribunal
considers that, however, an inquiry into whether the CBC was motivated by other
considerations is properly made when assessing Respondent's good faith. For purposes of
the present analysis, it is sufficient to note that the CBC took the measure so as to protect
the Bank, the banking system and the interests of depositors, i.¢., in order to protect the
public welfare.

A non-discriminatory measure taken in good faith

The Tribunal finds that the decision to remove Mr. Bouloutas was taken by the CBC in
good faith and in a non-discriminatory manner.

Before setting out the reasons for this finding, the Tribunal wishes to make a few remarks
with regard to the testimonies of the Partics’ banking experts.

First, the Tribunal notes that Prof. Morrison is of the view that “regulators should remove
bank directors during a crisis only when doing so is likely to improve the bank’s
position”,®” and specifically, its liquidity. He adds that “a rapid replacement of bank
directors [might] unsettle markets and worsen liquidity problems” and that such an effect
should be “risked” “only if there is clear evidence that markets would be still more
unsettled if the existing (cam of directors was retained”.*"”

In other words, Prof. Morrison puts forward a very strict test for determining the
circumstances in which a central bank may remove the management of a bank during a
time of crisis: when there is “clear evidence” that doing so is likely to improve liquidity.

*°* Letter from CBC (A. Orphanides) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 29 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0294).
40 Morrison Second Expert Report, at 141.
#10 Morrison First Expert Report, at 241.

224

913.

914.

915.

916.

Quite apart from the question of whether such circumstances may ever exist in times of
financial crises, the Tribunal observes that Prof. Morrison has admitted at the hearing that
he did not quote to any relevant literature as support for his opinion, that he did not cite to
any legal authority, that he had not read any academic paper on the subject of central banks’
removal of bank management, that he has had no relevant experience in this regard and
that he has never worked for a central bank."

The Tribunal therefore finds little support for its analysis in Prof. Morrison’s testimony.

Second, the Tribunal observes that Claimants strongly contest the reliability of Professors
Landau’s and Metrick’s testimonies. In their view, R dent’s experts “fund: ly
changed their evidence at the hearing by abandoning thcir mismanagement allegations”
and “invented” new grounds that would justify the CBC’s decision to remove Mr.
Bouloutas, in particular an alleged “presumption that you should remove managers if there
is a huge public support asked from the taxpayer”, a ground purportedly not relied upon in
their written expert reports.*!?

The Tribunal does not share Claimants’ point of view.

In this respect, the Tribunal observes that, in their First Expert Report, Professors Landau
and Metrick took the position that the CBC’s decision to remove Mr. Bouloutas was
reasonable for the following reasons: (i) Laiki’s senior management bore responsibility for
its strategic decisions and risk management failures;®"? (ii) the CBC lost confidence in
Laiki’s senior management due to its failure to address its worsening liquidity position and
the Bank’s increasing reliance on central bank financing;'! (iii) the correspondence
between Laiki and the CBC during October and November 2011 “reveal[ed] how the CBC
viewed Laiki’s management and the extent to which the CBC had lost confidence in Mr.
Vgenopoulos and Mr. Bouloutas”;*'> (iv) Laiki’s senior management itself’ argued that a
new board would benefit Laiki;*’® and (v) CBC’s ouster of Laiki senior management was

with its of senior at other institutions.*"7 In other words,
Laiki’s reliance on ELA was mentioned as one of the grounds that allegedly justified the
removal of management,

STy., Day 3, 4: 5-25; 5: 1-7.

812 C.PHS, at 27.

*3 Metrick-Landau First Expert Report, at 419.
815 Jd., at 422.

S15 Td., at 426,

816 fd, at 433, 434.

7 Id, 1 436.

225

917.

918.

919.

920.

921.

922.

In their Second Expert Report, Professors Landau and Metrick reiterated their reasoning
above.*!* In response to Prof. Morrison’s testimony that central banks should remove a
bank’s management only where there is a strong indication that this would lead to an
improvement in liquidity, Professors Landau and Metrick took the view that “crises require
strong government intervention and public financial support and this strengthens the case
for a swift removal of managers”.®!? As support for their position, Professors Landau and
Metrick referred to the EU Banking Communication, and provided a series of reasons why
it is common to see a bank’s management removed during financial crises if there is public
support given to the bank. Several examples from European countries were offered.
Further, Professors Landau and Metrick explained that Laiki’s large ELA exposure
“required maximum transparency from the bank and full cooperation from the
management” and “the CBC had no reason to believe Laiki’s existing management would
meet those conditions”.*”°

The Tribunal therefore finds that the arguments put forward by Respondent’s experts in
their written reports were in line with the arguments provided at the hearing.

Third, the Tribunal notes that Claimants also criticize the testimony of Professors Landau
and Metrick for having defended the CBC’s actions based not on the CBC’s framework
and reasons, but on their own framework. Additionally, Claimants take exception to Prof.
Metrick’s statement that the assessment of the reasonableness of the CBC’s decision was
based on the outcome achieved and not the reasoning or process which preceded it.*?!

The Tribunal bears these criticisms in mind in its analysis below.
§

Claimants base their theory that the CBC acted in bad faith when it removed Mr. Bouloutas
on the following arguments: (a) it was motivated by the goal to nationalize Laiki; (b) the
correspondence between Laiki and the CBC does not reveal any legitimate reason to
remove Mr. Bouloutas; and (c) the process followed for the removal of Mr. Bouloutas
lacked duc process and was not transparent. For its part, Respondent disputes all three of
these contentions.

The Tribunal will address cach onc in turn below.

*® Metrick-Landau Second Expert Report, at | 52.
"9 Td, at 143,

"0 Fd, at 156.

81 C-PHS, at 27, 28, $2, 63.

226

923.

924.

925.

926.

927.

928.

(a) Intent to nationalize. The Tribunal has already found in Section IX.C.1 above that the
record docs not support Claimants’ argument that Respondent had a plan to nationalize
Laiki. In that section of its analysis, the Tribunal focused primarily on the members of the
Cypriot Government, and in particular the President and the Minister of Finance. The
Tribunal will now address Claimants’ argument, pursuant to which Mr. Orphanides
removed Laiki’s management only after he had political support from Cabinet.

The evidence Claimants are relying upon are two statements made by Minister Kazamias
and Governor Orphanides on separate occasions.

For his part, Minister Kazamias made the following statement to the newspaper
Kathimerini on 6 January 2013:

“When in December 2011 the then Governor of the CBC requested his removal from the
[Board] of Marfin Laiki, in the context of his dispute with the Governor, Mr Vgenopoulos
sought to find out from me as the Minister of Finance and, on the same day, from the
President_of the Republic, our positions for the Governor's action against him. When
obviously, he deemed that the President and the Minister did not offer him any cover as
against the Governor, he his resignation on the same day.”*? is added]

While not taking any views with regard to the accuracy of this statement, the Tribunal
understands Mr. Kazamias’ declaration to refer to efforts made by Mr. Vgenopoulos to
clicit political support from the President of Cyprus and the Minister of Finance against the
Governor of the CBC. Mr. Vgenopoulos was of course at liberty to seek such political
support. Nevertheless, that support was not forthcoming, because ultimately Mr.
Vgenopoulos chose to resign. This statement, in other words, does not demonstrate an
intent by Mr. Orphanides to remove Mr. Vgenopoulos or Mr. Bouloutas for political
reasons.

The second statement Claimants refer to was made by Mr. Orphanides in an interview and
concerns the removal of Mr. Vgenopoulos:

“Q: Why did the decision for the removal of this specific businessman take that long?

Mr. Orphanides: If there was stronger political support, this would have been a risk which
the regulator could have taken,”

Claimants argue that this statement demonstrates the political nature of Mr. Orphanides’
decision to remove Messrs. Vgenopoulos and Bouloutas. The Tribunal considers that Mr.
Orphanides’ statement is open to other, less nefarious, interpretations.

"2 K, Kazamias, “Signing of Memo as soon as possible”, Kathimerini, 6 January 2013 (Exhibit C-0434),

2 Interview of A Orphanides, available at htt

vi/wawiv, youlube.com/watch? v=PWRhLZy5G-Mét=119, 30 April 2012

   

(Exhibit C-0354); See also, Tr., Day 2, 148: 12-17.

227

929.

930.

931.

932.

As Claimants correctly point out, the CBC is a regulatory body that is statutorily
independent. However, it does not act entirely outside of the political process. The
Governor of the CBC is appointed by the President and the Vice-President of Cyprus*™
and is required to submit annual reports to the President and the House of
Representatives.*> The Governor of the CBC may also be asked to appear before
committees of the House of Representatives in order to report on matters within the
competence of the CBC.*** Further, the auditors of the CBC are required by law to present
their audit report not only to the CBC Board, but also to the Minister of Finance.**?

More importantly, the CBC decides whether to grant liquidity support to banks in times of
emergency (ELA). As Professors Landau and Metrick have indicated in their testimony,
and Claimants have not disputed, this support is a quasi-fiscal responsibility of the State.
If ELA is not repaid and the value of the collateral provided by the bank is inadequate, the
CBC would suffer losses which would ultimately be borne by taxpayers. In other words,
were a bank to be unable to repay ELA, the CBC would have made a fiscal expenditure,
which falls under the authority of Parliament.*** The CBC also has the power to take
decisions which may fundamentally affect the banks under its supervision, such as the
removal of management. The Tribunal considers that it is natural that the CBC’s ability to
take appropriate measures in times of financial crisis would hardly be possible to sustain
without some form of support from the political branches.

In the present case, had the CBC’s removal of Messrs. Vgenopoulos and Bouloutas not
been based on objective considerations, the Tribunal may well have found a breach of the
Treaty obligation. Nevertheless, after a careful assessment of the record, the Tribunal is
not persuaded that the CBC acted principally on political, rather than prudential,
considerations.

In this respect, the Tribunal notes that, at the time of Mr. Vgcnopoulos’ resignation, the
ELA extended by the CBC to Laiki totaled EUR 2.5 billion*”’ (approximately 12 percent
of Cyprus’ 2011 GDP).*° Making a decision to continue extending ELA to Laiki and
eventually increasing that amount necessarily meant that the CBC was taking on the risk
that the debt would not be repaid and would have to be borne by Cypriot taxpayers. The

®4 Section 18(1) of Republic of Cyprus, Central Bank of Cyprus, Laws of 2002-2007, www.centralbank.gov.cy
(Exhibit CL-0143).

®5 Id, Section 55(1),

826 Id., Section 55(2).

27 fd, Section 60(b)

*°* Metrick-Landau First Expert Report, at 75, 76, 91, 94; Metrick-Landau Second Expert Report, at 156,

29 Laika, ELA Operations with Central Bank of Cyprus (Exhibit R-0277).

3 See, Metrick-Landau First Expert Report, at 75, 76, 91,94; Metrick-Landau Second Expert Report, at 156.

228

933.

934,

935.

936.

937.

938.

Tribunal is persuaded that a decision to grant liquidity in these proportions necessarily
required some form of consensus between the CBC and the Cabinet.

Further, as will be detailed below, the Tribunal is of the view that the record does not
support a conclusion that the CBC clearly acted arbitrarily or failed to afford due process
when removing Laiki senior management.

On these bases, the Tribunal is not prepared to infer from the one-line statement of Mr.
Orphanides the existence of a conspiracy between the CBC and the Minister of Finance
and/or the Cypriot Cabinct for the purpose of nationalizing Laiki.

b) No legitimate reason for the removal. After having considered the evidence before it,
the Tribunal has reached the conclusion that there is no “clear and compelling evidence”
that the CBC “erred or acted otherwise improperly” when it removed Mr. Bouloutas.*?!

The Tribunal agrees with Claimants that the lawfulness of a State’s conduct under its
domestic law cannot excuse that State’s breach of international law. The Tribunal also
agrees that an international arbitral tribunal is not held to apply the standard of review that
a Cypriot court would have applied when assessing a decision of the CBC taken under the
Banking Law.

As mentioned above, the Tribunal’s task under the Treaty is to verify if there is “clear and
compelling evidence” that the CBC “erred or acted otherwise improperly in reaching its
decision”.**? What the Tribunal is not called to do is to verify if the CBC’s decision to
remove Mr. Bouloutas was the best possible decision that it could have taken under the
circumstances or whether that decision was correct. The Tribunal will not sit in appeal on
the CBC’s judgment.

Bearing this mind, the Tribunal notes that the Banking Law relied upon by the CBC as
support for its decision had been in existence in Cyprus since before Claimants made their
investment. It provides that the CBC may, inter alia, decide to remove managers from one
of the banks it supervises:

“where a bank fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Law, or of any Regulation
issued under this Law or with the conditions of its licence, or in the opinion of the Central
Bank the liquidity and character of its assets have been impaired or there is a risk that the
ability of the bank to meet promptly its obligations may be impaired.”*? [emphasis added]

‘5! Saluka v. Czech Republic, at 272, 273.
832 Jd.

©} Section 30(1) of Republic of Cyprus, Banking Laws of 1997-2013, www.centralbank.gov.cy (Exhibit CL-0138).

229

939, The Tribunal considers that this provision in the Banking Law is similar to banking statutes
in other developed economics and follows established principles in the matter.

940. As Claimants’ expert Prof. Morrison has set out in his First Expert Report, the Spanish
central bank (Banco de Espajia) may remove senior management of a bank when “a credit
institution fails to meet or for objective reasons it is reasonably likely to be unable to meet,
requirements on solvency, liquidity, organisational structure or internal control”.**4
Similarly, the Bank of Portugal, the Banque de France and the National Bank of Belgium
may remove a bank’s management when the liquidity of the bank is impaired or it places
the interests of customers in jeopardy."

941. The Tribunal also notes that the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision “Guidelines:
Corporate governance principles for banks” emphasize the extensive powers banking
regulators should be given in order to be able to realize their function of protecting the
banking system:

“Supervisors should have a range of tools at their disposal to address governance
improvement needs and governance failures. They should be able to require improvement
steps and remedial action, and assure accountability for the corporate governance ofa bank.
These tools may include the ability to compel changes in the bank’s policics and practices,
the composition of the board of directors or senior management, or other corrective actions.
They should also include, where necessary, the authority to impose sanctions or other
punitive measures. The choice of tool and the time frame for any remedial! action should
be proportionate to the level of risk the deficiency poses to the safety and soundness of the
bank or the relevant financial system(s).""”*

942. Likewise, the EBA “Guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the
management body and key function holders” recommend:

“[t is important to ensure that credit institutions and competent authorilies intervene
effectively in cases where a member of the management body is not considered to be
suitable. [...] The appropriate corrective measures will depend on the circumstances staking
into account measures already taken. Measures can range from ordering actions ... to
temporary ban or replacement of single members of the management body.”"”

34 Morrison First Expert Report, at 234, citing from Article 6 of Spanish Law 9/2012 of 14 November 2012 on credit
institution restructuring and resolution.

835 Id., at 234-238,

536 Metrick-Landau Second Expert Report, at 138, quoting from Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, “Corporate
governance principles for banks”, October 2014, at 167.

37 Jd, quoting from EBA “Guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the management body and
key function holders”, 22 November 2012, at 19.

230

943. According to Claimants, the correspondence between the CBC and Laiki during October

2010-December 2011 “does not reveal any legitimate reason to remove Mr Bouloutas”.

oy 838

The Tribunal disagrees.

944. Before setting out the reasons for this finding, the Tribunal considers it useful to reproduce
below the full content of the CBC’s letter removing Mr. Bouloutas:

8 C-PHS, at 47

“As has been mentioned in our previous letters, such as, inter alia, our letter of 7 November
2011, the group’s management has proceeded to imprudent handlings, such as, for instance,

the irrational granting of loans without the use of prudent banking practice. It is noted that
this irrational granting of loans took place during periods of loss of deposits from the group,
especially in Greece. The above has deprived the bank of considerable liquidity, leading to
the bank’s non-compliance with the minimum required limits required in accordance with
the provisions of its directives as per the Calculation of Prudential Liquidity in Euro,
Directive 2008, R.A.A 250/2008, as subsequently amended, and as per the Calculation of
Prudential Liquidity in Foreign Currencies, Directive 2008, R.A.A. 360/2008, as
subsequently amended. As a result of the significant deterioration of the liquidity situation.

the _bank has so far received a total of €4.6 bil of Emergency Liquidity Assistance.
Nevertheless, in your letter of 23 November 2011, you insist on arguing that the bad

liquidity situation into which the bank has fallen, as well as the deterioration of the situation
that is being observed, is due exclusively to extrinsic factors. Indeed, the ongoing economic
crisis has contributed to the economic environment. You should have, however, avoided
actions, such as the irrational granting of loans without the use of prudent banking practice
which have rendered the group vulnerable to adverse developments, and promptly taken
those applicable measures which would have shielded the bank and enabled it to face the
existing extremely alarming situation which has arisen, something which you have not

lone, this putting at risk the security of the depositors’ interests and the group’s good
reputation.

 

Among the extrinsic factors that you mention in your letter of 23 November 2011 is the
downgrade of the group from the credit rating agency Moody’s by three grades on 8
November 201 1. In this regard, it is emphasized that the downgrade of the Marfin Popular
Bank Public Co Ltd group was by three grades, as opposed to the downgrade of other
Cypriot banking groups which also have presence in Greece and, as such, are facing similar
challenges and was only by one single grade. The above recent downgrade indicates that
the degree of deterioration of the Marfin Popular Bank Public Co Ltd group's state and the
level of concern which exists in the markets. is significantly higher compared to the above
other Cypriot banking groups. The relatively greater downgrade of your group also refers
to_the responsibilitics_of your group” as_well_as_to_the untimely
implementation of satisfactory corrective measures.

What is also particularly alarming is that the loss of deposits continues at high rates. In
particular, according to the information before me, from 7 November 2011 until 25
November 2011, the group lost deposits of a total of €598 m., an amount which is much
larger than your predictions, as well as compared to other Cypriot banking groups which

are also active in the Greek area.

231

945.

946.

The Tri
Boulou!

(i)

(ii)

Having in mind the above and all the relevant issucs that have arisen in our previous
correspondence, the reinstatement of the credibility and the good reputation of the bank is
the current management of the bank has still not achieved.

The role of the directors of banks’ boards of directors is of great importance as they have
the responsibility for the prudent functioning of the bank and the control of its business,
and for the implementation of which the said role and responsibility lies with the chief
executive officer.

In view of what is mentioned above and, particularly, in consideration of the on-going risk
of further deterioration of the liquidity situation, in order to secure the interests of the
depositors, the Central Bank, in accordance with article 30(1) of the Banking Law 1997 to
(No.2) 2011, requires your immediate removal from Marfin Popular Bank Public Co
Ltd." [emphasis added]

‘ibunal finds that this letter shows that the CBC was prompted to remove Mr.
tas by a multitude of reasons:
Management’s “irrational granting of loans without the use of prudent banking
practice ... during periods of loss of deposits from the group”;
The consequent non-compliance of the Bank with the regulatory minimum

liquidity levels in euros and foreign currency;

(iii) The Bank’s reliance on ELA, in the amount of EUR 4.6 billion;

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

Management’s refusal to acknowledge that the Bank’s precarious condition,
while significantly affected by the economic crisis, was also duc to managerial
failures, in particular its imprudent banking practices and its failure to promptly
take remedial measures;

The loss of market confidence in management, reflected in the Bank’s three-
notch downgrade by Moody’s, in contrast to the one-notch downgrade of other
Cypriot banks similarly affected by the crisis;

The alarming rate of deposit loss, which was higher than that of other Cypriot
banks;

(vii) The urgency of reinstating “the credibility and the good reputation of the bank”

(vii

The Tri
did not

and of “the depositors’ trust towards the group”; and
i) The need to protect depositors’ interests.

bunal cannot agree with Claimants’ contention that, since Laiki’s new management
take other remedial actions beyond those proposed by Mr. Bouloutas and Laiki’s

liquidity did not improve following his removal, the CBC’s reliance on the Bank’s ongoing
liquidity issues was arbitrary.

®° Letter from the CBC (A. Orphanides) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 29 November 201] (Exhibit C-0294),

232

947.

948.

949,

950.

951,

First, the Tribunal has already explained that the CBC’s decision was not based exclusively
on Laiki’s failure to comply with the regulatory liquidity ratios. A significant reason for
the regulator's decision was also the loss of trust in management both at the regulator’s
level, due to *s refusal to ack ledge some responsibility for the Bank’s
situation, and at the market level, which was reflected in the Bank’s three-notch downgrade

by Moody’s and the exponential loss of deposits in comparison to other Cypriot banks.

Second, Claimants’ arguments refer to events post-dating the CBC’s decision. The
Tribunal considers that it would be unfair to assess the banking regulator’s decision based
on developments that were posterior to it and, to some extent, were outside of its sphere of
control. The banking regulator had to use its best judgement and expertise in order to
identify the most suitable decision based on the facts that existed before it at that moment
in time.

Third, Claimants’ arguments are more aptly described as a challenge against the
effectiveness, the advisability or the correctness of the CBC’s decision. As mentioned
earlier, these are not issues properly before the Tribunal. In any event, while the Tribunal
takes no position with regard to whether the decision of the CBC was the best decision that
it could have taken under the circumstances, or whether it was correct, it does observe that
the CBC’s decision was based on a concrete set of objective facts and that those facts were
among those explicitly listed in Section 30(1) of the Banking Law as grounds for removing
management.

The Tribunal will not quote here in full the abundant correspondence between the CBC
and Laiki during the period October 2010-December 2011. That has been done under
Section IV above. However, the Tribunal will briefly reiterate what it considers to be the
main points arising from that correspondence.

Laiki’s failure to comply with the minimum liquidity ratio of 20% began in October 2010,
when the CBC alerted the Bank that the liquidity ratios of MEB were below 20%, while
those of MPB were “marginally within the limits” set by the CBC."*° The CBC requested
the Bank to take remedial measures. On 12 January 2011, the CBC wrote again, observing
that MPB’s liquidity had dropped to 16.55% on 7 January 2011 and reiterating its request
for remedial measures.™' The request was repeated on 11 April 2011, after the Bank’s
liquidity dropped to 9.55% despite the recent increase in its share capital by EUR 488
million in February 2011 and the sale of its Australian subsidiary.“? On 16 May 2011,
Laiki’s liquidity dropped further to 5.23%. The Governor of the CBC alerted the Bank that,

™ Letter from the CBC (K.S. Poullis) to MPB (E, Bouloutas), 11 October 2010 (Exhibit C-0206).

4! Letter from the CBC (C. Fanopoulos) to MPB (P. Kounnis), 12 January 2011 (Exhibit C-0219).

*® Letter from the CBC (KS. Poullis) to MPB (E. Boutoutas), 11 April 2011 (Exhibit C-0227); Letter from MPB (E.
Bouloutas) to the CBC (K.S. Poullis), 13 April 2011 (Exhibit C-0228).

233

952.

953.

954.

955.

956.

since 2009 and 2010, a significant decrease in deposits had been observed coupled with an
increase in loans, and counseled the Bank to adopt a “conservative policy in order to avoid
the creation of an exposure in the liquid assets ratio”.*

On 17 August 2011, the CBC requested that Laiki reconsider its strategy on liquidity in
order to account for possible negative implications due to developments in the domestic
and European markets. In particular, the CBC requested that Laiki submit before 30
September 2011 (i) a revised strategy for the management of liquidity risk and the
financing strategy in Euro and in foreign currency, including the plan to respond to liquidity
crisis situations; (ii) a financing plan for the following year; (iii) a description of the actions
the Bank intended to take in order to prolong the maturity profile of the deposits; (iv) a
description of the actions the Bank intended to take in order to ensure the stability of the
financing resources, particularly the deposits; and (v) a strategy for the increase of the
liquidity reserves.*“4

On 24 August 2011, the CBC released its on-site supervisory audit of Laiki’s branch in
Greece. The CBC expressed serious concems with regard to Laiki’s pricing and loan
policies, the concentration of its deposits and numerous situations of conflicts of interest.
The CBC ordered Laiki to take additional provisions for loans of approximately EUR 500
million and noted that the Bank’s liquidity ratios had dropped to 5.2% for its Greek
operations and to 7.19% for its Cypriot operations on 20 June 201 1.*4* Two days later, the
CBC notified Laiki that, on 24 August 2011, its liquid foreign currency assets had also
dropped below the regulatory minimum of 70%, to 48.05%.*#¢

On 27 September 2011, Laiki requested ELA in an amount of EUR 300 million. This
amount increased to EUR 1.5 billion on 5 October 2011, EUR 2.5 billion on 20 October
2011, EUR 3.3 billion on 15 November 2011 and EUR 3.5 billion on 6 December 2011.4”

On 20 October 2011, Laiki’s liquidity ratios in EUR dropped to 4.90% and in foreign
currency to 5.43%. This included the ELA obtained from the CBC, without which the ratios
would have been negative.*"*

Subsequent to the receipt of ELA, Laiki sent weekly liquidity updates to the CBC. The
Tribunal notes that these updates regularly underestimated the amount of ELA required by

“4 Letter from the CBC (A. Orphanides) to MPB (Ei. Bouloutas), 26 May 2011 (Exhibit C-0231),

“4 Letter from the CBC (A. Orphanides) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 17 August 2011 (Exhibit C-0254).

5 Letter fromt the CBC (K.S. Poullis) to MPB (E, Bouloutas), 24 August 2011 (Exhibit C-0255).

“ Letter from the CBC (K.S. Poullis) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 26 August 2011 (Exhibit R-0099),

7 Laiki, ELA Operations with the Central Bank of Cyprus (Exhibit R-0277), The Tribunal notes that ELA spiked to
EUR 4.6 billion on 17 November 2011 due to the downgrade of Laiki’s covered bond, but dropped again to EUR 3.3
billion when the bond obtained its rating from Moody's

# Letter from the CBC (A. Orphanides) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 31 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0275).

234

957.

958.

959.

the Bank. For instance, Laiki’s 28 September 2011 update estimated using an additional
EUR 700 million of ELA until 15 October 2011." That actual amount was closer to EUR
1.8 billion (on 17 October).®*° Laiki’s 4 October 2011 liquidity update estimated that ELA
would amount to EUR 757 million by the end of October and would drop to EUR 401
million by the end of the year in the base case scenario. In the stress case scenario, Laiki
estimated to require EUR 1.196 billion by the end of October 2011 and EUR 1.451 billion
by the end of December 2011.**! In actuality, Laiki used EUR 2.5 billion by 20 October
and EUR 3.5 billion by the end of December 201 1.*%

On each occasion the CBC requested that the Bank take remedial measures, the Bank
promised to comply. However, a number of the remedial measures promised by Laiki were
repeatedly postponed. For instance, Laiki’s plan to issue covered bonds for commercial
claims amounting to EUR | billion was initially announced for the end of September
2011,*then postponed for January 2012,**4 and then “early 2012”.855

The Tribunal also notes that Laiki sent its liquidity plan on 3 October 2011, three days later
than requested by the CBC. The measures suggested by Laiki included: (i) efforts to retain
and attract deposits; (ii) securitization and other transactions to generate medium-term
wholesale financing in an amount of approximately EUR 750 million; (iii) deleveraging,
in an amount of approximately EUR 246 million; (iv) plans to create additional collateral
eligible for Eurosystem financing through the issuance of Cypriot covered bonds, in an
amount of approximately EUR 1.25 billion; and (v) obtaining eligible collateral for the
purpose of emergency financing from the CBC and the ECB, for financing estimated at
EUR 5.67 billion and USD 2.15 billion."®° The Tribunal cannot fail to observe that the
majority of the liquidity that Laiki was planning to obtain was emergency assistance from
the CBC and the ECB.

Following | the submission of Laiki’s liquidity plan, the Bank and the CBC had a lengthy
cor ing the adequacy of ’s handling of the liquidity crisis.
The CBC complained on 14 October 2011 about Laiki’s liquidity plan, stating that “the
data you provide are incomplete, to a great extent, vague, and completely inadequate to
respond to the Central Bank's concerns” and requesting a new plan with “specific measures
.. within specific timelines in order for the Group to improve its liquidity position and its

 

“° Laiki Group Liquidity Position Update, 28 September 2011 (Exhibit R-0102).

85 Laiki, ELA Operations with the Central Bank of Cyprus (Exhibit R-0277).

851 Laiki Group Liquidity Position Update, 4 October 2011 (Exhibit R-0105)

882 Laiki, ELA Operations with the Central Bank of Cyprus (Exhibit R-0277).

*53 Letter from MPB (P. Kounnis) to the CBC (K.S. Poullis), 14 January 2011 (Exhibit C-0220).

¥S4 Laiki Group Liquidity Position Update, 4 October 2011 (Exhibit R-0105).

555 Laiki Group Liquidity Position Update, 1 December 2011 (Exhibit R-0128)

856 Letter from MPB (E. Bouloutas) to the CBC (A. Orphanides), 3 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0261).

235

960.

961.

962.

capital adequacy”.**” For his part, Mr. Bouloutas accused the CBC of being “unfair”,®**

maintained that the Bank’s liquidity plan was the result of a “thorough and comprehensive
analysis” and followed a “strict timeline”, but stressed that a strict compliance with the
plan could not be guaranteed due to the continued deterioration of the economic
environment in Europe and Grecce.**? The tone of the correspondence between the
regulator and the Bank worsened over the following weeks, with the CBC stating on a
number of occasions that Laiki’s management had failed to take corrective measures in
order to address the liquidity situation, had failed to address its loans portfolio and had
failed to submit a liquidity plan which would reduce its dependence on ELA," and
management countering that its worsening liquidity outlook was exclusively duc to the
economic crisis in Greece and Europe.

  

The Tribunal is mindful of the fact that the Parties’ experts disagree as to the appropriate
circumstances in which a banking regulator may dismiss a bank’s management. While that
debate is of interest to this analysis, the Tribunal docs not consider it dispositive. The
Tribunal considers that, even if the CBC had not complied with best standards in the
industry, that fact alone would not have established a Treaty breach. In any event, the
Tribunal has already indicated that it has reservations with regard to the standard put
forward by Prof. Morrison for the removal of managers.

The Tribunal does not find it necessary for the purposes of the present analysis to
conclusively establish whether Laiki’s liquidity crisis was exclusively due to the difficult
economic environment in Greece and Europe or whether, in conjunction with this, the
decisions taken by Laiki’s management had also played a part.

What is relevant to the Tribunal’s analysis is that the CBC relied on objective facts for its
conclusion that Laiki’s management bore at least some responsibility for the Bank’s
liquidity crisis, such as: Laiki’s loan policy; management’s failure to address the problem
of liquidity, despite repeated encouragements, since January 2011; and Laiki’s three-notch
downgrade by Moody’s, as opposed to the one-notch downgrade of its competitors. In
addition, the Tribunal notes that the due diligence of the Bank performed by external
consultants (Houlihan Lokey and PwC) in 2012 eventually confirmed the CBC’s
assessment with regard to the quality of Laiki’s loan portfolio. Houlihan Lokey’s duc
diligence assessment indicated a total balance sheet provisions range for the global loan
portfolio of between EUR 2,096 million and EUR 3,158 million. According to Houlihan

*5) Letter from the CBC (A. Orphanides) fo MPB (E, Bouloutas), 14 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0263).

*S8 Letter from MPB (E. Bouloutas) to the CBC (A. Orphanides), 18 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0266).

*S* Letter from MPB (E. Bouloutas) to the CBC (A. Orphanides), 27 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0766).

**® Letter from the CBC (A. Orphanides) to MPB (E, Bouloutas), 31 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0275); Letter from the
CBC (A. Orphanides) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 7 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0280); Letter from the CBC (A.
Orphanides) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 18 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0287).

236

963.

964.

965.

966.

967.

Lokey, the major provisions related to the Bank’s Greek portfolio, and they ranged from
EUR 1,520 million to EUR 2,199 million.*' During the 28 February 2012 Board of
Directors meeting, Laiki’s consultants explained that the Bank required increased
provisions due to the worsening economic outlook in Greece, the reduction in value of its
collaterals and due to specific problematic loans in Greece. The consultants explained that,
as a consequence of the latter, Laiki required increased provisions compared to the BoC.8

Further, it is not the task of the Tribunal to determine what remedial measures would have
been appropriate or advisable at that time in order to improve Laiki’s liquidity. It is certain
that management did make efforts to improve liquidity, but they proved to be ineffective.
Further, its plans to obtain more liquidity appeared to be at odds with the regulator’s
demand that reliance on central bank funding should be limited. While the CBC was not
particularly forthcoming with respect to what it expected management to do, the evidence
does establish that it must have been clear to management that the CBC expected Laiki to
gradually reduce its reliance on ELA, to make improvements with regard to its Greek loans
portfolio and to adopt a conservative policy going forward.*

To lude, the record establishes Laiki’s | ding nor i with y
liquidity ratios and the ineffectiveness of management’s efforts to address that situation.
The record also establishes that, against this background, Laiki became increasingly reliant
on ELA from the CBC. Moreover, rightly or wrongly, management never acknowledged
any responsibility for the Bank’s liquidity situation. The regulator and management
disagreed on the advisability of taking measures to address the Bank’s Greek loans
portfolio. All of these reasons were relied upon by the CBC when it removed Mr.
Bouloutas. These reasons were also among the reasons included in Section 30 of the
Banking Law as grounds for removing management.

On this basis, the Tribunal finds that the evidence in the record docs not clearly and
compellingly establish that the CBC erred when removing Mr. Bouloutas from his post.

(c) Absence of due process. The Tribunal further finds that the record does not establish
that the CBC failed to afford Claimants due process when removing Mr. Bouloutas.

In this respect, the Tribunal notes that, while the CBC had shown concern with regard to
Laiki’s liquidity since October 2010 without challenging management's decisions, starting

*‘! Houlihan Lokey, “Project Midas ~ Final Due Diligence Report", 24 February 2012 (Exhibit R-0147).

*? MPB, BoD Minutes, 28 February 2012 (Exhibit C-0339).

*® The Tribunal notes in this regard that subsequent due diligence of the Bank by Houlihan Lokey established that the
Bank needed to record increased provisions totaling EUR 1,52 billion for the full year 2011 for its Greek portfolio
(Houlihan Lokey, “Project Midas — Final Due Diligence Report”, 24 February 2012 (Exhibit R-0147)).

237

968.

from 14 October 2011, the CBC began expressing its frustrations with respect to
management’s handling of the liquidity crisis.

Indeed, on 14 October 2011, the CBC took issue with Laiki’s liquidity plan.“ On 31
October 2011, the CBC first notified Laiki that it was considering taking measures on the
basis of Section 30 of the Banking Law. Within this letter, Mr. Orphanides referred to the
correspondence between the Bank and the CBC from 2010 and 2011, and expressed his
frustration that “the bank's management did not take, in time, the necessary corrective
measures so as to remedy the situation.”** As part of this notification, the CBC attached a
report of the Bank Supervision and Regulation Department entitled “Prudential liquidity
of Marfin Popular Bank Public Co Ltd”. The report referred to Laiki’s failure to comply
with the minimum liquidity ratios in euros since 7 January 2011 and in foreign currency
since 18 August 2011. In relevant part, that report read:

“The management of Marfin Popular Bank group followed an irrational management of
liquidity (for example, granting of a large number of investment loans with a large
repayment amount on maturity ~ the letter of the Central Bank dated 24 August 2011 is
relevant, regarding the local regulatory inspection of the bank’s branch in Greece) and did
not proceed to the appropriate actions which would lead to the improvement of the situation
and to compliance with the provisions of the relevant Directives. [...]

As a result of the serious liquidity problem faced by Marfin Popular Bank group, it is
possible that it is unable to ensure that its current needs shall be immediately and timely
met. [...} Judging from the continuous aggravation of the situation of the liquidity of
Marfin Popular Bank group which, beyond the international economic crisis, is the result
of the wrong choices and the imprudent policy followed by the group’s management, it
becomes apparent that the latter is unable to take the necessary measures required for the
improvement of the situation and for safeguarding the smooth exercise of the services and
the good reputation of the group. Whereas the bank could have submitted, as it was
requested to do, a detailed plan with the specific measures which it would take at specific
time frames so that the group would cease to depend on the Emergency Liquidity
Assistance and improve its position as regards the liquidity, nevertheless it failed to do so.
On the contrary, by its letter dated 27 October 2011, the bank's management does not seem
to understand the seriousness of the matter so as to proceed to the immediate planning for
resolving the problems which it has created,” * (emphasis added}

 

The Tribunal considers that this report clearly sets out the very serious concerms of the
regulator about management’s handling of the liquidity crisis engulfing the Bank. What is
striking from this letter is the almost complete loss of confidence in management and in its
ability to grasp the seriousness of the matter and properly address it. The CBC did not refer
solely to management's liquidity plan, which it had deemed inadequate, but also to
longstanding issues that had emerged throughout that year: the results of the audit of the
Greek branch which revealed serious inadequacies in the Bank’s loan policies, as well as

“ Letter from the CBC (A, Orphanides) to MPB (E, Bouloutas), 14 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0263).
“ Letter from the CBC (A. Orphanides) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 31 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0275).

"5 Id.

238

970.

971,

972.

973.

867 Wg,

management’s continuous failure to take corrective measures in order to improve liquidity.
The CBC was particularly alarmed at what it deemed to be management's failure to
understand “the seriousness of the matter so as to proceed to the immediate planning for
resolving the problems which it ha[d] created”.*®”

Subsequent to this letter, Mr. Orphanides met with Mr. Vgenopoulos and Mr. Bouloutas
on 4 November 2011, and Mr. Vgenopoulos tendered his resignation.

Following his departure, the CBC continued to express its concems with regard to
management’s performance. In the CBC’s letter to the Bank dated 7 November 2011, Mr.
Orphanides again expressed the view that, up to that moment, Laiki had not put forward a
satisfactory plan for addressing liquidity and that, apart from the damaging effects of the
ongoing economic crisis on the Bank, “liquidity [had been] negatively affected to a great
extent by non prudent actions of the Management of the Bank”.*®* The CBC disagreed with
Laiki with respect to the effects on liquidity of the Bank’s policies. In this respect, Mr.
Orphanides referred to: (i) the release of blocked deposits so that depositors could
participate in the share capital increase of the Bank; and (ii) the granting of investment
loans with balloon payments and of financing for investment purposes in the form of
current accounts without a specific repayment schedule. The CBC imposed nine conditions

 

on the Bank’s of ions and ded its exy ion that “the i policy of the
Marfin Popular Bank Group [be] prudent and ... consistent with the liquidity condition of
the Group” and that would take “additional for the i di

 

improvement of the situation” aiming to restore compliance with the regulatory liquidity
ratios.

Subsequent to this letter from the regulator, Laiki submitted two liquidity updates, dated
14 November 201! and 17 November 2011, notifying the CBC that it expected to require
EUR 1.35 billion of additional ELA following the downgrade by three notches of the
Cypriot covered bond to below investment grade by Moody’s. Laiki indicated that it
expected the bond’s eligibility for ECB financing to be restored within a month, as it was
in the process of obtaining an investment grade from Fitch.*””

On 18 November 2011, the CBC reverted to Laiki notifying it that it was considering taking
further measures on the basis of Section 30 of the Banking Law:

“[A]s it is mentioned in the above letter dated 7 November 201 1, the Central Bank expected
that the management of Marfin Popular Bank Public Co Ltd Group would take additional

68 { etter from the CBC (A. Orphanides) to MPB (E, Bouloutas), 7 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0280),
"99 I.

0 Laiki Group Liquidity Position Update, 14 November 2011 (Exhibit R-0120); Laiki Group Liquidity Position
Update, 17 November 2011 (Exhibit R-0443),

239

974.

975.

measures for the immediate improvement of the situation aiming to achieve compliance
with the Legislation and the Directives of the Central Bank.

Instead, it is noted that the management of the bank has not taken the necessary measures
for the immediate improvement of the liquidity position of the Marfin Popular Bank Public
Co Ltd. In particular, based on the information available to me, the liquidity position of the

ank not only it has not i ve c it has signi ened. As a
result, and in order to address its immediate liquidity needs, the Group requested and
received during the period 9 November — 17 November 2011, i.c, after the above mentioned
letter of the Central Bank dated 7 November 2011, additional financing from the Central
Bank in the form of emergency liquidity assistance totaling €2.1 Billion. Consequently the
total amount of the financing which the Marfin Popular Bank Public Co Ltd Group received
from the Central Bank of Cypnus in the form of emergency liquidity assistance has reached
€4.6 Billion. In addition, based on the data which Marfin Popular Bank Public Co Ltd sends
to the Central Bank, it is expected that in the immediate future, ic. until the 21" of
December 2011, the Group will need additional financing in the form of emergency
liquidity assistance of about €650 million, exceeding €5.2 billion. Consequently, the taking
of immediate measures, which the present_management has not as yet taken, for the
improvement of the situation and bringing back the credibility and good name of the Group
is urgent.

 

Before taking any further decision in accordance with article 30(1) of the Banking Laws of
1997 to (No. 2) 2011, I would like to ask you to submit in writing any comments, views
and explanations on the above until Wednesday 23 November 2011."*”' [emphasis added]

Claimants argue that the CBC’s letter of 18 November 2011 could not have served as a
notice to the Bank for the removal of Mr. Bouloutas because the CBC did not explicitly
indicate that it was considering taking this measure and did not provide a report with its
notification. The Tribunal disagrees.

The Tribunal notes that Section 30(2) of the Banking Law required that the regulator,
before taking any measure provided in Section 30(1), should “furnish a report to the bank
inviting its comments thereon within a specified period which should not be less than three
days from the date of the delivery of the report”.*”? The Tribunal observes that the CBC
provided a report on Laiki’s liquidity on 31 October 2011, when it first notified the Bank
of its intent to take measures pursuant to Section 30 of the Banking Law. When the CBC
imposed operating conditions on Laiki, on 7 November 2011, it expressly reserved its right
to amend those conditions or to take additional measures. It is not clear to the Tribunal
whether Cypriot law required the CBC to furnish additional reports whenever it amended
the operating conditions or took additional measures pursuant to Section 30 of the Banking
Law on the basis of the same problems encountered by the Bank, or whether it was
sufficient to provide one report when the CBC took a series of measures on the basis of the
same concerns and factual matrix. However, the Tribunal does not find this issue to be

* Letter from the CBC (A. Orphanides) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 18 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0287).
*2 Republic of Cyprus, Banking Laws of 1997-2013 (Exhibit CL-0138).

240

976.

977.

978.

979.

980.

crucial to its determination, as the Tribunal is not called upon to apply the Cypriot Banking
Law. The Tribunal has to apply the Treaty and international law. Under the Treaty and
international law, Respondent was required to provide reasonable notice and reasons for
its decision. The Tribunal iders that Respond plied with this

 

q

The Tribunal finds that the CBC gave Laiki sufficient notice. Indeed, judging from its
previous correspondence with the CBC, management was amply aware that the regulator
was deeply dissatisfied with its performance in handling the liquidity crisis and particularly
with its reluctance to accept some responsibility for the Bank’s financial situation. The
letter of 18 November 2011, while not reiterating these concerns, did record the regulator’s
dissatisfaction with management’s failure to take any additional measures that would have
improved liquidity, coupled with the deterioration of the Bank’s liquidity situation and
increased reliance on central bank financing. The letter expressly referenced Section 30 of
the Banking Law, which empowered the CBC to take a number of measures, including the
removal of management. While the CBC could have been clearer and expressly indicate
that it was contemplating removing the CEO, the Tribunal cannot agree with Claimants
that this imprecision led to a situation where the Bank was completely surprised by the
CBC’s decision. The Tribunal considers that management certainly understood the CBC’s
concerns: Mr. Bouloutas’ letters of 22 November 2011°” and 23 November 20115” took
exception to the CBC’s position with respect to the causes of Laiki’s liquidity problems
and sought to establish that management was diligently monitoring and addressing the
liquidity crisis. In addition, Laiki was given three business days to respond to the CBC’s
letter, from Friday, 18 November 2011, until Wednesday, 23 November 2011, and
exercised its right to provide comments

The Tribunal has also found that the CBC gave reasons for its decision to remove Mr.
Boutoutas.

For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that the record does not establish that the CBC failed
to afford Claimants due process when it removed Mr. Bouloutas.

The Tribunal therefore concludes that Claimants have not satisfied their burden of
demonstrating that the challenged measure was not taken in good faith.

Further, the Tribunal considers that the removal of Mr, Bouloutas was not discriminatory.
At the time Mr. Bouloutas was removed there was no other bank in Cyprus that was
receiving ELA from the CBC.*’5 The BoC began requesting ELA from the CBC in
November 2012, one ycar after Mr. Bouloutas’ departure. The Tribunal therefore finds

*? Letter from MPB (E. Bouloutas) to the CBC (A. Orphanides), 22 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0290).
® Letter from MPB (E. Bouloutas) to the CBC (A, Orphanides), 23 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0291).
"5 BoC, ELA Operations within CBC, undated (Exhibit R-0529).

241

(wv)

981.

982.

983.

984.

that, if any discrimination were to have occurred, it could only have been established by a
preferential treatment accorded to the BoC subsequent to the removal of Messrs.
Vgenopoulos and Bouloutas. In any event, as the Tribunal has established in Sections
X.C.7 and XILC below, Respondent did not treat the BoC more favorably than Claimants’
investment.

A proportionate measure

Finally, the Tribunal finds that the CBC's decision to remove Mr. Bouloutas was
proportionate.

The Tribunal agrees with the Tecmed v. Mexico tribunal that:

“{T]he Arbitral Tribunal will consider, in order to determine if they are to be characterized
as expropriatory, whether such actions or measures are proportional to the public interest
presumably protected thereby and to the protection legally granted to investments, taking

proportionality. Although the analysis starts at the due deference owing to the State when
defining the issues that affect its public policy or the interests of society as a whole, as well
as the actions that will be implemented to protect such values, such situation docs not
prevent the Arbitral Tribunal, without thereby questioning such due deference, from
examining the actions of the State in light of Article 5(1) of the Agreement to determine
whether_such measures are reasonable with respect to their goals. the deprivation _of
economic rights and the legitimate expectations of who suffered such deprivation. There
must be a reasonable relationship of proportionality between the charge or weight imposed
to the forcign investor and the aim sought to be realized by any expropriatory measure. To
value such charge or weight, it is very important to measure the size of the ownership
deprivation caused by the actions of the state and whether such deprivation was
compensated or not.”*”* [internal citations omitted, emphasis added]

   

In other words, in order to determine whether the removal of management was a legitimate
exercise of the State’s regulatory powers, the Tribunal must weigh the competing interests
at stake: on the one hand, the State’s legitimate interest to protect the public welfare and,
on the other hand, the investor’s legitimate interest to continue managing its investment.

In the case before the Tribunal, the competing interests at stake were Cyprus’ interest in
protecting the safety and soundness of its banking sector, the interests of depositors and of
taxpayers al large against the risk that one of the two systemic banks in the country would
be unable to meet its financial commitments and would become bankrupt, and Claimants’
interest to continue managing Laiki. The Tribunal finds that the removal of management
satisfies the condition of proportionality and that Claimants were not made to bear an
excessive burden. Claimants were not deprived of the ownership of their shares in the

6 Tecmed v. Mexico, at 122.

242

985.

986.

987.

988.

Bank, of their right to have representatives as members of the Board of Directors (Messrs.
Foros, Theocharakis and Kounnis continued to serve on the Board until Laiki’s
recapitalization) or of their attendant right to vote in the General Shareholders’ meeting or
to collect dividend, if such were to be distributed. The limitation imposed on their
ownership rights was thus proportionate to the aim sought to be achieved, i.c., the
protection of depositors against the disorderly bankruptcy of Laiki and of the taxpayers
against the risk of insolvency of the State were the State to be called upon to support
guaranteed deposits.

For the reasons set out in the paragraphs above, the Tribunal concludes that the removal of
Messrs. Vg los and Boul by the CBC 1a legiti exercise of

Respondent’s regulatory powers and was not expropriatory.

The Tribunal has already established in Section VII.C above that the acts of the new Laiki
management, between December 2011 and June 2012, are not attributable to Cyprus.
Moreover and in any event, Claimants have not established with evidence that it was the
acts of the new Laiki management, as opposed to the acts of prior management or the
financial crisis, that led to the need for the Bank to be recapitalized. To the contrary, the
record demonstrates that it was the Claimants-appointed management, under Mr.
Bouloutas, who first broached the subject of recapitalization with the Ministry of Finance,
on 22 November 2011. The amount envisaged at the time was between EUR 1.5 and EUR
2 billion.*”’ In other words, the Bank required recapitalization in an amount roughly equal
to that requested in May 2012 even before Messrs. Vgenopoulos and Bouloutas were
removed, As a result, the Tribunal finds that the record does not support Claimants’
contention that, between December 2011 and June 2012, the management of Laiki laid the
ground for its expropriation.

Laiki’s recapitalization

After having examined the record and the Parties’ submissions, the Tribunal finds that
Laiki's recapitalization was a legitimate exercise of Cyprus’ regulatory powers and was
not expropriatory.

In the paragraphs below, the Tribunal will explain in detail the reasons for its conclusion.
The Tribunal will address the following questions: (i) whether Respondent shunned
Claimants’ 22 November 2011 recapitalization plan; (ii) whether Respondent intentionally
delayed clarifying the terms of its support for Laiki’s recapitalization in order to discourage

®7? Letter from MPB (E. Bouloutas) to the Ministry of Finance (K. Kazamias), 22 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0289).

243

private investors; and (iii) whether the recapitalization framework chosen by Respondent
was intended to deter private investment in Laiki.

Whether Respondent shunned Claimants’ 22 November 2011 recapitalization plan

989. The Tribunal finds that Respondent did not shun Claimants’ 22 November 2011
recapitalization plan, but instead advised Claimants of the various steps that would need to
be taken prior to the State supporting the Bank’s recapitalization.

990. The Tribunal! notes that, contrary to Claimants’ contention, Mr. Kazamias did not issue a
one-line rejection letter, but explained to Mr. Bouloutas that there was no guarantee in the
Management of Financial Crises Law, then in draft form, that the State would be able to
guarantee the share capital increase of the Bank in its entirety. The Minister of Finance
explained that the Government would first have to decide whether intervention in a
troubled bank was necessary and then make a decision on the precise manner in which it
would intervene. This decision would be based on the recommendation of the CBC and on
an analysis of two criteria: ensuring financial stability and minimizing the cost to the
Cypriot taxpayer.*”* In other words, the Ministry of Finance did not reject Laiki’s
recapitalization plan, but simply set out the operational framework for offering State
support.

991. The Tribunal does not consider that there was anything arbitrary or discriminatory in the
Ministry’s representation that, before the examination of Laiki’s request for support, the
Government would require a due diligence of the Bank by category and subcategory of
assets, country of activity and an assessment of possible losses. The Tribunal considers that
such due diligence would have been required in order for the State to understand the
financial condition of the Bank and assess the extent of the support that was needed.
Claimants argue that this type of assessment was no longer requested by Cyprus following
the removal of Messrs, Vgenopoulos and Bouloutas. The Tribunal disagrees. Following
the appointment of the new Chairman of the Board and CEO, Laiki engaged a number of
external consultants that carricd out a due diligence of the Bank (Houlihan Lokey and
PwC). Moreover, the Tribunal notes that when Cyprus was considering supporting both
Laiki and the BoC with funds from the Troika, both banks had to go through an in-depth
analysis by PIMCO before a decision on funding could be made.

 

992. Finally, the Tribunal notes that the Minister of Finance expressed its willingness to
continue discussing with Laiki. It was then up to the Bank to commence the legal process
for obtaining State support under the Management of Financial Crises Law.

** Letter from the Ministry of Finance of Cyprus (K. Kazamias) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 5 December 2011 (Exhibit
C-0300).

244

Whether Respondent intentionally delayed clarifying the terms of State support for Laiki

993.

994,

995.

996.

The Tribunal holds that the record does not support a finding that Cyprus delayed clarifying
the terms of its support for Laiki, which delay then acted as a deterrent to private investors.
The Tribunal finds instead that any delays in the Bank’s recapitalization with State funds
were due to the Bank’s efforts to attract private capital, Further, while Respondent’s delay
in clarifying the terms of its support may have played a part in the investors’ reluctance to
invest in the Bank, the record establishes that the main concern of private investors, which
proved fatal to Laiki, was the Bank’s exposure to Greece.

In this respect, beginning with January 2012, Laiki and the CBC started discussing the
Bank’s Capital Plan, which would have allowed it to mect the 9% CT1 ratio recommended
by EBA by the 30 June 2012 deadline. Laiki submitted its draft Capital Plan to the CBC
on 20 January 2012.*” Several meetings between Laiki and the CBC ensued in February
2012.%° On 28 February 2012, Laiki’s Board of Directors discussed the preliminary
financial statements for 2011. At that time, management estimated that the Bank would
suffer losses of EUR 1.969 billion due to the GGB haircut and that it would require
approximately EUR 1.5 billion in additional capital in order to comply with the CT1 ratio
of 9% recommended by the EBA.**' During this time, the Minister of Finance and the
Governor of the CBC were also discussing the possibility that the State would support the
two systemic banks, Laiki and the BoC. On 2 March 2012, the Minister of Finance
confirmed to the Governor of the CBC that the Cypriot Government would support both
Laiki and the BoC under the 2011 Management of Financial Crises Law if their
recapitalization through private sources was not entirely successful.**?

On 5 March 2012, Laiki sent a Discussion Paper to the Ministry of Finance and the CBC.
The Discussion Paper examined two scenarios for State intervention: (i) where no
significant interest by existing or new shareholders was shown and the intervention of the
Cypriot Government would be necessary for the full amount of the required capital; and
(ii) where a strategic investor showed serious interest, but was reluctant to invest due to the
Bank’s exposure to the Greek economy.**3

No answer to Laiki’s Discussion Paper appears to have been sent. However, the Ministry
of Finance and the CBC did discuss the options for the recapitalization of the Bank shortly
thereafter. Indeed, on 14 March 2012, the Minister of Finance requested the Governor of

5° MPB, Board Minutes, 17 January 2012 (Exhibit C-0321); MPB, BoD Minutes, 8 February 2012 (Exhibit C-0332);
Confidential memorandum from Central Bank of Cyprus to ECB, Note on ELA and Eurosystem borrowing for Marfin
Popular Bank Co Ltd, 23 January 2012 (Exhibit C-0782).

‘© MPB, BoD Minutes, 8 February 2012 (Exhibit C-0332).

‘S| MPB, BoD Minutes, 28 February 2012 (Exhibit C-0339).

*® Letter from Ministry of Finance (K. Kazamias) to the CBC (A. Orphanides), 2 March 2012 (Exhibit R-0150).
58 Email from C. Stylianides to A. Trokkos and the Governor of the CBC, 5 March 2012 (Exhibit C-0788).

245

997.

998.

999.

the CBC to establish a meeting in order to evaluate the implementation of Laiki’s and the
BoC’s capital reinforcement plans and the underwriting of the share issue. In his letter, the
Minister of Finance mentioned that “the first choice of the Government [was] the effective
confrontation of the matter of capitalisation of the banks through private sector
solutions.”**4 This mecting took place on 16 March 2012.8*5

A further meeting was held on 20 March 2012 at the Ministry of Finance between
representatives of the Ministry, the Bank and the Bank’s auditors, PwC. During this
meeting, Laiki represented that, due to the poor results in the previous financial year, PwC
intended to include a reservation in the financial statements, mentioning that there was.
significant uncertainty as to whether the Bank could continue operating as a going concern.
Laiki therefore requested that the Cypriot Government issue a written statement
committing itself to supporting the Bank. During this meeting, Laiki was formally told to
submit a written request for State intervention to the Minister of Finance and the CBC
“indicating clearly the size of the requested support” and the measures the Bank undertook
to implement. *8

However, the Tribunal notes that the first time Laiki submitted a firm request for support
which indicated the amount needed was on 2 May 2012.

Before that, a number of letters were circulated, but Laiki did not firmly request State
support. For instance, on 21 March 2012, Laiki wrote to the Minister of Finance seeking
State support, but did not indicate the amount that it required and moreover added that its
priority remained to attract private investors. In this letter, Laiki described the efforts it was
making in order to obtain private funds but noted that interest was low duc to the
deteriorating situation in Greece.**” Likewise, Laiki’s letter of 11 April 2012 to the
Ministry of Finance was not a firm request for State support. Instead, it was an exploratory
letter (‘we return to examine afresh the possibility of an underwriting by the Republic of
Cyprus”) that did not specify in any way the extent of State support needed (“either entirely
or for the total unallocated amount”).*** Laiki mentioned that it was working on
determining the terms of the capital issue and added that its “efforts for the attraction of
private capital [were] in full progress” but that the probabilities for success were extremely
limited.**? Further, in an internal Laiki email of 22 April 2012, which reported on
discussions held with potential investors in London, management expressed the view that

"4 Letter from the Minister of Finance (K. Kazamias) to the CBC (A. Orphanides), 14 March 2012 (Exhibit R-0154)
"Agenda of meeting between the Minister of Finance and the CBC Governor, 16 March 2012 (Exhibit R-0462).

"0 Internal Ministry of Finance Note, 3 April 2012 (Exhibit R-0474).

"7 Letter from Laiki (C. Stylianides) to the Ministry of Finance (K, Kazamias) and the CBC (A. Orphanides), 21
March 2012 (Exhibit R-0464).

™" Letter from Laiki (C, Stylianides) to Ministry of Finance (V. Shiarly) entitled “Recapitalisation of Laiki Bank”, 1
April 2012 (Exhibit R-0159).

ld

246

1000.

1001.

1002.

1003.

the Bank needed to “start seriously talking to the government technocrats ... in order to

quickly finalize this solution to be market friendly”.*°

Following these letters, several meetings took place between Laiki and the Ministry of
Finance.*”! On 24 April 2012,5” the Ministry of Finance formally requested the Cypriot
Cabinet to approve a letter committing the State to offer support to the Bank in the event
its efforts to obtain private capital were not successful. The Ministry of Finance issued the
letter on 27 April 2012, specifying that the “Cyprus Government [was] committed to
provide the necessary support to the Bank in order to address any liquidity and capital
adequacy problems in order to continue as a going concem”.*

The Tribunal considers that, while there may have been delays on the part of the Cypriot
Government to respond to Laiki’s letters, once the Bank firmly requested State support,
Respondent reacted promptly to offer it.

The Tribunal notes that it was on 2 May 2012 that Laiki first requested State support,
specified the amount that it estimated needing (EUR 1.8 billion) and attached a concrete
proposal.**4 Claimants contend that, following the receipt of this letter, the Minister of
Finance “simply directed Laiki to contact the CBC”.®* In effect, the Minister of Finance
replied the following day, indicating that the Management of Financial Crises Law required
that Laiki’s request be accompanied by a recommendation from the CBC and suggesting
that Laiki set up a meeting with the Minister in order to discuss the Bank’s letter.***

It was only on 7 May 2012 that Laiki’s Board of Directors authorized management to
continue discussing with the Government in order to obtain an underwriting of the rights
issue for up to EUR 1.8 billion.*°” That same day, Laiki met with the Governor of the CBC
in order to discuss the underwriting and, on 8 May 2012, Laiki formally submitted a request
for State support to the CBC.** On 11 May 2012, a further meeting took place between
representatives of Laiki, the Ministry of Finance and the CBC.®” Between 11 May 2012
and 15 May 2012, several meetings took place between representatives of Laiki and the
Ministry of Finance, during which Laiki submitted its comments on a draft of the

© Email from 23 April 2012 (Exhibit C-0666).

©! Letter from Laiki (C. Stylianides) to the CBC (P. Demetriades), 8 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0476)

“2 Proposal to the Cabinet, 24 April 2012 (Exhibit R-0475).

*) Letter from the Ministry of Finance (V. Shiarly) to Laiki (BoD), 27 April 2012 (Exhibit R-0161),

® T elter from Laiki (C. Stylianides) to the CBC (P. Demetriades), 8 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0476).

85 C.PHS, at 72.

“6 Letter from Laiki (C. Stylianides) to the CBC (P. Demetriades), 8 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0476).

“7 MPB, BoD Minutes, 7 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0163).

®8 Letter from Laiki (C, Stylianides) to the CBC (P. Demetriades), 8 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0476),

®9 Letter from MPB (M. Athanasiou) {o the Ministry of Finance (A. Trokkos), 12 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0478)

247

Underwriting Decree.” On 15 May 2012, the CBC issued its recommendation that the
Cypriot Government accept the Bank’s proposal for the underwriting of its share capital
issue of EUR 1.8 billion.”

1004. Subsequent to the CBC's recommendation, on 16 May 2012, the CBC and the Ministry of
Finance sought the approval of the European Commission’s Directorate General for
Competition for the underwriting.” On 17 May 2012, the Cypriot Parliament took into
discussion and then approved the Underwriting Decree. The Underwriting Decree was
published on 18 May 2012 in the Official Gazette.”

1005. The Tribunal considers that, despite some initial delays which could reasonably be
explained in light of Laiki's efforts to attract private capital, Respondent reacted promptly
when Laiki formally requested State support. Further, the Tribunal also finds that there is
no support in the record for Claimants’ contention that Respondent’s delays were caused
by its intent to sabotage Laiki’s recapitalization and bring the Bank firmly under State
control. To the contrary, the Minister of Finance expressly stated in a letter dated 14 March
2012 to the Governor of the CBC that the Government's first choice was that banks should
be recapitalized with private capital.% An internal Ministry of Finance note dated 20
March 2012 and discussing Laiki’s request for a letter confirming State support explicitly
mentioned that, while the State was open to support the banks, it would do so only as a last
resort.’ This was reiterated in the Ministry of Finance’s proposal to the Council of
Ministers dated 24 April 2012.°%

1006. Further, while the delay in the clarification of the terms of State support may have been
one reason for investors’ reluctance to invest in Laiki, nevertheless, the predominant reason
at this time for their lack of interest was the Bank’s exposure to Greece.

1007. The Tribunal notes that this reluctance was apparent to Laiki’s management {rom the very
beginning. In this respect, in its Discussion Paper, Laiki represented that, if a strategic
investor was found, “existing sharcholders [would] most likely be encouraged to contribute

  

%® Letter from the CBC (P. Demetriades) to the Ministry of Finance (V. Shiarly), 15 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0167).

* Letter from CBC (P. Demetriades) to EC's Directorate General for Competition (A. Italianer), 16 May 2012
(Exhibit R-0168); Emails between DG Competition @EEEBnd Ministry of Finance (EE 6 May 2012
(Exhibit R-0481).

°9} Minutes of the Meeting of the Parliamentary Commitice on Financial and Budgetary A flairs, 17 May 2012 (Exhibit
C-0363); Republic of Cyprus, Decree 182/2012 (Management of Financial Crises Laws of 2011 to (No 2) 2012) 18
May 2012(Exhibit CL-0146).

4 Letter from the Minister of Finance (K. Kazamias) to the CBC (A. Orphanides), 14 March 2012 (Exhibit R-0154).
°° Internal Ministry of Finance Note, 3 April 2012 (Exhibit R-0474),

   

       
 
    
 
 

% Proposal to the Cabinet, 24 April 2012 (Exhibit R-0475).
248

1008.

1009.

1010.

1011.

to an equity raising” and the Government would only step in for part of the required capital.
However, if no strategic investors were found by the end of June 2012, management took
the view that “it [was] rather unlikely that existing shareholders [would] be willing to
contribute to an equity raising” and the Government would probably be asked to put up the
entire amount. Significantly, the Discussion Paper recorded that the strategic investors that
had expressed an interest in the Bank were worried about “the perceived legacy Risks [sic]
associated with Greece”. In consideration of that, the two scenarios examined in the
Discussion Paper involved either no significant interest from a strategic or existing
investor, or interest from a strategic investor, but coupled with the reluctance to invest due
to the Bank’s exposure to Greece.”

PwC’s letter to the Bank concerning its financial statements for 2011 also recorded that
there was “significant uncertainty as to the ability of the Bank to raise the required capital
from existing shareholders” and “no confirmed participation from new investors”.°°*

Further, in its 21 March 2012 letter to the Minister of Finance and the Governor of the
CBC, Laiki mentioned that two to three strategic investors had shown interest in the Bank
but had not committed to participate in the capital increase. Laiki noted that “[i]nvestor
interest impinge[d] on the risks resulting from a future deterioration of the situation in
Greece”. A bleak outlook for finding private investors was also recorded in Laiki’s letter
to the Minister of Finance dated 1! April 2012, where Mr. Stylianides expressed the view
that the likelihood of the Bank attracting private capital was considered limited due to the
direction of the macroeconomic environment in Greece and the Bank’s exposure to
Greece,"

In his report to Messrs. Sarris and Stylianides following a meeting with potential investors

in London, Mr specified that:

“3. They ALL stated that the problem is Greece and the uncertainty that it creates for them.
They were very blunt in saying that They [sic] would not touch anything with such a
significant exposure in Greece, UNLESS, something is done with our operations there. The
issue of ring fencing was raised and discussed as a possible solution along with other
measures.”°!!

While Mr. Athanasiou expressed his view that money could be raised from those investors
under certain conditions, those conditions included the “proper and bullet proof ring
fencing of Greece”, in addition to a “non-dilutive, guarantee, first loss” Government

°°” Email from C. Stylianides to A. Trokkos and the Governor of the CBC, 5 March 2012 (Exhibit C-0788).

°°8 Letter from PwC (EMD to MPB (M. Sarris), 20 March 2012 (Exhibit C-0348).

°° Letter from Laiki (C. Stylianides) to the Ministry of Finance (K. Kazamias) and the CBC (A. Orphanides), 21
March 2012 (Exhibit R-0464).

% Letter from Laiki (C. Stylianides) to the Ministry of Finance (V. Shiarly), 11 April 2012 (Exhibit R-0159).
°M Email io 23 April 2012 (Exhibit C-0666).

249

1012.

1013.

1014.

1015.

9 ig,

participation in the share capital increase.’ Claimants have acknowledged in their
submissions before this Tribunal that obtaining any State support on this type of terms was

extremely unlikely.?!”

The Tribunal agrees with Claimants that Laiki’s letter of 2 May 2012 expressly mentioned
that the delay in clarifying the terms of the State’s participation in the share capital increase
“prevent[ed] any investors’ interest”, so that “investor interest in participating in the capital
increase of the Bank would be non-existent if intentions and the terms and conditions of a
possible participation of the State [were] not fully known.”?'4 However, Laiki’s 8 May
2012 letter to the Minister of Finance again referred to the situation in Greece as the main
reason behind investors’ lack of interest in the Bank. According to management, “the
interest of investors to participate in the planned capital issue {would] | be signifi icantly
limited up to non-existent, especially after the lation of in
Greece.” Mr. Stylianides also reported that the Board of Directors ‘of Laiki was convinced
that “it [was] not possible to raisc capital from existing and new shareholders” and that the
underwriting of the rights issue by the State would increase the participation of private
capital. Mr. Stylianides mentioned that the Bank had received “indications from investors,
whose main concer are [sic] the potential negative developments in Greece” that the put
option included in the Bank’s proposal for underwriting would increase their chances of
participating in the issue.?!®

The Tribunal also observes that, at this time, the Bank was making efforts to ring fence its
Greek operations, through the absorption of MEB into the Investment Bank of Greece, a
subsidiary of the Group. However, those efforts did not come to fruition duc to the outcome
of the Greek elections in May 2012.

For these reasons, the Tribunal is not persuaded that private investors were mainly deterred
from investing in the Bank due to the delay in the clarification of the terms of State support.
Instead, the Tribunal is of the view that a much more significant consideration for private
investors was the uncertainty surrounding Greece and the Bank’s significant exposure
thereto. The Tribunal also recalls that, at the time the Bank was seeking to attract private
capital in order to meet the EBA recommendation of a 9% CTI capital ratio, so did all

9°" C-PHS, at 85(c).
M4 Letter from Laiki (C. Stytianides) to the CBC (P. Demetriades), 8 May 202 (Exhibit R-0476).

15 Ig.

250

1016.

1017.

1018.

1019.

1020.

other banks in the European Union, There was therefore fierce competition on the market
for attracting private capital.

Further, the Tribunal is not persuaded that Claimants had expressed a serious interest in
purchasing Laiki’s Greek operations or in participating in the share capital increase in
proportion to their ownership stake.

In this respect, the Tribunal notes that Claimants have relied on the witness testimony of
Mr. Vgenopoulos®" as well as on the Board minutes of MIG dated 13 September 20127!8
as support for their contention that MIG was seriously pursuing the purchase of the Bank’s
Greek operations when it was shunned by Laiki’s management.

The Tribunal has already set out at Section VII.C above that the acts and omissions of
Laiki’s new management between December 2011 and June 2012 are not attributable to
Respondent. Therefore, the Bank was at liberty to pursue the options that it deemed best
for the raising of private funds and, as a corollary, not to pursue options that it did not find
satisfactory. This has no implications with regard to Respondent's international
responsibility.

Further and in any event, the Tribunal considers that the evidentiary record does not support
Claimants’ contentions. According to the evidence relied upon by Claimants, on 22
February 2012, Mr. Vgenopoulos and Mr. Bouloutas had a meeting in Athens with Laiki
management, during which they offered to purchase Laiki’s Greck operations. At that point
in time, Laiki showed an interest in the offer, but was not certain whether it wished to sell
only the Greek loan portfolio or the entirety of its Greek operations. According to Mr.
Vegenopoulos, despite his repeated requests that Laiki clarify this point, management never
reverted with an answer.

The Tribunal has no reason to doubt the veracity of Mr. Vgenopoulos’ testimony in this
regard, Nevertheless, the Tribunal is not persuaded that these talks were more than
exploratory talks or that they reflected the serious interest of MIG to invest. MIG’s Board
of Directors minutes of 13 September 2012, relied upon by Claimants, appear to suggest
that the talks with Laiki’s management had not been disclosed to the Board of MIG up until
that very moment:

“Mr. Vegenopoulos referred to the Company's alternatives for investment or activation in
the financial services sector through takeover of medium and small Greek banks seeking
to cover their capital needs or purchase of assets of Greek and Cypriot banks, Among other
things, it was mentioned that what is really needed right now in order to achieve the goal

°"” Vgenopoulos First Witness Statement, at 80; Vgenopoulos Fourth Witness Statement, at 63
°'8 MIG, BoD Minutes, 13 September 2012 (Exhibit C-0406).

251

1021.

1022.

1023.

1024.

19 Id

is having strong allies rather than substantial capital. Furthermore, discussion took place
regarding the feasibility of hiring 2-3 ex-employecs of the Bank in Greece for materializing
any endeavor in this regard.

Mr. SEB expressed his surprise and wondered how this can be materialized
i ilure_o} jk. OVE ioned at_thi H

primary engagement _of the _management_of the Company should _be enhancing its
underlying companies. Furthermore, he stated his opposition to hiring ex bank employees
and granting bonuses to the OA team.

Mr. Vgenopoulos replied that he was deprived of the right to fight for the rescue of the
Bank, which eventually remained in the hands of people with no knowledge or with other
agenda. Several officers have left the Bank either because they were overpaid or due to
their being associated to MIG. Management has held 4 meetings with bank representatives
as to whether MIG was interested to buy the Greck business, but the bank never came back
to specify what exactly was for sale.” ”!” [emphasis added]

The Tribunal also notes that Claimants have not disclosed any Board minutes of MIG
where a decision was taken committing the company to purchase Laiki’s Greek operations.
It appears that, in effect, MIG never made a decision to proceed with this purchase.
According to a press announcement made by MIG on 27 November 2012:

““MARFIN INVESTMENT GROUP HOLDINGS SA’ (‘the Company’) hereby
announces that it has become in the past the recipient of exploratory contacts on a possible
interest for the takeover of the Greek operations of ‘CYPRUS POPULAR BANK PUBLIC
CO LTD’. The Company has not so far received any concrete proposal and has not
therefore officially expressed its interest nor discussed or taken any relevant decision.””"

Consequently, Claimants’ contention that their serious interest in purchasing Laiki’s Greek
operations was shunned by the newly appointed management is not supported by the
record.

Further, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the record supports Claimants’ submission that
they would have participated in Laiki’s recapitalization.

Claimants refer to two statements made by Mr. Vgenopoulos in November 2011°?! as
support for their assertion that MIG was ready and willing to participate in the
recapitalization of the Bank. The Tribunal notes however that these statements were made
prior to the removal of Mr. Bouloutas from the Board and prior to the finalization of the
terms of PSI.

2° MIG Announcement, 27 November 2012 (Exhibit C-0417).

ou

Andreas Vgenopoulos Announcement, 4 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0278); Statement by Andreas Vgenopoulos,

“MARFIN POPULAR BANK will come out of this crisis stronger”, 17 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0286).

252

1025. Laiki’s Discussion Paper expressly recorded that the Bank’s existing shareholders would
be “encouraged” to participate in the capital increase if a strategic investor was found.
However, if this attempt was unsuccessful, “it [was] rather unlikely that shareholders
[would] be willing to contribute to an equity raising and thus MPB [would] have no option
but to seck government help, probably for the whole €1.35 - €1.8 bn”. The Discussion
Paper also mentions that “existing major shareholders have expressed their intention to
minimise and if possible avoid dilution, however, under the circumstances; this might not
be realistically possible as the required additional funds may not be available to them”.°??
In other words, Laiki’s existing shareholders, including MIG and DFG, were only
interested in investing in the Bank if a strategic private investor was found first.

1026. The reluctance of existing investors to commit funds was also confirmed by Laiki’s
auditors, PwC. In their letter to management dated 20 March 2012, PwC noted that, due to
market circumstances, there was “significant uncertainty as to the ability of the Bank to
raise the required capital from existing shareholders”.9”? Further correspondence from the
Bank to the Ministry of Finance and the CBC revealed the same bleak situation: no serious
interest shown by any private investor.

1027. On 26 June 2012, MIG’s Executive Committee issued a recommendation that the company
should not participate in the recapitalization of the Bank. MIG’s Executive Committee
referred to the following: (i) the nationalization of the Bank in light of the lack of investor
appetite to participate in the share capital increase; (ii) the market price of Laiki’s shares,
of below EUR 0.09; (iii) the uncertainty as to whether the capital increase would be the
last, in light of market circumstances; (iv) the administrative reform of Laiki, leading to
the appointment of Board Members by the Ministry of Finance; (v) the financial situation
and prospects of the Cypriot economy; and (vi) the impact of the eventual dilution of MIG’s
shareholding after the completion of the share capital increase.°™4

1028. The Tribunal will address in Sections IX.C.4 (iii) and IX.C.4 (iv) below the issue of the
corporate governance provisions in the Underwriting Decree and their effect on the
likelihood of a successful private recapitalization of Laiki. For purposes of the present
analysis however, the Tribunal notes that the main concerns behind MIG’s decision not to
participate in the recapitalization were the lack of a strategic investor (as per the Discussion
Paper), the uncertainty surrounding the capital that the Bank would actually require in order
to meet the EBA recommendation and the likelihood that MIG would be diluted despite
participating in the capital raising exercise.

2 Email from C. Stylianides to A. Trokkos and the Governor of the CBC, 5 March 2012 (Exhibit C-0788).
3 Letter from PwC (ED to MPB (M. Sarris), 20 March 2012 (Exhibit C-0348).
°4 Internal Memorandum to MIG Executive Committee
Exercise of pre-emption rights in the Share Capital Increase of Cyprus Popular Bank”, 26 June 2012
(Exhibit C-0381).

253

1029. The Tribunal therefore finds that Claimants cither did not have the funds or the willingness
to invest in Laiki and assume the risk that their capital contribution would not be sufficient
in order to avoid dilution. The Tribunal does not consider that the testimony of Mr.
Bouloutas or the evidence of Mr. Rosen, secking to establish that MIG and other Claimants
had the funds to participate in the recapitalization, is sufficient. What matters is that the
record contemporaneous to the events does not support a conclusion that Claimants had
shown actual, serious interest in the recapitalization.

1030. The Tribunal will now address the issue of the recapitalization framework and its impact
on Laiki’s recapitalization.

Whether the recapitalization framework chosen by Respondent was expropriatory

1031. Claimants argue that Cyprus structured the recapitalization framework in such a way as to
effectively deter any private investment in the Bank and to bring it under State control.
Respondent disputes this theory, and counters that the recapitalization framework adopted
by Cyprus was the best that it could offer under the circumstances, considering the lack of
investor interest and the limitations imposed by the European Commission. According to
Respondent, Laiki’s recapitalization was a legitimate exercise of the State’s regulatory
powers.

1032. The Tribunal agrees with Respondent.

1033. First, the Tribunal notes that the Treaty docs not establish an obligation for the Contracting
States to offer financial support to investments experiencing serious financial difficulties.
The Treaty only mandates that such investments not be expropriated, cither directly or
indirectly, and that they should not be subjected to treatment falling below certain
standards.

1034. Second, the Tribunal reiterates that its analysis does not seek to establish whether Cyprus’
chosen recapitalization method was the best possible choice that Respondent could have
made under the circumstances. The Tribunal “need not be satisfied that [it] would have
made precisely the same decision as the regulator in order for [it] to uphold such
decisions”.°°>

1035. Third, and as a corollary to the above, the Tribunal will not substitute its own judgment to
that of the Cypriot regulatory authorities that drafted the recapitalization framework. Both

™* Invesmart v. Czech Republic, at 501.

254

1036.

1037.

1038.

@
1039.

the Management of Financial Crises Law and the Underwriting Decree were drawn up by
several Cypriot regulatory authorities, including the Ministry of Finance and the CBC.
These public entities are entitled to a certain degree of discretion in making their choice of
a recapitalization framework. The Tribunal’s assessment is therefore limited to verifying
whether there was abuse, a lack of due process or a pretense of form designed to conceal
improper ends.

After having carefully examined the Parties’ submissions and the evidence in the record,
the Tribunal finds that the recapitalization framework chosen by Respondent was not
expropriatory, but represented a legitimate exercise of Cyprus’ regulatory powers. While
certain features of the recapitalization framework (and, in particular, the corporate
governance principles selected) did not reflect international best practices, this is not
sufficient in order to find a breach of the Treaty.

The Tribunal holds that Claimants have not satisfied their burden of showing that the
features of the recapitalization framework were arbitrary or irrational choices. To the
contrary, the record establishes that the recapitalization process was initiated following an
express request from the Bank. It is also established that Laiki’s auditors, PwC, were of the
view that recapitalization was necessary in order for the Bank to be able to continue
operating as a going concern.°** According to PwC, absent a confirmation from the Cypriot
Government that it would continue to support Laiki in its efforts to meet capital adequacy
and liquidity requirements, the auditors could not have certified the Bank’s financial
statements for 2011 and would have included a reservation regarding the Bank’s viability.
The Tribunal has no doubt that such a course of events would have sent a strong signal of
weakness to the markets and would have led to massive deposit flight. Further,
recapitalization also allowed the CBC to certify to the ECB that the Bank was viable and
thus ensure that it could continue to benefit from ELA. The Tribunal considers that, without
the continued financial support in the form of ELA, Laiki would in all probability have
failed. In other words, recapitalization was necessary in order to ensure the Bank’s very
survival. Finally, some limitations on normal corporate governance rights were necessary
so as to ensure that, after receiving financial support from the State, Laiki would not pursue
business policies that could threaten further its depositors and other taxpayers,

The Tribunal will set out in more detail below the reasons behind its findings.

An exercise of regulatory powers

The Parties do not dispute that the Management of Financial Crises Law is a regulatory
measure.

°6 Letter from PwC (EB © MPB (M, Sarris), 20 March 2012 (Exhibit C-0348).

255

1040.

1041.

7)
1042.

(iii)
1043.

1044.

Claimants dispute however that this characterization applies to the Underwriting Decree,
arguing that it was an individual act adopted solely for the recapitalization of Laiki. The
Tribunal does not find this distinction to be dispositive. The Underwriting Decree was
enacted on the basis of Sections 6, 7 and 14 of the Management of Financial Crises Law.
In other words, the Underwriting Decree was the measure through which a general
regulation was applied to a set of facts, i.e., the recapitalization of Laiki.

On this basis, the Tribunal finds that the police powers doctrine may be equally applied to
the Underwriting Decree, provided that the other conditions are satisfied.

Taken in order to protect the public welfare

The Tribunal considers that both the Management of Financial Crises Law and the
Underwriting Decree were enacted in order to protect the Cypriot banking sector and the
economy at large from the risk of the disorderly failure of the systemic banks. Moreover,
both Parties agree that Laiki required recapitalization in order to make up for the impact of
PSI+ and to achieve on 30 June 2012 the 9% CTI ratio recommended by the EBA.°7 In
other words, Laiki’s recapitalization was necessary in order to protect it from failing.

A non-discriminatory measure taken in good faith

The Tribunal notes that, while the focus of Claimants’ Memorial was the Management of
Financial Crises Law, that focus shifted in the Reply, at the hearing and in their post-
hearing submission to the Underwriting Decree. Nevertheless, because Claimants have not
explicitly dropped their claim that the Management of Financial Crises Law also represents
an expropriatory measure, the Tribunal will first address these contentions and then
proceed to its analysis concerning the Underwriting Decree.

The Management of Financial Crises Law. The Tribunal finds no support in the record for
Claimants’ allegations that the Management of Financial Crises Law was part and parcel
of Cyprus’ overarching plan to nationalize Latki, that it was enacted in haste, or that it
served no legitimate purpose. To the contrary, the record supports the conclusion that the
Management of Financial Crises Law was cnacted following a transparent and
comprehensive consultation process, which was respectful of Claimants’ due process
rights, and was non-discriminatory. Further, the record demonstrates that the law was
intended to ensure that Cyprus could rapidly intervene in order to support banks in financial
distress, and was not part of any plan to bring Laiki under State control.

7 C-PHS, at 64; R-PHS, at 59.

256

1045. The Tribunal has already established that the record does not support the conclusion that
there was an overarching “communist” plan to nationalize the Bank. The Tribunal will not
revisit this conclusion here.

1046. The Tribunal also finds that the Management of Financial Crises Law was adopted
following a process of extensive public consultation, which included, among others, the
ECB, Laiki as well as various associations of banks in Cyprus.

1047. The principles underpinning the Management of Financial Crises Law were initially set
out in a 2008 bill entitled “A Law to amend the Management of Revenues and Expenditure
and of the Accounting System of the Republic and other Related Matters Laws of 2002 and
2004”. This bill was intended to provide a framework for State recapitalization of
Cypriot banks if such measures were needed in the future and was initially intended to be
an di to existing legislation. The bill was submitted on 16 January 2009 by the
Cypriot Ministry of Finance to the ECB for comments. The ECB’s overarching view was
that the bill should contain more specific provisions with regard to the terms and conditions
of accessing State support, as well as the parameters of the State's intervention. The ECB
also issued a number of recommendations with respect to the provisions of the bill.

1048. Respondent stipulates that, following the receipt of the ECB’s comments, the bill went
through the normal legislative process and was considered on | February 2010 by the
Cypriot House of Representatives. Respondent adds that, sometime in 2011, the Ministry
of Finance and the CBC reassessed the idea of implementing the 2008 bill as an amendment
to existing legislation and instead supported enacting it as standalone legislation.
Concurrently, a draft law providing for the establishment of a new Cypriot financial
stability fund was enacted.?*°

1049. On 18 October 2011, the two bills were circulated by the Ministry of Finance to a number
of Cypriot banking associations, including the Association of Cyprus Banks (of which
Laiki was a member), the Association of International Banks in Cyprus, and the Cyprus
Financial Services Firms Association.”*' The draft Management of Financial Crises Law
was sent to Laiki on 21 October 2011.7

%°8 Bill entitled “A Law to amend the Management of Revenues and Expenditure and of the Accounting System of the
Republic and other Related Matters Laws of 2002 and 2004” (Exhibit RL-0088),

“8 European Central Bank, “Opinion at the request of the Cypriot Ministry of Finance on a draft law amending the
Laws of 2002 and 2004 on the of revenues and and on the system of the Republic
and related matters”, (CON/2009/12), 9 February 2009 (Exhibit C-0135).

°° Counter-Memorial, at 317-319.

 

1! Letter from Ministry of Finance 10 various partics, 18 October 201 | (Exhibit R-0107); Letter from
the Ministry of Finance 0 various parties, 18 October 2011 (Exhibit R-0108).
82 Email from CBC 0 MPB (END ttaching “EN The law for management of financial crises

20 Oct 2011", 21 October 2011 (Exhibit R-0111),
257

1050. On 20 October 2011, the two draft bills were submitted by the Ministry of Finance to the
ECB for an opinion.°*? The Tribunal has already seen at Section [X.C,1 above, that, on 25
October 2011, the draft law was debated by the Cypriot Cabinet, when it was decided to
proceed with the immediate registration of both bills for public debate at the House of
Representatives. Following registration, the bills were debated by the Parliamentary
Committee on Finance and Budget between | November and 6 December 2011, with the
participation of the relevant banking associations.’** A further meeting to discuss the two
bills was held on 4 November 2011 at the Ministry of Finance.??*

1051. The revised bill was also sent to the ECB for an opinion on 9 November 2011.96 The ECB
issued its opinion on 15 November 2011. In general, the ECB’s feedback was positive. The
ECB noted the following with regard to the corporate governance provisions in the draft
law:

“Sections 7 to 10 of the draft law on financial crisis management provide for a number of
powers vested in the Cypriot Minister for Finance to be exercised when the measures laid
down in Section 4(1)(a) are taken, and by way of derogation from the Law on Companies
and the Law on cooperative credit institutions. These powers include (i) restrictions in the
exercise of the voting rights attaching to shares or the voting rights possessed by the
shareholders of the t y financial institution; (ii) i of the majority of the
members of the Board of Directors of the beneficiary financial institution; and (iii) increase
of the share capital of the t iary financial institution. The ECB notes that, unlike the
measures sct out in Section 4 of the draft law, the above measures may be ‘recovery and
resolution measures’, to_be_taken the_resolution_ authority in the context _of a
comprehensive bank recovery and resolution regime. The ECB understands that the
inclusion of these measures in the draft law is temporary, unti! such time as an operational
recovery and is has been Li in Cyprus, and that the Iti

™ Letter from the Ministry of Finance (K. Kazamius) to the ECB (J.C. Trichet), 20 October 2011 (Exhibit R-0109),
Letter from the Ministry of Finance (K. Kazamias) to the ECB (J.C. Trichet), 20 October 2011 (Exhibit R-0110).

™ Transcript of the Minutes of the Parliamentary Committee on Financial and Budgetary Affairs Meeting, dated Ist
November 201 | concerning the Bills referred to in the attached Annex, | November 201 | (Exhibit R-01 14); Transcript
of the Minutes of the Parliamentary Committee on Financial and Budgetary Affairs Mecting of 21 November 2011
for the Discussion of the following Bills (a) ‘‘The Imposition of a Special Tax on Credit Institutions (Amendment)
(No. 2) Law of 2011, (b) The Financial Crisis Management Law of 2011 and (c) The Establishment and Operation of
an Independent Stability Fund Law of 2011, 21 November 2011 (Exhibit R-0121); Transcript of the Minutes of the
Parliamentary Committee on Financial and Budgetary Affairs Meeting dated 30 November 2011 for the Discussion
of the following Bills: “The Imposition of a Special Tax on Credit Institutions (Amendment) (No. 2) Law of 2011,
The Financial Crisis Management Law of 2011” and “The Establishment and Operation of an Independent Stability
Fund Law of 2011", 30 November 2011 (Exhtbit R-0127); Transcript of the Minutes of the Parliamentary Committee
on Financial and Budgetary Affairs Meeting, dated 6 December 2011 concerning the Bills referred to in the attached
Annex, 6 December 201 1 (Exhibit R-01 30).

5 Transcript of the Minutes of the Parltamentary Committee on Financial and Budgetary Affairs Mecting of 21
November 2011 for the Discussion of the following Bills (a) “The Imposition of a Special Tax on Credit Institutions
(Amendment) (No, 2) Law of 2011, (b) The Financial Crisis Management Law of 2011 and (c) The Establishment
and Operation of an Independent Stability Fund Law of 2011, 21 November 2011 (Exhibit R-0121).

6 ECB, Opinion on the management of financial crises and the setting up of an independent financial stability fund
{CON/201 1/93), 15 November 201t (Exhibit C-0284).

 

258

authority will reconsider in the future their interplay with the recovery and resolution
framework that is to apply, in the future, to financial institutions operating in Cyprus, and
on which the ECB expects to be consulted.”*”’ [emphasis added]

1052. In other words, the ECB did not express a critical view of the corporate governance
provisions. In effect, it seems that the ECB had a different understanding with respect to
the application of these provisions (i.c., as recovery and resolution measures), which does
not appear to be their stated purpose pursuant to the text of the law.

1053. Following the mectings with the stakcholders, the receipt of their comments and the
opinion of the ECB, the bill was ded and recirculated to stakeholders on 10 N i
2011.98 On 24 November 2011, the CBC sent an English translation of the draft law to
Laiki by email. On the same day, a meeting took place between CySEC and
representatives of Laiki, the BoC and other banks in order to discuss the draft law.”

 

1054. The Management of Financial Crises Law was enacted on 30 December 2011.

1055. The Tribunal considers that this consultation process, which involved a number of
regulatory bodies, banking associations as well as the affected banks (including Laiki),
respected Claimants’ due process rights.

1056. Further, the Tribunal finds that the Management of Financial Crises Law served a
legitimate purpose: it conferred upon Cyprus the power to intervene and support a bank in
financial difficulty, upon the latter’s request, and avoid negative systemic effects on its
economy. While the corporate governance provisions included in the Management of
Financial Crises Law possibly did not reflect international best practices, nevertheless they
do not itute “clear and II idence” that Respondent erred or acted otherwise
improperly.”

 

1057. Claimants’ main criticisms refer to the provisions of Section 7(2) of the law, pursuant to
which:

°” ECB, Opinion on the management of financial crises and the setting up of an independent financial stability fund
(CON/201 1/93), 15 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0284).

%* Email from the Ministry of Finance (Eto ACB QED and others, 10 November 2011 (Exhibit
R-0119).

°° Email from CBC Qo MPB QB 24 November 2011 (Exhibit R-0123).

5 Letter from CySEC (EEE Ministry of Finance CBC Bank of Cyprus
Chryssafinis and Polyviou LLC Hellenic Bank B
Demetriades & Ioannides LLC jand Commercial Banks Association ntitled “Proposed

Amendment of the Companies Law - Meeting dated 24 November 2011”, 25 November 2011 (Exhibit R-0125).
%' Saluka v. Czech Republic, at 273

259

“(2) In the case of adoption of one or more of the support measures provided for in sub-
paragraph (a) of paragraph (1) of article 4, the Minister may, with the concurring opinion
of the Central Bank and notwithstanding the provisions of the Companies Law, the Co-
operative Societies Law, the Law on Public Takeover Bids and the Investment Services
and Activities and Regulated Markets Law as well as any other law ~

(a)restrict the exercise of the voting rights attached to shares or voting rights held by the
sharcholders of the beneficiary financial institution, in relation to all or part of the issues
for which voting rights are exercised:

Itis provided that the shareholders retain the right of sale, disposition, transfer or other way
of alienation of the shares they hold;

(») appoint the majority of the members of the Board of Directors or the majority of the
i of the iary financial institution with the opinion of the
Finaness and Budget Parliamentary Committee of the House of Representatives, and
the of the Companies Law or the Co-operative Socictics Law, as well
as the terms of the articles of association or of the special regulations of the beneficiary
financial institution with regard to directors or Commissioners, that shall apply to the
directors or Commissioners who are appointed by virtue of this article:

 

It is provided that, in the event that provisions of this article are applied in conjunction with
the support measures provided for in point: of sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph (1) of
article 4, the powers of the Minister shall not derive from the participation of the Republic
in the ip structure of the y financial but shall derive directly
from the provisions of this Law;

 

 

(c) impose any terms on the financial institutions, including limitations on the availability
of financial products to the market or in the expansion of their activitics.”"”” [emphasis
added]

1058. The limitations above could be imposed by the Minister of Finance in those situations in
which the State offered support in one of the forms specified in Section 4(1 (a) of the law:
(i) the granting of government loans to financial institutions; (ii) the granting of
government guarantecs for loans and/or for the issue of bonds; and (iii) the provision of
capital in return for equivalent participation in the ownership structure of the financial
institution.

1059, The Tribunal agrees that these provisions depart from generally accepted corporate
governance principles, which align equity participation with governance rights.
Nevertheless, the Tribunal does not consider that this lack of alignment is in and of itself
sufficient to support a finding that the provisions served no legitimate purpose. The
Tribunal bears in mind that the very premise for the application of the Management of
Financial Crises Law was the existence of a financial crisis, during which the liquidity or
solvency problems of a bank threatened to provoke “systemic disturbances in the financial

2 Republic of Cyprus Law No 200(1)/2011 (Management of Financial Crises), 30 December 2011 (Exhibit C-0045).
260

1060.

1061.

1062.

1063.

1064.

1065.

1066.

system” (Section 3 of the law). The Tribunal accepts that the exceptional considerations
extant during a financial crisis, which mandate the protection of the banking system as a
whole, of depositors and taxpayers, may justify the temporary imposition of extraordinary
measures that could permit the State to intervene in order to safeguard these interests.

In any event, the Tribunal notes that Claimants did not consider these limitations to be a
strong deterrent for private investment. Indeed, Laiki’s 22 November 2011 recapitalization
proposal was based on the provisions of this law, then in draft form.

The Tribunal further finds that the Management of Financial Crises Law was not
discriminatory. Its enactment ensured the participation of a number of stakeholders,
including the banks potentially affected by Section 7. There is no question that the
provisions of the law were of general applicability.

For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that the Management of Financial Crises Law was a
non-discriminatory measure taken in good faith.

The Underwriting Decree. After carefully examining the record and the Parties’
submissions, the Tribunal finds that there is no compelling evidence that Respondent erred
or acted otherwise improperly by enacting the Underwriting Decree. To the contrary,
the Tribunal holds that the Underwriting Decree was a non-discriminatory measure, taken
in good faith, which — despite its limitations and flaws — permitted Laiki to survive.

First, the Tribunal is of the view that the Underwriting Decree served a legitimate purpose:
Laiki was recapitalized and, as a result, could continue operating as a going concern.

In this respect, the Tribunal reiterates that the Treaty does not impose upon the Contracting

Parties any obligation to inject funds into banks in financial difficulty. It is up to the

Contracting Parties to decide how to allocate the limited budgetary resources at their

disposal and whether they should be directed towards supporting banks or towards other

economic or social sectors. Such a decision is inherently political in nature and cannot be
d-g1 d by a tribunal ituted under an i treaty.

 

It is also important to note that Respondent’s intervention to recapitalize Laiki followed
from the Bank’s application to this effect. The recapitalization, with its attendant reduction
of Claimants’ shareholding and the subseq changes in Was not a
unilateral intervention by the Cypriot Government intended to oust Claimants from their
investment. The recapitalization was prompted by the very difficult financial condition of
the Bank, when the injection of private funds had proved to be impossible. Moreover, the

*? Saluka v. Czech Republic, at 273.

261

1067.

1068.

1069.

1070.

1071.

recapitalization was intended to avoid the profound effects the failure of one of Cyprus’
two systemic banks would have had on its economy.

Further, Laiki’s recapitalization permitted the Bank to continue operating as a going
concern. Duc to the perspective of the forthcoming recapitalization, Laiki’s auditors could
certify its financial statements for 2011 and not include a reservation with regard to the
viability of the Bank. The prospect of State support for the recapitalization also permitted
the CBC to certify to the ECB that Laiki was viable and thus ensure that it could continue
to benefit from ELA. Moreover, Laiki’s recapitalization protected the interests of
depositors and taxpayers, as it prevented the activation of the Deposit Guarantee Fund,
with the attendant loss in deposits and taxpayer money. The Tribunal is persuaded that, had
the recapitalization not been accomplished in June 2012, Laiki would have been confronted
with massive deposit flight that could have threatened its ability to continue benefiting
from ELA. Without the support of ELA, it would have been very likely that Laiki would
have failed.

The Tribunal is not persuaded that the ultimate insufficiency of the funds injected into Laiki
affects the conclusion that the Underwriting Decree served a legitimate purpose. The funds
provided by the Cypriot Government reflected the amount that the Bank itself had
estimated as necessary in order to ensure compliance with the minimum CTI ratio of 9%
recommended by the EBA. In any event, when it became clear that Laiki would need a
second recapitalization, Cyprus attempted to secure funds from the EFSF for this purpose.

Second, the Tribunal does not share Claimants’ view that the Underwriting Decree
evidences the intent of the Cypriot Government to deter private investment and obtain
control over Laiki. To the contrary, the record shows that Respondent acted in good faith
when it recapitalized the Bank.

The Tribunal has already established above that any delay by the Cypriot Government in
clarifying the terms of its support for Laiki was not due to a supposed intent to discourage
private investment. Instead, this delay was duc to Laiki having submitted its request for
State assistance relatively late, after having first attempted — unsuccessfully — to secure
private investment. In addition, the Tribunal found that, while the Cypriot Government
committed to support the Bank, it was only interested to do so as a measure of last resort,
afier the Bank had first sought private funds.

The Tribunal is not persuaded that there was any change in Respondent’s point of view at
the time of issuing the Underwriting Decree,

262

1072.

1073.

1074.

1075.

In this respect, the Tribunal does not consider that the statement of President Christofias
during the Cabinet meeting of 17 May 2012 supports Claimants’ theory of an overarching
plan to nationalize the Bank. In effect, President Christofias declared:

“Before closing the matter I want to say regarding the three persons that we will appoint
that I wish and hope that are [sic] not representatives of the banking capital that supposedly
know these issues, They must be economists, they must be persons that understand these
issues, but also persons devoted to the Government and not to the banking capital. We
should pay attention to that when examining names.”* [emphasis added]

It is clear from this intervention that President Christofias was referring to the three
members of Laiki’s Board of Directors that the Minister of Finance was entitled to appoint
under the then draft Underwriting Decree.%** Indeed, on 17 May 2012, the Cypriot
Government had not been called to purchase the unsubscribed shares of Laiki’s offering.
Subject to its analysis with respect to the corporate governance terms in the Underwriting
Decree, the Tribunal is of the view that the Cypriot Government was entitled to appoint
persons of trust on Laiki’s Board, who could effectively safeguard that the interests of
depositors and taxpayers would not be eschewed by a Board potentially under private
control.

Further, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the minutes of the 17 May 2012 meeting of the
Parliamentary Committee on Financial and Budgetary Affairs reveal that Respondent was
intent on deterring private investment into Laiki.™* In the Tribunal’s view, these minutes
support the opposite conclusion — that there was an initial reluctance on the part of
Parliament to support the Bank, that Parliament was eventually persuaded to support to
Bank in order to avoid systemic risks and that both Parliament and the Ministry of Finance
considered (rightly or wrongly) that the chosen recapitalization framework ensured that
there would be private participation in Laiki’s recapitalization and the State’s involvement
would be minimized.

In this respect:

“CHAIRMAN: [...] Why this specific bank should be supported at this stage, what are the
side-effects if it is not supported and what are these specific economic facts we have before
us which are also important as regards our own decisions.

L.-J
MINISTER OF FINANCE: [...] What is the consequence if we do not proceed with such
issue? It shall possibly mean — and this can be confirmed also by the people of Laiki Bank

°4 Extract from the Minutes of the Meeting of the Council of Ministers, 17 May 2012 (Exhibit C-0611).

45 Subsequently, the draft was amended so that the Minister of Finance could appoint five members of Laiki’s Board
(Section 11(1) of the Underwriting Decree).

™6 Minutes of the Meeting of the Parliamentary Committee on Financial and Budgetary Affairs, regarding the Bill of
Law “The Management of Financial Crises (Amending) (No. 2) Law of 2012”, 17 May 2012 (Exhibit C-0363)

263

— that since they are not in a position to proceed with the specific plan and given that
nothing clse specific is being planned which would assist the recapitalisation of the bank,
then possibly, a statement by the specific bank that they cannot satisfy the condition of
recapitalisation will be submitted [...] and the Central Bank of Cyprus thereafter shall
apply to the Ministry of Finance in order to move for the recapitalisation of the bank
pursuant to the law.

Given that the state is unable, at this sage, to find these resources for the recapitalisation,

wi is that, ver (tc shall be called to start negotiations with the
European authorities, the EFSF, in order to secure the relevant amount, something which
will lead, almost certainly, to the accession of Cyprus to the support mechanism with all
negative conditions and implications which may exist upon the state.

[..-] Going towards this direction and the proposal which is before you, apart from the fact
that the capability and possibility is created that some moncy would be secured from
investors, existing investors and/or new investors which shall reduce the state’s exposure
from EL8 billion to a smaller number, it gives the potential to the state to proceed with
some investigating efforts which are being made now in order to secure financing from a
third country.[...]

REPRESENTATIVE OF THE CENTRAL BANK OF CYPRUS: [...] [T]he underwriting
of this plan shall give the potential to more investors to participate in the issue, therefore,
in essence, in case where the state would have to intervene and the Cypriot taxpayer would
be burdened, the account for the Cypriot taxpayer shall be lower, precisely because there
is the assurance of the underwriting by the state.

We should also emphasize that Laiki Bank is the second largest bank in Cyprus and has
systemic importance. This means that any problems which the bank may have, if not
recapitalized, will create systemic risks for all the system with very negative consequences
for the entire Cypriot economy. An example which we could give is that, if we need to
compensate the depositors, on the basis of the Deposit Guarantee Fund and the relevant
regulations of the European Union which we also apply, the depositors should be
compensated up to €100,000 maximum for each deposit they hold. In such case, with the
latest data we have, we should pay — essentially, the state — over €7.5 billion in order to
compensate the depositors.” °4” [emphasis added]

 

1076. As further support for their contention that Respondent was intent on sabotaging the Bank’s
efforts to find private investors, Claimants refer to a statement made by Mr. Sarris, the
Non-Exccutive Chairman of the Board of Laiki. The Tribunal however is not persuaded
that this was the essence of Mr. Sarris’ statement:

“7 id pp.U

 

“We have indications from investors that if [there is] some kind of support from the
and_ indeed other additional things which could possibly strengthen the interest_from
investors..., in this way the possible provision of assistance by the state is decreased. [...]
[W]e believe that the proposal before you is a proposal which gives us at least, a chance to
raise capital from the private sector and also it is done in a manner which shall protect two
elements, the stability of the financial system which we should not forget because we
believe that Laiki’s fate is connected also with the fates of the other banks in Cyprus. And
the second one, to the extent possible, whereas the shareholder is most strictly punished.

 

3, 15, 16.
264

1077.

1078.

1079.

1080.

1081.

the depositor is protected, as well_as the taxpayer who is also a citizen of the Republic of
Cyprus.” “8 [emphasis added]

Mr. Sarris’ statement with respect to the Underwriting Decree’s effect on shareholders is
questionable at best. However, the Tribunal considers that it is unlikely that Mr. Sarris, in
the same breath, attempted to maximize private investor participation (“strengthen the
interest from investors”, “gives us ... a chance to raise capital from the private sector”)
while at the same time attempting to punish those same investors. The only reasonable
conclusion that the Tribunal can draw from this statement is that Mr. Sarris meant to
reassure disquieted members of Parliament that the State would not be asked to support the
Bank with a substantial amount without obtaining in return some control over the Bank so
that it could protect the depositors and taxpayers, if needed.

Whatever the meaning of Mr. Sarris’ statement may have been, the Tribunal does not
consider it to be dispositive. Indeed, Mr. Sarris was not speaking as a Government agent,
but as a representative of Laiki, a private entity. The Tribunal has concluded at Section
VILC above that the acts of Laiki’s management during the period December 2011 to June
2012 are not attributable to Respondent. Further, the minutes of this session do not record
officials of Cyprus taking a similar stance.

The Tribunal therefore concludes that the record docs not support Claimants’ position that,
through the Underwriting Decree, Respondent intended to deter private investment in
Laiki.

Third, the Tribunal finds that the adoption of the Underwriting Decree ensured Claimants’
due process rights. Indeed, the Tribunal has already established that Laiki was consulted in
the drafting process of the Underwriting Decree. In addition, Laiki’s input was reflected in
the final draft of the Underwriting Decree.

In this respect, Laiki’s Discussion Paper envisaged the following funding options for the
State in the eventuality that no significant interest would be expressed by existing or new
shareholders: (i) the Government would apply to the EFSF in order to obtain the necessary
funds; (ii) the Government would obtain a bilateral loan from a “friendly country” at
reasonable rates below market; and (iii) the Government would issue a bond to Laiki in
exchange for common equity/CoCos. With respect to the latter option, Laiki expressed the
view that, because the bonds would not provide liquidity, it would be more appropriate for
the Government to reccive CoCos rather than common equity. Laiki accepted that if the
State injected funds in exchange for common equity, this meant that the State would obtain

8 Hd., pp. 32, 33.

265

a 70%+ stake in the Bank and private shareholders would be “effectively almost ‘wiped-
out"?

1082. The record establishes that the Cypriot Government attempted to secure a loan from China
and/or Russia both in the attempt to finance State expenses and to recapitalize the Bank.
However, these attempts failed in June 2012 and Cyprus sought EFSF funding.’”

1083. Further, the Tribunal finds that Laiki’s 2 May 2012 proposal to the Ministry of Finance®*!
(with the clarifications sent on 12 May 2012)°* was reflected in the Underwriting Decree.
In effect, Laiki’s proposal envisaged that the size of the rights issue would be EUR 1.8
billion and the State would fully underwrite it. In order to incentivize private participation
in the share issue, Laiki proposed that the Government offer incentives in the form of
warrants to existing shareholders and participating investors and, possibly, a put option.

1084. While Respondent had to (iD 3 thc
demand of the European Commission's Directorate General for Competition,” at Laiki’s
request, Respondent did include the share warrants and reduced the price for their exercise
from 12% annually to 9%. Respondent also lowered the fee for the underwriting from 3%
of the total amount of the issue to 2%."

1085. Fourth, the Tribunal finds that the Underwriting Decree was not a discriminatory measure.
At the lime of its issuance, Laiki was the only Cypriot bank that had asked for State
assistance, In March 2012, the BoC successfully completed a capital increase of EUR 160
million and a EUR 432 million voluntary conversion of Convertible Enhanced Capital
Securities into ordinary shares. The BoC only applied for State support on 29 June 2012,
almost two months after the Underwriting Decree was issucd.?*> On this basis, the Tribunal
considers that, if any discrimination were to have occurred, it could only have been

blished through a p i ded to the BoC subseq to Laiki’s
recapitalization. The Underwriting Decree was not as a result discriminatory. In any event,

° nai a , ttaching Laiki's Discussion Paper,
“Recapitalising Marfin Popular Bank: The Prospective Role of the Cyprus Government, 5 March 2012 (Exhibit C-
0788).

950 See, Letter from the CBC (P. Demetriades) to the ECB (M. Draghi), 15 June 2012 (Exhibit C-0375); J, Wilson, D.
Dombey, P. Spiegel, “Cyprus requests Eurozone bailout”, Financial Times, 25 June 2012 (Exhibit C-0379).

*S! Letter from Laiki (C. Stylianides) to the CBC (P. Demetriades), 8 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0476),

°82 Email from Laiki 10 Ministry of Finance SD cching Underwriting Proposal to the

Republic of Cyprus, 12 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0478).
2 a RRR

° Email from Laiki QQ Ministry of Finance EMD at 5:56, 15 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0479);
Email from Laiki (Eo Ministry of Finance {EB at 7:25, 15 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0480),
°55 Leiter from the BoC (EEE o the CBC (P. Demetriades), 29 June 2012 (Exhibit R-0494).

 

266

1086.

(iv)
1087.

1088.

1089.

1090.

1091.

the Tribunal has found at Sections X.C.7 and XII.C below that the BoC was not treated
more favorably than Laiki.

For all these reasons, the Tribunal finds that the recapitalization framework chosen by
Respondent for Laiki was a non-discriminatory measure taken in good faith.

A proportional measure

Finally, the Tribunal holds that the recapitalization framework chosen by Respondent
complied with the requirement of proportionality.

The Management of Financial Crises Law. On a preliminary basis, the Tribunal notes that
this discussion appears to no longer be of interest to Claimants, as in their recent
submissions, they have focused their pleadings on the Underwriting Decree. Nevertheless,
the Tribunal considers that the adoption of the Management of Financial Crises Law was
a proportionate measure which gave Respondent the tools to intervene in order to support
distressed banks and avoid systemic risks to its banking system and economy.

The Tribunal finds that the limitations imposed on shareholders’ rights through Section 7
of the law were limited in scope, as they only applied in circumstances where State
intervention was accomplished through one of the following means: (i) the granting of
government loans to financial institutions; (ii) the granting of government guarantees for
loans and/or for the issue of bonds; and (iii) the provision of capital in return for equivalent
participation in the ownership structure of the financial institution. The Tribunal is of the
view that the limitations provided for in Section 7 were meant to ensure that, subsequent
to the State’s financial intervention in a troubled bank, the bank at issuc did not abuse the
support given and pursue policies that contravened the interests of depositors and
taxpayers.

When weighed against the public interest sought to be protected, i.¢., the safety and
soundness of the financial system, the Tribunal considers that the limitations imposed by
means of Section 7 of the law were not excessive, so as to effectively deter private
investment. Indeed, the evidence suggests that the law did not impede investor interest.
Claimants’ 22 ber 2011 pitalization plan expressly req d the appli of
the law, then in draft form, to Laiki’s recapitalization. The BoC successfully recapitalized
in March 2012 while the law was in force. Laiki’s efforts to identify a strategic investor in
February-May 2012 did not reveal that potential investors were discouraged due to the
provisions of the law, but due to the Bank’s exposure to Greece.

 

 

The Underwriting Decree. Claimants argue that the corporate governance provisions
included in the Underwriting Decree imposed disproportionate limitations on their

267

1092.

1093.

1094,

1095.

investment and deterred the participation of private investors in Laiki’s recapitalization.
Respondent counters that, at the time the Underwriting Decree was issued, it was virtually
a guaranteed fact that the State would become the majority shareholder of the Bank due to
the lack of investor interest and, as a result, the limitations did not materialize.

For the reasons that will be outlined in the paragraphs below, the Tribunal considers that
the corporate governance provisions included in the Underwriting Decree, despite not
being in conformity with international best practices, nevertheless do not fall foul of the
Treaty on grounds of proportionality. While the governance provisions may have played a
role in discouraging private investment, the Tribunal is not persuaded that it was those
provisions alone that led to the weak interest in the Bank from the private sector. The
Tribunal recalls that, at the time of the issuance of the Underwriting Decree, Laiki was in
a precarious financial condition and had unsuccessfully attempted to attract strategic
investors. Such investment was not forthcoming mainly due to the Bank’s heavy exposure
to Greece. The Underwriting Decree was issued following Laiki’s application for State
support and was intended to permit the Bank to continue operating as a going concern. The
recapitalization thus avoided a disorderly collapse of the Bank and disastrous effects on the
Cypriot economy. Further, and in any event, the evidence in the record does not support

that the ion of private i would have somehow
avoided the dilution of their shareholding. To the contrary, it is much more likely that, due
to the substantial amount of capital needed to recapitalize the Bank, any strategic private
investor would have demanded to obtain control. Thus, the Tribunal finds that, on balance,
while the Underwriting Decree was far from perfect, it did not place an excessive burden
on Claimants whilst attempting to secure the Bank’s survival and the safety and soundness
of the Cypriot financial system and economy at large.

 

 

The Tribunal will explain these findings in more detail in the paragraphs below.

fe

At the outset, the Tribunal iders that it is imp to blish a point of for
its analysis under the proportionality rubric. Indeed, what is relevant is whether the
corporate governance provisions included in the Underwriting Decree imposed an

cessive burden on Clai i » as that i existed on 18 May 2012.
This includes an analysis into whether Claimants’ rights to exercise their pre-emption
rights in order to maintain their equity stake in the Bank were excessively burdened by the
corporate governance provisions in the Underwriting Decree. The proportionality analysis
may not rest upon the potential effects of the corporate governance provisions on potential
private investors that would have injected funds into Laiki. Even assuming those
investments were a certainty, they are not protected under the Treaty.

 

In its assessment of whether the challenged measures imposed a disproportionate,
excessive burden on Claimants, the Tribunal has weighed the competing interests at stake.

268

1096.

1097.

1098,

1099.

On the one hand, the Tribunal considers that Cyprus had a legitimate interest to attach
certain conditions to the support it provided to the Bank. Considering that Respondent
underwrote the entirety of Laiki’s share issue, and that it assumed the risk of having to
subscribe the full amount of EUR 1.8 billion, Cyprus could legitimately demand that some
restrictions be placed on the Bank so as to protect the interest of taxpayers and the stability
of the financial sector. The Tribunal considers that this interest is reflected in the final two
sentences of Section 11 of the Underwriting Decree:

“Provided that the Ministry, upon consultation with the Central Bank, has the right to
impose stricter terms of conduct for purposes of implementing the Restructuring Plan and
enforcing the Law and the current Decree.””**

Provided further that, the power of the Minister to set terms and conditions arise directly
from the provisions of the Law and ccasc to be valid upon repurchase of the bank of the
new shares acquired by the Republic or sold to third parties.”**’ [emphasis added]

The minutes of the Parliamentary Committee on Financial and Budgetary Affairs’ session
of 17 May 2012 also show that Respondent was concerned that the Bank would misuse the
assistance given and/or take decisions against the interests of taxpayers. This concern also
applied to the time period between the issuance of the Underwriting Decree and the
recapitalization:

“REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE: [...] In that period, the three
directors to be appointed by the government shall have the right to veto all the decisions of
the Board of Directors therefore any actions of the board which are against the interests of
the taxpayer and of the need to safeguard the financial stability in the Cypriot economy,
may be deterred.”5*

On the other hand, Claimants had a legitimate interest that their shareholding should
continue to entitle them to participate in the decision-making processes of the Bank in a
proportion that reflected, though perhaps not necessarily mirrored, their equity
contribution.

In reaching its finding that the limitations included in Section 11 of the Underwriting
Decree did not impose an excessive burden on Claimants’ investment, the Tribunal has
considered the extent of the burden imposed, as well as the circumstances extant on 18
May 2012. The Tribunal has also accepted Ms. Bertin’s testimony that the Underwriting

°56 The Tribunal notes that in the Greek version of the text the symbol used at the end of this sentence is “:”, not “"

°7 Republic of Cyprus, Decree 182/2012 (Management of Financial Crises Laws of 2011 to (No 2) 20125 18 May
2012 www.centralbank.gov.cy (Exhibit CL-0146).

* Minutes of the Mecting of the Parliamentary Committee on Financial and Budgetary Affairs, regarding the Bill of
Law “The Management of Financial Crises (Amending) (No. 2) Law of 2012”, 17 May 2012, p, 42 (Exhibit C-0363).

269

Decree did not reflect international best practice and has taken due note of her testimony

“MR PRICE: Are you aware of any other country which has adopted such a decree with
similar governance provisions that, in your view, are not friendly to investors?

A. Just to be sure | understand the question, you are asking me whether | am aware of
another situation where a country adopted a similarly investor-unfriendly decree?

MR PRICE: Correct.

A. I’m not aware of [sic].”"*”

1100. In determining the extent of the burden imposed on Claimants’ investment by Section 11

1101.

1102.

of the Underwriting Decree, the Tribunal observes that there were two types of limitations
involved:

“11. (1) The Minister with the concurring opinion of the Central Bank and the Committee
on Financial and Budgetary A ffairs of the House of Representatives appoints from the date
of publication of this Decree, up to five members on the Board of Directors of the bank.

(2) With the concurring opinion of at least two of the five members of the Board of
Directors, appointed by the Minister, a right of veto is exercisable with respect to all
decisions of the Board of Directors.

(3) Upon the acquisition of the new shares by the Republic, the Minister with the
concurring opinion of the Central Bank and the Parliamentary Committee on Financial
Affairs of the House of Representatives, may appoint the majority on the Board of
Directors, irrespective of the amount of the Republic’s participation in the ownership
structure of the bank,

tol

(6) No decision of the General Meeting of the shareholders of the bank is enforced without
the approval of the Minister.“

First, as of the date of the publication of the Underwriting Decrce, the Minister of Finance
was entitled to appoint five members on Laiki’s Board, (wo of whom could exercise a right
of veto over any decision of the Board. Second, if the State were to acquire shares in the
Bank, the State would be entitled to appoint the majority of the members of Laiki’s Board
and to effectively veto decisions of the General Meeting of Shareholders.

The Tribunal agrees with Claimants that the powers granted to the Cypriot Government
were substantial and unusual in terms of the burden imposed on existing shareholders.
However, these powers were limited in time.

° Tr, Day 3, 99: 4-12,
%@ Republic of Cyprus, Decree 182/2012 (Management of Financial Crises Laws of 2011 to (No 2) 2012), 18 May
2012 www.centralbank.gov.cy (Exhibit CL-0146).

270

1103.

1104,

1105.

1106.

1107.

961 Id.

In particular, the powers granted to Respondent regardless of the subscription of shares
lasted from 18 May 2012 until 30 June 2012, i-e., less than two months.

The Tribunal also finds that the powers given to Respondent in consideration of the
subscription of shares were likewise limited: they lasted until the State’s exit from the
shareholding.

At the hearing, substantial attention was devoted to determining whether there was an end-
date to the terms and conditions set out in Section 11. In particular, the Parties focused their
attention on the final sentences of Section 11:

“(13) The bank undertakes any cost that may arise from the involvement of the Republic
in the underwriting of the whole pre-emption rights issue of the bank or from the
subsequent participation of the Republic in the ownership structure of the Bank:

Provided that the Ministry, upon consultation with the Central Bank, has
the right to impose stricter terms of conduct for purposes of implementing
the Restructuring Plan and enforcing the Law and the current Decree”

Provided further that, the power of the Minister to set terms and conditions
arise [sic] directly from the provisions of the Law and cease to be valid
upon repurchase of the bank of the new shares acquired by the Republic
or sold to third parties.”

The Tribunal cannot accept Claimants’ position that the two provisos at the end of Section
11 are connected with, and qualify only, paragraph (13). It appears to the Tribunal that the
final sentences refer to restrictions imposed on the Bank’s business (“the right to impose
stricter terms of conduct”), whereas paragraph (13) does not address such conduct in any
way, but simply answers the question of who bears the costs arising out of the underwriting
or of the Government’s participation in the Bank’s ownership. Further, the Tribunal
considers that the final two sentences of Section 11 are two sides of the same coin: the first
sentence empowered the Ministry of Finance to impose stricter measures so as to ensure
compliance with the Bank’s Restructuring Plan; the second sentence provided that the
Minister’s powers under Section 11 ended automatically (“the power of the Minister ...
cease [sic] to be valid upon repurchase”) when the State exited the Bank.

The Tribunal therefore finds that the corporate governance provisions in Section 11 of the

Underwriting Decree, while affording the Government substantial powers, were not
unlimited in time. Instead, they ended upon the State’s exit from the Bank.

271

1108,

1109.

1110.

962

Turning now to the circumstances present at the moment of the enactment of the
Underwriting Decree, the Tribunal rciterates its finding that, as of 18 May 2012, Laiki was
in a precarious financial condition and had not ded in ing private i

due to the extent of its exposure to Greece.

 

Laiki’s Discussion Paper, dated 5 March 2012 and relied upon by Claimants, explicitly
envisaged that, even if a strategic investor were to be found, that investor would be
reluctant to commit significant funds duc to the uncertainty surrounding Greece and the
Bank’s Greek portfolio. Moreover, the Discussion Paper expressly mentioned that existing
investors would probably not commit funds into the recapitalization if no strategic investor
could be identified. In this scenario, Laiki estimated that the State would end up with a
shareholding in the Bank exceeding 70%.”

Subsequent correspondence between Laiki, the Ministry of Finance and the CBC, internal
Laiki emails, as well as correspondence with potential investors revealed that, as the
deadline for the Bank’s recapitalization approached, the likelihood of finding a strategic
investor diminished, The 22 April 2012 internal Laiki email reporting on meetings with
potential investors in London is further evidence that there was a strong reluctance in the
market to invest in a Bank so heavily exposed to Greece:

“3. They ALL stated that the problem is Greece and the uncertainty that it creates for them.
They were very blunt in saying that They [sic] would not touch anything with such a
significant exposure in Greece, UNLESS, something is done with our opcrations there. The
issue of ring fencing was raised and discussed as a possible solution along with other
measures.

4. It is my conviction, following these meetings, that money can be raised if we have an
investment proposal for these investors that addresses fully the following (1) [sic] proper
government participation (non-dilulive, guarantee, first loss) that they can evaluate. (ii)
proper and bullet proof ring fencing of Greece (iii) that no further capital needs will be
required in the very near future. They ALL said That [sic] they would consider such a
proposal once available."

The Tribunal agrees with Professors Landau and Metrick, and notes that Claimants also
appear to acknowledge, thal the conditions demanded by the prospective investors before
cominitting funds (non-dilutive, guarantee, first loss government participation) were too
onerous for the State to be deemed reasonable."

Eni eee aching Laiki's Discussion Paper,

“Recapitalising Marfin Popular Bank: The Prospective Role of the Cyprus Government, 5 March 2012 (Exhibit C-

0788).

“© Email from (ED 3 Aprii 2012 (Exhibit C-0666).
et C-PHS, at 85 (e); Metrick-Landau Second Expert Report, at 174-177.

272

1112.

1113.

1114.

1115.

The challenge to find private investors was compounded when, following the Greek
legislative elections in May 2012, no parliamentary majority could be formed and the
markets were concerned that Greece may not accept the conditionality program agreed with
the Troika, default on its obligations and exit the Eurozone. Laiki’s 11 May 2012 letter to
the CBC recorded management's fear that, due to the situation in Greece, the risk of a
“possible mass bank run from depositors” should be tackled.°%

The minutes of the Parliamentary Committee on Financial and Budgetary Affairs’ session
of 17 May 2012 record the CEO of Laiki, Mr. Stylianides, make the following declaration:

“A. KYPRIANOU:

You are bankers, Have you made an estimate of how much would the private investment
be? Out of the €1.8 billion based on your specific proposal. I am sure that you have talked
with investors, with states etc, Tell us, what is your estimate of what the investment of the
private sector will be?

[ol

CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER LAIKI BANK GROUP:

I shall tell you some very rough estimates. With the existing current facts, we do not
estimate that this will be over 50%. This is the only thing J can tell you. [...]

Mr. Chairman, | would like to say something. I did not say ‘50%’. ‘Under no circumstances
it is over 50%’. Therefore, if you want me to be fully covered because | know what | am
saying, it is from 0% up to 50%.”*

Another relevant circumstance present on 18 May 2012 is that, up until that time, existing
sharcholders had not firmly indicated that they wanted to participate in the recapitalization.
Their tentative interest to avoid dilution was recorded in Laiki’s Discussion Paper, but with
the caveat that funds might not be available. Further, the same Discussion Paper mentioned
that existing sharcholders would in all likelihood not invest if no strategic investor were to
be found. In effect, no such investor ever materialized, so it is reasonable to infer that, as
of 18 May 2012, it had become clear both to Laiki’s management and to Respondent that
neither the existing shareholders, nor other third-party investors would commit to invest in
the Bank, at least to an extent that would avoid a situation in which the State obtained
majority ownership.

In any event, even if private investment had been found, Claimants have not discharged
their burden of proving that this would have avoided the dilution of their shareholding. The
Tribunal is of the view that, to the contrary, in light of significant funds necessary to

%5 | etter from MPB (C. Stylianides) to CBC (V. Shiarly), 11 May 2012 (Exhibit C-0793).
566 Minutes of the Mecting of the Parliamentary Committee on Financial and Budgetary Affairs, regarding the Bill of
Law “The Management of Financial Crises (Amending) (No. 2) Law of 2012”, 17 May 2012, pp. 75, 76 (Exhibit C-

0363).

273

1116.

1117.

1118.

1119.

1120.

967

recapitalize the Bank, it is unlikely that a potential investor would have agreed to a
shareholding structure that did not accurately reflect their financial outlay.

It therefore remains to be determined whether, after State support was announced, the
corporate governance provisions in the Underwriting Decree excessively burdened
Claimants’ existing corporate governance rights and deterred them from exercising their
pre-emption rights in order to avoid dilution. Whether those same corporate governance
provisions deterred other, private investors, is of no interest to this analysis. In such an
eventuality, Claimants would have suffered from the same dilution and the same limitations
as in the situation in which no private investors were found.

The Tribunal considers relevant in this respect that, on 25 October 2011, when Claimants
were considering various proposals in order to strengthen the capital position of the Bank,
including recapitalization, Government guarantees and the redemption of assets, the issue
of the State’s veto right emerged. Indeed, Claimants’ proposal envisaged that, if the Cypriot
Government were to cover all or any part of the share capital increase corresponding to a
proportion higher than 20%/25% of the share capital, the Government would have a

ae ee ee eee)

Further, on 22 November 2011, in their recapitalization proposal under the Management
of Financial Crises Law, Claimants suggested that Cyprus should appoint the majority of
the Board of Directors if it obtained a sharcholding greater than 50% in the share capital of
the Bank, or, if its participation interest was less than 50%, that it should appoint a number
of directors that was proportionate to its interest. In the latter scenario, the State would
maintain the right of veto for important strategic matters. °°

In other words, Claimants appeared to accept that, once State funds were injected into the
Bank, the Cypriot Government had a legitimate interest to ensure that the Bank did not
pursue polices at odds with the interests of depositors and taxpayers and could veto any
decision to this effect.

Further, the Tribunal considers that the recommendation of MIG’s Executive Committee
that the company not exercise its pre-emption rights is noteworthy. The Tribunal
observes that, while the appointment of Board members by the Ministry of Finance is
mentioned as a reason not to commit funds, the majority of the reasons listed were entirely

Geo
°°* Letter from MPB (E. Bouloutas) to the Ministry of Finance (K. Kazamias), 22 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0289).

°°? Internal Memorandum to MIG Executive Committce

“Exercise of pre-emption rights in the Share Capital Increase of Cyprus Popular Bank”, 26 June 2012

(Exhibit C-0381),

274

1121,

1122.

1123,

1124.

unrelated to the corporate governance provisions in the Underwriting Decree. Instead, MIG
was more concerned with the inevitable dilution of its investment following an injection of
funds and the uncertainty of being able to maintain even a diluted shareholding. MIG
anticipated that it would lose control over the Bank definitively, as the Government was
probably going to be the new majority shareholder. No explicit mention was made of the
Government’s veto right with respect to decisions of the Board or of the general meeting
of the shareholders.

An additional circumstance that is relevant to the Tribunal’s assessment is that, to the
Cypriot Government, ensuring that the Bank duly implemented its restructuring plan was
a priority, as it would have enhanced the likelihood of exiting the Bank and of recuperating
taxpayer funds.

For all these reasons, the Tribunal considers that the Underwriting Decree, while
containing corporate governance provisions that could be perceived as harsh on private
investors, nevertheless did not fall foul of the Treaty on grounds of proportionality.

Respondent's use of an unfunded State bond to recapitalize Laiki does not affect this
conclusion. The Tribunal is mindful of the ECB’s opinion that recapitalization through
State bonds risked being regarded by the markets as lacking credibility due to the fact that
they did not provide banks with liquidity.°”° However, the Tribunal also notes that the ECB
considered that bank-resolution tools would have been more appropriate for Laiki’s
solvency problems:

“In view of the fact that the support measures under the Ministerial Decree aim to address
solvency problems at a financial institution, the ECB considers that the objectives pursued
by the support_measures may be better achieved through bank resolution tools. A fully-
Nedged bank resolution regime, comprising tools such as bridge banks, asset separation
and transfers of business would offer legally sound means of resolving institutions on the
brink_of _i fc ding financial_stability, whilst_add: keh
rights.”””! [internal citations omitted] [emphasis added]

The Tribunal further notes that the State bond was counted towards Laiki’s CT1 capital
ratio in order to bring the Bank into compliance with the EBA recommendation. As the
Tribunal has already found in the paragraphs above, recapitalization permitted Laiki to
continue operating as a going concern. It was solely due to the prospect of a State-backed
recapitalization that Laiki’s auditors could certify its financial statements for 201] and not
include a reservation with regard to the viability of the Bank. Equally, the CBC could
certify to the ECB that Laiki was viable and thus ensure that it could continue to benefit

°° European Central Bank, “Opinion on the recapitalisation of the Cyprus Popular Bank”, (CON/2012/50), 2 July
2012 (Exhibit C-0386).
oN Te,

275

from ELA. The Tribunal is persuaded that, if Laiki had not been recapitalized by the State
in June 2012, it risked not being able to continue recciving ELA. In the absence of this
form of support, it would have been very likely that Laiki would have failed.

1125. Moreover, the Tribunal has already found that the Treaty docs not impose on Cyprus an
obligation to seek international financial assistance in order to support banks in difficulty.
Respondent was therefore not held by an obligation to resort to the EFSF in order to inject
liquidity into the Bank. In any event, Respondent continued to offer liquidity to Laiki in
the form of ELA. The Tribunal also notes that, at the time the Underwriting Decree was
issued, the bond could have been used to raise liquidity through ECB refinancing
operations. The bond only became ineligible for ECB refinancing on 25 June 2012, when
Fitch downgraded Cyprus to “BB+”, outlook negative.”

 

1126. For all these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that the Bank’s recapitalization in 2012 was
not expropriatory.

1127. For all the reasons set out in Section IX.C above, the Tribunal finds that Claimants’
expropriation claim is without merit.

1128. Before proceeding with a presentation of the Parties’ arguments with respect to the
remaining alleged breaches of the Treaty, the Tribunal observes that, in their Reply,
Claimants have made the following clarification:

“Cyprus begins this effort by arguing that the events complained of between 2007 and 2009
did not violate the FET standard. The Claimants never argued otherwise, but only identified
these events as a prologue to contextualize the treatment that ensued. By October 201}, the
long patter of hostility to Greek ownership of Laiki was in full view and ultimately led to
the decimation of the Claimants’ investments.”?”

1129. The Tribunal understands Claimants’ statement to mean that they are no longer maintaining
their claims for breach of the Treaty for any events which occurred during the period 2007-

2009, and spccifically:
(i) Cyprus’ alleged violation of the FET standard as a resull of its failure to engage in
dialogue in 2009, which Claimants argued was inconsistent, arbitrary,
unreasonable, oppressive, not transparent and in bad faith (Memorial, at 412-418);

* Fitch cuts Cyprus to *BB+’, Outlook Negative”, Reuters, 25 June 2012 (Exhibit C-0378); J. Cotterill, “A Cyprus
liquidity switch”, Financial Times, 26 June 2012 (Exhibit C-0380).
Reply, at 90.

276

(ii) Cyprus’ alleged violation of Claimants’ legitimate expectations that the CBC
governor would be impartial and that there would be checks and balances on
executive powers within the CBC (Memorial, at 419-427);9%

(iii) Cyprus’ alleged violation of the FET standard as a result of the CBC’s governor’s
refusal to permit the transfer of Laiki’s seat to Greece, which Claimants argued was
arbitrary and unreasonable (Memorial, at 428);

(iv) Cyprus’ alleged violation of its obligation under Article 2(2) and Article 3(1), (2)
of the Treaty not to treat Claimants less favorably than similar investors as a result
of its decision to block two attempts by Laiki to acquire a stake in BoC and of its
passing a law directed at Laiki to disempower Mr. Vgenopoulos (Memorial, at 542

(a), (b)).

X. WHETHER RESPONDENT BREACHED THE FAIR AND EQUITABLE
TREATMENT STANDARD

 

°74 With the exception of the claim concerning the dismissal of key officers, which is maintained.

277

tT

The Tribunal’s analysis

1210. Article 2 of the Treaty (“Promotion and Protection of Investments”) reads:

“1, Each Contracting Party promotes in its territory, investments by investors of the other
Contracting Party and admits such investments in accordance with its legislation and its
policy regarding foreign investments.

2. Investments by investors of a Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting
Party shat at all times te avcorded fair and equitable treatment and full protection and

y- Each Contracting y shall ensure that the management, maintenance,
enjoyment or disposal i inits territory, of investments by investors of the other Contracting
Party, are not impeded in any way by unjustifiable or discriminatory measures.

 

3. A possible change in the form in which the investments have been made does not affect
their substance as investments, provided that such a change docs not contradict the laws,
regulations and the policy regarding foreign investments of the relevant Contracting Party.

4. Returns from investments and, in cases of approved re-investments, the income ensuing
therefrom enjoy the same protection as initial investments.”

308

1211.

1212.

1213.

1214.

The Parties do not dispute that the FET standard is breached by conduct that is arbitrary,
discriminatory, in bad faith, that fails to afford due process or to ensure appropriate levels
of transparency. The Parties also agree that some proportionality inquiry must factor into
a tribunal’s analysis under the FET standard.

The Parties disagree however on how to appropriately determine proportionality.
Claimants put forward that the Tribunal should seek to determine whether the challenged
measures were “appropriately tailored to the pursuit of [a] rational policy with duc regard
for the consequences imposed on investors”.''3! Claimants consider that this requires the
Tribunal to ascertain, inter alia, whether the challenged measure is the least restrictive
means available to achieve the stated goal pursued by a State. Respondent takes exception
to this reading of the FET standard, arguing that it is not supported by arbitral
jurisprudence. Respondent considers that such a reading of the FET standard would
transform the Tribunal’s inquiry into a de novo review of the correctness and suitability of
the challenged measures, which is impermissible. In Respondent’s view, the Tribunal
should recognize that States enjoy a “margin of appreciation” when taking measures in the
public interest, such as the protection of public health or the stability of the financial system
as a whole.

The Tribunal does not consider it necessary to determine whether the theory of the “margin
of appreciation”, which was developed in international human rights jurisprudence, is
equally applicable in investor-State arbitration. The Tribunal has already concluded in
Section IX.C.2 above, in the context of its expropriation analysis, that it is not the role of
an international arbitral tribunal to evaluate the substantive correctness of economic and
policy choices made by a State, This same conclusion is equally valid in the context of an
FET analysis. In the words of the S.D. Myers v. Canada tribunal, the FET standard does
not create an “or ded mandate to second-guess government decisi king”.'? On
the facts of this case, the Tribunal should not determine, with the benefit of hindsight,
whether the challenged measures were the best solution that could have preserved the
investors’ interests and could have achieved the legitimate policy goal being pursued.
Instead, the Tribunal will limit its analysis of the challenged measures’ proportionality to
determining whether the measures “bea[r] a reasonable relationship to some rational
policy”!'*? and were appropriately tailored so as not to impose an excessive burden on an
investor.

 

The Tribunal wishes to make some preliminary remarks with respect to Claimants’
submission that Cyprus breached their legitimate expectations. Claimants refer in

331 Micula v. Romania, at 525.
"32.§.D. Myers v. Canada, at 261.
1 Invesmart v, Czech Republic, at 454.

309

1215.

1216.

1217.

1218.

1219.

particular to: (i) an expectation that Cyprus would conduct itself in accordance with the
principles of impartiality, regularity and proportionality; and (ii) an expectation that Cyprus
would follow the “rules of the road” agreed at the Eurozone summit.

First, the Tribunal is of the view that the breach of an expectation that a State would conduct
itself impartially, regularly and reasonably does not represent a separate legal basis for
finding a breach of the FET standard. The FET standard, in and of itself, establishes such
an obligation. There is therefore no need to place this legal construct under the legitimate
expectations rubric.

Second, the Tribunal notes that, while Claimants seek to demonstrate that the “rules of the
road” agreed at the Eurozone Summit were the basis of their legitimate expectations
protectable under the Treaty, Claimants also challenge Cyprus’ failure to demand better
terms during the Eurozone Summit, thus disputing the very outcome of the summit, of
which the “rules of the road” were one. Claimants have not adequately explained this
contradictory stance.

For the reasons that will be developed in the subsections below, the Tribunal has reached
the conclusion that the record does not support Claimants’ claim that Respondent breached
the obligation to accord their investments fair and cquitable treatment.

Whether Cyprus’ response to PSI+ breached the FET standard

The Tribunal has concluded at Section IX.C.2 above that Cyprus’ handling of PSI+ and its
purported failures to seck to negotiate an exemption from the EBA capital exercise or to
seek financial assistance from the EFSF were not expropriatory. The Tribunal based this
finding on its conclusion that Respondent’s conduct was not arbitrary, capricious, unrelated
to a rational policy or manifestly lacking in even-handedness. Consequently, and for the
same reasons that the Tribunal found that Cyprus’ response to PSI+ was not expropriatory,
it now also finds that this conduct did not breach the FET standard.

Whether Cyprus shunned Laiki’s November 2011 recapitalization plan

The Tribunal has found at Section 1X.C.4 above that Cyprus did not fail to engage with the
Bank’s November 2011 recapitalization plan, but instead advised Claimants of the steps
that needed to be followed in order to obtain State support. The Tribunal also held that
Respondent’s demand for a due diligence of the Bank prior to a grant of State financial
support was reasonable under the circumstances, as it would have allowed Cyprus to
understand the financial condition of the Bank and the extent of the financial support

310

1220.

1221.

1222.

needed. Further, the Tribunal concluded therein that, contrary to Claimants’ submission, a
similar demand was made following the of Messrs. V. poulos and Boul

in 2012, and again in 2013, when Cyprus was considering whether to support both Laiki
and the BoC with funds from the Troika. For these same reasons, the Tribunal concludes
that Respondent did not breach the FET standard through its handling of Claimants’
recapitalization plan.

Whether Cyprus failed to quell rumors about Laiki

The Tribunal holds that Respondent did not breach the FET standard on this basis and the
record does not support Claimants’ contention that the CBC was the source of rumors
concerning the Bank’s liquidity and ultimate viability.

The contemporaneous documents referred to by Claimants in support of their claim are
email chains that state as follows:
— On 30 Sep 2011, a Laiki employee notified that two
one belonging to a CBC employce and a second to their mother, had been closed
prior to maturity.'"34
— Sometime prior to 18 October 2011, a CBC employee closed a deposit of EUR
270,000 before maturity, stating that they wanted to transfer the amount to the
BoC’s private banking division. However, that employee continued to maintain
with Laiki a deposit of USD 109,000.''°
- Sometime prior to 26 October 2011, another CBC employee withdrew
approximately EUR 200,000 and announced an intention to close a deposit of her
daughter's, of EUR 37,000, citing “discussions in her working environment”,!36

 

In other words, the evidence proffered by Claimants shows that three CBC employces, who
are unnamed and otherwise unidentified, closed their deposits with Laiki prior to maturity.
The Tribunal has not been offered any information about these employees, where they
ranked in the hicrarchical structure of the regulator and what type of information they had
access to as a result of their work with the CBC. The Tribunal cannot conclude from the
simple fact of their employment affiliation that they had access to sensitive financial
information pertaining to Laiki and made financial decisions on this basis. It is equally
likely that these three individuals, like other depositors with the Bank, were informed

311

1223.

1224.

1225.

1226.

1227.

37

through other sources (such as the press) about Laiki’s difficult financial position. The
capital markets had already factored in the Bank’s precarious position, as evidenced by the
continued decline of Laiki’s share price at the time. Moreover, these events were taking
place at a time of continued worsening of the Greek financial crisis and it was public
knowledge that Laiki was heavily exposed to the Greek financial market.

The testimonies of Messrs. Kounnis and Bouloutas do not provide any more clarity as to
the identity and/or position of these CBC employees. Further, the Tribunal finds Mr.
Kounnis’ speculative assertion that “it [had] always [been] [his] sentiment that the rumours
originated within the CBC itself” and particularly with Mr. Orphanides, who “resorted to
this tactic as a means of undermining Mr Vgenopoulos”,''3” to strain credulity. The
Tribunal finds it highly implausible that the Governor of the CBC, whose main
responsibility was to guarantec the stability of the financial system, orchestrated a bank run
in order to put pressure on Mr. Vgenopoulos, all the while offering substantial liquidity
assistance to that same Bank through ELA.

Finally, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the withdrawal of a few deposits by CBC
employees demonstrates the existence of rumors with regard to the financial health of the
Bank.

For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that Claimants’ claim that Respondent breached the
FET standard by failing to quell rumors about Laiki have no merit.

Whether the removal of Claimants-led management breached the FET standard

In its analysis under Section 1X.C.3 above, the Tribunal concluded that the removal of Mr.
Vgenopoulos was not expropriatory, but the result of his personal decision not to oppose
the wishes of the CBC. The Tribunal also found that the record docs not support Claimants’
contention that the CBC threatened to withdraw ELA in order to force Mr. Vgenopoulos
to resign or that the members of Laiki’s Board of Directors were pressured. For these same
reasons, the Tribunal concludes that the removal of Mr. Vgenopoulos does not fall foul of
the Treaty’s FET standard.

With regard (o the purported removal of managers and directors affiliated with Claimants,
the Tribunal found in Section [X.C.3 above that it was the Bank, through its constituent
{egal organs and following duc procedures, who elected new members of the Board and
senior management. The Tribunal also concluded that the record did not support Claimants’
contention that directors and managers affiliated with them were excluded or sidelined. For

Kounnis Witness Statement, at 12.

312

1228.

1229.

1230.

these same reasons, the Tribunal now finds that there is no evidentiary support for the
purported policy of “Cypriotization” of Laiki, and that no breach of the FET standard can
arise therefrom.

Finally, in Section IX.C.3 above, the Tribunal held that the removal of Mr. Bouloutas was
carried out in a good faith effort to protect the public welfare, that it was non-
discriminatory, complied with due process and was proportional. The Tribunal found that
there were objective facts that supported the CBC’s decision to remove Mr. Bouloutas,
such as the Bank’s longstanding non-compliance with regulatory liquidity ratios, its
increasing reliance on central bank financing and the ineffectiveness of management's
efforts to improve the Bank’s finances. The Tribunal expressed the view that it was not
necessary to determine with precision the causes of the Bank’s financial problems or what
remedial measures would have been best to address them. It was sufficient to establish that
the CBC did not act arbitrarily, abusively or with improper motives to conclude that the
challenged conduct was not expropriatory. For these same reasons, the Tribunal now also
concludes that the removal of Mr. Bouloutas did not violate the FET standard in Article
2(2) of the Treaty.

Whether the management of Laiki post-December 2011 breached the FET standard

The Tribunal has found at Section VII.C above that the conduct of Laiki and of its Board
is not attributable to Respondent. For this reason, no breach of Article 2(2) of the Treaty
can arise from the conduct of Laiki’s management post-December 2011.

The Tribunal finds that, in any event, Claimants have not carried their burden of proving
that it was the reforms put in place by Laiki’s new management as well as its performance
during this period that caused the Bank's financial troubles. The Tribunal notes that, to the
contrary, the record supports the opposite conclusion. Laiki began experiencing financial
difficulties long before Messrs. Vgenopoulos and Bouloutas were replaced. A lengthy
correspondence with the CBC dating back to October 2010 shows that Laiki’s liquidity
position consistently deteriorated. An on-site audit report of MEB released in August
2011!!38 showed additional grave problems affecting the Bank’s loan portfolio, deposits
and internal governance. Soon thereafter, the Bank began receiving ELA which ballooned
in December 2011 to EUR 3.3 billion.''3° PwC, the Bank’s auditors, could not certify the
financial statements for 2011 — when Laiki was still managed by Claimants — due to
uncertainty over its ability to continue as a going concern.!!4°

"35 Letter from the CBC (K.S. Poullis) to MPB (E, Bouloutas), 24 August 2011 (Exhibit C-0255),

"9 Laiki Group Liquidity Position Update, | December 2011 (Exhibit R-0128)
"40 Letter from PwC a to MPB (M. Sarris), 20 March 2012 (Exhibit C-0348).

313

1231,

1232.

6.

1233.

1234,

Further, the Tribunal has concluded at Section IX.C.4 above that private investors were
reluctant to invest in the Bank due to its heavy exposure to Greece. While the efforts made
by Laiki’s new management could have been amplified, the record does not support
Claimants’ contention that it was duc to the insufficiency of such efforts that no private
investor was found. The overwhelming reason cited by investors throughout this time was
the Bank’s exposure to Greece. Moreover, as held in Section LX.C.4 above, the record does
not support Claimants’ contention that MIG expressed a scrious interest in purchasing
Laiki’s Greek operations.

For all these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that the management of Laiki subsequent to
December 2011 did not represent a breach of Article 2(2) of the Treaty.

Whether Cyprus intentionally deterred private investment in Laiki in breach of the
FET standard

In Section LX.C.4 above, the Tribunal has found that the record does not support Claimants’
contention that Cyprus delayed clarifying the terms of its support for Laiki in an attempt to
sabotage the Bank’s chances of finding private sources of capital. To the contrary, the
evidence shows that the most important factor that discouraged private investors from
showing an interest in the Bank was its substantial exposure to Greece. Within the same
section of the present Award, the Tribunal concluded that the recapitalization framework
chosen by Cyprus, while containing terms that were not in conformity with international
best standards, was not arbitrary, discriminatory or disproportionate, These conclusions are
equally applicable here, in the context of an FET analysis.

The Tribunal has taken note of Claimants’ submission that the following statement
included in Annex 2 to the Eurozone Summit statement sct out “the rules of the road” that
Eurozone Governments were meant to follow when offering assistance to distressed
financial institutions:

“Banks should first use private sources of capital, including through restructuring and
conversion of debt to equity instruments. Banks should be subject to constraints regarding
the distribution of dividends and bonus payments until the target has been attained. If
necessary, national governments should provide support, and if this support is not
available, recapitalisation should be funded via a loan from the EFSF in the case of
Eurozone countries.”'"""

"St Euro Summit Statement, 26 October 2011 (Exhibit C-0272).

314

1235.

1236.

1237.

1238.

The Tribunal does not consider it necessary to determine whether the principles set out in

“the rules of the road” could rep a source of Clai ” legi ions. It is
sufficient to conclude, for purposes of the present analysis, that, even if Claimants could
derive such expectations from Annex 2, those expectations have t not been breached by
Respondent. Indeed, Respondent’s approach to Laiki’s pitali llowed the same
steps as those set out in Annex 2 to the Eurozone Summit statement. In an initial stage,
Respondent indicated to the Bank that it would intervene only as a last resort, and only to
the extent that the Bank could not find alternative sources of capital. When Laiki’s attempts
to find private investment failed, Cyprus offered to underwrite the Bank’s share issue and
eventually purchased the majority of the new shares. When it became apparent that Laiki
would require a second recapitalization, Cyprus applied to the EFSF for funding.

 

 

For all these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent did not breach Article 2(2)
of the Treaty through its recapitalization of Laiki in the first half of 2012.

Whether Cvprus discriminated against Claimants’ investment

At the outset, the Tribunal notes that its conclusions below are limited to determining
whether Respondent discriminated against Claimants’ investment, in breach of Article 2(2)
of the Treaty. In other words, its observations and findings will be limited to determining
whether, in the words of Saluka v. Czech Republic, “(i) similar cases [were] (ii) treated
differently (iii) and without reasonable justification”.!'4* The Tribunal’s findings with
respect to Claimants’ claim that Respondent discriminated against them on the basis of
their Greek nationality are set out in Section XII below.

In the case sub judice, Claimants complain that Respondent discriminated against their
investment through the following conduct: (i) the majority of Laiki’s management was
removed beginning with November 2011, whereas the entire BoC management was
allowed to stay on for another year, when only a fraction of the board was removed; (ii)
the CBC used ELA as a tool in order to blackmail! Laiki and force the resignation of Mr.
Vgenopoulos, but adopted a much more lenient approach with respect to the BoC; (iii)
Laiki’s recapitalization was unusually harsh to private investors, whereas the BoC was
allowed to recapitalize by absorbing the “good part” of Laiki, while the “bad part” of the
Bank was wound down. It is not entirely clear to the Tribunal whether Claimants maintain
their claim that they were also discriminated against through the sale of Laiki’s Greek
operations. However, out of an abundance of caution, the Tribunal has decided to address
this issue.

i Satuka v. Czech Republic, 313.

315

1239,

1240.

1241.

1242.

1243.

1244.

After having carefully examined the evidence in the record and the Parties’ submissions in
this regard, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent did not breach Article 2(2) of the
Treaty by discriminating against Claimants’ investment.

First, the Tribunal finds that, contrary to Respondent’s submission, the inquiry under
Article 2(2) of the BIT mandates that the Tribunal look not only to the treatment of
Claimants’ shareholding as such, but also to the treatment of Laiki in comparison to the
BoC. In other words, it is equally relevant for a discrimination analysis under Article 2(2)
of the BIT if Laiki was subjected to discriminatory treatment, as that treatment could
directly impact Claimants’ sharcholding.

Second, the Tribunal finds that Laiki and the BoC were in similar circumstances. The banks
were comparable in size as the second largest and the largest bank in Cyprus. Both banks
were systemically important for the health of the country’s financial system, Both banks
were exposed to the Greek market — although perhaps not to the same extent. Both banks
were registered in Cyprus, traded on the Cyprus Stock Exchange and were subject to the
same regulatory framework. Finally, both banks required recapitalization, according to the
EBA capital exercise updated to 30 September 201 1''*? and to their own requests for State
support in May 2012,'" June 2012!"45 and October 2012.''® The fact that the financial
conditions of the two banks were different is not a sufficient ground to disprove that the
banks were in similar circumstances.

Third, the Tribunal finds that no difference in treatment existed between Laiki and the BoC
with respect to the removal of management or the grant of ELA by the CBC.

With regard to the removal of management, the Tribunal recalls that the CBC removed
Messrs. Vgenopoulos and in Ni ber 2011 following Laiki’s failure to
comply with the minimum regulatory liquidity ratios, its ever more increased reliance on
ELA and the ineffectiveness of management's efforts to address the Bank’s financial
problems. Other replacements on Laiki’s Board of Directors and senior management were

made by the Bank itself, following normal corporate procedures, !'47

 

The Tribunal notes that, in the case of the BoC, management was nol removed in November
2011. However, at that time, the BoC was not receiving emergency financial assistance

‘4 European Banking Authority, Marfin Popular Bank “Composition of capital as of 30 September 2011 (CDR3
rules)”, undated (Exhibit C-0574); European Banking Authority, Bank of Cyprus “Composition of capital as of 30
September 2011 (CDR3 rules)”, undated (Exhibit C-0572).

‘4 Letter from Laiki (C. a. to the CBC (P. Demetriades), 8 May 2012 (Exhibit R-0476).

"45 Letter from BoC|

Jo CBC (P. Demciriades), 29 June 2012 (Exhibit R-0494).

'46 CPB, Announcement, 3 October 2012 (Exhibit C-0411).
‘47 See, Section 1X.C.3 supra.

316

1245.

1246.

1247.

1248.

1249.

from the CBC.'“® The BoC first requested and obtained ELA on 15 November 2012.''4?
Soon thereafter, on 4 December 2012, the CBC made a formal request to the BoC that
members of its Board of Directors who had served continuously for more than nine years
should resign.''®° The reasons cited by the CBC were the financial difficulties faced by the
bank and the need for a fresh approach in view of an impending restructuring. On 17
December 2012, the BoC formally reported that five members of its Board of Directors,
who had served for more than nine consecutive years, had resigned following the
regulator’s recommendation. !!5!

In other words, in the case of both Laiki and the BoC, management was removed by the
CBC after emergency financial assistance was offered by the State in the form of ELA.
The Tribunal concludes that no breach of Article 2(2) occurred in this instance.

With regard to the grant of ELA, the Tribunal recalls its finding in Section 1X.C.3 above
that Laiki was offered emergency assistance immediately upon its request. The evidence
in the record does not support Claimants’ contention that the CBC used the threat of
withdrawing ELA in order to orchestrate the removal of Mr. Vgenopoulos. To the contrary,
Laiki continued to receive ELA until its resolution, in March 2013.'!5? Consequently, there
is no basis to conclude that the BoC was treated more favorably than Laiki with respect to

 

the grant of ELA. No discrimination of Claimants’ i has thus d in this
regard.
Fourth, the Tribunal finds that, following Laiki’s lution and the BoC’s italization

 

in March 2013, Claimants’ shareholding in the Bank was subject to the same treatment as
the shareholding of existing investors in the BoC, both of which were completely wiped
out, The difference in treatment between Laiki and the BoC, consisting of the former’s
resolution and the latter’s recapitalization, was based on a reasonable justification and, in
any event, had a de minimis impact on Claimants’ investment that does not amount to a
breach of Article 2(2) of the Treaty.

The Tribunal will explain its conclusion in the paragraphs below.
The Tribunal recalls that, contrary to Claimants’ submission, Respondent did not dismiss

out of hand Laiki’s request for State support, made in November 2011, but considered it
and ultimately, in May 2012, acceded to it.''*? Equally, the Tribunal finds no basis in the

48 See, BoC, ELA Operations with the CBC (Exhibit R-0529)

49 Je,

"5° Letter from the CBC (P. Demetriades) to Bank of Cyprus QED 4 December 2012 (Exhibit R-0211).
"5 Letter from the Bank of Cyprus {EEN o CBC (P. Demctriades), 17 December 2012 (Exhibit R-0213).
"'2 Laiki, ELA Operations with Central Bank of Cyprus (Exhibit R-0277).

"8 See, Section IX.C.4 supra.

317

1250.

1251.

record that can substantiate Claimants’ contention that only Laiki was required to submit
to an assessment of its assets and liabilities prior to obtaining State support. The record
clearly establishes that, following its own request for Slate support, the BoC was subject
to an in-depth diagnostic by PIMCO. The same diagnostic was applied to Laiki, who, at
the time, made a second request for State support.

Laiki was recapitalized in June 2012 on the basis of the Underwriting Decree, with all the
attendant limitations this placed on normal corporate governance principles.''* At the time
this occurred, the BoC had made no request for State financial support. In the first half of
2012, the BoC successfully raised EUR 594 million on the capital markets!''5 and declared
that it would be able to raise sufficient funds from private sources in order to comply with
the EBA CTI capital recommendation by the 30 June 2012 deadline. It was only in late
June 2012 that the BoC revealed that it would not be able to raise sufficient funds.''5¢ Thus,
on 29 June 2012, the BoC formally applied for State support in the form of a non-equity
capital injection of EUR 500 million.'” In other words, the BoC was not subject to
provisions similar to those included in the Underwriting Decree because at the time it had
not made a request for State support.

In October 2012, Laiki revealed that it had a remaining capital shortfall of EUR 1,125
million as of 30 June 2012 and would need additional State support.!'** In November 2012,
press reports began circulating that the CBC had second thoughts about the approach it had
adopted during Laiki’s recapitalization and was debating whether to use in the case of the
BoC “co-co bonds so that the participation of current shareholders [would] not [be]
compressed”.''®? Ultimately, Respondent did not go through with this approach for the
BoC’s recapitalization.

Ultimately, the proposals for the recapitalization of both Laiki and the BoC were put before
the Troika, as part of Cyprus’ application for financial assistance from the EFSF. As part
of this process, both banks’ capital needs were assessed by PIMCO. Following two
Eurozone summits and multiple rounds of negotiations between Cyprus and the Troika, on
25 March 2013, it was decided that Respondent would receive no financial assistance from
the EFSF to recapitalize either Laiki or the BoC. It was further decided that Laiki would
be resolved “with full contribution of equity shareholders, bond holders and uninsured
depositors!" and split into a “good bank” and a “bad bank”. The “good bank” would be

154 See, Section IX.C.4 supra.
"58 BoC Announcement, 20 March 2012 (Exhibit R-0463).

§S® Letter from CBC (P, Demetn
Cyprus Public Company Lt

  

des) to Bank of Cyprus QED entitled “Recapitalisation Plan for the Bank of
June 2012 (Exhibit R-0187),

"37 Letter from BoC a; CBC (P. Demetriades), 29 June 2012 (Exhibit R-0494),

''58 CPB, Announcement, 3 October 2012 (Exhibit C-0411).

189 “Second Thoughts of the Central Bank for state banks”, Stockwatch, 5 November 2012 (Exhibit C-0413).
116 Eurogroup Statement on Cyprus, 25 March 2013 (Exhibit C-0449),

318

1253.

1254.

1255.

M8 aa.

absorbed into the BoC, while the “bad bank” would be resolved. For its part, the BoC
would be lized through “‘a deposit/equity conversion of uni d deposits with full
contribution of equity shareholders and bond holders”.'"*! In other words, both Laiki’s and
the BoC’s existing shareholders and bondholders would be completely wiped out, while
uninsured depositors would suffer a reduction in the case of the BoC, and would be wiped
out in the case of Laiki. Finally, it was decided that, as a condition of offering financial
support to Cyprus, the Greek branches of Cypriot banks would have to be sold off for a
price to be determined by the European Commission. '!

On the basis of the above, the Tribunal finds that there was no difference in treatment
between existing BoC shareholders and existing Laiki shareholders, including Claimants:
they were both completely wiped out.

The Tribunal also finds that, even if Cyprus had accepted the initial bailout package
proposed by the Troika on 15-16 March 2013, the evidence in the record suggests that the
effect on Claimants’ shareholding (as well as on the shareholding of the original
shareholders in the BoC) would have been the same: complete dilution. The statement
released after the close of the Eurogroup meeting of 15-16 March 2013 mentioned that the
Troika’s explicit purpose was to downsize the Cypriot banking sector:

“The current fragile situation of the Cypriot financial sector linked to its very large size
relative to the country’s GDP will be addressed through an appropriate downsizing, with
the domestic banking sector reaching the EU average by 2018, thereby ensuring its long-
term viability and safeguarding deposits.

bel

Against this background, the Eurogroup considers that — in principle — financial assistance
to Cyprus is warranted to safeguard financial stability in Cyprus and the euro area as a
whole by providing a financial envelope which has been reduced to up to EUR 10bn. The
Eurogroup would welcome a contribution by the IMF to the financing of the
programme,”"!'6

The terms required to be fulfilled by Cyprus in order to access the reduced bailout package
available were the following: (i) the introduction of a one-off stability levy of 6.7%
applicable to resident and non-resident deposits of under EUR 100,000 and 9.9% on
deposits over EUR 100,000; (ii) the increase of the withholding tax on capital income; (iii)

"@ Internal Ministry of Finance Note, 15 May 2013 (Exhibit R-0514); CBC Note to the Institutions Committee, 28
May 2013 (Exhibit R-0515); Letter from CBC (P. Demetriades) to the Institutions Committee (D. Syllouris), 3 June
2013 (Exhibit R-0516); Ekathimerini.com, “EU dictated sale of Greek branches of Cypriot banks”, 26 May 2013
(Exhibit R-0243),

16 Eurogroup Summit Statement, 16 March 2013 (Exhibit C-0445).

319

1256.

1257.

1258.

1259,

the restructuring and recapitalization of banks; (iv) the increase in statutory corporate
income tax; and (v) the bail-in of junior bondholders, !'!

In other words, no funds were made available for the recapitalization of Laiki and the BoC
even under the first Troika bailout package. The banks were to be recapitalized through the
full contribution of equity shareholders, junior bondholders and, to the extent of the levies,
depositors. Consequently, even if Cyprus had accepted the initial bailout package proposed
by the Troika, Claimants would still have suffered a complete dilution of their
shareholding, as would have the BoC’s shareholders.

The Tribunal notes that an element of difference between the treatment afforded to Laiki
and the treatment afforded to the BoC by Cyprus existed: the latter survived, while the
former was resolved. There is considerable debate between the Parties on who decided to
resolve Laiki and save the BoC. To the Tribunal, this is not outcome-determinative. What
matters is that Cyprus, as a sovereign State, agreed and, by implication, decided, that the
BoC would continuc to exist while Laiki would be resolved.

The Tribunal accepts that this decision was taken in circumstances where the Troika was
requesting that both Laiki and the BoC be resolved:

“Doros Ktorides expressed concern that there is pressure from Troika to resolve both Laiki
and Bank of Cyprus”.""*

“During the [14 March 2013 Euro Working Group] meeting, the IMF reiterated its position
that the effective solution of the Cyprus banking sector problems, and the sustainability of
the public debt, should be achieved through the resolution of the two big banks.”!"

“Along the same lines, intense were the consultations with representatives of the Troika,
who, after the rejection of the first decision, insisted that the only possible solution, with
the new, clearly worse conditions created in the economy, was the dissolution of the two
systemic banks through the application of a so-called resolution of banking institutions, for
which procedure a legislative framework process did not exist until then, but apparently it
was ready and presented at that time before the government.” "'7

The Tribunal is persuaded that there was a reasonable justification for the difference in
treatment between Laiki and the BoC in March 2013: the different financial conditions of

"4 Jd, Ministry of Finance Announcement, Agreement for a Financial Assistance to the Republic of Cyprus, 18
March 2013 (Exhibit R-0229).

"6 Laiki, BoD Minutes, 22 March 2013 (Exhibit R-0509)

"16 Statement of President of the Republic, Nikos Anastasiades, before the Investigation Committee for the Economy,
Chronological Review of Events from | March 2013 until the First Eurogroup, 27 August 2013 (Exhibit R-0246),

"167 Jd, See also, Olli Rebn Statement on Cyprus in the European Parliament, 17 April 2013 (Exhibit R-0513): “{T]he
two largest Cypriot banks were allowed to build up by far too concentrated risk exposures. It was the problems in
these banks that caused the troubles for the sovereign and the economic decline of Cyprus — not the other way round”

320

1260.

the two banks, which made it impossible for both of them to survive. According to the
PIMCO Report, in the adverse scenario, Laiki would have required EUR 3.835 billion for
its recapitalization, while the BoC would have needed EUR 3.96 billion.''®* Nevertheless,
in the case of Laiki, the EUR 3.835 billion required for the Bank’s second recapitalization
would have been in addition to the EUR 1.8 billion that Cyprus had already injected in
June 2012.

The Tribunal notes that Laiki’s dire financial condition brought it close to the point of
collapse on two instances, in November 2012 and, more importantly, on 21 March 2013:

“10. On 18 November 2012, the CBC announced its own agreement with the Troika
regarding the programme for the financial sector. Since no subsequent agreement with the
government _was reached regarding fiscal matters, the Troika left Cyprus and_on_22
November 2012 Laiki Bank came under unprecedented pressure due to massive deposit

outflows.

11. The prompt recommendation of the CBC Governor to the government to announce its
intention to sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) averted the risk of collapse of
Laiki Bank, the second largest and systemic bank in Cyprus, which would have led to the
collapse of the entire financial system.However, a final agreement on the MoU could not
be signed before the completion of the independent diagnostic checks of Cypriot banks by
PIMCO, which were aimed at identifying the capital needs of Cypriot banks, a condition
stipulated in the MoU.

12. When the findings of PIMCO were submitted in January 2013, the country was already
in a pre-election period. Hence, the Troika deliberately abstained from any action that could
serve or be interpreted as a political intervention. Consequently, at the end of January 2013,
the ECB's Board of Directors extended the deadline of ELA to Laiki Bank until 21 March
2013. In making its decision, the ECB’s Board of Directors indicated that this decision was
taken in accordance with the Terms of Reference of the Eurogroup, in order to urge the
new government of the Republic of Cyprus to finalise the agreement for the support
programme soon after the elections of February 2013. This decision was announced by the
CBC Governor to the new president of the Republic of Cyprus in a letter dated 4 March
2013.

13. This was followed by the first Eurogroup decision on 16 March 2013 for a general
‘haircut’ on deposits of all banks operating in Cyprus. On 19 March 2013, Parliament
rejected the government's bill to implement this decision.

14. On 21 March, the ECB’s Board of Directors imptemented its decision to cease the
provision of ELA to Laiki Bank, with a requirement to repay on 26 March 2013. The
implementation of this decision would have led to a disorderly bankruptcy of Laiki Bank
and to an immediate activation of the Deposit Protection Scheme, which had only €125

million in funds. This would have resulted in an obligation for the Republic of Cyprus to

‘68 PIMCO, Independent Due Diligence Report of the Banking System of Cyprus, | February 2013 (Exhibit C-0437).

321

repay the €6,4 billion of insured deposits in Laiki Bank, which would have caused the
bankruptcy of the country itself. ''’ [emphasis added]

1261. The President of Cyprus, Nikos Anastasiades, confirmed this in his testimony before the
Pikis Commission:

“On Thursday the 21* of March 2013, shortly after noon, the Central Bank informed the
government and the leaders of the parties, that Laiki Bank would collapse within the next
few hours, duc to final exhaustion of liquidity. Obviously cash machines and possibly
electronic transactions, had Ied to the exhaustion of physical cash.”!"”°

1262. The Tribunal also recalls that, in March 2013, the BoC’s total ELA consumption stood at
EUR 2.3 billion, while Laiki’s at EUR 9.1 billion.!!!

1263. The Tribunal accepts that, if Cyprus had agreed to the resolution of both systemic banks,
this decision would have had substantial and lasting economic ramifications on the vast
majority of depositors and on the economy at large.!'”* The Tribunal does not consider it
unreasonable for Cyprus to have wanted to maintain the healthier of the two systemic banks
of the country and thus to seek to minimize the impact of the measures proposed by the
Troika.

1264. Moreover, because both Laiki’s and the BoC’s existing sharcholders were completely
wiped out, the Tribunal finds that the difference in treatment between Laiki and the BoC
only had de minimis implications as regards Claimants’ investment. Considering that no
EFSF funds were made available for the recapitalization of cither bank, even if Laiki had
been allowed to survive and would have been recapitalized through a similar method as the
BoC, Claimants’ sharcholding would have been entirely wiped out.

1265. The Tribunal wishes to add that, in any event, Claimants have not demonstrated that the
reason for treating Laiki and the BoC differently was improper.

1266. Finally, the Tribunal finds that Laiki and the BoC were treated in the same manner as
regards their Greek branches, since all Greek branches of Laiki, the BoC (and Hellenic
Bank) were sold to Piraeus Bank.!'7?

© CBC, Press Release, “Rescue Programme for Laiki Bank”, 30 March 2013 (Exhibit C-0458),

+ Statement of President of the Republic, Nikos Anastasiades, before the Investigation Committee for the Economy,
Chronological Review of Events from | March 2013 until the First Eurogroup, 27 August 2013 (Exhibit R-0246).
471 Laiki, FLA Operations with the Central Bank of Cyprus (Exhibit R-0277); BoC, ELA Operations within CBC
(Exhibit R-0529).

"72 See, Statement of President of the Republic, Nikos Anastasiades, before the Investigation Committee for the
Economy, Chronological Review of Events from 1 March 2013 until the First Eurogroup, 27 August 2013 (Exhibit
R-0246).

‘0° Ekathimerini.com, “EU dictated sale of Greek branches of Cypriot banks”, 26 May 2013 (Exhibit R-0243).

322

1267.

1268.

1269.

1270.

1271.

For these reasons, the Tribunal considers that the difference in treatment between Laiki
and the BoC in March 2013 does not represent a breach of Article 2(2) of the Treaty.

Whether Cyprus breached the FET standard through a failure to provide due process
to Claimants’ investment

After examining the submissions made by the Parties and the evidence in the record, the
Tribunal finds that Cyprus did not breach Article 2(2) of the Treaty by failing to provide
duc process to Claimants’ investment.

The Tribunal notes that Claimants’ arguments are threefold. First, Claimants contend that
Respondent denied them justice in the Nicosia proceedings. Second, Claimants argue that
Respondent failed to afford them due process and engaged in arbitrary and abusive conduct
in the criminal proceedings initiated against its witnesses in this arbitration, as well as in
the CySEC, Paphos and Limassol proceedings. Third, Claimants complain that Respondent
breached Article 2(2) of the Treaty through a public campaign of vilification and
harassment against them and their investment. The Tribunal shall examine these arguments
in turn.

The Nicosia proceedings. Claimants criticize the Nicosia proceedings in particular for the
court’s decision to award Laiki a worldwide freezing order of a “[m]anifestly irrational
amount” and against “[m]anifestly inadequate security” despite there being “[n]o real risk
of dissipation”.''” Further, Claimants argue that the freezing order was not reasoned and
that there were undue delays in the proceedings. Claimants do not dispute that they have
not exhausted local remedies, but contend instead they have exhausted all “‘effective”"'75
remedies in Cyprus. In their submission, following the enforcement abroad of the
worldwide freezing order, there is no remedy in Cyprus for the “business and reputational
harm to those subject to the [worldwide freezing order], nor for the fees that they have
already incurred in resisting the Greek and English enforcement proceedings”.!'7°

Respondent counters that the freezing order is not final and can still be challenged in the
Cypriot courts. Further, in its view, the harm allegedly suffered by Claimants in the
enforcement proceedings can be compensated by an award of damages in the Cypriot
courts. For these reasons, Respondent is of the view that local remedies have not been
exhausted and no denial of justice could have occurred,

114 C.PHS, at 124 (emphasis omitted).
5 Reply, at 121.
1178 fq

323

1272.

1273.

1274.

1275.

1276.

For its part, the Tribunal is of the view that “it is not enough to have an erroneous decision
or an incompetent judicial procedure” for a finding of denial of justice, but there must be
“clear evidence of ... an outrageous failure of the judicial system or a demonstration of
systemic injustice or that the impugned decision was clearly improper and
discreditable”.''”” The Tribunal aligns itself with other tribunals finding that “a claimant
cannot raise a claim that a judicial act constitutes a breach of international law, without
first proceeding through the judicial system that it purports to challenge, and thereby
allowing the system an opportunity to correct itself”.!'"8 Further, the Tribunal agrees with
Respondent that the exhaustion of local remedies is not, in the case of a denial of justice
claim, a mere pre-condition to arbitration, but a constituent clement of the delict:

“Denial of justice does not arise until a reasonable opportunity to correct aberrant judicial
conduct has been given to the system as a whole.”"'? [emphasis added]

It is not disputed by the Parties that Claimants have not exhausted local remedies against
the decisions taken by the Nicosia court. The issue to be determined is thus whether it
would have been obviously futile for Claimants to seck to challenge the impugned
decisions before raising the claim before this Tribunal.

In this regard, the Tribunal aligns itself with the Apotex v. United States tribunal, which
found:

“(Under established principles, the question whether the failure to obtain judicial finality
may be excused for ‘obvious futility’ turns on the unavailability of relief by a higher judicial
authority, not on measuring the likelihood that the higher judicial authority would have
granted the desired relief."'"" [emphasis in original]

In other words, what is required is “an actual unavailability of recourse, or recourse that is
proven to be manifestly ineffective — which, in turn, requires more than one side simply
proffcring its best estimate or prediction as to its likely prospects of success, if available
recourse had been pursued”.''*!

The Tribunal finds that Claimants have not made such a demonstration. Claimants have
not proven that they could not request an award of damages from the Cypriot courts to
compensate them for the business and reputational harm allegedly suffered on account of
the enforcement proceedings commenced abroad. Likewise, Claimants have not
demonstrated that the fees and expenses incurred to defend against these proceedings are

"77 Philip Morris v. Uruguay, at 500 (internal citations omitted) (emphasis omitted)
"78 Apotex v. United States, at 282.

"7 Pantechniki v. Albania, at 96,

"8 Apotex v. United States, at 276.

"ISU Td, at 284 (internal citations omitted).

324

1277.

1278.

1279.

1280.

1281.

not recoverable in Cyprus. Further, Claimants have not demonstrated that the remedies
available under Cypriot procedural law would not have permitted them to challenge what
they perceive as the manifestly wrongful decisions of the Nicosia court. Respondent
maintains that these remedies exist and are available under Cypriot law.!'*?

This failure to exhaust local remedies is sufficient, from the Tribunal’s point of view, to
warrant a dismissal of Claimants’ denial of justice claims pertaining to the Nicosia
proceedings.

The Tribunal however wishes to make some additional remarks,

Claimants complain of the significant delays incurred throughout the Nicosia proceedings.
However, the Tribunal notes that at least some of these delays were duc to requests and
applications from Claimants, while others followed motions from Laiki.''®? Moreover, the
Tribunal considers that, due to the complexity of the issues examined in the Nicosia
proceedings and the number of parties involved, some delays should have been expected.
The mere existence of delays in complex proceedings is not sufficient to establish a denial
of justice.

Claimants also challenge some of the decisions taken by the Nicosia court, in particular
their purported lack of reasoning, the amounts involved in the freezing order, its
extraterritorial effect or the court’s alleged lack of jurisdiction. The Tribunal is not a court
of appeal, and its role is not to verify whether the Nicosia court correctly applied Cypriot
law to the facts when deciding the various applications before it. It is not up to this Tribunal
to decide whether or not the Nicosia court was the competent forum for bringing the request
for a freezing order, or whether the amounts frozen were correct.

The Tribunal holds that, contrary to Claimants’ submission, the court did provide reasons
for its decision.'"* The Tribunal agrees with Claimants that the amounts involved in the
freezing order were undoubtedly significant. One may even argue that they were extreme.
However, the court made reasonable allowances for living expenses (EUR 20,000 per
month in the case of Messrs. Bouloutas and Vgenopoulos and EUR 10,000 per month in
the case of Mr. Mageiras) as well as legal costs (EUR 100,000 per month). The Tribunal
also bears in mind that, due to the magnitude of the Bank’s involvement in the Cypriot
economy and the impact of its downfall, the sums sought in these proceedings would
necessarily have been of a considerable magnitude. Had it not been for these latter
considerations, and had the freezing order not been challengeable to the higher court,

18 Rejoinder, at 485.

406 Respondent's Rejoinder to the Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, Annex 1.

'\ Cyprus Popular Bank Public Co Lid, of Nicosia v. Andreas Vgenopoulos and other Defendants, District Court of
Nicosia, Judgment regarding preservation orders dated 29 April 2013, 23 May 2014 (Exhibit CL-0230).

325

serious questions of a possible Treaty breach would have been raised. However, these are
not the circumstances of this case. Consequently, the Tribunal finds that Respondent did
not deny Claimants justice in the Nicosia proceedings.

1282. The Paphos, Limassol and CySEC proceedings. The Tribunal notes that the Paphos and
Limassol proceedings are suspended or have been dismissed at the time of this Award, with
no findings having been made against Claimants. No breach of Article 2(2) can therefore
arise in this regard.

1283. The Tribunal likewise finds that Respondent did not breach Article 2(2) of the Treaty
through its handling of the CySEC proceedings.

1284. In this respect, the Tribunal finds that, in all CySEC proceedings within the ambit of this
arbitration, the individuals under investigation were given the opportunity to present their
views on the findings of this administrative body. The evidence in the record also shows
that the proceedings were not targeted at Claimants: with the exception of the First CySEC
i igation, all other six i igations involved multiple individuals, many of whom
were not affiliated with Claimants. The First CySEC investigation concerned only one
individual, Mr. Bouloutas, as it was based on his individual conduct, consisting of a
statement made to the press. In those instances in which CySEC imposed fines, the
possibility to challenge the relevant decision before the Supreme Court was available and
made use of. Moreover, CySEC imposed fines not only on Laiki, Claimants or their
affiliates, but also on individuals not affiliated with Claimants. !!85

1285. Claimants complain that, on 26 January 2014, four months before the completion of the
Second CySEC investigation, the President of this institution declared to a newspaper that
she was optimistic that criminal proceedings could be brought against former managers of
Laiki.''** Respondent counters that the CySEC President was misquoted in the press and,
upon noticing this, she requested a correction, which was duly published. In this correction,
the statement read that CySEC was optimistic about “the completion of the investigations
as soon as possible and not ... their result”.!'*7 To this, Claimants respond that the
journalist who published the initial article confirmed in an affidavit the accuracy of the
initial statement.''** The Tribunal has not had the opportunity to examine neither the
President of CySEC, nor the journalist who published the initial version of her statement.
Under these circumstances, it is not possible for the Tribunal to determine with any degree
of accuracy what statement was madc by the President of CySEC. Consequently, the
Tribunal must conclude that Claimants have not carried their burden of demonstrating that

‘185 Respondent's Rejoinder to the Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, Annex 1.
‘IN T. Agathokleus, “New investigations commenced for Laiki”, Alitheia, 26 January 2014 (Exhibit C-0506).
1187

‘SS Affidavit 01 aD Exhibit C-0539).
326

1286.

1287.

1288.

1289.

1290.

the President of CySEC made the statement initially attributed to her. In any event, the
Tribunal notes that the Second CySEC investigation did not result in a criminal
investigation being opened against Claimants, as that initial quoted statement seemed to
suggest.

The Tribunal notes further that Claimants also criticize CySEC for taking “an unreasonably
selective approach to the evidence it chose to take into consideration” or for making “a
number of substantive errors in arriving at its final decision”.''*? The Tribunal recalls that
it is not a court of appeal and it may not review the decisions taken by the administrative
and judicial authorities in Cyprus for correctness. Having concluded that CySEC conducted
the proceedings in compliance with principles of due process, the Tribunal’s analysis of
the CySEC proceedings must end there.

The criminal proceedings. During the course of this arbitration, the Parties have debated at
Iength on the nature, purpose, appropriateness, conduct and effects of the criminal
proceedings initiated against some of the Claimants and their witnesses. At the interim
measures stage, the Tribunal stated:

“States have the sovercign right to investigate and prosecute potential criminal conduct
committed on their territory. The ICSID Convention does not grant investors immunity
from criminal prosecution by virtue of having filed a request for arbitration.”"""

This holding is as valid for the interim measures stage of the arbitration as it is for the
merits. The mere initiation of criminal proceedings against a party to the arbitration and/or
witnesses of that party is not sufficient, in and of itself, for a finding that an investment
treaty has been breached. This is accepted by Claimants, who state that “Cyprus is ... free
to investigate potential wrongdoing”.!!!

The main criticisms raised by Claimants with respect to the criminal proceedings initiated
against Messrs. Bouloutas, Foros, Vgenopoulos and Magciras pertains to the issuance of
arrest warrants against them during the pendency of this arbitration and the alleged
selectivity of the criminal prosecutions.

Considerable time and effort have been expended in this arbitration in order to determine
the effects of the arrest warrants issued against Messrs. Bouloutas, Foros, Vgenopoulos
and Mageiras on Claimants’ investment and the assertion of their rights in this arbitration.
The Tribunal does not consider it useful to reiterate herein the multiple and complex
considerations which prompted it to recommend that Cyprus suspend the enforcement of

"8 Memorial, at 329.
"9 Procedural Order No. 6, at 219.
"91 C-PHS, at 128.

327

1291.

1292.

these warrants!!?” or the considerations which, following the defendants’ refusal to appear

for their committal hearings, determined the Tribunal to recommend that Messrs.
Boul Foros, Vgenopoulos and Mageiras appear for their ital hearings. ''°> For
the purposes of the present analysis, it is sufficient to note that, at the interim measures
stage, the Tribunal was not persuaded that the state of the evidentiary record at that time
supported a conclusion that the criminal proceedings had been initiated abusively, with the
intent to harass Claimants or to gain a tactical advantage in this arbitration.'!°4 This
conclusion was then confirmed by the subsequent conduct of the criminal defendants and
of the Cyprus prosecutorial authorities, as well as by the now complete evidentiary record.
Indeed, following the issuance of Procedural Orders Nos. 7 and 8, and the appearance of
Messrs. Bouloutas and Foros for their committal hearings, the arrest warrants issued
against them!!* were withdrawn and bail was set in terms comparable to those imposed
for various BoC officials. Messrs. Bouloutas and Foros could thus travel freely without

Following R ke

fear of arrest. ”s request to ine him, Mr. Boul also
appeared at the hearing, For his part, Mr. Mageiras refused to appear for his committal
hearing, even when expressly invited by the Tribunal and when guarantecs of release upon
his appearance at the committal hearing were offered. The Tribunal notes that, in any event,
in June 2017, the arrest warrant issued against Mr. Mageiras was withdrawn.'!®° Moreover,
on 14 June 2018, the Cyprus Supreme Court confirmed that Messrs. Bouloutas and Foros’
initial election to appear for their committal hearings through counsel did not constitute
contempt of court and did not justify the issuance of arrest warrants. "197 In other words, the
Cypriot courts gave Claimants’ witnesses their time in court and ultimately sided with them
on these procedural issues.

The Tribunal thus maintains its provisional finding that the criminal proceedings were
initiated by Respondent as a result of the legitimate application of Cyprus criminal laws,
and not abusively, for tactical reasons or with the intent to harass Claimants. Moreover,
any impediment that affected some of Claimants’ witnesses as a result of the issuance of
arrest warrants was short-lived, as Cyprus suspended their enforcement and subsequently
withdrew them. For these reasons, the Tribunal finds no breach of the Treaty as a result of
the issuance of arrest warrants against Messrs. Bouloutas, Foros, Vgenopoulos and
Mageiras.

As support for their contention that Respondent selectively targeted them when bringing
the 2015 Criminal prosecution, Claimants have referred to the unanimous nature of the

1 See, Procedural Order No. 6, at 230-246, 253-257

1! See, Procedural Order No. 7, at 60-95.

4 See, Procedural Order No. 6, at 220, 223, 229, 231-237.

1. Mr. Vgenopoulos passed away before his committal hearing scheduled for 1 December 2016.
Claimants’ Letter to the Tribunal, 22 June 2017.

"” Claimants’ Letter to the Tribunal, 19 June 2018.

328

decision taken by the Laiki Board of Directors to postpone impairing the goodwill of the
Bank’s Greck operations. Claimants argue that “Cyprus has never substantiated its
selective prosecution” and, months after the completion of the interim phase of the
arbitration, “has still offered no evidence to justify its selective prosecution”.'°* The
Tribunal recalls that, according to established principles governing the burden of proof, it
is up to Claimants to demonstrate that the 2015 Criminal prosecution was arbitrary,
retaliatory, targeted or discriminatory. In any event, the Tribunal recalls that, at the
provisional measures hearing, the Attorney General of Cyprus, Mr. Clerides, provided the
following explanation for Cyprus’ decision to prosecute only four members of Laiki’s
Board of Directors:

“THE WITNESS: [W]e have decided in this case to prosecute only persons of the members
of the Board who had some knowledge in the subject matter of the criminal investigation,
persons who had participated in one way or another. [...] Who had knowledge of the facts
which create this offence, because without mens rea, you cannot secure a prosecution or
prosecute anybody.

ARBITRATOR PRICE: [O]ther than the fact that one was chair of the audit committee,
how is it that you picked these four and no others? What was the distinguishing feature of
these four?

THE WITNESS: One was the CEO, the other was the acting CEO, the other onc was
participating in the audit commission. They had special knowledge.

ARBITRATOR PRICE: And the other nine did not participate in the decision?

THE WITNESS: They didn’t have special knowledge so as to fix them with liability. [...]
The other two persons who had — could be fixed with knowledge were Mr. Mylonas and
Mr. Stylianides, These two people could have been added as accused persons on the charge
sheets. Mr. Mylonas was accepted for the reasons I gave — old age. And Mr. Stylianides
was preferred to be used as a prosecution witness.”"'%

1293. The Tribunal accepts the explanation offered by the Cyprus Attorney General.

1294, Claimants add that a statement attributed to the President of the Institutions Committee in
November 2013,'? as well as a statement attributed to the President of CySEC in January
2014!) also demonstrate the “vindictiveness”!?” of the criminal prosecutions initiated
against them.

1295. The Tribunal has already examined the statement attributed to the President of CySEC.
Therein, the Tribunal has concluded that Claimants have not demonstrated by a
preponderance of evidence that this statement can effectively be attributed to the President

198 C.PHS, at 129,

"9 Interim Measures Hearing Transcript, Day 2, 347: 18-22; 348: 1-4, 9-20; 354: 7-14.

“The unimaginable pillage”, Simerini, 14 November 2013 (Exhibit C-0498).

'201'T, Agathokleus, “New investigations commenced for Laiki”, Alitheia, 26 January 2014 (Exhibit C-0506),
1202 C_PHS, at 130 (emphasis omitted).

 

329

1296.

1297.

1298.

1299,

1300.

of CySEC. For this reason, this statement cannot support Claimants’ argument of a targeted
criminal prosecution.

The Tribunal further notes that the statement attributed to the President of the Institutions
Committee was included in an opinion piece published in Simerini. The paragraph in which
the contested statement appears reads as follows:

“Further than this, however, there are grave liabilities by many and various persons on
many levels. We are talking about a five billion curo loss. The Assistant-Attorney General,
R. Erotokritou, correctly said that: ‘To rob a bank, you must first buy it’. The [sic] bought
it, they governed it the way they wanted to and they pillaged it! The Secretary-Gencral of
DISY stated, the day before yesterday, yet again, that all those responsible for this pillage
have names and addresses. The night before last, the Attorney-General asked everyone to
be very careful when dealing with cases under investigation, such as the pillage of the
banking system and, particularly, of Laiki. This was, obviously, a direct reference to the
Committee of Institutions. Yesterday, this caused a reaction from the Chairman of the
latter, who indicated intenscly that for at least the last 15 months, nothing has happened.
The Committce is looking for evidence but it is the Attomey-General who must promote
the cases and look for the guilty parties, whom we all know. ‘If justice is not soon delivered
and the guilty persons not punished’, D. Syllouris said, ‘then we will be the pseudo state.
A serious state cannot delay the punishment of those found guilty’.”!"" (emphasis added]

A simple reading of the text above shows that the author of the opinion piece was not
seeking to attribute the statement “whom we all know” to the President of the Institutions
Committee, since the remark is not a direct quote. Moreover and in any event, the
observation itself does not mention any individual by name. In other words, this opinion
picce has a very low probative value and certainly cannot substantiate an allegation of a
selective prosecution.

For the reasons mentioned above, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the evidence in the
record demonstrates that the criminal proceedings unfairly and arbitrarily targeted
Claimants or their affiliates.

For these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent did not breach Article 2(2) of
the Treaty through it conduct of the criminal prosccutions.

Statements made in the media against Claimants and _their affiliates. Claimants also
challenge a number of statements that were published in the Cypriot media, which they
contend created a climate of hostility towards them and their investment and impeded the
Cypriot authorities from impartially deciding their cases.

1203 «The unimaginable pillage”, Simerini, 14 November 2013 (Exhibit C-0498),

330

1301.

1302.

1303.

1304.

1305.

1306.

The Tribunal has reviewed this evidence and has reached the conclusion that it does not
support Claimants’ allegations.

First, the Tribunal has already examined the statements attributed to the President of
CySEC and to the President of the Institutions Committee and has concluded that they
cannot support a conclusion of hostility towards Claimants or of a prejudgment of their
cases.

Second, the evidence referred to by Claimants includes a number of instances where the
Attorney General of Cyprus emphasized that the presumption of innocence and the rule of
law must be upheld in all proceedings involving the causes of the Cypriot financial
crisis.'? Such statements cannot have caused any harm to Claimants and, if anything,
showed that the prosecutorial authorities in Cyprus were intent on ensuring that the
principles of the presumption of innocence and due process were complied with.

Third, a number of statements challenged by Claimants do not specifically refer to them.
An example is the following statement by the President of the Institutions Committee:

“The president of the committee on institutions noted that ‘there are particular issues which
do not require comprchensive treatment in order for us to conclude to punishment.”'2°5

Similarly, a statement by the President of Cyprus, Nikos Anastasiades, docs not refer to
Claimants:

“Receiving the report, the President of the Republic warmly thank [sic] the Institutions
Committee because, with the complete and admirable co-operation between its members,
‘in order to clarify a certainly criminal behaviour on the part of those who were responsible
for the banking system of the country, has closed in a very brief time, I must say, taking
into consideration the complexity of the issue, an investigation with specific findings,
which will undoubtedly, I am sure, help those wo bear the responsibility for the
prosecution and punishment of those who are involved in the crime against the economy
of the land, [ie] the Attorney-General.”!7°

The Tribunal also notes that, while Claimants challenge these statements made in
connection with the report of the Institutions Committee, Claimants do not reiterate such
concerns with regard to the actual findings included in the final report of the Institutions
Committee. Consequently, the Tribunal finds that the statements above do not substantiate
Claimants’ submission that Cypriot authorities had an animus against them.

24M. Adamou, “They make populist and taunting statements...” Simerini, 6 April 2014 (Exhibit C-0511); “Cypriot
Economy; Time for Justice for the economy”, Stockwatch, 22 December 2013 (Exhibit C-0502).

1295 “Cypriot Economy: Time for Justice for the economy”, Stockwatch, 22 December 2013 (Exhibit C-0502),

'206 “The Report of the Institutions Committee is with the President”, Stockwatch, 13 May 2014 (Exhibit C-0521).

331

1307.

1308.

1309.

1310.

Finally, the Tribunal considers that, of the public statements challenged by Claimants, two
could potentially raise concerns. In the first, a member of the Cypriot Parliament’s Green
Party described Mr. Vgenopoulos as “a curse and a plague for Cyprus”.'?"” In the second,
the Cypriot Minister of Finance, H. Georgiades, declared in a radio interview that he “had
the impression that Laiki was destroyed by that very well known individual who was

welcomed as an investor from Greece”. !2%

The Tribunal does not consider however that these statements are sufficient to warrant a
conclusion that Claimants were unfairly targeted by Cyprus or were denied due process in
the various civil, administrative or criminal proceedings in the country as a result of
animosity towards them. As mentioned above, in the Nicosia, Paphos, Limassol and
CySEC proceedings, as well as in the criminal prosecutions initiated against Claimants, the
Tribunal identified no breach of duc process. Two statements that are adverse to Claimants’
interests in these proceedings, made by individuals who are not involved in local
proceedings, are not sufficient to outweigh the evidence showing that Claimants’ duc
process rights were complied with.

For all the reasons identified above, the Tribunal finds that Cyprus did not breach the FET
standard in Article 2(2) of the Treaty through a failure to provide due process to Claimants’
investment.

On the basis of the considerations above, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent did not
breach Article 2(2) of the Treaty by failing to accord fair and equitable treatment to
Claimants’ investment.

WHETHER RESPONDENT FAILED TO GRANT CLAIMANTS FULL
PROTECTION AND SECURITY

207 N. Palala, “Barrage fire against Vgenopoulos”, Simerini, 14 November 2013 (Exhibit C-0497).
"208 Astra Radio 92.8 FM, Extract of the Interview with the Minister of Finance of Cyprus, H. Gcorgiades, on the
“Morning edition” show, 5 April 2017 (Exhibit C-0859).

332

1319.

1320.

1321.

1322.

The Tribunal’s analysis
The Tribunal finds that Claimants’ claim has no merit.

Claimants’ case concerning the breach by Respondent of the FPS standard in Article 2(2)
of the Treaty is based — with a few exceptions — on roughly the same arguments as those
raised in the context of its expropriation and FET claims analyzed in Sections 1X.C and
X.C above. The Tribunal need not determine with precision the content of the obligation
to accord full protection and security to Claimants’ investment under Article 2(2) of the
Treaty in order to find that Claimants’ claims pertaining to PSI+, the removal of
management, the recapitalization of Laiki or the discrimination of Laiki in comparison with
the BoC have no merit. Even assuming that Claimants’ understanding regarding the content
of the FPS standard was correct and that a breach of the FET standard would automatically
entail a breach of the FPS standard, their claims would fail for the same reasons as those
that have been set out in detail in Sections [X.C and X.C above.

There are two elements that differentiate Claimants’ claims under the FET Standard and
those under the FPS Standard. Claimants argue that the CBC’s decision to impose
conditions on Laiki’s commercial operations in November 2011 and Respondent's
amendment of the Management of Financial Crises Law in January 2013 breached the FPS
Standard.

The Tribunal notes that the CBC’s decision of 7 November 2011 to place restrictions on
Laiki’s commercial operations was taken pursuant to Section 30(1)(b) of the Banking Law,
pursuant to which:

“30. (1) The Central Bank may take all or any of the following measures where a bank fails
to comply with any of the provisions of this Law, or of any Regulation issued under this
Law or with the conditions of its licence, or in the opinion of the Central Bank the liquidity
and character of its assets have been impaired or there is a risk that the ability of the bank
to meet promptly its obligations may be impaired, or where this is considered necessary
for the safeguarding of the interests of depositors or creditors ~

L..]

(b) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (a) above, impose conditions under
this section and in particular:

(i) require the bank to take certain steps or to refrain from adopting or
pursuing a particular course of action or to restrict the scope of its business
in a particular way;

(ii) impose limitations on the bank on the acceptance of deposits, the granting
of credit or the making of investments;

335

1323.

(iii) prohibit the bank from soliciting deposits, cither generally or from
specified persons or class of persons;

(iv) prohibit the bank from entering into any other transaction or class of
transactions;

(v) require the removal of any director, chief executive or manager of a bank;

(vi) oblige the bank to hold own funds in excess of the minimum level laid
down pursuant to the provisions of section 21;

(vii) require the reinforcement of the arrangements, processes, mechanisms and
strategies of the bank implemented to comply with subsections (2) and (3)
of section 19 and section 19A;

(viii) to require the bank to apply a specific provisioning policy or treatment of
assets in terms of capital requirements;

(ix) restrict or limit the business, operations or network of banks; and

(x) require the reduction of the risk inherent in the activities, products and
21232

systems of banks,”!***

The Tribunal also recalls that, prior to imposing these conditions on the Bank, the CBC
and Laiki engaged in a lengthy correspondence during which the regulator made clear to
management that it was extremely concerned about the precarious financial situation of the
Bank and dissatisfied with the measures taken by management to address it. One week
before the imposition of restrictions on the Bank’s commercial operations, on 31 October
2011, the CBC notified Laiki that it was “examin[ing] the possibility of taking measures
pursuant to the powers granted to it in accordance with section 30 of the Banking Business
Law of 1997 to (No 2) of 2011”.'23 The CBC’s letter attached a report of the Bank
Supervision and Regulation Department, which laid out the very grave concerns of the
regulator with respect to the Bank’s liquidity. Laiki submitted its comments on the above
on 3 November 2011, and expressed its disagreement with the CBC’s understanding of the
causes of the Bank’s liquidity problem.'?*4 During this time, Laiki was reliant on
emergency liquidity financing from the CBC in order to be able to continue offering its
services. On 7 November 2011, following a meeting between Mr. Orphanides and Messrs.
Boul and V; los, the CBC rei d its dissati ion with 's
solutions to the Bank’s liquidity problems and concluded that “there [was] danger that the
ability of the Bank for addressing its obligations on time could be reduced”.!2?5 The CBC

"22 Republic of Cyprus, Banking Laws of 1997-2013 (Exhibit CL-0138).

'23 Letter from the CBC (A. Orphanides) to MPB (E. Boutoutas), 34 October 201 1 (Exhibit C-0275).

224 Letter from MPB (E. Bouloutas) to the CBC (A, Orphanides), 3 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0277).
"225 Letter from the CBC (A. Orphanides) to MPB (E. Bouloutas), 7 November 2011 (Exhibit C-0280).

336

1324.

1325.

1326.

1327.

1226 ye,

therefore imposed nine conditions on the Bank’s operations “in order to safeguard the

interests of the depositors”. !2?"

For the same reasons that have prompted the Tribunal to conclude that the removal of Mr.
Bouloutas was carried out in the legitimate exercise of Cyprus’ police powers, the Tribunal
also finds that the CBC’s decision to impose nine operating conditions on the Bank was
likewise a legitimate exercise of Respondent’s police powers. There was thus no excess of
power against which Claimants deserved protection, Consequently, even if the Tribunal
were to interpret the FPS standard as advocated by Claimants, i.e., as imposing an
obligation to take all pI ionary and dial in
order to ensure a secure investment environment, there would be no breach of Article 2(2)
of the Treaty on this account.

The Tribunal further notes that the amendment to the Management of Financial Crises Law
challenged by Claimants reads as follows:

“(3) Persons appointed in any way as member [sic] to the board of directors or the
Committee of the beneficiary financial institution, and officers of the said institution acting
on the instructions of the board of directors or the Committee, in case of initiation of a
lawsuit, application or any other legal procedure for the claim of compensation or other
remedy or for the imposition of sanction [sic] against them in relation to an act or omission
during the exercise of their duties and responsibilities, which act or omission has occurred
during the period in which the Republic holds the majority shares of the beneficiary
institution with voting rights or appoint [sic] the majority of members or members with a
right to veto the decisions of the board of directors or the Committee, shall not be liable for
any responsibility unless it is proved that the act or omission was not in good faith or was
a result of gross negligence.”

Claimants complain that the limitation imposed on their right as shareholders to sue
members of Laiki’s Board of Directors for breach of duties rendered their investment
substantially less secure, in contravention to Article 2(2) of the Treaty. Respondent
counters that the introduction of this limitation was necessary in order to attract competent
professionals to the boards of Cyprus’ deeply troubled financial institutions at a time of
considerable economic uncertainty.

The Tribunal, after considering all the circumstances surrounding the enactment of this
amendment to the Management of Financial Crises Law, as well as its impact on
Claimants’ investment, finds that it does not fall foul of the FPS Standard in Article 2(2)
of the Treaty, even if one were to endorse Claimants’ interpretation thereof.

337

1328.

1329.

1330.

1331.

First, the Tribunal notes that, pursuant to this amendment of Section 13 of the Management
of Financial Crises Law, Claimants’ right as sharcholders to pursue in court the members
of Laiki’s Board of Directors was not curtailed in its entirety, Claimants retamed the right
to sue on the basis of bad faith or gross negligence.

Second, the Tribunal observes that the amendment applied after the entry into force of the
Underwriting Decree (“during the period in which the Republic holds the majority shares
of the beneficiary institution with voting rights or appoint [sic] the majority of members or
members with a right to veto the decisions of the board of directors of the Committee”).
The Underwriting Decree entered into force on 18 May 2012. The results of Laiki’s
recapitalization pursuant to the terms of the Underwriting Decree were announced on 2
July 2012, when Cyprus thus became the owner of 84% of the shareholding in Laiki. The
Tribunal therefore finds that the limitation on the sharcholders’ right to sue the Bank’s
directors for breach of duties primarily and substantially affected the rights of the Cyprus
Government itself. Claimants, though affected, were far less impacted duc to the size of
their sharcholding.

Third, the Tribunal is persuaded that there is some truth to Respondent's submission
according to which, in the absence of this type of legal protection for members of the boards
of Cyprus’ troubled financial institutions, it would have been difficult to attract
professionals with the required competence to manage a bank in financial difficulty.

Fourth and in any event, the Tribunal recalls that, at the time the Underwriting Decree
entered into force and following Laiki’s recapitalization, the Bank was in an extremely

difficult financial position. Its share price in June 2012 reflected this dire condition:!?2”

Kaczmarek First Expert Report, Figure 35.

338

1332.

1333.

1334.

Figure 35 -Lalki’s Indexed Share Price and MIG's Investment™”

Beee8 28 8

Cummulative Investment (in € millions)

  

zs

In
i
5 | Hil Ha
Sep-O1 Sep-5 Sep-06 Sep-l7 Sep-08 Sep-09 Sep-10 Sep-
GRBMIG Cummulative Investment in Laiki =——Laiki Index
—— Greek Banks Index ~~ Europe Banks Index
Global Banks Index

Consequently, any loss in value that Claimants would have suffered as a result of the
limitation of their rights was insubstantial for two reasons. First, due to their minority
shareholding. Second, due to the Bank’s precarious financial condition, reflected in its
insubstantial market capitalization.

The Tribunal is thus not persuaded that the limitation to Claimants’ rights to pursue
members of Laiki’s Board was substantial enough to warrant a conclusion that their
investment was not accorded full protection and security, even when this standard is
understood as Claimants plead in this arbitration.

For all these reasons, the Tribunal finds that Respondent did not breach the FPS Standard
in Article 2(2) of the Treaty.

WHETHER RESPONDENT DISCRIMINATED AGAINST CLAIMANTS’
INVESTMENT

Cc.

1339.

1340.

1341.

1342.

1343.

The Tribunal’s analysis

Article 3 of the Treaty (“Most Favoured Nation and National Treatment Provisions”)
stipulates:

“1, Neither Contracting Party shall subject investments in its territory owned in whole or
in part by investors of the other Contracting Party to treatment less favourable than that
which it accords to investments of its own investors or to investments of investors of any
third State,

2. Neither Contracting Party shall subject investors of the other Contracting Party, as
regards their activity in connection with investments in its territory, to treatment less
favourable than that which it accords to its own investors or to investors of any third State.

3. Such treatment shall not relate to privileges or advantages which cither Contracting Party
accords to investors of any third State:

a) on account of its membership of, or association with, a customs or economic union, a
common market, a free trade area or similar institutions.

b) on the basis of any double taxation agreement or other agreements regarding matters of
taxation.

4. Each Contracting Party has the right to maintain, in accordance with its laws, regulations
and its policy regarding forcign investments, exceptions from the national treatment of
paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.”

In Section X.C.7 above, the Tribunal has examined Claimants’ claim that Cyprus
discriminated against their investment by preferring the BoC to Laiki. That analysis was
made under Article 2(2)’s FET standard. In the paragraphs below, the Tribunal will focus
on Claimants’ discrimination claim based on Article 3 of the Treaty, in other words, on
their claim that they suffered from discrimination on the basis of their Greek nationality.

For the reasons that are set out below, the Tribunal finds that Claimants’ claim of
discrimination on the basis of nationality has no merit.

First, the Tribunal recalls its conclusion at Section X.C.7 above that Respondent did not
treat Laiki and the BoC differently with respect to the removal of management, the granting
of ELA and the sale of their Greek branches. Consequently, Claimants’ contention that the
BoC was preferred by Cyprus on account of it being controlled by Cypriots has no factual
or legal basis insofar as it concerns these three issues.

Second, the Tribunal concluded at Section X.C.7 above that there was a difference in
treatment between Laiki and the BoC consisting of Cyprus’ decision in March 2013 to

resolve Laiki and rescue the BoC. Nevertheless, the Tribunal found that this difference in

| 341 |

1344.

1345.

treatment was justified by the different financial conditions of the two banks and that, in
any event, the original shareholders of the BoC and the original shareholders of Laiki were
both completely wiped out in the process.

The Tribunal further finds that there is no support in the record for Claimants’ contention
that, when Cyprus decided to rescue the BoC and resolve Laiki, it preferred the BoC on
account of the controlling shareholders’ nationality. Claimants’ reference to the Secret
Report in an attempt to prove otherwise does not assist its case. In relevant part, the Secret
Report reads as follows:

“The afore mentioned information on investment interest was not credible. The Bank’s
CEO, Chr. Stylianides had sent an urgent letter (23/2/2012) to the Finance Minister Kikis
Kazamias as regards the bank's plan for raising capital and requested a meeting to ‘discuss
the parameters of a potential financial guarantee by the state to cover the issue
(underwriting)’.

This was proof that there was no investment interest in an insolvent bank. Kikis Kazamias
accepted the proposal put forward by Marfin Popular Bank and on 2 March 2012, sent a
letter to Orphanides in which he said that following the announcement of Marfin Popular
Bank's preliminary results, the government of the Republic of Cyprus reiterated its
commitment to support the banks, in case they did not receive the required funds from
private investors,

[-]

The fact that this decision was political, was confessed later on by the General Secretary
of AKEL, Andros Kyprianou:

‘As regards to Marfin Popular Bank, the amount of €1,8 billion, we had an internal party
difference of approach. A few of us said that the bank should be left to collapse or go into
a resolution process so that the Bank of Cyprus would be protected. Others said that we
should keep the bank at any cost and in the end we decided that Marfin Popular Bank
should be saved. From what the experts were saying [sic]. We trusted the experts and we
decided that Marfin Popular Bank had to be saved whilst perhaps it shouldn’t’.”!4
[emphasis in original]

The Tribunal notes that the quoted section in the Secret Report refers to Laiki’s
recapitalization in June 2012 and not to its resolution in March 2013. Thus, for this reason
alone, the Secret Report is inapposite. However, the Tribunal is also persuaded that this
section in the Secret Report does not support Claimants’ contention that the Government
of Cyprus intended to protect the BoC to the detriment of Laiki. According to this
document, at that time, there was a dispute within the AKEL party as to whether Laiki
should be recapitalized by the State or be resolved in order to protect the BoC. As this
d and a sut ial body of d ‘y and ial evid in the record
make clear, Laiki was not lefi to collapse. Instead, Respondent continued offering ELA,

1284 Secret Report, pp. 16, 17.

342

1346.

1347.

1348.

1349,

increased its sovereign debt by EUR 1.8 in order to assist with the Bank’s recapitalization,
and sought funds from the Troika to save both Laiki and the BoC. The fact that a defeated
faction within the governing party in Cyprus would have preferred to adopt a different
strategy and protect the BoC to Laiki’s detriment does not demonstrate that the Cyprus
Government itself was animated by such intent.

As support for their contention that Laiki was discriminated against in March 2013,
Claimants also refer to a statement made by Mr. Pavlou to the press:

“[D]uring the weekend after the 21" March, something occured [sic] and instead of the
plan for the creation of Good and Bad Laiki moving forward, the dissolution of the bank
and the absorption of its assets by Bank of Cyprus was finally decided. ‘Although I do not
have any evidence, I am almost certain that known, rich and powerful families of Nicosia
intervened so that they would not lose Bank of Cyprus’, he characteristically
mentioned.””'**5 [emphasis added]

The Tribunal notes that, on the face of the declaration made by Mr. Pavlou, a member of
Laiki’s Board of Directors in 2012-2013 and then Special Administrator of the Bank, Mr.
Pavlou was speculating as to the reasons why Laiki was resolved while the BoC was
allowed to continue operating. The Tribunal cannot attribute any evidentiary weight to such
a statement.

As regard Claimants’ claim that Respondent discriminated against their investment by
enacting the amendment to the Management of Financial Crises Law in January 2013, the
Tribunal finds it to be equally meritless. As mentioned in Section XI.C above, this
amendment curtailed Cyprus’ right to pursue in court members of Laiki’s Board of
Directors for breach of their duties to a far greater degree than it curtailed Claimants’ right.
Indeed, at the relevant time, Cyprus was the owner of 84% of Laiki’s shares, while
Claimants’ shareholding had been diluted to about 1%. It is difficult to see how, under
these Resp ) d its own i fo the detriment of
Claimants’.

For all the reasons mentioned above, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent did not
breach Article 3 of the Treaty.

"35 A. Antoniou, “Chris Pavlou; Powerful families destroyed Laiki", Sigmalive, 14 May 2013 (Exhibit C-0463),

343

XIII. WHETHER RESPONDENT BREACHED ITS UNILATERAL DECLARATIONS

at

Cc. The Tribunal’s analysis

1356. The Tribunal need not engage in an analysis of the legal basis of Claimants’ claim
hereunder in order to conclude that it lacks merit. As the Tribunal’s analyses under Sections
IX-XII above make clear, Respondent offered liquidity and recapitalization support to
Laiki and this permitted the Bank to continue operating until March 2013. The Tribunal
does not consider it necessary to reiterate these considerations here. This claim is therefore
dismissed.

XIV. DAMAGES

2 Case Concerning the Factory at Chorzéw, Germany v, Poland (Claims for Indemnity) (Merits) (1928) PCL Series
A No 17 (Exhibit CL-0065) (“Chorzéw Factory").
"47 Memonal, at 563-567; Reply, at 360, 361

346

lL

Cc. The Tribunal’s analysis

1383. The Tribunal has concluded at Sections LX-XIII above that Respondent did not breach its
obligations under the Treaty. For this reason, Claimants’ claim for damages must also fail.

Rejoinder, at 497-499,
Counter-Memorial, at 1076; Rejoinder, at 545.
1277 Counter-Memorial, at 1077-1082; Rejoinder, at 546,

353

 

XVI.

DECISION

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal decides as follows:

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)

{e)

Dismisses the claims by Messrs. Andreas Vgenopoulos and Alexandros Bakatselos;

Finds that it has jurisdiction to hear the remaining Claimants’ claims in this
arbitration;

Finds that Respondent, the Republic of Cyprus, has not acted in breach of the Treaty;
Dismisses Claimants’ claim for damages;

Orders Claimants to pay Respondent on a joint and several basis the amount of EUR
5,000,000 as ‘ion for Respondent’s ble costs in this arbi

Dismisses all other claims.

    

éssor Bernatd Hanotiau
President

I} July 26 19

Dod fy ie _Q. A004»

 

( Mr. Daniel M. Price ! Sir David A. O. Edward QC

Arbitrator Arbitrator

24 Joly LOI 18 frly 2018

363

