International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes

In the matter of

Maritime International Nominees Establishment
(MINE)
V.

Government of Guinea (Guinea)
(Case ARB/84/4)

DECISION
on the Application by Guinea for Partial Annulment
of the Arbitral Award dated January 6, 1988
in the above matter

Rendered by the Ad Hoc Committee
constituted by the Chairman of the Administrative Council of the Centre in
accordance with Article 52 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, and composed of:

Sompong Sucharitkul, President
Aron Broches, Member
Keba Mbaye, Member

Counsel

for MINE: Julius Kaplan for GUINEA: Stephen N. Shulman
Bruno A. Ristau Sally J. Schornstheimer
James W. Schroeder Kay K. Gardiner

VI.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Table of Contents

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Paras.
Introduction
Background of the Present Proceedings... 1.01-1.09
The Request for Partial Annulment of the Award... 2.01-2.07
Uy dural Devel 3.01-3.09
Preliminary Questions and General Considerations...... 4.01-4-12
General Comments on the Grounds for Annulment
Relied on by Guinea 5.01-5.13
A. Manifest Excess of Power.........+ 5.02-5.04
B. Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule
of Pi di 5.05-5.06
C. Failure to State Reasons.. 5.07-5.13
The Annulment Request
A. Breach of Contract... 6.01-6.56
— Background of the Dispute 6.04-6.25
— The Tribunal’s Decision on “Breach of
Contract” oe 6.26-6.29
— The Committee’s Findings 6.30-6.56
— _ Applicable Law. 6.31-6.37
— Manifest Excess of Power .... 6.38-6.43
— Failure to State Reasons... 6.44-6.56
B. Damage: 6.57-6.109
— The Parties’ Contentions before the Tribunal. 6.59-6.73
— The Award... 9 6.74-6.82
— The Parties’ Contentions in the Annulment
Proceedings 6.83-6.96
— The Committee's Findings 6.97-6.109
— Failure to State Reasons, including
Failure to Address Issues. 6.98-6.108

 

— Manifest Excess of Power and Serious
Departure from a Fundamental Rule

 

VII. Temporary Stay of Enforcement of the Award

VIII. Decision

on the Counter-Claims

 

   

Annex1 Procedural Order No. 1
Annex II Interim Order No. I

CASES 7

I. INTRODUCTION—BACKGROUND OF THE PRESENT
PROCEEDINGS

1.01 Request for Arbitration. On May 7, 1984, Maritime International Nominees Es-
tablishment (“MINE”), a company incorporated under Liechtenstein law, addressed a
request to the Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of Invest-
ment Disputes (“ICSID” or “the Centre”) for arbitration against the Republic of
Guinea (“Guinea”). The request was submitted pursuant to Article 36 of the Conven-
tion on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States (“the Convention”) and was registered by the Secretary-General on September
18, 1984, pursuant to the same provision.

1.02 The Substance of the Dispute. The dispute concerns an alleged breach by Guinea
of the 1 relationship of the parties established by an in the French
language dated August 19, 1971, entitled “Convention entre le Gouvernement de la
République de Guinée et Inter Maritime Bank—Genéve—Suisse” (“the Agree-
ment”). The Agreement recites that it was being entered into by the latter “agissant au
nom et pour le compte de Maritime International Nominees Establishment-Genéve, !

1.03 Applicable Law. Article XIII of the Agreement provides in substance that the
Agreement constitutes the law between the parties, supplemented in case the Agree-
ment “laisserait une difficulté sans solution” by the law of the Republic of Guinea. The
present ad hoc Committee (“the Committee”) will deal with this important provision
in detail in paras. 6.31—6.37 infra.

1.04 Settlement of Disputes. Article XVIII of the Agreement provides for conciliation
or, if necessary, arbitration of disputes regarding the interpretation or application of the
Agreement which the parties were unable to resolve amicably. The article contains,
among others, the following stipulation:

“La langue employée dans la présente Convention est la langue frangaise & laquelle

les conciliateurs ou les arbitres doivent se référer en cas de différend.”

The Tribunal appears to have disregarded this provision.

1.05 Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal. By a document executed on behalf of MINE
on December 6, 1974, and on behalf of Guinea on January 23, 1975, supplementing
and pro tanto amending the above-mentioned Article XVIII, the parties agreed to
submit the disputes which existed between them for settlement by arbitration pursuant
to the Convention by a tribunal consisting of one arbitrator appointed by each party
and of a third arbitrator, appointed by the Chairman of the Administrative Council of

i By Avenant No, 2 of August 31, 1972 (Exhibit 27 to Guinea’s Counter-Memorial), “MINE Inc.
(Panama) ci-aprés désignée ‘Maritime™ was substituted for “Inter Maritime Bank—Genéve—Suisse”. Since
that time at least one other substitution must have been effected as the ICSID proceedings were instituted by
MINE which was described as a Liechtenstein company. The fact that Liechtenstein is not a Contracting
State, ive., a party to the Convention, raised an issue as to the jurisdiction of the Centre which is limited to
disputes between Contracting States and nationals of other Contracting States. That issue appears to have been
resolved at the outset in favour of jurisdiction based on the Swiss nationality of MINE's controlling share hold~
er. The Award does not mention the issue and Guinea has not commented on it in its application for annul-
ment.

98 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the Centre, who would be president of the tribunal. In fact, the third arbitrator was
appointed by agreement of the parties who were each represented by an American law
firm with offices in Washington, pc?

1.06 The Arbitral Tribunal which was constituted in June 1985, some nine months
after the registration of the Request for Arbitration, was composed of Mr. Jack Berg,
nominated by MINE, Mr. David J. Sharpe, nominated by Guinea, and Mr. Donald
Zubrod, chosen as President by mutual agreement of the parties.

1.07 All three arbitrators were United States nationals. Messrs. Berg and Zubrod are
known to be experienced arbitrators in maritime and shipping matters. They are
members of the Society of Maritime Arbitrators (SMA). Mr. Berg is a former President
of the Society and Mr. Zubrod is its present President.3Mr. Sharpe is a professor of
maritime law. The dispute between the parties is clearly not a maritime dispute but an
investment dispute, and the parties did not inquire whether the arbitrators had French
language facility or familiarity with any legal system other than the Anglo-American.
1.08 The Award. After proceedings extending over two and one-half years, the Tri-
bunal rendered its Award. It was dispatched by the Centre to the parties on January 6,
1988, which in accordance with Article 49(1) of the Convention is the date of the
Award.

1.09 Following its findings in regard to MINE’s claim for breach of contract and
Guinea’s counter-claim for damages resulting from MINE's resort to AAA arbitration
in disregard of the parties’ agreement to arbitrate their disputes under the Convention,
and from MINE'’s attachment of Guinean property, the Tribunal concluded under the
heading “Award Reconciliation” as follows:

“All sums are stated in United States dollars.

Awarded to MINE as damages $ 6,726,497

Interest on MINE’s damages 5,457,986

Costs of ICSID arbitration 275,000
Total awarded to MINE 12,459,483

Awarded to Guinea towards

its counter-claim 210,000
Balance due to MINE $12,249,483

Guinea is directed to pay MINE the
sum of $12,249,483

2 ‘The exchanges with counsel at the hearing on October 28, 1988 (para. 3.08 infra) indicated that they
considered their proximity to each other and the Centre helpful to a cost efficient handling of the case, and
that such considerations also influenced Guinea's appointment of a Washington, D.C. arbitrator.

3 The SMA consists of more than 110 commercial arbitrators, “all of whom are well versed in shipping
activities...A good number of the arbitrators have commercial sailing experience or have degrees in naval
architecture and engineering”. (Howard M. McCormack in “Arbitration in Combined Transportation”, p.
17, Conference paper for 1988 ICCA, Tokyo Conference). None of them are practicing lawyers.

CASES 9

The Tribunal awards simple interest on the net award of the Reconcilia-
tion at the rate of nine percent per year from the day after the date of the
award until the award is satisfied.

The Tribunal directs that, except as otherwise provided, the parties bear
their own expenses in connection with the proceedings, and that the parties
bear equally the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal, and the
charges for the use of the facilities of ICSID.”

Il. THE REQUEST FOR PARTIAL ANNULMENT OF THE AWARD

2.01 On March 28, 1988, within 120 days after the date on which the Award was
rendered, Guinea addressed an application in writing to the Secretary-General re-
questing partial annulment of the Award pursuant to Article 52 of the Convention (the
“Application”). In explaining what it meant by “partial annulment”, Guinea stated that
“Guinea does not seek annulment of the decision on the two counterclaims, but only
of the performance dispute and the determination of damages regarding that dispute”
(Application, p. 1, note 1). The amount awarded to Guinea on the counter-claims was
US$ 210,000. As appears from page 38 of the Application, Guinea also seeks annul-
ment of the Tribunal’s award to MINE of costs towards its fees and expenses in the
ICSID arbitration in the amount of US$ 275,000.

2.02 The three grounds on which Guinea bases its request for annulment are ex-
pressed in the Convention as follows:

a.“‘that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it was based” (Art.
52(1)(e));
b.“that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers” (Art. 52(1)(b));

c.“‘that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of proce-
dure” (Art. 52(1)(d).

2.03 In Section V.A. of the Application, Guinea presented an initial submission re-
garding the Tribunal’s errors requiring annulment.

2.04 As regards failure to state reasons, Guinea alleges that the Tribunal failed to state
any reasons for its decision on damages. It alleges further that the Tribunal failed to
address pivotal questions which, had they been resolved in Guinea’s favour, would have
reversed the Tribunal’s liability determination. In Guinea’s view, failure by an arbitral
tribunal to deal with every question submitted to it as required by Article 48(3) of the
Convention affords a ground for annulment as a species of failure to state reasons, even
though it is not specifically mentioned as such.

2.05 As regards manifest excess of powers, Guinea argues that the Tribunal’s failure
“to apply any law, much less the correct law” as to both liability and damages consti-
tuted such excess (Application, p. 23).

100 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

2.06 Thirdly, Guinea argues that the Tribunal departed from a fundamental rule of
procedure by adopting a measure of damages that had not been advanced or discussed
by the parties and which Guinea had no occasion to address.

2.07 In addition, Guinea requested as a preliminary matter that enforcement of the
Award be stayed pending the Committee’s decision on the Application.

IIL. PROCEDURAL DEVELOPMENTS

3.01 After the Committee, composed of Messrs. Broches, Mbaye and Sucharitkul,
had been constituted by the Chairman of the Administrative Council in accordance
with Article 52(3) of the Convention, its members conferred by telephone on May 17,
1988 from their respective places of residence and elected Professor Sucharitkul Pres-
ident of the Committee.

3.02 The Committee members also took note of the fact that pursuant to Article
52(5) of the Convention, if the applicant requests a stay of enforcement of the award
in its application, enforcement shall be stayed provisionally until the Committee rules
on the request, and that the Secretary~General had, together with the notice of regis-
tration of the Request for Partial Annulment, informed both parties of the provisional
stay of the award in accordance with Arbitration Rule 54(2).

3.03 The Committee thereupon, still acting by telephone with the participation of

Mr. Bertrand Marchais, Secretary of the Committee, adopted Procedural Order No.
1 of May 17, 1988, a copy of which is attached to this Decision as Annex I.

3.04 The parties were convened to meet with the Committee at The Hague on June
16 and 17, 1988, to review matters of procedure including, in particular, Guinea’s
request for a stay of enforcement which the Committee was to consider as a matter of
priority pursuant to Arbitration Rule 54(1). The Committee also set time-limits
within which the parties might submit observations on Guinea’s request for a stay. Ob-
servations were received within those time-limits from MINE and Guinea on May 27
and June 7, 1988, respectively. MINE did not submit a second round of observations.

3.05 With the agreement of the parties, the Committee met at the Peace Palace in
The Hague, pursuant to the administrative arrangements between the Centre and the
Permanent Court of Arbitration, on June 15, 1988, for consultations among its
members and on June 16 and 17, 1988, for preliminary procedural consultations with
the parties.

3.06 Continuation of Stay of Enforcement. Both parties supplemented their written pre-
sentations on the subject by oral presentations, including exchanges between counsel.
The Committee authorized the submission of supplemental written observations on
the issue of security in connection with enforcement of the Award. The Committee
was thereupon ready to rule on Guinea's request for the continuation of the provisional
stay of enforcement until the Committee’s decision on the Application. Having con-
sidered the written and oral submissions of both parties, the Committee issued its
Interim Order No. I, dated August 12, 1988, the operative part of which reads as
follows:

CASES tol

“Having reviewed the circumstances of the case, the Committee is of the view that
termination of the stay at this time would impose hardships on Guinea whose inter-
ests would be severely affected. This prospect of hardships combined with the risk
of frustration of recoupment, in case of Guinea’s success in this annulment proceed-
ing, have led the Committee to decide that the provisional stay of enforcement of
the Award should continue for the time being.”

The full text of Interim Order No. I is attached to this Decision as Annex II.

3.07 Procedural Consultations and Adoption of Schedule for the Written Procedure. At the
June meeting at The Hague, the Committee and the parties agreed that Guinea’s Ap-
plication was to be considered its Memorial and that the sequence of the further
written procedure on the merits would consist of a Counter-Memorial by MINE to
be filed by August 1, 1988; a Reply by Guinea to be filed by August 19, 1988; and a
Rejoinder by MINE by September 6, 1988, which time-limit was subsequently ex-
tended to September 16, 1988.

3.08 Oral Procedure on the Merits. On September 23, 1988, in consultation with the
other members of the Committee, the Secretary-General and the parties, the President
of the Committee scheduled a hearing on October 28, 1988, at the seat of the Centre
in Washington, D.C.

3.09 At the morning session of the hearing, counsel for both parties summarized and
in some respects further elaborated on the parties’ written submissions respectively in
support of and in opposition to Guinea’s Application. Each side had an opportunity to
respond to the presentation made by the other. During the afternoon session, the Com-
mittee members posed questions to counsel relating to certain aspects of their submis-
sions.

IV. PRELIMINARY QUESTIONS AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
4.01 In its ination of the lication, the C i has eda

number of questions of a preliminary character. The Committee finds it helpful to state
its views on these questions and to record some general considerations, before exam-
ining the central question whether and to what extent the grounds alleged by Guinea

and contested by MINE justify partial annulment of the Award.
A. Finality of ICSID Awards

4.02 Article 53 of the Convention provides that the award shall be binding on the
parties “and shall not be subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except those
provided for in this Convention”. The post-award procedures (remedies) provided for
in the Convention, namely, addition to, and correction of, the award (Art. 49), and in-
terpretation (Art. 50), revision (Art. 51) and annulment (Art. 52) of the award are to
be exercised within the framework of the Convention and in accordance with its pro-
visions. It appears from these provisions that the Convention excludes any attack on the
award in national courts. The award is final in that sense. It is also final in the sense that
even within the framework of the Convention it is not subject to review on the merits.
It is not final, on the other hand, in the sense that it is open to being completed or
corrected, interpreted, “revised” or annulled. It is to this last remedy that Guinea has
had recourse in the present case.

102 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

B. Annulment

1. Nature of the Remedy
4.03 Paragraph (1) of Article 52 of the Convention provides that either party may
request annulment of the award on one or more of the five grounds stated in that para-
graph and paragraph (3) provides that the ad hoc Committee which will be constituted
to rule on the request for annulment “shall have the authority to annul the award or
any part thereof on any of the grounds set forth in paragraph (1)”.
4.04 Article 52(1) makes it clear that annulment is a limited remedy. This is further
confirmed by the exclusion of review of the merits of awards by Article 53. Annulment
is not a remedy against an incorrect decision. Accordingly, an ad hoc Committee may
not in fact reverse an award on the merits under the guise of applying Article 52.

4.05 The fact that annulment is a limited, and in that sense extraordinary, remedy
might suggest either that the terms of Article 52(1), i.e., the grounds for annulment,
should be strictly construed or, on the contrary, that they should be given a liberal in-
terpretation since they represent the only remedy against unjust awards. The Commit-
tee has no difficulty in rejecting either suggestion. In its view, Article 52(1) should be
interpreted in accordance with its object and purpose, which excludes on the one
hand, as already stated, extending its application to the review of an award on the merits
and, on the other, an unwarranted refusal to give full effect to it within the limited but
important area for which it was intended.

4.06 The Committee notes that it is not inconsistent with the foregoing, and that it
is in fact incumbent on an ad hoc Committee, to give full effect to the wording of
Article 52(1) which defines and delimits the grounds for annulment. Thus, Article
52(1)(b) does not provide a sanction for every excess of its powers by a tribunal but
requires that the excess be manifest which necessarily limits an ad hoc Committee's
freedom of appreciation as to whether the tribunal has exceeded its powers. Again, the
text of Article 52(1)(d) makes clear that not every departure from a rule of procedure
justifies annulment; it requires that the departure be a serious one and that the rule of
procedure be fundamental in order to constitute a ground for annulment.
2. Partial Annulment

4.07 Paragraph (3) of Article 52 authorizes an ad hoc Committee to annul the award
or any part thereof. Guinea’s request for partial annulment is clearly admissible. It seeks
the annulment of the portion of the Award adjudging MINE'’s claim. It does not
request annulment of the portion of the Award adjudging Guinea’s counter-claim.
Nor, for that matter, has annulment of that portion been requested by MINE. That
portion of the Award will remain in effect regardless of the annulment in whole or in
part of the portion of the Award in respect of which Guinea has formulated its request
for annulment. This is reflected in Arbitration Rule 55(3), which provides that in case
of a resubmission of a dispute after annulment in part of the original award, “the new
Tribunal shall not reconsider any portion of the award not so annulled”.

CASES 103

3. Powers and Obligations of Ad Hoc Committees

4.08 The Committee notes that an ad hoc Committee may annul an award (or any
part thereof) only pursuant to a request by a party and only within the scope of that
request, unless by necessary implication annulment entails the annulment of other por-
tions.

4.09 Article 52(3) provides that an ad hoc Committee “shall have the authority to
annul the award or any part thereof on any of the grounds set forth in paragraph (1)”.
The Convention does not require automatic exercise of that authority to annul an
award whenever a timely application for its annulment has been made and the applicant
has established one of the grounds for annulment. Nor does the Committee consider
that the language of Article 52(3) implies such automatic exercise.

4.10 An ad hoc Committee retains a measure of discretion in ruling on applications
for annulment. To be sure, its discretion is not unlimited and should not be exercised
to the point of defeating the object and purpose of the remedy of annulment. It may,
however, refuse to exercise its authority to annul an award where annulment is clearly
not required to remedy procedural injustice and annulment would unjustifiably erode
the binding force and finality of ICSID awards.

4.11 Inthe course of the proceedings, MINE has advanced the argument that a series
of annulments of ICSID awards might impair the effectiveness and integrity of ICSID
as an international institution for settlement of disputes between States and foreign in-
vestors. The Committee was accordingly urged to keep this consideration in mind in
its examination of Guinea’s application.

4.12 MINE’s argument wrongly assumes that frequent annulments will necessarily
be the result of overly strict tests applied by ad hoc Committees. It overlooks the possi-
bility that such frequent annulments reflect neglect by arbitrators, parties or counsel of
requirements flowing from the specificity of ICSID arbitration as defined in the Con-
vention and the Arbitration Rules. A pure statistical approach, for which there is in any
event no significant basis at the present time, is wholly inappropriate as a measure of
ICSID's effectiveness.

V. GENERAL COMMENTS ON THE GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT
RELIED ON BY GUINEA

5.01 Guinea relies on three of the five grounds of annulment provided in Article

52(1) which in relevant part reads as follows:

“(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in wri-
ting addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following
grounds:
(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers; .....
(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of

procedure; or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.”

104, ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

A. Manifest Excess of Power

5.02 Guinea submits that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers by violat-
ing its obligation under the first sentence of Article 42(1) of the Convention to decide
the dispute “in accordance with such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties”,
alleging that the Tribunal “failed to apply any law whatsoever, much less correct law”
(Application, p. 23).

5.03 The full text of the sentence in question reads:

“The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as may
be agreed by the parties.”

The Committee is of the view that the provision is significant in two ways. It grants
the parties to the dispute unlimited freedom to agree on the rules of law applicable to
the substance of their dispute and requires the tribunal to respect the parties’ autonomy
and to apply those rules. From another perspective, the parties’ agreement on applica~
ble law forms part of their arbitration agreement. Thus, a tribunal’s disregard of the
agreed rules of law would constitute a derogation from the terms of reference within
which the tribunal has been authorized to function. Examples of such a derogation
include the application of rules of law other than the ones agreed by the parties, or a
decision not based on any law unless the parties had agreed on a decision ex aequo et
bono. If the derogation is manifest, it entails a manifest excess of power.

5.04 Disregard of the applicable rules of law must be distinguished from erroneous
application of those rules which, even if manifestly unwarranted, furnishes no ground
for annulment (see History of the Convention, Vol. II, pp. 340 and 854).

B. Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure
5.05 A first comment on this provision concerns the term “serious”. In order to con-
stitute a ground for L the dep from a “fund. 1 rule of p
must be serious. The Committee considers that this establishes both quantitative and
qualitative criteria: the departure must be substantial and be such as to deprive a party
of the benefit or protection which the rule was intended to provide.
5.06 Asecond comment concerns the term “fundamental”: even a serious departure
from a rule of procedure will not give rise to annulment, unless that rule is “funda-
mental”. The Committee considers that a clear example of such a fundamental rule is
to be found in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commer-
cial Arbitration which provides:
“The parties shall be treated with equality and each party shall be given full op-
portunity of presenting his case.”
The term “fundamental rule of procedure” is not to be understood as necessarily in-
cluding all of the Arbitration Rules adopted by the Centre.

C. Failure to State Reasons
5.07 Article 48(3) of the Convention provides:

“The award shall deal with every question submitted to the Tribunal, and shall
state the reasons upon which it is based.”

CASES 105

Failure to comply with the last part of the above sentence is made an explicit ground
for annulment by paragraph (1)(e) of Article 52. Failure to comply with the first part
of the sentence is not in so many words made a ground for annulment. The Commit-
tee will consider below whether and in what circumstances failure to deal with every
question submitted to the tribunal may nevertheless be a ground for annulment as a
species of failure to state reasons.

5.08 The Committee is of the opinion that the requirement that an award has to be
motivated implies that it must enable the reader to follow the reasoning of the Tribunal
‘on points of fact and law. It implies that, and only that. The adequacy of the reasoning
is not an appropriate standard of review under paragraph (1)(e), because it almost in-
evitably draws an ad hoc Committee into an examination of the substance of the tribu-
nal’s decision, in disregard of the exclusion of the remedy of appeal by Article 53 of the
Convention. A Committee might be tempted to annul an award because that exami-
nation disclosed a manifestly incorrect application of the law, which, however, is not a
ground for annulment.

5.09 In the Commiittee’s view, the requirement to state reasons is satisfied as long as
the award enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to Point B.
and eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of law. This
minimum requirement is in particular not satisfied by either contradictory or frivolous
reasons.

5.10 A statement of reasons is a valuable element of the arbitration process. The
Committee has noted that the Committee of Legal Experts, which was to advise the
Executive Directors of the World Bank on the draft Convention, by a vote of 28 to 3
rejected a proposal which would allow the parties to dispense with the requirement of
a reasoned award (History of the Convention, Vol. II, p. 816). A waiver of the require-
ment in an arbitration agreement would therefore not bar a party from seeking an an-
nulment for failure of an award to state reasons.

5.11 In the form in which it was submitted to the Legal Committee the draft of what
became Article 48(3) only required that the award state the reasons on which it was
based. The requirement that the award should deal with every question submitted to
the tribunal was added by the Legal Committee but, as already stated, failure to comply
with that requirement was not expressly made a ground for annulment. In fact, the
only explicit provision dealing with the subject which was added to the draft of the
Convention was Article 49(2) which provides, among other things, that upon the
timely request of a party a tribunal may after notice to the other party “decide any
question which it had omitted to decide in the award”. (See for the discussion leading
to this result, History of the Convention, Vol. II, pp. 848-849).

5.12 The Committee has considered whether Article 49(2) constitutes the only
remedy for non-compliance with the obligation to deal with every question submitted
to the tribunal. It has concluded that Article 49(2) provides a satisfactory remedy for
the case of a tribunal having failed to exercise its jurisdiction in full. For example, in
the present case the Tribunal failed to rule on MINE's claim to be reimbursed for the
costs and expenses incurred in the United States District Court and in arbitration before

106 ICSID REVIEW—-FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the American Arbitration Association in earlier stages of its conflict with Guinea.
Article 49(2) would have provided a specific remedy and, not having invoked it,
MINE could not have relied on that failure for purposes of annulment.

5.13 Guinea’s complaint against the Award falls into a different category. Article
49(2) would not have provided a remedy for the Award’s failure to deal with questions
submitted by Guinea to the Tribunal. The defect complained of by Guinea could not
have been cured by supplementing the Award, but would have required in effect that
it be reconsidered in the light of the Tribunal’s decision on the “omitted” question.
The Committee accepts that in such a case failure to deal with a question may render
the award unintelligible and thus subject to annulment for failure to state reasons.

VI. THE ANNULMENT REQUEST

A. Breach of Contract

6.01 Guinea has advanced two grounds for annulment of the portion of the Award
concerning Guinea’s alleged breach of contract.

6.02 Guinea contends that the Tribunal’s decision that Guinea breached the Agree-
ment must be annulled because in reaching its decision the Tribunal manifestly ex-
ceeded its powers and, in addition, failed to state the reasons on which that decision
was based.

6.03 In the process of examining Guinea’s contentions, the Committee finds it useful
to consider the background of the Agreement and to identify some of its provisions on
which the parties based their principal arguments on the breach of contract issue in the
proceedings before the Tribunal.

BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE

6.04 In 1963, Guinea entered into an agreement with the Harvey Aluminum
Company (‘‘Harvey A ”). That created a joi

Compagnie des Bauxites de Guinée (“CBG”), which was established to mine a
bauxite deposit near Boké. Harvey’s interest was later transferred to Halco, Inc., a
company owned by six major aluminum producers who contracted to purchase
bauxite from CBG (‘the bauxite receivers”).

 

6.05 Article 9 of the Harvey Agreement gave Guinea the right to transport up to 50%
of the exported tonnage, provided Guinea could do so at freight rates not in excess of
market rates. The precise wording of that provision is as follows:

“Le Gouvernement se réserve, dans la mesure ou cela n’aura pas d’effets défavo-
rables sur la vente de bauxite, le droit de faire charger le tonnage exporté, dans
une proportion maxima de 50%, par des navires battant pavillon guinéen ou assi-
milé, ou encore par des navires affrétés par lui sur le marché international des fréts,
le tout a la condition expresse que les prix pratiques soient inférieurs ou égaux 4
ceux qui seraient constatés sur le marché des fréts dans des conditions identiques
pour la période considérée pour le frét et les relations maritimes en cause.” (Gui-
nea’s Exhibit 144) 4

* The Committee quotes all French language texts in the original.

CASES 107

6.06 Against this background, Guinea and MINE concluded the Agreement whose
object is stated as follows:

“Anticle er

Objet de la Convention

La présente Convention a pour objet de déterminer entre le ‘Gouvernement’ et
‘Maritime’ les principes généraux d’association des signataires dans une SOCIE-
TE D’ECONOMIE MIXTE de transports maritimes au long-cours, ci-aprés dé-
nommée ‘SOCIETE’.”
6.07 Article II sets forth the purposes of the joint-venture company, and states its
principal purpose as
“,,.'armement et la gestion de navires au long-cours sous forme d’achat, de lo-
cation-vente ou d’affrétement dans des conditions conformes aux intéréts des par-
ties.”
6.08 Article III deals with the initial capital of the joint-venture company and the
partners’ respective contributions. As amended by Avenant No. 2 of August 31, 1972
(Exhibit 27 to Guinea’s Counter-Memonial), it reads in relevant part:
“Le Capital initial de la SOCIETE ne sera pas inférieur 4 US$ 2,000,000.
Il sera divisé en 100,000 actions d’une valeur minimum chacune de
US$ 20.00 a savoir:

— 49,000 actions ‘A’ au moins qui seront remises aa GOUVERNEMENT

en contrepartie:

(a) [deleted]

(b) du droit d’assurer le transport de 50% du tonnage de bauxite revenant au
GOUVERNEMENT conformément a1’ Article IX de la Convention du
ler octobre 1963 entre le Gouvernement de la République de Guinée et
Harvey Aluminum Co. of Delaware.

(c) du régime fiscal ct douanier de longue durée et de la garantie d’une ex
ploitation paisible pendant la durée du présent accord, tels que définis par
les présentes.

— 51,000 actions ‘B’ qui seront souscrites au pair par ‘MARITIME’ en
espéces.””
6.09 Under the heading “Fonctionnement de la Société” Article IV provides, among
other things:
“La SOCIETE sera organisée de maniére 4 pouvoir assurer d’elle-méme l’arme-
ment, la gérance technique et Commerciale de navires, et prendra 4 cet effet tou-
tes dispositions utiles sans préjudices 4 ses intéréts.”
6.10 When MINE proposed that it be paid a fee by the company for services to be
rendered to it outside Guinea and that MINE also be paid a management fee, this was
resisted by Guinea as being inconsistent with Article [V which in Guinea’s view called
for in-house handling of these matters from the start of operations.

108 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

6.11 Governance of the joint-venture company to be created is the subject of a
lengthy Article V. The company was to have a Conseil d’Administration of 10
members. The Government and MINE were each to appoint five members. The Pres-
ident of the Conseil would be designated by the Government from among the
members appointed by it, while the Vice-President was to be designated by MINE
from among its appointees. The company was further to have a Directeur Général
chosen by MINE and a Directeur Général Adjoint chosen by the Government.

6.12 Meetings of the Conseil d’Administration were to be called by its President
whenever he considered it to be appropriate. The President was obliged to convene
the Conseil d’ Administration whenever he was requested to do so by three or more of
its members. One of MINE’s complaints against Guinea was that the President failed
to act promptly on such requests.

6.13 Article V also contains the following provision:

“Dans tous les actes la formalité de la double signature est nécessaire pour
engager la SOCIETE:

pour les décisions d’ orientation politique de l’action de la SOCIETE, de
son action générale d’Administration, de Contréle, la double signature
dont il s’agit concerne celle du Président et du Vice-Président ou de leurs
fondés de pouvoirs.

(

2

(b) pour les actes d’Administration portant sur une valeur supérieure 4
1,000,000 de Francs guinéens, la double signature visée ci-dessus est celle
du Directeur Général et du Directeur Général Adjoint ou de leurs fondés
de pouvoirs.”

6.14 Guinea relied on this provision to resist proposals by MINE to authorize it, or
the Shipping Committee which had been created, not only to negotiate but to con-
clude contracts of affreightment with the bauxite receivers and charters covering vessels
to carry the bauxite. MINE considered such authority indispensable in view of the
need to match the contracts and charters in almost simultaneous transactions, and to
act promptly in a highly volatile market. Guinea insisted on its rights under Article V
denying that approval by the Conseil d’Administration would unduly delay, and
thereby frustrate, the conclusion of the contracts and charters after they had been ne-
gotiated.

6.15 Article VIII of the Agreement, as amended by Avenant No. 2, deals with the
allocation of cargo. The “Article 9” cargo rights of Guinea were to be transferred to
the joint-venture company pursuant to Article III (para. 6.08 supra) and this was con-
firmed after the creation of SOTRAMAR by Article 3 of the Decree of March 6,
1972:

“La Société Guinéenne de Transport Maritime ‘SOTRAMAR’ est habilitée 4
transporter les 50% du frét de la bauxite du gisement de Boké conformément 4
l'article 9 de la convention du ter octobre 1963 entre la République de Guinée
et Harvey Aluminum Company.” (MINE’s Exhibit 1)

CASES 109

6.16 In Article XII (“Assistance Technique”), MINE undertakes among other things
to make available to the joint-venture company, at its request,

“Je personnel technique nécessaire & son bon fonctionnement, personnel ne pou-
vant étre fourni par le GOUVERNEMENT.”

6.17 Asa result of the meeting between the partners at Conakry on August 28 and
29, 1972, the following paragraph was added to Article XI:
“MARITIME s’engage 4 fournir et 4 garantir a la Société I’acquisition sous forme
de location-vente et d’affrétement le nombre de navires correspondant aux be-
soins de la Société. Ces bateaux doivent étre en bon état de navigabilité dans la
coque et dans les machines et répondent [sic] aux exigences techniques d’une So-
ciété de classification et de surveillance choisie par les 2 parties.”

6.18 The minutes of the meeting referred to above (MINE’s Exhibit N.) state:
“MINE déclare prendre toute la garantie financiére et technique pour I’acquisi-
tion des navires en affrétement et en location-vente. La partie Guinénne fournira

son assistance pour obtenir la signature des Chartes Party [sic] par les partenaires
de CBG.” (p. 6)

6.19 In answer to Guinea’s complaint that notwithstanding the obligations MINE
had undertaken it had failed to produce a single ship, MINE stated that in the absence
of cargo the joint-venture company had no need for ships.

6.20 By 1973, no contract of affreightment or charter party had been concluded and
Guinea informed the bauxite receivers that they would temporarily have to make their
own shipping arrangements when cargo would become available in October of that
year. MINE ascribed this situation to Guinea’s refusal to take the steps necessary to
make SOTRAMAR a viable organization, while Guinea blamed MINE for failing to
meet the competitive condition for “Article 9” freight, and failing to take prompt
action in chartering tonnage after agreement was reached with the bauxite receivers
on “arbitrated” rates. These rates were a compromise, arrived at under pressure of
Guinea, between MINE’ asking price and the bauxite receivers’ offer of market rates.

6.21 MINE pointed out that implementation of the “arbitration” required complex
negotiations concerning the compensation due to the bauxite receivers for accepting
higher-than-market freight rates: It also requested a meeting of the Conseil d’Admin-
istration to auth the ion of the Ip as well as the
service and management agreements on which it continued to insist. The President did
not convene the Conseil d’Administration.

6.22 Guinea for its part concluded that MINE was unwilling to carry out its obliga
tions under the Agreement and started to explore alternative arrangements for the ex-
ercise of its “Article 9” cargo-carrying rights. Guinea did not inform MINE either of
its exploratory talks or of the conclusion on March 16, 1974, of an agreement with
Afrobulk for the carrying during two years of the “Article 9” cargo and the conclusion
of a joint-venture thereafter. Article V of the Afrobulk agreement provides:

“Je Gouvernement s’engage:

110 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

1, A notifier immédiatement 4 Halco et aux acheteurs la désignation de la Société
Réunie [Afrobulk] comme transportateur assimilé et habilité pour le transport de
la bauxite en application de l'article 9 de la Convention de base de Boké.

2. aapporter son appui a Afrobulk pour son acceptation par les acheteurs comme
transporteur selon les conditions et termes de ladite Convention..."* (MINE’s Ex-
hibit T.)

6.23 At about the same time, on March 11, 1974, MINE served notice on Guinea
of the existence of disputes and invoked Article XVIII of the Agreement on the settle-
ment of disputes, naming its appointee for the conciliation procedure which is pro-
vided for in that article. Article XVIII further provides that if the conciliation effort fails
to achieve the desired result within one month after written notice of a dispute, the
dispute will be submitted to arbitration.

6.24 MINE gave notice of two disputes. The first concemed Guinea’s refusal to take
the necessary measures to make SOTRAMAR a viable company. Specific complaints
under this heading were directed at Guinea’s refusal to grant SOTRAMAR’s manage-
ment the necessary powers to conclude contracts of affreightment and charter parties,
its refusal to conclude service contracts with MINE, its insistence on rates which would
bankrupt SOTRAMAR and its refusal to hold meetings of the Conseil d’Administra~
tion.

6.25 The second dispute concerned the information which MINE had received
from well-informed sources to the effect that the “A” shareholders, i.c., Guinea,
“1. Ont unilatéralement contacté les acheteurs de bauxite pour assurer le
transport de la quantité de bauxite 4 exporter 4a SOTRAMAR aux termes
de la Convention [entre MINE et Guinée].

2. Ont unilatéralement négocié avec des tiers le transport de la bauxite
contrairement aux droits et obligations de SOTRAMAR contenus dans la
Convention.”

THE TRIBUNALS DECISION ON “BREACH OF CONTRACT”

6.26 In response to MINE'’s allegation of Guinea’s breach of contract, Guinea argued
that it was on the contrary MINE which had breached the Agreement by failing to
conclude contracts of affreightment and to charter-in covering vessels following the
1973 “arbitration meeting” and that Guinea’s arrangement with Afrobulk was a legit-
imate measure in mitigation of damages.

6.27 The Tribunal rejected Guinea’s defence:

“The Tribunal finds that MINE did not breach the Convention [SOTRAMAR
Agreement] in failing to conclude contracts of affreightment and to charter-in
covering vessels following the July 1973 meeting.” (Award, p. 32)

6.28 The Tribunal further found:

CASES ul

“that Guinea's entering the AFROBULK agreement was contrary to the spirit,
and express provisions of the Convention [SOTRAMAR Agreement].” (Award,

p. 33)

and that
“Guinea's conduct in secretly negotiating the AFROBULK arrangement, and in
denying its existence to MINE thereafter, exhibits bad faith on its part, violating
the principle of good faith set forth in the French [sic] Civil Code.” (Award, ibid.)

6.29 The Tribunal’s decision on the breach of contract was stated in the following
terms:
“The Tribunal concludes unanimously that Guinea prevented SOTRAMAR,
from ing under the Cs ion (SOTRAMAR A and there-

by breached the Convention, when Guinea entered the AFROBULK agreement
in March 1974.” (Award, p. 34)

 

THE COMMITTEE'S FINDINGS

6.30 The Committee will now consider Guinea’s argument that the portion of the
Award relating to the breach of contract must be annulled because the Tribunal “failed
to apply any law whatsoever, much less the correct law—Guinean law, based on
French law” (Application, p. 23) and “‘the dearth of stated reasons for many important
conclusions” (Application, p. 24).
6.31 Applicable Law. The first paragraph of Article XIII of the Agreement reads as
follows:
“La Loi de la présente Convention sera la Loi de la République de Guinée en vi-
gueur ala date de signature, sous réserve des dispositions du présent Article XIII.”
Thus, the applicable law is Guinean law in force on August 19, 1971.
6.32 The second paragraph records the parties’ recognition that the provisions of the
Agreement “sont conformes aux Lois et Réglements, et 4 l’ordre public de la Répub-
lique de Guinée ou y dérogent intentionnellement pour le présent et le futur”.
6.33 The third paragraph states that the Agreement will thus be binding on the parties
“nonobstant toutes les dispositions du droit interne public, administratif ou privé, qui
pourraient intervenir en Guinée, et ce, sans exception ni réserve”. Thus, Guinean leg-
islation subsequent to August 19, 1971, cannot affect the Agreement.
6.34 The fourth and final paragraph of Article III states that accordingly “la Loi
Guinéenne n’interviendra dans l’interprétation et l’exécution de la présente Conven-
tion qu’A titre supplétif et seulement dans le cas ot celle-ci laisserait une difficulté sans
solution”.
6.35 The Committee notes that the term “Loi Guinéenne” must be understood to
mean “droit guinéen” (Guinean law), the word “loi” being taken in its substantive
sense. The Committee is aware of the fact that Guinean law is independent of French
law, although derived from it. Before Guinea became independent in 1958, French
law was applicable under certain conditions in the colony (which became an “overseas
territory” in 1946), as in all other French-governed colonies in West Africa. It must be

112 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

recalled that local custom was applied side by side with the so-called “modem” law,
depending on the subject-matter. In civil and commercial matters, moder law rapidly
replaced custom. Ni heless, French laws and regulations were not ically ap-
plicable in the colonies in these matters. They had to be introduced in accordance with
the principle of “spécialité législative”. In this matter the “Code Civil” was introduced,
and the modifications locally enacted were not necessarily the same as those applicable
in France. Consequently, certain discrepancies may be found between French law as
applied in France, and local Guinean law. As will be seen in para. 6.40 infra, this was
not the case as far as Article 1134 of the “Code Civil” is concerned. In 1971, when the
Agreement was concluded, Guinean law consisted both of pre-1958 laws and regula~
tions that the Guinean legislative power had kept in force and measures adopted after
1958. Both constituted Guinean law.

6.36 Thus, pursuant to Article XIII of the Agreement Guinean law as defined above
is to be applied to disputes if the Agreement provides no solution for the difficulty that
has arisen in the course of its execution. In other words, the law to be applied between
the parties is the Agreement. Nevertheless, when the Agreement is silent or incom-
plete, recourse must be had to Guinean law in its entirety, subject to the qualification
that the only rules of Guinean law (public or private) that are applicable are those that
were in existence at the date of the Agreement. Thus, the Agreement can be said to
have “frozen” the applicable law at that date.

6.37 The Agreement was concluded by the Republic of Guinea and it would be
possible to argue that the applicable Guinean law was public law, but both parties were
agreed that the applicable law was private law. In this context, the relevant Guinean law
is the law of contract which was contained in Book III, Title II] (Des contrats ou des
obligations conventionnelles en général) of the “Code Civil de l'Union Frangaise”, re-
ferred to by MINE as “Union Civil Code”, compiled by G.-H. Camerlynck and R.
Decottignies.>

6.38 Manifest Excess of Power. Proceeding now to an examination of Guinea’s allega-
tion that the Tribunal “failed to apply any law, let alone the correct law,” constituting
a manifest excess of power, the Committee notes that Guinea has expressed itself in
general terms. It states on p. 24 of the Application:
“Most notable is the almost total lack of citation to legal authorities. The single
legal reference is contained in one footnote, citing an article of the French Civil
Code as it appears in Louisiana law.”

6.39 In its Memorial in the Arbitration proceeding (p. 30) and again in its Post-
Hearing Brief in the same proceeding (pp. 57-58), MINE based its case specifically on
Article 1134 of the “Union Civil Code”. There was no disagreement between the
parties as to the binding nature of agreements lawfully entered into and the require-

5 Paris, Librairie Générale de Droit et de Jurisprudence, 1951.

© The second sentence of this statement is incorrect. On p. 33 of the Award, the Tribunal stated that
Guinea had violated “the principle of good faith set forth in the French Civil Code,” quoting Article 1134
in full in French.

CASES u3

ment of good faith in the carrying out of their contractual obligations. The disagree-
ment between the parties concerned the application of the Agreement, which pursuant
to its Article XIII was binding on them. Each party argued its view of the facts and
their effect under the Agreement and the Tribunal concluded, rightly or wrongly, that
MINE had not failed to perform its obligations under the Agreement, so as to be in
breach thereof; that Guinea was not entitled under the Agreement to dispose of its
cargo-carrying rights which it had agreed to contribute to SOTRAMAR,; and that by
transferring these rights to a joint-venture between it and an international shipping
group Guinea had violated its obligation of good faith imposed by Article 1134 of the
“French Civil Code” [sic].

6.40 There is thus no basis for saying that the Tribunal failed to apply any law. Ad-
mittedly, the Tribunal erred in citing Article 1134 of the French Civil Code. The
Committee notes, however, that the relevant provision of the applicable Guinean law
is contained in the “Code Civil de l'Union Frangaise” with the same number and the
same contents as Article 1134 of the French Civil Code. For this reason, the Commit-
tee does not consider that this error warrants annulment.

6.41 On pp. 30-31 of the Application, Guinea further complains that the Tribunal
failed to conduct an inquiry on its own into the “causes que la loi autorise” for the uni-
lateral termination of the Agreement which constitute an exception to the rule of
Article 1134 that agreements may be cancelled only by mutual consent. The Commit-
tee notes that Guinea did not plead before the Tribunal that such an exception applied.

6.42 In the Committee’s view, the annulment proceeding is not an occasion to
present arguments and submissions which a party failed to make in the underlying pro-
ceedings. Besides, the argument based on the words “causes que la loi autorise” is un-
tenable.

6.43 The Committee concludes accordingly that the Tribunal has not failed to apply
the “correct” law and has not manifestly exceeded its power.

6.44 Failure to state reasons. Guinea alleges that a number of important decisions of
the Tribunal were “unreasoned and unsupported”, and that the Tribunal had failed to
address and resolve certain issues raised by Guinea. The Award on breach of contract
should therefore be annulled pursuant to Article 52(1)(e) of the Convention for viola-
tion of Article 48(3) which requires that “the Award shall deal with every question sub-
mitted to the Tribunal, and shall state the reasons upon which it is based”.

6.45 On pp. 32-33 of the Application, Guinea asserts as an example of the Tribunal’s
failure to respect Article 48(3) that the Tribunal’s statement that the changed commer-
cial circumstances brought about by the Middle East War in 1973 did not make it
“legally impossible for either side to perform” the Agreement (Award, p. 29) is “un-
reasoned and unsupported”, and that it is moreover inconsistent with the Tribunal’s
finding “that neither short-term nor long-term contracts of affreightment were avail-
able, through no fault of the parties” (Award, pp. 38-39). The Award should therefore
be annulled because of failure to state reasons and the statement of contradictory
reasons.

114 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

6.46 Guinea's assertions are not well-founded. Neither party had argued that it was
legally impossible for it to perform the Agreement and there is nothing in the record
that suggests that there might have been a legal impediment. There was no necessity
for the Tribunal to give reasons for stating an obvious truth from which it drew no con-
clusions. The Committee’s reading of the Award indicates that the statement served
merely as a transition to the Tribunal’s discussion of the commercial, as opposed to legal
difficulties. The finding that there were such difficulties is of course in no sense incon-
sistent with the finding that there was no legal impediment to performance of the
Agreement.

6.47 Guinea also complains that the Award does not address, or at any rate did not
resolve, the issue of MINE’s unwillingness to proceed without acceptance by Guinea
of its condition on agency fees and authority for the Shipping Committee to conclude
contracts of affreightment and charters. Guinea had argued that these conditions were
contrary to the terms of the Agreement which in effect requires the approval of both
parties (Application, p. 27). Guinea further complains that the Tribunal did not address
the related argument by Guinea that the duty of good faith did not require it to give
up its contractual rights to approve contracts of affreightment and to have SOTRA-
MAR itself handle the operation of the shipping company (Rebuttal to MINE's
Counter-Memorial, p. 20).

6.48 The Tribunal was aware of Guinea’s arguments on these points, which are re-
flected in paras. (4) and (6) of the Tribunal’s statement of “Guinea’s Assertions”, sum-
marizing Guinea’s position that MINE bore the responsibility for SOTRAMAR’s
failure to function (Award, pp. 27-29). With particular reference to MINE’s demand
for agency fees, the Tribunal noted that “the Convention did not say clearly that
SOTRAMAR would pay agency and management expenses before Guinea and
MINE divided SOTRAMARSs net profits” and that “the uncertainty exacerbated re-
lations between the parties when MINE spelled out the fees” (Award, p. 11).

6.49 In the Tribunal’s “Findings on Liability”, it started out by stating that “from the
correspondence put in evidence and the testimony given, it appears that Guinea’s
conduct, through its officials, was not the conduct of a commercially astute investor in
a complex international industry” (Award, pp. 27-28). In a footnote to that finding,
the Tribunal stated that while the Guinean officials may have had the expectation that
MINE would be the sole manager, Guinea’s role as described in the Agreement was an
active role, and the Agreement and SOTRAMARSs by-laws required Guinea to par-
ticipate in the business management of SOTRAMAR.

6.50 The Tribunal did not explicitly address and decide either of Guinea’s arguments
set out in para. 6.45 supra. Nor did it consider MINE’s argument that Guinea violated
its obligation to take reasonable steps to make SOTRAMAR viable, specifically by re
fusing to appoint an agent for SOTRAMAR and denying authority to MINE to con-
clude contracts of affreightment and charter-parties without first securing the approval
of the SOTRAMAR Board of Directors, which Guinea, moreover, failed to convene
promptly.

CASES 1s

6.51 The Tribunal did not have to address these specific conflicting contentions of
the parties because it did address and resolved Guinea’s principal argument to the effect
that after the July 1973 agreement (“arbitration”) with the bauxite receivers, MINE,
in the Tribunal’s paraphrase, “demonstrated its lack of will and competence to put
SOTRAMAR in operation, thereby breaching its obligations under the C it

[Agreement], because MINE failed to conclude contracts of affreightment and charter
in tonnage” (Award, p. 31).

6.52 The Tribunal rejected Guinea’s argument, which it said “misconstrues the
facts” (Award, p. 31), and stated its reasons: the “‘arbitrated rates” were only a part of
the whole affreightment package, leaving important stated conditions still to be nego-
tiated; even if the “arbitration” had sufficed to enable the conclusion of contracts of af-
freightment at the “arbitrated rates” and covering tonnage had been chartered within
a commercially reasonable period after the July 1973 meeting, “SOTRAMAR would
soon have gone bankrupt, because world shipping rates rose precipitously”; and “the
rapidly escalating shipping market during the latter part of 1973 and early 1974 would
have made it impossible for MINE properly to mesh three-year contracts of affreight-
ment with chartered-in tonnage” (Award, pp. 31-32).

6.53 Thus, the Tribunal’s finding on p. 32 of the Award that “MINE did not breach
the C ion [Ag) ] in failing to clude contracts of affreigt and to
charter-in covering vessels” following the 1973 meeting is supported by reasons which
can be followed without great difficulty. Their substance is not subject to review by the
Committee. The reasons for the Tribunal’s findings also make clear why it did not have
to address Guinea's assertions mentioned in para. 6.45 supra: whether Guinea or MINE
was right on the issue of MINE’s demand of a service contract and a management fec,
or on that of authority to conclude contracts of affreightment and charters, had become
irrelevant.

6.54 As the Committee already stated, in the context of its rejection of Guinea’s al-
legation that the Tribunal had manifestly exceeded its powers, the Tribunal’s decision
on the breach of Agreement was based on the provisions of that Agreement itself and
on Article 1134 of the “Code Civil de l'Union Frangaise”, the applicable law according
to Guinea.

6.55 After concluding that MINE had not breached the Agreement, the Tribunal
noted the fact which was not disputed that Guinea had surreptitiously negotiated with
third parties and had entered into an agreement with Afrobulk in which it had disposed
of a right exercisable by SOTRAMAR without MINE’: consent, and arrived at the
conclusion that Guinea had breached the Agreement and violated its duty of good
faith. Guinea complains that the Tribunal failed to deal with its arguments on the limits
of good faith and on its right to conclude the agreement with Afrobulk in response to
MINE’s prior refusal to go forward without Guinea’s relinquishing its contractual
rights. This complaint is based on the assumption, contrary to the Tribunal’s finding,
that MINE was in breach of the Agreement. It is in effect an appeal against the Tribu-
nal’s decision on breach of contract, but appeal is excluded by the Convention.

116 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

6.56 The Committee concludes accordingly that the Tribunal has not violated
Article 48(3) of the Convention and has not failed to state the reasons on which its de-
cision on breach of contract was based.

B. Damages

6.57 Guinea advances three grounds for annulment of the portion of the Award
awarding damages to MINE following the Tribunal’s finding that Guinea has breached
the Agreement.

6.58 Guinea contends that the Tribunal’s decision on damages must be annulled,
first, because the Tribunal failed to state the reasons on which that decision was based,
second, because in reaching its decision it manifestly exceeded its powers and third,
because it seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure.

THE PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL

6.59 MINE’s basic position was that it was “entitled to be reimbursed the profits it
would have made, had Respondent not breached the Contract” (Memorial, p. 40) and
that its compensatory damages should also cover its out-of-pocket costs incurred in
seeking to make SOTRAMAR a viable company, as well as its costs and expenses in
connection with the prior AAA arbitration.”

The Tribunal did not discuss the claim of out-of-pocket costs and AAA costs in its
award and did not award MINE damages on account of these two items.

6.60 In support of its claim for compensatory damages, MINE stated that “[T]his
theory of damages is universally recognized and accepted not only under the common
law system, [citations to U.S. decision omitted] but also under the French system
applied both in France and in its colonies”, citing Article 1149 of the “Union Civil
Code”. The Committee notes that Article 1149 provides:

“Les dommages et intéréts dus au créancier sont, en général, de la perte qu'il a
faite et du gain dont il a été privé, sauf les exceptions et modifications ci-aprés.”

6.61 Guinea did not contest the principle of compensation for loss of future profits,
but rejected MINE’s claim on the ground that it was speculative. Reasoning first from
the point of view of the common law, Guinea stated that the common law requires
MINE to prove its claim for damages with reasonable certainty, citing U.S. Court of
Appeals cases. It then went on to say that “{T]reatises on contracts and damages law

7 Although the parties had in 1975 executed a consent to ICSID jurisdiction, MINE did not proceed
before the Centre, but in January 1978 started proceedings in the District Court of the District of Columbia
for an order under Section 4 of the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) to compel arbitration before the American
Arbitration Association (AAA). Guinea did not appear and in June 1980 the AAA arbitral tribunal which had
been constituted rendered an award in excess of US$25 million, which primarily represented compensatory
damages for breach of contract. MINE then returned to the D.C. court filing a motion to confirm and enter
judgement on the award under Section 9 of the FAA. Guinea appeared and filed a motion to dismiss for lack
of subject matter jurisdiction on the grounds among others of sovereign immunity and the existence of an
ICSID arbitration agreement. In January 1981, the Court denied Guinea’s motion and confirmed and entered
judgement on the award. Guinea appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia circuit
which concluded, contrary to the court below, that Guinea was immune under the Foreign Sovereign Im-
munity Act 1976 and reversed the District Court's decision on that ground.

CASES M7

under the Civil Code restate [sic] that principle without qualification” (Counter-
Memorial, p. 62), quoting Starck, Droit Civil: Obligations and Chartier, La Réparation
du Préjudice.

6.62 Replying to Guinea’s contention that MINE’s claim for damages is too specu-
lative to be allowed, MINE argued, reverting to exclusive reliance on U.S. law, that it
has long been established that damages do not need to be proved with mathematical
certainty, particularly where the uncertainty has been caused by the defendant's wrong-
fal breach (Reply, pp. 47-48).

6.63 In its Post-Hearing brief (pp. 72-73), Guinea countered that MINE’s prospec~
tive profits were to be derived from a new business with no performance record, in
which market fluctuations are the norm.

6.64 MINE argued that there were no major difficulties in ascertaining what the
damages on account of profit foregone were “although they may be calculated in
several different ways depending upon which business approach SOTRAMAR would.
have chosen to take” for the exercise of its “Article 9” cargo-carrying rights (either pur-
chase of vessels or short-term charters). In the AAA proceedings (Note 7 supra), MINE
proposed alternative calculations “A” and “B”, both resulting in damages of approxi-
mately US$ 15 million. Guinea not having appeared, the AAA arbitrators commis-
sioned-an independent report by a New York accounting firm, Grayson & Bock,
which presented three separate theories (or methods) of calculation, called “X”, “Y”
and “Z” respectively. The accountants preferred method “Y” which yielded a figure
of US$ 36 million as damages as of 1980 (Memorial, pp. 40-42).

6.65 In its Counter-Memorial before the Tribunal, Guinea contended that the exist-
ence of “a veritable alphabet soup of damage theories” was the best demonstration of
the speculative nature of MINE’s claim for damages. It went on to characterize the
Grayson & Bock calculations as based on “factual errors and unproven assumptions”,
as shown, among other things, by the inclusion of compensation for anticipated earn-
ings from the service and management contracts proposed by MINE, which were not
called for by the Agreement and which neither Guinea nor SOTRAMAR had agreed
to enter into, and by the assumption that SOTRAMAR operations would have lasted
20 years, even though MINE itself had based its calculations on a 10-year period (pp.
64-66).

6.66 There is no need to mention the parties’ detailed arguments in support of an
and in opposition to theory “Y” since the Tribunal, largely accepting Guinea’s argu-
ments, rejected that theory as a basis for calculating MINE’s damages.

6.67 Grayson & Bock’s theory “Z.” was based on the assumption that SOTRAMAR
would have negotiated 3-year contracts with the bauxite receivers over a period of
twenty years, and chose Guinea’s share of Afrobulk’s estimated earnings as a proxy for
SOTRAMARS earnings. Guinea’s agreement with Afrobulk provided for exercise by
the latter of Guinea’s “Article 9” carrying rights for two years, to be followed by the

8 US$ 66 million as of January 1, 1987 (Award, p. 36).

118. ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

conclusion of an Afrobulk/Guinea joint-venture. Afrobulk was dissolved before the
end of the two-year period and Guinea established a joint-venture, Guinomar, with
another partner. Guinomar had since continued as Guinea’s “Article 9” carrier. Guinea
argued that the actual financial performance of Guinomar, rather than the assumed per-
formance of Afrobulk, should therefore be the proxy for SOTRAMAR’s eamings
(Post-Hearing Brief, p. 90). Guinea stated that during 1974 through 1984 it received
a total of only US$ 6 million from all sources, (Afrobulk, the receivers and Guinomar),
that is less than 10% of MINE’ claim of US$ 66 million under theory “Y”.

6.68 MINE maintained that theory “Z” and the calculations thereunder remained
valid. The Tribunal might make such modifications as it deemed appropriate, such as
reducing the earnings period from 20 to 10 years or deducting agency fees, but there
was no legal basis for requiring the Tribunal to look exclusively at the actual operating
results under Afrobulk, in the interregnum between the termination of the Afrobulk
arrangement and the start-up of Guinomar, and under Guinomar. However, even if the
Tribunal were to follow Guinea’s argument, an amount of damages representing “a
classic worst case scenario” could still be calculated. MINE’s calculations arrived at an
amount just below US$ 9 million of which somewhat more than half represented in-
terest calculated at 9% per annum and compounded (Post-Hearing Rebuttal Brief, pp.
41-45).

6.69 In its Surrebuttal Brief, Guinea presented a detailed refutation of MINE’s
“worst case” theory, including the following points: the 10-year period is too long and
inherently speculative; while supposedly based on “what actually occurred”, the theory
is not based on what actually occurred (certain items include compensation for profits
foregone for a period during which Guinea actually earned no money from “Article
9”); as to other items, it is speculative in that MINE has no basis for assuming that
SOTRAMARS profit would have been comparable to the income Guinea derived
from an alternative to the joint-venture; yet other items give MINE credit for profits
that it has no legitimate claim to receive (pp. 26-29).

6.70 In the context of criticizing the “worst case” theory, Guinea stated that MINE
improperly assumed that it was entitled to interest on its damages. “By simply assuming
entitlement to interest, MINE has failed to meet its burden of proving its entitlement
to its damage request”. Awarding interest would also be “inappropriate” because
MINE itself caused the delays. Thus, interest should be excluded in its entirety (ibid.,
pp. 28-29).
6.71 In a separate attack on MINE’s claims, Guinea invoked Article XVI of the
Agreement for the proposition that MINE would in no event be entitled to compen-
sation for profits foregone for more than one year. That article provides in relevant part:

“La durée de la SOCIETE est fixée & 30 (trente) ans. Toutefois, 10 (dix) ans aprés

Ja date de constitution de la SOCIETE, le GOUVERNEMENT pourra s’il le dé-

sire, acquérir 51 (cinquante et un) % des actions; et 15 (quinze) ans, aprés la date

de constitution de la SOCIETE, le GOUVERNEMENT aura l’option de rache-

ter partie ou totalité de la participation de MARITIME [MINE]...

Cependant, la SOCIETE peut-étre dissoute avant terme d’accord parties.

CASES 119

Si une partie décide de se retirer avant le délai initialement convenu, elle le noti-
fiera formellement 12 (douze) mois 4 lavance; l'autre partenaire étant tenu de
manifester son avis par écrit au plus tard 6 (six) mois aprés la date de notification.

‘Au cas ott cet avis serait défavorable au retrait, le requérant acceptera de perdre 10
(dix) % de ses droits sur l'actif net de la SOCIETE, créances communes non-
comprises.

Le remboursement s’effectuera en nature constituée essentiellement de navires
dont la valeur sera déterminée par une Société fiduciaire internationale choisie par
les parties.”

Guinea contended, relying on American cases, that Article XVI is a liquidated damages
provision and would in any event limit recovery to one year’s damages (Counter-
Memorial, pp. 57-59).

6.72 _ In its reply (pp. 42-47), MINE contested both of Guinea’s assertions. It denied
that Article XVI is a liquidated damages provision, asserted that Article XVI never
became operative, and contended that Article XVI is not applicable because the specific
notice provisions were not met by Guinea, relying in each instance exclusively on U.S.
cases.

6.73 MINE also denied that Article XVI would limit the recovery of damages to a
one-year period only. It relied for this purpose on the “applicable law”, which it newly
defined as “international commercial law, or Guinean law when there is a specific
Guinean law in point”. MINE claimed to have caused the commercial laws of major
European countries (France, Germany, Spain, Switzerland and United Kingdom) to
be thoroughly reviewed by “eminent local attorneys” and to have been advised by
anonymous “eminent counsel” that Article XVI would not serve to limit MINE’S
damages to a one-year period. It recalled that Guinean law “closely tracks French law”
without, however, relying especially on “eminent French counsel” or providing his
opinion.
THE AWARD
(pp. 34-40 inclusive)

6.74 The Tribunal opened the portion of the Award dealing with damages by stating
MINE'’s contention that it is entitled to damages measured by the profits lost because
Guinea breached the SOTROMAR Agreement, and adding in its own words, “that
is, the expectancy of MINE's share of the net profits that SOTRAMAR would have
earned if Guinea had performed the Convention by letting SOTRAMAR go into op-
eration”. The Tribunal rejected this expectancy as a measure of damages:

“The leading obstacle to this theory of damages is the fact that SOTRAMAR
never earned any profits; and because SOTRAMAR was a new venture, the pro-
jection of expectancy of net profit is too speculative to use in assessing damages.
Other contract damage theories are also unusable” (pp. 34-35).

6.75 Particularizing that statement, the Tribunal then described theory “Y”, theory
“Z” and MINE’s “worst-case scenario” and Guinea’s objections to each of them.

120 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

6.76 Theory “Y” was based on the allegation that Guinea breached the Agreement
by refusing to take the necessary action to establish shipping operations on the basis of
long-term contracts of affreightment, and to build up a fleet through hire-purchase ar-
rangements, so that MINE was damaged by losing what the Tribunal called “a hypo-
thetical share of hypothetical profits in a hypothetical form of doing business”,
projected over 20 years (pp. 35-36). Theory “Z” was based on Guinea’s breach in 1974
when it concluded the Aftobulk agreement and held Guinea liable for MINE's share
of the net profits that SOTRAMAR would have earned, had it functioned under the
Afrobulk and Guinomar agreements, projected for 20 years (p. 36).

6.77 The Tribunal then recited Guinea's response to both theories, namely, that
MINE's projections of alleged profits over a 20-year period, for a new business venture
with no performance record, where market fluctuations are common-place, was spec-
ulative. It also recorded that Guinea argued that theory “Y” was discredited by the
weight of the evidence, and that theory “Z” was irrational since it disregarded the
actual financial performance of Guinomar, Guinea’s current “Article 9” carrier, and
projected revenue ten times what Guinea actually received from 1974 through 1984
(p. 37).

6.78 The Award also records Guinea's criticism of MINE’s “worst-case” theory as
not reflecting what actually occurred, and failing to prove entitlement to interest (pp.
37-38).

6.79 The Tribunal stated its view on the principles governing damages for breach of
contract in the following terms:

 

“The Tribunal accepts the general principle that MINE is entitled to be compen-
sated for the profits it would have earned if Guinea had not breached the Con-
vention. The lost profits need not be proven with complete certainty, nor should
recovery be denied simply because the amount is difficult to ascertain.” (Award,
p. 38).

The Tribunal did not cite statutory or case law references.

6.80 The Award then states that, having considered the detailed presentations of
MINE’ theories “Y” and “Z”, the Tribunal has concluded “that neither theory rep-
resents a usable approach to MINE’ loss of profits”. It rejected theory “Y” on substan-
tially the same grounds as had been argued by Guinea (p. 38). Its rejection of theory
“Z” was not based on the fact that it disregarded the actual financial performance of
Guinomar, as urged by Guinea (see para. 6.67 supra), but on the ground that “it is far
from certain that these [short-term] contracts of affreightment could have been con-
cluded”. The Tribunal noted that Guinomar managed to obtain contracts of affreight-
ment only when the shipping partner undertook significant business risks in order to
make the resultant rates more attractive to the bauxite receivers, namely, by providing
a 10-year fixed rate contract for eastbound grain cargo from the United States to Eu-
ropean ports. It expressed the view that MINE probably could not have concluded sig-
nificant contracts of affreightment without a similar undertaking, which did not appear
to be MINE's intention from the start (pp. 38-39).

CASES 121

6.81 The Tribunal did not comment on MINE’s “worst-case” theory as a basis for
the calculation of damages but, without introduction, stated its own finding. It started
out by saying that MINE’ loss of profits may be measured adequately by the Afrobulk
agreement since the 50 cents per ton which Guinea received from Afrobulk for its
“Article 9” rights during a two-year period rightfully belonged to SOTRAMAR. It
went on to state that “it seems fair to conclude that such an arrangement could have
been extended, or negotiated with others, to a total period of ten years”. The Tribunal
added by way of explanation:

“While the Convention was to last 30 years, the Bauxite Receivers under the
Harvey Agreement were bound to CBG for only 20 years, and 10 years appears
tobea ble period dering that the Ci
provisions for early termination.” (Award, pp. 39-40).

 

6.82 The Tribunal also awarded simple interest on each year’s estimated lost profits
from 1975 through 1987 at the average U.S. prime interest rate for each year published
by the Chase Manhattan Bank. The Tribunal calculated lost profits at US$ 6,726,497
and interest at US$ 5,457,986.

THE PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS IN THE ANNULMENT PROCEEDINGS.

6.83 Failure to State Reasons, including Failure to Address Issues. As the Committee
stated in para. 5.13 supra, a tribunal's failure to address a question submitted to it may
render its award unintelligible and thus subject to annulment for failure to state reasons.

6.84 (a) Limitation of damages to one year.

Guinea complains that the Tribunal failed to address its contention that Arti-
cle XVI of the Agreement limits any recovery of damages for lost profits to only one
year (Application, p. 34). The Tribunal disregarded or implicitly rejected this con-
tention of Guinea’s by awarding damages over a ten-year period without giving rea-
sons (ibid., p. 35). MINE argues that it was for the Tribunal to interpret Article XVI,
which constituted the law binding the parties, and that the Tribunal had obviously
agreed with the arguments presented by MINE in the arbitral proceedings. More-
over, the Tribunal gave its reason for using a period of 10 years (Counter-Memorial,
pp. 49-51). Guinea replies that the Tribunal did not give the slightest indication of
its reasoning on the Article XVI point which, if resolved in Guinea's favour, would
have reduced the damages to a fraction of the amount awarded by the Tribunal. It is
not for MINE to supply the reasoning (Rebuttal to MINE’s Counter-Memorial, p.
25).

6.85 — (b) Interest on damages

Guinea states that in awarding interest to MINE on damages, the Tribunal
failed to give any reason for rejecting Guinea’s arguments presented in its Post-
Hearing Surrebuttal Brief. Guinea also criticizes the Tribunal for having chosen to
award interest at the United States prime rate without stating its reasons (Application,
pp. 35-36) and submits that it is not for the Committee to imagine what might or
should have been the arbitrators’ reasons.

122 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

6.86 MINE argues that the Tribunal operated under the legal principle that MINE
as the injured party was entitled to be made whole and that this necessarily required
the Tribunal to grant interest to MINE (citing a United States Supreme Court case).
MINE also explains the award of interest expressed in United States Dollars at the
prime rate, arguing that the Tribunal knew that the currency of the Agreement was the
US. dollar, that thus an interest rate related to that currency was appropriate, and that
the rate selected was one actually paid by a major U.S. bank (Rejoinder, pp. 15-16).

6.87 — (c) Damages over a ten-year period

Guinea alleges that the Tribunal stated its own damages theory and conclusion
“without benefit of reason”. In addition, the conclusion contradicts the reasoning of
the Tribunal in rejecting MINE’s theory based on the expectancy of profits as too
speculative (Application, p. 41). MINE replies that the Tribunal gave its reason for
using a 10-year period on pp. 50-51 of the Award, namely, that ten years appears to
be a reasonable period considering that the SOTRAMAR agreement contained pro-
visions for early termination (Counter-Memorial, p. 50).

6.88 Guinea denies the validity of MINE’s attempt to deem the award to contain
reasoning by virtue of the parties’ presentation of facts and legal arguments to the Tri-
bunal (Rebuttal to MINE’s Counter-Memorial, p. 30).

6.89 (d) Hypothetical basis of the decision on damages

Guinea asserts that in awarding MINE royalty damages for 10 years, the Tri-
bunal based itself on assumptions as to the extension of an Afrobulk type agreement
for a period of ten years and as to MINE'’s willingness to accept such an arrangement.
The Tribunal gave no reasons and cited no support for its conjecture which is against
the evidence in the record. Afrobulk was dissolved even before its two-year agree-
ment was completed and the subsequent royalty fees mentioned in evidence were
much lower than the 50 cents Afrobulk royalty (Application, pp. 41-42). MINE de-
nies that the decision was made on hypothetical assumptions, stating that it was on
the contrary based on the evidence and constituted a fair and reasonable method to
calculate damages “within the principle of adequate certainty” (Counter-Memorial,
p. 57).
6.90 Guinea argues that MINE has failed to rebut its assertion that the possibility of
extending the same royalty arrangement for ten years is purely hypothetical. MINE
does not point to any evidence in the record, “for there is none” (Rebuttal to MINE’s
Counter-Claim, p. 30). MINE answers that the Tribunal took into account “four
factors of record” which constituted the factual basis for its calculation. They were (i)
the 50 cents royalty under the Afrobulk agreement; (ii) the fact that the Agreement
could be terminated after the expiration of 10 years; (iii) the quantity of bauxite carried;
and (iv) MINE'’s entitlement to 35% of SOTRAMAR:s profits.

6.91  (e) Deduction of interest on MINE’s withdrawn capital contribution

Guinea argues that the Tribunal failed to address its argument that if the Tri-
bunal decides that MINE was entitled to interest on any damages, interest on the
amount of US$ 1,020,000 which had been withdrawn should be deducted. The

CASES 123

damages portion of the award should therefore be annulled pursuant to Article
52(1)(d) and (c) (Application, p. 37). MINE does not deny that the Tribunal did not
address Guinea’s argument but states that the failure to address every issue tendered
toa Tribunal is not a ground for annulment, and that the Tribunal’s failure to rec-
ognize Guinea’s claims “was at best an error of law; but not a ‘manifest’ disregard of
the Tribunal’s powers justifying an annulment of the Award” (Counter-Memorial,
p. 64).?
6.92 Guinea replies that “the awarding of almost $2 million additional damages
without giving the slightest reason in fact or law for overriding a party’s strenuous ob-
jections” is clearly a ground for annulment (Rebuttal to MINE’s Counter-Memorial,
p. 29).
6.93 Manifest Excess of Powers: Failure to Apply “Law”. Guinea attacks the Award on
damages for failure to apply “law” and/or “reference to legal authorities” to the fol-
lowing points, among others: burden of proof (Application, p. 32), interest on damages
(ibid., p. 37) and damages calculation (ibid., p. 41). MINE replies that the Tribunal,
having all the evidence before it, was able on the basis of that evidence to make its own
calculation of damages which constituted in its best judgment the amount of gain or
lost profits with reasonable certainty. It is meaningless to discuss the Tribunal’s exercise
of judgment in terms of ‘burden of proof’ (Counter-Memorial, p. 61). As regards in-
terest on damages, MINE asserts that under French law the assessment of compensa~
tory interest is within the sound discretion of the judge, citing A. Weill & F. Terre,
Droit Civil—Les Obligations (1987), No. 434 (ibid., p. 62).
6.94 Serious Violation of a Fundamental Rule of Procedure. Guinea asserts that, having
rejected MINE’s damages theories “Y” and “Z,” as unusable, the Tribunal should have
concluded that MINE had failed to prove its damages. However, the Tribunal devised
a different measure of damages without informing the parties and without giving
Guinea an opportunity of rebuttal (Application, pp. 42-43).
6.95 MINE answers that the Tribunal based its damages calculation on evidence and
information to which both parties had access. The final calculation, based on evidence
of record, was clearly within the discretion of the Tribunal (Counter-Memorial, pp.
44-48). In support of its argument, MINE cites the English translation of the 1985 de-
cision of the ad hoc Committee in the matter of Kléckner v. Cameroon (ARB/81/2) for
the proposition that where a tribunal in the course of its deliberations reaches a provi-
sional conclusion that the legal basis for its decision may be different from the parties’
respective arguments, and provided that its own theory and argument remain within
the “legal framework” of the parties’ submissions,

“[W]hether to reopen the proceeding before reaching a decision and allow the

parties to put forward their views on the arbitrators’ ‘new’ thesis is rather a question

of expedience.” (para. 91).
6.96 Guinea replies that if MINE had proffered a new damages theory after Guinea
had filed its last brief, that theory could not be utilized without permitting Guinea an

° Guinea had not claimed that the Tribunal was guilty in this respect of a manifest excess of power.

124 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

opportunity to address it. It then contends that “{I]t can be no different when it is the
Tribunal rather than a party who dreams up a new theory”, and that this is especially
true where, as Guinea claims to be the case, “the new theory of damages is based on a
re-writing of the contract...that required Guinea to continue ‘in partnership’ with
MINE even if the contract could not be performed as intended” (Rebuttal to MINE’s
Counter-Memorial, p. 31).

THE COMMITTEE'S FINDINGS

6.97 The Committee will now consider Guinea’s argument that the portion of the
Award relating to damages must be annulled, first because of the Tribunal’s failure to
state reasons, second because of manifest excess of power, and third because of serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

Failure to State Reasons, including Failure to Address Issues

6.98 The Committee has first examined the numerous instances of alleged violations
of Article 48(3) of the Convention advanced by Guinea in support of its Application
for annulment of the damages portion of the Award (paras. 6.84-6.85 supra). Several of
these appear to the Committee singly to justify, and collectively to compel, annulment
of that portion.

6.99 The Committee will first mention two instances in which the Tribunal failed
to deal with questions raised by Guinea, the answer to which might have affected the
Tribunal’s conclusion. Failure to address these questions constituted a failure to state
the reasons on which that conclusion was based.

6.100 In opposing MINE’s damages claim, Guinea argued that pursuant to Article
XVI of the SOTRAMAR agreement, all MINE would be entitled to if Guinea had
breached that agreement (which it denied) was damages for one year. It also argued
that in any event the award of interest (whose justification it denied) on the amount of
damages arrived at by one or the other formula (whose validity it contested) should be
reduced by the interest on the sum of US$ 1,020,000 capital contribution which
MINE had withdrawn in 1975. Both arguments were briefed by the parties and evi-
dence was presented.

6.101 If Guinea’s argument on Article XVI had been accepted, it would have meant
a radical reduction of the damages claim which was based alternatively on a 20-year
and a 10-year period. Acceptance of the argument on the withdrawal by MINE of its
cash capital contribution would have substantially reduced the interest element of the
damages award. They raised therefore important issues. The Tribunal either failed to
consider them, or it did consider them but thought that Guinea’s arguments should be
rejected. But that did not free the Tribunal from its duty to give reasons for its rejection
as an indispensable component of the statement of reasons on which its conclusion was
based.

6.102 Guinea further submits that the award of damages for lost profits must be an-
nulled for failure to state reasons for awarding interest on the damages sum, particularly
in the face of Guinea’s challenge of MINE’s entitlement to interest on the ground that
MINE waited 9 years to go to ICSID arbitration.

CASES 125

6.103 In objecting to the award of interest on the ground that many United States ju-
risdictions “do not permit recovery of the pre-judgment interest on unliquidated dam-
ages”, Guinea disregards the applicable law. It is, on the other hand, not open to doubt
that the Tribunal should have stated the reason why it rejected Guinea’s argument
based on MINE'’s delay in starting ICSID proceedings.

6.104 Guinea advances a separate objection to the Tribunal’s failure to give reasons for
the award of interest at the U.S. bank rate. In light of the fact that the U.S. dollar was
the currency of the contract, the justification of that currency and bank rate of interest
is apparent. An express statement to that effect is however wanting.

6.105 While the viol of the requi of the C i ioned in the
foregoing paragraphs affect particular aspects of the Tribunal’s damages calculations,
Guinea's principal complaint is addressed to its very basis (see paras. 6.87-6.91 supra).
The Committee finds that to the extent that the Tribunal purported to state the reasons
for its decision, they were inconsistent and in contradiction with its analysis of damages
theories “Y” and “Z.”.

6.106 MINE's “worst case” scenario and the damages calculation by the Tribunal have
in common that they do not purport to estimate profits that SOTRAMAR would
have made, but rather take as a base either the actual or hypothesized profits under the
substitute Afrobulk/Guinomar arrangements. The theory underlying this approach,
which was not articulated either by the parties or by the Tribunal, may have been that
for Guinea to keep the fruits of the substitute arrangements, which according to the
Tribunal’s ruling on breach of contract it had concluded in violation of the Agreement,
would have constituted unjust enrichment, and that MINE should therefore be award-
ed the same share of those profits as it was entitled to receive if they had been
SOTRAMAR profits.

6.107 Guinea had supplied information to the Tribunal concerning the profits it had
received under the substitute arrangements for a 10-year period. MINE argued that
these were understated. The Tribunal did not decide the issue. It did, however, for its
own damages calculations assume, without explanation and contrary to what really
happened, that arrangements yielding 50 cents per ton (the royalty rate of the Afrobulk
agreement) could have been concluded for a period of ten years. Having concluded
that theories “Y” and “Z” were unusable because of their speculative character, the
Tribunal could not, without contradicting itself, adopt a “damages theory” which dis-
regarded the real situation and relied on hypotheses which the Tribunal itself had re-
jected as a basis for the calculation of damages. As the Committee stated in para. 5.09
Supra, the requirement that the Award must state the reasons on which it is based is in
particular not satisfied by contradictory reasons.

 

6.108 For all these reasons, the Committee finds that the portion of the Tribunal’s

126 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

Award relating to damages must be annulled for failure to state the reasons on which
it is based.
Manifest Excess of Power and Serious Departure
from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure
6.109 Having reached the Conclusion that the Award on damages must be annulled
for failure to state reasons, the Committee sees no need to examine the alternative
grounds for annulment advanced by Guinea.

C. Costs

6.110 Guinea requests that the Tribunal’s decision on costs be annulled because it
has failed to state the reasons on which its award of US$ 275,000 in costs of the IC-
SID arbitration was based.

6.111 The award of costs is not part of the award of damages on account of profits fore-
gone. The amount of costs claimed by MINE was contested by Guinea on the ground
that it included costs incurred in the attempted measures of constraint in execution of
the AAA award. The Tribunal apparently took this argument into account and award-
ed a lower amount. Article 61(2) of the Convention provides that the Tribunal shall
decide how and by whom the costs of proceedings including the expenses incurred by
the parties, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charge for
the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. The article confers a discretionary
power on the Tribunal which was in particular under no obligation to state reasons for
awarding costs against the losing party. Guinea has not alleged that the Tribunal abused
its discretion.

6.112 The award of costs can nevertheless not remain in existence since its basis, viz.,
that Guinea was the losing party, has disappeared as a result of the annulment of the
portion of the Award relating to damages. The award of costs cannot survive the an-
nulment of that portion of the Award with which it is inextricably linked. The Com-
mittee therefore finds that the award of costs must be annulled in consequence of the
annulment of the damages portion of the Award.

VII. TEMPORARY STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD
ON THE COUNTER CLAIMS

7.01 As noted in paras. 2.01 and 4.08 supra, Guinea has not requested annulment of
the decision of the Tribunal on its counter-claims. That portion of the Award is there-
fore final and remains in effect. In the circumstances, the Committee has found it ap-
propriate to order the temporary stay of enforcement of the unannulled portion of the
Award under Arbitration Rule 54(3) in order to give either party an opportunity to
request a new tribunal constituted pursuant to Article 52(6) of the Convention to grant
a stay pursuant to Arbitration Rule 55(3). The Committee considers that a period of

10 ‘The parties exchanged lengthy arguments in their presentations to the Tribunal and the Committee
on another contention of Guinea's, viz., that MINE had failed to mitigate its damages when it refused Guin
a's offer to let MINE share half the Afrobulk agreement. In view of the Committee's decision to annul the
damages portion of the Award, it does not find it necessary to deal with the question whether the Tribunal’s
disposition of Guinea's contention might have furnished an independent ground for annulment.

CASES 127

ninety days following the date of its decision will be adequate for the purpose and de-
termines that the stay will automatically terminate on the last day of that period.

VIII. DECISION
8.01 Based on the foregoing,
THE COMMITTEE,
Noting that Guinea has not requested annulment of the portion of the Award in the
sum of US$ 210,000 in respect of its counter-claims and that that portion of the
Award remains in effect as res judicata,
Noting that the stay of enforcement of the Award ordered by the Committee’s In-
terim Order No. I terminates automatically as of the date of this Decision pursuant
to Arbitration Rule 54(3),

UNANIMOUSLY

A. Rejects Guinea’s request for annulment of the portion of the Award which holds

that Guinea breached the SOTRAMAR Agreement;

B. (1) Grants Guinea’s request for annulment of the portion of the Award
awarding MINE damages (including “interest on damages”) as rep-
aration for Guinea’s breach of contract and annuls that portion of
the Award;

(2) Rules that as a result of the above annulment, the portion of the
Award awarding MINE US$ 275,000 towards the costs of the
ICSID arbitration no longer has any foundation, and is therefore an-
nulled;

C. Orders, in accordance with Arbitration Rule 54(3), the temporary stay of en-

forcement of the portion of the Award in respect of the counter-claims for a period

of ninety days following the date of this Decision;

D. Rules

(1) that the parties bear their own expenses in connection with the
present proceedings;

(2) that the parties bear equally the fees and expenses of the members
of the Committee and the charges of the Centre, as determined by
the Secretary-General; and

(3) that accordingly MINE shall reimburse Guinea one half of the
amounts paid by the latter to the Centre in respect of such fees, ex-
penses and charges pursuant to Administrative and Financial Reg-
ulation 14,

Keba Mbaye Sompong Sucharitkul Aron Broches
Member President Member

14 December 1989

