DATE: 20050111
DOCKET: C41169

COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO

DOHERTY, ARMSTRONG and LANG JJ.A.

BETWEEN:

THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES Patrick G. Foy, Q.C.

Applicant (Appellant) J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C. and
Robert J.C. Deane
for the applicant (appellant)

-and -

MARVIN ROY FELDMAN Barbara Melsaac, Q.C.
KARPA for the respondent (respondent)
Respondent (Respondent)

-and -

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF
CANADA
Respondent (Intervener)

Heard: May 21, 2004

On appeal from the judgment of Justice W. Dan Chilcott of the Superior
Court of Justice dated December 3, 2003.

ARMSTRONG J.A.:

fl] A NAFTA arbitration tribunal found that the United Mexican States
(“Mexico”) engaged in discriminatory conduct by granting tax rebates to
domestic companies that were denied to the Respondent’s American owned
company engaged in a similar business. Mexico applied to the Ontario
Superior Court of Justice to set aside the arbitration award. The Ontario courts
have jurisdiction because Ottawa was named as the place of arbitration,
although the hearing took place in Washington, D.C. Justice Chilcott

dismissed the application. Mexico now appeals to this court.

[2] The factual dispute underlying these proceedings is somewhat
complex. To a large extent, however, that complexity is not germane to this
appeal. There are three grounds of appeal. The first two are closely related.
They turn on a determination of the appropriate standard of review and an
application of that standard to issues raised by the appellant. The third ground
of appeal engages public policy considerations.

[3] Like the application judge, I would hold that the award of the
arbitration tribunal is entitled to a high degree of deference and again like the
application judge, I would hold that the appellant has not shown any basis
upon which to interfere with the arbitration award. I also agree that the award
of the arbitration tribunal is not contrary to the public policy of Ontario. I
would therefore dismiss the appeal.

Factual Background

[4] Marvin Ray Feldman Karpa (“Mr. Feldman’) is a citizen of the United
States who operated an export business in Mexico through Corporacion de
Exportaciones Mexicanas S.A. de C.V. (“CEMSA”). CEMSA purchased
cigarettes from volume retailers such as Wal-Mart and Sam’s Club within
Mexico and sold them to purchasers outside Mexico.

[5] The production and sale of cigarettes are taxed pursuant to the Impuesto
Especial Sobre Produccion y Servicios (the “Special Tax on Production and
Services” or “IEPS”). If certain of the products subject to the IEPS tax are
exported, rebates may be paid to the exporter. Cigarettes which are exported
qualify for the rebate. However, in order to obtain the rebate, the exporter
must provide invoices that “separately and expressly state the amount of the
IEPS tax paid”.

[6] | CEMSA applied for the tax rebates periodically and, from time to time,
such rebates were granted. However, Mexico subsequently changed its
approach and CEMSA was denied the tax rebates because it was unable to
produce invoices that separately stated the amount of the tax paid.

[7] The manufacturers of the cigarettes refused to sell to CEMSA and other
exporters; consequently CEMSA purchased its cigarettes from volume
retailers. The invoices issued to CEMSA by the volume retailers did not have
the tax separately stated as such tax had been paid by the manufacturers who
had sold to the retailers. However, the manufacturers did not separate the tax

paid on their invoices to the retailers. Thus, the price paid by CEMSA for
cigarettes included the tax, but, as already stated, such tax did not appear on its
invoices received from the volume retailers.

[8] In addition to the denial of the tax rebates, CEMSA was refused
registration as an authorized exporter of cigarettes by the Mexican authorities.

[9] In 1998, the Mexican Taxation Agency, the Secretaria de Hacienda y
Credito Publica (“SHCP”) performed an audit of CEMSA, which concluded
that CEMSA had received between January 1996 and September 1997 IEPS
tax rebates. SHCP claimed repayment of approximately US $25 million,
which also included interest, adjustment for inflation and penalties. The audit
also concluded that CEMSA had grossly over-stated the amount of the tax
paid. It was subsequently established, and accepted by the arbitrators, that
CEMSA had been exporting cigarettes to at least one company that did not
exist.

The NAFTA Arbitration

[10] On April 30, 1999, Mr. Feldman referred these matters to arbitration by
filing a notice of arbitration pursuant to chapter 11, article 1120, of the North
American Free Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”). A tribunal was established
which was composed of Professor Konstantinos D. Kerameus of Greece
(President), Professor David A. Gantz of the United States and Mr. Jorge
Covarrubias Bravo of Mexico.

[11] | In his notice of application, Mr. Feldman sought damages in the amount
of 475 million pesos, which was roughly the equivalent of US$ 50 million.
Mr. Feldman based his claim on three grounds:

(i) Mexico’s refusal to pay the IEPS rebates to CEMSA was tantamount to
nationalization or expropriation contrary to article 1110 of NAFTA;

(ii) Mexico’s refusal to pay the IEPS rebates constituted a denial of natural
justice and a violation of international law contrary to article 1105:1 of
NAFTA; and

(iii) | Mexico’s refusal to pay the IEPS rebates to CEMSA constituted a
breach of article 1102 of NAFTA which requires Mexico to accord to investors
of another party to NAFTA treatment no less favourable than it accords to its
own investors.

[12] A majority of the tribunal (Messrs. Kerameus and Gantz) concluded
that Mexico had breached article 1102. While declining to find a breach of the
expropriation provision in article 1110, the majority said that “the actions by
the Mexican government against the claimant — even though in some instances
inconsistent and arbitrary — should not be treated as expropriatory...”. The
third member of the tribunal, Mr. Covarrubias, agreed with that result. All
three declined to give effect to the alleged denial of natural justice.

[13] Neither the application to the Superior Court nor the appeal to this court
involve the alleged breaches of articles 1110 and 1105:1, so there is no need to
consider further those parts of the arbitration award.

[14] The issue in respect of article 1102 of NAFTA was defined in the
majority award as follows at para. 169:

The question, rather, is whether rebates have in fact been provided for
domestically owned cigarette exporters while denied to a foreign re-seller,
CEMSA. Mexico is of course entitled to strictly enforce its laws, but it must
do so in a non-discriminatory manner, as between foreign investors and
domestic investors. Thus, if the IEPS Article 4 invoice requirement is ignored
or waived for domestic cigarette reseller/exporters, but not for foreign owned
cigarette reseller/exporters, that de facto difference in treatment is sufficient to
establish a denial of national treatment under Article 1102.

[15] There was no issue that rebates were denied to CEMSA. The only
question for the tribunal was whether domestic cigarette exporters received
IEPS rebates without requiring them to produce invoices showing the quantum
of tax paid separately.

[16] Mr. Feldman sought to prove his case through the production of records
from the Mexican taxing authority in respect of its treatment of domestic
taxpayers. Mexico refused to produce such records on the basis of its statutory
duty to preserve taxpayer confidentiality. Mexico relied upon Article 69 of its
Federal Fiscal Code, which Mexico said prohibited the production of such
information.

[17] The parties agreed upon the following protocol for the production of
documents which was contained in Procedural Order No. 2 (3 May 2000) of
the arbitration proceedings:

In accordance with Article 41(2) of the Additional Facility Arbitration Rules,
the Tribunal may, if it deems it necessary at any stage of the proceeding, call

upon the parties to produce documents, witnesses and experts. In addition,
either party may seek from the other party the disclosure of reasonably
specified documents and the production of statements on specific points by
identified witnesses or experts. Disputes related thereto will be decided upon
by the Tribunal, which may require a party to produce documents and written
or oral statements by witnesses or experts. If a party does not comply with
such a request by the Tribunal, the Tribunal may draw the appropriate
inferences.

[18] Mr. Feldman continued to request the production of other taxpayers’
records and Mexico continued to object based upon Article 69 of its Fiscal
Code. Eventually, Mexico agreed to file a statement from an official of the
taxing authority attesting to the circumstances of any IEPS rebates paid to
cigarette resellers other than CEMSA and any subsequent action taken by
SHCP. Mr. Feldman agreed to this approach “if a thorough search is made of
SHCP’s files and Respondent [Mexico] acknowledges the IEPS rebates made
to resellers other than CEMSA”.

[19] Mexico filed a statement of Eduardo E. Diaz Guzman, the General
Administrator of Major Taxpayers for SHCP. He provided the following
information regarding IEPS rebates for cigarette exports:

SAT’s databases provide the following information regarding IEPS rebates for
cigarette exports;

1. 5 marketer companies have requested IEPS rebates in transactions
involving cigarette exports;

2. 3 of these applications were authorized and 2 were rejected;

3. The approximate total of the rebates granted to these 3 companies is
$91,000,000.00 (ninety-one million pesos);

4. Rebates were granted to one of the companies during September,
October and December of 1996; January, February and June through
December of 1997; January through December of 1998; January through
March of 1999 and January of 2000

A second company was granted rebates during October and November
of 1999, and January, February, March and May of 2000.

The third company was granted rebates in September and December of

1996 and January of 1997.

5. According to a letter dated October 27th of 2000, the General Revenue
Administration, through the Local Revenue Administration of Monterrey, is in
the process of determining and collecting the reim-bursement of illegitimate
rebates paid to one of the 3 companies. The process continues to this date.

[20] Ina second statement, Mr. Diaz said that the payment of a rebate does
not end the matter. Taxpayers who have received rebates that are found to be
invalid are subject to an order for repayment and other sanctions for a period
of up to five years.

[21] The majority, in concluding that there had been a breach by Mexico of
article 1102, stated at para. 187 of the award:

On the basis of this analysis, a majority of the Tribunal concludes that Mexico
has violated the Claimant’s rights to non-discrimination under Article 1102 of
NAFTA. The Claimant has made a prima facie case for differential and less
favourable treatment of the Claimant, compared with treatment by SHCP of
the Poblano Group. For the Poblano Group and for other likely cigarette
reseller/exports, the Respondent has asserted that audits are or will be
conducted in the same manner as for the Claimant, and implied that they will
ultimately be treated in the same way as the Claimant. However, the evidence
that this has occurred is weak and unpersuasive. The inescapable fact is that
the Claimant has been effectively denied IEPS rebates for the April 1996
through November 1997 period, while domestic export trading companies
have been given rebates not only for much of that period but through at least
May 2000, suggesting that Article 4(III) of the law has been de facto waived
for some if not all domestic firms. While the Claimant has also been
effectively precluded from exporting cigarettes from 1998 to 2000, there is
evidence that the Poblano Group companies have apparently been allowed to
do so, notwithstanding Article 11 of the IEPS law. Finally, the Claimant has
not been permitted to register as an exporting trading company, while the
Poblano Group firms have been granted this registration. All of these results
are inconsistent with the Respondent’s obligations under Article 1102, and the
Respondent has failed to meet its burden of adducing evidence to show
otherwise.

[22] The majority awarded damages to CEMSA calculated on the basis of
rebates withheld from CEMSA. The damages were adjusted by excluding
sales to a fictitious company and by eliminating certain excessive claims by
CEMSA. The amount awarded was 7,496,428 new pesos, which is

approximately US $1.6 million.

[23] The dissenting member of the tribunal, Mr. Covarrubias, held that the
evidence was insufficient to establish the claim of discrimination. Indeed he
held that there was no evidence of discrimination. He was critical of the
majority view that the burden of proof was shifted from the claimant to the
respondent. He was also critical of the majority for drawing adverse
inferences against the respondent that were unsupported by the evidence.

[24] In respect of damages, the dissenting arbitrator stated that CEMSA had
no legal entitlement to the rebates and it was “repugnant” to order Mexico to
pay damages based upon a calculation of adjusted rebate figures.

The Application to the Superior Court of Justice

[25] In the Superior Court of Justice, Mexico proceeded under the
International Commercial Arbitration Act, R.S.O 1990, c. I-9 and the
UNICITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration, which is
attached as a schedule to the Act. Mexico sought to set aside the majority
award on three grounds:

(i) the procedure adopted by the majority was contrary to the agreement of
the parties;

(ii) | Mexico was unable to present its case by reason of the majority drawing
impermissible inferences from the evidence; and

(iii) the award of damages is in conflict with public policy contrary to article
34(2)(b)of the Model Law.

[26] The Attorney General of Canada intervened in the Superior Court in
support of Mexico. The Attorney General submitted that the majority failed to
take into account article 2105 of NAFTA, which provides that no party to
NAFTA is required to produce information, the disclosure of which would
impede law enforcement or would be contrary to the party’s law protecting
personal privacy. The Attorney General also submitted that the majority award
was in error in respect of the drawing of negative inferences against Mexico.
The Attorney General took no position on the other issues.

[27] The application judge refused to give effect to any of the grounds raised
by Mexico and the intervenor. The application was therefore dismissed.

[28] In this court, Mexico contends that the application judge erred in failing
to set aside the majority award and raises the same three grounds in support of
its submissions. The Attorney General of Canada did not participate in this
appeal.

Governing Legislation
(ji) NAFTA

[29] The North American Free Trade Agreement was concluded between the
governments of Canada, the United Mexican States and the United States of
America, and came into force on January 1, 1994. Chapter 11 of NAFTA
provides for the settlement of disputes concerning alleged breaches of NAFTA
by means of a tripartite arbitration panel. Mr. Feldman was entitled to submit
his claim to arbitration because he is a national of the United States of America
and satisfies the definition of “investor” under article 1139:

investors of a Party means a Party or state enterprise thereof, or a national or
an enterprise of such Party, that seeks to make, is making or has made an
investment;

[30] Pursuant to article 1124:4, the presiding arbitrator is drawn from a
roster of 45 arbitrators who meet the qualifications of the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States and the rules of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID).

[31] This arbitration was governed by the ICSID Additional Facility rules
which provide in article 52(4):

The award shall be final and binding on the parties. The parties waive any
time limits for the rendering of the award which may be provided for by the
law of the country where the award is made.

@) International Commercial Arbitration Act

[32] The application to set aside the arbitration award in the Superior Court
was brought pursuant to the International Commercial Arbitration Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. 1-9 (the “ICAA”). Under s. 2(1), the ICAA incorporates the Model
Law on International Commercial Arbitration adopted by the United Nations

Commission on International Trade and is appended as a schedule to the Act.

[33] Article 34 of the Model Law provides for access to judicial review by
the courts:

(1) — Recourse to a court against an arbitral award may be made only by an
application for setting aside in accordance with paragraphs (2) and (3) of this
article.

(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the court specified in article 6
only if:

(a) the party making the application furnishes proof that:

(i) a party to the arbitration agreement referred to in article 7 was under
some incapacity; or the said agreement is not valid under the law to which the
parties have subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of this
State, or

(ii) the party making the application was not given proper notice of the
appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise
unable to present his case, or

(iii) the award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within
the terms of the submission to arbitration, or contains decisions on matters
beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration, provided that, if the
decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from those not
so submitted, only that part of the award which contains decisions on matters
not submitted to arbitration may be set aside, or

(iv) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not
in accordance with the agreement of the parties, unless such agreement was in
conflict with a provision of this Law from which the parties cannot derogate,
or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance with this Law; or

(b) the court finds that:

(i) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by
arbitration under the law of this State, or

(ii) the award is in conflict with the public policy of this State.

(3) An application for setting aside may not be made after three months

have elapsed from the date on which the party making that application had
received the award or, if a request had been made under article 33, from the
date on which that request had been disposed of by the arbitral tribunal.

Standard of Review

[34] Notions of international comity and the reality of the global
marketplace suggest that courts should use their authority to interfere with
international commercial arbitration awards sparingly.

[35] In another context, Austin J.A. made reference to “the strong
commitment made by the legislature of this province to the policy of
international commercial arbitration through the adoption of the ICAA and the
Model Law...”: see Automatic Systems Inc. v. Bracknell Corp. (1994), 18 O.R.
(3d) 257 at 216 (C.A.).

[36] Gibbs J.A., speaking for the majority of the British Columbia Court of
Appeal in Quintette Cole Ltd. v. Nippon Steel Corp., [1990] B.C. J. No. 2241,
addressed the issue of judicial deference to international commercial
arbitration awards as follows at page 6:

It is important to parties to future such arbitrations and to the integrity of the
process itself that the court express its views on the degree of deference to be
accorded the decision of the arbitrators. The reasons advanced in the cases
discussed above for restraint in the exercise of judicial review are highly
persuasive. The “concerns of international comity, respect for the capacities of
foreign and transnational tribunals, and sensitivity to the need of the
international commercial system for predictability in the resolution of
disputes” spoken of by Blackman, J. are as compelling in this jurisdiction as
they are in the United Sates or elsewhere. It is meet therefore, as a matter of
policy, to adopt a standard which seeks to preserve the autonomy of the forum
selected by the parties and to minimize judicial intervention when reviewing
international commercial arbitral awards in British Columbia. That is the
standard to be followed in this case.”

[37] Quite apart from principles of international comity, our domestic law in
Canada dictates a high degree of deference for decisions of specialized
tribunals generally and for awards of consensual arbitration tribunals in
particular.

[38] The Supreme Court of Canada has provided a list of factors which
should be considered when determining the appropriate degree of deference to

be accorded to a tribunal subject to judicial review. See Pushpanathan v.
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 982 at pp.
1005-1012. The Supreme Court divided the factors into four categories:

(i) the presence of a privative clause;

(ii) the expertise of the tribunal;

(iii) _ the purpose of the governing legislation; and

(iv) whether the issue to be determined is a question of law or fact.

[39] The ICSID Additional Facility rules, which govern this arbitration,
provide that “the award shall be final and binding” and no more. There are no
additional words to exclude appeals and judicial review. Indeed, judicial
review is expressly provided for under s. 34 of the Model Law. It would
therefore appear that, in this case, there does not exist what has sometimes
been referred to as a “full” privative clause. That said, s. 34 of the Model Law
limits judicial review to traditional jurisdictional grounds. In addition, s. 34
provides judicial review if the subject matter of the dispute is not capable of
settlement by arbitration under Ontario law or the award is in conflict with the
public policy of Ontario.

[40] There was nothing in the record before us that described the particular
expertise of the tribunal members. We do know that the president of the
tribunal was selected from a special roster of 45 individuals. The individuals
listed on the roster are required, pursuant to NAFTA, article 1124:4, to be
“experienced in international law and investment matters”. The application
judge observed that Mexico did not challenge the expertise of any of the
tribunal members.

[41] NAFTA tribunals settle international commercial disputes by an
adversarial procedure under which they determine legal rights in a manner not
dissimilar to the courts. This may suggest that such tribunals ought not to
attract a high degree of deference upon judicial review. However, I accept that
there is merit in the submission of counsel for Mr. Feldman that “the dispute
settlement mechanism and the need for expertise, all combine to indicate that
the statutory purpose is to take the resolution of these disputes out of the hands
of domestic courts.” If this is so, it would again suggest a high degree of
deference on review by the courts.

[42] The matters to be decided by the tribunal in this case were heavily fact

laden. I will have more to say about the nature of the particular issues to be
determined by the tribunal later in these reasons. However, it is trite to say that
a tribunal, which is engaged primarily in a fact-finding task, is entitled to a
high degree of judicial deference.

[43] Taking the above factors into account, I conclude that the applicable
standard of review in this case is at the high end of the spectrum of judicial
deference.

The Grounds of Appeal

@ Was the arbitral procedure contrary to the agreement of the
parties?

[44] Mexico submits that the procedure adopted by the majority of the
tribunal violated the arbitration agreement from which all NAFTA tribunals
derive their jurisdiction. The agreement to arbitrate under chapter 11 involves
an express acceptance that the hearing will be carried out in accord with the
procedures set forth in NAFTA. Mexico submits that if the tribunal failed to
follow the procedural provisions in NAFTA, then Mexico’s consent to the
submission to arbitration is vitiated and should be set aside by the court
pursuant to article 34(2)(a)(iv) of the Model Law.

[45] Mexico submits that the majority award is contrary to article 2105 of
NAFTA by drawing adverse inferences from Mexico’s failure to make
disclosure of information related to domestic taxpayers. Article 2105 provides:

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require a party to furnish or
allow access to information the disclosure of which would impede law
enforcement or would be contrary to the Party’s law protecting personal
privacy or the financial affairs and accounts of individual customers of
financial institutions.

[46] Mexico further argues that since a chapter 11 tribunal is without
authority to compel disclosure of taxpayer information, it has no authority to
draw an adverse inference from a party’s inability to lawfully provide such
information.

[47] Mexico refers in particular to paragraph 178 of the arbitration award,
where the majority made reference to the failure of the appellant to provide an
explanation why it did not lead evidence to show that a domestic group of

companies had not been treated in a more favourable fashion than CEMSA.
The appellant also refers to paragraph 186 of the award where the majority
observed:

Presumably, if there was evidence that another domestic investor has been
treated in a manner equivalent to the Claimant, in terms of export registration,
audit, and granting or withholding of rebates, the Respondent would have
provided that evidence to the tribunal...

[48] Resolution of this ground of appeal, requires consideration of the
second ground of appeal.

(ii) | Was Mexico prevented from presenting its case?

[49] Mexico relies upon article 34(2)(a)(ii) of the Model Law which
provides that an arbitral award may be set aside by the court if the party
seeking judicial review was unable to present its case.

[50] This ground of appeal is linked to the first ground of appeal in that
Mexico relies upon the majority’s drawing of adverse inferences from the
appellant’s failure to present evidence in respect of the treatment of domestic
taxpayers.

[51] Mexico submits that, pursuant to Article 69 of its Fiscal Code, it was
prohibited from disclosing the treatment afforded to other taxpayers and that
such position was consistently stated to the tribunal. Mexico further submits
that by drawing adverse inferences from its failure to present evidence of the
position of other taxpayers, the tribunal effectively prevented Mexico from
presenting its defence. According to counsel for Mexico, such conduct by the
tribunal was contrary to the agreement between the parties and Procedural
Order No. 2 of the tribunal. Procedural Order No. 2 provided in part that if a
party did not comply with a request by the tribunal to produce documents and
witness statements, the tribunal may draw “the appropriate inferences”.
Mexico argues that it fulfilled its obligations by delivering the two statements
of Diaz Guzman and at no time prior to the issuance of its award did the
tribunal suggest that the information from Mr. Diaz was insufficient.

[52] It is Mexico’s position that the tribunal’s finding that Mexico breached
article 1102 was a direct function of the tribunal’s drawing of adverse
inferences contrary to the procedural accord sanctioned by Procedural Order
No. 2.

[53] As suggested above, this ground of appeal flows directly from the first
ground. To some extent, they are different sides of the same coin. I will
therefore deal with these two grounds of appeal together.

Analysis

[54] NAFTA article 2105 was not raised by Mexico during the course of the
arbitration. It was raised for the first time after the release of the award.
Counsel for Mexico submitted a request for the Correction and Interpretation
of the Award pursuant to the ICSID Additional Facility Rules. Mexico
requested the tribunal to consider the application of article 2105 in regard to
the findings of the majority. The tribunal refused to do so and observed that
Mexico was effectively seeking a new decision. The original dissenting
member of the tribunal joined with the majority in this refusal.

[55] However, counsel for Mexico did raise the issue of Article 69 of the
Mexican Fiscal Code during the arbitration hearing as discussed above. In
particular, in its Rejoinder pleading, Mexico stated:

186. The national treatment allegation presents special problems of proof for
the defense because SHCP is bound by domestic law to preserve taxpayer
confidentiality. The Respondent cannot disclose names and provide details of
what actions it has taken or is in the course of taking against other taxpayers
for impermissible claims of IEPS rebates.

187. The Reply seeks to exploit this domestic law restraint on the defense by
criticizing the Respondent for complying with its taxpayer confidentiality law
and failing to discharge the burden of proof (see paragraph 1 of the Reply).

188. The Respondent objects to this tactic, but, for the reasons noted below,
it is unnecessary in this case to consider this issue further. [emphasis added]

 

The Rejoinder pleading then referred to evidence led by counsel for Mexico in
relation to action taken against domestic companies who had received rebates.
On this issue, the Rejoinder concluded:

194. Thus, there is ample record evidence that Mexican-owned enterprises in
like circumstances to CEMSA are being investigated. Some were the
Claimant’s financiers, suppliers, and customers.

[56] The majority considered this evidence and did not find it persuasive. In
paragraph 187 of the award (referred to in para. 21 above), the majority

observed:

...the Respondent [Mexico] has asserted that audits [of domestic exporters] are
or will be conducted in the same manner as for the Claimant [Mr. Feldman],
and implied that they will ultimately be treated in the same way as the
Claimant. However, the evidence that this has occurred is weak and
unpersuasive.

[57] Mexico was not required by the tribunal to produce any information
which it did not wish to produce contrary to Article 69 of the Fiscal Code. It
chose to file the statements of Mr. Diaz and other evidence. The majority were
not persuaded that Mexico had satisfied the burden of responding to the prima
facie case made by the claimant, Mr. Feldman.

[58] I see some merit in Mexico’s argument that if the tribunal is without
authority to compel disclosure of taxpayer information, it has no authority to
draw an adverse inference from a party’s inability to provide such
information. However, I am not satisfied that this reflects what happened in
this case. As stated above, Mexico was not required at the hearing to produce
information it did not wish to produce. It decided, however, to produce certain
taxpayer information. That information failed to satisfy the tribunal which, in
turn, led the tribunal to conclude that if Mexico had evidence that a domestic
taxpayer had “been treated in a manner equivalent to the claimant...[it] would
have provided that evidence.” In my view, the tribunal was entitled to come to
such a conclusion.

[59] I also do not accept the argument advanced in respect of Procedural
Order No. 2. Under that order, the tribunal “may draw the appropriate
inferences” when a party fails to comply with an order to produce documents.
There was no order by the tribunal pursuant to Procedural Order No. 2 with
which Mexico failed to comply. I do not see that Procedural Order No. 2 is
relevant to the circumstances here.

[60] It is also important to bear in mind that the issue as defined by the
arbitration tribunal was essentially a question of fact — “whether rebates have
in fact been provided for domestically owned cigarette exporters while denied
to a foreign reseller, CEMSA”. In this case, the majority found, on Mexico’s
own evidence, that it had allowed rebates for domestic exporters that it had
refused to CEMSA. On a finding of fact, for which there is support in the
evidence, the court must defer to the tribunal.

[61] Iam unable to conclude that the majority of the tribunal acted in breach

of NAFTA article 2105 or Procedural Order No. 2. In my view, the arbitral
procedure was not contrary to the agreement of the parties and Mexico was not
prevented from presenting its case.

(iii) Is the award of damages in conflict with public policy?

[62] Mexico submits that the damages awarded to Mr. Feldman’s company
were based upon unlawful rebates and are, therefore, contrary to public policy.
Counsel for Mexico relies upon s. 34(2)(b)(ii) of the Model Law, which
provides that an arbitral award may be set aside by the court if the court finds
an award is in conflict with the public policy of Ontario.

[63] Mexico also finds support for its position in the reasoning of the
dissenting arbitrator at page 16:

If, in actual fact, the Claimant is not entitled to IEPS rebates, it is repugnant to
grant him a somewhat equivalent amount as compensation for damages, only
because he alleges that there is a [sic] another investor — a Mexican investor, in
like circumstances - - who has been granted IEPS rebates without being
entitled to them either. This issue becomes even more sensitive if we consider,
as described above, that the economic viability of CEMSA’s business was
based on obtaining illegal tax rebates; otherwise such business was pointless.

If the approach taken in this Award were to prevail, it would suffice for any
investor from a NAFTA State to show that another State party to the same
Treaty has made only one mistake or miscalculation in the administration of a
tax, favouring a single national investor - - whose circumstances are
apparently similar - - to claim and obtain a benefit from that State, to the
detriment of its public finance.

[64] Mexico further submits that the tribunal’s award of damages is contrary
to public policy because CEMSA, as found by the tribunal, had substantially
over-claimed the tax paid and said it was exporting to a fictitious company in
Honduras.

[65] Finally, Mexico argued that the application judge misapprehended its
submission in the court below to the extent that he understood counsel to
submit that the award “is contrary to public policy because CEMSA was
unable to provide invoices showing the tax separately”.

Analysis

[66] A chapter 11 tribunal has authority to make an award of monetary
damages pursuant to NAFTA, article 1135. The question for the court is
whether the particular award in this case is contrary to public policy. In Re
Corporacion Transnacional de Inversiones, S.A. de C.V. et al and STET
International S.p.A. et al (2000), 49 O.R. (3d) 414, this court cited with
approval the statement of principle by Feldman J. in Schreter v. Gasmac Inc.
(1992), 7 O.R. (3d) 608 at p. 623 (Gen. Div.):

The concept of imposing our public policy on foreign awards is to guard
against enforcement of an award which offends our local principles of justice
and fairness in a fundamental way, and in a way which the parties could
attribute to the fact that the award was made in another jurisdiction where the
procedural or substantive rules diverge markedly from our own, or where there
was ignorance or corruption on the part of the tribunal which could not be seen
to be tolerated or condoned by our courts.

[67] The damages are equivalent to the rebates that CEMSA had been
refused at the same time that domestic exporters were receiving rebates.
Mexico was in effect waiving the requirement to produce invoices stating the
tax separately for domestic exporters, while at the same time refusing to waive
the requirement for CEMSA. In my view, the award of damages is not
contrary to public policy. There is nothing fundamentally unjust or unfair
about the award. It is rationally connected to the discriminatory conduct found
by the tribunal and seeks to redress the effect of the discrimination. The award
is a logical quantification of the harm caused to CEMSA by the discriminatory
conduct.

[68] I do not accept the submission of counsel for Mexico that CEMSA’s
conduct in claiming fictitious rebates renders the award contrary to public
policy. While this court does not condone such conduct, the extent to which it
should affect the award of damages is for the tribunal to decide. The tribunal
made allowances for the inflated rebate claims in its assessment of damages. I
cannot conclude that its failure to deny any monetary recovery is contrary to
public policy.

[69] In the conclusion that I have reached on this issue, it is not necessary to
determine whether the application judge misapprehended the argument on
public policy.

CONCLUSION

[70] For the above reasons, I would dismiss the appeal.

COSTS

[71] The parties are agreed that the successful party to the appeal should be
entitled to costs on a partial indemnity basis fixed at $25,000. I would so order
costs payable to the respondent in that amount, including disbursements and
Goods and Services Tax.

RELEASED:
“DD” “Robert P. Armstrong J.A.”
“JAN 11 2005” “T agree Doherty J.A.”

“T agree Susan Lang J.A.”

