Date of dispatch to the parties: December 16, 2002
International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes

MARVIN FELDMAN

Vv.

MEXICO
CASE No. ARB(AP)/99/1

AWARD
President : Prof. Konstantinos D. KERAMEUS
Members of the Tribunal : Mr. Jorge COVARRUBIAS BRAVO

Prof. David A. GANTZ

Secretary of the Tribunal : Mr. Alejandro A. ESCOBAR
and Ms. Gabriela ALVAREZ AVILA

In Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1,
between Mr. Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa,
represented by
Mr. Mark B. Feldman, Ms. Mona M. Murphy, Mr. Douglas R.M. King
of Feldman Law Offices, P.C. (formely Feith & Zell, P.C.), and
Mr. Nathan Lewin and Ms. Stephanie Martz of the Law Firm of Miller, Cassidy,
Larroca & Lewin, L.L.P.

and
The United Mexican States,
represented by Lic. Hugo Perezcano Diaz, Consultor Juridico Subsecretaria de
Negociaciones Comerciales Internacionales
Ministry of Economy
THE TRIBUNAL,

Composed as above,
Makes the following Award

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A Introduction and Summary of the Dispute 1
B__ Representation 1
C_ The Arbitral Agreement. 1
D Facts and Allegation 2
E The Proceedings 8
F Jurisdiction 13
Fl Standing 14
F.2 Time Limitation 15
F3 Admissibility of an Additional Claim under NAFTA Article 1102.00.00. eee eects 15
F4 Relevance of Claims Pre-Dating NAFTA’s Entry into Force .........c.ceceeeseee ee eeeeeeeeeeneseeeeeee 15

G_ Additional Jurisdictional Issues 15
G.1__ Estoppel with regard to the Period of Limitation and the Basis of the Claim... 15
G.2__ Exhaustion of Local Remedies 21
G3 Analysis 23
G4 — Other Jurisdictional Constraint 26
H_ Merits 30
H.1_ Expropriation: Overview of the Positions of the Disputing Parties «0.0.00... cece 30
H.2 Applicable Law: NAFTA Article 1110 and International Law..0.........cce ee eee tees 33
H.3 _ Respondent’s Actions as an Expropriation Under Article 1110............cccscessessesssestesstesesteeseeseeenee 39
H3.1 Many Business Problems Are Not Expropriation ..0.........c0c0.ceceeses sees eesessesteseeseeteseeneeeeneeee 41
H.3.2 Gray Market Exports and International Law... ccecece sees sesesseeseseeeeseeseeeeseeseeteseeneseenenee 42
H.3.3 Continuing Requirements of Article 4(IIT) of IEPS Law... ceeees ee eseeteseeseeeeneeee 44
H.3.4 Public Purpose 54
H.3.5 Non-Discrimination 55
H.3.6 Due Process/Fair and Equitable Treatment/Denial of Justice «0.0.0.0... cece eee eeeeee eee 56
H.3.7 The Claimant in Control of CEMSA .........ccsccsesscessessessssseeseesseeseestesnseseesecsesnseseesueaseeneessesness 58
H.3.8 Other NAFTA Decisions 59

I National Treatment (NAFTA Article 1102) 63
LL Views of the Disputing Parties 64
12 Analysis by the Tribunal 67

 

a

1.2.1 In Like Circumstance: 69

1.2.2 Existence of Discrimination 71

 

1.2.3 Discrimination as a Result of Nationality

 

 

1.2.4 Most Favored Investor Requirement? 77
Damages 79
Costs and Fee: 86

 

Decision 88

A INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF THE DISPUTE

1. This case concerns a dispute regarding the application of certain tax laws by the
United Mexican States (hereinafter “Mexico” or “the Respondent”) to the export of tobacco
products by Corporacién de Exportaciones Mexicanas, S.A. de C.V. (“CEMSA”), a company
organized under the laws of Mexico and owned and controlled by Mr. Marvin Roy Feldman
Karpa (hereinafter “Mr. Feldman” or “the Claimant”), a citizen of the United States of America
(‘United States”). The Claimant, who is suing as the sole investor on behalf of CEMSA,
alleges that Mexico’s refusal to rebate excise taxes applied to cigarettes exported by CEMSA
and Mexico’s continuing refusal to recognize CEMSA’s right to a rebate of such taxes
regarding prospective cigarette exports constitute a breach of Mexico’s obligations under the
Chapter Eleven, Section A of the North American Free Trade Agreement (hereinafter
“NAFTA”). In particular, Mr. Feldman alleges violations of NAFTA Articles 1102 (National
Treatment), 1105 (Minimum Level of Treatment), and 1110 (Expropriation and

Indemnification).1 Mexico denies these allegations.

B REPRESENTATION

2. The Claimant is represented in these proceedings by Mr. Mark B. Feldman of
Feldman Law Offices, P.C. (formerly Feith & Zell, P.C.) The Respondent is represented by
Lic. Hugo Perezcano Diaz, Consultor Juridico, Subsecretaria de Negociaciones Comerciales

Internacionales, Secretarfa de Economia, Government of Mexico.

C THE ARBITRAL AGREEMENT

1 See the Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim, submitted under NAFTA Article 1119, p. 2.
The Notice of Intent also mentioned NAFTA Article 1106, on performance requirements, but
the obligations of this provision were not invoked in the Notice of Claim.

3. The dispute is subject to arbitration under the North American Free Trade
Agreement, concluded between the Government of the United States of America, the
Government of Canada and the Government of the United Mexican States, and which entered

into force on January 1, 1994.

4. NAFTA Article 1117 entitles an investor to bring a claim against a NAFTA State
Party on behalf of an enterprise of another NAFTA Party which the investor owns or controls.
NAFTA Article 1139 provides that an “enterprise of a Party means an enterprise constituted or

organized under the law of a [NAFTA] Party.”

5. NAFTA Article 1120 provides that arbitral proceedings may be instituted under
the Additional Facility Rules of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID”), as modified by the provisions of Chapter Eleven, Section B of the NAFTA, provided
that either the disputing Party whose measure is alleged to be a breach referred to in Article 1117
(in this case, Mexico) or the Party of the investor (in this case, the United States), but not both, is
a party to the ICSID Convention.2 The ICSID Additional Facility Rules, rather than the ICSID
Convention, are applicable in this case since only the United States, as the Party of the investor,
but not the United Mexican States, as the Respondent in this case, is a Contracting State to the
ICSID Convention. Under NAFTA Article 1122(1), in conjunction with NAFTA Articles 1116,
1117 and 1120, Mexico expresses its consent to the submission to arbitration of claims of
investors who are nationals of another State Party to the NAFTA either under the ICSID

Convention, under the Additional Facility Rules, or under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

D_ FACTS AND ALLEGATIONS

6. Much of the complexity of this case results from the parties’ disagreements with
regard to the facts. The reasons for this are several. First, in some instances, records are not
available because they have been destroyed, as records are routinely destroyed at the Mexican

Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (Secretaria de Hacienda y Crédito Publico, hereinafter

2 Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States, opened for signature March 18, 1965, entered into force October 14, 1966.

“SHCP”) after five years (counter-memorial, para. 144). Secondly, there are disagreements to
particular facts which the Tribunal cannot rectify on the basis of the material presented, either
because the information does not exist or because the Respondent has been unwilling or unable
to produce it. As a result, in some instances, the “evidence” presented by both sides results in an
assertion of facts rather than proof of facts. This section summarizes what the Tribunal believes
to be the key facts and assertions, noting when the "facts" are from a particular party's point of

view. They are discussed in more detail in the relevant sections of this award.

7. The case concerns the tax rebates which may be available when cigarettes are
exported. Mexico imposes a tax on production and sale of cigarettes in the domestic market
under the Impuesto Especial Sobre Produccién y Servicios ("IESP") law, a special or excise tax
on products and services. In some circumstances, however, a zero tax rate has been applied to
cigarettes that are exported. According to the Respondent, the IEPS Law “has basically
remained the same since its origins [in 1981], although the underlying methodology of the tax
has changed several times" (counter-memorial, para. 85). Review of the various versions of the

TEPS law between 1990 and 1999 confirms this conclusion.

8. Under the 1991 IEPS law, certain activities generated liability for the tax,
including, inter alia, selling domestically, importing and exporting the goods listed in Article 2,
section I of the Law. The IEPS law also included the tax rate for each product. In the case of
domestic sales and imports of cigarettes, the rates were 139.3% from 1990 through 1994, and
85% from 1995 through 1997 (Article 2). However, the IEPS rate on exports of cigarettes from
1990 through 1997 was 0%. From 1992, only exports to countries that were not considered low
income tax jurisdictions (tax havens) -- in general, countries with an income tax rate above 30%-
- were eligible for a 0% rate. In most instances, when cigarettes were purchased in Mexico at a
price that included the tax, and subsequently exported, the tax amounts initially paid could be

rebated.

9. The Claimant’s firm, CEMSA, first began exporting cigarettes in 1990.
According to the Respondent, the record shows that SHCP paid the IEPS rebates to the claimant

for 1990-1991 in full (including amounts properly owing to inflation and interest) and declined

only to pay the demanded "financial costs" for which there was no provision under the Fiscal
Code (counter-memorial, para. 142(b)). While the Claimant contended that CEMSA had by
1991 established a cigarette export business, the Respondent alleges that CEMSA's request for
IEPS rebates in November 1990-1991 related solely to exports of beer and alcoholic beverages

(counter-memorial, para. 142(a)).

10. According to the Claimant, an authorized producer of cigarettes in Mexico, Carlos
Slim "protested [regarding Claimant's exports] and the government took administrative steps and
passed legislation to cut off rebates to CEMSA in 1991" (memorial, p. 2). This assertion is
contested by the Respondent. The 1991 legislation was apparently designed to provide IEPS
rebates to exports undertaken by producers of cigarettes (such as Cigatam, a firm allegedly
controlled by Carlos Slim), but to deny rebates for exports by resellers of cigarettes, such as
CEMSA (memorial, p. 2, counter-memorial, para. 93). The amendments to Article 2, Section III
in 1991, specified that a 0% rate applied to final exports, under the terms of the customs
legislation, by producers and bottlers of the goods, and by foreign trade companies, as well as by
persons entering into contracts with producers and bottlers, including for sale abroad, as long as
they complied with certain requirements to be issued by SHCP (counter-memorial, para. 93).

The Claimant, as a reseller, became ineligible for rebates.

11. The Claimant initiated an Amparo action before the Mexican courts in February,
1991, challenging the constitutional validity of Article 2, Section III, in that it limited the 0% tax
rate to producers and bottlers. The Amparo alleged that these measures infringed upon the
constitutional principle of "equity of taxpayers" by excluding all other exporters from the
possibility of obtaining the 0% rate (counter-memorial, para. 102). In April, 1991, the Fifth
District Judge in Administrative Matters dismissed CEMSA's Amparo, in part, but granted it, in
part, citing that SHCP had no authority to issue the implementing fiscal regulations for 1991,
which CEMSA was challenging. The decision was appealed by both sides in May, 1991. In
July, CEMSA also filed a criminal complaint against the SHCP officials responsible for
enactment of the 1991 amendment to Article 2 section III of the IEPS Law, for abuse of authority

and conspiracy (counter-memorial, para. 107).

12. Pending final resolution of the Amparo, the Mexican Congress amended the IEPS
law, effective January 1, 1992, to allow IEPS rebates to all cigarette exporters, and CEMSA was
able to export cigarettes with rebates most of that year. Effectively, this new law reverted to the
system in force in 1990, making all final exports eligible for application of the 0% rate (counter-
memorial, para. 93). As far as the Tribunal is able to determine, the 1992 legislation remained

unchanged in all aspects relevant to this case through 1997.

13. According to the Claimant, after the IEPS law was amended in 1992, the
Claimant began to export cigarettes. Claimant claims to have received rebates thereafter
(counter-memorial, paras. 144, 146); this assertion is neither confirmed nor denied by the
Respondent, because the records have been destroyed after five years in accordance with normal

SHCP policies (counter-memorial, para. 144).

14. In January, 1993, according to the Claimant, the Respondent shut down CEMSA's
cigarette export business for a second time, (memorial, p. 3) because the Claimant could not
meet other requirements of the IEPS law (counter-memorial, paras. 151-152). The reasons for

the Claimant’s inability to produce invoices are rather complicated.

15. The IEPS requires cigarette producers to pay the 85% tax, which is then passed on
to purchasers in their purchase price (Article 8 of IEPS). The taxable base is the sales price to
the retailer, and further tax is not paid on subsequent sales (Article 4, Section 8 of IEPS). To be
eligible for the tax rebate, the IEPS tax on the cigarettes must be stated "separately and expressly
on their invoices" (memorial, p. 3; counter-memorial, paras. 89, 91). This is required by Article
4 of the IEPS Law, which applies to all taxes covered by the IEPS, not just taxes on cigarettes.
Only producers, and not resellers, have access to the itemized invoice. CEMSA purchased the
cigarettes from volume retailers such as Wal-Mart or Sam's club (rather than the producers), at a
price that included the IEPS tax, but was not itemized separately on the invoice. CEMSA thus

was never able to obtain invoices separating the tax.

16.In August, 1993, the Supreme Court of Justice ruled in favor of CEMSA, finding

unanimously that "measures allowing IEPS rebates only to producers and their distributors

violated constitutional principles of tax equity and non-discrimination" (memorial, p. 2; see also
counter-memorial, para. 108). The court did not discuss or rule explicitly on any other relevant
issues, such as whether the Claimant was entitled to rebates notwithstanding the Claimant’s

inability to produce invoices stating the tax amounts separately.

17. During the period 1993-1995, the Respondent recognized that CEMSA was a
taxpayer entitled to the 0% tax rate on cigarette exports, but continued to demand that the
Claimant meet the invoice requirements of Article 4 of the IEPS law, even though it was

impossible for CEMSA to meet those requirements.

18. CEMSA claims that Mexican tax officials gave the Claimant "assurances" in
1995-1996 that rebates would be paid (memorial, p. 2) and alleges that negotiation of an oral
“agreement” took place in 1995, confirmed and finally implemented in 1996, which would
permit CEMSA to resume exporting cigarettes in large quantities in June 1996. As discussed in
detail in Section F5, the Respondent vigorously denies the existence of any such agreement, and
asserts that it was complying with the 1993 Supreme Court Amparo decision by affording
Claimant access to the 0% tax rate for exports. Neither party was able to produce conclusive

evidence of the existence or non-existence of such an agreement or understanding.

19. Regardless of the possible existence or non-existence of an agreement, the
Claimant states that he was paid rebates from June 1996 to September 1997, a total of sixteen
months (memorial, pp. 2, 3). CEMSA claims that during these sixteen months, "Hacienda
officials knew that CEMSA was receiving IEPS rebates on cigarette exports without having
obtained invoices separating the tax" (memorial, p. 4). The Respondent counters by observing
that it is standard practice for SHCP to pay requests for rebates promptly as they are submitted,
given that they have the authority to audit IEPS tax returns to determine if the requirements of
the law have been complied with. According to the Claimant, "by late 1997, CEMSA accounted

for almost 15% of Mexico's cigarette exports" (memorial, p. 4).

20. However, this situation did not last. The Respondent finally terminated rebates to

CEMSA on or before December 1, 1997. According to the Claimant, this was done without

prior warning (memorial, pp. 2, 4), and the Respondent refused to pay rebates of US $2.35

million owed to CEMSA on exports made in October and November 1997 (memorial, p. 4) .

21. Since December 1, 1997, the IEPS law has been amended to bar rebates to
cigarette resellers such as CEMSA, limiting such rebates to the “first sale” in Mexico. Articles
11 and 19 of the IEPS were amended so as to provide that tax rebates are not allowed on sales
subsequent to those made to the retailer. The amendments also imposed an obligation on
exporters of certain goods, including cigarettes, of registering in the Sectorial Exporters Registry
in order to be entitled to apply for the 0% IEPS rate on exports. Subsequently, under the 1998
amendment, CEMSA was also refused registration as an authorized exporter of cigarettes and
alcoholic beverages (memorial, p. 4, see also reply, para. 5). Absent such registration, Mexican
Customs authorities will not issue the “pedimento” (export documentation) that is required to
export goods from Mexico. The Respondent contends that this refusal was a result of an on-

going audit of CEMSA’s earlier claims for IEPS tax reimbursements.

22. On July 14, 1998, SHCP began an audit of CEMSA and demanded that CEMSA.
repay the approximately US$25 million for IEPS rebates SHCP asserts the Claimant received
during the twenty one-month period of January 1996 to September 1997, with interest and
penalties. To avoid forfeiture and criminal sanctions for non-payment, CEMSA challenged the
“assessment” in the Mexican courts. This assessment proceeding in the Mexican courts remains
pending. A separate proceeding, which has been concluded, challenged the Respondent’s denial

of IEPS rebates for the period October-November 1997.

23. The Claimant is not the only reseller/exporter of cigarettes in Mexico. The
Claimant and the Respondent agree that at least two other firms, Mercados I and Mercados II,
owned by named Mexican nationals (the “Poblano Group’) are resellers of cigarettes in "like
circumstances" with CEMSA (counter-memorial, paras. 460-470, 48). The Claimant asserts that
these Mexican firms have been permitted to obtain rebates for taxes on exported cigarettes
during periods when such rebates have been denied to the Claimant, notwithstanding the inability
of these firms to produce the necessary invoices stating the tax amounts separately. The

Respondent concedes that at least five companies have been registered as cigarette exporters, but

has been unable or unwilling to provide any detailed information on the status of those firms or
their access to IEPS tax rebates. The Respondent, however, alleges that the Claimant and the
“Poblano Group” belong effectively to the same business entity and, therefore, are not eligible to

be compared to each other for national treatment purposes.

E THE PROCEEDINGS

24. The present arbitration was initiated on April 30, 1999, when the Claimant,
pursuant to NAFTA Article 1120, submitted a Notice of Arbitration and request for approval of
access to the Additional Facility to the Secretary-General of ICSID. The Claimant asserted that
Mexico’s actions in this case were “tantamount to nationalization or expropriation and
constitute[d] a denial of justice in violation of the rules and principles of international law and

NAFTA Articles 1110 and 1105(1).”3 The Claimant requested the following relief:

(a) a declaration that Mexico has breached its obligations to Marvin
Feldman by expropriating his investments without providing
prompt, adequate and effective compensation, and by failing to
accord to CEMSA fair and equitable treatment and full protection
and security;4

(b) an order directing Mexico to pay Marvin Feldman damages in
respect of the loss CEMSA has suffered through Mexico’s conduct
described above of US$50 million, or approximately $475 million
Mexican pesos, along with interest on the award to be computed at
the applicable rate of interest; and

(c) any other legal or equitable relief deemed just and warranted.

The Acting Secretary-General of ICSID approved access to the Additional Facility on May 27,
1999 and issued a Certificate of Registration of the Notice of Arbitration on the same day.

3 The Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration, p. 5 (submitted on April 30, 1999).
4 The Claimant subsequently submitted an additional request for a declaration that Mexico had
breached its obligations to afford CEMSA national treatment under NAFTA Article 1102.

25. An arbitral tribunal was constituted in accordance with NAFTA Articles 1123 and
Article 6 of the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules (hereinafter “the Arbitration
Rules”). The Claimant appointed Professor David A. Gantz (a national of the United States) and
Mexico appointed Mr. Jorge Covarrubias Bravo (a national of Mexico), as arbitrators. Following
a request made by the Claimant under NAFTA Article 1124, and after extensive consultation
with the parties, the Secretary-General of ICSID appointed Professor Konstantinos D. Kerameus
(a national of Greece) as President of the Tribunal. On July 30, 1999, in accordance with
NAFTA Article 1125, the Claimant agreed in writing to the appointment of all the arbitrators.
On January 18, 2000, in accordance with Article 14 of the Arbitration Rules, ICSID informed the
parties that all the arbitrators had accepted their appointment and that the Tribunal was therefore
deemed to be constituted, and the proceeding to have begun, on that date. Mr. Alejandro A.
Escobar, Senior Counsel, ICSID, was assigned to serve as the secretary of the Tribunal. All
subsequent written communications between the parties were to be made through the ICSID

Secretariat.

26. The first session of the Tribunal was held, with the parties’ agreement, in
Washington, D.C. on March 10, 2000. Among the matters agreed on at the first session, it was
determined that the languages of the proceeding would be English and Spanish. In accordance
with NAFTA Article 1130 and Articles 20 and 21 of the Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal then
issued Procedural Order No. 1, determining that the place of arbitration would be Ottawa,
Province of Ontario, Canada, without prejudice to the Arbitral Tribunal meeting at any other
place, with or without the parties, as may be convenient. The parties accepted this

determination.

27. On February 15, 2000, the Claimant had submitted a request for provisional
measures for the preservation of his rights, to which the Respondent replied on March 6, 2000.
Proposals and observations on the scheduling of the proceedings were also exchanged.
Following further discussion on these matters at the first session of the Tribunal, on May 3, 2000
the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, declining, under NAFTA Article 1134, to grant the
Claimant’s request for provisional measures. In Procedural Order No. 2, the Tribunal also

determined a schedule for the request, disclosure and production of documents, and for the filing

of a memorial and counter-memorial, reserving any instructions that the parties file a reply and a

rejoinder.

28. In the context of the parties’ requests for documentation, the Claimant submitted
communications of May 23, June 20, and July 11, 2000, to which the Respondent replied by a
communication of July 11, 2000. Finding that the foregoing communications raised
“jurisdictional issues that both parties wish[ed] the Tribunal to consider and rule upon before the
exchange of written pleadings on the merits,” the Tribunal, on July 18, 2000, issued Procedural
Order No. 3 directing the parties to exchange written pleadings on preliminary jurisdictional
matters and suspending the schedule set forth in the second procedural order. Under this order,
the Claimant was requested to file a memorial on jurisdictional issues, the Respondent was then
to file a counter-memorial, and the parties were then simultaneously to file further observations

on such jurisdictional issues.

29. On July 18, 2000, the Claimant requested the revision of Procedural Order No. 3
asking for the jurisdictional issue to be joined to the merits, for the briefing schedule on other
issues to be adjusted, and for a direction that discovery proceed pending such disposition. On
July 20, 2000, the Respondent replied opposing the Claimant’s request for revision of Procedural
Order No. 3.

30. Referring to the correspondence from both the Claimant and the Respondent
subsequent to the issuance of Procedural Order No. 3, the Tribunal on August 3, 2000 issued
Procedural Order No. 4 reaffirming the directions given in Procedural Order No. 3 and fixing a

revised schedule for the briefing of preliminary jurisdictional issues.

31. By respective communications of August 15, 2000, Canada and the United States
requested that the Tribunal permit each of them to make submissions pursuant to NAFTA Article
1128 on the jurisdictional issues raised in the case within 14 days of the date of the last filing by
a party on such issues. By letter of August 18, 2000, the Respondent referred to those
communications from Canada and the United States, and requested an additional time period for

commenting on their submissions made under NAFTA Article 1128 as well as on the Claimant’s

-10-

additional observations on jurisdiction. By letter of August 21, 2000, the Claimant opposed such
modification of the briefing schedule sought by the Respondent, and on the same day submitted

his memorial on jurisdictional issues as directed by the Tribunal.

32. By letter of the Secretary of August 24, 2000, the Tribunal determined it
unnecessary to modify the briefing schedule set forth in Procedural Order No. 4, under which
“the parties have been afforded an opportunity of a simultaneous second round of written
pleadings on preliminary issues in order to address, by way of further explanation, arguments
already made.” Also on August 24, 2000, the Tribunal invited Canada and the United States to

file any NAFTA Article 1128 submissions on preliminary issues by October 6, 2000.

33. On August 29, 2000, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal order the
production of documents by the Claimant concerning the preliminary issues briefed by the
parties. On September 1, 2000, the Tribunal directed both parties to promptly comply with any
requests for the production of documents which they regard to be in good faith, and after
exhaustion of all best efforts, to be admissible, relevant and otherwise inaccessible to the party

requesting them.

34. On September 8 and 11, 2000, respectively, the Respondent filed English and
Spanish versions of its counter-memorial on preliminary issues. On September 13, 2000,
following a request by the Claimant, the Respondent filed an English translation of the

Appendixes of its counter-memorial.

35. On September 22, 2000, the parties simultaneously filed their additional
observations on the preliminary jurisdictional issues in English and, in Spanish on September 27
and 28, 2000, respectively. On October 6, 2000, Canada and the United States of America filed

their respective submissions under NAFTA Article 1128.
36. The Claimant, by letter of October 6, 2000, opposed what it alleged were two new

motions made by the Respondent in its additional observations as submitted on September 22,

2000 regarding the production of documents and the matter of confidentiality with regard to

-ll-

public statements made by the parties in the case. On October 20, 2000, the Respondent
submitted its observations on the submissions of Canada and the United States, the Claimant’s
communication of October 6, 2000 and the Claimant’s additional observations of September 22,
2000. The Respondent further requested a hearing on the preliminary issues briefed by the
parties. The Claimant submitted a letter on October 24, 2000 in which it opposed a hearing on

preliminary issues. The Tribunal decided not to hold a hearing on these matters.

37. On December 6, 2000, the Tribunal issued its Interim Decision on Preliminary
Jurisdictional Issues (the “Interim Decision”), ruling on certain jurisdictional questions and
joining others to the merits of the case, as described further below. Also on December 6, 2000,
the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 5, declining to grant the requests of the Respondent
regarding the production of documents and the confidentiality of matters related to the
proceedings. The Tribunal set forth a new schedule for the exchange of documents and

pleadings on the merits.

38. On December 22, 2000, the Claimant requested the Secretariat to distribute
certain documents he had filed with the Secretariat in response to a request by the Respondent.
On December 29, 2000, in accordance with Procedural Order No. 5, the parties filed their
submissions on the presentation of witnesses and the production of documents. On January 5,

2001 the Tribunal issued further directions regarding the production of documents.

39. Pursuant to the Tribunal’s directions of January 5, 2001, the Claimant filed, on
January 10, 2001, a letter indicating the reasons for which he opposed the production of certain
documents and informed which documents have already been produced to the Respondent.
Similarly on January 11, 2001, the Respondent indicated the reasons for which it opposed the
production of certain documents requested by the Claimant and commented on the Claimant’s
communication of December 29, 2000.

40. The Claimant, by letter of January 16, 2001, commented on the Respondent’s
previous correspondence regarding the production of documents. On February 5, 2001, the

Tribunal issued further directions regarding the production of documents.

-12-

Al. The Claimant’s memorial and the Respondent’s counter-memorial on the merits
were filed respectively on March 30 and May 24, 2001. The Claimant filed his reply to the
counter-memorial on the merits on June 11, 2001. The Tribunal, on June 19, 2001, issued its
Procedural Order No. 6 concerning the marshalling of evidence at the hearing on the merits. The

Respondent’s rejoinder was filed on June 25, 2001.

42. On June 28, 2001, Canada made a NAFTA Article 1128 submission on issues

concerning the merits. The United States made no such submission.

43. From July 9 to July 13, 2001, the Tribunal held its hearing on the merits in
Washington, D.C., at which both parties appeared and presented witnesses. Witnesses called by
the Claimant for cross-examination were Rafael Obreg6n-Castellanos and Fernando Heftye-
Etienne; witnesses called for cross-examination by the Respondent were Oscar Roberto Enriquez
Enriquez, Marvin Feldman Karpa and Jaime Zaga Hadid. Full verbatim transcripts in English

were made of the hearing and distributed to the parties.

44, On April 17, 2002, the Tribunal asked the parties and the NAFTA Parties to
submit their views on how the Tribunal should treat parallel proceedings and on the issue of
relief. The Claimant filed his submission on May 28, 2002 and the Respondent its submission on

May 29, 2002. The NAFTA Parties made no submission in this respect.
4S. The Deputy Secretary-General, by letter of August 5, 2002, informed the Tribunal
that Mr. Alejandro A. Escobar, to the Secretariat’s regret, left ICSID for private legal practice

and indicated that Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila, Counsel, ICSID, was replacing him as Secretary

of the Tribunal.

F JURISDICTION

46. In its Procedural Order No. 4, the Tribunal identified the five preliminary

jurisdictional questions on which the parties were to submit their written pleadings:

-13-

a. Whether the Claimant, being a citizen of the United States of America, and a
registered permanent resident in Mexico, had standing to sue under Chapter

Eleven of NAFTA?

b. Whether the Respondent was entitled to raise any defense on the basis of the
time limitation set forth in NAFTA Article 1117(2), and in particular whether
such time limitation affected the Tribunal’s consideration of facts relevant to
the claim or claims, and whether the Respondent was estopped from relying on

such time limitation?

c. Whether the Claimant had properly submitted a point of claim in this arbitration

proceeding concerning an alleged violation of NAFTA Article 1102?

d. Whether the Claimant was allowed to submit additional claims, if any, or

amend its claim, on the basis of an alleged violation of NAFTA Article 1102?

e. Whether measures alleged to be taken by the Respondent in the period between
late 1992 and January 1, 1994, when NAFTA came into force, and which are
alleged to be in violation of NAFTA, general international law, or domestic

Mexican law, were relevant for the support of the claim or claims?

47. The Tribunal, in its Interim Decision of December 6, 2000, decided most of the
jurisdiction issues, which will be summarized below under the headings of standing, time
limitation, admissibility of an additional claim under NAFTA Article 1102, and relevance of
claims pre-dating NAFTA’s entry into force. Discussion of additional jurisdiction issues, not
addressed in the Interim Decision, will follow, including issues of estoppel with regard to the

period of limitation and the basis of the claim and exhaustion of local remedies.

F.1 Standing

48. On the issue of the Claimant’s standing, the Tribunal ruled in its Interim Decision
of December 6, 2000 (paras. 24-38), that the Claimant, being a citizen of the United States and of
the United States only, and despite his permanent residence (inmigrado status) in Mexico, has
standing to sue in the present arbitration under NAFTA Chapter 11. The Tribunal accordingly
dismissed the Respondent’s preliminary defense pertaining to the Claimant’s lack of standing
because of his permanent residence in Mexico, and found that it was not necessary to address the
Claimant’s allegation that Respondent’s defense about the Claimant’s standing is not timely.

-14-

F.2 Time Limitation

49. Regarding the issue of time limitation under NAFTA Article 1117(2) for
submitting claims to arbitration, the Tribunal found in its Interim Decision (paras. 39-47) that the
cut-off date of such three-year limitation period is April 30, 1996 rather than February 16, 1995.
Two additional questions concerning such time limitation were joined to the consideration of the
merits of the case and are discussed further below (paras. 53-65).

F.3. Admissibility of an Additional Claim under NAFTA Article 1102

50. As to whether the Claimant has submitted or is allowed to submit additional
claims, or amend his claims, on the basis of an alleged violation of NAFTA Article 1102
concerning denial of national treatment, the Tribunal found in its Interim Decision (paras. 50-59)
that the point of claim concerning an alleged violation of NAFTA Article 1102 was properly
before the Tribunal because it had been in substance included in the notice of intent to submit the
claim to arbitration (i.e., “the notice of arbitration” referred to in the Interim Decision), and had
been presented in a timely fashion. In addition, to the extent that such point of claim was
subsequently presented as ancillary claim, the Tribunal accepts such incidental or additional
claim to be within its jurisdiction.

F.4_ Relevance of Claims Pre-Dating NAFTA’s Entry into Force

S51. On the issue whether measures alleged to be taken by the Respondent in the
period between late 1992 and January 1, 1994, when NAFTA came into force, and which are
alleged to be in violation of NAFTA, general international law, or domestic Mexican law, are
relevant for the support of the claim or claims, the Tribunal found in its Interim Decision (paras.
60-63) that only measures alleged to be taken by the Respondent after January 1, 1994, when
NAFTA came into force, and which are alleged to be in violation of NAFTA, are relevant for the
support of the claim or claims under consideration.

52. The Tribunal hereby confirms each of the findings on jurisdictional questions, and
the reasons on which they are based, set forth in its Interim Decision of December 6, 2000,
which is attached to this Award and forms an integral part hereof.

G_ ADDITIONAL JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES

G.1  Estoppel with regard to the Period of Limitation and the Basis of the Claim

53. In its Interim Decision of December 6, 2000, the Arbitral Tribunal, joined the

following questions to the examination of the merits (Interim Decision para. 49):

-15-

(a) whether the Parties on or about June 1, 1995 reached an agreement concerning
CEMSA’s right to export cigarettes and to receive tax rebates on such exports, and
whether deviation from this agreement was formally confirmed in February 1998, thus
bringing about a suspension of the limitation period for some 32.5 months, i.e. from June
1, 1995 to mid-February 1998; and
(b) whether the Respondent is equitably estopped from invoking any limitation period
because it gave the Claimant assurances that exports would be permitted and rebates paid
to CEMSA (ibid., para. 48).
During the examination of the merits, the Claimant enlarged his invocation of estoppel, in order
for it to cover not merely the defense of limitation but the very basis of the damages claim itself

(see Claimant’s memorial, Introduction and Summary, p. 8, and paras. 179-186).

54, The first, and more technical, issue of a possible suspension of the limitation
period for about 32.5 months has been addressed by the Claimant in his memorial (paras. 62-68,
184, 187) and partly in his reply (para. 65), and by the Respondent partly in its counter-memorial
(paras. 18-20, 57, 401-427) and partly in its rejoinder (paras. 106-143).

55. In essence, the Claimant alleges several meetings with middle- and high- ranking
SHCP officials in 1995 concerning the resumption of cigarette exports by CEMSA with rebates
of the IEPS. During these meetings, Claimant alleges that oral assurances were given by the
Mexican tax administration to the Claimant. The Claimant understands such assurances as
amounting to an agreement. He concludes by asserting that a suspension or “tolling” of the
period of limitation is “appropriate in a case such as this one where a lawsuit was discouraged by
the actions of a defendant. Although the clearest example is where a defendant has expressly
agreed not to raise a defence based upon a statute of limitations, other representations, promises,
or actions will suffice to estop a party from invoking a statute of limitations” (memorial, para.

187; footnotes omitted).
56. The Respondent denies that any oral agreement was reached. Even if there had

been an oral agreement, such an agreement could have no legal effect under Mexican law, and

the Claimant was or should have been aware of that (counter-memorial, paras. 19-20).

-16-

57. The scope of this issue seems to be more limited than it appears at first sight. In
fact, the Claimant asks for a suspension of the period of limitation for about 32.5 months. If
accepted, such suspension would effectively extend backwards the cut-off date of the three-year
limitation period under NAFTA Article 1117(2) from April 30, 1996 to mid-August 1993.
Since, however, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis starts only from January 1, 1994,
when NAFTA came into force (see supra, para. 51, and in more detail, the Interim Decision of
December 6, 2000, para. 62), the same date would necessarily be the terminus post quem for

limitation purposes if a suspension, as requested, were to be admitted.

58. In substance, in view of the Tribunal, such suspension or “tolling” of the period
of limitation is unwarranted. NAFTA Article 1117(2) does not provide for any suspension of the
three-year period of limitation. Even under general principles of law to be applied by
international tribunals, it should be noted that in several national legal systems such suspension
is provided only in the final part of the limitation period (e.g. in the last six months) and only
either in cases of act of God or if the debtor maliciously prevented the right holder from
instituting a suit (see e.g. German Civil Code para. 203; Greek Civil Code Article 255). In this
case no such unavoidable events have been pleaded. Basically, the Claimant maintains that a
lawsuit was “discouraged” by the Respondent’s actions (memorial, para. 187), among other
things because the Claimant took the revocation of an audit as a confirmation of alleged previous
agreements (ibid., para. 68). However, “discouraging” a lawsuit does not amount to preventing
it. The decision whether, and when, to bring a lawsuit lies with the prospective plaintiff, who
also bears the respective benefits and risks. Among the various factors to be taken into
consideration is the running of the period of limitation and its interruption as well. Nothing in
the file shows that the Claimant, appropriately represented by counsel, was prevented from
taking into consideration all relevant factors. Therefore, the Tribunal confirms April 30, 1996 as

the cut-off date of the three-year limitation period under NAFTA Article 1117(2).
59. We turn now to the more general issue of the Respondent’s estoppel from

invoking any limitation period because it gave the Claimant assurances that exports would be

permitted and rebates paid to CEMSA, as well as from denying the very basis of the damages

-17-

claim itself (see supra, para. 53). According to the Claimant, the IEPS law in force from January
1, 1992 through December 31, 1997 recognized that all cigarette exporters were entitled to
rebates of the IEPS tax included in the purchase price of cigarettes. The Respondent is estopped
from asserting a contrary view in this arbitration, because Mexican officials confirmed that
interpretation to the Claimant over the years both in writing and verbally (memorial, para. 170
b). The formal requirement of the IEPS law that a taxpayer seeking a rebate obtain a vendor’s
invoice stating the IEPS tax separately and expressly is not applicable to CEMSA as a matter of
Mexican or international law because that requirement could not be complied with by CEMSA
for reasons beyond its control (ibid., para. 170 c). SHCP was fully aware of CEMSA’s export
activities and, without requiring invoices stating the IEPS tax separately and expressly, agreed to
grant rebates, which they did until the policy was changed in November 1997 (memorial, para.
175). SHCP officials made express commitments to the Claimant that SHCP would rebate IEPS
taxes to CEMSA, and that CEMSA was entitled to calculate the tax itself without having
invoices from its vendors stating the IEPS tax separately and expressly. The Claimant and
CEMSA relied on such commitments and representations to their detriment when CEMSA
purchased cigarettes including an 85% IEPS tax. The Respondent is, therefore, estopped from
(1) denying CEMSA’s application for rebates in October-November 1997, and (2) claiming

repayment for rebates on exports in 1996-1997 (memorial, paras. 184, 185).

60. In addition, the Claimant asserts, within the same issue of estoppel, that a
statement regarding how a law is applied is a statement of fact. In any event, the distinction is
not relevant under international law. Estoppel can be availed of to deny both statements as well
as their legal consequences. Domestic tax law rules do not have the function or the authority of
establishing or refuting the estoppel principle. The doctrine of estoppel, based on the
fundamental legal interest in predictability, reliance and consistency, is particularly important in
the context of NAFTA, a regime designed to protect and promote trade and investment among

the parties (reply, paras. 59-63).
6l. The Respondent, on the other hand, denies that any oral agreement to waive the

invoice requirement was ever reached. Even if existent, such agreement would have been legally

irrelevant under Mexican law. Under the tax systems of all three NAFTA countries, taxpayers

-18-

are precluded from raising an estoppel preventing the enforcement of tax laws, as they are
written, through the methods followed by the Claimant (counter-memorial, para. 20). More
generally, estoppel may have effect only in relation to statements of fact, not to statements on the
meaning of a law. Presently, the alleged estoppel results not from statements of fact but rather
from statements, if any, as to the meaning of the IEPS law, an alleged agreement as to the
calculation of IEPS and so on (counter-memorial, paras. 401-407). The Respondent alleges that
the approach taken to the issue of estoppel by the three NAFTA countries is relevant to a
consideration of estoppel under international law. In Mexico, only a written resolution by SHCP
to resolve a real and concrete issue of tax law is binding. In Canada, a government official
cannot create an estoppel in relation to the interpretation of legislation. In the United States, an
erroneous interpretation of the law by tax authorities does not estop them from asserting an
appropriate tax (counter-memorial, paras. 411-427). There can be no agreement whereby
CEMSA could overstate the amount of IEPS claimed so that it receives more money than paid by
the original taxpayers. Indeed, the Claimant has grossly miscalculated the IEPS tax paid

(counter-memorial, paras. 428-433).

62. In addition, according to the Respondent, the cases cited by the Claimant in
support of estoppel involve state boundary disputes and even there it is not clear whether the
International Court of Justice really applied the doctrine of estoppel. An attempt to borrow
underdeveloped and peripheral principles from such an area of international law and apply them
to another should be made with caution. The same legal effect that attaches to the conduct of
States in boundary disputes, which they are presumed to have considered with the utmost
seriousness, cannot apply in cases where a large state bureaucracy deals with an individual
taxpayer (rejoinder, paras. 108-111, 127). Finally, preclusion of estoppel under the domestic law
of the NAFTA countries is important because it disproves the Claimant’s allegations (1) that
there was reliance on his part, (2) that there is an international law of estoppel directly applicable
to SHCP, as it would be extraordinary to conclude that the NAFTA Parties had imposed on their
tax authorities an obligation contrary to their domestic laws, and (3) that such an estoppel is part

of customary international law (ibid., paras. 38-143).

-19-

63. In view of conflicting arguments by the Parties (supra, paras. 59-62), the Arbitral
Tribunal stresses that, like many other legal systems, NAFTA Articles 1117(2) and 1116(2)
introduce a clear and rigid limitation defense which, as such, is not subject to any suspension
(see supra, para. 58), prolongation or other qualification. Thus the NAFTA legal system limits
the availability of arbitration within the clear-cut period of three years, and does so in full
knowledge of the fact that a State, ie., one of the three Member Countries, will be the
Respondent, interested in presenting a limitation defense. The quality of one Party as a State as
well as all specificities and constraints necessarily connected to any state activity neither exclude
nor qualify resort to the defense of limitation. Of course, an acknowledgment of the claim under
dispute by the organ competent to that effect and in the form prescribed by law would probably
interrupt the running of the period of limitation. But any other state behavior short of such
formal and authorized recognition would only under exceptional circumstances be able to either
bring about interruption of the running of limitation or estop the Respondent State from
presenting a regular limitation defense. Such exceptional circumstances include a long, uniform,
consistent and effective behavior of the competent State organs which would recognize the
existence, and possibly also the amount, of the claim. No such circumstances were presented to
the Tribunal in this case. It is true that some assurances on CEMSA’s entitlement to IEPS tax
rebates were given to Claimant and CEMSA at various times by various middle-and high-
ranking SHCP officials, and with varying content. But such assurances never amounted to either
an authorized and formal acknowledgment of the claim by the Respondent or to a uniform,
consistent and effective behavior of Respondent. Therefore, the Tribunal does not deem that the
Respondent is estopped from invoking the three-year limitation period under NAFTA Article
1117(2).

64. Analogous, although not identical, considerations prevail with regard to the next
issue, to wit whether the Respondent is, on account of the same assurances and promises,
estopped from denying the very basis of the damages claim itself (see supra, paras. 53 in fine,
59). Here again the criterion is a long, uniform, consistent and effective behavior of the
competent State organs (see supra, para. 63). The Tribunal recognizes again that some
assurances on CEMSA’s entitlement to IEPS tax rebates were given to Claimant and CEMSA at

various times, probably over a longer period, by various middle- and high-ranking SHCP

-20-

officials, and with varying content. However, the Tribunal misses the uniform, consistent and
effective character of such behavior as well as its connection with the competent State organs at
all times. In this respect, the Tribunal also takes into consideration that in any state governed by
the rule of law there is no way to impose, to reduce, to claim, to recuperate, or to transfer any tax
burdens by agreements with some tax officials not provided by the law. Such agreements would
necessarily have a quasi private character and could neither bind the State nor be enforced

against it.

65. Accordingly, the Tribunal does not find that the Respondent is equitably or
otherwise estopped from denying the very basis of the damages claim itself. Notwithstanding
this finding, the Tribunal will consider such behavior of several SHCP officials while examining
the bases of “creeping” or otherwise relevant form of expropriation, or effective denial of
national treatment, under NAFTA Articles 1110 and 1102. Indeed, it is possible that behavior of
some State organs such as the ones under consideration here may have led the Claimant to
initiate, or to expand, his investment and, thus, may have contributed to the occurrence or the
amount of his damage, if any. This may be particularly relevant with respect to more or less
technical or “procedural” aspects of Mexican legislation on taxation, such as the requirement of
separately and expressly stating the IEPS tax in invoices issued to CEMSA.

G.2_ Exhaustion of Local Remedies

66. Both Parties have addressed the relationship between domestic litigation in
Mexico and this international arbitration as well as the related doctrine of exhaustion of local
remedies (memorial, paras. 214-219; counter-memorial, paras. 365-378; reply, paras. 34-52;

rejoinder, paras. 41-51).

67. In essence, the Claimant alleges that NAFTA Chapter 11, and particularly its
Section B, was designed to provide investors of the NAFTA Parties with impartial international
dispute resolution. A prospective claimant must make an election. If he wants to pursue a
damage claim under NAFTA, he has to waive his rights to pursue damages in the local courts.
Thus, Mexico traded its traditional position on the exclusive jurisdiction of its courts in exchange
for the enormous benefits to be drawn from NAFTA (see opening statement by Mr. Feldman on
July 9, 2001, transcript, vol. 1, pp. 52-53). Accordingly, this Arbitral Tribunal may well
examine both Mexican domestic laws and the conduct of Mexican tax authorities to determine

whether they meet minimum standards of international law, including due process of law, fair

-21-

and equitable treatment, and full protection and security, as incorporated by NAFTA Articles
1110(1)(c ) and 1131(1) (ibid., pp. 54-55). Therefore, an international tribunal reviewing state
action under international law may reach a different result than a domestic tribunal reviewing the
same conduct under domestic law. The potential difference of results is due to the difference of
standards. This could readily happen in a case where the domestic statutory framework was
designed to discriminate against the claimant (see closing statement by Mr. Feldman on July 13,

2001, transcript, vol. 5, p. 182).

68. In addition, the Claimant maintains that both the investor and the investment have
waived their right to claim damages in the Mexican courts, as required by NAFTA Article 1121
(reply, para. 34). Whatever proceedings may be pending now in Mexico, they do not constrain
the Arbitral Tribunal since (1) under Mexican procedure, the Claimant was required to challenge
SHCP’s actions in order to avoid seizure of property and, likely, imprisonment; and (2) after this
Tribunal was constituted, the Claimant filed papers seeking to terminate all domestic litigation
(reply, para. 39). In sum, the Claimant neither has any effective legal remedy under Mexican
law nor can be required to introduce every year a new Amparo procedure in order to meet all
annual minor amendments to the IEPS law, no matter how marginal and irrelevant these

legislative amendments may be.

69. The Respondent basically denies that the Claimant has any right to receive IEPS
rebates as a matter of Mexican law. Subject to constitutional questions, the particular issue of
the requirement of separate and express invoices has been resolved in two separate proceedings
before the Mexican courts, which have sole jurisdiction over issues of Mexican law, and is likely
to be addressed again in one of the proceedings for an extended period of time. Neither is there
any international legal right to IEPS rebates nor is this Arbitral Tribunal authorized to substitute
its views of domestic law for those of the local courts (rejoinder, paras. 29-33). According to the
Respondent, the Claimant is having his day in court in Mexico, and in any event, as those
proceedings involve issues of Mexican law they are not relevant to this proceeding. Those
proceedings would be relevant only if the Claimant were in a position to challenge the Mexican
court actions as constituting a denial of justice under international law, which the Claimant has

not done. Consequently, it would be incorrect to state that there were an absence of an effective

-22-

legal remedy just because the Claimant lost in one of the proceedings; at the time of the
Respondent’s submission, the Claimant appears to be prevailing in the second action, but it is not
final. If that were true, every disappointed litigant who otherwise met the standing requirements
of NAFTA Chapter Eleven, Section B, would bring a claim under international law (rejoinder,
paras. 40, 41). The Respondent concludes therefore that, with the exception of the claim for an
alleged denial of national treatment, all of the claims advanced in this proceeding would require
the Arbitral Tribunal to apply domestic law in the place of the proper judicial body (counter-

memorial, para. 40).

70. In addition, the Respondent maintains that, in any event, any CEMSA’s claimed
right to IEPS rebates would depend on issuing invoices separately and expressly stating the tax.
This particular condition, which was never complied with by the Claimant, is now sub judice on
appeal in the Mexican courts (counter-memorial, paras. 11, 360-364). Accordingly, the
international responsibility of a State cannot be engaged unless and until the measure in issue has
been tested at the local level and has become final by pronouncement of the highest competent
authority (counter-memorial, para. 371). The exhaustion of local remedies rule is applicable
under NAFTA as in general under international law. Nor does any relevant waiver exist here,
since the waiver required by NAFTA Article 1121 is limited to damages only (transcript, vol. 2,
pp. 79, 81) and, in any event, the Claimant neither discontinued proceedings in the domestic
courts nor did he refrain from initiating others with respect to measures allegedly in breach of

NAFTA Chapter Eleven, Section A (rejoinder, paras. 47-51).

G.3 Analysis

71. The decision on the issue of exhaustion of local remedies as a condition for claim
admissibility primarily depends on the wording and construction of the relevant NAFTA
provisions. Indeed, it is generally understood that the local remedies rule may be derogated
from, qualified, or varied by virtue of any binding treaty (Case Concerning Elettronica Sicula,
S.p.A., United States of America v. Italy, 1989, IL.C.J. Reports 4, para. 50). Such qualification
took place here under NAFTA Articles 1121 and Annex 1120.1.

-23-

72. Article 1121(2)(b) and (3) in its relevant parts provides as follows:

2. A disputing investor may submit a claim under Article 1117 [Claim by an Investor
of a Party on Behalf of an Enterprise] to arbitration only if both the investor and the
enterprise:

(b) waive their right to initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court
under the law of any Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any proceedings
with respect to the measure of the disputing Party that is alleged to be a breach referred
to in Article 1117, except for proceedings for injunctive, declaratory or other
extraordinary relief, not involving the payment of damages, before an administrative
tribunal or court under the law of the disputing Party.

3. A consent and waiver required by this Article shall be in writing, shall be delivered

to the disputing Party and shall be included in the submission of a claim to arbitration.
23. It appears that this Article, rather than confirming or repeating the classical rule of
exhaustion of local remedies, envisages a situation where domestic proceedings with respect to
the same alleged breach referred to in Article 1117 are either available or even pending in a court
or tribunal operating under the law of any Party. In such case, Article 1121(2)(b) requires, for a
recourse to arbitration to be open, that the disputing investor waive his right to initiate or
continue the other domestic proceedings. Therefore, in contrast to the local remedies rule,
Article 1121(2)(b) gives preference to international arbitration rather than domestic judicial
proceedings, provided that a waiver with regard to the latter is declared by the disputing investor.
This preference refers, however, to a claim for damages only, explicitly leaving available to a
claimant “proceedings for injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary relief’ before the
national courts. Thus, Article 1121(2)(b) and (3) substitutes itself as a qualified and special rule
on the relationship between domestic and international judicial proceedings, and a departure
from the general rule of customary international law on the exhaustion of local remedies. The
thrust of such substitution seems to consist in making recourse to NAFTA arbitration easier and
speedier, as opposed to the general pattern of opening up international arbitration to private

parties as against third states.

74. In particular with respect to Mexico as Respondent, Annex 1120.1 of NAFTA
restricts resort to arbitration. According to this provision in its relevant parts,

“With respect to the submission of a claim to arbitration:

-24-

(b) where an enterprise of Mexico that is a juridical person that an investor of another
Party owns or controls directly or indirectly alleges in proceedings before a Mexican
court or administrative tribunal that Mexico has breached an obligation under

(i) Section A ......

the investor may not allege the breach in an arbitration under this Section”.

75. Annex 1120.1 of NAFTA gives, thus, a statutory preference to domestic
proceedings in Mexico vis-&vis a possible international arbitration under NAFTA Chapter 11,
Section A, by obviously preventing the disputing investor from instituting, then waiving
domestic proceedings and, only thereafter resorting to arbitration, as provided under Article
1121(2)(b) (see supra, paras. 72, 73). This prohibition applies, however, only if the Claimant
“alleges in proceedings before a Mexican court or administrative tribunal that Mexico has
breached an obligation under ... Section A”. In any event, since the Respondent expressly
confirms that “the Claimant has also not sought to submit an alleged breach of the NAFTA to the
Mexican courts, so there is no conflict with Annex 1120.1” (rejoinder, para. 48), the Tribunal

does not see any obstacle to the present arbitration connected to Annex 1120.1 of NAFTA.

76. As far as the waiver requirement under Article 1121(2)(b) and (3) is concerned,
the Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied that the appropriate waivers were attached by both the Claimant
and CEMSA as Exhibits B and C to the Notice of Arbitration of April 30, 1999 and also
delivered to the Respondent, as indicated in the Notice of Arbitration (p. 3 under B(1)(a)), noting
that the Respondent has not challenged the delivery or the sufficiency of the waivers (rejoinder,

para. 46).

77. Under Article 1121(2)(b), the waivers are required for, and limited to, claims for
damages only. Indeed, the Notice of Arbitration presents as requests four related claims for
damages (p. 11 under D); they do not apply to “proceedings for injunctive, declaratory or other
extraordinary relief.” A later request by the Claimant with regard to the illegality or invalidity of
a tax assessment by the Respondent for about US$25 million asks for declaratory relief only and,
therefore, does not require a waiver under Article 1121(2)(b) (see supra, paras. 72, 73). It has to
be examined below, however, whether this request, while relieved from the requirement of

waiver, stands properly before the Tribunal in terms of its scope of authority (see infra, para. 88).

-25-

78. The Respondent observes that the Claimant, in spite of the waiver, did not in fact
withdraw from several related domestic proceedings in Mexico; nor does the Respondent suggest
that it was incumbent upon the Claimant to withdraw (see rejoinder, paras. 47, 48). The Arbitral
Tribunal, however, does not find the point to be pertinent. Mexican courts are hailed by the
Respondent as the appropriate forum for determining the Claimant’s rights under the IEPS law
(see, e.g., counter-memorial, paras, 367, 368; rejoinder, paras. 48-51). In the first instance, we
agree. However, questions as to whether Mexican law as determined by administrative
authorities or Mexican courts is consistent with the requirements of NAFTA and international
law are to be determined in this arbitral proceeding, and we are not barred from making that
determination by the fact that not all of the issues have yet been resolved by Mexican courts.
Otherwise, any arbitral tribunal could be prevented from making a decision simply by delaying
local court proceedings. Nor is an action determined to be legal under Mexican law by Mexican
courts necessarily legal under NAFTA or international law. At the same time, an action deemed
to be illegal or unconstitutional under Mexican law may not rise to the level of a violation of

international law.

G.4 Other Jurisdictional Constraints

79. As noted earlier, several jurisdictional issues in this arbitration have been resolved
by the Tribunal’s “Interim Decision on Preliminary Jurisdictional Issues” rendered on December
6, 2000. However, this decision was limited to “the specific preliminary issues set forth in [the
Tribunal’s] Procedural Order No. 4 and at paragraph 11” of the Interim Decision itself. Other
jurisdictional issues were not precluded, to the extent they have arisen in the course of this

arbitral proceeding.
80. Such an additional jurisdictional issue, which arose later, pertains to the authority
of this Tribunal to grant declaratory relief with respect to the validity or legality of the 1998 audit

and the corresponding tax assessment by SHCP vis-avis CEMSA.

81. It appears to be common ground between the Parties (memorial, paras. 121-126;

counter-memorial, paras. 240-268) that in July 1998 SHCP launched an audit, or a verification

-26-

visit by an audit team (visitadores), with regard to CEMSA’s 1996-1997 exports. The audit was
conducted with the presence of the police and with the use of several photocopying machines
brought by the visiting team for that purpose. Several months later, on March 1, 1999, SHCP
issued its determination by which it concluded the audit through a tax assessment against
CEMSA in the amount of $250,551,635 Mexican pesos for wrongfully obtained tax rebates in
1996-1997, plus interest, fines, and actualization on account of inflation. The Claimant
(memorial, para. 123) alleges that this amount is equal to about US$25 million, including a claim

of recovery of some US$9.1 million in IEPS rebates paid in 1996 and 1997.

82. Thereafter, in March 1999, CEMSA challenged the audit of the April 1996 -
September 1997 IEPS rebates and the ensuing tax assessment before the first-instance Fiscal
Tribunal of the Federation. The Claimant argued that there was a fatal inconsistency between his
right to the 0% tax rate under Article 2 of the IEPS and the invoice requirements under Article 4
of the same law. The Fiscal Tribunal’s decision held in favor of CEMSA on some points and in
favor of SHCP on others. Apparently the decision held that SHCP could not require invoices
with the IEPS expressly transferred and stated separately since it was a requirement with which it
was impossible to comply in the case of cigarette exports (see counter-memorial, paras. 261,
571-574). On the other hand, the decision denied any tax rebates on processed tobacco exports
to “low tax jurisdictions”, notably Honduras, in accordance with Article 2 of the IEPS law. Asa

result, however, the tax assessment by SHCP was quashed.

83. Both parties opposed this decision (supra, paras. 68-69). The Claimant also filed
an Amparo proceeding before the Circuit Court; SHCP availed itself of a “recourse of revision”
before the same court. The circuit courts held that the requirements of Articles 2 and 4 were not
contradictory. Further appeals ensued. In the most recent (March 29, 2002) determination in
this litigation, a Mexican court of appeals has apparently held that the Claimant did have a
constitutional right under the IEPS law in force in 1996-1997 notwithstanding his inability to
produce invoices showing the tax amounts separately, on the ground that the invoice "formality”
discriminates among different taxpayers (producers and exporters) who carry on the same
activity. The decision also appears to hold unconstitutional the provision of the IEPS law that

precludes receipt of tax refunds for exports to low tax jurisdictions (see Claimant’s May 8

-27-

submission, 2002, paras. 7-8.). However, both Parties agree that this most recent decision is not
final so that the proceeding remains sub judice before the competent federal courts (Claimant’s
May 8, 2002 submission, para. 17; Respondent May 8, 2002 submission, para. 18; memorial,

para. 124; counter-memorial, para. 268).

84. What, then, is the relevance of these Mexican court decisions for this Tribunal?
The Tribunal is not inclined to give them significant weight, in part because neither of the Parties
has suggested that they are controlling, although the Mexican courts’ discussion of legal issues
provides necessary background to the Tribunal’s understanding of these issues as required for a
proper application of NAFTA and international law. First, of course, the 1998 assessment
proceeding is not final. While the most recent decision favors the Claimant, the Respondent may
prevail at the next step. Second, the 1998 decision, related to the negative response to a request
presented to the tax authority (this decision differs from the Claimant’s position specifically with
regard to the exigency of separately stating the IEPS amounts in the invoices) which is final,
essentially reinforces the Respondent’s position, creating a conflict which this Tribunal cannot
and should not try to resolve. Third, and probably most important, Mexican courts are applying
Mexican law, while this Tribunal must apply the provisions of NAFTA and international law,
which do not necessarily provide the same results as under Mexican law. Finally, as noted
earlier, the Claimant has not challenged any of the Mexican court decisions, even those
unfavorable to the Claimant, as breaching the international law standard for denial of justice, and
it is premature to consider any question of possible non-compliance of a Mexican court decision

by the Respondent, since the issue of compliance has not yet arisen.

85. The purely declaratory character of the relief sought by the Claimant, to wit to
declare the Respondent’s 1999 tax assessment as invalid, is not necessarily inconsistent with
NAFTA Chapter 11, Section B, in particular Articles 1116(1) and 1117(1), which appear to limit
relief to claim for “loss or damage by reason of, or arising out, that breach”. It may also not be
generally inconsistent with the exception of taxation measures in view of NAFTA Article
2103(6). Particular attention should be drawn, however, to the question whether such

declaratory relief is admissible in the circumstances of this case.

-28-

86. The Claimant qualifies the requested declaration as “an incidental or additional
claim respecting the audit and tax assessment ... The issues and the evidence are the same as
those in the original claim, and the Tribunal will necessarily decide the new claim when it
decides the first” (reply, para. 31). The Claimant concludes on this point by asserting a denial of
justice if the Tribunal should award damages to the Claimant and the Respondent could seek to
set off against those damages any audit liability assessed by the Mexican tax authorities, given
that the issues at stake are the same with the ones litigated before the Tribunal (reply, paras. 32-

33).

87. The Respondent answers by denying this Tribunal’s jurisdiction to entertain the
Claimant’s request for “a declaration that Respondent is not entitled to recover rebates paid to

CEMSA in respect of cigarette exports in 1996-1997” because

(a) NAFTA Chapter Eleven, Section B, vests the Tribunal only with jurisdiction to
award monetary compensation;

(b) the Claimant has not submitted to arbitration a claim in respect of the 1998 audit;
and

(c) the requested declaration would usurp the jurisdiction of the Mexican courts and

would not be enforceable in any event (counter-memorial, para. 575).

Further, according to the Respondent, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to entertain the claim that
a contingent award be issued in the amount of any tax assessment levied against the Claimant as
a result of the 1998 audit, for the additional reason that such claim would not yet be ripe (ibid.,

paras. 576, 577).

88. In view of conflicting arguments by the Parties (supra, paras. 86-87), the Arbitral
Tribunal stresses that, according to NAFTA Article 1136(1), an award made by a Tribunal shall
have binding force between the disputing Parties and in respect of the particular case. This rule
also implies that a NAFTA State Party must comply with a final arbitral award in its entirety as
well. In casu, CEMSA’s entitlement to tax rebates in the critical period necessarily constitutes

an important segment of the present arbitration. Any decision by this Arbitral Tribunal thereon

-29-

is bound to have, under the terms of NAFTA Article 1136(1), a direct bearing upon any domestic
litigation (pending or final) on the entitlement to tax rebates. Therefore the validity or legality of
the 1999 tax assessment with respect to the tax rebates obtained in the years 1996 and 1997
hardly constitutes an independent or unrelated count in this arbitration. Rather, the validity or
recovery of these tax rebates functionally have an impact on, and belong to, the Tribunal’s
evaluation whether a “creeping” or any other relevant (under NAFTA Articles 1110 and
2103(6)) form of expropriation has taken place. In addition, it appears to the Arbitral Tribunal
that the Claimant as well understands this declaratory relief in the context of expropriation under
NAFTA Article 1110 since his request seeks an arbitral finding that such tax assessment by the
Respondent “constitutes a measure tantamount to expropriation under, and in breach of, NAFTA
Article 1110” (memorial, submission A(4), p. 130). Similarly, the validity or recovery of these
tax rebates may be relevant to determining whether Respondent has violated Article 1102, to the
extent the Tribunal determines that Claimant has been treated less favourably with regard to the
tax rebates than domestic investors in like circumstances, as discussed in Section I, infra.
Therefore, since the Claimant submits this allegation of invalidity within the framework of
NAFTA Articles 1102 and 1110, the invalidity issue will be dealt with within the appropriate

framework but does not warrant an autonomous answer in the operative part of this Award.

H MERITS

H.1 Expropriation: Overview of the Positions of the Disputing Parties

89. In this proceeding, the Claimant’s key contention is that the various actions of
Mexican authorities, particularly SHCP, in denying the IEPS rebates on cigarette exports to
CEMSA, resulted in an indirect or “creeping” expropriation of the Claimant’s investment and
were tantamount to expropriation under Article 1110. They were also arbitrary, confiscatory and
discriminatory, a violation of the Claimant’s right to due process (see memorial, Introduction and
Summary, p. 6; first Swan’s affidavit, paras. 30-34). The Claimant asserts that the “measures”
he has complained about may also be characterized as a “denial of justice” (one aspect of denial
of due process) under article 1110 (memorial, paras. 189-203). Nor does the Claimant believe

that the Mexican government policy of limiting cigarette exports is justified by public policy

-30-

concerns, particularly in light of the stated purpose of the IEPS law in 1980, which was to
encourage Mexican exports (memorial, para. 189, quoting Statement of Purpose of IEPS Law for

1981, Diario Oficial, Dec. 30, 1980).

 

90. In particular, the Claimant asserts that the 1993 Supreme Court Amparo decision
required Mexican officials not only to provide CEMSA with the 0% excise tax rate on exports,
but also to permit CEMSA to obtain rebates of the tax amounts included in the price CEMSA
paid its suppliers, Walmart and Sam’s Club. According to the Claimant, the decision makes no
sense if it holds Article 2 of the IEPS Law -- permitting only manufacturers, not resellers, to
obtain the 0% tax rate for exported cigarettes -- unconstitutional, but continues to permit SHCP
to deny the rebates to firms that are not IEPS taxpayers and do not have invoices showing the tax
amounts stated separately, as Article 4(III) of the IEPS law specifies. In seeking the rebates, the
Claimant asserts that he reasonably relied on a series of letters from SHCP officials, oral
assurances from those officials, and their actions in granting the rebates during some periods
(1992 and April 1996 to September 1997). Rebates were granted although the officials were
fully aware at all relevant times that the Claimant lacked invoices that stated the tax amounts
separately, and would rely on their actions. Some of the same officials had denied those rebates
during earlier periods. In fact, according to the Claimant, there was effectively an oral
agreement or understanding with SHCP officials, concluded through a series of meetings and
exchanges of letters in 1994 and 1995, to the effect that the 1993 Amparo decision provided the
Claimant the right to receive rebates, rather than simply the right to a 0% TEPS tax on cigarette
exports (memorial, paras. 68-69). This understanding, according to the Claimant, resulted from
the impossibility of the Claimant’s obtaining the invoices, the influences of the U.S. Embassy

and the entry into force of NAFTA (memorial, Introduction and Summary, pp. 3-4).

91. It is the Claimant’s view, however, that the Mexican government did not comply
with the Amparo decision, despite the oral agreement to afford the Claimant the rebates. Rather,
Mexican government officials sought return of the rebates that had been granted between April
1996 and September 1997, and ultimately denied the Claimant’s rebates for October and
November 1997, effectively preventing the Claimant from exporting cigarettes. The application

of the IEPS law by Mexican authorities (particularly strict application of Article 4(III)) requiring

31-

invoices with the separate statement of tax amounts, even though it was impossible for CEMSA
to obtain them, had the intended result. SHCP’s actions effectively drove CEMSA out of the
cigarette export business, in violation of Article 1110. According to the Claimant, these facts
precisely fit the traditional definition of indirect or creeping expropriation: Mexico’s intent was
to put the Claimant out of the cigarette export business through manipulation or interpretation of
IEPS legal requirements, and by denying the IEPS rebates over a period of time. The Claimant
concludes that the fact that tax laws are applied in such a way as to accomplish the expropriation

does not convert an expropriation into valid regulation.

92. The Respondent disagrees on a variety of grounds. First, SHCP’s actions --
demanding invoices with the IEPS tax amounts stated separately as a condition of the IEPS
rebates -- were required by the IEPS law. That requirement in the Respondent’s view is fully
consistent with the 1993 Mexican Amparo Supreme Court case, which applied to both cigarette
and alcoholic beverage exports, and decided only that resellers such as the Claimant, as well as
producers, were entitled to the 0% IEPS tax rate on their exports (counter-memorial, paras. 1-2).
SHCP was prepared to apply the 0% tax rate and to grant the rebates, but if and only if the
Claimant complied with the other requirements of the IEPS law, including those relating to
invoices. According to the Respondent, the question of the requirement that the person seeking
the rebates be a taxpayer and, particularly, of invoices stating the tax amounts separately was
never before the Mexican Supreme Court and was not decided by it (counter-memorial, para.
23). Moreover, there was never any intent on the part of SHCP officials to waive the
requirements of Article 4 of the IEPS law. Rebates are initially granted in a virtually automatic
process, with SHCP reserving the right under the law to audit recipients to determine whether

they were entitled to the rebates and whether the amounts sought were correct.

93. According to the Respondent, there is no basis for finding an “agreement”
between the Claimant and SHCP that the Claimant was entitled to rebates under the Amparo
decision. There was no such agreement beyond the obvious understanding of SHCP officials,
communicated to the Claimant both orally and in writing, that they would comply with the
Amparo decision. That decision goes no further than to require that the Claimant be afforded the

0% tax rate. SHCP officials did not, and could not have, abrogated the other requirements of the

-32-

TEPS law, including but not limited to providing invoices with tax amounts separately stated, in

accordance with Article 2 ( counter-memorial, paras. 168, 172).

94, Also, the Mexican circuit court has determined, inter alia, in the “nullification”
proceeding initiated by the Claimant in 1998, that IEPS legal provisions requiring invoices
stating the tax amounts separately as a condition of obtaining rebates are not inconsistent with
principles of tax equity. In the Respondent’s view, this is a determination under Mexican law
that is not properly before the Tribunal (rejoinder, para. 16). While the arguments are in general
detailed and complex, the Respondent believes that this litigation proves that Mexican
administrative authorities acted consistently with Mexican law and court decisions (even though
the case only applies by its actual terms to applications for rebates submitted in November and
December 1997). Thus, there is no denial of justice under Mexican law, or other violation of

international law that could be considered the basis for a violation of Article 1110.

95. The Respondent also questions whether the Claimant can demonstrate the
ownership of an “investment” that was allegedly expropriated in Mexico by Mexican authorities;
in the absence of an investment, the Claimant has no standing to bring an action under Chapter
11. In particular, to the extent the Claimant is seeking payment of rebate amounts for October
and November 1997, this is a debt obligation that is specifically excluded from the definition of
investment under NAFTA Article 1139. Nowhere is there an “investment” of which the

Respondent seized ownership and control (counter-memorial, para. 302 ff.).

H.2 Applicable Law: NAFTA Article 1110 and International Law

96. A threshold question is whether there is an “investment” that is covered by
NAFTA. The term “investment” is defined in Article 1139, in exceedingly broad terms. It
covers almost every type of financial interest, direct or indirect, except certain claims to money.
The first listed item under “investment” is “an enterprise.” There is no disagreement among the
parties that Corporacién de Exportaciones Mexicanas, S.A. (CEMSA) is a corporate entity
organized under the laws of Mexico, essentially wholly owned by the American citizen investor,
Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa (first Feldman statement, para. 1). Among the dictionary definitions

of “enterprise” are “a unit of economic organization or activity; esp. a business organization”

-33-

(Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, 1977 ed.). As such, the Tribunal determines that
CEMSA comes within the term “enterprise” and is thus an “investment” under NAFTA. This
conclusion is consistent with that reached by other NAFTA Chapter 11 tribunals. For example,
the tribunal in S.D. Myers v. Canada concluded that a Canadian corporation organized for the
purpose of facilitating hazardous waste exports to the United States, an affiliate of S.D. Myers in
the United States owned by the same shareholders as S.D. Myers, satisfied the NAFTA
requirements for an “investment.” (S.D. Myers v. Government of Canada , Partial Award,

November 13, 2000, paras. 230-231, http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/3992.pdf.)

97. Expropriation under Chapter 11 is governed by NAFTA Article 1110, although
NAFTA lacks a precise definition of expropriation. That provision reads in pertinent part as
follows:

1. No Party may directly or indirectly nationalize or
expropriate an investment of an investor of another Party in its
territory or take a measure tantamount to nationalization or
expropriation of such an investment (“expropriation”), except:

(a) for a public purpose;
(b) on a non-discriminatory basis;
(c) in accordance with due process of law and article 1105(1); and
(d) on payment of compensation in accordance with
paragraphs 2 through 6.5

The key issue, in general and in the instant case, is whether the Respondent’s actions constitute
an expropriation.

98. The Article 1110 language is of such generality as to be difficult to apply in
specific cases. In the Tribunal’s view, the essential determination is whether the actions of the
Mexican government constitute an expropriation or nationalization, or are valid governmental
activity. If there is no expropriatory action, factors a-d are of limited relevance, except to the

extent that they have helped to differentiate between governmental acts that are expropriation

5 Emphasis added. Paras. 2-6 provide for compensation “equivalent to the fair
market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation took place;”
that compensation be paid without delay and be fully realizable; include interest in a hard
currency; and be freely transferable. Jd. Article 1110(1) (2-6).

-34-

and those that are not, or are parallel to violations of NAFTA Articles 1102 and 1105. If there is
a finding of expropriation, compensation is required, even if the taking is for a public purpose,

non-discriminatory and in accordance with due process of law and Article 1105(1).

99. The view that the conditions (other than the requirement for compensation) are
not of major importance in determining expropriation is confirmed by the Restatement of the
Law of Foreign Relations of the United States, a source relied on by many American and
Canadian lawyers that has been discussed in the memorials of both the Claimant and the
Respondent in this proceeding.6 For example, according to the Restatement, the public purpose
requirement “has not figured prominently in international claims practice, perhaps because the
concept of public purpose is broad and not subject to effective reexamination by other states.”
(AMERICAN LAW INSTITUTE, Restatement of the Law Third, the Foreign Relations of the
United States, USA, American Law Institute Publishers, Vol. 1, 1987, (hereinafter Restatement),
Section 712, Comment g.). Similarly, the Restatement suggests that if proper compensation is
paid for an expropriation, the fact that the taking was not for a public purpose and was
discriminatory, “might not in fact be successfully challenged.” A comment observes, perhaps
somewhat inconsistently, that “economic injuries [falling under section 712(3)] are generally
unlawful because they are discriminatory or are otherwise arbitrary.” (/d., Sec. 712, Comment i.)
This last clause suggests that if the government actions (legislative, administrative or judicial)
are discriminatory or arbitrary (or perhaps unfair or inequitable), as arguably is the case here,
they are more likely to be viewed as expropriatory, imparting a degree of circularity to the

“expropriation versus regulation” dichotomy.

100. Most significantly with regard to this case, Article 1110 deals not only with direct
takings, but indirect expropriation and measures “tantamount to expropriation,” which
potentially encompass a variety of government regulatory activity that may significantly interfere

with an investor’s property rights. The Tribunal deems the scope of both expressions to be

6 Memorial, paras. 151 ff.; counter-memorial, paras. 335 ff. (with some qualifications). It
is important to note that the language used by the Restatement, section 712, differs significantly
from that used in NAFTA, even though the concepts are similar.

-35-

functionally equivalent. Recognizing direct expropriation is relatively easy: governmental
authorities take over a mine or factory, depriving the investor of all meaningful benefits of
ownership and control. However, it is much less clear when governmental action that interferes
with broadly-defined property rights -- an “investment” under NAFTA, Article 1139 -- crosses
the line from valid regulation to a compensable taking, and it is fair to say that no one has come

up with a fully satisfactory means of drawing this line.

101. By their very nature, tax measures, even if they are designed to and have the
effect of an expropriation, will be indirect, with an effect that may be tantamount to
expropriation. If the measures are implemented over a period of time, they could also be
characterized as “creeping,” which the Tribunal also believes is not distinct in nature from, and is
subsumed by, the terms “indirect” expropriation or “tantamount to expropriation” in Article
1110(1). The Claimant has alleged “creeping expropriation.” The Respondent has objected that
the Claimant has in effect added a new element to the case which, among other things, should
have been submitted to the Competent Authorities under Article 2103(6) for a determination as
to whether it should be excluded from consideration as an expropriation. The Restatement
defines “creeping expropriation” in part as a state seeking “to achieve the same result [as an
outright taking] by taxation and regulatory measures designed to make continued operation of a
project uneconomical so that it is abandoned” (Restatement, Section 712, Reporter’s Note 7).
Since the Tribunal believes that creeping expropriation, as defined in the Restatement, noted
above, is a form of indirect expropriation, and may accordingly constitute measures “tantamount
to expropriation”, the Tribunal includes consideration of creeping expropriation along with its

consideration of these closely related terms. 7

7 The Tribunal notes that the S.D. Myers tribunal (citing Pope & Talbot) effectively
concluded that the words “tantamount to expropriation” were designed to embrace the concept of
“creeping” expropriation rather than to “expand the internationally accepted scope of the term
expropriation.” See S.D. Myers v. Government of Canada, Partial Award, November 13, 2000,
para. 286, http:/www.state.gov/documents/organization/3992.pdf .

-36-

102. Ultimately, decisions as to when regulatory action becomes compensable under
article 1110 and similar provisions in other agreements appear to be made based on the facts of

specific cases. This Tribunal must necessarily take the same approach.

103. The Tribunal notes that the ways in which governmental authorities may force a
company out of business, or significantly reduce the economic benefits of its business, are many.
In the past, confiscatory taxation, denial of access to infrastructure or necessary raw materials,
imposition of unreasonable regulatory regimes, among others, have been considered to be
expropriatory actions. At the same time, governments must be free to act in the broader public
interest through protection of the environment, new or modified tax regimes, the granting or
withdrawal of government subsidies, reductions or increases in tariff levels, imposition of zoning
restrictions and the like. Reasonable governmental regulation of this type cannot be achieved if
any business that is adversely affected may seek compensation, and it is safe to say that

customary international law recognizes this (see infra para. 105).

104. | Drawing the line between expropriation and regulation has proved difficult both
in the pre-NAFTA context and for the handful of NAFTA Chapter 11 tribunals that have
considered the issue. Here again, despite the less specific language and the lack of references to
“tantamount to expropriation,” the Restatement is somewhat helpful, particularly the comments,
in understanding customary international law in this area. Section 712 reads in pertinent part as
follows:

“A state is responsible under international law for injury resulting
from:

(1) a taking by the state of the property of a national of another state that

(a) is not for a public purpose, or
(b) is discriminatory, or
(c) is not accompanied by provision for just compensation.”

While the language itself differs considerably from Article 1110, many of the essential
substantive elements are the same, particularly the concept of a taking and the conditions.

-37-

105. The “comments” to the Restatement are designed to assist in determining, inter
alia, how to distinguish between an indirect expropriation and valid government regulation:

A state is responsible as for an expropriation of property under
Subsection (1) when it subjects alien property to taxation,
regulation, or other action that is confiscatory, or that prevents,
unreasonably interferes with, or unduly delays, effective
enjoyment of an alien’s property or its removal from the state’s
territory... A state is not responsible for loss of property or for
other economic disadvantage resulting from bona fide general
taxation, regulation, forfeiture for crime, or other action of the
kind that is commonly accepted as within the police power of
states, if it is not discriminatory.... (Restatement, Section 712,
comment g, emphasis supplied.)

 

 

106. It is notable that the Restatement comment specifically includes “taxation” as a
possible expropriatory action and establishes state responsibility, inter alia, for unreasonable
interference with an alien’s property. At the same time, non-discriminatory, bona fide general
taxation does not establish liability. The Reporter’s Notes to the Restatement further suggest that
“whether an action by the state constitutes a taking and requires compensation under
international law, or is a police power regulation or tax that does not give rise to an obligation to
compensate even though a foreign national suffers loss as a consequence” must be determined in

light of all the circumstances (Restatement, Section 712, Reporter’s Note 5).

107. Along with the Restatement, this Tribunal has also sought guidance in the
decisions of several earlier NAFTA Chapter 11 Tribunals that have interpreted Article 1110.
The Tribunal realizes that under NAFTA Article 1136(1), “An award made by a Tribunal shall
have no binding force except between the disputing parties and in respect of the particular case,”
and that each determination under Article 1110 is necessarily fact-specific. However, in view of
the fact that both of the parties in this proceeding have extensively cited and relied upon some of
the earlier decisions, the Tribunal believes it appropriate to discuss briefly relevant aspects of
earlier decisions, particularly Azinian v. United Mexican States and Metalclad v. United Mexican
States. Nevertheless, there has been only one prior finding of a taking under Article 1110, in
Metalclad, and the principal rationale for that decision was substantially overruled by the

reviewing court, the Supreme Court of British Columbia. In the other decisions to date which

-38-

have considered allegations of a violation of Article 1110 and attempted to articulate criteria for
the determination (S.D. Myers v. Canada and Pope & Talbot v. Canada) the tribunals for various

reasons have failed to find violations of Article 1110.

H.3 Respondent’s Actions as an Expropriation Under Article 1110.

108. The Tribunal has struggled at considerable length, in light of the facts and legal
arguments presented, the language of Article 1110 and other relevant NAFTA provisions,
principles of customary international law and prior NAFTA tribunal decisions, to determine
whether the actions of the Respondent relating to the Claimant constituted indirect or “creeping”
expropriation, or actions tantamount to expropriation. (There is in this case no allegation of a
direct expropriation or taking under Article 1110.) The conclusion that they do not is explained

below.

109. The facts presented here might, depending on their interpretation, appear to
support a finding of an indirect or creeping expropriation. The Claimant, through the
Respondent’s actions, is no longer able to engage in his business of purchasing Mexican
cigarettes and exporting them, and has thus been deprived completely and permanently of any
potential economic benefits from that particular activity.8 Between 1991, when the Claimant
brought his Amparo action, and December 1997, when SHCP definitively refused to provide
CEMSA with tax rebates on exported cigarettes, SHCP followed an inconsistent and non-
transparent course of action. In some instances, SHCP authorized and paid the rebates (for 1992
exports, for example), in others, for significant periods of time (1994 -1995), it denied them. At
various times SHCP officials provided written documentation to the Claimant that might have
led some persons—reasonably or otherwise-- to believe that SHCP had agreed with the
Claimant’s position that the 1993 Amparo decision required that the Claimant be afforded the

rebates (see, e.g., letters of March 12, 1992, May 10, 1994 and March 16, 1997). SHCP has

8As discussed in the “Damages” section of this Award (paras. 189-207 ), there is a
serious question as to whether the Claimant’s business would have been economically viable
even had SHCP consistently granted the rebates in the proper amount, given the very low gross
profit, based on the gross profit of less than US$0.10 between CEMSA’s net-of-tax cost of the
cigarettes and the selling prices realized from CEMSA’s customers.

-39-

sought through a tax audit a refund of rebates paid to the Claimant in 1996 and 1997, increased
by an inflation factor, interest and possible penalties. Also, under Article 2103(6) of NAFTA,
the State Parties expressly confirm that tax regulatory activity may be expropriatory under

Article 1110, albeit with significant limitations.9

110. | No one can seriously question that in some circumstances government regulatory
activity can be a violation of Article 1110. For example, in Pope & Talbot, Canada argued that
“mere interference is not expropriation; rather, a significant degree of deprivation of fundamental
rights of ownership is required.”10 That tribunal rejected this approach:

Regulations can indeed be characterized in a way that would constitute creeping expropriation...
Indeed, much creeping expropriation could be conducted by regulation, and a blanket exception
for regulatory measures would create a gaping loophole in international protection against
expropriation. (Id., para. 99.)

However, the Pope & Talbot tribunal failed to find a violation of Article 1110 in that case. This
Tribunal finds the legal arguments against a finding of expropriation more persuasive, for
reasons described in detail below, and reaches the same conclusion on facts very different from

those in Pope & Talbot.

111. This Tribunal’s rationale for declining to find a violation of Article 1110 can be
summarized as follows: (1) As Azinian suggests, not every business problem experienced by a

foreign investor is an expropriation under Article 1110; (2) NAFTA and principles of customary

9 First, NAFTA Article 2103 generally excludes tax measures from coverage under
NAFTA: “Except as set out in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to tax
measures.” However, this exclusion is not absolute. Article 2103(3)(b) makes Article 1102
applicable to tax measures, and Article 2103(6) makes Article 1110 applicable under certain
conditions. Article 1105 is not mentioned among the exceptions to the exclusion; therefore, it
does not apply to tax measures, other than in a situation in which an expropriation under Article
1110 has been found, and there is an analysis as to whether the expropriatory action met the
requirements of due process and Article 1105 as provided in Article 1110(1)(c).

10 Pope & Talbot v. Government of Canada, Interim Award, June 26, 2000, paras. 87-88,
http://www.state. gov/documents/organization/3989.pdf. Canada also asserted that “tantamount”
simply means “equivalent,” and that this language was not intended to expand Article 1110’s
coverage beyond creeping expropriation to cover regulatory action. Id. para. 89.

-40-

international law do not require a state to permit “gray market” exports of cigarettes; (3) at no
relevant time has the IEPS law, as written, afforded Mexican cigarette resellers such as CEMSA
a “right” to export cigarettes (due primarily to technical/legal requirements for invoices stating
tax amounts separately and to their status as non-taxpayers); and (4) the Claimant’s
“investment,” the exporting business known as CEMSA, as far as this Tribunal can determine,
remains under the complete control of the Claimant, in business with the apparent right to engage
in the exportation of alcoholic beverages, photographic supplies, contact lenses, powdered milk
and other Mexican products--any product that it can purchase upon receipt of invoices stating
the tax amounts-- and to receive rebates of any applicable taxes under the IEPS law. While none
of these factors alone is necessarily conclusive, in the Tribunal’s view taken together they tip the

expropriation / regulation balance away from a finding of expropriation.

H.3.1 Many Business Problems Are Not Expropriations

112. First, the Tribunal is aware that not every business problem experienced by a
foreign investor is an indirect or creeping expropriation under Article 1110, or a denial of due
process or fair and equitable treatment under Article 1110(1)(c). As the Azinian tribunal
observed, “It is a fact of life everywhere that individuals may be disappointed in their dealings
with public authorities... It may be safely assumed that many Mexican parties can be found who
had business dealings with governmental entities which were not to their satisfaction...” (Robert
Azinian and Others v. The United Mexican States, Award, November 1, 1999, para. 83, 14
ICSID Review. FILJ 2, 1999.) To paraphrase Azinian, not all government regulatory activity
that makes it difficult or impossible for an investor to carry out a particular business, change in
the law or change in the application of existing laws that makes it uneconomical to continue a
particular business, is an expropriation under Article 1110. Governments, in their exercise of
regulatory power, frequently change their laws and regulations in response to changing economic
circumstances or changing political, economic or social considerations. Those changes may well

make certain activities less profitable or even uneconomic to continue.
113. Here, it is undeniable that the Claimant has experienced great difficulties in
dealing with SHCP officials, and in some respects has been treated in a less than reasonable

manner, but that treatment under the circumstances of this case does not rise to the level of a

-41-

violation of international law under Article 1110. Unfortunately, tax authorities in most
countries do not always act in a consistent and predictable way. The IEPS law on its face
(although not necessarily as applied) is undeniably a measure of general taxation of the kind
envisaged by Restatement Comment g (see supra, paras. 105, 106). As in most tax regimes, the
tax laws are used as instruments of public policy as well as fiscal policy, and certain taxpayers

are inevitably favored, with others less favored or even disadvantaged.

114. Moreover, the Claimant could have availed himself early on of the procedures
available under Mexican law to obtain a formal, binding ruling on the invoice issue from SHCP,
but apparently chose not to do so (see prepared testimony of Fernando Heftye, paras. 7-9).
Despite the legal uncertainties of the issues upon which the success of his business depended, the
Claimant asked for clarification of the legal issues under Article 4 of the IEPS law only when
effectively forced to do so, in April 1998 after SHCP denied the Claimant’s request for tax
rebates for the October 1997 — January 1998 exports, and in March 1999 when as a result of a tax
audit SHCP demanded return of rebates, plus interest, inflation adjustment and penalties, for
rebates earlier received in 1996 and 199711. It is unclear why he refrained from seeking
clarification, but he did so at his peril, particularly given that he was dealing with tax laws and
tax authorities, which are subject to extensive formalities in Mexico and in most other countries

of the world.

H.3.2 Gray Market Exports and International Law

115. Second, NAFTA and principles of customary international law do not, in the view
of the Tribunal, require a state to permit cigarette exports by unauthorized resellers (gray market

exports). A prohibition to this effect may rely on objective reasons. Such reasons include

11 Also, although the Tribunal is aware, as indicated earlier, that the 1999 Fiscal Court
proceedings challenging SHCP’s efforts to recoup tax rebates from the Claimant are not final,
the most recent decision has upheld the Claimant’s position that the requirements of the IEPS
law for invoices stating the tax amounts separately and precluding rebates for exports to low tax
jurisdictions, are unconstitutional under Mexican law. The significance of this court decision is
somewhat offset by the fact that in a separate, 1998 proceeding challenging denials of tax rebates
from October 1997 through January 1998, which is final, another Mexican court determining
essentially the same issues found in favor of SHCP (see Amparo decision of August 24, 2000).

-42-

discouragement of smuggling (of cigarettes purportedly exported back into Mexico), which may
deprive a government of substantial amounts of tax revenue, maintenance of high cigarette taxes
to discourage smoking (as in Canada) and, as a Mexican government official has suggested,
assisting producers in complying with trademark licensing obligations under private agreements
(see statement of Ismael Gomez Gordillo, App. 6045-6054). It is undeniable, as both parties in
this proceeding have recognized, that smuggling of cigarettes is a serious problem not only for

Mexico but for many other nations.12

116. The conclusion that neither NAFTA nor rules of customary international law
require a state to permit gray market cigarette exports is to some extent reinforced by the
determination of the U.S. Competent Authority that Mexico’s action in enacting legislation
effective January 1, 1998, which restricted the availability of rebates of excise taxes to those who
purchase cigarettes in the “first sale” within Mexico (i.e., the sale from the producer to the
producer’s customer, but not any subsequent resales) was not an expropriation under Article
1110 of NAFTA. (Letter of Feb. 17, 1999 from Assistant U.S. Treasury Secretary Donald C.
Lubick to Mexican Under Secretary of Revenue Tomas Ruiz.) The effect of this 1998 IEPS
amendment had exactly the same objective as the 1991 IEPS amendment that denied resellers the
availability of the zero tax rate for their exports. (This was the 1991 IEPS amendment that was
held unconstitutional in the Amparo decision by the Mexican Supreme Court in 1993.) The U.S.
Competent Authority letter attempts to de-link the 1998 measure to the earlier measures by
stating that “No inference should be drawn concerning my views or the views of the United
States government regarding whether the first two measures described above [the alleged refusal
of Mexico to implement the Amparo decision and its refusal to provide the IEPS rebates] is an
expropriation under Article 1110 of the NAFTA,” but the comparison is inescapable. At

minimum, it suggests that tax law and policy changes are intended to be given relatively broad

12 See, e.g., Annex 6 of the Claimant’s reply memorial, providing copies of recent
newspaper reports regarding the smuggling of U.S. cigarettes to Canada and several European
countries; indications that cigarette producers in Mexico have reduced cigarette prices by 25% in
order to compete more effectively with smuggled cigarettes (transcript, July 12, 2001, p. 148);
and documentation provided by the Respondent suggesting that some cigarettes exported from
Mexico to the United States are being re-imported into Mexico from El Paso.

-43-

leeway under NAFTA, even if their effect is to make it impractical for certain business activities

to continue.

H.3.3. Continuing Requirements of Article 4(III) of IEPS Law

117. Third, in the present case, a per se government ban on reseller exports of
cigarettes (or other products) from Mexico was not in force during the entire 1990-1997 period.
The Respondent’s efforts to impose such a ban legislatively in 1990 were held unconstitutional
by the Supreme Court in a 1993 Amparo decision. In a narrow interpretation of that decision —
that it required both producers and resellers be offered the zero percent tax rate for exports, but
no more — it was legally possible for the Claimant to export cigarettes at the 0% rate if the
Claimant could meet the other requirements of the IEPS law.13 However, the Claimant was
effectively prevented from benefiting from the 0% rate, and therefore from exporting cigarettes,
unless he could also obtain a rebate of the taxes reflected (but not separately stated) in the price
that the Claimant paid to large retailers - Walmart and Sam’s — for his cigarettes. This problem
resulted from the fact that Mexican cigarette producers — particularly Cigatam, the Mexican
licensee of the Marlboro brand — refused to sell to him because they wanted to maintain an
export monopoly (according to first Feldman statement, para. 14) or perhaps for other reasons, a
refusal which was apparently within their right under Mexican law. In economic terms, it would
have been impossible for the Claimant to pay the price of the cigarettes in Mexico, including the
85% excise tax required under the IEPS law, and then sell the cigarettes in any foreign country.
(Once the foreign nation added its own excise taxes upon importation, the Mexican cigarettes

with both tax amounts included would have been priced far out of the market.)

118. In his efforts to obtain the rebates, the Claimant was stymied by a long-standing
requirement of the IEPS law, the requirement in Article 4(III) that when seeking rebates he, as

non-taxpayer, present invoices showing that the IEPS tax had been separately transferred to the

13 Technically, the Amparo appears to apply only to the IEPS law challenged, i.e.
the 1990 version. However, Article 2(III) of the law was further amended in 1992 to provide the
0% tax rate to reseller/exporters as well as producer/exporters, so long as the destination nation
was not a low tax (tax haven) jurisdiction.

taxpayer (see supra para.15). However, even assuming that the Claimant is a “taxpayer” under
this provision given the peculiarities of the tax calculation for cigarettes — and there is some
doubt as to this conclusion — he could not obtain the required invoices at any relevant time. The
Claimant could not obtain the information from the retailers who supplied his cigarettes (since
they did not know the tax amounts themselves), and the producers of the cigarettes were
unwilling to provide the information.14 Thus, it appears to the Tribunal that the Claimant never
really possessed a “right” to obtain tax rebates upon exportation of cigarettes, but only a right to
the 0% tax rate. This is important, because as far as the Tribunal can determine, the only
significant asset of the investment, the enterprise known as CEMSA, is its alleged right to
receive IEPS tax rebates upon exportation of cigarettes, and to profit from that business.15 We
also note that the Claimant concedes that “discrimination between cigarette producers and
resellers is [not] necessarily a violation of international law.” (See Claimant’s May 8, 2002
submission, para. 9.) The Claimant relies, rather, on the alleged refusal of Mexican authorities to
comply with the 1993 Amparo decision and the alleged subsequent agreement between the
Claimant and SHCP officials that the Claimant would be permitted the rebates despite the

absence of invoices stating the tax amounts separately.

119. The key contentious issue here is whether the denial of IEPS rebates for failure to
meet with the invoice requirement constituted expropriation of the Claimant’s investment (a

right to export cigarettes) under Article 1110. A related issue is the denial of tax rebates for

14 Although the tax base for the IEPS cigarette tax was the retail sale price, under the
IEPS law the party responsible for paying the tax was the producer or its controlled distributor,
not the retailer, presumably to assure that the full amount of the taxes would be paid in a
distribution system where many of the retailers were small kiosk operators who apparently were
not trusted to remit the proper tax amounts to SHCP, or to maintain records adequate to assure
SHCP that the full taxes were being paid. See IEPS Law, Article 11 (1991).

15 The record is largely devoid of any statement of CEMSA’s physical assets. The
Claimant asserts that the initial capitalization of CEMSA upon its formation in 1998 was a total
of $ 510,000 Mexican pesos, but there is no indication as to what percentage of this was paid in
capital. Feldman declaration of March 28, 2001, para. 1. Moreover, the Claimant’s claim for
compensation is based almost entirely on a calculation of lost profits and its value as a going
business [concern], plus a demand for the rebates anticipated but not paid for October -
November 1997. See memorial, para. 231.

-45-

exports allegedly made to a low tax jurisdiction (Honduras), also purportedly barred under the
TEPS law (see supra para.8). However, in determining whether the Claimant was deprived of a
“fundamental right of ownership” (the term used by the Pope & Talbot tribunal) by Mexican
government actions in the critical 1996-1997 period, it is important to observe that the invoice
requirements of the IEPS law were not new, and had not been changed by Mexican officials
(except to the extent or non-extent of enforcement ) to the detriment of the Claimant. At all
times between January 1, 1987, including April 1990, when CEMSA was first registered as an
export company, and January 1, 1998, when the new IEPS law definitively denied rebates except
for the “first sale” in Mexico, Article 4(III) of the IEPS law as written (even if not always as
applied) effectively required resellers such as CEMSA to obtain invoices stating the tax amounts
separately. Even if the 1999 Mexican Fiscal Court proceeding ultimately results in a decision
that the denial of the rebates for 1996-1997 is unconstitutional under Mexican law, this is not a
situation in which the Claimant can reasonably argue that post investment changes in the law
destroyed the Claimant’s investment, since the IEPS law at all relevant times contained the
invoice requirements. Of course, Mexico had first sought to ban such exports in 1990 by
denying the 0% tax rate to resellers, but that effort was defeated by the Supreme Court. Thus, in
retrospect, the Claimant’s most intractable problem with regard to cigarette exports was not the
0% tax rate, but the technical requirements of the IEPS law with regard to invoices and, much
later, the denial of tax rebates for exports to low tax jurisdictions, also clearly stated in the IEPS

law during all relevant periods.

120. The Claimant argues that the 1993 Amparo Supreme Court decision resolved not
only the 0% tax rate, but the invoice and taxpayer limitations in the IEPS law as well, and
contends that SHCP improperly limited the scope of that decision to the 0% tax rate. There is
language in the opinion that condemns discrimination between producers and other sellers
generally, which is not limited to the 0% tax rate. Also, there is some inherent logic behind the
Claimant’s position; if the Claimant were correct, this would be a strong argument for finding a
creeping expropriation or denial of justice. If the Amparo decision resolves only the 0% tax rate,
but the Claimant cannot satisfy the other requirements of the IEPS law, including Article 4

regarding invoices, there is no possibility of CEMSA’s benefiting from that decision with regard

-46-

to cigarette exports, as the company is still prevented from carrying on its cigarette export

business.

121. The problem for the Claimant is that a careful reading of the Amparo Supreme
Court decision reveals no mention of Article 4; the discussion is confined solely to the
availability of the 0% tax rate under Article 2 of IEPS law to resellers as well as producers, and
to a general assessment of the unconstitutionality of discrimination. For various reasons, Article
4 was not raised by the Claimant and was not discussed by the Supreme Court, even though the
issue of the 0% tax rate was specifically raised with regard to both alcoholic beverages and
cigarettes.16 There is no indication in the opinion that the Supreme Court intended to abrogate
or modify this critical provision of the IEPS law, since it apparently did not even consider the
issue, and the Tribunal has no way of guessing what the result would have been had the Article 4
issue been squarely presented to the Supreme Court. In this respect, even the Claimant admits
that the court in the Amparo case did not review the mechanics of IEPS (reply, para. 43). Rather,
as noted above, no Mexican court directly addressed these issues until the Claimant brought the

April 1998 and March 1999 challenges.

122. Moreover, the Amparo judgment limited to Article 2 (and a parallel Amparo
decision sought by another company, Lynx) were successful in protecting the Claimant’s (and
Lynx’s) rights to export alcoholic beverages, since both the Claimant and Lynx could obtain the
necessary invoices from their suppliers due to their ability to purchase alcoholic beverages
directly from the Mexican manufacturers and function as eligible taxpayers, and the different

IEPS tax structure applicable to alcoholic beverages.17 Thus, the decision had considerable

16 Several possible reasons emerged during the hearing. It was suggested that Article 4
of the IEPS law could only have been challenged within 15 days of the enactment of the
provision, which occurred in 1984 or 1985, well before CEMSA was incorporated, or tbecause at
the time the Article 4 requirements had not been applied to the Claimant (transcript, July 12,
2001, pp. 127-135, testimony of Oscar Enriquez Enriquez).

17 The IEPS applied to alcoholic beverages appears to function in a manner similar to
normal value added taxes, with each succeeding seller being treated as a taxpayer. The special
rules using the retail price as the tax base but making the producer or distributor the person

(Continued ...)

-47-

practical benefit for the Claimant at the time even without addressing or resolving the Article 4
question which the Claimant had not raised in the proceeding. In this Tribunal’s view, that court
decision did not resolve the Claimant’s problems with obtaining tax rebates on cigarette exports

because the Claimant failed to challenge Article 4 of the IEPS law.

123. The documentation and testimony regarding what transpired subsequently
between the Claimant and the Respondent concerning the IEPS requirements is unfortunately
ambiguous and often conflicting, making it difficult for this Tribunal to determine exactly what
occurred. For example, a letter was provided to the Claimant by SHCP on March 12, 1992, in
response to a written request from the Claimant — before the Amparo decision but after the 1992
changes in the IEPS law. It is unclear whether the request was treated by SHCP as a formal
ruling under Article 34 of the Fiscal Code; SHCP officials subsequently have asserted that the
letter was general and did not relate to a specific situation, and thus was not treated as a formal,
binding ruling under Article 34. (See witness statement of Jose Riquer, May 17, 2001, para. 7).
That letter refers to Article 2 of the IEPS law and Articles 22, 34 and 42 of the Fiscal Code, but
does not mention Article 4 of the IEPS law.18 However, this letter may have been issued at a
time when the invoices stating the taxes separately were not yet at issue, as the Claimant’s
statement of facts suggests (see memorial, para. 14-18, discussing the problem in the context of

denial of IEPS rebates to re-sellers).

responsible for paying the taxes for cigarettes apparently apply only to tobacco products,
gasoline and diesel fuel. See IEPS law, Article 11 (1992 and other years).

18 It states in operative part that “you are hereby confirmed your opinion in the sense
that you are entitled to request the return of the balance in your favor resulting from the crediting
of the special tax on production and services paid on the acquisition of alcoholic beverages and
processed tobacco exported as from January 1‘, 1992, provided such exports are made to
countries with an Income Tax rate applicable to legal entities exceeding 30%.” (Letter from Jose
Antonio Riquer Ramos to CEMSA, March 12, 1992, App. 0062-0069.) SHCP reserved the
rights of surveillance and verification. It is also unfortunate that neither the Claimant nor the
Respondent were able to produce a copy of the February 6, 1992, letter to which SHCP’s letter
was a response, so it is impossible for the Tribunal to know whether this response was in the
context of a letter raising the Article 4 invoice issue, or, equally likely, raising only the 0% tax
rate issue which was then before the Supreme Court.

-48-

124. Other than this 1992 letter and an even more ambiguous May 10, 1994, letter
confirming the obligation of tobacco and alcoholic beverage sellers to show the transfer of the
tax amount separately on the invoice, there are no other written communications that could
reasonably be treated as formal rulings, and none at all that specifically address the Article 4
requirement. SHCP officials state that they have been unwilling to provide written rulings to the
Claimant on the issues raised by the Claimant informally, and that only a written ruling pursuant
to Article 34 of the Fiscal Code would be binding. (See testimony of Fernando Heftye Etienne,
paras. 8-11.) Officials explain this on the not unreasonable ground that the Claimant did not
follow proper administrative procedures under Article 34 of the Fiscal Code in requesting such
determinations. Insofar as the Tribunal has been able to determine, at no time before 1998 did
the Claimant present the Article 4 issue to a Mexican court, or seek a formal, binding

administrative ruling from SHCP.

125. The Claimant also contends that, in accordance with the Claimant’s interpretation
of the Amparo decision, SHCP effectively concluded an oral agreement with the Claimant to
permit the rebates, and then refused to carry out the agreement. Such a failure, if proven, could
be evidence of a denial of due process or fair and equitable treatment, and support a conclusion
that the IEPS law was intentionally being administered in a manner designed to destroy
CEMSA’s export operations. There is considerable evidence in the record of some sort of an
informal agreement or understanding between the Claimant and SHCP in 1995, based on a
number of meetings and correspondence. The Claimant suggests that the agreement was to
provide rebates without the invoices, with the understanding that SHCP would then not have to
seek the invoices from Carlos Slim/Cigatam as may be required of SHCP by Mexican law (first
Feldman Statement, paras. 40-42). Perhaps the best evidence for some sort of understanding is
the fact that a high profile taxpayer such as the Claimant was granted the rebates for a sixteen
month period in 1996-1997, even though SHCP officials were well aware that it was impossible
for the Claimant to obtain invoices with the IEPS tax amounts separately stated. On the other
hand, given SHCP’s authority to audit rebates after the event, and the fact that it is a large

organization with various offices accepting IEPS and other tax rebate applications in significant

-49-

numbers, it is possible that the Claimant’s applications did in fact receive routine

treatment/approval.

126. Unfortunately for the Claimant, however, even if there was some sort of oral
understanding, there is little persuasive evidence as to its scope, i.e., whether it was limited to
assuring the availability of the 0% tax rate as required by the 1993 Amparo Supreme Court
decision, or whether it also authorized the Claimant to obtain rebates notwithstanding the lack of
invoices stating the tax amounts separately, or even authorized the Claimant to obtain rebate
amounts in excess of those otherwise permitted. Not only has no written document from SHCP
been made available to the Tribunal, but apparently neither the Claimant nor his counsel
prepared any contemporaneous memoranda reflecting such an agreement, despite the many

meetings with SHCP officials.

127. SHCP flatly denies the existence of an oral agreement (testimony of Fernando
Heftye Etienne, para. 3). While SHCP contends it has not violated the Amparo decision
requiring the 0% tax rate (counter-memorial, paras.112-113), it also takes position that the
decision applied only to the 1990 law, not to subsequent versions of the IEPS law, and in any
event that the law at all relevant times required the Claimant to possess invoices stating the tax
amounts separately, since SHCP had no authority to exempt the Claimant from the requirements
of Article 4(III) of the IEPS law (/d., paras. 6, 12). Thus, even if the Claimant has met his
burden of proof with regard to the existence of an oral agreement or understanding, he has not
met that burden with regard to demonstrating the precise subject matter of such an undertaking.
SHCP’s inconsistent actions (or inactions) belie any clear understanding between the Claimant

and SHCP, beyond compliance with the application of the 0% tax rate to CEMSA’s exports.

128. As noted above, a finding of expropriation here depends in significant part on
whether under the circumstances the Article 4 invoice requirements are inconsistent with the
Claimant’s rights under NAFTA Article 1110. On the basis of the evidence presented to the
Tribunal, the Tribunal is not persuaded that they are. The Article 4 invoice requirements have
been part of the IEPS law at least since 1987, that is, for at least three years before CEMSA was

first registered as an export company in 1991. Since the operation of its export business

-50-

depended substantially on the terms of the IEPS law, the Claimant was or should have been
aware at all relevant times that the separate invoice requirement existed, as there has been no de
jure change in it at any time relevant to this dispute. Equally important, the Tribunal is reluctant
to find an expropriation based largely on the failure of Mexican government officials to comply
with an agreement in which those officials allegedly waived an explicit requirement of a tax law,
even though there is some evidence, albeit contested by the Respondent, that the requirement
was de facto ignored at some times both for the Claimant and for other cigarette resellers,
including but not limited to members of the [so-called] Poblano group.19 This, however, is not
in the view of the Tribunal evidence of expropriatory action and will be dealt with below in the

section on national treatment.

129. If the IEPS law, Article 4, obligation to possess invoices stating the tax amounts
separately was simply a technical requirement of the IEPS law, the result here might be
considered formalistic and unreasonable. As noted earlier (para. 114, note 11), it is under
challenge as unconstitutional discrimination between taxpayers in Mexico, according to the still
pending 1999 Fiscal Court proceedings. However, the Tribunal does not consider the invoicing
requirements to be a mere formality or patently unreasonable, to be waived easily by officials
based on their discretion. The obvious and legitimate purpose of the requirement that the IEPS
tax amounts be stated separately on invoices to be submitted to SHCP authorities on demand as
the basis of a tax rebate is to make it possible for the tax authorities to determine in a straight-
forward manner whether the tax amounts on exported products for which a rebate is sought are
accurate and not overstated. This is clearly a rational tax policy and a reasonable legal

requirement.

19 As discussed more fully in the section of this award on discrimination, evidence in the
record suggests that there are 5-10 or more firms registered under Mexican law as cigarette
exporters. (Obregon-Castellanos testimony, transcript, July 9, 2001, p. 141). It may well be that
the requirements of Article 4 have been waived from time to time for them as well given the
practical impossibility for resellers to export without the tax rebates, although the Mexican
government has unfortunately been unwilling or unable to enlighten the Tribunal on this fact.

-51-

130. The Claimant himself is an excellent example of why this requirement is
necessary to protect the revenue. Without invoices, it was of course impossible for the Claimant
to know the precise amount of the IEPS taxes included in the selling price of the cigarettes he
purchased from Walmart or Sam’s Club, for his exports in 1996 and 1997. However, a very
close approximation of the IEPS tax amounts could have been made by the Claimant for these
years, just as it was in 1992 (see Zaga-Hadid affidavit, annex A) based on the IEPS tax rate for
cigarettes applicable in 1996 and 1997 (85%), by dividing the selling price (inclusive of tax) by
1.85 to determine the price net of taxes, and then subtracting that amount from the selling price
to determine the tax amounts. For example, if as the Claimant alleges, he paid US$7.40 per
carton for cigarettes, and the tax rate specified in the IEPS law was 85%, the tax included in the

US$7.40 price was approximately US$3.40.20

131. |The Claimant apparently used this formula in 1992, and received the rebates. He
used a somewhat different formula in 1996, which over-stated the rebate amounts.21 Then, in
1997, he used a completely different formula, which had the effect of grossly overstating the tax
amounts, US$6.55 instead of US$3.40 per carton, an overstatement of 93%.22 The Claimant
asserts that this methodology was explicitly approved by Director of Major Taxpayers Jose
Riquer Ramos (Feldman affidavit, Mar. 28, 2001, para. 70). Mr. Riquer has denied this (Riquer
statement, May 17, 2001, paras. 19-25). In the final analysis, the Tribunal does not find the
Claimant’s testimony on this issue to be credible. It is inconceivable to the Tribunal that even if

SHCP officials were prepared to forego the invoice requirement informally during some periods,

20 Using the formula 7.40 = 1.85 X, where X is the price net of tax, X = 7.40/1.85 =
4.00. (See Feldman affidavit, Mar. 28, 2001, para. 6.) The remaining amount is the tax,
US$7.40 - US$4.00 = US$3.40. See IEPS law, Article 2(1)(H).

21 Although the methodology used in 1996 is relatively obscure (see Zaga-Hadid
affidavit, annex A, exh. 3 of memorial), the result of the methodology used was to increase the
portion of the purchase price treated as IEPS taxes subject to rebates from 45.95% to 55.95% of
the purchase price.

22 He arrived at this figure by simply multiplying the price of US$7.40 by 85%, in other
words, treating 85% of the purchase price as tax amounts subject to government rebate upon
exportation. (Zaga-Hadid affidavit, annex 3; first Feldman statement, para. 70.) This increased
the tax amounts, in an unwarranted way, from 45.95% to 85% of the gross sales price.

-52-

as appears to be the case, they would have given the Claimant or any other taxpayer carte

blanche to over-estimate the amount of the rebates, in flagrant violation of the IEPS law.23

132. The Claimant also argues that notwithstanding the Respondent’s (and this
Tribunal’s) interpretation of the scope of the 1993 Amparo decision, SHCP’s actions between
1993 and 1997, particularly certain oral and written communications, were so arbitrary as to
constitute expropriatory action. The Tribunal, as noted earlier (para. 125), has some sympathy
with the Claimant’s position here. The various written and oral communications from SHCP to
the Claimant are at best ambiguous and misleading, perhaps intentionally so in some instances,
as were SHCP’s actions in permitting rebates during some periods and denying them in others.
However, a reasonable person, given the complex and exacting nature of tax laws and
regulations, and the ambiguity of statements by and correspondence with SHCP officials, should
have sought expert tax counsel if it was not already available to him. Had this occurred, the
Tribunal doubts than any competent tax attorney would have confirmed the Claimant’s right to
rebates in the absence of proper invoices showing the tax amounts separately, given the text of
Article 4 of the IEPS law and the lack of apparent legal authority on part of SHCP officials to

waive this requirement.

133. While the transparency in some of the actions of SHCP may be questioned, it is
doubtful that lack of transparency alone rises to the level of violation of NAFTA and
international law, particularly given the complexities not only of Mexican but most other tax
laws. The British Columbia Supreme Court held in its review of the Metalclad decision that
Section A of Chapter 11, which establishes the obligations of host governments to foreign
investors, nowhere mentions an obligation of transparency to such investors, and that a denial of

transparency alone thus does not constitute a violation of Chapter 11 (United Mexican States v.

23 There was considerable discussion in the testimony of the parties regarding whether
one of the Poblano Group companies, Lynx, had received excess IEPS rebates for 1991 as a
result of Lynx’s Amparo suit. (See third statement of Enrique Diaz Guzman, paras. 7-8, App.
6455-6456; declaration of Oscar Enriquez Enriquez, Jun. 8, 1991, paras. 3 bis - 14 bis.)
However, the Tribunal believes that the Claimant failed to demonstrate that the amounts received
on behalf of Lynx were excessive, once interest and an inflation factor for the five year period
between accrual and payment are factored in.

-53-

Metalclad, Supreme Court of British Columbia, Reasons for Judgment of the Honorable Mr.
Justice Tysoe, May 2, 2001, paras. 70-74, http://www.naftalaw.org.; transparency is a general
NAFTA obligation of the NAFTA Parties under Chapter 18). While this Tribunal is not required
to reach the same result as the British Columbia Supreme Court, it finds this aspect of their

decision instructive.

134. Under the circumstances, therefore, the Claimant would have been wise to seek a
formal administrative ruling on the applicability of Article 4 of the IEPS, and court review if the
ruling were adverse, far before he was forced to do so in 1998, but for whatever reason he chose
not to do so. Formal administrative procedures and the courts, according to the record, were at
all times available to him, and have not been challenged here as being inconsistent with
Mexico’s international law obligations. Moreover, in Mexico, as in the United States and most
other countries, oral or informal opinions are not binding on the tax authorities (see Article 34 of
Fiscal Code, counter-memorial, paras. 18-20). Regardless of the results of the ruling process the
Claimant would have been better off. If he had received a favorable ruling on Article 4, it would
have been much easier for him to defend his rights under Mexican law and before this Tribunal.
If he had lost, he could have at least avoided the uncertainties of his alleged right to rebates
during much of the 1992-1997 period, and could have brought a NAFTA claim under Chapter 11

much earlier.

H.3.4 Public Purpose

135. As noted earlier, in the absence of a finding of expropriation and in view of the
Restatement comments the Tribunal is reluctant to give excessive weight to the public purpose,
non-discrimination and due process criteria in Article 1110(1). However, in this instance even if
they are considered significant the Tribunal believes that they do not contradict an otherwise
negative finding. The Claimant suggests, accurately in the view of this Tribunal, that Mexican
government policy is designed to prevent cigarette resellers including CEMSA from exporting
cigarettes from Mexico to other countries. He attributes this to political pressures from Carlos
Slim, a major owner of Mexico’s largest cigarette producer, Cigatam. He alleges that this policy

is in conflict with normal Mexican policies that promote exports, and cites such policies as

-54-

evidence that the restrictions do not have a valid public purpose (see memorial, paras. 31, 188,

189).

136. | However, the Tribunal has already indicated its view that there are rational public
purposes for this policy. These include, inter alia, discouraging “grey” market exports and
seeking to control illegal re-exportation of Mexican cigarettes into Mexico. There is ample
evidence on the record to suggest that cigarette smuggling is a significant problem for Mexico,
even if that evidence does not effectively link the Claimant with the illegal imports.24 It may be
that Mexican authorities feel they have greater control over cigarette producers who export (or
that such producers are constrained by licensing agreements, such as the one that presumably
exists between Philip Morris of the United States and Cigatam, the Marlboro producer, in
Mexico), than they do over independent resellers. Also, as noted above, there are valid public
policy reasons for requiring invoices that separately state the IEPS tax amounts as a condition of

receiving the refunds, i.e., to prevent inaccurate or excessive claims for rebates.25

H.3.5 Non-Discrimination

137. |The Chapter 11 scheme establishes a right to national treatment for investors (and
damages for breach thereof) that is distinct from the right to damages from acts of

expropriation.26 In this respect, the Tribunal notes that the S.D. Myers tribunal, having weighed

24 Respondent made an extensive effort in its briefs and during the hearing to document
a series of export transactions by the Claimant, and to link those exports with re-entry of the
cigarettes into Mexico. While Respondent was unable to demonstrate that the Claimant was
aware of any such illegal practices, or that any of the cigarettes the Claimant exported were re-
entered into Mexico, Respondent did demonstrate evidence of a serious problem. Counter-
memorial, pp. 104-116, and transcript, July 12, 2001, pp. 148 ff.

25 See supra, paras. 130, 131, and Respondent’s exhibits for cross-examination of the
Claimant, Vol. II, tab 6.

26 Moreover, under international law, there is considerable doubt whether the
discrimination provision of Article 1110 covers discrimination other than that between nationals
and foreign investors, i.e., it is not applicable to discrimination among different classes of
investors, such as between producers and resellers of tobacco products, at least unless all
producers are nationals and all resellers are aliens. Thus, under the Restatement, the relevant
comment states that “a program of taking that singles out aliens generally, or aliens of a

(Continued ...)

-55-

the allegations of expropriation and finding no violation of Article 1110, nevertheless found
Canada in violation of its obligations under Article 1102 and Article 1105 (S.D. Myers v.
Government of Canada, Partial Award, November 13, 2000, paras. 256, 268,
http://www state.gov/documents/organization/3992.pdf ), violations that also constituted discrimination
under Article 1110(1)(b) and denial of fair and equitable treatment under Article 1110(1)(c).

This issue is examined below: see the section I on Article 1102.

H.3.6 Due Process/Fair and Equitable Treatment/Denial of Justice

138. | Regarding the possible claim of a denial of due process or a denial of justice, the
Tribunal notes that the Claimant actually alleges a denial of justice primarily with regard to
SHCP’s failure — the failure of the Executive Branch — to implement the 1993 Amparo decision
(memorial, p. 8). The Claimant only suggests in passing that the nullification decision of the
circuit court may rely on a provision of the 1998 IEPS law to deny rebates that the Claimant
sought for 1997 (reply, p. 16). In April 1998, the Claimant was effectively forced to seek
“injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary relief’ before the Mexican Fiscal Court, as
permitted under Article 1121. In that first case, CEMSA sought a declaratory judgment
confirming CEMSA’s right to receive tax rebates. This was necessary because of a
determination of the tax authorities that CEMSA was not entitled to the rebates for exports made
in October-November 1997, since CEMSA could not present invoices that complied with the
Article 4 requirement that the IEPS tax amounts be stated separately, and was not a taxpayer
entitled to claim IEPS rebates under Article 11 (the latter applied only to the situation under the
amended IEPS law effective January 1, 1998). In that action the Mexican courts ultimately
decided, inter alia, that CEMSA was subject to the invoice requirements of Article 4 (proceeding

related to the negative response to a request presented to the tax authority referred above in

particular nationality, or particular aliens, would violate international law.” The comment does
not refer to discrimination between national producers and resellers (whether national or foreign)
operating under somewhat different circumstances, particularly under the tax laws. Also, there is
an implication in the NAFTA Parties’ interpretation of Article 1105 of July 31, 2001, that a
breach of one substantive provision of Section A should not in itself be considered a breach of a
separate provision (NAFTA Free Trade Commission, Notes of Interpretation of Certain Chapter
11 Provisions, July 31, 2001, consulted on the web site of the Department of Foreign Affairs and
International Trade of the Government of Canada. See NAFTA Articles 1131(2) and 2001).

-56-

paragraph 84). The Tribunal notes that this decision is in obvious conflict with the Claimant’s
interpretation of the 1993 Amparo decision as guaranteeing the Claimant’s right to obtain IEPS
rebates notwithstanding the Article 4 invoice requirement. In a separate action challenging
SHCP’s decision to audit CEMSA and ultimately to demand return of the rebate amounts paid to
CEMSA between April 1996 and September 1997, discussed supra at paras. 82-83, the issue of
whether the invoice requirements under Article 4 of the IEPS law are legal under Mexican law

and the Mexican constitution remains pending.

139. Assuming that Article 1110 must be interpreted in accordance with international
law, as Article 1131(1) states, not just any denial of due process or of fair and equitable
treatment (the latter through the cross-reference in Article 1110(1)(c) to Article 1105) constitutes
a violation of international law. In this instance, the allegations of denial of due process or
denial of justice are weakened by several factors. Here, as in Azinian, the Claimant does not
effectively contend that there was a denial of justice by Mexican courts, either with regard to the
Supreme Court’s Amparo decision or the various lower courts’ subsequent determinations in the
nullification and assessment cases. Rather, in the instant case the Claimant’s assertions of denial
of justice relate to actions of SHCP rather than the courts. (See Claimant’s May 8, 2002
submission, para. 9, stating that “the Claimant maintains that Respondent’s insistence on such
discrimination [between producers and exporters] in disregard of both the Supreme Court
decision and the agreement Mexican officials made with the Claimant in 1995-96 constitutes
discrimination and denial of justice under international law.”) Azinian states that “A
governmental authority surely cannot be faulted for acting in a manner validated by its own
courts unless the courts themselves are disavowed at the international level.” Azinian further
suggests that there must be a showing that the court decision itself is a violation of NAFTA, or
that the relevant courts have not accepted the suit, or there is “a clear and malicious
misapplication of the law” (Robert Azinian and Others v. The United Mexican States, Award,

November 1, 1999, paras. 97, 102, 103, 14 ICSID Review. FILJ 2, 1999.).

-57-

140. This is a standard that the nullity and assessment decisions almost certainly do not
meet.27 Given as noted earlier that Mexican courts and administrative procedures at all relevant
times have been open to the Claimant, the Claimant’s victory in the 1993 Amparo decision, and
the availability of court review in the nullity and assessment decisions filed by the Claimant in
1998, there appears to have been no denial of due process or denial of justice there as would rise
to the level of a violation of international law. As the Respondent concedes, this Tribunal could
find a NAFTA violation even if Mexican courts uphold Mexican law (counter-memorial, para.
364); this Tribunal is not bound by a decision of a local court if that decision violates
international law. Also, as discussed in Section G2, NAFTA does not require a claimant to
exhaust local court remedies before submitting a claim to arbitration. The Claimant is limited

only by the requirements of Article 1121(2)(b).

141. | While there may be an argument for a violation of Article 1105 under the facts
of this case (a denial of fair and equitable treatment), this Tribunal has no jurisdiction to decide
that issue directly. As noted earlier, Article 1105 is not available in tax cases, but may be
relevant in the cross-reference of Article 1110(1)(c). The Tribunal does not need to decide
whether this cross-reference makes a full Article 1105 consideration appropriate in a tax matter.
Even assuming, arguendo, that the Respondents’ actions in the aggregate do constitute a denial
of fair and equitable treatment that reaches the relatively egregious level of a violation of
international law, this alone does not establish the existence of an illegal expropriation under
Article 1110. As S.D. Myers indicates, it may be appropriate for a NAFTA tribunal to find a

violation of Article 1105 and at the same time decline to find a violation of Article 1110(1)(c).

H.3.7 The Claimant in Control of CEMSA

142. Although the Tribunal does not consider this a controlling argument, the

regulatory action has not deprived the Claimant of control of his company, CEMSA, interfered

27 Moreover, the Mexican courts have been deciding issues of national law which it is
inappropriate for the Tribunal to review, except and unless those determinations (or of Mexican
administrative agencies such as SHCP) are themselves denials of justice or otherwise in violation
of NAFTA or international law.

-58-

directly in the internal operations of CEMSA or displaced the Claimant as the controlling
shareholder. The Claimant is free to pursue other continuing lines of business activity, such as
exporting alcoholic beverages or photographic supplies, as in the past, or other products for
which he can obtain from Mexico the invoices required under Article 4. Of course, he was
effectively precluded from exporting cigarettes, certainly by the IEPS law amendments, that
went into force in 1998 making the IEPS rebates available only to producers, and in the
Tribunal’s view by the invoice requirements of Article 4(III), which were stated requirements of
Mexican law at least since 1987, and did not change at any relevant time subsequently.

However, this does not amount to Claimant’s deprivation of control of his company.

H.3.8 Other NAFTA Decisions

143. The Tribunal’s conclusion that the actions by the Mexican government against the
Claimant — even though in some instances inconsistent, and arbitrary — should not be treated as
expropriatory, is in the Tribunal’s view consistent with earlier NAFTA Chapter 11 decisions that
have sought to interpret Article 1110, including not only Metalclad, Azinian and S.D. Myers,

discussed above, but also Pope & Talbot.

144. Metalclad v. United Mexican States is the only NAFTA decision to date in which
a violation of Article 1110 has been found. Metalclad was granted a federal government permit
for a hazardous waste disposal facility in January 1993, and began construction shortly
thereafter. However, despite early support, opposition arose from the state and municipal
governments, apparently because of the usual “NIMBY” (not in my back yard) concerns. Work
on the new facility, which included a clean up of the residues left by the previous operators, was
completed in March 1995, but opposition from local interests intensified, despite efforts of

Metalclad and the federal government to satisfy them.28

28 See Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, Award, August 30, 2000, paras.

1, 32, 38, 40, 45-46, 16 ICSID Review. FILJ 1, 2001. Metalclad and Mexican federal
environmental authorities entered into an agreement in which Metalclad agreed, inter alia, to
make certain modifications in the site, take specified conservation steps, recognize the
participation of a Technical Scientific Committee and a Citizen Supervision Committee, employ
(Continued ...)

-59-

145. Ultimately, the municipality denied Metalclad’s construction permit, in a process
which was closed to Metalclad, and the governor of San Luis Potosi issued an “Ecological
Decree” declaring the area of the landfill to be a “Natural Area for the protection of rare cactus”
(see Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, Award, August 30, 2000, paras. 50, 54,
57, 59-60, 16 ICSID Review. FILJ 1, 2001). Based on these actions, the Metalclad Tribunal
opined that Article 1110,

includes not only open, deliberate and acknowledged takings of
property... but also covert or incidental interference with the use of
property which has the effect of depriving the owner, in whole or
in significant part, of the use or reasonably-to-be-expected
economic benefit of the property even if not necessarily to the
obvious benefit of the host state. (Id, para. 103.)

146. The tribunal, in reaching its finding of indirect expropriation, not only cited
“reasonably-to-be-expected economic benefit,” but found it important that Metalclad had relied
on the representations of the Mexican federal government of its exclusive authority to issue
permits for hazardous waste disposal facilities. It also faulted the lack of transparency in the
Mexican legal system for siting of hazardous waste facilities. Separately, without much
discussion, the Tribunal found that the state government’s decree fixing Metalclad’s site as an
“ecological preserve” effectively barring the landfill operation permanently, was a “further

ground for a finding of expropriation.” 29

147. The Metalclad Tribunal’s finding of an expropriation based on transparency and,

implicitly, on reliance by the Claimant, was effectively vacated by the British Columbia

local manual labor, and make regular contributions toward the social welfare of the municipality,
including limited free medical advice. Id., para. 48.

29 This is rather strangely characterized as an act “tantamount to expropriation,”
although it probably was more accurately described as a direct expropriation. Jd. paras. 109-111.
Ultimately, the tribunal awarded Metalclad compensation of US$16,685,000 for the loss of its
investment in Mexico (more than US$90 million in damages was sought) based on violations of
NAFTA Articles 1105 (fair and equitable treatment) and 1110 (expropriation). See Metalclad,
Id., paras. 76-92, 103-105, 123-125, 128, 131.

-60-

Supreme Court (British Columbia was the “seat” of the arbitration), responding to a challenge by
the Government of Mexico. However, the tribunal’s determination that the Mexican state’s
decision to make Metalclad’s site into an ecological preserve was expropriatory was confirmed
by the British Columbia Court. (United Mexican States v. Metalclad, Supreme Court of British
Columbia, Reasons for Judgment of the Honorable Mr. Justice Tysoe, May 2, 2001, para. 84,

http://www.naftalaw.org.)

148. The facts, and the reasonableness of the Claimant’s reliance in Metalclad, are thus
quite different from the instant case. The assurances received by the investor from the Mexican
government in Metalclad were definitive, unambiguous and repeated, in stating that the federal
government had the authority to authorize construction and operation of hazardous waste
landfills, and that Metalclad had obtained all necessary federal and other permits for the facility.
(See ibid., paras. 28-41.) Nor is there any indication that the assurances received by Metalclad,
despite some ambiguities, were inconsistent with Mexican law on its face. Finally, Metalclad
was deprived of all beneficial use of its property, which was incorporated into an ”ecological

preserve.”

149. In contrast, in the present case, the Mexican government essentially opposed the
Claimant’s business activities at every step of the way, notwithstanding a few periods when the
rebates were granted. Also, in the present case the assurances allegedly relied on by the
Claimant (which assurances are disputed by Mexico) were at best ambiguous and largely
informal (since the Claimant never sought a formal written tax ruling on the Article 4 issue, or
litigated the issue until 1998). They were also in direct conflict with Article 4(III) of Mexico’s
IEPS law requiring the possession of invoices stating the taxes separately as a condition of

receiving tax rebates.30

30 Here, as in Metalclad, there was without doubt a lack of transparency with regard to
some actions by Mexican government officials. Yet, if the British Columbia Supreme Court is
correct that lack of transparency is not in itself a violation of Chapter 11 of NAFTA, the fact that
SHCP communications and other actions after the 1993 Amparo decision were inconsistent and
ambiguous, and difficult for the Claimant to assess, are insufficient to justify a finding of
expropriation under Article 1110.

-61-

150. | S.D. Myers v. Canada involved a government action barring exports (hazardous
waste). There, the tribunal noted that expropriation normally constitutes a taking of “property”
with a view toward transfer of ownership,31 a situation that did not occur in that case or in this
one. No expropriation was found in S.D. Myers, although the Tribunal did find violations of

Articles 1102, 1105 and 1106 (see paras. 123, 256, 280, 284).

151. Somewhat different issues arise in comparison with Pope & Talbot which again
focused on the alleged denial of a right to export, in this instance, softwood lumber.32 The Pope
& Talbot Tribunal had opined (in what would be considered dicta in the US legal system) that
regulatory measures could constitute expropriation under Article 1110, and found that the lumber
export control regime came within Article 1110. However, it also noted that the investor was
able to continue to export and to earn profit on those exports, and declined to find a violation of
Article 1110, based on this consideration and on the ground that the investor “remains in control
of the Investment, it directs the day-to-day operations of the Investment, and no officers or
employees of the Investment have been detained.... Canada does not...take any other actions
outing the Investor from full ownership and control of his investment.” The Tribunal suggested
further that in determining “whether a particular interference with business activities amounts to
an expropriation, the test is whether that interference is sufficiently restrictive to support a

conclusion that the property has been ‘taken’ from its owner.” ( ibid., paras. 100, 102.)

31 S.D. Myers v. Government of Canada , Partial Award, November 13, 2000, para. 280,
http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/3992.pdf .

32 The Claimant had argued that the Canadian lumber export control regime had
“deprived the Investment of its ordinary ability to alienate its product to its traditional and
natural market,” and that by reducing the claimant’s quota of lumber that could be exported to
the United States without paying a fee, Canada violated Article 1110. Pope & Talbot v.
Government of Canada, Interim Award, June 26, 2000, para. 81,
http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/3989.pdf .

-62-

152. | Given that the Claimant here has lost the effective ability to export cigarettes, and
any profits derived therefrom33, application of the Pope & Talbot standard might suggest the
possibility of an expropriation. However, as with S.D. Myers, it may be questioned as to whether
the Claimant ever possessed a “right” to export that has been “taken” by the Mexican
government. Also, here, as in Pope & Talbot, the regulatory action (enforcement of long-
standing provisions of Mexican law) has not deprived the Claimant of control of the investment,
CEMSA, interfered directly in the internal operations of CEMSA or displaced the Claimant as
the controlling shareholder. The Claimant is free to pursue other continuing lines of export
trading, such as exporting alcoholic beverages, photographic supplies, or other products for
which he can obtain from Mexico the invoices required under Article 4, although he is
effectively precluded from exporting cigarettes. Thus, this Tribunal believes there has been no

“taking” under this standard articulated in Pope & Talbot, in the present case.

153. On the factual basis set out in the record, and this analysis, the Tribunal holds that
the actions of Mexico with regard to the Claimant’s investment do not constitute an

expropriation under Article 1110 of NAFTA.

I NATIONAL TREATMENT (NAFTA ARTICLE 1102)

154. In the present case, there are only a handful of relevant investors, one foreign (the
Claimant) and one domestic (the Poblano-Guemes Group), each engaged in the business of
purchasing Mexican cigarettes and marketing those cigarettes abroad. These investors cannot
purchase the cigarettes from Mexican cigarette producers because the producers (and their
wholly owned distributors) refuse to sell to them. Therefore, the Claimant or the Poblano Group
firms must purchase their cigarettes from volume retailers, Walmart and Sam’s Club. Since
‘Walmart and Sam’s Club are retailers and not IEPS taxpayers, they do not have available to them
the precise amounts of the IEPS taxes included in the price paid first by the retailers in the
transaction with the producers or distributors, and then by the Claimant and other

reseller/exporters. Accordingly, neither the Claimant nor the Poblano Group companies can

33 For a discussion of the profitability of the Claimant’s cigarette exporting business (or
lack thereof), see Section J, infra.

-63-

comply with the requirement of the IEPS law, Article 4(III), which makes it a condition of
obtaining tax rebates upon export that the applicant be a taxpayer who possesses invoices

showing the tax amount stated separately.

1.1 Views of the Disputing Parties

155. The essence of the Claimant’s denial of national treatment argument is that
Mexico discriminated against CEMSA in the 1998-2000 period. During that period, SHCP
permitted at least three resellers of cigarettes (Mercados Regionales and Mercados Extranjeros —
respectively Mercados I and Mercados II: the Poblano Group, and MEXCOBASA, ownership
unknown) and possibly some others, to export cigarettes and to receive rebates, notwithstanding
the fact that like the Claimant, they purchased their goods from retailers, are not formally
taxpayers and thus could not have invoices stating the IEPS tax amounts separately (memorial,
paras. 128-135, 225). The Claimant also objects to similar discriminatory treatment in the 1996 -
1997 period. The Claimant reports that the Respondent admits paying NP$ 91,000,000 to three
cigarette exporter/trading companies after September 1996, a period when the Claimant was
either denied rebates or an effort was made by SHCP to recoup rebate amounts originally granted

(memorial, para. 134).

156. In addition, the Claimant’s firm, CEMSA, was denied registration as an export
trading company, while no similar denial occurred with regard to the members of the Poblano
Group. There is no persuasive evidence that SHCP has made any parallel effort to recoup the
rebates paid to the members of the Poblano Group during the relevant periods. Thus, according
to the Claimant, CEMSA and the members of the Poblano group have been treated differently,
and “there is a NAFTA violation under the ordinary meaning of the words used in Article 1102”

(reply, para. 12).

157. The Claimant also argues that discrimination under Article 1102 is actionable
whether it is de jure or de facto. In this case, even though the IEPS law is non-discriminatory on
its face, it has been applied in a discriminatory manner. Nor is there any need to demonstrate

that the reason for the discrimination is a result of the Claimant’s nationality, if in fact the

-64-

Claimant is being treated less favorably than a domestic investor in like circumstances

(memorial, paras. 224-226).

158. The Respondent counters that the known domestic investors in the business of
reselling/exporting cigarettes, the “Poblano-Gamez-Guemes network companies” were in fact
related to CEMSA rather than competitors (counter-memorial, paras. 487-500). The Respondent
asserts that the evidence shows that there were not really distinct entities, CEMSA and the
Poblano Group. Rather, CEMSA and the Poblano Group companies were effectively part of the
same corporate group, even if there was no common ownership of shares. They sold goods to
each other; Poblano group members loaned money under favorable terms to CEMSA; and they
engaged in a range of financial and business dealings which were not arms-length in nature. As
a legal matter there cannot be discrimination under Article 1102 unless there exists a foreign
investor and an unrelated domestic investor who are treated differently. If the foreign investor
and the domestic firms in like circumstances are really one and the same, there can be no

discrimination as between Mexican and foreign investors.

159. The Respondent also argues that there is no de jure discrimination in the IEPS
law, in the sense that the law by its terms treats all re-sellers in the same manner. Also, because
of the manner in which the law operates Mexican authorities do not know until after the fact who
is seeking rebates on cigarettes and therefore, there can be no de facto discrimination (counter-
memorial, paras. 501-504). It was SHCP’s policy to deny IEPS rebates to all cigarette
reseller/exporters who lacked the requisite invoices, regardless of nationality (counter-memorial,
para. 505). The Respondent has demonstrated that all resellers are being audited and will be
assessed if there is evidence that they did not have the proper invoices (Diaz Guzman first and

second statements, rejoinder, para. 184).

160. According to the Respondent, notwithstanding the fact that CEMSA is arguing de
facto discrimination, because CEMSA cannot show de jure discrimination, it would be highly
inappropriate for the Tribunal to find a violation of national treatment based on the failure of
SHCP to provide a benefit which they had no authority under Mexican law to provide. Under

Article 4(III) of the IEPS law, SHCP has no authority to provide IEPS rebates to persons

-65-

claiming such rebates unless those claimants have invoices showing the tax amounts stated
separately. Thus, a SHCP official would be acting ultra vires if he agreed that CEMSA could
apply for and receive IEPS rebates without regard to the amounts or whether the correct formula
for calculating the rebates was used by CEMSA. Moreover, the fact that the overstatement of the
rebate amounts by CEMSA was discovered only after an audit reinforces the reasonableness of
Mexican legislation (Article 4 of the IEPS law) which requires a taxpayer to have invoices with

the correct tax amounts stated therein as a condition of receiving the rebates.

161. Thus, according to the Respondent, there is simply no indication of discrimination
between foreign investors and domestic investors in this instance. Evidence on the record
indicates that the Poblano group, like CEMSA, even if unrelated, is also being audited with
regard to irregularities in tax payments. SHCP conducts hundreds or thousands of audits each
year and the fact that it audits one company (which happens to be foreign) sooner than it audits a
company in like circumstances (which happens to be domestic) is not in itself evidence of
discrimination. Administrative agencies must receive some latitude in carrying out their duties,

as the tribunals in Pope & Talbot v. Canada and S.D. Myers v. Canada have stated.

162. According to Mexico, denial of CEMSA’s registration as an export trading
company — a separate but related issue — was not a denial of national treatment, because in this
instance CEMSA and the Poblano Group were not in like circumstances. CEMSA was at the
time under audit and SHCP had discovered discrepancies in the amounts of the IEPS rebates
sought for 1996 and 1997. The Poblano Group was not at that time under audit. Thus, it was
reasonable for SHCP to deny export registration to CEMSA until the irregularities discovered in

the audit had been resolved.

163. | Assuming, arguendo, that there is different treatment, Mexico argues that it is not
sufficient under Article 1102 just to show different treatment for there to be a violation of Article
1102. Rather, any discrimination shown between the Claimant and domestically owned cigarette
seller/exporters must be shown to be a result of the fact that the Claimant is a foreign national.

(rejoinder, para. 174; see transcript, July 10, 2002, pp. 107-109.)

-66-

164. Neither Canada nor the United States has exercised its right under Article 1128 to
express views on the proper interpretation of Article 1102 in its Article 1128 submission, and the

Tribunal for that reason is left to consider only the views of the Claimant and Mexico.34

1.2 Analysis by the Tribunal

165. The national treatment/non-discrimination provision is a fundamental obligation
of Chapter 11.35 The concept is not new with NAFTA. Analogous language in Article III of the
GATT has applied as between Canada and the United States since 1947, and with Mexico since
1985, with regard to trade in goods. Article 1602 of the United States - Canada Free Trade
Agreement, with regard to investment, applied between those two NAFTA Parties from 1989-
1993. NAFTA’s Article 1102(2) provides that

“Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party treatment no less favorable
than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments of its own investors with respect to the
establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other
disposition of investments.”

(Article 1102(1) is the same except that it refers to “investors” rather than to “investments of
investors;” under Article 1102(3), the obligation applies to state/provincial governments as well,
but this is not relevant here.)

166. Despite its deceptively simple language, the interpretative hurdles for Article
1102 are several. They include (a) which domestic investors, if any, are in “like circumstances”
with the foreign investor; (b) whether there has been discrimination against foreign investors,

either de jure or de facto; (c) the extent to which differential treatment must be demonstrated to

34 Mexico has provided excerpts from United States submissions in other cases, which
imply that there must be a showing that the reason for differential treatment is nationality. See,
e.8., US. Submission of April 7, 2000, in Pope & Talbot,
http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/4097.pdf. However, such statements were made in
the context of cases with different fact situations and, possibly, legal and policy considerations.
Under those circumstances, this Tribunal chooses not to consider them.

35 See Daniel M. Price & P. Brian Christy, An Overview of the NAFTA Investment

Chapter, in The North American Free Trade Agreement: A New Frontier in International Trade
and Investment in the Americas 165, 174 (Judith H. Bello, Allan F. Holmer & Joseph J. Norton,
eds., 1994).

-67-

be a result of the foreign investor’s nationality; and (d) whether a foreign investor must receive

the most favorable treatment given to any domestic investor or to just some of them.36

167. Analysis of these issues in the present case is complicated by the fact that only a
limited amount of relevant factual information has been presented to the Tribunal, particularly
with regard to the various domestic companies which may be in the business of reselling and
exporting cigarettes from Mexico, and the treatment by SHCP of those resellers other than the
Claimant. Neither party suggests that there are any foreign owned reseller/exporters other than
the Claimant. One of the Respondent’s witnesses indicated under questioning that there might
be 5-10 or more other firms registered in Mexico for exporting cigarettes. There is agreement
between the parties that there is at least one Mexican owned reseller/exporter, the so-called
“Poblano Group,” consisting of Mercados Regionales and Mercados Extranjeros (“Mercados I”
and “Mercados II’) and possibly other entities. A third company, MEXCOBASA, was
mentioned by the Claimant but the ownership is not indicated in the record (first Feldman
statement, para. 94). A Mexican official, Enrique Diaz Guzman, has confirmed that at least three
trading companies (i.e., not producers) received IEPS rebates for cigarette exports at various
times between September 1996 and May 2000, in the total amount of approximately NP$
91,000,000 (first Diaz Guzman statement, App. 0506, 0515). Many of those rebates were
authorized and paid after January 1, 1998, when amendments to the IEPS law effectively made
the 0% tax rate and IEPS rebates on cigarette exports legally unavailable to anyone other than
producers (by limiting the payment of the tax rebates to the first sale) (1998 IEPS law, Article
11).

168. There is disagreement as to how these trading companies (presumably the

Poblano Group companies) were treated in comparison to the Claimant, that is, whether the

36 The issue of whether the size of the “universe” of foreign investors, and of domestic
investors, matters has been an issue in other NAFTA Chapter 11 cases, including S.D. Myers
(see S.D. Myers v. Government of Canada , Partial Award, November 13, 2000, paras. 93, 112,
256, http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/3992.pdf) and particularly in Pope & Talbot (see
Pope & Talbot v. Government of Canada, Interim Award, June 26, 2000, paras. 11, 24, 36, 38,
http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/3989.pdf). However, the Respondent here has not
raised that issue, and the Tribunal accordingly does not address it (see infra paras. 185, 186).

-68-

Poblano Group was provided IEPS tax rebates denied during some periods to the Claimant,
notwithstanding the same lack of invoices stating the tax amounts separately, as required by
Article 4 and, after January 1, 1998, notwithstanding the bar to rebates except on the first sale.
There is also a lack of detailed information as to whether SHCP has made effective efforts to
recoup the rebates provided to the Poblano Group for the 1996-1997 period, as it has with
respect to the Claimant, or for IEPS payments made in 1998 to 2000. On the grounds that there
is an ongoing audit of Caesar Poblano, the principal owner of the Poblano Group companies,
SHCP has declined to provide any detailed information on the treatment of the Poblano Group
and how that treatment compares to treatment by SHCP of the Claimant. One of SHCP’s
witnesses, Mr. Diaz Guzman, did, however, state that only one of the three trading companies he
identified was in the process of audit (as of March 2001), so presumably there are two others

which have not been audited, despite being in like circumstances with the Claimant.

169. Also, given that this is a case of likely de facto discrimination, it does not matter
for purposes of Article 1102 whether in fact Mexican law authorizes SHCP to provide IEPS
rebates to persons who are not formally IEPS taxpayers and do not have invoices setting out the
tax amounts separately, as has been required by the IEPS law consistently since at least 1987 and
perhaps earlier. The question, rather, is whether rebates have in fact been provided for
domestically owned cigarette exporters while denied to a foreign re-seller, CEMSA. Mexico is
of course entitled to strictly enforce its laws, but it must do so in a non-discriminatory manner, as
between foreign investors and domestic investors. Thus, if the IEPS Article 4 invoice
requirement is ignored or waived for domestic cigarette reseller/exporters, but not for foreign
owned cigarette reseller/exporters, that de facto difference in treatment is sufficient to establish a

denial of national treatment under Article 1102.

1.2.1 In Like Circumstances

170. In the investment context, the concept of discrimination has been defined to imply
unreasonable distinctions between foreign and domestic investors in like circumstances
(Restatement, Sec. 712, Comment f). As discussed in the Article 1110 section (supra, paras.
115, 129), there are at least some rational bases for treating producers and re-sellers differently,

e.g., better control over tax revenues, discourage smuggling, protect intellectual property rights,

-69-

and prohibit gray market sales, even if some of these may be anti-competitive.37 Thus, as
discussed in the expropriation section, the Tribunal does not believe that such producer - reseller

discrimination is a violation of international law.

171. In this instance, the disputing parties agree that CEMSA is in “like
circumstances” with Mexican owned resellers of cigarettes for export, including the two
members of the Poblano Group, Mercados Regionales and Mercados Extranjeros (see memorial,
para. 222; counter-memorial, para. 486), although Mexico of course denies that there has been
any discrimination largely on the ground that CEMSA and the Poblano Group are effectively the
same entity. In the Tribunal’s view, the “universe” of firms in like circumstances are those
foreign-owned and domestic-owned firms that are in the business of reselling/exporting
cigarettes. Other Mexican firms that may also export cigarettes, such as Mexican cigarette
producers, are not in like circumstances. While the Claimant’s Amparo decision held
discrimination between producers and resellers of alcohol and tobacco products (at least as to the
availability of the 0% tax rate for exported goods) to be unconstitutional, such discrimination is
effectively reinstated by the 1998 IEPS law that limits IEPS tax rebates to the first sale,
excluding any subsequent purchaser/exporter from the benefit, and has effectively been upheld in
the other litigation brought by the Claimant in 1998, also discussed earlier. The Tribunal also
notes that Article 1102 says nothing regarding discrimination among different classes of a

Party’s own investors.

172. Accordingly, the Tribunal holds that the companies which are in like
circumstances, domestic and foreign, are the trading companies, those in the business of
purchasing Mexican cigarettes for export, which for purposes of this case are CEMSA and the

corporate members of the Poblano Group.

37 With minor exceptions, NAFTA does not regulate the creation and maintenance of
monopolies. “Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent a Party from designating
a monopoly.” Article 1502(1). Thus, affording cigarette producers a monopoly on exports
would not appear to be an article 1102 violation, as long as all non-producers, both domestic and
foreign, are treated in the same manner.

-70-

1.2.2 Existence of Discrimination

173. The limited facts made available to the Tribunal demonstrate on balance to a
majority of the Tribunal that CEMSA has been treated in a less favorable manner than
domestically owned reseller/exporters of cigarettes, a de facto discrimination by SHCP, which is
inconsistent with Mexico’s obligations under Article 1102. The only confirmed cigarette
exporters on the limited record before the tribunal are CEMSA, owned by U.S. citizen Marvin
Roy Feldman Karpa, and the Mexican corporate members of the Poblano Group, Mercados I and
Mercados II. According to the available evidence, CEMSA was denied the rebates for October-
November 1997 and subsequently; SHCP also demanded that CEMSA repay rebate amounts
initially allowed from June 1996 through September 1997. Thus, CEMSA was denied IEPS
rebates during periods when members of the Poblano Group were receiving them (see supra

para. 167, memorial, p. 3).

174. Even if Mexico is auditing Mr. Poblano, the process was begun long after the
audit of CEMSA, and according to the files provided to the Tribunal concerning this audit, there
is no documentation that the audit continued after approximately March 2000, or that it even
involved IEPS rebates (transcript, July 11, 2001, p. 2). CEMSA’s rebates (before and after
audits) have already been denied, and several years later no such action has been taken with
regard to the Poblano Group. Arguably, the fact that CEMSA has been audited well before any
other domestic reseller/exporters is in itself evidence of discrimination, even if SHCP is legally
authorized to audit all taxpayers. If Mexican authorities are auditing or intend to audit other
taxpayers who are in like circumstances with CEMSA, the Government of Mexico, as the only
party with access to such information, has not been particularly forthcoming in presenting the
necessary evidence. The two files presented to the Tribunal during the hearing (designated nos.
328 and 333) are incomplete, indicating no final or even continuing audit action (transcript, July
11, 2001, p. 2). The only clear knowledge that Mr. Poblano is subject to some sort of audit was
supplied by the Claimant (first Feldman affidavit, para. 92), and counsel for the Claimant asserts
that the evidence in the record demonstrates only that Mr. Poblano is subject to a personal audit
for 1997 (transcript, July 13, 2001, p. 155). The Mexican Government has declined to provide
any specific information as to the number of other possible taxpayers in like circumstances

(resellers). The government’s witness, Mr. Obregon-Castellanos, admitted that there were more

-71-

than five, and likely more than ten firms registered as cigarette exporters (transcript, July 9,
2001, p.141), but was evasive with regard to tobacco exporter numbers even though he testified
confidently and explicitly that there were 400 registered exporters of alcoholic beverages

(transcript, July 11, 2001, p. 10).

175. The evidence also shows that CEMSA was denied registration as an export
trading company, apparently in part because this action was filed, and in part as a result of the
ongoing audit of the rebates for exports during 1996 and 1997, even though, as Mr. Diaz
Guzman indicated, three other cigarette export trading companies had been granted registration.
An unsigned memorandum which reasonably could have been generated only in SHCP indicates
that registration was being denied on the basis of the audit of the Claimant’s rebate payments.
There is no evidence that any domestic reseller/exporter has been denied export privileges in this
manner. Moreover, there appears to have been differential treatment between CEMSA and Mr.
Poblano with regard to registration issues as well. According to the Claimant’s witness, Mr.
Carvajal, taxpayer CEMSA filed its application for export registration status on June 30, 1998;
information was still being requested in writing seven months later. For taxpayer Mr. Poblano,
information was requested by SHCP orally within 14 days of the date of Poblano’s application,

and any questions were apparently resolved (transcript, July 11, 2001, p. 3).

176. The extent of the evidence of discrimination on the record is admittedly limited.
There are only a few documents in the record bearing directly on the existence of differing
treatment, particularly the statement of Mr. Diaz Guzman, the “mystery” memorandum from
SHCP’s files, and the tax registration statement for Mercados Regionales, owned by the Poblano
Group. One member of this Tribunal believes that this evidence on the record is insufficient to
prove discrimination (see dissent). The majority’s view is based first on the conclusion that the
burden of proof was shifted from the Claimant to the Respondent, with the Respondent then
failing to meet its new burden, and on an assessment of the record as a whole. But it is also
based on a very simple two-pronged conclusion, as neither point was ever effectively challenged
by the Respondent:
a. No cigarette reseller-exporter (the Claimant, Poblano Group member or otherwise) could

legally have qualified for the IEPS rebates, since none under the facts established in this

-72-

case would have been able to obtain the necessary invoices stating the tax amounts

separately.

b. The Claimant was denied the rebates at a time when at least three other companies in like
circumstances, i.e. resellers and exporters (see supra para. 171) apparently including at

least two members of the Poblano Group, were granted them.

177. On the question of burden of proof, the majority finds the following statement of
the international law standard helpful, as stated by the Appellate Body of the WTO:

. various international tribunals, including the International Court of Justice,
have generally and consistently accepted and applied the rule that the party who
asserts a fact, whether the claimant or respondent, is responsible for providing
proof thereof. Also, it is a generally accepted canon of evidence in civil law,
common law and, in fact, most jurisdictions, that the burden of proof rests upon
the party, whether complaining or defending, who asserts the affirmative of a
claim or defence. If that party adduces evidence sufficient to raise a presumption
that what is claimed is true, the burden then shifts to the other party, who will fail
unless it adduces sufficient evidence to rebut the presumption. (Emphasis
supplied.)38

Here, the Claimant in our view has established a presumption and a prima facie case that the
Claimant has been treated in a different and less favorable manner than several Mexican owned
cigarette resellers, and the Respondent has failed to introduce any credible evidence into the

record to rebut that presumption.

178. In weighing the evidence, including the record of the five day hearing, the
majority is also affected by the Respondent’s approach to the issue of discrimination. If the
Respondent had had available to it evidence showing that the Poblano Group companies had not

been treated in a more favorable fashion than CEMSA with regard to receiving IEPS rebates, it

38 United States — Measures Affecting Imports of Woven Wool Shirts and Blouses from
India, Adopted 23 May 1997, WT/DS33/AB/R, p. 14. Accordingly, Asian Agricultural Products
Limited v. Republic of Sri Lanka, ICSID Reports, pp. 246, 272, 1990. (“In case a party adduces
some evidence which prima facie supports his allegation, the burden of proof shifts to his
opponent.”).

-73-

has never been explained why it was not introduced. Instead, the Respondent spent a substantial
amount of its time during the hearing and in its memorials seeking (unsuccessfully in the
Tribunal’s view) to demonstrate that CEMSA and the Poblano Group were related companies (as
there could be no discrimination, presumably within a single company group)39. Yet, if the
Poblano Group firms had not received the rebates, that evidence of relationship would have been
totally irrelevant. Why would any rational party have taken this approach at the hearing and in
the briefs if it had information in its possession that would have shown that the Mexican owned
cigarette exporters were being treated in the same manner as the Claimant, that is, denied IEPS
rebates for cigarette exports where proper invoices were not available? Thus, it is entirely
reasonable for the majority of this Tribunal to make an inference based on the Respondent’s
failure to present evidence on the discrimination issue. It is also notable that despite the lengthy
presentation of evidence by the Respondent seeking (unsuccessfully in the Tribunal’s view) to
link the Claimant with an alleged smuggling operation operated by or on behalf of Mr. Poblano,
export registration was nevertheless granted for Mr. Poblano’s companies. This occurred at
approximately the same time as registration was being denied for CEMSA, apparently because of
the pending CEMSA audit. Again, the differing treatment of CEMSA and the Poblano Group is

obvious.

179. There is also evidence in the record to suggest that Lynx, an earlier Poblano
Group company, was treated somewhat more favorably by Mexico, as the Federal Fiscal

Tribunal decided in February 1996 that Lynx was entitled to IEPS rebates on cigarette exports,

39 Counter-memorial, para. 488; see, e.g., transcript, July 10, 2001, pp. 110-113. It
is undeniable that CEMSA and the Poblano Group maintained a business relationship; CEMSA,
inter alia, was a seller of cigarettes to several of the Poblano Group companies from time to
time, and had borrowed working capital from Mr. Poblano (memorial, paras. 101-102).
However, there is no evidence of any common stock ownership, common membership on
corporate boards of directors or any of the normal indices of common ownership and control.
Moreover, SHCP has treated the two as completely separate taxpayers, audited CEMSA early on,
while more than three years later no final action has been taken against the Poblano Group.
Clearly, there is no evidence that the Mexican government considered CEMSA and the Poblano
Group companies to be a common enterprise prior to this proceeding. Accordingly, this Tribunal
would not be inclined to treat them as such so as to defeat the Claimant’s assertion of
discrimination.

-74-

despite the likely absence of invoices stating the tax amounts separately (e.g. memorial, para. 36;
App. 1047-1070). As a result of this decision and Lynx’ Amparo victory (which applied
specifically only to alcoholic beverage exports), SHCP also paid rebates to Lynx for IEPS taxes
applicable to cigarette exports in 1992, along with substantial additional amounts for interest and
inflation.40 This was a period during which CEMSA faced uncertainty over the availability of
rebates for cigarette exports, despite the fact that limited exports were made in 1992 by CEMSA.
However, by 1996, when SHCP recognized Lynx’ right to the rebates, SHCP had denied rebates

to CEMSA for test shipments for several years.

180. All of this confirms a further weakness in the Respondent’s argument that there
can be no de facto discrimination under circumstances where rebates are essentially granted
initially on the basis of a ministerial decision, with the detailed analysis coming later in the event
of questions or an audit. Given the Claimant’s notoriety at SHCP over the years, the newspaper
articles and threats of litigation against SHCP officials, the audit that was initiated and then
abruptly terminated in 1995, the multiple meetings with SHCP officials, etc., it is difficult for the
Tribunal to believe that the Claimant’s requests and actions were not well-known to and
carefully monitored by SHCP officials. Those factors certainly created the necessary conditions

for discrimination.

1.2.3. Discrimination as a Result of Nationality

181. It is clear that the concept of national treatment as embodied in NAFTA and
similar agreements is designed to prevent discrimination on the basis of nationality, or “by
reason of nationality.” (U.S. Statement of Administrative Action, Article 1102.) However, it is

not self-evident, as the Respondent argues, that any departure from national treatment must be

40 See Zaga-Hadid testimony, transcript, July 13, 2001, p. 142, tables introduced into
evidence during the hearing. Allegations that Lynx had been intentionally paid excessive rebates
by SHCP were denied (third witness statement of Diaz-Guzman, App. 06455-06456) and further
disputed at the hearing by both parties. The evidence on this issue before the Tribunal is
conflicting, and the Tribunal is not convinced that the amounts paid, including interest paid and
the inflation adjustment for the 1993-1996 period, were in fact excessive.

-75-

explicitly shown to be a result of the investor’s nationality. There is no such language in Article
1102. Rather, Article 1102 by its terms suggests that it is sufficient to show less favorable
treatment for the foreign investor than for domestic investors in like circumstances. In this
instance, the evidence on the record demonstrates that there is only one U.S. citizen/investor, the
Claimant, that alleges a violation of national treatment under NAFTA Article 1102 (transcript,
July 13, 2001, p. 178), and at least one domestic investor (Mr. Poblano) who has been treated
more favorably. For practical as well as legal reasons, the Tribunal is prepared to assume that
the differential treatment is a result of the Claimant’s nationality, at least in the absence of any

evidence to the contrary.

182. However, in this case there is evidence of a nexus between the discrimination and
the Claimant’s status as a foreign investor. In the first place, there does not appear to be any
rational justification in the record for SHCP’s less favorable de facto treatment of CEMSA other
than the obvious fact that CEMSA was owned by a very outspoken foreigner, who had, prior to
the initiation of the audit, filed a NAFTA Chapter 11 claim against the Government of Mexico.
Certainly, the action of filing a request for arbitration under Chapter 11 could only have been
taken by a person who was a citizen of the United States or Canada (rather than Mexico), i.e., as
a result of his (foreign) nationality. While a tax audit in itself is not, of course, evidence of a
denial of national treatment, the fact that the audit was initiated shortly after the Notice of
Arbitration (first Feldman affidavit, paras. 85-86) and the existence of the unsigned memo at
SHCP noting the filing of the Chapter 11 claim in the context of the Claimant’s export
registration efforts, at minimum raise a very strong suspicion that the events were related, given

that no similar audit action was taken against domestic reseller/exporter taxpayers at the time.

183. More generally, requiring a foreign investor to prove that discrimination is based
on his nationality could be an insurmountable burden to the Claimant, as that information may
only be available to the government. It would be virtually impossible for any claimant to meet
the burden of demonstrating that a government’s motivation for discrimination is nationality
rather than some other reason. Also, as the Respondent argues, if the motives for a government’s
actions should not be examined, there is effectively no way for the Claimant or this Tribunal to

make the subjective determination that the discriminatory action of the government is a result of

-16-

the Claimant’s nationality, again in the absence of credible evidence from the Respondent of a
different motivation. If Article 1102 violations are limited to those where there is explicit
(presumably de jure) discrimination against foreigners, e.g., through a law that treats foreign
investors and domestic investors differently, it would greatly limit the effectiveness of the

national treatment concept in protecting foreign investors.

184. This conclusion is consistent with that reached in an earlier Chapter 11
proceeding, Pope & Talbot v. Government of Canada. The Pope & Talbot tribunal indicated its
inclination to presume that discriminatory treatment of foreign investors in like circumstances
would be in violation of Article 1102. According to that tribunal such differences between
domestic and foreign investors would “presumptively violate Article 1102(2), unless they have a
reasonable nexus to rational government policies that (1) do not distinguish, on their face or de
facto, between foreign-owned and domestic companies, and (2) do not otherwise unduly
undermine the investment liberalizing objectives of NAFTA.” One of that tribunal’s concerns
was that if there had to be a showing that the discrimination was based on nationality, it would
“tend to excuse discrimination that is not facially directed at foreign owned investments” (Pope
& Talbot v. Government of Canada, Award on the Merits of Phase 2, April 10, 2001, paras. 78,
79, http://www.dfait-maeci.gc.ca/tna-nac/Award_Merits-e.pdf ) (The Pope & Talbot tribunal, on
the facts, ultimately declined to find a violation of national treatment). In the instant case, the
treatment between the foreign investor and domestic investors in like circumstances is different
on a de facto basis, and such discrimination is clearly in conflict with the investment
liberalization objective found in Article 1102. This Tribunal sees no reason to disagree with the

Pope & Talbot tribunal’s articulation in this respect.

1.2.4 Most Favored Investor Requirement?

185. | NAFTA is on its face unclear as to whether the foreign investor must be treated in
the most favorable manner provided for any domestic investor, or only with regard to the
treatment generally accorded to domestic investors, or even the least favorably treated domestic
investor. There is no “most-favored investor” provision in Chapter 11, parallel to the most
favored nation provision in Article 1103, that suggests that a foreign investor must be treated no

less favorably than the most favorably treated national investor, if there are other national

-77-

investors that are treated less favorably, that is, in the same manner as the foreign investor. At
the same time, there is no language in Article 1102 that states that the foreign investor must
receive treatment equal to that provided to the most favorably treated domestic investor, if there

are multiple domestic investors receiving differing treatment by the respondent government.

186. It may well be that the size of the domestic investor class here is larger than two —
one Mexican government witness stated that there might be 5-10 or more registered to export
cigarettes — and it may also be that some of those other investors have been treated in a manner
more similar to the Claimant’s treatment than to the more favorable treatment afforded to the
Poblano Group. However, in the absence of evidence to this effect presented by Mexico — the
only party in a position to provide such information — the Tribunal need not decide whether
Article 1102 requires treatment equivalent to the best treatment provided to any domestic
investors. Presumably, if there was evidence that another domestic investor had been treated in a
manner equivalent to the Claimant, in terms of export registration, audit, and granting or
withholding of rebates, the Respondent would have provided that evidence to the Tribunal. In
this case, the known “universe” of investors is only two, or at the most three, one foreign (the
Claimant) and one domestic (the Poblano Group companies), and the Tribunal must make its
decision on the evidence before it. Thus, the only relevant domestic investor is the Poblano

Group and the comparison must be between the Poblano Group and Claimant.

187. On the basis of this analysis, a majority of the Tribunal concludes that Mexico has
violated the Claimant’s rights to non-discrimination under Article 1102 of NAFTA. The
Claimant has made a prima facie case for differential and less favorable treatment of the
Claimant, compared with treatment by SHCP of the Poblano Group. For the Poblano Group and
for other likely cigarette reseller/exporters, the Respondent has asserted that audits are or will be
conducted in the same manner as for the Claimant, and implied that they will ultimately be
treated in the same way as the Claimant. However, the evidence that this has occurred is weak
and unpersuasive. The inescapable fact is that the Claimant has been effectively denied IEPS
rebates for the April 1996 through November 1997 period, while domestic export trading
companies have been given rebates not only for much of that period but through at least May

2000, suggesting that Article 4(III) of the law has been de facto waived for some if not all

-78-

domestic firms. While the Claimant has also been effectively precluded from exporting
cigarettes from 1998 to 2000, there is evidence that the Poblano Group companies have
apparently been allowed to do so, notwithstanding Article 11 of the IEPS law. Finally, the
Claimant has not been permitted to register as an exporting trading company, while the Poblano
Group firms have been granted this registration. All of these results are inconsistent with the
Respondent’s obligations under Article 1102, and the Respondent has failed to meet its burden of

adducing evidence to show otherwise.

188. In reaching the conclusion that the Respondent has breached its obligations to the
Claimant under Article 1102, the majority observes that the cigarette exports by the Claimant
and other similar situated resellers may be economically unsustainable, if IEPS rebates are
unavailable, but there is nothing in the IEPS law during the relevant period (after the 1993
Amparo decision and before the 1998 amendments) that legally precludes the exports per se.
The majority is also of the view that the factual pattern in this case reveals more than a minor
error or two by the Respondent. Rather, it demonstrates a pattern of official action (or inaction)
over a number of years, as well as de facto discrimination that is actionable under Article 1102.
That being said, there is no disagreement that Chapter 11 jurisdiction over tax matters is
carefully circumscribed by Article 2103, or that this Tribunal would be derelict in its duties if it

either expanded or reduced that jurisdiction.

J~=DAMAGES

189. Concerning the quantum of damages to be awarded to the Claimant, the Tribunal
observes at the outset that the appropriate measure and amount of damages is only generally and
cursorily discussed by the Parties. Still more limited is the amount of evidence presented to the

Arbitral Tribunal in this respect.
190. The Claimant assumes that CEMSA’s damages for the Respondent’s unlawful

discrimination under Article 1102 are identical to those claimed for the unlawful expropriation,

without either allowing for any divergence in both cases or taking into account the particular

-79-

case of only de facto discrimination (memorial, para. 233). Regarding the valuation of damages,
the Claimant asks for three elements of compensation (memorial, paras. 236-246):

(1) $64,582,645 Mexican pesos (or US$6,458,264) for IEPS due in the period of October-
December 1997; (2) $90,350,605 Mexican pesos (or US$9,035,060) for lost profits in the period
of January 1, 1994 - May 1996, calculated on the expected exports applying a profit margin of
62.4% and (3) $148,886,141 Mexican pesos(or US$14,888,614), requesting CEMSA’s “going
concern value” on the basis of the present discounted value of the future cash flow. The sum of

the three elements amounts to $303, 819, 391 Mexican pesos (or US$30,381,938).

191. In his reply of June 11, 2001, the Claimant asserted that his calculation of IEPS,
even if erroneous, was never challenged by the Respondent (reply, paras. 72-75). He adds a
claim for lost profits after December 1, 1997, without specifying any amounts (reply, para.
76(3)). He concludes by alleging that, even if CEMSA claimed more IEPS than Cigatam already
paid, it would “still be entitled to damages in the order of twenty million dollars” (reply, para.

78).

192. The Respondent, on the other hand, alleges that CEMSA’s financial records in the
critical period were either inadequate or missing altogether. In addition, it is asserted that
CEMSA’s cigarette export business was not profitable (counter-memorial, paras. 513-517).
Further, the Respondent denies that CEMSA was “a normal trading company” (counter-
memorial, para. 560) or had any fair market value at all material times (counter-memorial, paras.

532-539, 564).

193. In its rejoinder, the Respondent objects to the calculation of damages by the
Claimant (rejoinder, paras. 202-262). In particular, the Respondent challenges the new claim for
lost profits and concludes that the gross profit on each carton sold could be, at best, only five

cents (rejoinder, para. 258).
194. The Tribunal, first, observes that under NAFTA Article 1117(1) in f. (as well as

Article 1116(1) in f.) an investor of a Party on behalf of an enterprise may submit to arbitration a

claim that the other Party violated, among other provisions, the obligation to accord national

-80-

treatment under NAFTA Article 1102 and, therefore, “that the enterprise has incurred loss or
damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach”. NAFTA provides no further guidance as to
the proper measure of damages or compensation for situations that do not fall under Article 1110
(expropriation); the only detailed measure of damages specifically provided in Chapter 11 is in
Article 1110(2-3), “fair market value,” which necessarily applies only to situations that fall
within that Article 1110. It follows that, in case of discrimination that constitutes a breach of
Article 1102, what is owed by the responding Party is the amount of loss or damage that is
adequately connected to the breach. In the absence of discrimination that also constitutes
indirect expropriation or is tantamount to expropriation, a claimant would not be entitled to the
full market value of the investment which is granted by NAFTA Article 1110. Thus, if loss or
damage is the requirement for the submission of a claim, it arguably follows that the Tribunal

may direct compensation in the amount of the loss or damage actually incurred.

195. To date only two other NAFTA tribunals, in S.D. Myers and Pope & Talbot, have
found a compensable violation, of Articles 1102 and 1105 (respectively). The damages phase of
S.D. Myers has not been completed. However, in outlining its intended approach to damages,
that tribunal concluded that in the absence of a special provision, the drafters of the NAFTA
intended to leave it open to tribunals to determine a measure of compensation appropriate to the
specific circumstances of the case, taking into account the principles of both international law
and the provisions of NAFTA. (S.D. Myers v. Government of Canada , Partial Award,
November 13, 2000, paras. 303-319, http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/3992.pdf.)

196. In Pope & Talbot, the tribunal found only a relatively minor breach of Article
1105; claims of Article 1102 and Article 1110 violations and additional alleged Article 1105
violations, among others, were rejected. In its opinion of May 31, 2002, that tribunal did not
explain its rationale for damages in detail, emphasizing only the rejection of the claimed
damages for the cost of management time to deal with the respondent’s breach of Article 1105,
and of lost profits for a short period of time during which the firm’s mills were shut down by the
respondent, again in breach of Article 1105(the latter were rejected not in principle, but because
the tribunal, after considering the claimant’s assertions, determined that there had been no loss of

profits). The only damages that were allowed were out-of-pocket expenses relating to the

-81-

respondent’s violation, incurred by the Claimant in defending itself. (These were items such as
legal and accounting, and lobbyist fees.) (Pope & Talbot v. Government of Canada, Award in

Respect of Damages, May 31, 2002, paras. 81-90, http://www.naftalaw.org).

197. It is obvious that in both of these earlier cases, which as here involved non-
expropriation violations of Chapter 11, the tribunals exercised considerable discretion in
fashioning what they believed to be reasonable approaches to damages consistent with the

requirements of NAFTA.

198. On this rationale, the Tribunal focuses on the most recent articulation of damages
asked for by the Claimant in his reply (see supra, para. 191). For reasons stated earlier, of the
three elements of damages sought for by the Claimant, the third one representing CEMSA’s
“going concern value” is to be dismissed because this item requires a finding of expropriation,

which is not the present case (see supra, paras. 108-114).41

199. | The second element of damages seeks lost profits in the period of January 1, 1994
- May 1996 and, therefore, is covered by the three-year limitation period under NAFTA Article
1117(2), as explained in paras. 39-47 of the Interim Decision on Preliminary Jurisdictional Issues
of December 6, 2000. In that Interim Decision we held that the cut-off date of the three-year
limitation period is April 30, 1996. Even if the Claimant asks, under the element under
discussion, for lost profits for one month (May 1996) coming immediately after the cut-off date,
the claim does not specify its amount with regard to that particular month and, in any case, has

not convinced the Tribunal with respect to both existence and extent.

41 We observe, without deciding, that even if there had been an expropriation, there is
inadequate proof in the record to demonstrate that CEMSA had more than negligible going
concern value. As noted in footnote 15, there is no statement of CEMSA’s physical assets in the
record, other than an assertion of an initial capitalization of 510,000 Mexican pesos at the time of
formation in 1988, without any indication as to what percentage of this was paid in. The going
concern value of an enterprise which earns 90% of its alleged revenues from gray market sales of
cigarettes is also suspect. As discussed in para. 201, infra, after selling and financing costs, this

(Continued ...)

-82-

200. Again, even had there been greater specificity on the part of the Claimant, the
Tribunal is not convinced on the basis of the evidence in the record that CEMSA’s operations
would have been profitable, should CEMSA had received the IEPS rebates during the relevant
time in the proper amounts. As discussed earlier, when the IEPS tax rate was 85%, the Claimant
erroneously treated 85% of the invoice price as taxes subject to rebate. (In fact, only
approximately 45.95% of the invoice price was properly attributable to taxes.) If the gross price
to Sam’s was US$7.40, and it is assumed that the IEPS rebate is 85% of the gross price, the net
price (less the rebates) would be US$4.00 (7.40/1.85). This produces a gross margin of only
US$0.05 from an export selling price of US$4.05, which could not possibly cover the Claimant’s
expenses, including but not limited to the 14% interest on his loans from the Poblano Group (see
Feldman affidavit, paras. 6, 72). Even if these approximations are slightly off, there is simply
insufficient gross margin to cover normal operating expenses, let alone profit, unless of course,

the Claimant can obtain IEPS tax rebates from SHCP, as he did in 1996 and 1997.

201.  Assertions that the Claimant, had he been aware of the correct amount of the
rebates, would have simply raised his US$4.05 per carton selling price, are totally unpersuasive
from a business or economic point of view. Any reasonable businessman would set his prices
based on supply and demand. If the Claimant could have obtained US$5.00 or US$6.00 or more
per carton, he undoubtedly would have done so, as the Respondent contends (see rejoinder,
paras. 216-221). Moreover, the Claimant had no significant customer base. All of his sales in
his best year, 1997, were either to members of the Poblano Group, or to an apparently fictitious
company, Dilosa, S.A. which may have been allegedly doing business in Honduras, a low tax
jurisdiction for which IEPS rebates were not legally available (IEPS Law, 1997, Article 2(III)).
In short, the Tribunal is convinced that the Claimant did not have a viable business exporting
cigarettes purchased from retailers in Mexico, and could not have made a profit regardless of
whether SHCP provided the IEPS rebates, assuming of course that the rebates sought and

provided approximated the actual amount of IEPS taxes originally assessed on the cigarettes.

operation could not have been profitable, and a money losing business seldom has significant
value as a going concern.

-83-

202. There remains only the first element of damages, concerning IEPS rebates due in
the period of October - December 1997. According to the Claimant, their amount is $64,
582,645 Mexican pesos (or US$ 6,458,264). In the record there are customs documents that
reasonably reflect the relevant exportations during that period (pp. 3057 to 3199 of volume 8 that

is annexed to the memorial).

203. Notwithstanding this assertion, the record demonstrates that during the three
months of the relevant period, the Claimant filed only three requests for IEPS rebates for a total
amount of $18,978,361 Mexican pesos as follows:

On November 3, 1997, he requested $10,134,669 Mexican pesos

On December 1, 1997, he requested $8,841,061 Mexican pesos

On January 5, 1998, he requested $2,631 Mexican pesos
To calculate the correct amount of the tax, the value of the exported merchandise should be
divided by 1.85. The result, the value of the cigarettes, is subtracted from the gross invoice
price, to arrive at the correctly estimated tax amounts. Thus, beginning with the $18,978,361
Mexican pesos, specified by the Claimant, according to the applications presented November 3,
December 1, both of 1997, and January 5, 1998, and assuming that this number results from the
erroneous calculation of the tax amounts that was made by the Claimant (applying simply the
85% against the gross invoice price, as discussed earlier (para. 131) and dividing that number by
85 and multipliying it by 100), the gross selling price for the cigarettes on the basis of which
CEMSA requested the payment of IEPS is $22,327,483 Mexican pesos. This amount coincides

with the invoices presented by the Claimant, that related to the relevant period.
204. As the gross invoice price is $22,327,483 Mexican pesos, the tax that corresponds
to that amount is $10,258,573.5 Mexican pesos. This is the result of the following operation:

$22,327,483 / 1.85 = $12,068,909.73 Mexican pesos (This is the price of the
cigarettes net of the IEPS)

$22,327,483 — $12,068,909.73 = $10,258,573.5 Mexican pesos (This is the

approximate correct IEPS amount assuming an 85% tax rate.)

-84-

205. However, the Tribunal believes it appropriate to exclude the IEPS that correspond to an
exportation to Honduras made in the relevant period. As Honduras is a tax haven jurisdiction
(jurisdicci6n de baja imposici6n fiscal), this export was not legally subject to an IEPS rebate
under Article 2(IID) of the IEPS law. Thus, the total IEPS amount of $10,258,573.50 Mexican
pesos should be reduced by the amount of $793,946.00 Mexican pesos (the rebate amount for the
Honduran sale). Thus, the revised total award is $9,464, 627.50 Mexican pesos. (This amount
of $793,946.00 Mexican pesos is obtained by dividing the price paid by CEMSA when it
acquired the merchandise that it exported to Honduras, by 1.85%. EMSA bought 27,000
Marlboro Flip Top from Sam’s Club, for an amount of $1,728, 000.00 Mexican pesos, according
to invoice 2060 dated September 29, 1997; that same merchandise was exported to Honduras on
October 15, 1997 with export declaration 3465-7007533, also dated October 15, 1997, and with
the invoice 2068 issued by CEMSA, which refers to 450 boxes or master cases of Marlboro Flip
Top; one box or master case of Marlboro Flip Top contains 60 Flip Top packs). The total
revised award indicated above of $9,464,627.50 Mexican pesos is increased by simple interest
calculated from the date the rebates should have been paid (see below) to the date of this
decision, in accordance with the interest rate paid on Federal Treasury Certificates or bonds
issued by the Mexican Government, with a maturity of 28 days (see annex). The total interest so

calculated is $7,496,428.47 Mexican pesos.

The amount of the rebates that should have been paid to Claimant is as follows:
on January 19, 1998, $4,684,253.45 Mexican pesos;
on February 16, 1998, $4,778, 951.89 Mexican pesos; and
on March 3, 1998, $1,422.16 Mexican pesos.

The interest should be calculated according to the law in force for the rebates requested in 1997
(payable 51 days after the request) and for the rebates requested in 1998 (payable 41 days after
the request). Thus, as of the date of this decision, the total amount awarded by the tribunal is

$16,961,056 Mexican pesos (principal amount of $9,464,627.50 plus interest of $7,496,428.47).

If the Respondent, for any reason, does not immediately pay the amount of compensation herein

mentioned, at the time payment is made, the Respondent shall add the interest that continues to

-85-

be generated on the original amount of $9,464,627.50 Mexican pesos, using the same calculation

methodology as described above and in the annex of this award.

206. Thus, the correct amount for this (only proved) element of damages, based on the
above analysis, is $9,464,627.50 Mexican pesos, plus simple interest at the rate calculated in
conformity with the Mexican Government Federal Treasury Certificates interest rates (CETES)

at maturity of 28 days.

207. Concerning the currency of the Award, the Tribunal observes that the Claimant in
his Notice of Arbitration of April 30, 1999 asked for an "award of approximately 475 million
pesos, which, assuming an exchange rate of $9.5 Mexican pesos to the U.S. dollar, equals U.S.
50 million dollars" (Notice of Arbitration, p. 11). Thus, it appears that, according to the
Claimant, the principal currency of the Award should be the Mexican peso. Such currency also
corresponds to the facts of the case since the monetary amount is requested by the Claimant in
lieu of IEPS rebates due to him but not paid by the Respondent, such IEPS rebates being
necessarily expressed in the Respondent's official currency. Therefore, the Tribunal considers
that the Award should also be expressed in Mexican pesos, regardless of whether the Parties in
subsequent communications may have referred also to U.S. dollar as a matter of convenience. It
must be added that the parity between the Mexican peso and the U.S. dollar does not seem to
have significantly changed in the last three years or so. In any event, even more significant
changes must have been approximately reflected in the respective rates of interest. For reasons
of consistency, then, the Tribunal will apply the Mexican Government bond interest rates to the

award of damages expressed in Mexican pesos.

K_ COSTS AND FEES

208. Regarding the costs of this arbitration, the Tribunal recalls Article 59(1) of the
Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules. Under this provision, “[uJnless the parties otherwise
agree, the Tribunal shall decide how and by whom the fees and expenses of the members of the
Tribunal, the expenses and charges of the Secretariat and the expenses incurred by the parties in

connection with the proceeding shall be borne”. In the absence of any agreement by the parties

-86-

in this respect, the Tribunal takes into account that both parties have partly won and partly lost,
and that the percentage of victory and loss did not have any measurable effect on the amount of
costs. Accordingly, the Tribunal decides that each party bear half of the costs of the arbitration
(fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal as well as expenses and charges of the
Secretariat), as billed by ICSID. In addition, each party bears its own legal fees and costs in

connection with the arbitration.

-87-

L. DECISION

For these reasons, the Tribunal

209. Finds that the Respondent has not violated the Claimant's rights or acted

inconsistently with the Respondent's obligations under NAFTA Article 1110;

210. Finds that the Respondent has acted inconsistently with the Claimant's rights and
the Respondent's obligations under NAFTA Article 1102;

211. Orders the Respondent to pay immediately to the Claimant the sum of $
9,464,627.50 Mexican pesos as principal, plus interest generated at the time of signature of this
award, in the amount of $7,496,428.47 Mexican pesos, which interest shall accrue until the date
the payment is effectively made, pursuant to the last part of paragraph 205 of this award; the
interest to be calculated shall be simple interest, for each month of the period of calculation at a
rate equivalent to the yield for the month, of the Federal Treasury Certificates, issued by the

Mexican Government, with a maturity of 28 days.
212. Denies all other claims for compensation;

213. Orders that each party be responsible for its own legal fees and related costs, and

that the costs of the arbitration, as billed by ICSID, be shared equally by the parties.

Made as at Ottawa, Province of Ontario, Canada, in English and Spanish.

Professor Konstantinos D. Kerameus
Date:

Mr. Jorge Covarrubias Bravo Professor David A. Gantz
(subject to the attached dissenting opinion) Date:
Date:

-88-

