INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between

MASDAR SOLAR & WIND COOPERATIEF U.A.
Claimant

v.
KINGDOM OF SPAIN
Respondent

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT’S REQUEST
FOR A SUPPLEMENTARY DECISION

Members of the Tribunal
Mr. John Beechey CBE, President of the Tribunal
Mr. Gary Born, Arbitrator
Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary to the Tribunal
Ms. Luisa Fernanda Torres

Assistant to the Tribunal
Mr. Niccold Landi

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 29 November 2018

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Claimant:

Mr. Yacine Francis
Mr. Simon Roderick
Ms. Marie Stoyanov
Mr. Ignacio Madalena
Ms. Stephanie Hawes

Allen & Overy LLP

11th Floor, Burj Daman Building, Happiness
Street

Dubai International Financial Centre

Dubai

United Arab Emirates

Representing Respondent:

Mr. Jose Manuel Gutiérrez Delgado
Mr. Antolin Fernandez Antufia

Mr. Roberto Fernandez Castilla
Ms. Patricia Frohlingsdorf Nicolas
Ms. Monica Moraleda Saceda

Ms. Elena Ofioro Sainz

Ms. Amaia Rivas Kortazar

Ms. Maria José Ruiz Sanchez

Mr. Diego Santacruz Descartin

Mr. Javier Torres Gella

Abogacia General del Estado

Ministry of Justice of the Government of Spain
Calle Ayala 5

28001, Madrid

Spain

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

THE PROCEEDINGS

On 29 June 2018, the Kingdom of Spain filed with ICSID a Request dated 28 June 2018 for
a Supplementary Decision in respect of the Award rendered by the Tribunal on 16 May 2018
(the “Award”), together with Annexes I to III (the “Request”). The Request was registered
by the ICSID Secretary-General on 5 July 2018. It was transmitted to the Members of the
Tribunal that same day, in accordance with Rule 49(2)(d) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

The Request included an application by the Kingdom of Spain to stay enforcement of the
Award (the “Application”).

Pursuant to Rule 49(3) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal conveyed the following
message to the Parties on 19 July 2018:

“The Tribunal invites the Claimant to reply to [the] Kingdom of Spain's
application to stay enforcement of the Award ‘until a decision pursuant
to Article 49 of the ICSID Convention is rendered’ by Friday, 27 July
2018. The Claimant's submission in reply to the supplementation issues
is to be served by Friday, 14 September 2018.

In addition, the Parties are invited to confer and to seek to agree whether
they envisage the filing of any further submissions after those identified
above, and whether they anticipate a procedure other than that the
Tribunal shall determine the issues on the documents. The Parties are
asked to inform the Tribunal by Friday, 27 July 2018. The Tribunal is
not persuaded that a further oral hearing is necessary.

The Tribunal considers, too, that it should be made clear to the Parties
now that there was no Dissenting Opinion and hence there is none to be
produced. The Award is complete as it stands and is a decision of the
Tribunal. It is clear on the face of the Award to what extent it is
unanimous and to what extent it is a decision of the Tribunal by a
majority.”

On 26 July 2018, Claimant submitted its Reply to the Kingdom of Spain’s application for a
Stay of Enforcement of the Award. On the same day, Claimant confirmed that (i) its Reply to
the Request for Supplementary Decision would be filed by 14 September 2018, as directed
by the Tribunal; (ii) it did not anticipate the need for any further written submissions; and (iii)
it agreed that a further oral hearing would not be necessary.

On 26 July 2018, Respondent also confirmed its agreement that no further written
submissions after the Claimant’s Reply to the Request for Supplementary Decision would be
required, and that no oral hearing would be necessary.

The agreement of the Parties concerning the procedure to be adopted was recorded in
Procedural Order No. 6, dated 30 July 2018.

7. On 24 August 2018, the Tribunal issued its “Decision on the Respondent's Application to

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

Stay Enforcement of the Award” by which it rejected the Application.

8. On 12 September 2018, Claimant filed its Observations on the Request (the “Observations”).

Il. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

(a) Re

9. Respondent maintains that the Tribunal “omitted to decide” the following four

‘espondent’s Position

questions:

10. As to
jurisd

“(i) determination of whether EU Law applies to the facts and Merits of
the Dispute; (ii) determination of the date of the [sic] Masdar’s
investment in Spain; (iii) disclosure of the Dissenting Opinion on
valuation method|;] and (iv) disclosure of the Damages Valuation
Model.”'

the first question, Respondent contends that EU law has to be applied not only to
ictional issues, but also to the merits of the dispute.? According to Respondent, the
Parties agreed to the application of EU law to both the facts and the merits of the dispute.?

11. Respondent contends that the Tribunal:

“[(D]id not solve whether EU Law had to be appl{ied] to the facts and
Merits of the dispute regardless both parties to the dispute agreed that
EU Law formed part of the relevant investment framework and therefore,
it should be applied to the facts and merits of the dispute, especially to
address the Claimant's legitimate expectations;”* and,

“has omitted to deal with an important question that has been submitted
to it by both parties (Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention), since it has
only decided the application of the EU Law on the jurisdictional phase.”*

12. Respondent requests the Tribunal:

' Request, para 5.
2 Ibidem, para. 8.

“[T]o supplement the Award by specifically addressing whether EU Law
shall be applied to decide the facts and/or the merits of the dispute;”®
and,

“[ilf the answer is positive the Respondent respectfully requests the
Tribunal to supplement the Award by specifically addressing how the

3 Ibidem, para. 24.

* Ibidem, para. 27

* Ibidem, para. 28.
° Ibidem, para. 29.

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

application of EU Law (as applicable International Law or as a fact)
affects the facts and/or the merits of the dispute, and in particular:

(i) How EU Law on State Aid affects to the Claimants’ Legitimate
Expectations on the maintenance for twenty five years of an immutable
amount of incentives that constitute State Aid;

(ii) How EU Law on Environmental protection affects the Legitimate

Expectations of the Claimant with regard to the possibility of obtaining

the incentives for renewables for the electricity produced by burning
97

gas.

Respondent contends that “subsidies to renewables provided by Spain constitute State aid
under EU Law”® and refers to the 2008 and the 2014 EU Commission Guidelines on State aid
for environmental protection to which, according to Respondent, “subsidies for renewables
had to be subject.”? Respondent considers that this legislation is relevant to the assessment of
Claimant’s legitimate expectations, so far as the application of the FIT pursuant to
RD661/2007 is concerned.' In addition, Respondent asserts that:

“[...] the Tribunal did not allow the Respondent to submit the final

Decision of the EU Commission issued in November 2017 in the State

Aid proceeding when the Respondent requested its permission to do
sil

SO.

Respondent suggests that on the basis of the terms of its Procedural Order No. 4, by which
the Tribunal ordered Respondent to produce any document pertaining to “Spain's notification
to the European Commission under Article 108(3) TFEU as to whether the above-referenced
measures are in conformity with EU rules on state aid (the State Aid Notification),” the
Tribunal had “accepted the materiality and relevance of these documents for the outcome of
the case.”

With reference to the second question, Respondent affirms that both Parties agreed that the
legitimate expectations of an investor and the specific commitments giving rise to them must
be considered at the time when the relevant investment was made.'? According to
Respondent, the Tribunal seems to have agreed with this position.'4

Respondent asserts that the Tribunal:

7 Ibidem, para. 30.

5 Ibidem, para. 9.

° Ibidem, para. 10.

' Ibidem, para. 30(i).

"| Ibidem, para. 22.

"2 Ibidem, para. 21.

' Ibidem, paras. 31 and 34.
4 [bidem, para. 41.

20.

21.

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

“[Did] not solve the time in which the investment was made in order to
assess legitimate expectations of the investor, a key issue disputed by the
parties.”'>

And it submits that the Tribunal:

“[H]as omitted to deal with a question that is disputed and crucial for
both parties and has been submitted to it {...].”"®

Thus, Respondent requests the Tribunal:

“[T]o supplement the Award by specifically addressing the date in which
the Claimant made its investment in order to assess its legitimate
expectations.”'7

On the third question, Respondent asserts that the application of the DCF method to calculate
the quantum of damages:

“[H]as been a disputed issue between the parties that was submitted to
the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal.”'®

Respondent contends that the application of the DCF method is a “contentious point between
the arbitrators” on the basis of the fact that the expression “a/the majority of the Tribunal”
appears five times in Section VIII.C.(2) of the Award and thirty times more in the rest of the
damages part of the Award.!?

Respondent maintains that:

“By omitting the dissenting opinion of one of the members of the Arbitral
Tribunal regarding the applicability of the DCF method’?®

the Tribunal has omitted to deal with the issue of the application of the DCF method.
Respondent, therefore, requests the Tribunal to supplement the Award:
“(Bly disclosing: (i) what member of the Arbitral Tribunal has a
Dissenting Opinion on the valuation method appropriate to value the

renewable investments of the Claimant; and (ii) which were that
member’s reasons to reject DCF as a valuation method.”*'

'S Ibidem, para. 42.
'S Ibidem, para. 31 at p. 10 (the numbering of the paragraph is inconsistent in the original version).
"” Tbidem, para. 43.
'8 Ibidem, para. 46.
'? Ibidem, para. 48.
20 Ibidem, para. 50.
2! Ibidem, para. 51.

22.

23,

24,

25.

26.

27.

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

With reference to the fourth question, Respondent contends that Exhibit BQR-1 107? does not
evidence the adjustments, which are the subject of paragraphs 654(b), (c) and (d) of the
Award. According to Respondent, in the evidentiary record of this arbitration there is no
document which contains the said adjustments.”*

Respondent submits that:

“(H]ow the Tribunal has performed the task of ‘[A]pplying these
adjusted assumptions to Brattle’s valuation model’, reducing the
damages globally in EUR 67,5 million (from EUR 132 million to EUR
64,5 million), is unexplained, unreasoned, and unjustified. Indeed, it is a

complete black box.”*4
Respondent states that the Tribunal’s omission directly affects Respondent’s right of defence:

“[A]s for instance, it is not possible to assess whether the Tribunal has
incurred in any arithmetic error in its damages calculation.”?5

Respondent requests the Tribunal:

“[T]o supplement the award and provide the parties, as soon as possible,
with the Excel file or valuation model which evidences: (i) the adjustment
of para 654.(b); (ii) the adjustment of para 654.(c); and, (iii) the
adjustment of para 654.(d).”® And,

“[T]o supplement the Award by reasoning all the steps followed to apply
in the Brattle’s excel model BOR-110, the sole document referred by the
Arbitral Tribunal as the basis of its findings: (i) the adjustment of para
654.(b); (ii) the adjustment of para 654.(c); and, (iii) the adjustment of
para 654.(d)."?7

(b) Claimant’s Position

Claimant submits that the Tribunal has not omitted to deal with the questions identified by
Respondent.?8

According to Claimant, Respondent’s Request amounts to a “backdoor attempt”: “to have
the Tribunal reconsider the merits of the case,” in spite of the “narrow scope of
supplementation” permitted under Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention.?°

® See Award, fn. 605.

3 Request, para. 62

24 Ibidem , para 63 (emphasis in original).
25 Ibidem, para. 64.

26 Ibidem, para. 66.

27 Ibidem, para. 67.

28 Observations, para. 2.

2 Ibidem, para. 3.

28.

29.

30.

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

Claimant states that the Request falls outside the scope of Article 49(2) of the ICSID
Convention. Citing legal scholarship and decisions of ICSID tribunals in support of its
position, Claimant argues: (i) that tribunals are not obliged to “address in the award every
argument put forward by the parties, provided they decide on the essential issues of the
case;”*° and (ii) that the “remedy of supplementation is very narrow in scope,” being limited
to “inadvertent omissions and minor technical errors in the award.”>|

On the first question — i.e. the asserted failure of the Tribunal to determine whether EU law
applies to the facts and the merits of the dispute — Claimant contends that, in the course of the
arbitration, it argued:

“[T]hat the dispute had to be resolved under the ECT and public
international law, not EU law;” and,

“that there is no inconsistency between EU law and the ECT, and should
there be any inconsistency, the latter would prevail.”

Claimant maintains that Respondent’s argument that the Parties were in agreement that EU
law applied to the present dispute is simply incorrect.>>

31. Claimants further argues that:
“In this case, the Tribunal was called to decide the case under the ECT.
Since the Tribunal found that there is no incompatibility between ECT
and EU law, it was unnecessary to analyse EU law further.”
32. As to the assessment of Claimant’s legitimate expectations in light of EU law on State aid
and the EU Directives identified by Respondent in the Request, Claimant contends that:

“Spain only referred to these documents in connection with the
Claimant's expectations regarding the use of gas, and not in the context
of whether EU rules on State aid had any relevance to the assessment of
the Claimant's legitimate expectations;”** and,
“[...] during the course of the arbitration, the focus of the Respondent's
allegations regarding these Guidelines [the 2008 and the 2014 EU
Commission Guidelines on State aid for environmental protection) was
not legitimate expectations but on those Guidelines justifying the
adoption of the Disputed Measures.”*©

> Ibidem, para. 11.

3! Ibidem, para. 13.

32 Ibidem, para. 16.

3 Ibidem, para. 17.

+4 Ibidem, para. 20.

>5 Ibidem, para. 22.

%6 Ibidem, para. 23.

33.

34,

35.

36.

37.

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

Claimant asserts that the Tribunal has “implicitly” addressed the issue whether Claimant had
legitimate expectations that the RD661/2007 regime would continue to apply to its
investment. In particular, Claimant argues that:

“The Tribunal did decide this question when it found that Spain's
commitments regarding the continued application of the RD 661/2007
regime were sufficiently specific to generate legitimate expectations.”>”

Claimant points out that the 2014 EU Commission Guidelines on State aid for environmental
protection, the ruling in the Elcogas case*® and any other EU documentation dated 2014 upon
which Respondent seeks to rely could not have any relevance to the assessment of Claimant’s
legitimate expectations “as they were published years after Masdar’s relevant investments
were made.”

With reference to Respondent’s argument that in its assessment of Claimant’s legitimate
expectations, the Tribunal had not taken into consideration Directive 2001/77/EC of 27
September 2001 and Directive 2009/28/EC of 23 April 2009, Claimant affirms that:

“It was [...] sufficient for the Tribunal to find that Spain committed to
provide the ‘benefits’ under RD 661/2007 giving rise to legitimate
expectations, including the right to produce electricity using 15% of
natural gas.”*°

Claimant dismisses the proposition that it referred to these Directives as part of the relevant
investment framework for the purposes of addressing legitimate expectations.*! While it
accepts that it did indeed refer to the RE Directives of 2001 and 2009, it had done so in order
to show the EU’s and the Member States’ commitments to encourage and develop RE power
infrastructure, with the targets that were set forth in those directives. The Claimant also
submitted that the RD 661/2007 regime was in line with those objectives and that EU law did
not require Spain to adopt the Disputed Measures. The question was not whether those
Directives gave rise to legitimate expectations, but whether:

“[...] RD 661/2007 and Spain’s actions did so. The Tribunal discharged
this duty when finding that RD 661/2007 gave rise to legitimate
expectations.”*?

According to Claimant, it is unclear how Respondent’s argument based on Claimant’s
document request pertaining to “Spain's notification to the European Commission under
Article 108(3) TFEU as to whether the above-referenced measures are in conformity with EU

37 Ibidem, para, 24.

38 R-030, Order of the Court of Justice of the European Union Regarding The Pre-Judicial Question C- 275/13, ELCOGAS,
22 October 2014.

39 Observations, para. 25.

* Ibidem, para. 26.

“ Request, para. 23.

* Observations, para. 27.

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

rules on state aid (the State Aid Notification)” could amount to support Respondent’s
submission that the Tribunal omitted to decide a relevant question in the Award. In Claimant’s
submission, it could not and did not do so.

38. So far as the second question is concerned, Claimant says that Respondent’s complaint that
the Tribunal had failed to determine the date of Masdar’s investment in Spain does not
withstand scrutiny:

“It is clear from the narrative provided in the Award that the Claimant
made its investments in the CSP plants in phases over a period of time
commencing in 2008 and through 2010.”**

39. On the third question — i.e. the absence of a reasoned dissenting opinion on valuation method
— Claimant, relying on Article 48(4) of the ICSID Convention, contends that an arbitrator
cannot be compelled to produce a dissenting opinion and to provide a statement of his or her
reasons. Nor, Claimant submits, is an arbitral tribunal obliged to identify the dissenting
arbitrator.“ Claimant refers to the Tribunal’s observation in its Procedural Order No. 6 of 30
July 2018, by which it made clear that:

“[...] there was no Dissenting Opinion and hence there is none to be
produced. The Award is complete as it stands and is a decision of the
Tribunal.”*®

40. Claimant notes, further, that the Tribunal had dealt with the question as to the appropriate
method of calculation for determining the fair market value of Claimant’s investments and it
had explained why it had adopted the DCF method:

“In paragraphs 567 to 574 of the Award, the Tribunal summarises the
arguments made by both parties in this respect. In paragraphs 575 to
587 of the Award, the Tribunal articulates its reasons for preferring the
DCF method over the Respondent's arguments for an asset-based
valuation.”*7

41. With reference to the fourth question — i.e. the call for production of the Tribunal’s damages
valuation model and detail of its working calculations — Claimant argues first, that, as a matter
of principle, Respondent’s request for supplementation of the Tribunal’s analysis of Exhibit
BQR-110 and for the production of an excel spreadsheet with the valuation model goes
beyond anything contemplated by Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention. An ICSID tribunal
is under no obligation to produce its valuation model.*®

Request, para. 21.

#4 Observations, para. 34.
43 Ibidem, para. 38.

* Ibidem, para. 40.

*” Ibidem, para. 39.

*8 Ibidem, paras. 43 and 44.

42.

43.

44,

45.

Tl.
46.

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

Specifically, Claimant submits that Respondent’s request that the Tribunal supplement the
Award “by reasoning all the steps followed to apply in the Brattle’s excel model BQR-110"°
exceeds the limits of Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention.*°

Claimant rejects Respondent’s criticism that the Tribunal’s damage calculation is

“unexplained, unreasoned, and unjustified.”°' Claimant, noting the decisions in MINE v.

Guinea and Eiser v. Spain, contends that the Tribunal, acting within its discretion:

“[P]erformed an in-depth analysis of the assumptions that served as the
basis of the Claimant’s DCF calculation, also indicating the
assumptions it ultimately adopted in order to reach the conclusion that
amount of damages that should be awarded was €64.5 million.
Therefore, the Tribunal discharged its duties under Article 48(3) in its
damages assessment.”

Claimant refutes Respondent’s assertion that it is not possible to extract the figure of EUR
64.5 million from the valuation model provided in Exhibit BQR-110. It identifies the four
salient adjustments made to the model by the Tribunal® and it describes how the Tribunal
adjustments must be applied to the excel spreadsheet under Exhibit BQR-110. On the basis
of that exercise, Claimant concludes that:

“[...] contrary to Spain’s position in the Request, it is possible to reach
the figure of €64.5 million in damages [...].”°

In light of the above, Claimant requests the Tribunal to:
“(a) deny Spain’s Request in its entirety; and

@)
[wl
ANALYSIS

order Spain to assume all of the fees and costs of the Request
56

Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 49 are the relevant
provisions which govern supplementary decisions and rectification of errors. Article 49(2) of
the ICSID Convention provides:

“The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45 days after the
date on which the award was rendered may after notice to the other party
decide any question which it had omitted to decide in the award, and

+ Request, para. 67.

5° Observations, para, 45.

5! Request, para 63 (emphasis in original).
52 Observations, paras. 47 and 48.

5 Ibidem, para. 48.

54 Ibidem, para. 53.

55 Ibidem, para. 60.

56 Ibidem, para. 61.

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

shall rectify any clerical, arithmetical or similar error in the award. Its
decision shall become part of the award and shall be notified to the
parties in the same manner as the award. The periods of time provided
Sor under paragraph (2) of Article 51 and paragraph (2) of Article 52
shall run from the date on which the decision was rendered.”

47, The procedure governing the submission, receipt and processing of requests for a
supplementary decision or for rectification of an award is set out in ICSID Arbitration Rule
49 which provides:

“(1) Within 45 days after the date on which the award was rendered,
either party may request, pursuant to Article 49(2) of the Convention, a
supplementary decision on, or the rectification of, the award. Such a
request shall be addressed in writing to the Secretary-General. The
request shall:

(a) identify the award to which it relates;
(b) indicate the date of the request;
(c) state in detail:

(i) any question which, in the opinion of the requesting party,
the Tribunal omitted to decide in the award; and

(ii) any error in the award which the requesting party seeks to
have rectified; and

(d) be accompanied by a fee for lodging the request.

(2) Upon receipt of the request and of the lodging fee, the Secretary-
General shall forthwith:

(a) register the request;
(b) notify the parties of the registration;

(c) transmit to the other party a copy of the request and of any
accompanying documentation; and

(d) transmit to each member of the Tribunal a copy of the notice
of registration, together with a copy of the request and of any
accompanying documentation.

(3) The President of the Tribunal shall consult the members on whether
it is necessary for the Tribunal to meet in order to consider the request.
The Tribunal shall fix a time limit for the parties to file their observations
on the request and shall determine the procedure for its consideration.

10

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

(4) Rules 46-48 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to any decision of the
Tribunal pursuant to this Rule.

(5) If a request is received by the Secretary-General more than 45 days
after the award was rendered, he shall refuse to register the request and
so inform forthwith the requesting party.”

48. The nature and purpose of the supplementation procedure provided for by Article 49(2) of the
ICSID Convention, was considered in Compaftia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi
Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic.5" In Vivendi, the Ad Hoc Committee made clear that:

“[I]¢ is important to state that that procedure, and any supplementary
decision or rectification as may result, in no way consists of a means of
appealing or otherwise revising the merits of the decision subject to
supplementation or rectification. Those sorts of proceedings are simply
not provided for in the ICSID system.”

In Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt,*® the Ad Hoc Committee concluded that:

“A proceeding under Article 49(2) would not allow the Tribunal to go
Jurther than to decide upon the question it had omitted to deal with.”

In Ickale Insaat Limited Sirketi v. Turkmenistan,® the tribunal stated that:

“According to Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal ‘may
[...] decide any question which it had omitted to decide in the award’ in
a supplementary decision. Such a decision ‘shall become part of the
award and shall be notified to the parties in the same manner as the
award.’ The language used in Article 49(2) (‘may’) suggests that the
tribunal may decide, in its discretion, whether a supplementary decision
is required or indeed appropriate. This is the position adopted by other
ICSID tribunals.”

49. The ambit of the Article 49(2) procedure has been the subject of considerable commentary.
For example:

57 CL-0252, Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija, S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Request for Supplementation and Rectification of its Decision
Concerning Annulment of the Award, 28 May 2003, para. 11.

58 CL-0025, Wena Hotels v Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on the Application by the Arab
Republic of Egypt for Annulment of the Arbitral Award dated December 8, 2000, 5 February 2002, para. 101.

° CL-0259, Ickale Insaat Limited Sirketi v. Turkmenistan, (CSID Case No. ARB/10/24, Decision on Claimant’s Request
for Supplementary Decision and Rectification of the Award, 4 October 2016 (“J¢kale”), para. 102. The Ickale tribunal
mentioned as an example Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/23,
Decision on Claimant's Request for Supplementation and Rectification of Award, 18 January 2013, para. 39 (“The Tribunal
observes that the Parties are in agreement that the Tribunal has discretion as to whether or not to supplement an award
under the terms of Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention. The term ‘may’ leaves no doubt that this is the case when the
Tribunal has omitted to decide a question submitted to it.”) See, CL-0259, Ickale, fn. 214.

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

“[...] the procedure of self-correction under Art. 49(2) will be useful only
in the case of inadvertent omissions of a technical character but not in
the case of a considered omission affecting a fundamental aspect of the
tribunal’s reasoning.”

“[...] case law on Art. 49(2) confirms the limited relevance of the remedy
of suppl ion. It is useful for unintentional omissions of technical
nature. [...] It is not a sufficient remedy for a failure to address major
facts and arguments [that] go to the core of the tribunal’s decision.”°!

 

“The remedy offered by Art. 49(2) will be useful only in cases of
inadvertent omissions of a technical character. [...] Art. 49(2) will not
be useful in cases of a failure to address major facts and arguments
which go to the core of the tribunal’s decision.”

“[This remedy] is intended to provide a simple, inexpensive process for
dealing with minor technical and clerical mistakes in the award, such as
calculation errors or typos.”

“[...] supplementation and correction deal with minor technical and
clerical mistakes in the award [...] This remedy is designed for
inadvertent omissions and minor technical errors. It is not designed for
a substantive review of the decision. Rather, it enables the tribunal to
correct mistakes that may have occurred in the award’s drafting in a
simple way [...] the time limits for a request for revision or annulment
do not start to run until a decision on a request for rectification or
annulment has been rendered.”

50. The Tribunal has provided the Parties with an opportunity to file observations pursuant to
ICSID Arbitration Rule 49(3) and it has applied ICSID Arbitration Rules 46-48, mutatis
mutandis, in preparing this decision, as required by ICSID Arbitration Rule 49(4).

51. Within the context of its Article 49(2) Request, Respondent contends that the Tribunal has
omitted to deal with the four “questions” that it has identified and defined in its Request and
in respect of which, the Parties’ submissions are set out in summary form above.

52. On the basis of a careful review of the Parties’ submissions and supporting materials and of
the content of its Award, the Tribunal concludes that there is no basis to supplement the
Award in accordance with the provisions of Article 49(2) and that Respondent’s Request

© SCHREUER, MALINTOPPI, REINISCH & SINCLAIR, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2009, p. 860.

6! SCHREUER, MALINTOPPI, REINISCH & SINCLAIR, cit., p. 864.

& SCHREUER, MALINTOPPI, REINISCH & SINCLAIR, cit., p. 1014.

© HEISKANEN and HALONEN, Post-Award Remedies, in Giorgetti (Ed.), Litigating International Investment Disputes: A
Practitioner's Guide, Brill/Nijhoff, 2014, p. 523.

“ DONG, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Course on Dispute Settlement, International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes, 2.8 Post-Award Remedies and Procedures, pp. 1-7-8, available at
http://unctad.org/en/Docs/edmmisc232_en.pdf.

12

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

should be denied. In any event, Respondent’s Request raises matters which go well beyond
those properly within the ambit of an Article 49(2) request. The Tribunal sets out its reasoning
below.

(a) Respondent’s First Question

53. Respondent requests the Tribunal to supplement the Award “by specifically addressing
whether EU Law shall be applied to decide the facts and/or the merits of the dispute.”®>

54. At paragraph 340 of the Award, the Tribunal stated that:

“To conclude, EU law is not incompatible with the provision for
investor-State arbitration contained in Part V of the ECT, including
international arbitration under the ICSID Convention. The two legal
orders can be applied together as regards the Parties’ arbitration
agreement and this arbitration, because only the ECT deals with
investor-State arbitration; and nothing in EU law can be interpreted as
precluding investor-State arbitration under the ECT and the ICSID
Convention.”

55. In accordance with its mandate, the Tribunal decided the merits of the case on the basis of the
ECT. The Tribunal concluded that Respondent failed to accord fair and equitable treatment
to Claimant on the basis of Article 10(1) of the ECT. In light of the fact that the ECT is the
applicable law and that the Tribunal decided the case accordingly and that, in any event, the
Tribunal found no incompatibility between the ECT and EU law, there was no need to
investigate the application of EU law to the facts and/or to the merits of the dispute.

56. Subject to the condition that the Tribunal agreed to supplement the Award by addressing
whether EU law applied to decide the facts and/or the merits of the dispute (“Jf the answer is
positive [...]”), Respondent further requested the Tribunal to deal with two sub-questions
pertaining to the impact of EU law on State aid and on environmental protection on
Claimant’s legitimate expectations.® For the reasons stated in the previous paragraph, that
condition has not been satisfied and it is not necessary to consider these matters further.

(b) Respondent’s Second Question

57. Respondent requests the Tribunal to supplement the Award “by specifically addressing the
date in which the Claimant made its investment in order to assess its legitimate
expectations,”®” The Award contains a comprehensive, clear and self-explanatory chronology
of the events constituting and surrounding the making of Claimant’s investment at paragraphs
89 to 99 of the Award. As Claimant notes at paragraph 34 of its Observations:

“It is clear from the narrative provided in the Award that the Claimant
made its investments in the CSP plants in phases over a period of time

© Request, para. 29.
& Ibidem, para. 30.
° Ibidem, para. 43.

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

commencing in 2008 and through 2010. The Award makes it clear that
at all relevant times the Claimant had a legitimate expectation to the
continued application of the RD 661/2007 regime as a result of: (a) its
‘substantial due diligence’; and (b) the specific commitments made by
the Respondent to qualifying investments (including the three CSP Plants
in which the Claimant invested). Notably, the Award expressly indicates
that RD 661/2007 — the regime that was in place at the time Masdar
invested — included a very specific unilateral offer from the State and it
was because of these specific commitment that Masdar's expectations to
the continued application of the RD 661/2007 economic regime were
legitimate.”

58. That is an analysis with which the Tribunal concurs. In the Award, the Tribunal assessed
Claimant’s legitimate expectations as to the continuing application of RD 661/2007. The
Tribunal does not accept that it failed to address the question as to when Claimant made its
investment.

(c) Respondent’s Third Question

59. Respondent requests the Tribunal to supplement the Award by disclosing (i) which arbitrator
dissented from the majority’s decision on the appropriate valuation method for calculating
Claimant’s damages and (ii) his/her reasons for not concurring with the other arbitrators.

60. In its communication to the Parties dated 19 July 2018, the Tribunal made clear that:

“[T]here was no Dissenting Opinion and hence there is none to be
produced, The Award is complete as it stands and is a decision of the
Tribunal. It is clear on the face of the Award to what extent it is
unanimous and to what extent it is a decision of the Tribunal by a
majority.”

61. The Tribunal’s position is in line with Articles 48(1) (which authorises decisions by a majority
vote) and 48(4) of the ICSID Convention (which allows arbitrators to attach individual
opinions to the award).® In any case, it has to be remembered that an arbitrator who does not
concur with the majority is not obliged to issue a dissenting opinion or to state the reasons for
his/her disagreement in the award. In fact, it is a “right” and not an obligation of the dissenting
arbitrator to issue a separate or a dissenting opinion, if he or she deems it appropriate.”

© Award, paras. 496-499 and 512-521.

® See also Rule 47(3) of ICSID Arbitration Rules: “Any member of the Tribunal may attach his individual opinion to the
award, whether he dissents from the mejority or not, or a statement of his dissent.” (Emphasis added).

7 Titi, Investment Arbitration and the Controverted Right of the Arbitrator to Issue a Separate or Dissenting Opinion,
LAPE 17 (2018), p. 198: “The ICSID Convention is rare among investment arbitration rules to expressly recognize the
right of the arbitrator to attach his or her personal opinion to the award.” SCHREUER, MALINTOPPI, REINISCH &
SINCLAIR, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2001, p. 816: “The text [of Article 48(4) of the ICSID Convention] is
permissive. It leaves an individual member of a tribunal with several options. [...] A member voting against the majority
opinion, has three possibilities. The first is to simply vote against without offering an explanation. The second is to offer a
statement of dissent without offering a full opinion. The third is to write a detailed and fully reasoned dissenting opinion.”

14

 

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

 

62. Accordingly, no suppl of the kind req d by Respondent is either necessary or
appropriate under Article 49(2).

(d) Respondent’s Fourth Question

63. Respondent contends that Exhibit BQR-1107' does not evidence the adjustments of paras
654(b), (c) and (d) of the Award and that the Tribunal’s damage calculation is “unexplained,

unreasoned, and unjustified.”

64. In paragraphs 564 to 655 of the Award, the Tribunal has explained in detail both the reasons
which led it to apply the DCF method to its valuation and the assumptions adopted by the
Tribunal to conclude that the amount of damages to be paid by Respondent amounted to some
EUR 64.5 million. In the course of this valuation exercise, the Tribunal took into
consideration all of the arguments advanced by the Parties and their experts; in light of the
facts of the case, the Tribunal applied some assumptions and adjustments, which are clearly
identified in the Award.”

65. With reference to Respondent’s request that the Tribunal supplement the Award “by
reasoning all the steps followed to apply in the Brattle’s excel model BQR-110,”™ the
Tribunal notes, first, as a matter of principle, that there is no obligation upon a tribunal to
provide a detailed point by point justification of every step that it has taken in the course of a
valuation such as this. Support for this proposition is to be found in numerous ICSID decisions
and in the Decision of the tribunal on the Request for Correction, Supplementary Decision
and Interpretation in ADM v, Mexico, which was faced with an interpretation of Article 57 of
the ICSID (Additional Facility) Rules — a provision akin to Article 49(2) of the ICSID
Convention.’> Second, and in any event, as Claimant has pointed out at paragraphs 54 to 59
of its Observations, the implementation of the adjustments adopted by the Tribunal in the
valuation model by reference to Exhibit BQR 110 is a straightforward task.

7 See Award, fn. 605.

” Request, para 63 (emphasis in original).

® Award, paras. 600-652.

74 Request, para 67.

75 See CL-249, Eiser Infrastructure Limited and Energia Solar Luxembourg S.a.r.l. v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No.
ARB/13/36, Award, 4 May 2017, para. 473: “in a case of such scope and complexity damages cannot be determined with
mechanical precision”); CL-250, Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v Government of Guinea, \CSID
Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision on the Application by Guinea for Partial Annulment of the Arbitral Award, 14 December
1989, para. 5.09: “[i]n the Committee's view, the requirement to state reasons is satisfied as long as the award enables one
to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to Point B. and eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of

fact or of law”), and CL-255, Archer Daniels Midland Company and Tate & Lyle Ingredients Americas, Inc. v. The United
Mexican States, \CSID Case No, ARB(AF)/04/05, Decision on the Request for Correction, Supplementary Decision and
Interpretation, 10 July 2008, para. 33; “{i]/, at the other extreme, the ‘questions’ to be decided in this case were the precise
mathematical weight to be accorded to every factor affecting the calculation of damages, then few awards would be immune

Jrom allegation of infra petita.”

15

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

(e) The Tribunal’s Conclusion

66. In light of the above, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent’s Request establishes no basis
upon which a case may be made that the Award should be supplemented and/or rectified
pursuant to Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention. The Request must therefore be dismissed.

Iv. COSTS
67. Claimant requests that the Tribunal:

“[...] (b) order Spain to assume all fees and costs of the Request,
including the costs of the Claimant’s legal representation and other costs
incurred by the Claimant in connection with the Request.””®

68. Having considered the Parties’ positions, and taking account of the Tribunal’s decision, which
resulted in the dismissal of Respondent’s Request, the Tribunal determines that each Party
shall bear its own legal and other expenses (“Costs of the Parties”) incurred in connection
with the Request; but that Respondent shall pay the entirety of the Tribunal’s fees and
expenses and the administrative expenses of ICSID (i.e. the “Costs of the Proceeding”)
incurred in connection with the Request. The Costs of the Proceeding incurred in connection
with the Request amount to USD 75,501.06 and have been paid out of the advances made by
the Parties to ICSID in equal parts.” As a result, each Party’s share of the Costs of the
Proceeding relating to the Request amounts to USD 37,750.53. Accordingly, the Tribunal
orders Respondent to pay Claimant USD 37,750.53 for the expended portion of Claimant’s
advances to ICSID in connection with the Request.

Vv. DECISION
69. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides as follows:
(a) The Respondent’s Request for a Supplementary Decision is denied.

(b) Each Party shall bear its legal and other expenses incurred in connection with the
Respondent’s Request for a Supplementary Decision.

(c) The fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the administrative expenses of
ICSID incurred in connection with the Respondent’s Request for a Supplementary
Decision which amount to USD 75,501.06 shall be borne by Respondent. Accordingly,
the Tribunal orders Respondent to pay Claimant USD 37,750.53 for the expended portion
of Claimant’s advances to ICSID in connection with the Request.

[Space left blank intentionally]

7 Observations, para. 61.

7 That total amount is composed of: Arbitrators’ Fees and Expenses (USD 30, 187: 99) + ICSID’s Administrative Fees
(USD 42,000) + Direct Expenses (USD 3,313.07). The balance will be to the Parties in

to the payments that they advanced to ICSID.

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1)

 

“PB. ibe Vreu a /

Professor Brigitte Stern Mr. Gary Born
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: NOV 0 8 2018 Date: NOV 2 7 2018

Mr. John Beechey, CBE
President

Date: NOV 1 6 2018

