IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION
BEFORE A TRIBUNAL CONSTITUTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THE FREE TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA AND THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, DATED 30 JUNE 2007
and —

THE ARBITRATION RULES OF THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION
ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW, 1976

PCA CASE N° 2018-55

— between —

1. MASON CAPITAL L.P. (U.S.A.)
2. MASON MANAGEMENT LLC (U.S.A.)

(“Claimants’’)

and —

REPUBLIC OF KOREA

(“Respondent,” and together with Claimants, the “Parties”)

 

DECISION ON RESPONDENT’S
PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS

 

The Arbitral Tribunal
Professor Dr. Klaus Sachs (Presiding Arbitrator)
The Rt. Hon. Dame Elizabeth Gloster

Professor Pierre Mayer

Registry

Permanent Court of Arbitration

This page intentionally left blank

Til.

VI.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

TABLE OF CONTE!

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES ....
PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 2

 

 

A. Commencement of the arbitration and constitution of the Tribunal.

 

B. Process for determination of Respondent’s preliminary objections...........

 

 

C. — Written pleadi 5
D. — Hearing on preliminary objections 5
STATEMENT OF FACTS. 7

 

 

A. — Corporate structure of Claimants and their affiliates.........

 

 

B. The Partnership Law and the Partnership Agreement

 

C. — Claimants’ alleged investments in SC&T and SEC

  

D. — Capital contributions and incentive allocation of the General Partner
SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS AND REQUESTS FOR RELIEF............. 18

A. — Summary of Respondent’s preliminary objections

 

 

 
 

 

 

B.  Respondent’s request for relief. 19
C. Summary of Claimants’ position on Respondent’s preliminary objection: 19
D. — Claimants’ request for relief. 20
KEY LEGAL PROVISIONS 22
THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONING 25

 

A. — Claimants’ objection to the expedited procedure and request for a declaration of
jurisdiction and admissibility of the General Partner’s claim sesseeeeeee

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Claimants’ position 26
2. Respondent’s position 26
3. Tribunal’s analysis 27
B. — Respondent’s preliminary objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the General
Partner’s claim 28
1. Whether the General Partner qualifies as an “investor” that has “made” an
“investment” under the FTA 29
2. Whether the General Partner has standing to bring a claim.....

 

C. Respondent’ preliminary objection that the General Partner’s claim is legally deficient 80
1. Respondent’s position 81

2. Claimants’ position 83

3. The Tribunal’s analysis............. 84
D. — Costs of the prelimi phase 85

 

 

VII. OPERATIVE PART. 87

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

GLOSSARY OF DEFINED TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

CAFTA

Cayman Fund

Cheil

Claimants

Capital Markets Act

Counter-Memorial

Domestic Fund

FTA

General Partner

Investment Manager

Limited Partner

Mason

Memorial

Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim

Central American — Dominican Republic Free
Trade Agreement

Mason Capital Master Fund L.P.

Cheil Industries Incorporated

Mason Capital L.P. and Mason Management

Korean Financial Investment Services and
Capital Markets Act

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary
Objections dated 19 April 2019

Mason Capital L.P.

The Free Trade Agreement between the Republic
of Korea and the United States of America,
signed on 30 June 2007, entered into force on
15 March 2012

Mason Management LLC

Mason Capital Management LLC

Mason Capital Ltd.

The Mason group of companies

Respondent’s Memorial on
Objections dated 25 January 2019

Preliminary

Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim
dated 13 September 2018

Partnership Agreement

Partnership Law

Private International Law Act

PCA

Respondent

Response

Reply

Rejoinder

Samsung

Samsung Shares

SC&T

SEC

UNCITRAL Rules

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Second Amended and Restated Limited
Partnership Agreement dated | January 2013

Exempted Limited Partnership Law, 2014 of the
Cayman Islands

Korean Act on Private International Law

Permanent Court of Arbitration

Republic of Korea

Respondent’s Response to Notice of Arbitration
and Statement of Claim dated 12 October 2018

Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections
dated 28 June 2019

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections
dated 11 September 2019

Samsung group of companies

Shares of Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd and
Samsung C&T Corporation

Samsung C&T Corporation

Samsung Electronics, Inc.

Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law, 1976

iii

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

The claimants in this arbitration are Mason Capital L.P. and Mason Management LLC
(collectively referred to as “Claimants”), two companies incorporated under the laws of the State
of Delaware, the United States of America, with their registered office at 251 Little Falls Drive,
Wilmington, DE 19808, U.S.A.

Claimants are represented in these proceedings by Ms. Claudia T. Salomon, Ms. Lilia B. Vazova,
Mr. Matthew C. Catalano of Latham & Watkins LLP, 885 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022,
U.S.A., Ms. Sophie J. Lamb QC, Mr. Samuel M. Pape, and Mr. Bryce Williams of Latham &
Watkins LLP, 99 Bishopsgate, London EC2M 3XF, United Kingdom, Mr. Wonsuk (Steve) Kang
of Latham & Watkins LLP, 29F One IFC, 10 Gukjegeumyung-ro Yeongdeungpo-gu, Seoul
07326, Republic of Korea, and Mr. Eun Nyung (Ian) Lee and Mr. John M. Kim of KL Partners,
7th Floor, Tower 8, 7 Jongro 5 gil, Jongro-gu 7, Seoul 03157, Republic of Korea.

The respondent is the Republic of Korea (“Respondent” or “Korea’’).

Respondent is represented in these proceedings by Mr. Paul Friedland, Mr. Sven Volkmer,
Mr. Damien Nyer, Ms. Insue Kim of White & Case LLP, 1221 Avenue of the Americas, New
York 10020-1095, U.S.A., Mr. Jun Hee Kim, Ms. Sebyul Chun of White & Case LLP, 31F One
IFC, 10 Gukjegeumyung-ro, Yeongdeungpo-gu, Seoul 07326, Republic of Korea, Mr. Moon
Sung Lee, Mr. Dong Seong Nam, Mr. Robert Wachter, Mr. Kyung Chun Kim, Mr. Sang Hoon
Han, Mr. Hee Woong Lee, Ms. Ayong Lim, and Ms. Elizabeth Shin of Lee & Ko, Hanjin
Building, 63 Namdaemun-ro, Jung-gu, Seoul 04532, Republic of Korea.

A dispute has arisen between Claimants and Respondent concerning Claimants’ investment in
Samsung C&T Corporation (“SC&T”) and Samsung Electronics, Inc. (“SEC”), two publicly
listed Korean companies that form part of the Samsung group of companies (“Samsung
Group”).' According to Claimants, Korean government officials improperly and illegally
manipulated the SC&T shareholder vote to approve the merger of SC&T with Cheil Industries,
Inc. (“Cheil’””) at an undervalue to SC&T shareholders. These actions, Claimants argue, amount

to violations of the minimum standard of treatment and national treatment standard under the

Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, 13 September 2018 (the “Notice of Arbitration and
Statement of Claim”), { 2.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

FTA and caused damages to Claimants.” Respondent denies Claimants’ allegations as to the

violations of the FTA and damages in their entirety.*

The merits of such allegations are not the subject for today. This decision addresses certain
preliminary matters, namely Respondent’s application of 25 January 2019 that the Tribunal
dismiss certain of Claimants’ claims pursuant to Articles 11.20.6 and 11.20.7 of the FTA on the
basis that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over them or, alternatively, that, as a matter of law, some
of Claimants’ claims are not claims for which an award in favour of Claimants may be made

under Article 11.26 of the FTA.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY

Commencement of the arbitration and constitution of the Tribunal

On 7 June 2018, Claimants served upon the Government of the Republic of Korea a Notice of
Intent to bring arbitration proceedings against the Republic of Korea pursuant to Article 11.16.2
of the Free Trade Agreement between the Republic of Korea and the United States of America,
signed on 30 June 2007 and entered into force on 15 March 2012 (the “FTA”).

On 13 September 2018, Claimants filed the Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim
pursuant to Article 3(1) of the United Nations Commission for International Trade Law

Arbitration Rules, 1976 (the “UNCITRAL Rules”) and Article 11.16.3 of the FTA.

In the Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, Claimants appointed The Rt. Hon. Dame
Elizabeth Gloster, a national of the United Kingdom, as the first arbitrator. Dame Elizabeth’s

contact details are:

The Rt. Hon. Dame Elizabeth Gloster
One Essex Court
Temple
London EC4Y 9AR
United Kingdom
In its Response to Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim dated 12 October 2018,

Respondent agreed to the application of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules and appointed Professor

Pierre Mayer, a French national, as the second arbitrator. Professor Mayer’s contact details are:

Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, {ff 3-6, 64, 74, 81.

Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 25 January 2019 (the “Memorial”), { 3.

ll.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Professor Pierre Mayer
20 Rue des Pyramides
Paris 75001

France

On 11 December 2018, the Parties, pursuant to Article 11.19.1 of the FTA, appointed Professor
Dr. Klaus Sachs, a German national, as the presiding arbitrator. Professor Sachs’ contact details

are:

Professor Dr. Klaus Sachs
CMS Hasche Sigle
Nymphenburger StraBe 12
80335 Munich

Germany

On 13 December 2018, the Parties agreed to the administration of the proceedings by the
Permanent Court of Arbitration (the “PCA”). The PCA accepted to act as registry on
14 December 2018.

On 22 December 2018, the PCA, acting on behalf of the Tribunal, circulated drafts of the Terms

of Appointment and the Procedural Order No. | for the Parties’ review and comments.

Following an extension request which was granted by the Tribunal, on | and 4 February 2019,
respectively, the Parties submitted their joint comments on the draft Terms of Appointment and
draft Procedural Order 1. In their joint communication of 1 February 2019, the Parties consented

to the appointment of Mr. Marcus Weiler as Assistant to the Tribunal.

On 19 February 2019, a first procedural meeting was held via telephone conference in which
counsel and representatives for both Parties, all members of the Tribunal, the Assistant to the

Tribunal, and the PCA participated.

On 25 February 2019, having considered the Parties’ comments, the Tribunal issued its Terms of
Appointment, signed by the President of the Tribunal, which, inter alia, fixed Singapore as the
place of arbitration (legal seat) pursuant to the Parties’ agreement, set out rules concerning the
language of the arbitration and translations. A final version of the Terms of Appointment signed

by all Parties and each member of the Tribunal was circulated on 11 March 2019.

20.

21.

22.

23.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Also on 25 February 2019, having considered the Parties’ comments, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 1, which set out the rules of procedure, including the transparency regime
applicable to these proceedings.

dent’s imi bi

Process for determination of Resp 's pr 'y
On 18 and 19 January 2019, the Parties jointly submitted a proposed intermediate timetable to
the Tribunal, pursuant to which Respondent was to file its preliminary objections under Articles
11.20.6 and 11.20.7 of the FTA together with a proposed procedural timetable for the preliminary
objections phase by 25 January 2019 and the Parties were to revert to the Tribunal with an agreed
timetable for the preliminary objections or, in case of disagreement, with separate proposed
timetables by 12 February 2019. On 21 January 2019, the Tribunal confirmed that the proposed

intermediate timetable was acceptable.

Following an extension request which was granted by the Tribunal, on 13 February 2019, the
Parties reverted to the Tribunal separately with their observations on the appropriate process for

determining Respondent's preliminary objections and the procedural calendar.

Having obtained prior leave, on 15 February 2019, Respondent submitted further observations
on Claimants’ characterization of certain legal authorities cited in Claimants’ submission of

13 February 2019.

During the first procedural meeting on 19 February 2019, as recorded in the Tribunal’s letter
dated 26 February 2019, the Parties and the Tribunal agreed on a tentative schedule for the
determination of Respondent’s preliminary objections in deviation from the time limits set forth
in Article 11.20.7 of the FTA. The tentative schedule was subject to the Parties’ subsequent

agreement or a decision by the Tribunal to this effect.

On 28 February and 4 March 2019, Claimants and Respondent, respectively, confirmed their
agreement to the timetable set out in the Tribunal’s letter of 26 February 2019 and provided
further comments on the admissibility of a further separate jurisdictional phase subsequent to the

preliminary objections phase.

On 5 March 2019, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 2, which established the
procedural calendar for the determination of Respondent’s preliminary objections, as agreed by
the Parties at the first procedural meeting and confirmed by the Parties’ letters of 28 February

and 4 March 2019. The Tribunal also reserved its position as to the admissibility of another

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

separate jurisdictional phase until such time as a request for another jurisdictional phase were

made.

Written pleadings

On 25 January 2019, Respondent submitted its Memorial, with supporting evidence and a

proposed procedural calendar for the preliminary objections phase.

On 19 April 2019, Claimants filed their Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections (the

“Counter-Memorial”), with supporting evidence.

On 28 June 2019, Respondent filed its Reply on Preliminary Objections (the “Reply”), with

supporting evidence.

Further to a joint request from the Parties, on 30 August 2019, the Tribunal issued Procedural

Order No. 3 in which it adopted a revised procedural calendar.

On 6 September 2019, pursuant to the revised procedural calendar, Claimants submitted witness.
statements and expert reports in anticipation of Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections,
excluding accompanying documents. On 11 September 2019, Claimants filed their Rejoinder on

Preliminary Objections (the “Rejoinder”).

On 26 September 2019, Respondent sought leave to introduce three new Korean legal authorities
(Exhibits R-23, R-24 and R-25) into the record. Upon the Tribunal’s invitation to comment,
Claimants objected to Respondent’ s request by letter dated 27 September 2019. On 28 September

2019, the Tribunal admitted the legal authorities onto the record.

Hearing on preliminary objections
On 16 September 2019, each side submitted a final list of fact and expert witnesses it wished to

cross-examine at the hearing.

On 24 September 2019, a pre-hearing conference call was held in which counsel and
representatives for the Parties, all members of the Tribunal, the Assistant to the Tribunal and the

PCA participated.

The hearing on Respondent’s preliminary objections (the “Hearing on Preliminary

Objections” or the “Hearing”) was held at the New York International Arbitration Center, 150

PCA Case N° 2018-55

Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

East 42nd Street, New York, NY 10017, U.S.A., from 2 to 4 October 2019. The following persons

attended the hearing:

Tribunal:

Claimants:

Respondent:

Professor Dr. Klaus Sachs

The Rt. Hon. Dame Elizabeth Gloster
Professor Pierre Mayer

Mr. Marcus Weiler

Dr. Levent Sabanogullari

Mr. James McGovern

Ms. Claudia T. Salomon
Ms. Sophie J. Lamb QC
Mr. Michael A. Watsula
Mr. Bryce Williams

Mr. Dong-Seok (Johan) Oh
Mr. John M. Kim

Ms. Jisun Hwang

Mr. Kenneth Garschina
Mr. Derek Satzinger

Mr. Rolf Lindsay

Professor Jae Yeol Kwon

Ms. Wansoo Suh
Mr. Jon Walton

Ms. Laura Vazquez

Mr. Changwan Han
Mr. Donghwan Shin
Ms. Sujin Kim

Mr. Sangjin Park
Mr. Kyungsung Yoo
Mr. Paul Friedland
Mr. Damien Nyer
Mr. Sven Volkmer
Mr. Surya Gopalan
Mr. Sanghoon Han
Ms. Ji Hyun Yoon
Mr. Richard Jung Yeun Won

Presiding Arbitrator
Arbitrator

Arbitrator

Assistant to the Tribunal
PCA

General Counsel and Chief Compliance
Officer, Mason Capital

Counsel, Latham & Watkins
Counsel, Latham & Watkins

Counsel, Latham & Watkins

Counsel, Latham & Watkins

Counsel, KL Partners

Counsel, KL Partners

Counsel, KL Partners

Co-Founder, Mason Capital (Witness)
CFO, Mason Capital (Witness)
Partner, Walkers (Expert)

Dean, Kyung Hee University School of
Law (Expert)

Interpreter
Legal Assistant, Latham & Watkins
Legal Assistant, Latham & Watkins

Ministry of Justice

Ministry of Justice

Ministry of Justice

Ministry of Health and Welfare
Ministry of Health and Welfare
Counsel, White & Case
Counsel, White & Case
Counsel, White & Case
Counsel, White & Case
Counsel, Lee & Ko

Counsel, Lee & Ko

Counsel, Lee & Ko

33.

34.

35.

Til.

36.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Ms. Rachael Reynolds Partner, Ogier (Expert)

Professor Hyeok-Joon Rho Professor, Seoul National University
School of Law (Expert)

Mr. Chi-hyun Ahn Interpreter

At the Hearing, the following fact and expert witnesses gave evidence for Claimants and were
cross-examined by Respondent’s counsel in accordance with the procedure set out in Procedural
Order No. | and agreed at the pre-hearing conference call: Mr. Kenneth Garschina and Mr. Derek
Satzinger of Mason Capital, Mr. Rolf Lindsay of Walkers and Professor Jae Yeol Kwon of Kyung

Hee University School of Law.

At the Hearing, the following expert witnesses gave evidence for Respondent and were cross-
examined by Claimants’ counsel in accordance with the procedure set out in Procedural Order
No. 1 and agreed at the pre-hearing conference call: Ms. Rachael Reynolds of Ogier and Professor

Hyeok-Joon Rho of Seoul National University School of Law.

At the Hearing, as recorded in the Tribunal’s letter of 8 August 2019, the Tribunal and the Parties
agreed that the Parties would not submit any post-hearing briefs unless the Tribunal seeks further
clarifications on specific issues from them. The Tribunal decided that it would not need any

further clarifications from the Parties.
STATEMENT OF FACTS

Corporate structure of Claimants and their affiliates

Mason Capital Management LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, is an investment
management firm that was founded in or about January 2002 (the “Investment Manager’”).* All
employees of the Mason group of companies (“Mason”) are employed by the Investment

Manager.’

Witness Statement of Kenneth Garschina, 17 April 2019 (“First WS Garschina”) [CWS-1], 42;
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Formation of Amagansett Capital Management LLC,
9 January 2002 [C-2].

Counter-Memorial, {{ 13; Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019,
p. 177:22-24 [Cross-examination of Mr. Satzinger].

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

10

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

According to Claimants, the Investment Manager “actively manages a portfolio of investments
with the objective of achieving capital appreciation over time.” ° Its investments are made

through two funds:

a. Mason Capital L.P., a limited partnership organized under the laws of the State of

Delaware, the United States of America (the “Domestic Fund”); and

b. Mason Capital Master Fund L.P., an exempted limited partnership governed by the
Exempted Limited Partnership Law, 2014 of the Cayman Islands (the “Cayman

Fund”, “Fund” or “Partnership”).’

The general partner of the Domestic Fund and the Cayman Fund is Mason Management LLC
(the “General Partner”), a limited liability company incorporated under the laws of the State of
Delaware, the United States of America. The General Partner was founded in or around July 2000
by Messrs. Michael Martino and Kenneth Garschina, two U.S. nationals.* The General Partner

became the general partner in the Cayman Fund in or around 2009.?

In addition to the General Partner, the Cayman Fund has a sole limited partner, Mason Capital
Ltd. (the “Limited Partner’), an exempted company incorporated under the laws of Cayman

Islands. '°
The Cayman Fund became operational at the start of 2010."!

The following summary chart encapsulates the relevant entities of Mason:'?

Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, 7.
Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, 7.

First WS Garschina [CWS-1], 91; Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Formation of Reef
Management LLC, 26 July 2000 [C-1].

Second Witness Statement of Derek Satzinger, 6 September 2019 (“Second WS Satzinger”) [CWS-4],
q12.

First Witness Statement of Derek Satzinger, 18 April 2019 (“First WS Satzinger”) [CWS-2], 10; First
WS Garschina [CWS-1], 7.

Second WS Satzinger [CWS-4], 12.
Cf. First Expert Report of Rolf Lindsay, 18 April 2019 (“First ER Lindsay”) [CER-1], Annex 3.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

 

Mason Capital Management LLC

 

Delaware investment management firm
(“Investment Manager”)

 

 

Mason Management LLC

 

Delaware limited liability company
(“General Partner”)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

\ Mason Capital Ltd.
\ Cayman Islands
\ exempted company
\ (“Limited Partner™)
\
\ L
¥ x
Mason Capital LP. Mason Capital Master Fund L.P.
Delaware limited partnership Cayman Islands exempted limited.
A“ = - partnership
(“Domestic Fund”) (“Cayman Fund”)
B. The Partnership Law and the Partnership Agreement
42.

 

Cayman Islands exempted limited partnerships are governed by the Exempted Limited
Partnership Law, 2014 of the Cayman Islands (the “Partnership Law’”).'* The Parties have made
submissions, inter alia, on the following provisions of the Partnership Law:

SECTION 3

SAVING OF RULES OF EQUITY AND COMMON LAW

The rules of equity and of common law applicable to partnerships as modified
by the Partnership Law but excluding sections 31, 45 to 54 and 56 to 57 shall
apply to an exempted limited partnership, except where they are inconsistent
with the express provisions of this Law.

Exempted Limited Partnership Law, 2014 of the Cayman Islands [CLA-22].

Q)

a)

Q)

a)

Q)

a)

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

SECTION 4(2)
CONSTITUTION

An exempted limited partnership shall consist of one or more persons called
general partners who shall, in the event that the assets of the exempted limited
partnership are inadequate, be liable for all debts and obligations of the
exempted limited partnership, and one or more persons called limited partners
who shall not be liable for the debts or obligations of the exempted limited
partnership save as provided in the partnership agreement and to the extent
specified in section 20(1) and 34(1), but a general partner, without derogation
from his position as such, may, in addition, take an interest as a limited partner
in the exempted limited partnership.

SECTION 14
MODIFICATION OF GENERAL LAW

A limited partner shall not take part in the conduct of the business of an
exempted limited partnership in its capacity as limited partner.

All letters, contracts, deeds, instruments or documents whatsoever shall be
entered into by or on behalf of the general partner (or any agent or delegate of
the general partner) on behalf of the exempted limited partnership.

SECTION 16(1), (2)

PROPERTY

Any rights or property of every description of the exempted limited
partnership, including all choses in action and any right to make capital calls
and receive the proceeds thereof that is conveyed to or vested in or held on
behalf of any one or more of the general partners or which is conveyed into or
vested in the name of the exempted limited partnership shall be held or deemed
to be held by the general partner and if more than one then by the general
partners jointly, upon trust as an asset of the exempted limited partnership in
accordance with the terms of the partnership agreement.

Any debt or obligation incurred by a general partner in the conduct of the
business of an exempted limited partnership shall be a debt or obligation of the
exempted limited partnership.

SECTION 20(1)

LIABILITY OF LIMITED PARTNER

Tf a limited partner takes part in the conduct of the business of an exempted
limited partnership in its dealings with persons who are not partners, that
limited partner shall be liable, in the event of the insolvency of the exempted
limited partnership, for all debts and obligations of that exempted limited
partnership incurred during the period that he participates in the conduct of the
business as though he were, for that period, a general partner, but he shall be
liable only to a person who transacts business with the exempted limited
partnership during the period with actual knowledge of his participation and
who then reasonably believed the limited partner to be a general partner.

 

a)

Q)

@)

4)

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

SECTION 23

DIFFERENCES DECIDED BY GENERAL PARTNER

Any difference arising as to matters connected with the business of the
exempted limited partnership shall be decided by the general partner, and, if
more than one, by a majority of the general partners as is provided in the
partnership agreement.

SECTION 33

PROCEEDINGS

Subject to subsection (3), legal proceedings by or against an exempted limited
partnership may be instituted by or against any one or more of the general
partners only, and a limited partner shall not be a party to or named in the
proceedings.

If the court considers it just and equitable any person or a general partner shall
have the right to join in or otherwise institute proceedings against any one or
more of the limited partners who may be liable under section 20(1) or to
enforce the return of the contribution, if any, required by section 34(1).

A limited partner may bring an action on behalf of an exempted limited
partnership if any one or more of the general partners with authority to do so
have, without cause, failed or refused to institute proceedings.

Tf any action taken pursuant to subsection (3) is successful, in whole or in part,
as a result of a judgment, compromise or settlement of any action, the court
may award any limited partner bringing any action reasonable expenses,
including attorney's fees, from any recovery in any action or from an exempted
limited partnership.

43. The relationship between the General Partner and the Limited Partner is further governed by the

Second Amended and Restated Limited Partnership Agreement dated | January 2013 (the

“Partnership Agreement”).'* The Parties have made submissions, inter alia, on the following

provisions of the Partnership Agreement:

1.05

ARTICLE 1

ORGANIZATION

Objects and Purposes. The primary purpose of the Partnership shall be to
purchase, sell or hold, for investment or speculation, Securities, on margin or
otherwise, for the account and risk of the Partnership.

ARTICLE 2

DEFINITION

 

“Partnership Interests” shall mean a Partner’s interest in the Partnership. The
Partner’s economic interest shall be expressed as a percentage equal to (i) the
balance in the Capital Account of such Partner divided by (ii) the aggregate
balance in the Capital Accounts of all the Partners at any given time. The

Second Amended and Restated Limited Partnership Agreement, | January 2013 [C-30].

11

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

General Partner may, in its sole and absolute discretion, offer one or more
series or sub-series of Partnership Interests.

ARTICLE 3

THE GENERAL PARTNER

3.01 Management. The management, control and the conduct of the business of the
Partnership shall be vested exclusively in the General Partner. The General
Partner is the general partner of the Partnership. The Limited Partners shall
have no part in the management, control or operation of the Partnership or the
conduct of its business and shall have no authority to act on behalf of the
Partnership in connection with any matter, except as provided in Sections
10.01 and 12.01.

3.02 Authority of General Partner. The General Partner shall have the power by
itself on behalf and in the name of the Partnership to carry out any and all of
the objects and purposes of the Partnership set forth in Section 1.05, and to
perform all acts and enter into and perform all contracts and other undertakings
which it may deem necessary or advisable or incidental thereto, and to have
and possess the same rights and powers as any general partner in a partnership
formed under the laws of the Cayman Islands, including, without limitation,
to:

(n) commence or defend any litigation or arbitration involving the
Partnership or the General Partner in its capacity as General
Partner...

3.06 Exculpation. The General Partner (and its members, employees, agents and
affiliates) (each, a “Covered Person”) shall not be liable to any other Partner
or the Partnership for any loss suffered by the Partnership unless such loss is
caused by such Covered Person’s Gross Negligence, willful misconduct or
breach of fiduciary duty. A Covered Person may consult with counsel and
accountants in respect of Partnership affairs and, in acting in accordance with
the written advice or opinion of such counsel or accountants, such Covered
Person shall not be liable for any loss suffered by the Partnership provided that
such counsel or accountants shall have been selected with reasonable care and
the written advice was not induced by such Covered Person’s Gross
Negligence or willful misconduct. Covered Persons shall not be liable for
errors in judgment or for any acts or omissions that do not constitute Gross
Negligence, willful misconduct or breach of fiduciary duty.

 

 

 

3.07 Indemnifi

 

(a) A Covered Person shall be indemnified and held harmless by the
Partnership from and against any and all losses, liabilities and
expenses (collectively, “Losses”) arising from claims, demands,
investigations, actions, suits or proceedings, whether civil,
criminal or administrative (each, a “Proceeding”), in which it
(and its members, employees and agents) may be involved, as a
party or otherwise, by reason of the management of the affairs
of the Partnership, whether or not it continues to be such at the
time any such Loss is paid or incurred. A Covered Person shall
not be entitled to indemnification hereunder for any conduct
arising from its Gross Negligence, willful misconduct, breach of

 

 

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

its fiduciary duty or breach of this Agreement in connection with
its management of the Partnership’s affairs...

ARTICLE 4

CAPITAL ACCOUNTS

4.01 Capital Contributions. Each Partner shall make an initial Capital Contribution
in cash or in kind, with the consent of the General Partner. Limited Partners
shall also make an initial Capital Contribution that is attributable to each series
or sub-series of shares issued by such Limited Partner for the benefit of the
shareholder(s) of such series or sub-series. The initial Capital Contribution by
a Limited Partner shall not be less than $1,000,000 for Partners admitted on or
after the effective date of this Amended and Restated Limited Partnership
Agreement, except to the extent the General Partner, at its sole discretion,
permits an initial Capital Contribution in a lesser amount.

   

4.03 Capital Account. A capital account shall be established for each Partner on the
books of the Partnership for the General Partner and for each series or sub-
series of shares issued by a Limited Partner (each, a “Capital Account”), and
such Capital Account shall be adjusted as provided for herein. ...

4.06 Allocation of Net Profits and Net Losses

(a) Net Profits and Net Losses for a Valuation Period shall be
preliminarily allocated among the Capital Accounts in
proportion to their respective Opening Capital Balances for such
Valuation Period.

(b) With respect to each Capital Account of a Limited Partner, as of
the end of each Fiscal Year, there shall be allocated to the Capital
Account of the General Partner, as its incentive allocation (the
“Incentive Allocation” ) 20% of:

(i) the Cumulative Net Profits preliminarily allocated
to such Capital Account of such Limited Partner
pursuant to Section 4.06(a) for such Fiscal Year
minus

(x) any management fees paid by the
Limited Partner on behalf of the
shareholders of the series or sub-series
corresponding to such Capital Account
for such year, and

(y) any expenses attributable to such series
or sub-series of shares that are incurred
by the Limited Partner and are not
otherwise reflected in the Capital
Account balance,

 

over (ii) the CUNL (as defined below), if any, for such
Capital Account as of such Fiscal Year-end.

For the avoidance of doubt, the General Partner will not receive
an Incentive Allocation for a Fiscal Year if the calculation in the
previous sentence results in a negative number. For the avoidance
of further doubt, an Incentive Allocation will be made with
respect to a Capital Account for a partial calendar year due to an
intra-year contribution, or in the event some or all amounts are
voluntarily or mandatorily withdrawn from such Capital Account

45.

46.

47.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

as of a date other than the end of a Fiscal Year. The General
Partner, in its sole discretion, may reduce, waive or grant rebates
with respect to the Incentive Allocations for certain Capital
Accounts.

Claimants’ alleged investments in SC&T and SEC

In or around February 2014, Claimants began an analysis of whether to invest in the Korean
technology sector. According to Claimants, they undertook a thorough analysis of the Samsung
Group, spending “hundreds of hours investigating and analyzing” in order to make a decision on
an investment.'° Eventually, they decided to focus on an investment in SEC and (later) SC&T

(the “Samsung Shares”) which they considered a “promising investment opportunity.”'®

At the end of May 2014, Claimants started purchasing swaps denominated in U.S. dollars."”

On 23 June 2014, Standard Chartered Bank Korea, acting based on a power of attorney issued by
the Cayman Fund,'* filed an application for investment registration with the Korean Financial
Supervisory Service. The application form stated the “Trade Name (of foreign corporation, etc.)”
as “MASON CAPITAL MASTER FUND L.P.” (i.e., the Cayman Fund), the applicant’s
nationality as “Cayman Islands”, the investor category as “Corporation”, the “Acts and relevant
provisions providing the grounds for establishment (creation)” as “THE LAW OF CAYMAN
ISLANDS” and “[t]he first major shareholder” as “MASON CAPITAL LTD.” (i.e., the Limited

Partner) with 100% share of equity.'”

The trading account with Standard Chartered Bank Korea, in which the Samsung Shares

belonging to the Cayman Fund were to be held, was opened in the name of the Cayman Fund.”°

First WS Garschina [CWS-1], {[ 14; Second Witness Statement of Kenneth Garschina, 4 September 2019
(“Second WS Garschina”) [CWS-3], {9 11-12, 18.

First WS Garschina [CWS-1], Mf 12, 13.
Mason Trading Records Samsung Electronics, 8 August 2015 [C-31]. The Tribunal notes that Mason’s
trading records for SEC and SC&T [C-31, C-32] distinguish between trades by Mason Capital LP (i.e., the
Domestic Fund) and by Mason Capital Master Fund LP (i.e., the Cayman Fund).

Mason Capital Master Fund L.P. Application for Investment Registration Certificate, 9 June 2014 [C-66],
pp. 6-7.

Cayman Fund’s Application for Foreign Investment Registration, 23 June 2014 [R-7].

Email from QR to EE. 17 uly 2014 [C-68}; Goldman Sachs Brokerage Letter,
10 September 2018 [C-29].

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

In early August 2014, Claimants closed out the swaps and began to purchase SEC shares
directly?! By 16 September 2014, they had acquired 141,650 shares in SEC.”?

On 23 September 2014, Claimants started selling all of their SEC shares so that as of 14 October
2014 they held no shares in SEC.”

On 30 October 2014, Claimants started buying shares in SEC again, with their position reaching
a peak of 247,553 shares on 3 April 2015. On the same day, Claimants began selling some of

their shares again and continued doing so until 3 June 2015.4

In mid-April 2015, Claimants purchased a first instalment of SC&T shares which they sold

entirely a few days later.°
On 26 May 2015, SC&T and Cheil announced plans to merge.”°

In early June 2015, Claimants began to purchase larger quantities of SC&T shares. On 11 June
2015, their stake in SC&T reached a peak of 3,401,878 shares. Thereafter, on 26 June and 13 July
2015, Claimants sold around 10% of their SC&T shares.”

On 4 June 2015, Claimants increased their holding in SEC by another 58,699 shares. In the
following days up until 9 July 2015, Claimants sold 73,479 of their SEC shares.”*

On 17 July 2015, the voting date of the merger, Claimants’ total investment in SEC and SC&T
consisted of 81,901 SEC shares and 3,046,915 SC&T shares.” More specifically, the Domestic
Fund held 29,435 SEC shares and 1,094,990 SC&T shares, while Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC’s

Mason trading records Samsung Electronics, 8 August 2015 [C-31].

Mason trading records Samsung Electronics, 8 August 2015 [C-31].

Mason trading records Samsung Electronics, 8 August 2015 [C-31].

Mason trading records Samsung Electronics, 8 August 2015 [C-31].

Mason trading records SC&T, 10 August 2015 [C-32].

Cheil Industries Announces Merger with Samsung C&T, Korea Herald, 26 May 2015 [C-5].
Mason Trading Records SC&T, 10 August 2016 [C-32].

Mason Trading Records Samsung Electronics, 8 August 2015 [C-31].

Goldman Sachs Brokerage Letter, 10 September 2018 [C-29]. The Tribunal notes that according to the
trading records for SC&T of 10 August 2015 [C-32], Claimants held 3,047,115 shares in SC&T as of
17 July 2015.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

statement of holding reflected that the Cayman Fund held 52,466 SEC shares and 1,951,925
SC&T shares.*°

The shareholder registries of SEC and SC&T reflected the Cayman Fund and the Limited Partner

as registered shareholders in June 2015.*!

Following the merger vote, Claimants incrementally sold their entire Samsung Shares so that by
August 2015 they no longer held any shares in SEC or SC&T.* Claimants allegedly incurred

losses as a result of this.**

Capital contributions and incentive allocation of the General Partner

In accordance with Article 4.03 of the Partnership Agreement, the General Partner established
individual capital accounts for both the Limited Partner and for itself that were updated on a

monthly basis.

Between the beginning of the Cayman Fund’s operations in early 2010 and the end of May 2014,
the Limited Partner provided net capital contributions of approximately USD 5.56 billion.**
These capital contributions were credited to the Limited Partner’s capital account.*° The General

Partner did not make any cash contributions to its capital account up to May 2014.*”

At the end of May 2014, the Cayman Fund’s assets had a value of approximately USD 6.52
billion.** The difference of USD 0.96 billion between the amount of the Limited Partner’s net

capital contributions and the value of the Cayman Fund’s assets was, according to Mr. Satzinger,

Goldman Sachs Brokerage Letter, 10 September 2018 [C-29].

Samsung C&T Corporation Register of Shareholders, 11 June 2015 [R-8]; Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd.
Register of Shareholders, 30 June 2015 [R-9].

First WS Garschina [CWS-1], { 20. Again, the Tribunal notes that pursuant to Mason’s trading records for
SC&T of 10 August 2015 [C-32], Mason retained 200 shares in SC&T on 10 August 2015.

First WS Garschina [CWS-1], { 20.

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, p. 182:8-25 [Cross-examination
of Mr. Satzinger].

Second WS Satzinger [CWS-4], { 13.

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, pp. 185:16-187:7 [Cross-
examination of Mr. Satzinger].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, p. 192:17-19 [Cross-examination
of Mr. Satzinger].

Second WS Satzinger [CWS-4], { 14.

61.

62.

63.

40

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

due to the latter’s appreciation in value.* In Claimants’ view, this amount reflects the value of
the General Partner’s “historic contribution of its investment decision-making, management and
expertise”?

Between the beginning of 2010 and the end of May 2014, the General Partner accumulated
incentive allocations of approximately USD 351.86 million in total.*' The General Partner’s
incentive allocations, as defined under Article 4.06(b) of the Partnership Law (the “Incentive
Allocation”), were credited to its capital account,” the majority of which the General Partner
took out of its capital account every year.*? Specifically, the General Partner’s Incentive

Allocation for the year 2013 was substantially withdrawn in January 2014.*4

In 2014, the value of the Cayman Fund’s assets depreciated by approximately 12% or USD 720
million.*> As a result of this, the General Partner did not receive any Incentive Allocation in
2015."°

In January 2015, the General Partner’s capital account contained at most “a couple of hundred

thousand dollars”.7

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, pp. 188:20-189:9 [Cross-
examination of Mr. Satzinger].

Rejoinder, {| 58, referring to Second WS Satzinger [CWS-4], {| 13-14; Transcript of Hearing on
Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, p. 190:4-16 [Cross-examination of Mr. Satzinger].

Second WS Satzinger [CWS-4], { 15.

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, pp. 192:23-193:4 [Cross-
examination of Mr. Satzinger].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, pp. 193:12-194:20 [Cross-
examination of Mr. Satzinger].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, p. 194:1-4 [Cross-examination
of Mr. Satzinger].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, pp. 206:19-207:16 [Cross-
examination of Mr. Satzinger].

First WS Satzinger [CWS-2], {[ 15; Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October
2019, pp. 205:4-206:18 [Cross-examination of Mr. Satzinger].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, p. 210:3-9 [Cross-examination
of Mr. Satzinger].

65.

66.

67.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS AND REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

Summary of Respondent’s preliminary objections
Respondent raises two preliminary objections pursuant to Articles 11.20.6 and 11.20.7 of the

FTA,** which, according to Respondent, would materially reduce the subsequent phase of the

proceedings if they were successful.”

First, Respondent raises an objection to the Tribunal’s competence under Article 11.20.7 of the
FTA. It argues that the General Partner’s claim fails at the jurisdictional level for two reasons,
namely (i) because the General Partner does not qualify as an “investor” since it did not “make”
an “investment” within the meaning of Article 11.28 of the FTA and did not own or control the
Samsung Shares under Korean law;* and (ii) because under the FTA as well as international law,
the General Partner lacks standing to bring a claim on behalf of the Cayman Fund and the Limited

Partner as third-party beneficiaries.*!

Second, Respondent files an objection under Article 11.20.6 of the FTA submitting that the
General Partner’s claim is “legally deficient” and, as a matter of law, not a claim for which an
award in favour of the General Partner may be made because the General Partner did not incur

the alleged damages and cannot claim damages for the benefit of the Cayman Fund.”

As to Claimants’ objection to the appropriateness of the preliminary phase of the proceedings,
Respondent submits that the determination of its objections does not require an inquiry into the

“full factual record”.*?

While Respondent’s counsel has referred to three preliminary objections in his opening statement at the
Hearing on Preliminary Objections (Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October
2019, p. 7:7-8), has only d two inary objections in its Memorial, { 2.
Depending on whether Respondent’s two arguments regarding the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear the
General Partner’s claim are counted as separate objections, there are two or three preliminary objections.
For the purposes of this Decision, the Tribunal will assume that there is one preliminary objection under
Article 11.20.7 of the FTA, consisting of two main arguments, and one preliminary objection under Article
11.20.6 of the FTA.

Memorial, 2.
Memorial, 415; Reply, 54.
Memorial, 15.

Memorial, {ff 6-7.

Reply, { 120.

B.

68.

69.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Respondent’s request for relief
In the Memorial, Respondent requests that the Tribunal:

a. Declare that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the claims brought by the GP
and dismiss all the claims brought by the GP on the basis that:

(i) the GP cannot bring claims on behalf of the Cayman Fund under the
FTA, and/or

(ii) the GP does not qualify as an investor under Article 11.28 of the FTA.

b. In the alternative, declare that the GP’s claim is, as a matter of law, not a claim
for which an award in favor of the GP may be made, and dismiss the GP’s
claims accordingly; and

c. Order any other relief the Tribunal deems appropriate.**
In the Reply, Respondent amends its request for relief and now requests that the Tribunal:

a. Declare that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the GP’s claims on the basis
that: the GP has not made an investment in accordance with Article 11.28 of
the FTA; and/or the GP did not own or control the Samsung Shares, and,
accordingly, dismiss all of the claims brought by the GP:

b. In the alternative:

(i) Dismiss the GP’s claim for losses incurred by the Cayman Fund and the
Limited Partner on the basis that: the GP lacks standing to submit
claims on behalf of third parties under Article 11.16.1; and/or the GP’s
claim in respect of such portion is, as a matter of law, not a claim for
which an award in favor of the GP may be made under Article 11.20.6;
and

 

  

(ii) Declare that the GP can claim damages only to the extent of its own
Partnership Interest in 2015;

c. Order Claimants to bear in full the costs of this preliminary phase of the
arbitration and all of Korea’s costs of legal representation and other expenses;
and

d. Order any other relief the Tribunal deems appropriate.*>

-y of Clai position on Resp 's preliminary obj

 

Claimants reject Respondent’s preliminary objections in their entirety.

As to Respondent’s first preliminary objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, Claimants submit

(i) that the General Partner is an “investor” and the Samsung Shares are an “investment” within

Memorial, 4 37.
Reply, { 121.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

the meaning of the FTA, and (ii) that there is no standing requirement under the FTA or

international law and even if there were, the General Partner would satisfy that requirement. °°

72. In relation to Respondent’s preliminary objection that, as a matter of law, the General Partner’s
claim is not a claim for which an award in its favour may be made, Claimants submit that
Respondent has not come close to discharging its burden of proof that that an award of damages
in favour of the General Partner is demonstrably doomed to fail. Claimants contend that
Respondent’s “legal deficiency” objection is premised on a misunderstanding of the role of the

General Partner and its proprietary rights regarding the Samsung Shares.*”

73. Furthermore, Claimants maintain their objection, raised in their letter of 13 February 2019, that
the objections raised by Respondent in its Memorial are not appropriate for preliminary

determination and should not have been raised in this process.**

D. Claimants’ request for relief

74. In the Counter-Memorial, Claimants request that the Tribunal render an award:

a. declaring the General Partner's claim admissible, and that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction over that claim;

b. rejecting Korea’s objections to the Tribunal’s competence;

c. rejecting Korea’s objection to the General Partner’s claim under Article

11.20.6 of the Treaty;

d. ordering that Korea pay all of Mason’s costs incurred in relation to this phase
of the proceedings, including attorneys’ fees and expenses, expert witn
costs and the costs of the arbitration, and compound interest on all such costs;
and

  

e. ordering such other relief as the Tribunal may deem appropriate,

and proceed to the merits of Mason’s claims.*?

75. Inthe Rejoinder, Claimants request that the Tribunal render an award:

 

a. declaring the General Partner's claim admissible, and that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction over that claim;

b. rejecting Korea’s objections to the Tribunal’s competence;

c. rejecting Korea’s objection to the General Partner’s claim under Article

11.20.6 of the Treaty;

56 Counter-Memorial, {1 9, 61.
57 Counter-Memorial, {] 9, 93-94.
58 Counter-Memorial, {| 106-107; Rejoinder, ff 126-127.

8° Counter-Memorial, { 108.

20

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

d. ordering that Korea pay all of Mason’s costs incurred in relation to this phase
of the proceedings, including attorneys’ fees and expenses, expert witness
costs and the costs of the arbitration, and compound interest on all such cost
and

 

 

e. ordering such other relief as the Tribunal may deem appropriate;

and proceed to the merits of Mason’s claims.”

© Rejoinder, 128.

21

76.

77.

6

PCA Case N° 2018-55

Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

KEY LEGAL PROVISIONS

The Free Trade Agreement between the Republic of Korea and the United States of America was

signed on 30 June 2007, entered into force on 15 March 2012.°!

Articles 11.20.6 and 11.20.7 of the FTA deal with preliminary objections by respondents:

ARTICLE 11.20
CONDUCT OF THE ARBITRATION

Without prejudice to a tribunal's authority to address other objections
as a preliminary question, a tribunal shall address and decide as a
preliminary question any objection by the respondent that, as a matter
of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award in favor of
the claimant may be made under Article 11.26.

(a) Such objection shall be submitted to the tribunal as soon as
possible after the tribunal is constituted, and in no event later
than the date the tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its
counter-memorial or, in the case of an amendment to the notice
of arbitration, the date the tribunal fixes for the respondent to
submit its response to the amendment.

(b) — Onreceipt of an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall
suspend any proceedings on the merits, establish a schedule for
considering the objection consistent with any schedule it has
established for considering any other preliminary question, and
issue a decision or award on the objection, stating the grounds
therefor.

 

(c) In deciding an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall
assume to be true claimant's factual allegations in support of any
claim in the notice of arbitration (or any amendment thereof) and,
in disputes brought under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the
statement of claim referred to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules. The tribunal may also consider any relevant
facts not in dispute.

(d) The respondent does not waive any objection as to competence
or any argument on the merits merely because the respondent did
or did not raise an objection under this paragraph or make use of
the expedited procedure set out in paragraph 7.

In the event that the respondent so requests within 45 days of the date
the tribunal is constituted, the tribunal shall decide on an expedited basis
an objection under paragraph 6 and any objection that the dispute is not
within the tribunal’s competence. The tribunal shall suspend any
proceedings on the merits and issue a decision or award on the
objection(s), stating the grounds therefor, no later than 150 days after
the date of the request. However, if a disputing party requests a hearing,
the tribunal may take an additional 30 days to issue the decision or
award. Regardless of whether a hearing is requested, a tribunal may, on

The FTA [CLA-23].

22

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

a showing of extraordinary cause, delay issuing its decision or award by
an additional brief period, which may not exceed 30 days.

78. Article 11.16 of the FTA governs the submission of a claim to arbitration:

ARTICLE 11.16
SUBMISSION OF A CLAIM TO ARBITRATION

1. In the event that a disputing party considers that an investment dispute
cannot be settled by consultation and negotiation:

   

(a) the claimant, on own behal
under this Section a claim

f, may submit to arbitration

(i) that the respondent has breached
(A) an obligation under Section A,
(B) an investment authorization, or
(C) an investment agreement;

and

(ii) that the claimant has incurred loss or damage by
reason of, or arising out of, that breach; and

(b) the claimant, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that
is a juridical person that the claimant owns or controls
directly or indirectly, may submit to arbitration under this
Section a claim

(i) that the respondent has breached
(A) an obligation under Section A,
(B) an investment authorization, or

(C) an investment agreement;

(ii) that the enterprise has incurred loss or damage by
reason of, or arising out of, that breach

(emphasis added).

79. Article 11.28 of the FTA defines the terms “enterprise of a Party”, “investment” and “investor of

a Party”:

ARTICLE 11.28
DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Chapter

23

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise constituted or organized under the law
of a Party, and a branch located in the territory of a Party and carrying out
business activities there.

investment means every asset that an investor owns or controls, directly or
indirectly, that has the characteristics of an investment, including such
characteristics as the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation
of gain or profit, or the assumption of risk.

Forms that an investment may take include:
(a)...
(b) shares, stock, and other forms of equity participation in an enterprise;

(c)...

 

investor of a Party means a Party or state enterprise thereof, or a national or an
enterprise of a Party, that attempts to make, is making, or has made an investment
in the territory of the other Party; provided, however, that a natural person who
is a dual national shall be deemed to be exclusively a national of the State of his
or her dominant and effective nationality.

(emphasis added).
80. Article 1.4 of the FTA defines the terms “enterprise of a Party” and “national”:

ARTICLE 1.4
DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Agreement, unless otherwise specified:

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise constituted or organized under a
Party’s law

 

national means

(a) with respect to Korea, a Korean national within the meaning of
the Nationality Act; and

(b) with respect to the United States, “national of the United States”
as defined in the Immigration and Nationality Act.

24

VI.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONING

The Tribunal has carefully reviewed all of the arguments and evidence presented by the Parties
during the preliminary phase of these proceedings. Although the Tribunal may not address all
such arguments and evidence in full detail in its reasoning below, the Tribunal has nevertheless

considered and taken them into account in arriving at its decision.

Before turning to its analysis of Respondent’s preliminary objections, the Tribunal points out
that, as Respondent’s counsel stated in his opening statement at the Hearing,” these objections
proceed from two core propositions, namely that: (i) under the FTA and international law, a
claimant cannot bring a claim to the extent that another entity beneficially owns the assets in
question; and (ii) as a matter of fact, the General Partner has failed to establish its beneficial

interest in the Samsung Shares.

Several of Respondent’s arguments under different provisions of the FTA are premised upon
these two core propositions. The Tribunal will deal with these propositions in detail in the context
of Respondent’s argument on legal and beneficial ownership and, where relevant, refer to these

propositions in its assessment of Respondent’s other arguments.

The Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections is delivered as part of the
expedited procedure for the determination of preliminary objections set out in Articles 11.20.6
and 11.20.7 of the FTA. In this context, it is relevant to note that Claimants contend that it is not
appropriate for the Tribunal to determine the Respondent's objections as a preliminary issue and
have requested a declaration that the General Partner’s claim is admissible and that the Tribunal
has jurisdiction over it. The Tribunal will deal with these points as a preliminary issue before

turning to the substance of Respondent’s objections.

The Tribunal’s reasoning is therefore structured as follows: it will first deal with Claimants’
objection and request for a declaration of jurisdiction and admissibility (A.); thereafter, the
Tribunal will address Respondent’s two preliminary objections, which relate to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction over the General Partner’s claim (B.) and the legal deficiency of that claim (C.);
finally, the Tribunal will deal with the Parties’ respective requests to order the opposing Party to

bear the costs of this preliminary phase (D.).

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, pp. 7:7-17, 9:11-15
[Respondent's Opening Statement].

25

86.

87.

88.

89.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Claimants’ objection to the expedited procedure and request for a declaration of
jurisdiction and admissibility of the General Partner’s claim

As a preliminary issue, the Tribunal addresses Claimants’ objection® to the appropriateness of
the preliminary determination of Respondent’s objections and Claimants’ request for a
declaration that the General Partner’s claim is admissible and that the Tribunal has jurisdiction

over that claim.

Claimants’ position

In their letter of 13 February 2019, Claimants argued that Respondent’s objections raised in its
Memorial are not appropriate for expedited determination and do not fall within the scope
contemplated by the expedited procedure under the FTA as they raise complex factual and legal
issues necessitating a detailed factual inquiry and the assessment of expert evidence and questions
of foreign municipal law. Furthermore, Claimants took issue with Respondent’s reservation of
its right to bring further objections at a later stage of the proceedings. In their letter, Claimants

requested the Tribunal to join Respondent’s objections to a full jurisdictional phase.

In their Counter-Memorial, Claimants add that “the Tribunal’s examination of the question of
damages risks prejudging the merits of the General Partner’s claim without access to the full
factual record, and without giving the General Partner a ‘full opportunity’ to present its case, as
it is entitled under the UNCITRAL Rules.” As part of their request for relief, Claimants request
the Tribunal to declare that the General Partner’s claim is admissible and that the Tribunal has

jurisdiction over that claim.

Respondent’s position

In its Memorial, Respondent “reserves its rights to amend and supplement this Memorial,
including to request other relief and raise additional jurisdictional objections to either or both
Claimants’ claims, as [Respondent] may consider necessary or appropriate to enforce or defend

its rights” (emphasis added).

Counter-Memorial, {{ 106-107, referring to Claimants’ letter to the Tribunal, 13 February 2019; Rejoinder,
Ml 126-127.

Counter-Memorial, 108; Rejoinder, {[ 128.
Counter-Memorial, { 106.
Counter-Memorial, { 108.

Memorial, 4 38.

26

90.

ol.

92.

93.

94.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

In its Reply, Respondent argues that the question of whether and to what extent the General
Partner holds a beneficial interest in the alleged investments does not require an inquiry into the
“full factual record” but only requires evidence of the amounts allocated in the capital accounts

of the General Partner and the Limited Partner at the relevant times.

Tribunal’s analysis

In its Procedural Order No. 2, the Tribunal decided to “rule on the admissibility of another
separate jurisdictional phase if and when a request for such phase is made” and explained that
“[nJeither the FTA nor the UNCITRAL Rules appears to entitle it to declare further jurisdictional
phases inadmissible before an actual request for such phase is made.” For that reason, the

Tribunal rejected Claimants’ request to join Respondent’ s objections to a full jurisdictional phase.

To the extent that Claimants maintain their objection to the appropriateness of the preliminary
determination of Respondent’s objections,” the Tribunal points out that, under Article 11.20.7
of the FTA, it is required to decide on an expedited basis an objection under paragraph 6 and any
objection that the dispute is not within the Tribunal’s competence. The FTA therefore does not
grant the Tribunal any discretionary power whether or not to hear such objections on an expedited

basis.

In the Tribunal’s view, both preliminary objections raised by Respondent fall within the ambit of
the expedited procedure under Articles 11.20.6 and 11.20.7 of the FTA. Respondent’s first
objection relates to the Tribunal’s competence over the General Partner’s claim in the context of
Article 11.20.7 of the FTA. Its second objection that the General Partner’s claim is, as a matter
of law, not a claim for which an award in favour of the General Partner may be made falls within

the scope of Article 11.20.6 of the FTA.

The final point in relation to Claimants’ objection is that whether the substantive threshold under
Articles 11.20.6 and 11.20.7 of the FTA is met is a different question which does not relate to the
admissibility of the expedited procedure. The Tribunal might well come to the conclusion that,
based on the current evidence before it, it is unable to accept a preliminary objection at this stage
of the proceedings. The Tribunal will deal with that question in the context of its analysis of

Respondent's two preliminary objections.

Reply, | 120.

Counter-Memorial, {{ 106-107, referring to Claimants’ letter to the Tribunal, 13 February 2019; Rejoinder,
Ml 126-127.

27

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

101.

70

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

For these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that Claimants’ objection to the appropriateness of the

preliminary determination of Respondent’s objections is not well-founded.

As to Claimants’ request for declaratory relief, the Tribunal notes that Article 11.20.6(d) of the
FTA expressly provides that the respondent does not waive any objection as to competence or
any argument on the merits merely because the respondent did or did not raise a preliminary

objection or make use of the expedited procedure set out in Article 11.20.7 of the FTA.

In the Tribunal’s view, a declaration made now to the effect that the Tribunal has jurisdiction
over the General Partner’s claim would be irreconcilable with Article 11.20.6(d) of the FTA as
it would curtail Respondent’s right under that provision to raise other jurisdictional objections
that are not preliminary objections or fall outside the scope of the expedited procedure under

Article 11.20.7 of the FTA.

Consequently, the Tribunal is not prepared to declare the General Partner’s claim admissible and

to assume jurisdiction over that claim at this stage of the proceedings.

For this reason, the Tribunal rejects Claimants’ application for a declaration at this stage of the
proceedings that the General Partner’s claim is admissible and that the Tribunal has jurisdiction

over that claim.

Respondent’s preliminary objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the General
Partner’s claim

Respondent’s preliminary objection under Article 11.20.7 of the FTA that the General Partner’s
claim is not within the Tribunal’s competence is based on two arguments, namely: (i) that the
General Partner does not qualify as an investor that has made an investment; and (ii) that the

General Partner lacks standing to bring a claim on behalf of the Cayman Fund.

Respondent has amended its request for relief and presented its requests for a new order in its
Reply.” Respondent's principal request to dismiss all of the General Partner’s claims is premised
on Respondent's first argument that the General Partner does not qualify as an investor that has
made an investment. Its alternative request to dismiss the General Partner’s claim for losses
incurred by the Cayman Fund and the Limited Partner and to declare that the General Partner can

claim damages only to the extent of its own Partnership Interest in 2015 rests upon Respondent’s

Reply, { 121.

28

102.

103.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

second jurisdictional argument that the General Partner lacks standing to bring a claim on behalf

of the Cayman Fund.

The Tribunal’s analysis of Respondent’s preliminary objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over
the General Partner’s claims will be structured as follows: the Tribunal will first deal with
Respondent's principal request to dismiss all of the General Partner’s claims and in this context
will address the argument that the General Partner does not qualify as an investor that has made
an investment under the FTA (1.); it will then turn to Respondent's alternative request based upon
the argument that the General Partner lacks standing under the FTA to bring a claim on behalf of

the Cayman Fund (2.).

‘Whether the General Partner qualifies as an “investor” that has “made” an “investment”
under the FTA

a) —_Respondent’s position

Respondent submits that Article 11.28 of the FTA defines “investor” as a “Party or state
enterprise thereof ... that ... has made an investment in the territory of the other Party.” To satisfy
this provision and qualify as an “investor”, Respondent argues that the General Partner would
need to establish — and has failed to establish — the existence of an “investment” and that it “has

made” the investment.”!

In relation to the FTA’s definition of “investment” in Article 11.28 as “every asset that an investor
owns or controls, directly or indirectly, that has the characteristics of an investment, including
such characteristics as the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of gain or
profit, or the assumption of risk”, Respondent submits that this list of characteristics is non-
exhaustive and merely illustrative and does not deprive the term “investment” of its inherent
meaning.” It contends that this inherent meaning is to be established with reference to the
“considerable body of authorities under international investment law” pursuant to which the
minimum features of an “investment” include “a contribution that extends over a certain period

of time and that involves some risk”.”*

Memorial, 4 20; Reply, ‘I 25-26.

Reply, {i 26, 29-31.

Memorial, {| 21; Reply, 126, referring to Romak S.A. (Switzerland) v. the Republic of Uzbekistan,
UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. AA280, Award, 26 November 2009 (“Romak v. Uzbekistan”) [RLA-10],
4 207; Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/I1/1, Excerpts of the Award, 30 April 2014 (“Novia Scotia Power v. Venezuela”) [RLA-20],
484; Caratube International Oil Company LLP v. The Republic of Kazakhstan, \CSID Case No.

29

105.

106.

107.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

In contrast, Respondent contends that mere ownership or control of an asset absent the above-
mentioned characteristics of an investment are insufficient to qualify for FTA protection.” In
particular, Respondent rejects Claimants’ argument that shareholding per se satisfies the
definition of investment because shares and stocks are listed among the “[florms that an
investment may take.””* Such enumeration, Respondent argues, is merely illustrative and does
not override the explicit FTA requirement for an asset to possess, at a minimum, several of the
75

above-mentioned characteristics of an investment

In relation to the first characteristic of an investment listed in Article 11.28 of the FTA, a
“commitment of capital or other resources”, Respondent asserts that “a ‘substantial’ or
‘meaningful’ contribution”, using the investor’s “own financial means and [conducted] at its own
financial risk” is required.” In this regard, Respondent relies on the decision in KT Asia v.
Kazakhstan, in which the tribunal declined jurisdiction because the relevant contribution was not
made by the claimant, but by the claimant’s beneficial owner.” Similarly, Respondent submits
that the tribunal in Quiborax v. Bolivia found that legal ownership or control of assets is
insufficient to establish a contribution to an investment.””

Respondent contends that the General Partner failed to adduce evidence that would show that it
had acquired the Samsung Shares with its own capital as opposed to the capital of the Cayman
Fund. Therefore, Respondent concludes that the General Partner did not make a contribution, let

alone a substantial one, of its “own financial means and at its own financial risk” that would

Arb/08/12, Award, 5 June 2012 (“Caratube v. Kazakhstan”) [RLA-12], 1360; Republic of Italy v.
Republic of Cuba, Interim Award, Ad Hoc Arbitral Tribunal, 15 March 2005 [RLA-34], 181; Salini
Construttori 8.P.A, and Italstrade .P.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 16 July 2001 [RLA-28], 152.

Reply, 4 28.

Reply, 4.27.

Reply, 27, referring to Lee M. Kaplan and Jeremy K. Sharpe, United States, in: Commentaries on
Selected Model Investment Treaties (Chester Brown ed., OUP, 2013) [CLA-48], pp. 767-768; Jin Hae Seo

v. Republic of Korea, HKIAC Case No. 18117, Submission of the United States of America, 19 June 2019
[RLA-58], 7 15.

Reply, { 33, relying on Joy Mining Machinery Ltd. v. Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Award on
Jurisdiction, 6 August 2004 [RLA-5], 53; Alapi Elektrik B.V. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/13, Excerpts of Award, 16 July 2012 (“Alapi v. Turkey”) [RLA-44], | 360; Caratube v.
Kazakhstan [RLA-12], 1 434.

Memorial, 22, referring to KT Asia Investment Group B.V. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, \CSID Case No.
ARB/09/8, Award, 17 October 2013 (“KT Asia v. Kazakhstan”) [RLA-17], { 170; Reply, 39.

Reply, 133, referring to Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kapliin v. Plurinational
State of Bolivia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 September 2012 (“Quiborax v.
Bolivia”) [RLA-45}, | 233.

30

108.

109.

80

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

qualify as an investment.*” To the extent Claimants assert that the General Partner contributed
“other resources”, Respondent contends that Claimants’ argument centres on pre-investment
activity that cannot satisfy Article 11.28 of the FTA.‘' Respondent further argues that, in any
event, Claimants failed to present evidence to show that such pre-investment activity was

®° and that it follows from

performed by the General Partner as opposed to another Mason entity,
the above that the General Partner did not “make” an investment, as it did not engage in an “active
contribution” or “action of investing”, but merely tried to “piggyback on contributions made by

others (including the Cayman Fund and the Limited Partner).”*?

Respondent submits that a separate reason for the tribunal in KT Asia v. Kazakhstan to decline
jurisdiction was that the relevant shareholding did not qualify as an investment as it was intended
to have a duration of only 16 months which the tribunal considered insufficient to show the
required duration and the intent to establish a long-term presence in the host country. Similarly,
Respondent asserts that the General Partner intended to make “a short-term speculative bet” and
that it has failed to introduce concrete evidence of its intent to hold the Samsung Shares for a

sufficiently long duration.**

As for the “assumption of risk” criterion under Article 11.28 of the FTA, Respondent argues that
Claimants failed to prove that the General Partner has assumed a risk of loss. *° Respondent
asserts that there cannot be an investment risk if no contribution of economic value was made,

because “a claimant that makes no contribution incurs no risk of losing such (inexistent)

Memorial, {{ 22, 26, referring to Caratube v. Kazakhstan [RLA-12], | 434; KT Asia v. Kazakhstan [RLA-
17], (9 192-206; Reply, 49135, 40, referring to Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Lid. v.
Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20, Award, 26 April 2017 (“Blue Bank v. Venezuela”) [RLA-23],
9M 163, 172.

Reply, { 36, referring to First WS Garschina [CWS-1], 141 13-15.
Reply, 1 36.
Reply, 1 37-38, referring to Clorox Spain S.L. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, PCA Case No. 2015-

30, Award, 20 May 2019 (“Clorox v. Venezuela”) [RLA-57], {] 799-836; Alapi v. Turkey [RLA-44],
4350.

Memorial, 23, referring to KT Asia v. Kazakhstan [RLA-17], "207-216; Romak v. Uzbekistan [RLA-
10], 4 207.

Memorial, 27, referring to US Hedge Fund Company Mason, Purchases 2.2% Stake in Samsung C&T,
Seoul Economic Daily, 26 June 2015 [R-1]; Reply, {{ 50-53, referring to First WS Garschina [CWS-1],
qi 10, 15, 19; Dani Burger, Your Guide to the Many Flavors of Quant, Bloomberg, 24 October 2017 [R-
11]; Hedge Fund Investment Due Diligence Report: Mason Capital, December 2010 [R-3]; Event Study
Tools, Event-Driven Investment Strategies, available at | www.eventstudytools.com/event-driven-
investment-strategies [R-19].

Memorial, 4 28; Reply, ‘I 41-42.

31

110.

11.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

contribution.”*’ According to Respondent, in cases where beneficial and nominal ownership are
split, the nominal owner cannot be considered as having incurred any risk. ** Reiterating that the
General Partner cannot be considered to have made a contribution to the Samsung Shares,
Respondent argues that the General Partner cannot have incurred any risk of losing such
contribution.” This conclusion, Respondent submits, is bolstered by the fact that the General
Partner was contractually shielded from any risk of financial loss pursuant to the Partnership
Agreement and would also not incur a loss pursuant to the Incentives Allocation if the Samsung

Shares decreased in value.”

Respondent further submits that, even if the General Partner “made” an investment with the
“characteristics of an investment”, Claimants would also need to show — and have failed to show

— that the General Partner “owned or controlled” the investment.”!

To the extent that Claimants assert that Cayman law and the Partnership Agreement provide that
the General Partner legally owned or controlled the Samsung Shares, Respondent submits that
Cayman law is irrelevant to the question.” Instead, Respondent argues that Korean law, as the
law of the place of incorporation of SC&T and SEC, governs the question whether the General
Partner legally owned or controlled the Samsung Shares.° Respondent asserts that, to be
recognized as an owner of a Korean company and to exercise shareholder’s rights, a foreign
investor in Korea must satisfy two requirements under Korean law: “(i) an investor must acquire
shares in the investor’s own name after registering as a foreign investor with the Financial
Services Commissions in accordance with the Capital Markets Act; and (ii) the investor must

register as a shareholder in the shareholder registry of the Korean company.” According to

Memorial, {| 24, citing KT Asia v. Kazakhstan [RLA-17], J 219; Reply, 1 43.

Memorial, {| 14, 24, citing Occidental Petroleum Corporation, et al. v. The Republic of Ecuador
(“Occidental v. Ecuador”), \CSID Case No. ARB/O6/I1, Decision on Annulment, 2 November 2015
(“Occidental Annulment”) [RLA-21], | 259; KT Asia v. Kazakhstan [RLA-17], { 219.

Memorial, {if 25, 28, citing Blue Bank v. Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20, Award, 6 April 2017
[RLA-23], { 163; Reply, 1.43.

Reply, {Ml 44-45, referring to Partnership Agreement [C-30], Article 3.06.
Reply, 154.
Reply, {Mf 55-56, citing Partnership Law [CLA-22], § 16(1).

Reply, 1 56, relying on Zachary Douglas, The International Law of Investment Claims (CUP, 2009) [RLA-
39], {4 102-103; Italba Corporation v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/16/9, Award,
22 March 2019 [RLA-56], Sif 216-235.

Reply, {{{ 57-61; referring to Legal Opinion of Hyeok-Joon Rho, 28 June 2019 (“Rho Opinion”) [RER-
2], § V.

32

112.

113.

100

101

102

103

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Respondent, the General Partner satisfied neither of these requirements. °° In fact, it was the
Cayman Fund, not the General Partner, which was registered as foreign investor in Korea and as
shareholder in the shareholder registries of SC&T and Samsung Electronics.°° As a consequence,
Respondent asserts that the General Partner did not own or control the Samsung Shares as a

matter of Korean Law and should be estopped from making an argument to the contrary.”

Finally, Respondent argues that, even assuming that Cayman law applied to the question of legal
ownership, the General Partner “held the Samsung Shares only in trust for the Cayman Fund”,
and the shares were in fact part of the Cayman Fund’s estate, which means that any dividend or
proceed from a sale of the Samsung Shares would have benefited the Cayman Fund, not the
General Partner.** In other words, even if the General Partner were the legal owner, the Cayman

Fund was still the beneficial owner of the shares.”

Respondent submits that the General Partner has not established that it had any Partnership
Interest in the Samsung Shares.'°° It contends that the Partnership Agreement provides that, at
any given time, the General Partner’s and the Limited Partner’s respective beneficial interest is
expressed as a percentage equal to “(i) the balance in the Capital Account of such Partner divided
by (ii) the aggregate balance in the Capital Accounts of all the Partners” (“Partnership
Interest”).'°' It asserts that Claimants have submitted no evidence showing the existence and
extent of the General Partner’s Partnership Interest in the Cayman Fund, and thus the Samsung
Shares, in 2015.'° Respondent further submits that the “indivisible beneficial interest” claimed
by Claimants means only that the partners’ respective beneficial interests are not separable until
these assets are distributed, and does not mean that the General Partner had a beneficial interest

in 100% of the Cayman Fund’s assets.'°*

Reply, 158.
Reply, {i 20-23, 57-58.
Reply, {i 59-63.

Reply, {| 60, fn. 134, referring to Legal Opinion of Rachel Reynolds, 28 June 2019 (“Reynolds Opinion”)
[RER-1], 428.

Memorial, ff 12-13.

Reply, | 100.

Reply, {| 14, citing Partnership Agreement [C-30], Article 2.12.

Reply, 1 17.

Reply, {i 18, 99-100, referring to Reynolds Opinion [RER-1], {ff 30, 51.

33

114.

115.

116.

117.

104

105

106

107

108

109

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

b) ~— Claimants’ position

Claimants argue that the General Partner qualifies as an “investor” under Article 11.28 of the
FTA since, as a company incorporated in the state of Delaware, it is an enterprise of a State party
to the FTA, the United States, and it made an investment in the territory of Korea, via the
Samsung Shares.'4 Additionally, the General Partner performed almost all of its business
activities in the United States.'°

Claimants submit that the Samsung Shares fall square within the “broad definition” of investment
in Article 11.28 of the FTA, because they were owned and controlled by the General Partner and

they were “shares” and “stock”.!°

Referring to Article 11.28 of the FTA, Claimants argue that the relevant assets, to qualify as an
investment, are to be controlled or owned, directly or indirectly, by the investor. In this regard,
Claimants submit that the Samsung Shares comply with this requirement because the General
Partner (i) had direct control over the Samsung Shares; (ii) had indirect control over the Samsung
Shares, through its supervision of the Investment Manager; and (iii) directly owned the Samsung
Shares.'°”

With respect to direct and indirect control, Claimants contend that the General Partner controlled
the Samsung Shares “de jure” and “de facto” by virtue of its complete and exclusive power over
these shares.”!°* Claimants assert that the General Partner’s direct control is further evidenced by
the fact that, under Cayman law, the General Partner was the only entity allowed to exercise any
rights related to business and the assets and to engage in conduct of the business, including having
the ultimate say over the Samsung Shares’ acquisition, exercising the power to vote at
shareholder meetings, receiving dividends, and engaging in advocacy as a shareholder. '”

Moreover, Claimants argue that the General Partner supervised the Investment Manager when

Counter-Memorial, {ff 10-12; Rejoinder, 4 9, 38-39.
Counter-Memorial, {| 13; Rejoinder, {ff 9, 39.
Counter-Memorial, {ff 25-26; Rejoinder, 1 50.
Counter-Memorial, ff 25-28.

Counter-Memorial, {ff 29-30.

Counter-Memorial, {| 30-31, referring to First ER Lindsay [CER-1], {{ 17-18, 22-26; Partnership Law
[CLA-22], 8§ 14, 16.

34

118.

119.

120.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

the latter acted with respect to the Samsung Shares.''!® The Limited Partner, in contrast, was

legally prohibited from any involvement in the decision-making process.!!!

Regarding direct ownership, Claimants argue that the General Partner “exclusively held

ownership rights and obligations in the Shares. In particular, Claimants submit that the

General Partner had direct legal ownership of the Samsung Shares as, under Cayman law, the

113

“partnership” is not an entity and cannot own property.''* According to Claimants, all property

is owned by the General Partner.''*

Claimants submit that Korean law plays no role in determining the General Partner’s ownership
or control of the Samsung Shares.'' First, Claimants argue that the FTA protects direct as well
as indirect investors. Even if the Tribunal were to assume that the Cayman Fund directly owned
the Samsung Shares under Korean law, the General Partner would nevertheless have owned and
controlled the Samsung Shares for the purposes of the FTA, because the General Partner owned
and controlled the Cayman Fund and, consequently, qualifies as indirect investor.''® Second,
Claimants contend that, under Korean private international law, the legal capacity of a foreign
organization is determined by reference to that organization’s personal foreign law, which in this
case is the law of the Cayman Islands. ''’ Under Cayman law, the Cayman Fund does not exist
as an entity separate from the General Partner and the Limited Partner.''* It, according to

Claimants, thus lacks capacity under both Cayman and Korean law.'!°

With respect to any alleged registration requirement, Claimants argue that the investment
registration does not preclude the General Partner’s claim under the FTA, pointing out that in

case of registration of a foreign fund, the investment registration may be made in the name of

Counter-Memorial, 31, referring to First WS Satzinger [CWS-2], {[ 8; First WS Garschina [CWS-1], 1 6.
Counter-Memorial, 33.
Counter-Memorial, 35.
Counter-Memorial, { 36.

Counter-Memorial, {| 36, referring to First ER Lindsay [CER-1], 23(a); Partnership Law [CLA-22],
§ 16(1).

Rejoinder, | 92.
Rejoinder, | 93.

Rejoinder, | 95 referring to Legal Opinion of Jae Yeol Kwon, 6 September 2019 (“Kwon Opinion”)
[CER-3], {if 20-21.

Rejoinder, 95, referring to Reynolds Opinion [RER-1], 24-27.
Rejoinder, 1 95.

35

121.

122.

120

122

128

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

such fund, even if the fund does not have separate legal capacity.'*° Even assuming that there
were errors during the registration process, these would have “no effect on ownership of [the

Samsung Shares]”!?!

as mistakes in the process of making an investment deprive investors of
treaty protection only in “rare circumstances”.'”? According to Claimants, Respondent also failed
to prove that the purported registration error estops the General Partner from arguing that it is

within the FTA’s jurisdiction.!

Claimants assert that the definition of “investor” does not impose a requirement of “beneficial
ownership”: the expression “‘attempts to make, is making, or has made an investment” in Article
11.28 of the FTA is merely intended to expand, rather than to limit, the temporal scope of the
FTA’s protection and does not create a requirement that an investment must be “beneficially
owned” by an investor.!74 Claimants argue that it is impermissible for Respondent to add
jurisdictional limits beyond the text of the FTA by recourse to an alleged “inherent meaning” of
investment, noting that the additional requirements introduced by Respondent, including a

contribution of an investor’s own capital, have no basis in the FTA.'?°

Claimants reject Respondent’s argument that the General Partner does not have a beneficial
interest in the Samsung Shares.'”° Claimants submit that the General Partner had an “indivisible
beneficial ownership interest in the Samsung Shares”, which reflected its right to an Incentive
Allocation in consideration for the General Partner’s management of the business.'?? According
to Claimants, Respondent’s contention that the General Partner’ s beneficial interest is determined
by the definition of “Partnership Interest” in the Partnership Agreement is incorrect and irrelevant

because the term is used only in relation to limited partners.'** In Claimants’ view, the defined

Rejoinder, J 117, referring to Kwon Opinion [CER-3], 1 51-52.
Rejoinder, {ff 118-119, referring to Kwon Opinion [CER-3], 155.

Rejoinder, 119, fn. 137, citing Mytilineos Holdings SA v. The State Union of Serbia, UNCITRAL, Partial
Award on Jurisdiction, 8 September 2006 (“Mytilineos Holdings v. Serbia”) [CLA-82], 151-152;
Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004 (“Tokios
Tokelés v. Ukraine”) [CLA-44], | 86 and relying on Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/17, Award, 6 February 2008 [CLA-83], 117.

Rejoinder, 4 120.
Counter-Memorial, ff 79-83.
Counter-Memorial, {ff 84-86.
Rejoinder, 1 88.

Counter-Memorial, {| 34-38, referring to First ER Lindsay [CER-1], {| 23(b), 36-39; Partnership Law
[CLA-22], § 16(1); Rejoinder, {| 86-91; referring to Supplementary Expert Report of Rolf Lindsay,
6 September 2019 (“Second ER Lindsay”) [CER-2], {i 18-19.

Rejoinder, {ff 89-90.

  

36

123.

124.

129

130

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

term “Partnership Interest” is used only in relation to the withdrawal or transfer of a limited
partner or the admission of a new general partner, and does not determine the right of the partners
to share in the bundle of assets.” Claimants instead assert that the General Partner’s beneficial
interest is determined by reference to increase or decrease in value of each relevant asset,
accordingly, the General Partner has a beneficial interest associated with each of its investments,
including the Samsung Shares.'*°

Claimants further submit that the Samsung Shares qualify as an “investment” because they
“easily satisfy each of the characteristics of an investment” identified in Article 11.28 of the FTA,
even though satisfying one would be sufficient to come within the scope of the definition.'*!
Notably, Claimants emphasize that the FTA itself expressly states that shares in an enterprise

constitute an investment.'*?

Claimants submit that Respondent is wrong to assert that the FTA requires any commitment of
capital or other to be “sut ial” or “ i 1.13 Notwi ding, Claimants
contend that the General Partner made a contribution to Samsung’s balance sheet in exchange for
acquiring ownership and control over the Samsung Shares at the prevailing market price. '™ This,
according to Claimants, reflects a substantial and meaningful commitment of capital by the
General Partner.'** Claimants submit that the funds used for that capital commitment were in
significant part the “General Partner’s historic contribution of its investment decision-making
management, and expertise to grow the capital available for investment”, valued at approximately
US$ 0.96 billion, combined with the Limited Partner’s cash contributions.'** Claimants argue

further that investment tribunals faced with similar circumstances have concluded that a

Rejoinder, [ 36, referring to Second ER Lindsay [CER-2], { 19.
Rejoinder, 91, referring to Second ER Lindsay [CER-2], { 22.
Counter-Memorial, 41 referring to Article 11.28 of the FTA [CLA-23].

Counter-Memorial, 441, referring to Saluka Investment B.V. v. The Czech Republic, PCA Case No. 2001-
04, Partial Award, 17 March 2006 (“Saluka v. Czech Republic”) (CLA-41], {| 205, 209; Rejoinder, 1
84-85,

Rejoinder, 1 56.

Counter-Memorial, 4 43.

Rejoinder, ff 56-57.

Rejoinder, 57-58, referring to Second WS Satzinger [CWS-4], Mf 13-14.

37

125.

126.

127.

128.

142

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

commitment of capital existed.'*” In any event, Claimants consider the origin of funds committed

to an investment irrelevant.'**

In addition, Claimants contend that the General Partner also committed other resources, including
by investing its “management time and effort into the process and decision to invest in the
Samsung Shares, as well as into its investment once made, including hundreds of hours of its
analysts’ time in ongoing research, meeting with experts in Korea and conversations with the
Samsung Group’s investor relations representatives.” '*° In this regard, Claimants reject
Respondent’s argument that pre-investment activity does not constitute a commitment of

resources.'“°

Claimants further disagree with Respondent’s contention that the FTA only protects investors
who make an “active contribution” and engage in “action of investing”, arguing that the majority
of investment tribunals have refused to apply the “activity” concept or found that investors
satisfied any such “activity” requirement.'*! In contrast, the cases relied upon by Respondent are
exceptional and should be disregarded as outliers.'“? In any event, the General Partner satisfies

any activity requirement.'

For Claimants, “it is equally obvious that an investment in the equity of a commercial enterprise”,

here the Samsung Shares, involved an expectation of gain or profit.!“*

Claimants also assert that the Samsung Shares required an assumption of risk in the form of a

“hope of receiving a benefit (including the inherent risk one will not result).”!* In particular,

Counter-Memorial, 49 42-44, citing Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine [CLA-44], 80 and distinguishing KT Asia
v. Kazakhstan [RLA-17], | 204; Caratube v. Kazakhstan [RLA-12], 191 437-438.

Counter-Memorial, {ff 87-88, referring to Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/20,
Award, 14 July 2010 (“Saba Fakes v. Turkey”) [CLA-40], 1 134; Rejoinder, {| 109.

Counter-Memorial, 45, referring to First WS Garschina [CWS-1], 1 14; Rejoinder, ff 59-60.
Rejoinder, 61.

Rejoinder, {ff 41, 4, referring to Kim et al. v. Republic of Uzbekistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/6, Decision
on Jurisdiction, 8 March 2017 [CLA-70], {if 306, 310-313; Mytilineos Holdings v. Serbia [CLA-82],
Ml 126-135.

Rejoinder, ff 44-46, distinguishing Alapi v. Turkey [RLA-44], 91 311, 359, 379-380; Quiborax v. Bolivia
[RLA-45], {{] 232-233; Clorox v. Venezuela [RLA-57], {{] 831-832, 834.

Rejoinder, | 47.
Counter-Memorial, 46; Rejoinder, ff 54-55.

Counter-Memorial, {ff 47-49, referring to KT Asia v. Kazakhstan [RLA-17], | 218; Nova Scotia Power v.
Venezuela [RLA-20], {91 84, 94; Rejoinder, {{ 66-67, referring to Second ER Lindsay [CER-2], {if 5, 30.

38

129.

130.

147

148

149

150

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

“[iJf the Samsung Shares lose value, the General Partner will receive zero return for that
investment notwithstanding its ongoing commitment of significant resources”.'“° Other risks,
according to Claimants, include “significant and material financial and reputational damage” to

the General Partner.'*”

Claimants reject Respondent’s argument that additional characteristics of an investment such as
duration may be introduced into the FTA. Claimants assert that the duration requirement
advanced by Respondent “has no textual foundation” in the FTA and that similar attempts to read
an “inherent” meaning into the definition of investment have been rejected by investment
tribunals constituted under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.'“* Even if the Tribunal were to
find that duration was relevant, Claimants submit that “[s]hort-term projects are not deprived of
‘investment’ status solely by virtue of their limited duration” and that the “intended duration
period ... should be considered”.'” In this regard, the General Partner’s intentions “more than
meet any ‘duration’ requirement, even if one were added to the [FTA]” as “the General Partner
intended to hold the Samsung Shares for a considerable duration” as a matter of commercial
logic.!°

Contrary to Respondent’s submission, Claimants argue that the FTA explicitly permits
investment structures like that employed by the General Partner.'*! Claimants assert that, under
Article 11.28 of the FTA, the General Partner, being a U.S. investor, may bring claims before the
Tribunal regardless of whether it is the ultimate beneficiary of the investment or characterized as
a direct or indirect investor in the investment.!*? Claimants also contend that any overlap between
the interests of the General Partner and other investors or entities in the investment structure does

153,

not limit the existence of the General Partner’s claims.'** According to Claimants, the source of

Rejoinder, 1 68.
Rejoinder, J 69(b), citing Second ER Lindsay [CER-2], 31.

Counter-Memorial, #9 50-53, referring to Guaracachi America, Inc. and Rurelec PLC v. The Plurinational
State of Bolivia, PCA Case No. 2011-17, Award, 31 January 2014 [CLA-32], | 364 and distinguishing
Romak v. Uzbekistan [RLA-10], { 184. Rejoinder, {ff 71-73, referring to Clorox v. Venezuela [RLA-57],
4819.

Counter-Memorial, 4 55, citing Romak v. Uzbekistan [RLA-10], | 225; KT Asia v. Kazakhstan [RLA-17],
4 209; Rejoinder, 4 75-76.

Counter-Memorial, 56; Rejoinder, 79.
Rejoinder, 15.

Rejoinder, 17, referring to Lee M. Caplan and Jeremy K. Sharpe, United States, in: Commentaries on
Selected Model Investment Treaties (Chester Brown ed., OUP 2013) [CLA-48], p. 767.

Rejoinder, 18, referring to CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Republic of Argentina, ICSID Case
No. ARB/O1/8, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 17 July 2003 [CLA-76], 1 86;

39

131.

132.

133.

154

156

157

158

159

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

the funds used to make the investment is irrelevant.'** Claimants assert that Article 11.11 of the
FTA contains a denial of benefits clause to limit the structures the investors may use, which
Respondent has not invoked, and cannot invoke, since it requires that the investor has no

“substantial business activities” in the United States.'**

Indeed, Claimants argue that the investment structure used by the General Partner is “neither
exceptionally complex, nor especially unique” and investment tribunals had no difficulties in the

past exercising jurisdiction over similar claims.!°°

Claimants assert that Respondent’s arguments are based on a misunderstanding of Claimants’
investment structure. First, the General Partner acted in its own name and capacity when it
brought the claim, as the Cayman Fund does not have its own legal personality and no separate
existence from the General Partner and the Limited Partner.'>? Second, contrary to Respondent's
submission, the Limited Partner is not the investor, as it only provided capital to add to the
investment that the General Partner owned and controlled, and otherwise played no role in the
investment.'** Third, the General Partner did not act as a mere trustee because, in an exempted
limited partnership, the General Partner controls the actions of the Partnership and the Limited

Partner acts only as a source of funds for the General Partner.'*°

c) The Tribunal’s analysis

The Tribunal’s analysis of this first prong of Respondent’s preliminary objection to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction will be structured as follows: the Tribunal will first address Respondent’s argument

that the General Partner does not qualify as an investor since it did not own or control the

RREEF Infrastructure (G.P.) Limited et al. v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/30, Decision
on Jurisdiction, 6 June 2016 (“RREEF v. Spain”) [CLA-67], 1 86.

Rejoinder, 19, citing Bridgestone Licensing Services, Inc. and Bridgestone Americas, Inc. v. Panama,
ICSID Case No. ARB/16/34, Decision on Expedited Objections, 13 December 2017 [CLA-28],
4M 161, 185; Flemingo Dutyfree Shop Private Limited v. Republic of Poland, UNCITRAL, Award,
12 August 2016 (“Flemingo v. Poland”) [CLA-68], 331.

Rejoinder, 21.

 

Rejoinder, | 23-26, referring to Eiser Infrastructure Limited and Energia Solar Luxembourg S.a rl. v.
Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Case No. ARB/13/36, Award, 4 May 2017 (““Eiser v. Spain”) [CLA-78], 11
213-215, 221-231; RREEF v. Spain [(CLA-67], | 129-134, 139, 141-150, 156-160.

Rejoinder, {ff 28-31 referring to First ER Lindsay, {15 [CER-1]; Reynolds Opinion [RER-1], 24;
Second ER Lindsay [CER-2], {{{ 5, 17-19; Impreglio S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, {CSID Case
No. ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 22 April 2005 [CLA-69], {| 139.

Rejoinder, {[ 32, referring to Second WS Satzinger [CWS-4], {| 12-15; First ER Lindsay [CER-1], { 19.
Rejoinder, {{f 33-34, referring to Second ER Lindsay [CER-2], ff] 24, 31; First ER Lindsay [CER-1], | 34.

40

134.

135.

136.

137.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Samsung Shares (1), before turning to Respondent’s argument that the General Partner has not

made an investment under the FTA (2).

(1) Whether the General Partner owned or controlled the Samsung Shares

The Tribunal has to decide whether the General Partner owned or controlled the Samsung Shares,
directly or indirectly, under Article 11.28 of the FTA. While this is a question arising under
international law, the Tribunal cannot decide this question in isolation from the relevant

provisions of municipal law.

(i) Applicable law

With regard to the regulation of corporate relationships, the tribunal in Perenco v. Ecuador held
that “[g]iven the absence of detailed general or conventional rules of international law governing
the organisation, operation, management and control of an enterprise, a tribunal should in
principle be guided by the more detailed prescriptions of the applicable municipal law.”'® In the
Tribunal’ s view, this principle equally applies to ownership of tangible and intangible property.'©!
Neither the FTA nor general international law provide for any specific rules on the ownership of

shares in a company.

When a tribunal turns to municipal law to ascertain the owner of assets in a cross-border
transaction, the exercise will regularly involve a consideration of the conflict-of-law rules under
municipal law to determine the substantive law governing the existence and scope of ownership
rights. In assessing whether a foreign organization has become the owner of shares under
municipal law, two distinct questions of private international law arise: (i) which law governs the
existence and scope of ownership rights of shares in a company; and (ii) which law decides the

question of whether a foreign organization has the legal capacity to acquire and hold such rights?

As regards the first question, Respondent argues that “[t]he appropriate choice of law for

determining the existence or scope of property rights is the municipal law of the property or, in

Perenco Ecuador Ltd. V. The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Remaining Issues of Jurisdiction and on Liability,
12 September 2014 (“Perenco v, Ecuador”) [CLA-37], { 522, referring to Case Concerning the Barcelona
Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited (Belgium v. Spain), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1970, 4 38.

See also Zachary Douglas, The International Law of Investment Claims (CUP 2009) [CLA-39], {| 101-
102, providing that “[i]nvestment disputes are about investments, investments are about property, and
property is about specific rights over tangibles and intangibles cognisable by the municipal law of the host
state. General international law contains no substantive rules of property law. Nor do investment treaties
purport to lay down rules for acquiring rights in rem over tangibles and intangibles. Whenever there is a
dispute about the scope of the property rights comprising the investment, or to whom such rights belong,
there must be a reference to a municipal law of property” (footnotes omitted).

41

138.

139.

140.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

case of shares in a corporation, the law of the place of incorporation of the corporation.” !©

Claimants do not dispute this.'°? The Tribunal notes that Respondent’s position is based on the
widely accepted Jex situs rule “which is universally applied by municipal courts” and “the
appropriate choice of law rule for determining the existence or scope of property rights that
comprise an investment.”'® Consequently, the Tribunal concludes that Korean law governs the

existence and effects of ownership rights in the Samsung Shares.

The Parties’ main disagreement relates to the second question, namely the law applicable to
determine the legal capacity of the Cayman Fund. Claimants contend that this question is
governed by Cayman law as Korea’s private international law refers to the personal foreign law
of a foreign organization to determine its legal capacity.'°* Respondent, on the other hand,
contends that this issue is also governed by the municipal law of the property or, in the case of

shares in a corporation, the law of the place of incorporation of that company, i.e. Korean law.'%

Article 16 of the Korean Act on Private International Law (the “Private International Law
Act”) provides that “[cJorporations and other organizations shall be governed by the
applicable law of the establishment thereof: in case corporations or other organizations
established in foreign countries have their principal business offices located in the Republic
of Korea or transact their principal business in the Republic of Korea, such corporations and
other organizations shall be governed by the law of the Republic of Korea.”!°7

Professor Rho and Professor Kwon, the two legal experts who gave expert testimony on Korean
law, agree on three issues as regards the legal capacity of foreign organizations under Korean
law: first, the experts are in agreement that Article 16 of the Private International Law Act sets

out a general principle in relation to the legal capacity of a foreign organization that could, in

Reply, 156.

See Rejoinder, {[ 95, which deals exclusively with the legal capacity of a foreign organization under Korean
private international law.

Zachary Douglas, The International Law of Investment Claims (CUP 2009) [CLA-39], | 87. This also
seems to follow from Article 19(1) of the Korean Act on Private International Law which the Parties have
only submitted in Korean [CLA-54] but which, according to the English translation available on the
website of the Korean Ministry of Government Legislation
(http://www.moleg.go.kr/english/korLawEng?pstSeq=52687, last updated 4 November 2019), provides:
“Real rights, or other rights subject to registration, concerning movables and immovables shall be governed
by the lex situs of the subject matter.”

Rejoinder, 95.
Reply, 156.

 

Private International Law Act [CLA-54].

42

141.

142.

143.

168

169

170

Im

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

theory, be deviated from in special statutes;'® second, they concur that some Korean statutes
apply to foreign organizations even if they otherwise lack legal capacity under Korean law or
169

under the law of the place of their establishment third, the experts agree that a person or

organization that does not have the legal capacity to hold rights, either by way of the general
provision or a specific statute of Korean law, cannot own shares under Korean law.'”

The experts’ disagreement centres on the question whether in the present case there are any
special statutes that derogate from the general principle set out in Article 16 of the Private
International Law Act and instead provide that a foreign organization lacking legal capacity under

the law of its place of establishment can still acquire ownership of shares under Korean law.

In Professor Rho’s view, Article 168.1 of the Korean Financial Investment Services and Capital
Markets Act (the “Capital Markets Act”) is one of these special statutes (which he calls “Alien
Law statutes”) that regulate international issues and derogate from the “General Legal Capacity”
set out in Article 16 of the Private International Law Act.'"! Professor Rho concludes that “[e]ven
where a foreign entity does not have a General Legal Capacity pursuant to the law of its place of
establishment, such entity can be bestowed with legal capacity to the extent that such entity is

subject to the Capital Markets Act.”!”

In Professor Kwon’s opinion, Article 168.1 of the Capital Markets Act does not displace the
general principle laid down in Article 16 of the Private International Law Act. In his view,
Article 168.1 only serves to place limits on acquisitions of listed securities by foreign
corporations but does not permit foreign organizations lacking legal capacity under the law of its

place of establishment to acquire listed securities.'”

The Tribunal begins its analysis by looking at the wording of Article 168.1 of the Capital Markets

Act. The provision bears the heading “Restrictions on Foreigners’ Trading of Securities and

Kwon Opinion [CER-3], {{{ 20-23; Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October
2019, pp. 357:23-358:5 [Cross-examination of Professor Rho].

Kwon Opinion [CER-3], { 23; Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019,
pp. 340:22-342:15 [Presentation of Professor Rho].

Rho Opinion [RER-2], { 17; Kwon Opinion [CER-3], {| 17.

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, p. 343:12-15 [Presentation of
Professor Rho].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, p. 345:13-17 [Presentation of
Professor Rho].

Kwon Opinion [CER-3], {| 26-29.

43

145.

146.

147.

148.

174

176

17

178

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Exchange-Traded Derivatives” and stipulates that “[wJith respect to trading and other
transactions involving securities or exchange-traded derivatives by foreigners (referring to
individuals with no address or residence for not less than six months in the Republic of Korea;
hereafter the same shall apply in this Article), foreign corporations, etc., restrictions may be
placed on the limit of acquisition, etc. in accordance with the guidelines and methods prescribed

by Presidential Decree” (emphasis added).'

Article 9.16 of the Capital Markets Act and Article 13.2.1 of the Enforcement Decree to the

Capital Markets Act define the term “foreign corporations, etc.” as including, inter alia, a

175 and a “fund or an

“foreign company established pursuant to statutes of a foreign country’
association created and supervised or managed in accordance with the statutes of a foreign

country”.!76

The experts are again in agreement that a foreign organization which lacks legal capacity under
the law of the place of its establishment falls within the definition of “foreign corporations, etc.”

and the ambit of the Capital Markets Act.'””

The Tribunal accepts that there could in theory be statutory provisions under Korean law pursuant
to which foreign organizations lacking legal capacity at the place of their establishment are
deemed to be legally capable for the purposes of that specific act, thereby overriding the general
principle set out in Article 16 of the Private International Law Act. Essentially, this is a question

of lex specialis derogat legi generali.

The Tribunal, however, is not convinced that Article 168.1 of the Capital Markets Act constitutes
such a special statute that overrides the general principle. The provision’s scope of application is
clearly defined by its express terms: it allows restrictions to be placed on the limit of acquisition
of listed securities by way of presidential decree. Nowhere does it state that it seeks to expand
the list of buyers entitled to acquire property, including listed securities, under Korean law. By

contrast to other statutory provisions (such as Article 57 of the Korean Civil Procedure Act!’%),

Capital Markets Act [R-14].

Capital Markets Act [R-14], Article 9.16.4.

Enforcement Decree to the Capital Markets Act [R-16], Article 13.2.1.
Rho Opinion [RER-2], {| 19; Kwon Opinion [CER-3], { 28.

Korean Civil Procedure Act [R-20], providing that “[wJhere a foreigner has a litigation capacity under the
laws of the Republic of Korea, he/she shall be deemed to have a litigation capacity, even where he/she
does not have such capacity pursuant to the laws of his/her home country.”

44

149.

150.

151.

152.

179

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

there is no express provision in the Capital Markets Act dealing with the issue of legal capacity
of foreign organizations.'” The Tribunal thus concludes that the Capital Markets Act does not

regulate the legal capacity of a foreign organization to acquire shares in Korean companies.

 

To the extent that Professor Rho has relied in his testimony on other Korean statutory provisions,

{180 fis

e.g. in the Civil Procedure Act'*’ or the Corporate Tax Act'*!, neither these provisions nor the
respective jurisprudence of the Korean courts permit the acquisition of shares by foreign funds
that lack legal personality at the place of their establishment. In the Tribunal’s view, these statutes
deal with specific, narrowly confined issues different from the present one and do not displace

the general principle set out in Article 16 of the Private International Law Act.

As a final remark on the applicable law, the Tribunal notes that subjecting the legal capacity of a
foreign organization to hold property rights to the /ex situs of the property would result in a legal
nullity becoming the owner of the property. Both at the national and international level, this
would be an undesirable result as it would create considerable uncertainty as to who can exercise

the ownership rights in these assets.

(ii) Legal ownership

Having established that Korean law governs the existence and scope of ownership rights in the
Samsung Shares whereas Cayman law governs the Cayman Fund’s legal capacity to acquire and
hold rights, the Tribunal now turns to the application of these substantive laws to the present

dispute.

Respondent argues that for a foreign investor to be recognized as an owner of shares in a Korean

company, the investor must register as a foreign investor, acquire shares in its own name and

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, p. 387:9-16 [Cross-examination
of Professor Rho], pp. 421:17-422:2 [Cross-examination of Professor Kwon].

See fn. 178.

Article 2.3 of the Korean Corporate Tax Act [CLA-56] provides: “The term ‘foreign corporation’ means
an organization that has its headquarters or main office in a foreign country in the form of a corporation
that meets the standards prescribed by Presidential Decree (limited to such a corporation that does not have
a place for actual management of its business in the Republic of Korea).” Article 13.1 of the Korean
Framework Act on National Taxes [CLA-57] provides: “Any incorporate body, foundation or other
organization (hereinafter referred to as ‘organization other than juristic person’) which is not a juristic
person (referring to domestic and foreign corporations under subparagraph | and 3 of Article | of the
Corporate Tax Act; hereinafter the same shall apply), which falls under any of the following subparagraphs
and does not distribute profits to its members, shall be deemed a juristic person and governed by this Act
and other tax-related Acts”.

 

45

153.

154.

155.

156.

186

187

188

189

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

register as a shareholder in the shareholder registry.'*?

In support of its argument, Respondent
relies on Professor Rho’s legal opinion according to which “[t]he [Korean] Supreme Court has
regarded the ownership of shares as an issue of determining the party to a share subscription
agreement for new shares or share purchase agreement for existing shares.”'*?

It is undisputed that the Cayman Fund was registered as foreign investor with the Financial

Supervisory Service'** and as shareholder on the shareholder registries of SEC and SC&T. !*5

This leads Respondent to conclude that the Cayman Fund became the legal owner of the Samsung
Shares under Korean law as only the Cayman Fund established a shareholder relationship with
SC&T and SEC, and that any trust arrangement under Cayman law and the Partnership

Agreement would be external to that relationship.'**

The Tribunal disagrees with that conclusion. Assuming the Samsung Shares were indeed
purchased in the name of the Cayman Fund,'*’ the legal consequences of that acquisition in the
name of the Cayman Fund are governed by the same law that applies to the Fund’s legal capacity
to hold rights. Therefore, Cayman law, as the law at the place of the Fund’s establishment,

determines who becomes the legal owner of shares purchased in the name of the Fund.

There is no dispute between the Parties'** or the legal experts on Cayman law, Mr. Lindsay and
Ms. Reynolds,'*? that, under Cayman law, the Cayman Fund lacks legal personality and the
capacity to hold property and that the General Partner owns all partnership assets on trust for the

Cayman Fund.

Reply, 57, referring to Rho Opinion [RER-2], § V.

Rho Opinion [RER-2], { 28, citing Supreme Court Decision Case No. 2016Da265351, 5 December 2017
[R-12].

Cayman Fund’s Application for Foreign Investment Registration, 23 June 2014 [R-7].

Samsung C&T Corporation Register of Shareholders, 11 June 2015 [R-8]; Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd.
Register of Shareholders, 30 June 2015 [R-9].

Reply, 1 60.

The Tribunal notes that while the experts agree that under the Korean Commercial Act, existing shares are
transferred by agreement of the seller and purchaser and delivery of the relevant share certificates (Kwon
Opinion [CER-3], { 46; Rho Opinion [RER-2], {{{ 16; 31-32), no such share purchase agreements that
might indicate the identity of the contracting parties have been produced.

Reply, 60, fn. 134; Counter-Memorial, | 36.

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, pp. 231:8-24; 234:7-20 [Expert
conferencing of Mr. Lindsay and Ms. Reynolds].

46

157.

158.

159.

160.

190

192

194

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Under Article 16.1 of the Partnership Law, “[a]ny rights or property of every description of the
exempted limited partnership ... shall be held or deemed to be held by the general partner ...
upon trust as an asset of the exempted limited partnership in accordance with the terms of the
partnership agreement” (emphasis added).'°

Mr. Lindsay and Ms. Reynolds concur that by using the words “deemed to be held”, the
Partnership Law clarifies that the general partner will be the legal owner of the partnership’s
assets regardless of whether the partnership is named as the owner.'?' As Ms. Reynolds has
explained, “the reason for that [provision] is because sometimes in parts of the world or in other
context, the Partnership will be named as the owner”.'*? The present case falls squarely within

that scope of application.

The Tribunal thus concludes that, even if the Samsung Shares were acquired in the name of the
Cayman Fund, they were legally owned by the General Partner. This follows from the reference
of Korea’s private international law to Cayman law as the law governing the Fund’s legal

capacity, and Cayman law accepting this reference.'°*

This result is not contradicted by statutory provisions of Korean law, such as Article 311.1 of the

Capital Markets Act!” or the Real Name Act!”°.

Partnership Law [CLA-22], § 16(1).

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, pp. 329:16-330:10 [Expert
conferencing of Mr. Lindsay and Ms. Reynolds].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, p. 329:18-20 [Expert
conferencing of Mr. Lindsay and Ms. Reynolds].

The Tribunal is mindful of Ms. Reynold’s caveat that “Cayman Law would defer to the Law of
Incorporation to determine who owns shares. So, if we're talking about Korean shares, then we would refer
to the law of Korea as to who owns them.” (Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2,
3 October 2019, p. 232:13-16; see also p. 330:11-14). In the Tribunal’s view, it is irrelevant whether
Cayman law defers to the /ex situs for general ownership of the assets. Rather, the question at issue is
whether Cayman law accepts the reference of foreign conflict-of-law rules to determine the legal capacity
of an exempted limited partnership. The Tribunal agrees with Mr. Lindsay that “if the analysis [under
foreign law] is that the Shares are owned by the Partnership, then the legal title to those Shares is
determined as a matter of Cayman Islands law” (Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2,
3 October 2019, p. 233:11-14). On that basis, the Tribunal concludes that Cayman law accepts the reference
of Korea’s private international law.

 

 

  

Article 311.1 of the Capital Markets Act [R-14] provides that “[a]ny person who is stated in an investor's
account book and the depositor's account book shall be deemed to hold the respective securities.”

The Tribunal notes that the Real Name Acct itself is not part of the record but that the Act has been
interpreted in the Concurring Opinion of the Korean Supreme Court, Decision Case No. 2015-Da-248342,
23 March 2017 [R-10], pp. 6-7 as establishing a presumption that “only the title holders entered in the
shareholder registry must be deemed shareholders.”

47

161.

162.

163.

164.

196

197

198

199

200

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

First, the Tribunal is not convinced that these provisions deal with ownership. In the Korean
original, the verb “to hold” in Article 311.1 of the Capital Markets Act is not identical with the
verb “to own’.'% As regards the registration as foreign investor and on the companies’
shareholder registries, the Korean law experts essentially agree that neither registration has any

direct bearing on ownership rights under Korean law.!””

Second, there is no need to resort to any of the legal presumptions in the above-mentioned
provisions. In the present case, there is only one legal entity, namely the General Partner, that is
capable of holding rights on trust for the Cayman Fund. As explained above, when the Cayman
Fund is recorded as the titleholder, this refers to a legal nullity and is understood as referring to
the General Partner under the applicable law. There is thus no discrepancy between the holder of
the trading account, the investment registration and the shareholder registration and the General
Partner. The present case is different from the scenario described by Professor Rho in which a
purchaser acquires shares in the name of a third person who is designated as titleholder.'** In the

present instance, the entity that was designated as titleholder does not exist as a legal person.

Consequently, the Tribunal concludes that under the applicable municipal laws, the General

Partner became the legal owner of the Samsung Shares.

(iii) Beneficial ownership

As an alternative argument, Respondent submits that, even if Cayman law applied to the question
of legal ownership under Article 11.28 of the FTA, the General Partner held the Samsung Shares
only in trust for the Cayman Fund, relying on the finding in Blue Bank v. Venezuela that “[a]s
trustee, Blue Bank does not own the assets, but simply manages and administers them ... to the
benefit of a third party.”!°? Respondent submits that the Samsung Shares were part of the Cayman
Fund’s estate and that any dividends or proceeds from a sale of the Samsung Shares would only
benefit the Cayman Fund but not the General Partner in its capacity as trustee.?” In essence,

Respondent argues that the General Partner was not the beneficial owner of the Samsung Shares.

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, p. 391:10-17 [Cross-examination
of Professor Rho].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, pp. 364:14-365:4, 366:8-376:25
[Cross-examination of Professor Rho]; Kwon Opinion [CER-3], 11 49, 55.

Rho Opinion [RER-2], 31.
Reply, 160, fn. 134, citing Blue Bank v. Venezuela [RLA-23], 1 163.
Reply, 160, fn. 134.

48

165.

166.

167.

168.

201

202

203,

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

As pointed out above, Claimants contend that Article 11.28 of the FTA does not impose a
requirement of beneficial ownership. In any event, Claimants submit that “[t]he General Partner
is pursuing its own claim based on its own rights under the Treaty as the legal and beneficial
owner of the Samsung Shares.”?”!

As is clear from the legal authorities cited support of the Parties’ submissions, there are two major
schools of thought on the implications of a split between legal and beneficial ownership in

international investment case law and scholarly writings.

The first school considers that there is a general principle of international investment law that a
claimant only qualifies as an investor to the extent that it can prove a beneficial interest in the
investment. According to this view, legal title alone is insufficient to establish ownership.
Representative of this school of thought is Professor Stern’s dissenting opinion in Occidental v.

Ecuador which states:

As far as the position of international law towards beneficial owners, in cases where
the legal title and the beneficial ownership are split, is concerned, it is quite
uncontroversial, after a thorough review of the existing doctrine and case-law, that

international law grants relief to the owner of the economic interest.”°
This was affirmed by the annulment committee in the same matter in the following terms:

In cases where legal title is split between a nominee and a beneficial owner
international law is uncontroversial: as Arbitrator Stern has stated in her Dissent

the dominant position in international law grants standing and relief to the owner

of the beneficial interest — not to the nominee.”

Rejoinder, 123.

Occidental Petroleum Corporation, et al. v. The Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11,
Dissenting Opinion of Professor Stern, 20 September 2012 (“Occidental Dissent”) [RLA-15], 1 148.

Occidental Annulment [RLA-21], { 259. The annulment committee added the following observations on
Professor Stern’s analysis: “The position as regards beneficial ownership is a reflection of a more general
principle of international investment law: claimants are only permitted to submit their own claims, held for
their own benefit, not those held (be it as nominees, agents or otherwise) on behalf of third parties not
protected by the relevant treaty. And tribunals exceed their jurisdiction if they grant compensation to third
parties whose investments are not entitled to protection under the relevant instrument. This subjective
limitation of ICSID jurisdiction is a natural consequence of international investment law. Arbitral tribunals
are not courts of justice holding unfettered jurisdiction. ... Specifically, protected investors cannot transfer
beneficial ownership and control in a protected investment to an unprotected third party, and expect that
the arbitral tribunal retains jurisdiction to adjudicate the dispute between the third party and the host State.
To hold the contrary would open the floodgates to an uncontrolled expansion of jurisdiction ratione

 

 

 

49

169.

170.

204

205

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

The second school of thought does not accept that, under general international investment law,
only the beneficial owner fulfils the characteristics of an investor. For example, the tribunal in
Saba Fakes v. Turkey made the following observations on the division of legal title and beneficial

ownership:

[T]he division of property rights amongst several persons or the separation of legal
and beneficial ownership is commonly accepted in a number of legal systems, be
it through a trust, a fiducie or any other similar structure. Such structures are in no
way indicative of a sham or a fraudulent conveyance, and no such presumption
should be entertained without convincing evidence to the contrary. The separation
of legal title and beneficial ownership rights does not deprive such ownership of
the characteristics of an investment within the meaning of the ICSID Convention
or the Netherlands-Turkey BIT. Neither the ICSID Convention, nor the BIT make
any distinction which could be interpreted as an exclusion of a bare legal title from

the scope of the ICSID Convention or from the protection of the BIT.2"

Along the same lines, the tribunal in Von Pezold v. Zimbabwe considered prima facie evidence

of legal ownership sufficient to establish jurisdiction:

The next ground of challenge is that the von Pezold Claimants have not proved
beneficial ownership. The Tribunal can find no requirement that beneficial
ownership be proven in either the Swiss or German BITs, and sees no basis on
which such a requirement should be read into the BITs. In the present case, the
Tribunal finds that the Claimants have provided prima facie evidence of legal

ownership which has not been rebutted and this is sufficient to establish

205

jurisdiction.

personae, beyond the limits agreed by the States when executing the treaty.” (Occidental Annulment [RLA-
21), (| 262-264). On this basis, the annulment committee reached the following conclusion: “By
compensating a protected investor for an investment which is beneficially owned by a non-protected
investor, the Tribunal has illicitly expanded the scope of its jurisdiction and has acted with an excess of
powers. ... In the present case, the excess of powers is manifest ...”” (Occidental Annulment [RLA-21], 1]
266, 268).

Saba v. Turkey [CLA-40], { 134.

Bernhard von Pezold and Others v. Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15, Award, 28 July
2015 (“Von Pezold v. Zimbabwe”) [CLA-27], { 314. In similar vein, the tribunal in Flemingo v. Poland
[CLA-68], {| 331 stated: “With regard to Respondent's alternative submission that only ‘the ultimate
beneficiary of the investment’ would be entitled to the Treaty’s protection, the Tribunal observes that, as
between Claimant and the ultimate beneficiary of the investment, there are indeed three layers of
companies ... However, the Tribunal notes again that the Treaty did not expressly provide for the limitation

 

 

50

171.

172.

173.

174.

206

207

208,

209

210

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

The Tribunal considers that at this stage of the proceedings it can leave open which school of
thought should be applied to the present case. Even assuming, without deciding, that the FTA
and/or applicable rules of international law require an investor beneficially to own the
investment, the Tribunal is convinced that the General Partner fulfils that requirement. As the
Tribunal will explain below, Claimants have sufficiently established that the General Partner has

a beneficial interest in the Samsung Shares.

At the outset, the Tribunal notes that the facts underlying the question whether the General

Partner has a beneficial interest in the Samsung Shares are largely undisputed.

Notably, there is no dispute between the Parties that the General Partner did not make any cash
capital contributions to the Cayman Fund. It is also undisputed that every year the General Partner
took out most of the Incentive Allocations credited to its capital account and that it withdrew
most of its Incentive Allocation for 2013 in January 2014. Finally, there is no dispute that as a
result of the Cayman Fund’s losses in 2014, the General Partner did not receive any Incentive
Allocation in 2015 and that in January 2015, the General Partner’s capital account contained at
most “a couple of hundred thousand dollars”.?°

There are also several points of agreement between the two experts on Cayman law, Mr. Lindsay
and Ms. Reynolds. First, they concur that Cayman law distinguishes between legal title and
beneficial interest.’ Second, the experts are in agreement that the General Partner’s beneficial
interest in the Cayman Fund, including the Samsung Shares, is determined by the terms of the
Partnership Agreement.”” Third, they agree that any beneficial interest that a partner may have
in the partnership assets is indivisible in the sense that a partner is not entitled to particular
assets.”" Fourth, they concur that the concept of indivisibility does not determine the amount of

a partner’s beneficial interest in the partnership.”"° Fifth, they agree that under Cayman law any

of treaty protection to the ultimate beneficiary of the investment and, therefore, such a restriction cannot
be read into it.”

See above at fff 61-63.

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, p. 235:6-11 [Expert conferencing
of Mr, Lindsay and Ms. Reynolds].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, p. 239:11-16 [Expert
conferencing of Mr. Lindsay and Ms. Reynolds].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, pp. 239:17-241:1 [Expert
conferencing of Mr. Lindsay and Ms. Reynolds].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, pp. 321:7-322:6 [Expert
conferencing of Mr. Lindsay and Ms. Reynolds].

SI

175.

176.

177.

178.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

legal proceedings by or against an exempted limited partnership may be instituted by or against
au

the general partner only.
The Parties, however, disagree on whether the General Partner’ s beneficial interest is determined
based on the balance of its capital account or by reference to its entitlement to an Incentive
Allocation. While Respondent argues that the General Partner’s beneficial interest in July 2015
amounted to zero as the General Partner had virtually nothing in its capital account in 2015 and
could not earn an Incentive Allocation regardless of the performance of the Samsung Shares,!”
Claimants argue that the General Partner’s beneficial interest is determined by reference to the
increase or decrease in value of the partnership assets.?!>

In accordance with the expert testimony of Mr. Lindsay and Ms. Reynolds, the Tribunal will
begin its analysis of the General Partner’s beneficial interest by looking at the wording of

Partnership Agreement.

Article 2.12 of the Partnership Agreement defines the term “Partnership Interests” as “a Partner’s
interest in the Partnership. The Partner’s economic interest shall be expressed as a percentage
equal to (i) the balance in the Capital Account of such Partner divided by (ii) the aggregate

balance in the Capital Accounts of all the Partners at any given time.”?!4

While at first glance the concept of “Partnership Interest” does not appear to be limited to the
Limited Partners’ economic interest in the Partnership, a systematic review of the provisions in
the Partnership Agreement referring to this concept shows that the term is tailored to Limited
Partners. The Tribunal agrees with Mr. Lindsay’s assessment that the Partnership Agreement
uses the term only in respect of “the withdrawal or transfer by any Limited Partner of its interest
in the Partnership; and ... obtaining the necessary consent of Limited Partners to the admission
of an additional General Partner”,?!> the withdrawal of the General Partner, which the Limited
Partners holding Partnership Interests of a certain threshold must consent to,'® and the winding-

up of the Partnership following the withdrawal of the General Partner in which case the Limited

First ER Lindsay [CER-1], | 25; Reynolds Opinion [RER-1], 33.

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 3, 4 October 2019, pp. 462:21-463:5, 464:19-465:4
[Respondent's Closing Statement].

Rejoinder, {{ 36, citing Second ER Lindsay [CER-2], { 22.
Partnership Agreement [C-30], Article 2.12.

Second ER Lindsay [CER-2], { 18, referring to Partnership Agreement [C-30], Articles 5.04(b), 6.02,
7.01., 7.07, 8.01, 8.02, 11.02].

Partnership Agreement [C-30], Article 7.05.

52

179.

180.

181.

182.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Partners holding Partnership Interests of a certain threshold may appoint a successor. ?!7
Consequently, the definition of “Partnership Interest” in Article 2.12 of the Partnership
Agreement is insufficient to establish the General Partner’s beneficial interest in the partnership

assets.

Article 4.06(b) of the Partnership Agreement provides, in relevant part, that “[w]ith respect to
each Capital Account of a Limited Partner, as of the end of each Fiscal Year, there shall be
allocated to the Capital Account of the General Partner, as its incentive allocation ... 20% of ...
the Cumulative Net Profits preliminarily allocated to such Capital Account of such Limited
Partner” minus any management fees and expenses paid by the Limited Partner and to the extent
that the “Cumulative Net Profits” exceed the “Cumulative Unrecovered Net Losses” of previous

years.7!8

In the Tribunal’s view, this general entitlement to an Incentive Allocation represents a beneficial
interest of the General Partner in the Partnership’s assets. It is undeniable that the Incentive
Allocation entitles the General Partner to share in the benefits of ownership of the Partnership’s
assets. Whenever the Partnership’s assets gain in value and generate net profits above a certain

watermark, the General Partner gets its share of these profits.

While under the Partnership Agreement the General Partner’s beneficial interest in the
partnership assets could in theory not only be determined by its entitlement to an Incentive
Allocation but also by its capital contributions, this question does not arise in the present case as
the General Partner has not to date made any cash contributions. Consequently, the entitlement
to an Incentive Allocation reflects a beneficial interest of the General Partner, in its own right, in

the Partnership’s assets including the Samsung Shares.

Whether or not this entitlement to an Incentive Allocation results in a payment in any given year
is a different question that is of no relevance to the determination of the General Partner’s
beneficial interest in the Partnership’s assets. Even if this entitlement does not materialize in a
specific year, this does not deprive the General Partner of its entitlement to share in any future
profits the same assets might generate. If this were not the case, the General Partner’s beneficial

interest in any given year could only be determined retroactively. Consequently, the Tribunal

Partnership Agreement [C-30], Articles 10.01(a), 10.04.
Partnership Agreement [C-30], Article 4.06(b)..

53

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

does not consider the balance of the General Partner’s capital account in 2015 to be dispositive

of its beneficial interest in the Samsung Shares at the time of the alleged breaches of the FTA.

183. Having concluded that the General Partner’s entitlement to an Incentive Allocation represents a
beneficial interest in the Samsung Shares, the Tribunal need not at present decide whether the
General Partner has a beneficial interest in the Samsung Shares beyond its Incentive Allocation,
for example an interest based on its entitlement to apply the assets of the Partnership in discharge

of the Partnership's debts for which it, the General Partner, is solely responsible.?!”

184. In this context, the Tribunal notes, however, that Claimants’ argument” that the concept of
indivisibility determines the extent of its beneficial interest in the Partnership’s assets has not

been confirmed by the Parties’ experts. They have stated at the Hearing:

Q. Then, on a last topic, I’m coming back to the discussion of indivisibility. Does
the notion of ‘indivisibility’ determine the amount of a Partner’s beneficial interest

in the Partnership?

A. (Ms. Reynolds) Do you mean quantum?
Q. Yes.

A. (Ms. Reynolds) I would say no.

A. (Mr. Lindsay) No, it doesn’t. That’s the whole — that is the point of indivisibility.
So, to the extent that two or three assets perform especially well and the General
Partner feels buoyed by the idea that it will share in the upside of those assets, it
has, until the point that you conduct the calculation of the Net Profit at the end of
the year, it has notionally an indivisible interest in the upside of those assets. If one
asset, then, performs particularly badly, then the General Partner loses the benefit

of the stellar performance of the other assets.

Q Right.

219 See below at 224.
20 ‘Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 3, 4 October 2019, pp. 500:6-501:5 [Claimants’
Closing Statement]; pp. 538:25-539:15 [Claimants’ Counsel].

54

185.

186.

187.

188.

221

222

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

So, does the notion of indivisibility help us to determine if a Partner has, for
example, | percent beneficial interest or a 99 percent beneficial interest?

A. (Mr. Lindsay) No.
A. (Ms. Reynolds) No. (emphasis added)!

The Tribunal agrees with that mutual view of the experts. Furthermore, the Tribunal does not
deem it necessary to further differentiate between the beneficial and the economic interest of the
General Partner in the Partnership’s assets, as suggested by Claimants in their closing
statement.2” In the Tribunal’s view, both terms can be used interchangeably and relate to the

General Partner’s right to share in the benefits of ownership of the Partnership’s assets.

As a last point on this issue, the Tribunal observes that it is this entitlement to share in the

Partnership’s profits that distinguishes the General Partner from the claimant in Blue Bank v.

 

Venezuela who “as a trustee holding the assets of the Qatar Trust for the ultimate benefit of third
party interests, does not own the assets of the Qatar Trust, did not invest these assets for its own

account and cannot, therefore, ground jurisdiction on any investment made by it”.??>

Contrary to
a bare trustee, the General Partner is not disinterested in the Partnership’s property but holds, in

its own right, a beneficial interest in these assets which makes him a beneficial co-owner.

Based on this finding and without ruling on any requirement of beneficial ownership under the
FTA or international law, the Tribunal rejects Respondent’s argument that the General Partner

was not a beneficial owner of the Samsung Shares.

(iv) Estoppel

As a final point on ownership, the Tribunal addresses Respondent’s argument that the General
Partner is estopped from relying on its ownership of the Samsung Shares due to the registration
of the Cayman Fund as foreign investor without disclosure of the General Partner’s purported

224

interest.”

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, p. 321:7-322:6 [Expert
conferencing of Mr. Lindsay and Ms. Reynolds]; Second ER Lindsay [CER-2], 1 10.

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 3, 4 October 2019, pp. 500:6-501:5 [Claimants’
Closing Statement].

Blue Bank v. Venezuela [RLA-23], { 172.
Reply, 159.

55

189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

194.

225

226

227

228,

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Without ruling on the applicability or the prerequisites of the estoppel doctrine, the Tribunal
considers that the requirements advanced by Respondent are not met. As the Tribunal has
determined above,” the registration of the Cayman Fund as the titleholder has to be understood
as referring to the General Partner under the applicable municipal laws. Consequently, there is

no mismatch between the recorded and the actual investor.

Furthermore, Respondent has not established that it actually relied on the representations as there
is no indication that the application would not have been granted if it had been submitted in the
General Partner’s name. Finally, Respondent has not shown that it suffered a loss, or that
Claimants derived a benefit, from the representations made on the foreign investment registration

application.

For these reasons, the Tribunal rejects Respondent’s estoppel argument and concludes that the

General Partner owned the Samsung Shares in the sense of Article 11.28 of the FTA.

(v) — Control

The Tribunal now turns to Respondent’s argument that the General Partner did not, directly or

indirectly, control the Samsung Shares.

Respondent’ s argument is twofold: first, Respondent asserts that because the General Partner was
not registered as an owner on the shareholder registries of SEC and SC&T, it did not have the

legal capacity to exercise any shareholding rights under Korean law;”°

second, Respondent
submits that whatever control the General Partner exercised over the Samsung Shares was only
in the name of the legal owner, the Cayman Fund, and that this is similar to a situation where a

director exercises shareholder rights on behalf of a corporation.”””

In relation to the first point, the Tribunal refers to its earlier findings that the Cayman Fund lacks
legal personality and that, although the Cayman Fund was nominally registered on the
shareholder registries of SEC and SC&T, it could exercise its shareholding rights only through

the General Partner.?** Under Cayman law, to which Korean private international law refers in

See above at ff 151-163.
Reply, 161.

Reply, 1 62.

See above at 162.

56

195.

196.

197.

198.

199.

200.

229

230

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

this context, the General Partner is the only entity that is entitled to exercise any rights associated
with the ownership of the Partnership’s assets.

The present case is therefore different from the situation described in the second part of
Respondent’s argument. The General Partner did not exercise any shareholder rights on behalf

of a corporation but in its own name.

The Tribunal thus concludes that the General Partner controlled the Samsung Shares, de jure and

de facto.

(2) Whether the General Partner has failed to make an investment under the FTA

 

The Tribunal now turns to Respondent’s second argument that the General Partner does not

qualify as an investor as it has failed to make an investment under the FTA.

As a preliminary issue, the Tribunal will address the question whether the FTA only affords

protection to investors who themselves have made the covered investment.

Respondent argues that the investor itself must have made an investment that fulfils the
characteristics of an investment under the FTA.”° In Claimants’ submission, Respondent
attempts to construct two additional, extra-textual hurdles for investors: (i) a requirement that, to
meet the definition of an investor under the FTA, a claimant must also demonstrate certain
characteristics found in the definition of investment; and (ii) by claiming that the FTA only

affords protection to investors who make an active contribution.”

The Tribunal notes that while Article 11.28 of the FTA defines an “investor of a Party” as “a
Party or state enterprise thereof, or a national or an enterprise of a Party, that attempts to make.
is making, or has made an investment in the territory of the other Party ...”, the definition of
“investment” under the same provision describes the relationship between an investor and an
investment in the following terms: “investment means every asset that an investor owns or
controls, directly or indirectly, that has the characteristics of an investment, including such
characteristics as the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of gain or profit,

or the assumption of risk” (emphasis added).

Reply, 126.
Rejoinder, ff 40-41.

57

201.

202.

203.

204.

231

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

The Tribunal thus has to decide whether the relationship between protected assets and qualifying
nationals is exclusively governed by the concepts of (direct or indirect) ownership or control or
whether the use of the verb “making” in the definition of an investor imposes additional

requirements on the investor.

This question is inextricably linked to Respondent’s core legal proposition that an investor must
beneficially own the investment. Respondent’s argument that an investor needs to make an own
contribution, expect own gain or profit and assume own risk presupposes that an investor enjoys

the benefits of legal ownership.?*!

The Tribunal need not decide this question. Nor does it need to rule on the issue whether the
specific characteristics listed in the definition of investment are merely stated by way of example
or need to be fulfilled cumulatively. In light of the Tribunal’s prior finding in relation to the
General Partner’s beneficial interest, and as will be set out in more detail below, the General
Partner fulfils all additional requirements that Respondent invokes. In particular, the General
Partner has made its own contribution (i), expected its own gain or profit (ii) and assumed its
own risk (iii). In addition, and again without ruling on the existence of such jurisdictional

requirement, the General Partner has held the Samsung Shares for a sufficient duration (iv).

(i) Commitment of capital or other resources

Respondent’s argument on the absence of a meaningful contribution centres on Claimants’
alleged failure to establish that the General Partner had acquired the Samsung Shares with its
own capital as opposed to the capital of the Cayman Fund. This leads Respondent to conclude
that the General Partner did not make a contribution, let alone a meaningful one, of its own
financial means and at its own financial risk that would qualify as an investment.?*” According
to Respondent, the General Partner’s alleged contribution of knowledge and management merely
constitutes pre-investment activity that is not protected under the FTA, did not transfer value and
contribute to Samsung’s business and therefore does not qualify as the contribution of “other

+9 233

resources According to Respondent, Claimants have also not established that any pre-

This connection between the making of an investment and the requirement of beneficial ownership has
also been noted by Hanno Wehland, Blue Bank International v. Venezuela: When Are Trust Assets
Protected under International Investment Agreements, 34(6) J. Int’l Arb. (2017) [RLA-22], p. 956
(“[B]eneficial ownership may indeed be a requirement for obtaining treaty protection, simply because in
the absence of any beneficial interest, an ‘investment’ will typically not have been made.”).

Memorial, {i 25-26, referring to KT Asia v. Kazakhstan [RLA-17], {| 192-206; Blue Bank v. Venezuela
[RLA-23], 49 163, 172; Reply, 191 35, 40.

Reply, Mf 35-36.

58

205.

206.

207.

208.

234

235

236

237

238,

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

investment analysis was in fact performed by the General Partner and not by the Investment

Manager.?*

Claimants argue that the General Partner made a contribution by committing the capital under its
exclusive control to the acquisition of the Shares (totalling approximately USD 5.56 billion) and
contributed its investment decision-making, management and expertise (totalling approximately
USD 0.96 billion).?*> According to Claimants, this qualifies as the contribution of “other
resources” in the sense of Article 11.28 of the FTA. In relation to the temporal scope, Claimants
point to the fact that the definition of “investor” in Article 11.28 of the FTA comprises “attempts
to make ... an investment” and thus also extends to the pre-investment phase.?*° Furthermore,
Claimants assert that the General Partner engaged as a significant minority shareholder in an

ongoing dialogue with the Samsung Group even after acquisition of the shares.?*7

The Tribunal bears in mind the fact that the General Partner did not make any cash contributions
to the Partnership and that the funds used to acquire the Samsung Shares originate from the

Limited Partner’s cash contributions.***

However, again, the Tribunal does not deem it necessary to decide whether the origin of the
capital used to acquire the shares plays a role in determining whether the General Partner has
made an own contribution. In the Tribunal’s view, Claimants have sufficiently established that
the General Partner’s investment decision-making, management and expertise constitutes a

commitment of “other resources” in the sense of Article 11.28 of the FTA.
Mr. Garschina has described these activities in his written testimony in the following way:

The team under my supervision spent hundreds of hours investigating and
analyzing Samsung Electronics and the Samsung Group. The internal team
regularly met and discussed the company’s performance, including reviewing
analyst reports from local and international brokers, and preparing and compiling
models for the companies. The team travelled to Korea, and worked with other

market participants (including other foreign investors in Samsung, and investment

Reply, 1 36.

Rejoinder, 1 58.

Rejoinder, {1 39, 61.

Rejoinder, J 62, citing Second WS Garschina [CWS-3], 1 10-12.
See above at 59.

59

209.

210.

211.

239

240

241

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

banks), with experts on Korean companies and the Korean market, and with the

Samsung Group’s investor relations group ...

While Mason was a minority foreign investor, and its ability to control the ultimate
direction of the company was limited, it was clear that Samsung was at least
outwardly interested in the views of foreign investors on Samsung’s approach to
corporate governance. The team’s regular meetings with Samsung’s investor
relations group were not only an opportunity to learn more about the drivers of the
Samsung business, but also to express our views and suggestions on Samsung’s
corporate strategy, provide feedback on the expectations of the market, and

contribute to the pressure on Samsung to reform its internal governance.”*°

There is no dispute between the Parties that the FTA generally allows contributions in kind.“
Instead, Respondent’s arguments centre on the temporal aspect and the involvement of the

Investment Manager.

In respect of Respondent’s argument that these activities predate the investment in the Samsung

 

Shares, the Tribunal considers that pre-investment activities are included in the ambit of the FTA.
This follows from the definition of investor whose explicit language (“attempts to make, is
making, or has made an investment’) extends the FTA’s temporal scope of application to the pre-
investment phase. The ordinary meaning of these terms, which the Tribunal shall have regard to
under Article 11.22.1 of the FTA in conjunction with Article 31.1 of the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties, is that an investor is already protected by the FTA if it is still in the process

of making an investment.

Regarding the involvement of the Investment Manager, the Tribunal is aware of Mr. Satzinger’s
testimony that all staff was employed by the Investment Manager.™*! Yet both Mr. Satzinger and
Mr. Garschina also state in their witness statements that the decision-making authority in Mason

and its related entities rested in the General Partner at all times, and that the General Partner has

Second WS Garschina [CER-3], {J 18-19.

See Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 3, 4 October 2019, p. 474:6-8 [Respondent’s
Closing Statement].

First WS Satzinger [CWS-2], {{ 8; Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October
2019, p. 177:22-24 [Cross-examination of Mr. Satzinger].

60

212.

213.

214.

215.

242

243,

245

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

merely delegated the exercise of some of its authority under the Partnership Agreement to the

Investment Manager which remained under the supervision of the General Partner.”

The General Partner’s decision-making authority is confirmed by Article 3.01 of the Partnership
Agreement which provides that “[t]he management, control and the conduct of the business of

the Partnership shall be vested exclusively in the General Partner.”?4*

The Partnership Agreement
also explicitly provides for the possibility that the General Partner employs agents in the
performance of its services.“ Finally, only the General Partner but not the Investment Manager
was entitled to share in the benefits of the Partnership’s assets and thereby assumed risk, as the

Tribunal will explain in more detail below.”45

The Tribunal therefore concludes that any work by the Investment Manager was performed on
behalf and in the exercise of the General Partner’s rights and obligations under the Partnership

Agreement.

As a final point on the issue of contribution, the Tribunal has taken note of Mr. Lindsay’s and
Ms. Reynold’s initial disagreement on whether investment expertise qualifies as a contribution
in kind under Cayman law.™“* In the Tribunal’s view, whether investment expertise constitutes a
contribution in kind under Cayman law is not relevant to the question at issue whether the General
Partner’s investment decision-making, management and expertise qualifies as the commitment

of “other resources” in the sense of Article 11.28 of the FTA.

At the Hearing, it became clear that the experts were essentially in agreement that, while the
value of the General Partner’s investment expertise was not initially reflected in its capital

account, this did not mean that the Partnership Agreement did not ascribe to it any value at all.

First WS Garschina [CWS-1], 6; First WS Satzinger [CWS-2], {if 7-8.
Partnership Agreement [C-30], Article 3.01.

Article 3.02 of the Partnership Agreement [C-30] provides in relevant terms: “The General Partner shall
have the power by itself on behalf and in the name of the Partnership to carry out any and all of the objects
and purposes of the Partnership set forth in Section 1.05, and to perform all acts and enter into and perform
all contracts and other undertakings which it may deem necessary or advisable or incidental thereto, and
to have and possess the same rights and powers as any general partner in a partnership formed under the
laws of the Cayman Islands, including, without limitation, to: ... (1) employ such agents, brokers,
consultants, advisors, attorneys and as it deems ibly appropriate and necessary for the
conduct of the business of the Partnership ... (emphasis added).”

See below at {ff 219-225.

Reynolds Opinion [RER-1], { 42; Second ER Lindsay [CER-2], { 17.

61

216.

217.

218.

219.

220.

247

248,

249

250

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Rather, the Incentive Allocation reflects the value that the Partnership Agreement assigns to the

General Partner’s investment expertise.”

The Tribunal agrees with that assessment. The Partnership Agreement is structured in such way
that the General Partner contributes its investment decision-making, management and expertise
to the benefit of the Partnership and receives an Incentive Allocation in return for these services.
In the Tribunal’s view, the provision of these services constitutes a contribution of “other

resources” in the sense of the FTA.

Consequently, the Tribunal concludes that the General Partner has made a contribution within

the meaning of Article 11.28 of the FTA.

(ii) | Expectation of gain or profit

It is undisputed between the Parties that the General Partner, through its entitlement to an

Incentive Allocation, had an expectation of gain or profit.2*

(iii) Assumption of risk

Turning to the question whether the General Partner assumed any risk in respect of the Samsung
Shares, the Tribunal will first address Respondent’s argument that a claimant does not bear any
risk associated with the acquisition of equity where it has not made any capital contribution to

that acquisition.”

The Tribunal refers to its prior finding that the General Partner’s investment decision-making,
management and expertise constitutes a commitment of other resources.’ While the General
Partner has not made any cash contributions, the Partnership Agreement assigns a value to the
services rendered by the General Partner. Given that this value is dependent on the performance
of the Partnership’s assets, the Tribunal agrees with Claimants’ submission that the General

Partner assumed the risk that, despite its commitment of other resources, the Partnership’s assets,

See Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 2, 3 October 2019, pp. 273:6-279:16 [Expert
conferencing of Mr. Lindsay and Ms. Reynolds].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, p. 35:18-22 [Respondent's
Opening Statement].

Reply, 1 43.
See above at | 204-217.

62

221.

222.

223.

224.

225.

226.

251

252

255

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

including the Samsung Shares, would not appreciate in value and that it would not receive any

Incentive Allocation.”*!

The Tribunal need not go any further and look at any spill-over effects in respect of other assets
of the Partnership.” Any depreciation in the value of the Samsung Shares can negatively affect
the General Partner’s Incentive Allocation and thereby curtail its ability to recover the costs and

expenses associated with its services.

For this reason, the Tribunal disagrees with Respondent’s characterization of the Incentive
Allocation as a “one-sided arrangement that allowed the [General Partner] to share in the upside
of market operations (such as the acquisition of the Samsung Shares) without any liability to
share in their downside”.?** The General Partner shares in the downside by having rendered its

services in vain and without receiving any consideration.

Furthermore, the fact that the Partnership Agreement”™ limits the General Partner’s liability
towards the Limited Partner or the Partnership does not absorb the above-mentioned risk that the

General Partner is unable to make good for its contribution of other resources.

The Tribunal may also have to determine whether the General Partner’s undisputed liability to
discharge the debts of the Partnership could have some relevance for the assessment of its alleged

own loss.?

The Tribunal therefore concludes that the General Partner assumed the investment risk that it

would not receive an Incentive Allocation in exchange for the resources contributed by it.

(iv) Duration

The Tribunal refers to the Parties’ disagreement as to whether there is an additional implicit

requirement under the FTA and/or general international investment law that the investment needs

Rejoinder, ff 67-68.
Rejoinder, [ 69, referring to Second ER Lindsay [CER-2], J 30(b).
Reply, 145.

Article 3.06 of the Partnership Agreement [C-30] provides: “The General Partner (and its members,
employees, agents and affiliates) (each, a ‘Covered Person’) shall not be liable to any other Partner or the
Partnership for any loss suffered by the Partnership unless such loss is caused by such Covered Person’s
Gross Negligence, willful misconduct or breach of fiduciary duty...”.

   

 

H
See Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 3, 4 October 2019, pp. 519:13-527:12.

63

227.

228.

229.

230.

256

257

258

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

to be held for a sufficient duration. The Tribunal is aware that the non-exhaustive list of
characteristics of an investment in Article 11.28 of the FTA does not include any requirement as
to the duration of an investment. Yet the Tribunal need not rule on this legal issue as the General

Partner fulfils any implicit requirement suggested by Respondent.

The Parties agree that if a duration requirement is to be applied, the Tribunal needs to look to the

intended duration of the investment.”

In the absence of an explicit requirement of duration in the FTA, there are no clear indications
which duration is to be deemed sufficient. Assuming (but not deciding) that an implicit duration
requirement exists, the Tribunal agrees with the flexible approach adopted by other tribunals, as

formulated by the Romak v. Uzbekistan tribunal:

The Arbitral Tribunal does not consider that, as a matter of principle, there is some
fixed minimum duration that determines whether assets qualify as investments.
Short-term projects are not deprived of ‘investment’ status solely by virtue of their
limited duration. Duration is to be analyzed in light of all of the circumstances, and

of the investor’s overall commitment.?*

The Tribunal concludes that the General Partner satisfies this standard and held the Samsung

Shares for a sufficient duration.

In his written testimony, Mr. Garschina has described Mason’s investment strategy as follows:

What prompted us to invest at that time was the prospect that the transition to the
next generation of leadership would require a significant restructuring of the

Samsung Group. The restructuring would be a catalyst to unlock value in the

Reply, {Ml 47-49; Rejoinder, 9 71-76.

Reply, {4 50-51; Counter-Memorial, 55, citing KT Asia v. Kazakhstan [RLA-17], {209 (“When ass
the duration in light of the circumstances, the question arises about the weight to be given to the investor's
intentions or expectations in terms of duration. Like the tribunals in Deutsche Bank and in L.E.S.I, this one
is of the opinion that ‘it is the intended duration period that should be considered to determine whether the
criterion is satisfied’”. See also Deutsche Bank AG v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/09/2, Award, 31 October 2012 (“Deutsche Bank y. Sri Lanka”) [CLA-30], J 304 (“[I]t is
the intended duration period that should be considered to determine whether the criterion is satisfied.”).
Romak v. Uzbekistan [RLA-10], { 225. This standard has been confirmed in Deutsche Bank v. Sri Lanka
[CLA-30], { 303 (“With respect to duration, the Tribunal once again agrees with Schreuer that ‘[duration]
is a very flexible term. It could be anything from a couple of months to many years’. Further, the Tribunal
concurs with the statement made by the Tribunal in Romak v. Republic of Uzbekistan, holding that ‘short-
term projects are not deprived of ‘investment’ status solely by virtue of their limited duration. Duration is
to be analysed in light of all the circumstances, and of the investor’s overall commitment’.”).

 

64

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

business for shareholders. The Samsung heir apparent was under a lot of pressure
from shareholders (particularly foreign shareholders) to improve governance and

increase returns ...

Consistent with our view, Samsung was interested in foreign investors’ preferences
for returns and a desire to be in line with global peers within 2-3 years. Samsung’s
view was that restructuring was likely to take the form of a holding/operating
company structure, but this was ‘unlikely to be a near-term event’ given tax, money

and other logistics involved.?°

231. At the Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Mr. Garschina added that

[a]lso a part of it was the corporate environment in Korea and the fact that laws had
been passed that would require certain structures to be unwound. Those structures,
commonly referred to as the ‘chaebol’ system, are a group of circularity- driven —
I mean, if you looked at the Mason capital structure, and I’m confused by it, if you
looked at the Samsung structure, your brain would explode, so the Government of
Korea said this is not hospitable to investment capital.”

232. Also at the Hearing, Mr. Garschina commented on the time horizon of Mason’s investment in

Samsung as follows:

Q. And do I understand your testimony to be that the time horizon on your Samsung

holdings was longer than three to nine months?

A. It was impossible to tell because of the complexity of it. ...

Q. It was impossible to tell, I think that’s good enough.

A. You know, some investments you make, there’s a merger agreement, and you’re
going to get paid a certain amount of money, and it’s feasible to bracket a time
period where you’re going to receive your money. Other investments — and — and

having a shorter time, your money invested for a shorter period of time is not a bad

29 Second WS Garschina [CWS-3], 11 8-9.
260 Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, p. 123:16-25 [Cross-examination
of Mr. Garschina].

65

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

thing, it’s a good thing, because your Internal Rate of Return will be higher and
your investor’s capital will be at risk for a shorter period of time and for less market
tisk, a lot of other factors that we were not interested in imposing on our investors

unnecessarily.

But this investment is more of an open-ended, long-term investment because the
gestation period for change in Korea was going to be long. I would compare it to
like a long bankruptcy investment where you have the process moves along quite
slowly as evidenced by the fact that we’ re still sitting here in 2019, and they’ re still

restructuring. (emphasis added)”*!

233. Mr. Garschina further stated that under normal circumstances Mason intended to hold the

261

262

Samsung Shares until after the restructuring:

Q. I'm asking you whether that is your testimony, that you intended to hold the

Shares until after the restructuring?

A. I think - I think we were going to hold the Shares until not only in the
restructuring happened but at a price — inherent in investing is being happy where

the price is. You can’t just — it’s not untrue —
Q. Right.
A. = but there are many reasons.

Q. Right. So, you were intending to hold the Shares until you could make money

selling them in the market; right?

A. Or until there was a reason that we had to get out, which happened in this case.7

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, pp. 136:8-137:11 [Cross-
examination of Mr. Garschina].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, p. 144:5-18 [Cross-examination
of Mr. Garschina].

66

234.

235.

236.

237.

263

264

265

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

The Tribunal gathers from Mr. Garschina’s written and oral testimony that when Mason started

investing the duration of the investment was difficult to as:

 

s but that Mason expected this to

be “more of an open ended, long term investment”.*

Mr. Garschina’s testimony is confirmed by the estimates on the investment’s duration provided

in contemporaneous email correspondence between Mason employees (and third parties) that has

 

been exhibited together with Mr. Garschina’s second witness statement.

 

On 22 May 2014, a. a Mason employee and member of the core team for the Samsung
investment, 7 sent an email to other Mason employees as well as Mason’s co-founder,
Mr. Martino, summarizing the takeaways from a meeting with Samsung’s investor relations a
few days earlier. In this email, provided the following a:

of possible overhauls of Samsung’s corporate governance:

sment of the time horizon

 

Re: chairman’s health and potential corporate governance, they think the company
will eventually have some sort of holdco/opco structure. But this could take easily
5+ years to come to fruition as the amount of tax, money and other logistics

involved will make it unlikely to be a near-term event. (emphasis added)***

 

Tn an email of 27 May 2014, Mason employees circulated a detailed note prepared by the financial
services company J. In this note, the author commented on the possible timeframe of any

changes in Samsung’s corporate governance structure as follows:

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, p. 137:5-6 [Cross-examination
of Mr. Garschina].

Second WS Garschina [CWS-3], 4.

Email from I (0 EY ct, 22 May 2014 [C-42].

67

238.

239.

240.

241.

266

267

268

269

270

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

In an email of i” to a contact at of 15 July 2014 in preparation of a trip to

Seoul, describes Mason’s investment strategy inter alia in the following terms:

We are primarily value-driven, with a longer-term time horizon. We generally take
a bottoms up, fundamental view on most positions. We invest globally across all

asset clas

 

s, but mostly in equities and credit. We have taken large positions

within Asia, that we have held for several years. (emphasis added)?*”

On that basis, the Tribunal concludes that the General Partner was prepared to hold the Samsung

Shares for a longer term.

Contrary to Respondent’s assertion, the Tribunal does not see any indications that the General
Partner intended “to exploit short-term fluctuations in share prices associated with the Merger,
rather than to make a long-term commitment.””** Respondent bases this assertion on the General
Partner’s allegedly event-driven investment strategy and the timing of the acquisition of the

SC&T shares following the announcement of the merger.

As to Respondent’s first point, the Tribunal notes that even if the General Partner’s investment
had been “event-driven” in the sense that the General Partner considered possible changes of
Samsung’s corporate governance as an opportunity to invest, this is not indicative of any short-
term investment in and by itself. The Tribunal is aware of the due diligence report published by
the Rhode Island Office of the General Treasurer describing Mason’s investment horizon as being
“shorter than most event driven and distressed managers, with an average holding period of 3 to
9 months.” Independent of whether this statement is a correct and fair description of Mason’s
investment horizon,”” the Tribunal does not consider that this average holding period was meant
to apply to the General Partner’s investment in Samsung. As the Tribunal has explained, there

are clear indications in Mason’s contemporaneous email correspondence that the General Partner

[C-43], p.2

Email from [ED (0 I | 15 July 2014 (c-34].

Reply, 153.

Hedge Fund Investment Due Diligence Report, Mason Capital, 31 December 2010 [R-3], p. 6.

The Tribunal has noted Mr. Garschina’s reservations about the report; see Transcript of Hearing on
Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, p. 120:8-122:10 [Cross-examination of Mr. Garschina].

68

242.

243.

am

272

214

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

intended to hold the Samsung Shares for a longer term. The same due diligence report also
acknowledges that “the fund may be invested in situations that play out over extended periods of

time and thus is exposed to market risk”?!

In relation to Mason’s trading pattern between May 2014 and July 2015 and, in particular, the
timing of its acquisition of the SC&T shares, the Tribunal has studied Mason’s trading records

for SEC?” and SC&T?” as well as the explanations provided by Mr. Garschina at the Hearing.

While the Tribunal is aware that Mason sold its entire position in SEC in August 2014 and again
in October 2014, the Tribunal does not consider this to be indicative of a short-term investment.
At the Hearing, Mr. Garschina described these trades as part of the execution process and

independent of Mason’s investment strategy:

Q. And isn’t it true that you sold your entire holding of Samsung Electronics — by

the 10th of October, you had sold your entire holding of Samsung Electronics?

A. That’s what it says. What I would say to you is that part of the execution process
often is — it’s like when you’ re going into an ocean, you don’t jump in right away,
at least I don’t, sometimes you put a leg in, sometimes you put an arm in, and you
splash water on yourself, and if you don’t like it you may go out, but you ultimately
go in, and that’s part of the execution process for investing. And I think that’s what
you’re seeing here. It’s maximizing, getting the lowest price for our investors for

which — who we’re fiduciaries.

Q. I understand the reasons. But what I’m asking you is that by the 10th of
October 2014, isn’t it true that Mason had liquidated its entire holding in Samsung

Electronics?

A. It looks like that, but again, I would say that that’s not the end of the investment.
That’s part of the execution process. (emphasis added)?”

 

Hedge Fund Investment Due Diligence Report, Mason Capital, 31 December 2010 [R-3], p. 6.
Mason trading records Samsung Electronics, 8 August 2015 [C-31].

Mason trading records SC&T, 10 August 2015 [C-32]. See also above at {| 44-57 as well as the
demonstrative exhibits [RDE-1] and [RDE-2].

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, pp. 147:13-148:7 [Cross-
examination of Mr. Garschina].

69

244.

245.

215

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Q. You don’t say anywhere in your Witness Statements, in your two Witness
Statements, Mr. Garschina, that after the period from May 2014 to June 2015
Mason had been trading in and out of Samsung Electronics. You don’t say that in

your Witness Statements?

A. To me, it’s not relevant. Optimizing our price is something completely different

from my investment thesis and my investment research and the ideas I have in my

 

275

mind. (emphasis added)

 

The Tribunal finds this explanation convincing. The Tribunal considers that a holistic approach
is warranted when looking at the individual buy and sell executions. In the Tribunal’s view,
Claimants have satisfactorily explained that such buy and sell executions merely constituted price
optimizations that are part of Mason’s overall investment strategy and do not contradict its

intention to hold the Samsung Shares for a longer period of time.

Mr. Garschina has explained the timing and the duration of Mason’s position in SC&T as follows:

Q. So, Mason held the Shares in SC&T for about two months; right? Correct?

A. Well, we started in April and we ended in August — August? Yeah, August.

Q. Sorry, Mason — you started in April, you bought 334,000, you sold them in
April, and then you bought in May, in June, early June, and you held them until

August. That’s about two months.

A. That’s the trading record, although I would emphasize that C&T was a proxy
for Samsung Electronics. It essentially is a company — maybe still today; I haven’t
followed it — its primary asset was shares in Samsung Electronics. They had some

other peripheral assets. But the reason to buy C&T — there were several reasons

 

but one of the main reasons to buy it was that it was a cheaper proxy of Samsung

Electronics.

So I don’t — you haven’t pointed me to how much Samsung Electronics we owned

at this point.

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, pp. 150:19-151:2 [Cross-
examination of Mr. Garschina].

70

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Q Right.

A. But what I would say is that it’s a — my recollection is that we swapped, not in
a financial funding instrument, but we sold some Samsung or just bought Samsung
C&T as a cheaper way to buy Samsung Electroni

 

So, when I look at our investment at Samsung, it’s in — for restructuring of

Samsung, it says as a whole. It’s not C&T or Samsung.

And importantly, I think that C&T effectively, its main asset was Samsung
Electronics in the cross holdings. So, if you added up the Shares in Samsung
Electronics and then added up the other, I believe there was some real estate and a
few other operating businesses — I believe there was a blood — some sort of generic
biotech business — if you added that up, you are ‘creating,’ my word, Samsung

Electronics at a cheaper price.

So, when you say we entered C&T and we exited at — and during a short period of
time, I would say two things: One, our investment, as I said before, begins the day
we start research. Executing in the market is a switch that we turn on when we want

to have economic exposure to that investment process.

And two, and C&T _were_not letely di d
investments since they were overlapping in th e that they were both inherently
exposed to Samsung Electronics and that Samsung C&T was also undergoing a
merger vote that we anticipated would have to be — the exchange ratio would have

to be increased if the vote was turned out. (emphasis added)?”*

246. In the Tribunal’s view, Mr. Garschina provided a conclusive explanation as to why Mason
decided to increase its position in SC&T while at the same time selling some of its shares in SEC.
Mason considered SC&T to be a proxy for SEC which it thereby could acquire at a cheaper price.
The Tribunal is persuaded that Mason’s holdings in SEC and SC&T are based on the same

investment strategy and constitute a coherent investment.

26 ‘Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 1, 2 October 2019, pp. 154:1-155:24 [Cross-

examination of Mr. Garschina].

71

247.

248.

249.

250.

251.

217
278,

279

280

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Even if the acquisition of the SC&T was (partially) inspired by the merger announcement, this.
would not be indicative of an insufficient duration. Rather, as the Tribunal has explained, Mason

considered the overhaul of Samsung’s corporate governance structure to be an ongoing process.

Consequently, the Tribunal finds that the General Partner intended to hold the Samsung Shares

for a sufficient duration.

d) Conclusion

For the above reasons, the Tribunal concludes that the General Partner owned and controlled the
Samsung Shares and made an investment in the sense of Article 11.28 of the FTA. Consequently,
the Tribunal rejects Respondent’s request for a declaration that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction
over the General Partner’s claim on the basis that: the General Partner has not made an investment
in accordance with Article 11.28 of the FTA; and/or the General Partner did not own or control
the Samsung Shares; and rejects Respondent’s request to dismiss all of the claims brought by the

General Partner for that reason.

Whether the General Partner has standing to bring a claim
a) —_Respondent’s position

Respondent submits that the General Partner lacks standing under the FTA and international law,
as it has no “beneficial ownership” in the alleged investment and brings claims for damages
allegedly suffered by the Cayman Fund as a third party. ?”7

In relation to the FTA, Respondent argues that, pursuant to Article 11.16.1 of the FTA, the
General Partner may submit to arbitration claims only “on its own behalf” and on behalf of its
Korean subsidiaries, but not on behalf of third Parties such as the Cayman Fund.*” Contrary to
Claimants’ submission, Respondent asserts that the expression “on its own behalf” does not
merely serve to distinguish regular claims from derivative claims on behalf of an enterprise of
Respondent.?” Respondent also contends that legal ownership and control do not suffice to claim

compensation for an alleged breach of the FTA.”

Reply, | 64.
Reply, {if 65-66.
Reply, 167.
Reply, 167.

72

252.

253.

254.

255.

285

286

287

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Respondent asserts that Article 11.16.1 of the FTA is comprehensive and does not cover the
situation where a claimant brings claims on behalf of a third party that is not a host-State
enterprise.”*! Additionally, absent a beneficial interest, the General Partner cannot have “incurred
loss or damage” as required by Article 11.16.1(a) of the FTA.?*? Moreover, the distinction
between Articles 11.16.1(a) and (b) would be rendered meaningless if Claimants’ interpretation
prevailed since, in either scenario, the entire loss would then be that of Claimants.”

To support its reading of Article 11.16.1 of the FTA, Respondent refers to investment tribunal
decisions on the analogous Articles 1116 and 1117 of the North American Free Trade

Agreement.”*4

According to Respondent, the restriction on standing contained in the FTA is confirmed by a
“general principle of international investment law”, namely that “claimants are only permitted to
submit their own claims, held for their own behalf not those held (be it as nominees, agents or

39285

otherwise) on behalf of third parties.”**° Relying on the dissent as well as the decision of the

Annul: C i in Occidental v. Ecuador, Respondent argues that, in cases where

 

beneficial and legal ownership are not in the same hands, international law grants standing only

to the beneficial owner, as the owner of the economic interest, but not to the nominal owner.?*°

Respondent rejects Claimants’ contention that these authorities are inapposite because their
reasoning is based on the law of diplomatic protection. In this regard, Respondent asserts that a
large number of investment tribunals have adopted the above-mentioned principle as a principle
of international investment law to dismiss claims brought by nominal owners on behalf of

beneficial owners regardless of the principle’s position in the law of diplomatic protection.?*” In

Reply, 1 68.

Reply, 1 69.

Reply, 1 70.

Reply, Mf 71-74, citing Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Award in Respect of
Damages, 31 May 2002 [RLA-30], | 80; Mondev International Ltd. V. United States of America, 1CSID
Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award, 11 October 2002 [RLA-31], | 82; William Richard Clayton et al. v. The
Government of Canada, PCA Case No. 2009-04, Award on Damages, 10 January 2019 [RLA-55], | 388;
S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Submission of the United States of America, 18
September 2001 [CLA-39], 1 6.

Memorial, 4 11 citing Occidental Annulment [RLA-21], { 262; Reply, 1 64-66.

Memorial, ff 14-16; Reply, {11 77-78, relying on Occidental Annulment [RLA-21], ff 259, 262, 265-266;
Occidental Dissent [|RLA-15], | 148-149, 151.

Memorial, {{{ 14, 17; Reply, 9 79-86, referring to Occidental Annulment [RLA-21], | 259; Occidental
Dissent, [RLA-15], 139-144; Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 22 April 2005 (“Impregilo v. Pakistan”) [RLA-6], 19 144-153; Blue

73

256.

257.

288,

289

290

291

292

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

contrast, Respondent submits that the investment tribunal decisions put forward by Claimants are

not persuasive since on a closer reading they do not support Claimants’ position.”*

Finally, Respondent rejects Claimants’ argument that a /ex specialis regime established by the
FTA prevails over general principles of international law, including the principles related to
standing and beneficial ownership.” First, “applicable rules of international law” are part of the
applicable law in this dispute pursuant to Article 11.22.1 of the FTA.” Second, “a treaty
provision is lex specialis vis-a-vis rules of international law only if the provision expressly
regulates the same subject matter with more specificity.””°! While the “express provisions”?°?
would serve as evidence of the treaty parties’ intent to derogate from general international law,
none of the FTA’s provisions “derogates from the beneficial ownership requirement under
international investment law”.?°? To the extent that Claimants argue otherwise, the authorities

adduced in Claimants’ favour do not support their position.”

Turning to the facts of the case, Respondent submits that the General Partner “stands before this
Tribunal not to claim compensation for its own losses, but for losses purportedly suffered by the

Cayman Fund (and by its Limited Partner). The GP claims the entirety of the alleged loss in value

Bank v. Venezuela [RLA-23], { 163; Zhinvali Development Ltd. V. Republic of Georgia, ICSID Case No.
ARB/0O/1, Award, 24 January 2003 [RLA-4], {{ 396-405; PSEG Global, Inc., and Konya Ingin Electrik
Uretim ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5, Award, 19 January
2007 [RLA-7], 325; Mihaly International Corp. v. Sri Lanka, 1CSID Case No. ARB/00/2, Award, 15
March 2002 (“Mihaly v. Sri Lanka”) [RLA-3], 1 24-26; Khan Resources Inc., et al. v. Government of
Mongolia, UNCITRAL, Award on the Merits, 2 March 2015 [RLA-50], { 388.

Reply, {Mf 87-89, addressing Claimants’ arguments with respect to Saluka v. Czech Republic [CLA-41], 1
244; Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, A.S. v. The Slovak Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision
of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999 (“CSOB v. Slovak Republic”) [RLA-26], { 31;
Saba Fakes v. Turkey {CLA-40], { 140.

Reply, 191.
Reply, 1 92.

Reply, {| 92, referring to Martti Koskenniemi, Fragmentation of International Law: Difficulties Arising
from the Diversification and Expansion of International Law, U.N. Doc. A/CN.4/L.682 (2006) [RLA-38],
56.

Reply, 93, citing Loewen Group v. United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, Award,
26 June 2003 [RLA-32], { 162.

Reply, 1 93.

Reply, {| 94-97, citing KT Asia v. Kazakhstan [RLA-17], | 128; Waste Management Inc. v. United
Mexican States (II), ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, 30 April 2004 (“Waste Management v.
Mexico”) [CLA-19], {9 84-85; RosInvestCo UK Lid. v. The Russian Federation, SCC Case No. Arb.
V079/2005, Final Award, 12 September 2010 (“RosinvestCo v. Russia”) [CLA-38], IM 388, 672; Hulley
Enterprises Limited (Cyprus) v. The Russian Federation, PCA Case No. AA226, Interim Award on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 30 November 2009 (“Hulley v. Russia”) [CLA-33], {| 420-421; Von
Pezold v. Zimbabwe [CLA-27], 1 838-839.

74

258.

259.

260.

261.

295

296

297

298,

299

300

301

302

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

of the Samsung Shares that it held on trust for the benefit of the Cayman Fund, irrespective of
the existence and extent of the GP’s own loss (which depends on the GP’s Partnership Interest in
the Samsung Shares, if any).”?°°

According to Respondent, the General Partner has not shown that it had any Partnership Interest
in the Samsung Shares.” Furthermore, whether the General Partner is “exclusively responsible
for the conduct of the [Cayman Fund’s] investment business”, makes all relevant decisions, and
is “the only entity with capacity to engage in legal proceedings with respect to the Cayman

Fund's] assets” is irrelevant to the General Partner’s standing under the FTA.”

b) ~— Claimants’ position

Claimants reject Respondent’s attempt to introduce “standing” or “beneficial ownership”
requirements into the FTA, arguing that these are contrary to the express terms of the FTA.?°*
Indeed, according to Claimants, the General Partner has a standing as it owned and controlled the
Samsung Shares.”

Claimants submit that Respondent’s position rests upon a “tortured reading” of Article 11.16 of
the FTA which, by its plain terms, does not require a potential claimant to demonstrate “standing”
premised on beneficial ownership.*” Contrary to Respondent’ s submission, the term “on its own
behalf” in Article 11.16.1(a) of the FTA does not introduce such a requirement and is simply
used to distinguish regular and derivative claims that can be filed “on behalf of an enterprise of

the respondent” under Article 11.16.1(b) of the FTA2”!

Claimants further argue that a “freestanding general principle” that denies standing to a party
without beneficial ownership does not exist in the regime of international investment law, which

is distinct from the customary international law regime of diplomatic protection.*” According to

Reply, 1 99.
Reply, { 100.

Reply, { 102.

Counter-Memorial, 61; Rejoinder, {| 100.
Counter-Memorial, { 60; Rejoinder, {| 113.
Counter-Memorial, {ff 62-64; Rejoinder, { 101.
Counter-Memorial, 65; Rejoinder, {| 102.

Counter-Memorial, [ 66, referring to Ahmadou Sadio Diallo (Republic of Guinea v. Democratic Republic
of the Congo), Judgment, 24 May 2007 [CLA-26], 1 88-90; Rejoinder, | 105-109.

75

262.

263.

264.

265.

304

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Claimants, the existence of such a principle is not supported by the decisions cited by Respondent

and has been rejected by other authorities.

Even if such a “general principle” were to exist, Claimants contend that it could not override the
lex specialis regime created by the FTA. According to Claimants, Respondent misapplies the
lex specialis doctrine when it states that the “treaty provision is lex specialis vis-a-vis
international law only if the provision expressly regulates the same subject matter with more
specificity.”*°5 Instead, according to Claimants, the /ex specialis doctrine operates at a general,

subject-matter level.*°°

Notwithstanding, Claimants submit that the General Partner satisfies Respondent’s additional
standing requirement, noting that “the General Partner is not bringing a claim on behalf of a ‘third
party.’ To the contrary, the General Partner is enforcing its own rights under the Treaty as a legal

and beneficial owner and controller of the Samsung Shares.”*””

c) The Tribunal’s analysis

In its Reply, Respondent has introduced an alternative request for relief that the Tribunal dismiss
the General Partner’s claim for losses incurred by the Cayman Fund and the Limited Partner on
the basis that the General Partner lacks standing to submit claims on behalf of third parties, and
that the Tribunal declare that the General Partner can claim damages only to the extent of its own
Partnership Interest in 2015.

Respondent submits that the General Partner lacks standing to submit claims on behalf of the
Cayman Fund and the Limited Partner under Article 11.61.1 of the FTA as well as under general

international investment law.

Counter-Memorial, {[ 66-71, referring to Occidental Annulment [RLA-21], | 261, fn. 192; Impregilo v.
Pakistan, [RLA-6]; Blue Bank vy. Venezuela [RLA-23]; Perenco v. Ecuador [CLA-37], 523, fn. 828;
Zachary Douglas, The International Law of Investment Claims (CUP 2009) [CLA-49], 1559, which in
turn refers to CSOB v. Slovak Republic [RLA-26]; Rejoinder, {ff 105-108.

Counter-Memorial, 1 72-75, citing Waste Management v. Mexico (CLA-19], 85; KT Asia v. Kazakhstan
[RLA-17], 9 129, 140, 143; RosinvestCo v. Russia [CLA-38], { 323; Hulley v. Russia [CLA-33], | 429;
Von Pezold v. Zimbabwe [CLA-27], 1314.

Rejoinder, 112.
Rejoinder, 112.
Rejoinder, 113.
Reply, { 121.

76

266.

267.

268.

269.

270.

31

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

As stated above, Article 11.16.1(a) of the FTA provides, in relevant parts, that a “claimant, on its

 

own behalf, may submit to arbitration under this Section a claim (i) that the respondent has
breached ... and (ii) that the claimant has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of,
that breach” (emphasis added).

Pursuant to Article 11.16.1(b) of the FTA, a “claimant, on behalf of an enterprise of the
respondent that is a juridical person that the claimant owns or controls directly or indirectly, may
submit to arbitration under this Section a claim (i) that the respondent has breached ... and (ii)
that the enterprise has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach”
(emphasis added).

Claimants argue that the General Partner brings the claim against Respondent in its own name
and in its capacity as general partner of the Partnership and therefore easily satisfies Respondent’s
purported standing requirement.*”

By contrast, Respondent argues that the General Partner does not bring a claim for its own loss
or damage. Respondent’s legal standing argument, as its counsel has made clear in his closing

statement at the Hearing on Preliminary Objections,*!°

is premised on the theory that a claimant
only acts on its own behalf if it has a beneficial interest in the investment. Under that logic, the
General Partner’s claim would qualify as its own to the extent it can establish its beneficial

interest in the Samsung Shares.

In the Tribunal’s view, Respondent's alternative request for relief, as formulated in its Reply, has
a more limited scope than Respondent’s original request for relief as set out in its Memorial.*!!
Under the amended request for relief, the Tribunal is only requested to dismiss such claims of the
General Partner that are for losses incurred by the Cayman Fund and the Limited Partner.
Respondent no longer seeks dismissal of all the General Partner’s claims for lack of standing. In
other words, Respondent’s amended request does not appear to extend to any claims for own loss

or damage that the General Partner may have suffered. In fact, Respondent acknowledges that

Rejoinder, { 28-31, 113, referring to Second ER Lindsay [CER-2], (15, 7.

Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 3, 4 October 2019, p. 518:20-22 [Respondent's
Closing Statement] (‘[B]eneficial interest’ is the international label that it's given, it has to be on its own
behalf or its own loss or damage.”).

Memorial, 4 37.

77

271.

272.

273.

274.

275.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

the General Partner might be able to seek recovery of its own loss or damage to the extent of its

beneficial interest.*!*
The Tribunal considers it neither possible nor appropriate to grant Respondent’s alternative

request for relief at the current stage of the proceedings. This is for several reasons.

First, Claimants do not pretend to claim for losses incurred by the Limited Partner and/or the
Cayman Fund as asserted by Respondent. Rather, they have repeatedly confirmed that the
General Partner is seeking to recover its own loss or damage.*!? On Claimants’ own case, the

General Partner’s claim is solely brought in its own right under Article 11.16.1(a) of the FTA.

The Tribunal emphasizes that through the entitlement to an Incentive Allocation, the General
Partner, in its own right, enjoys a beneficial interest in the Samsung Shares.*' It is thus
conceivable that the General Partner has suffered own loss or damage in the sense of

Article 11.16.1(a) of the FTA.

Whether that applies to the General Partner’s entire claim or whether the General Partner is in

fact seeking recovery of some losses that it did not incur itself is not a question for today.

It is important to remember that the purpose of this preliminary phase of the proceedings is to
deal with such objections that can be swiftly and fairly resolved based on the limited record

available to the Tribunal.*!° This means, as a corollary, that a tribunal may also decide to defer

Reply, {99 (“The GP claims the entirety of the alleged loss in value of the Samsung Shares that it held on
trust for the benefit of the Cayman Fund, irrespective of the existence and extent of the GP’s own loss
(which depends on the GP’s F ip Interest in the Samsung Shares, if any).” (emphasis added)).

Rejoinder, {{f 28-31, 113, referring to Second ER Lindsay [CER-2], { 5, 7; Transcript of Hearing on
Preliminary Objections, Day 3, 4 October 2019, p. 537:15-19 [Claimants’ Counsel] (“The only way in
which the General Partner can pursue the claim is in its own role. The General Partner pursuing its claim
in its role as General Partner of the Partnership. It's not pursuing a claim in the name of the Partnership.””)
and p. 538:20-22 [Claimants’ Counsel] (“[The General Partner] is not bringing a claim on behalf of a third
party. It’s bringing the claim with regard to its own interests.”).

See above at ff 172-187.

 

  

See the findings on similarly worded provisions in the Central American - Dominican Republic Free Trade
Agreement (CAFTA) in Pac Rim Cayman LLC v. Republic of El Salvador, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/12,
Decision on the Respondent's Preliminary Objections under CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5,
2 August 2010 (“Pac Rim y. El Salvador”) [(CLA-36], J 116 (“The Tribunal concludes that the object and
purpose of these two provisions is to create, under CAFTA, an effective and flexible procedure for the
swift and fair resolution of disputes between claimant investors and respondent host states, to be exercised
reasonably by a tribunal according to all the circumstances of the particular case.”). See also below at
4 299-300.

78

276.

277.

278.

279.

280.

316

317

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

its decision on a particular issue until such time that it has a full factual and legal record before

it.

The Tribunal emphasizes that Claimants have not yet made any submissions on which type of
losses the General Partner will eventually seek to recover.*'® Given the early stage of these

proceedings, this is by no means unusual.

Consequently, absent a full factual and legal record before it, the Tribunal has no choice but to
accept, for the time being, Claimants’ assertion that the General Partner is bringing a claim for
its own loss or damage. The Tribunal will deal with the General Partner’s claim for damages if

and when it is put to the Tribunal.

Second, the Tribunal wishes to underline that granting Respondent’s alternative request now
would not expedite the proceedings or serve procedural efficiency. Respondent's assertion that
its preliminary objections “would materially reduce the subsequent phase of the proceedings”?!”
does not apply to its alternative request for relief premised on the General Partner’s alleged lack

of standing.

The Tribunal is presently not faced with a situation in which there are several distinct investments
and where the Tribunal is called upon to differentiate between those investments within its
jurisdiction and those which fall outside its competence. Rather, in the present case, there is only

one possible investment, the Samsung Shares.

Given that the General Partner’s beneficial interest is indivisible in the sense that it extends to all
Samsung Shares (without any determination of the extent of its beneficial interest), it is
impossible to distinguish between that part of the shares in which the General Partner has a

beneficial interest and that part in which it is not interested and which would therefore fall outside

See Transcript of Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 3, 4 October 2019, p. 507:10-25 [Claimants’
Closing Statement] (“We have a loss that is capable of legal protection. We have an interest in the
performance of the Fund, and that interest is enshrined in a contract. The quantification of its value will
depend in the event on the ultimate theory of damage, or theories, which we might choose to deploy. Could
be lost profits, could be direct loss, loss of opportunity, an ‘alternative transaction’ model, could be loss of
clients, reputational damage and so on. All of those are categories of loss known to the law. That analysis
might take into account past performance, peer performance, market performance, any number of potential
future scenario: [A] of that is for a quantum stage, the quantification stage. It does not, by any stretch,
negate the legal sufficiency of the pleaded claim.”).

Memorial, 2.

 

 

 

79

281.

282.

283.

284.

285.

286.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Respondent thus effectively requests the Tribunal to exercise its

jurisdiction pro rata in respect of the Samsung Shares.

As a corollary, even if the Tribunal were ultimately to find that the General Partner may, in its
own right, only claim for the loss of its Incentive Allocation, the Tribunal would have to deal
with issues of liability and quantum for the entirety of the Samsung Shares. Granting

Respondent's relief now would not dispose of any of these issues.

Consequently, the Tribunal rejects Respondent’s application to dismiss, at this stage of the
proceedings, the General Partner’s claim for losses incurred by the Cayman Fund and the Limited
Partner on the basis that the General Partner lacks standing to submit claims on behalf of third
parties under Article 11.16.1 of the FTA. The Tribunal reserves its decision as to whether the
General Partner’s claim is for its own loss or is tantamount to a claim on behalf of the Limited

Partner to a later stage of the proceedings.

The Tribunal now turns to Respondent’s request for a declaration that the General Partner can
claim damages only to the extent of its own Partnership Interest in 2015, which Respondent has

introduced in its Reply.

The Tribunal refers to its prior finding that the General Partner’s beneficial interest is not
tantamount to the “Partnership Interest’ as defined in Article 2.12 of the Partnership
Agreement.*!* The Tribunal has already decided that the General Partner’s entitlement to an
Incentive Allocation represents a beneficial interest in the Partnership’s assets and is independent

of the balance of its capital account in 2015.

Consequently, the Tribunal rejects Respondent’s request to declare that the General Partner can

claim damages only to the extent of its own Partnership Interest in 2015.

Respondent’ preliminary objection that the General Partner’s claim is legally deficient

This section addresses Respondent’s second preliminary objection that as a matter of law, the
General Partner’s claim is not a claim for which an award in favour of the General Partner may

be made under Article 11.26 of the FTA?

See above at | 182.

In its Reply, Respondent has requested the Tribunal to “dismiss the GP’s claim for lo: incurred by the
Cayman Fund and the Limited Partner on the basis that ... the GP’s claim in respect of such portion is, as
a matter of law, not a claim for which an award in favor of the GP may be made under Article 11.20.6”

 

80

287.

288.

289.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Respondent’s position

Respondent contends that Article 11.16.1 of the FTA requires Claimants to have “incurred loss
or damage by reason of, arising out of, [a] breach [of the FTA].” *”° It follows, so argues
Respondent, that the FTA does not allow Claimants to bring claims for losses allegedly suffered
by third parties.*?! According to Respondent, such requirement is consistent with international
law?

Repeating its argument that the General Partner lacks beneficial ownership of the Samsung
Shares, Respondent submits that the General Partner had no right to enjoy the economic benefits
in the first place and, therefore, cannot have suffered any alleged damage.*” Respondent argues
that any alleged loss incurred as a result of Respondent’s conduct would have been the loss of
the Cayman Fund as the beneficial owner of the Samsung Shares, just like any increase in the
value of the shares would have accrued to the Cayman Fund only.** Consequently, any award of

damages in favour of the General Partner would result in an unjust enrichment of the latter.*?>

Respondent rejects Claimants’ argument that a claim for which an award in favour of the claimant
may not be made is limited to “legally impossible” claims, as such qualifying words are
“significantly absent” in the text of the provision.*”° Likewise, Respondent submits that, contrary
to Claimants’ arguments, it does not need to prove that the alleged FTA breaches “had no
consequences on the General Partner” and that “the General Partner’s situation remained
unaffected by [these alleged breaches].” *?’ Rather, Respondent asserts that the General Partner,

absent a beneficial interest in the Samsung Shares, cannot have suffered an economic loss, cannot

(Reply, {| 121; emphasis added). The Tribunal understands this to refer to the wording of Article 11.20.6
of the FTA, according to which “a tribunal shall address and decide as a preliminary question any objection
by the respondent that, as a matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award in favor of
the claimant may be made under Article 11.26.” (emphasis added).

Memorial, 431.
Memorial, 431.
Reply, | 109.

Memorial, {ff 32-35, relying on Waguih Elie George Siag and Clorinda Vecchi v. The Arab Republic of
Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/15, Award, 1 June 2009 (“Siag v. Egypt”) [RLA-8], {| 582, 584;
Occidental Dissent [RLA-15], { 161; Hanno Wehland, Blue Bank International v, Venezuela: When Are
Trust Assets Protected under International Investment Agreements 34(6) J. Int’| Arb. (2017) [RLA-22], p.
958, fn. 64.

Memorial, 435.

Memorial, 4 35, referring to Occidental Dissent [RLA-15], 162.
Reply, {| 107, referring to Pac Rim v. El Salvador [CLA-36], | 108.
Reply, { 108.

81

290.

291.

292.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

claim damages on its own behalf, and that an award in favour of the General Partner for such

claim may not be made.**8

Respondent criticizes Claimants’ characterization of the standard of compensation established in
the Case Concerning the Factory at Chorzéw (Germany v. Poland), noting that Claimants
“jgnore[] the Permanent Court of Justice’s statement in Chorzéw that one must ‘exclud[e] from
the damage to be estimated [any] injury resulting for third parties’”.*°

Respondent further rejects Claimants’ argument that the General Partner may claim damages
suffered by the Limited Partner given that any recovered amounts “would be re-invested on the
Cayman Fund’s behalf, and thus potentially generate future benefits for the [General Partner].”**°
Respondent considers this argument to be flawed because it blurs the distinction between separate
beneficial interests of the General Partner and the Limited Partner, which results in different
economic losses. **! Additionally, the prospect of profiting from a third party’s recovery of
damages is not enough to circumvent the restriction that a claimant may recover damages only

for its own losses.*”

Respondent also disagrees with Claimants’ argument that the General Partner would not be
unjustly enriched if it was awarded damages, because the award for damages “would be held on
the Cayman Fund’s behalf in accordance with Cayman law and the Partnership Agreement.”**
According to Respondent, any such arrangement under domestic law cannot circumvent the
restrictions contained in Article 11.16.1(a) of the FTA and international law.*** Moreover, even
if the General Partner were to hold an award on damages on trust for the Cayman Fund, that
would only serve to show that the claim is brought on the Cayman Fund’s, and not on the General

Partner’s, behalf.**>

Reply, { 108.

Reply, { 111, citing Case Concerning the Factory at Chorz6w (Germany v. Poland), PCI, Series A No.
17, Decision on the Merits, 13 September 1928 (“Chorzéw”) [CLA-1], p. 31; Occidental Annulment
[RLA-21], 291; Siag v. Egypt [RLA-8], | 582.

Reply, { 114.
Reply, 114
Reply, { 114.
Reply, { 115.
Reply, {Mf 115-116, citing mpregilo v. Pakistan [RLA-6], 19 151-152.
Reply, 117.

82

293.

294.

295.

296.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Finally, Respondent submits that the fact that the alleged breach of the FTA had “other
consequences” for the General Partner, including for its right to participate in the meetings of the
companies, is irrelevant to the General Partner’s economic interest in the Samsung Shares and

any alleged ensuing damages.**°

Claimants’ position

Claimants argue that the General Partner is entitled to compensation for Respondent’s treaty
violations in accordance with the Chorzdéw standard pursuant to which all consequences of an
internationally wrongful act must be wiped out. **’ Claimants also assert that Respondent’s
objections under Article 11.20.6 of the FTA are based on “limitations that have no place in the
(FTA].” 3%

According to Claimants, given the early stage of the proceedings, Respondent must meet an
extremely high standard of proof, namely that the General Partners claims are “demonstrably
doomed to failure”, and “legally hopeless” and that Respondent’s “wrongful acts had no
consequences for the General Partner (to be wiped out), and the General Partner’s situation
remained unaffected by those acts (with no need for that situation to be reestablished)” even
assuming the facts alleged by the General Partner to be true.**” Claimants assert that Respondent

has failed to discharge this burden.

Claimants submit that Respondent’s argument that the General Partner has no beneficial interest
in the Samsung Shares is incorrect and recalls that the General Partner did have an indivisible
beneficial interest over the assets of the partnership, including the Samsung Shares.*“° According
to Claimants, Respondent’s wrongful acts “affected the value of the Samsung Shares, and thus
the General Partner’s partnership interest, including the General Partner’s entitlement to an

incentive allocation.”*"!

Reply, 118.
Counter-Memorial, { 100, citing Chorzéw [CLA-1], p. 47.
Counter-Memorial, 4 93.

Counter-Memorial, 491 94, 96-97, 101, referring to Bridgestone v. Panama [CLA-28], 197; The Renco
Group. Inc. v. The Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No. UNCT/13/I, Decision as to the Scope of the
Respondent's Preliminary Objections under Article 10.20.4, 18 December 2014 (“Renco Group v. Peru”)
[CLA-43], | 206; Pac Rim v. El Salvador (CLA-36], | 110; Rejoinder, 122.

Counter-Memorial, { 102.

Counter-Memorial, {| 103, referring to First WS Garschina [CWS-1], { 11; First WS Satzinger [CWS-2],
Ml 12-13; Rejoinder, | 124.

83

297.

298.

299.

300.

 

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Even if Respondent were successful in proving that the General Partner had no beneficial interest
in the Samsung Shares, Claimants argue that Respondent has not proven (i) that “damage to the
value of the [Samsung] Shares nevertheless had no other consequences for the General Partner,
including as the party bearing ultimate liability for the business in the event of insolvency”; and
(ii) that “the damage to the General Partner’s investment in the Samsung Shares had no
consequences for the General Partner’s legal and controlling interests in the [Samsung]
Shares.” Moreover, Claimants allege that the loss in value of the Samsung Shares resulted in

potentially “significant and material financial and reputational damage.”*7

In addition, Claimants argue that Respondent failed to substantiate its assertion that an award on
damages in favour of the General Partner would unjustly enrich the latter. Indeed, an award on
damages to the General Partner would be held in the same way that the Samsung Shares originally
were held and would therefore restore the position that existed but for Respondent’s wrongful
conduct.*4

The Tribunal’s analysis

At the outset of its analysis of Respondent’s preliminary objection under Article 11.20.6 of the
FTA, the Tribunal refers to the fact that other tribunals have been called upon ruling on
preliminary objections under similarly worded investment treaties such as the Central
American — Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement (“CAFTA”) and the United States —
Peru Trade Promotion Agreement.*

The Tribunal agrees with the remarks made by the Pac Rim v. El Salvador tribunal on the standard

of review as well as the Tribunal’s discretion in ruling on such objections:

The Tribunal does not consider that the standard of review under Article 10.20.4 is
limited to “frivolous” claims or “legally impossible” claims, contrary to the

submissions of the Claimant ...

The Tribunal does consider that the word “may” in Article 10.20.4 (line 4) confers

an important arbitral power in whether to grant or refuse a preliminary objection,

Counter-Memorial, 4 104, referring to First ER Lindsay [CER-1], 11 16, 26, 32(c).
Rejoinder, | 124.

Counter-Memorial, 105.

Pac Rim v. El Salvador [CLA-36]; Renco Group v. Peru [CLA-43].

84.

301.

302.

303.

304.

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

to be exercised reasonably in all the circumstances of the particular case. The word

“may” is not “must” or otherwise mandatory ...

In other words, returning to the negative language of Article 10.20.4, to grant a
preliminary objection, a tribunal must have reached a position, both as to all
relevant questions of law and all relevant alleged or undisputed facts, that an award
should be made finally dismissing the claimant’s claim at the very outset of the
arbitration proceedings, without more. Depending on the particular circumstances
of each case, there are many reasons why a tribunal might reasonably decide not to
exercise such a power against a claimant, even where it idered that such a
claim appeared likely (but not certain) to fail if assessed only at the time of the

preliminary objection. (emphasis added)*“°

The Tribunal refers to its prior conclusion that it would be neither possible nor appropriate for it
to decline jurisdiction over the General Partner’s claim for losses incurred by the Cayman Fund
and the Limited Partner at the present stage of the proceedings given that this would involve

making findings on issues of quantum that have not been fully pleaded.

The same considerations apply in the context of Respondent’s legal deficiency objection under
Article 11.20.6 of the FTA. To use the words of the Pac Rim v. El Salvador tribunal, the Tribunal
has not reached a position, both as to all relevant questions of law and all relevant alleged or
undisputed facts, that an award should be made finally dismissing the General Partner’s claim
for losses incurred by the Cayman Fund and the Limited Partner at the very outset of the

arbitration.

For these reasons, the Tribunal rejects Respondent’s request to dismiss the General Partner’s
claim for losses incurred by the Cayman Fund and the Limited Partner on the basis that the
General Partner’s claim in respect of such portion is, as a matter of law, not a claim for which an

award in favour of the General Partner may be made under Article 11.26 of the FTA.

Costs of the preliminary phase

As a final matter, the Tribunal turns to consider the issue of costs of this preliminary phase of the

proceedings.

Pac Rim v. El Salvador {CLA-36], { 108-110.

85

305.

306.

307.

308.

309.

310.

347

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Both Parties have requested the Tribunal to order the other Party to bear the full costs of this

preliminary phase.**”
The Tribunal has discretion to award costs under Article 11.20.8 of the FTA, which provides:

When it decides a respondent’s objection under paragraph 6 or 7, the tribunal may,
if warranted, award to the prevailing disputing party reasonable costs and
attorney’s fees incurred in submitting or opposing the objection. In determining
whether such an award is warranted, the tribunal shall consider whether either the
claimant’s claim or the respondent’ s objection was frivolous, and shall provide the

disputing parties a reasonable opportunity to comment.

In the present circumstances, the Tribunal does not consider it appropriate to award costs to any

Party at this stage of the proceedings.

The Tribunal cannot award costs in favour of Respondent as it has not succeeded in its

preliminary objections.

On the other hand, the Tribunal does not consider it appropriate to award costs in favour of
Claimants. That is for two reasons: first, Respondent’s preliminary objections have not been
frivolous; the fact that the Tribunal has postponed its decision on some of the issues shows that
the preliminary objections have addressed crucial issues arising in the case; second, the Tribunal
is of the view that many of the issues addressed in this preliminary phase will retain their
relevance for the liability and quantum phase; the efforts and costs associated with this

preliminary phase of the proceedings have therefore not been wasted.

Consequently, the Tribunal reserves its decision on costs for the final award.

Reply, | 121; Counter-Memorial, 108.

86

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

VII. OPERATIVE PART

311. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

()

declares that the General Partner owned and controlled the Samsung Shares and made an
investment in accordance with Article 11.28 of the FTA; accordingly rejects Respondent’s
request for a declaration that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the General Partner’s
claim on the basis that: (i) the General Partner has not made an investment in accordance
with Article 11.28 of the FTA and/or (ii) the General Partner did not own or control the
Samsung Shares; and rejects Respondent’s request to dismiss all of the claims brought by

the General Partner for that reason;

rejects Respondent’s application to dismiss, at this stage of the proceedings, the General
Partner’s claim for losses incurred by the Cayman Fund and the Limited Partner on the
basis that the General Partner lacks standing to submit claims on behalf of third parties

under Article 11.16.1 of the FTA;

rejects Respondent’s request to dismiss the General Partner’s claim for losses incurred by
the Cayman Fund and the Limited Partner on the basis that the General Partner’s claim in
respect of such portion is, as a matter of law, not a claim for which an award in favour of

the General Partner may be made under Article 11.26 of the FTA;

rejects Respondent’s request for a declaration that the General Partner can claim damages

only to the extent of its own Partnership Interest in 2015;

rejects Claimants’ application for a declaration at this stage of the proceedings that the

General Partner’s claim is admissible and that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over that claim;

reserves its decision on the costs of this preliminary phase of the arbitration for the final

award.

87

PCA Case N° 2018-55
Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Place of arbitration (legal seat): Singapore

Signed, this_22, day of De cemS i 2019,

Eloi Ql’ PD

The Rt. Hon. Dame' Jleabeth Gloster Professor Pierre Mayer
Arbitrator Arbitrator

 

 

Professor Dr. Klaus Sachs

Presiding Arbitrator

88

