INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDING BETWEEN

MATHIAS KRUCK AND OTHERS
CLAIMANTS

and

KINGDOM OF SPAIN
RESPONDENT

ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23

 

DECISION ON THE PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY
MR. GARY B. BORN

 

Issued by

Prof. Vaughan Lowe QC
Prof. Zachary Douglas QC

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Mairée Uran Bidegain

Date: 16 March 2018

THE PARTIES’ REPRESENTATIVES

REPRESENTING CLAIMANTS:

Matthias Kruck and Others
c/o Mr. Kenneth R. Fleuriet
Ms. Amy Roebuck Frey
Mr. Christopher Smith
King & Spalding
12, cours Albert ler
75008 Paris, France
and
c/o Mr. Jan K. Schaefer
TaunusTurm
Taunustor 1
Frankfurt am Main 60310
Germany
and
c/o Mr. Reginald R. Smith
Mr. Kevin D. Mohr
King & Spalding
1100 Louisiana, Suite 4000
Houston, Texas 77002, U.S.A.
and
c/o Ms. Verénica Romani Sancho
Mr. Gonzalo Ardila Bermejo
Mr. Luis Gil Bueno
Ms. Inés Vazquez Garcia
G6mez Acebo & Pombo Abogados
Castellana, 216
28046 Madrid, Spain

REPRESENTING RESPONDENT:

Kingdom of Spain

Abogacia General del Estado

c/o Mr. Diego Santacruz Descartin
Ms. Monica Moraleda Saceda

Mr. Javier Torres Gella

Ms. Amaia Rivas Kortazar

Mr. Antolin Fernandez Antufia

Mr. Javier Castro Lopez

Ms. Elena Ofioro Sainz

Mr. Roberto Fernandez Castilla
Ms. Patricia Froehlingsdorf Nicolas
Ms. Ana Maria Rodriguez Esquivias
Mr. Alvaro Navas Lopez

Ms. Gloria de la Guardia Limeres
Ministry of Justice

of the Government of Spain

Calle Ayala 5

28001, Madrid

Spain

yow>

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION AND THE PARTIES

 

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
THE DECISION TO VACATE THE HEARING .........ccsccscsccscssesteseeteseeeseeseseeseseeseseenesneneaeenes 3
SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS .........csccscsccscssessesestesestesesesesesesseseeeseeeseeneseees 4

 

The Basis for Respondent’s Disqualification Proposal .

 

 

 

Claimants’ Submission 7
EXPLANATIONS FURNISHED BY MR. BORN .........c:ccssssseessessesseeseesessessesssssssnssneeseeseeseesy 8
ANALYSIS 8
The Legal Standard for the Disqualification of an Arbitrator... cocci 8
Application of the Standard to the Facts of the Case... cccccceeeneeeeesesees eects cseeeeeeneneeeeeee 11
COSTS 12
DECISION 13

 

iii

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain
ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23

A. INTRODUCTION AND THE PARTIES

Claimants are 108 legal entities established in Germany (including sixty-five limited liability
partnerships and forty-three private companies), and eight individuals of German nationality,

including Mathias Kruck (the “Claimants”).
Respondent is the Kingdom of Spain (the “Respondent” or “Spain’”).
Claimants and Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties.”

This decision rejects Respondent’s Proposal to disqualify Mr. Gary Born as arbitrator in

the present proceedings.
B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 4 June 2015, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for Arbitration
pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes

between States and Nationals of Other States (“ICSID Convention”).

The Tribunal is composed of Vaughan Lowe, a national of the United Kingdom, President,
appointed by agreement of the Parties; Gary B. Born, a national of the United States of
America, appointed by Claimants; and Zachary Douglas, a national of Australia, appointed

by Respondent.

On 19 January 2016, the Secretary-General notified the Parties that all three arbitrators had
accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to have been
constituted on that date, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules”). Ms. Mair¢e Uran Bidegain, ICSID

Team Leader/Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 19 February 2016, Respondent filed preliminary objections pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41(5).

On 14 March 2016, the Tribunal issued a decision dismissing Respondent’s preliminary

objections pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5).

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain
ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23

On 15 March 2016, the Tribunal held a first session by telephone conference.

Following the first session, on 30 March 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1
recording the agreement of the Parties on procedural matters. Procedural Order No. | set

out a schedule for the jurisdictional/merits phase of the proceedings.

Pursuant to Annex A, of Procedural Order No. 1, as modified by agreement of the Parties,
the main pleadings were submitted as follows: Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, 28 July
2016; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Memorial on Jurisdiction,
31 October 2016; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits and Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction,
26 April 2017; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction, 27 June
2017; and Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, 23 July 2017.

Pursuant to Annex A, of Procedural Order No. 1, as modified by agreement of the Parties,

the hearing was scheduled to take place from 26 February to 1 March 2018.

On 13 February 2018, Respondent proposed the disqualification of Gary B. Born, in
accordance with Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9 (the
‘Proposal’). On that date, the Centre informed the Parties that the proceeding had been

suspended until the Proposal was decided, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6).

The Parties were also informed that the Proposal would be decided by Professors Lowe
and Douglas (the ‘Two Members’), in accordance with Article 58 of the ICSID
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(4).

On 14 February 2018, Claimants submitted preliminary observations to the Proposal, to

which Respondent responded by 15 February 2018.

On 15 February 2018, the Two Members ordered that the hearing dates be vacated and
established a procedural calendar for the Parties’ submissions on the Proposal. In
compliance with that procedural calendar, Claimants submitted their Response to Spain’s

Application to Disqualify Professor Born, on 20 February 2018.

20.

21.

22.

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain

ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23

Gary B. Born furnished his explanations on 27 February 2018 as envisaged by ICSID
Arbitration Rule 9(3).

The Parties filed a simultaneous round of comments on 5 March 2018.

THE DECISION TO VACATE THE HEARING

The Two Members gave urgent and careful consideration to the question whether it was
possible to preserve the scheduled hearing dates of 26 February to 1 March 2018. Rule 9(6)
of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, under which this proposal for disqualification of Mr Born
was brought, stipulates that “[t]he proceeding shall be suspended until a decision has been
taken on the proposal.” The question was, therefore, whether the proceeding could in
practice be suspended in order for the decision on the proposal for disqualification to be
taken in a manner that was procedurally fair, and then unsuspended so that, if the proposal
was ultimately rejected, the proceeding could go ahead as planned. Of course, if the

proposal was ultimately accepted, the proceeding would not go forward.

The Two Members recognised that there was a need to approve the introduction of the
Masdar transcript! into the record, and for that filing to take place before Claimants and
Mr Born could respond to Respondent’s application. That filing could not realistically be
secured before 15 February. There would then have been only about six working days
available before the scheduled start of the hearing, within which provision would have to
be made for Claimants’ response, Mr Born’s response, additional observations by the
Parties, and the consideration and the submissions and deliberation and taking and

communication of the decision.

The Two Members certainly could not assume that each Party had said all that it had to say
about the matter. Indeed, Respondent had expressly reserved the right to make further
submissions. There was a possibility that Claimants and/or Mr Born might make
submissions based upon parts of the transcripts other than those identified by Respondent;

and it was possible that new arguments might be developed.

' See infra W929 and 34.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

D.

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain

ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23

Bearing in mind also that under Procedural Order No 1, paragraph 11, communications
could be filed in either English or Spanish, provided that a filing in Spanish must be
accompanied within two business days by a translation into English, and considering that
the Parties needed to travel to Paris some time in advance of the opening of the hearing,
the Two Members concluded that they could not guarantee procedural fairness if they were

to plan to decide on the challenge prior to the date scheduled for the opening of the hearing.

Moreover, the Two Members could not, of course, know whether the challenge would be
upheld or rejected; and a decision rendered a day or two before the scheduled opening of
the hearing, even if it were practically possible (which it was considered it was not), could

have caused more, rather than less, disruption.

Though conscious of the disruption and expense that might be caused, on 15 February 2018

the Two Members ordered that the hearing dates be vacated.
SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

As set forth above, on 13 February 2018, Respondent wrote to the Tribunal proposing the

disqualification of Mr Gary Born, the arbitrator appointed by Claimants.
Respondent’s letter said that:

“The disqualification is grounded upon the, respectfilly said, lack of

the qualities required by Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention,

evidenced by different circumstances described herein below and which

manifestly preclude the challenged arbitrator from being relied upon to

exercise independent judgment.”
In the 13 February 2018 letter, Respondent alleged that Mr Born’s dissenting opinion in
Case No. 2014-03 Mr Jiirgen Wirtgen and others v Czech Republic (‘Wirtgen’), dated 11
October 2017: (i) demonstrated Mr Born’s manifestly biased opinion regarding other EU
countries’ feed-in tariffs, (ii) misapplied the applicable law, and (iii) showed his manifestly
biased opinion regarding the expectations derived from highly regulated sectors. The letter
alleged that the dissent shows that Mr Born “has already prejudged the result” of later

arbitrations, including the present arbitration.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain

ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23

The 13 February 2018 letter also referred to what it said was Mr Born’s “biased
examination” of counsel and witnesses in two other cases, Masdar Solar & Wind
Cooperatief U.A. v Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1) (‘Masdar’), and KS
Invest GmbH and TLS Invest GmbH v Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/25)
(‘KS Invest’). Respondent sought “for the sake of good procedural order” permission to
introduce into the record the relevant parts of the transcripts of the hearings in Masdar and

KS Invest, and brief comments thereon by Respondent.
Further, Respondent stated in its 13 February 2018 letter that:

“.. the Kingdom of Spain expressly reserves its right to expand the
arguments set forth in this Request for Disqualification, in particular
after receiving the explanations of the challenged arbitrator in
accordance with Arbitration Rule 9(3).”

On 14 February 2018 Claimants wrote to the Tribunal asserting that:

“Spain's proposal to disqualify Mr. Born is utterly groundless. It is
‘based’ in its entirety on: 1) Mr. Born’s dissenting opinion in an award
involving the Czech Republic; and 2) unspecified allegations of ‘bias’
can be found in questions posed by Mr. Born at hearings
against Spain (held in September 2016 and October
2017), but which Spain has failed to disclose on the spurious ground
that it needs this Tribunal’s ‘permission’ to submit the relevant
transcripts.”

 

In that letter Claimants submitted that “it would be a violation of due process and
Claimants’ right to an efficient disposition of this case if Spain’s proposal to disqualify Mr
Born were to result in a postponement of the final hearing scheduled to begin in 11 days.”
Claimants also asked in that letter that “Spain should be required to immediately submit

the transcript references to which it refers.”

On 14 February 2018, the Two Members invited Respondent to provide a response to
Claimants’ letter, by close of business on 15 February 2018. Respondent replied on 15
February 2018, stating that its challenge to Mr Born had been issued promptly and as soon
as possible, and asserting its “right to be judged by impartial and independent arbitrators”
which “also means appearing to be impartial and independent for any reasonably and well

informed third party.”

34.

35.

36.

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain

ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23

Respondent’s 15 February 2018 letter included the extract from the transcript of the KS
Invest hearing, stating that because Claimants had asked in their 14 February that “Spain
should be required to immediately submit the transcript references to which it refers”, and
because Claimants counsel in the present case were also counsel for the claimants in KS
Invest, Respondent understood that it had counsel’s consent to introduce the transcript into

the present case. The request to introduce part of the transcript in Masdar remained.

1. The Basis for Respondent’s Disqualification Proposal

The bases for the challenge in Respondent’s letter of 13 February 2018 were, in essence:

i. that Mr Born’s dissenting opinion in the Wirtgen case demonstrated that he has
already reached an immutable and biased opinion on issues at the core of the present
arbitration, notably on the question of the nature and effect of government
commitments to maintain prices paid for electricity, and on the question of the

applicability and effect of EU Law;

ii. that Mr Born’s questioning of counsel in the Masdar case and of a fact witness in
the KS Invest case was intended to obtain admissions on questions that Mr Born
had already prejudged, and demonstrated Mr Born’s unwillingness or apparent

inability to consider alternative viewpoints.

Respondent submitted that Mr Born has already reached firm and incorrect decisions on a
number of points of law and fact which are liable to be applied to similar issues in the
present case, contrary to the arguments being advanced in this case by Respondent. It
pointed to paragraph 47 of Mr Born’s dissenting opinion in Wirtgen as “one of the most

important” indications evidencing this. Paragraph 47 states that:

“47. In_my view, it is essential to appreciate this background, both
regulatory and commercial. Put simply, the entire renewable energy
sector in the Czech Republic (as in anumber of other states) was based
in the commitment of the state, like the commitments of other states,
that the prices paid for electricity produced from renewable energy
sources would be maintained unchanged (except for upward
adjustments to reflect inflation) for a specified period of time,

regardless of market conditions or regulatory judgments. In turn, this

provided investors and lenders with the security that was otherwise

6

37.

38.

39.

40.

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain
ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23

absent in the renewable energy sector.” [Emphasis supplied by
Respondent]
Respondent considers this passage to indicate a finding extending to the Spanish electricity

tariff scheme in issue in the present case.

On these bases, Respondent asserted that “Mr Born has arrived to an immutable conclusion
and this conclusion will not change whatever the effort expended by the Respondent to
prove or to argue otherwise.”? In the view of the Two Members, that formulation of the
submission—which will be referred to as “immutable prejudgment”—fairly encapsulates the
essence of Respondent’s challenge as developed through the instances and arguments set

out in its submissions.

In its 5 March 2018 letter, Respondent explained that it did not challenge Mr Born because
he had decided against Spain in earlier cases but rather because, as would be objectively
assessed by any third person, he has prejudged issues relevant to the present case, thereby
undermining Respondent’s right to present its case to an impartial and open-minded
arbitrator. It said that Mr Born’s subjective intentions were irrelevant to this question,
which concerns the objective appraisal of his impartiality and the question whether there
is an appearance of bias. Respondent repeated that the evidence of Mr Born’s opinion in
the Wirtgen dissent, and of his attitude in the Masdar and KS Invest cases would lead a
reasonable third party to find it highly likely that Mr Born would not be an impartial and

open-minded arbitrator in the present case.

2. Claimants’ Submission

In their letter dated 20 February 2018, Claimants responded to the challenge. The main
points made in that letter are that ‘prejudgment’ of certain legal issues is an aspect of an
arbitrator’s knowledge of the law, and no basis for a finding that the arbitrator lacks
independence, and that an arbitrator’s prior decisions in other cases are no ground for
disqualification, even if they involve issues similar to those pending. Claimants argued
further that neither the Wirtgen dissent nor the questioning in the Masdar and KS Invest

cases in fact demonstrate any manifest lack of independence, prejudgment of any issues,

2 Respondent's 13 February 2018 letter, 444.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain
ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23
or refusal to consider Spain’s arguments, and that the factual and legal issues in the present

case are in any event different from those in the Wirtgen, Masdar and KS Invest cases.

Claimants’ 5 March 2018 letter repeated their assertion that the mere fact that an arbitrator
holds views on the legal consequences of a particular fact pattern or has previously decided
the same issue in another case does not mean that he will not exercise ‘independent
judgment’. It also said that the Wirtgen case is not the same or even substantially similar
to the present case; and it points out that Spain made no objection to Mr Born’s questions

in the Masdar and KS Invest cases at the time.

. EXPLANATIONS FURNISHED BY MR. BORN

Mr. Born provided his explanations on 27 February 2018.

In his letter dated 26 February 2018, Mr Born reiterated his commitments to be both
independent and impartial, and to maintain an open mind as regards the issues in the present
case, which he said is different from the Wirtgen case. Specifically, he said that general
comments made in the Wirtgen dissent were generic references to situations, not intended
to refer to Spain or any other EU jurisdiction. Further, he said that his questioning in the
Masdar and KS Invest cases was intended solely to understand and clarify the evidence and

issues being put forward in those cases.
ANALYSIS

The Two Members have considered all of the Parties’ respective submissions, but in this
decision, they refer to them only in so far as is necessary for an understanding of the

decision.

1. The Legal Standard for the Disqualification of an Arbitrator

The proposal for Mr Born’s disqualification is made under Article 57 of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 9 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. Article 57 reads as follows:

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain
ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23

“Article 57

A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the disqualification
of any of its members on account of any fact indicating a manifest lack
of the qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article 14. A party to
arbitration proceedings may, in addition, propose the disqualification
of an arbitrator on the ground that he was ineligible for appointment to
the Tribunal under Section 2 of Chapter IV.”

46. Section 2 of Chapter IV of the ICSID Convention is not material in the present context.
The disqualification proposed in this case alleges that Mr. Born manifestly lacks the

qualities required by Article 14(1). Paragraph 1 of Article 14 reads as follows:

“Article 14

(1) Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high
moral character and recognized competence in the fields of law,
commerce, industry or finance, who may be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment. Competence in the field of law shall be of
particular importance in the case of persons on the Panel of
Arbitrators.”

47. While the English version of Article 14 of the ICSID Convention refers to “independent
judgment,” and the French version to “toute garantie d’indépendance dans I'exercice de
leurs fonctions” (guaranteed independence in exercising their functions), the Spanish
version requires “imparcialidad de juicio” (impartiality of judgment). Given that all three
versions are equally authentic, it is accepted that arbitrators must be both impartial and

independent.*

48. Impartiality refers to the absence of bias or predisposition towards a party. Independence

is characterized by the absence of external control. Independence and impartiality both

3 Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/O8/5, Decision on the Proposal for
Disqualification of Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, 13 December 2013 (“Burlington”) (Respondent’s Annex 12),
65; Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Lid. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB/12/20, Decision on the Parties’ Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, 12 November 2013 (“Blue
Bank”) (Respondent’s Annex 11), 158; Suez Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and InterAguas Servicios
Integrales del Agua S.A. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/03/17, and Suez Sociedad General de Aguas de
Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19, Decision on the
Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral Tribunal, 22 October 2007 (together “Swez”)
(Respondent’s Annexes 4 and 5), 28.

49.

50.

51.

52.

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain
ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23
“protect parties against arbitrators being influenced by factors other than those related to

the merits of the case.” *

In their submissions, the Parties argued in some detail what the exact roles of ‘impartiality’
(emphasised by Respondent) and ‘independence’ (emphasised by Claimants) are in this
context, and what the standard of proof is in relation to the question. The Two Members
have considered those arguments but are satisfied that they make no material difference to

the outcome in the present context.

The Two Members are bound by the standard set forth in the ICSID Convention.
Accordingly, this decision is made in accordance with Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID
Convention. As set forth in past decisions, “Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID Convention
do not require proof of actual dependence or bias; rather it is sufficient to establish the

appearance of dependence or bias.”

Moreover, both Respondent and Claimants seem to agree that the legal standard to be
applied to the Proposal is an “objective standard based on a reasonable evaluation of the

evidence by a third party.” °

As a consequence, “the subjective belief of the party
requesting the disqualification is not enough to satisfy the requirements of the

Convention.””

Thus, the test that the Two Members have applied is whether it has been shown that there
are any circumstances that would cause a reasonable third party to conclude that Mr Born
cannot be relied upon to exercise independent judgment. Those circumstances could
include, for example, evidence of partiality, or of a lack of independence from a party or
some other interested person, or of a personal interest in some aspect of the subject-matter
of the proceedings, or of an unwillingness on the part of an arbitrator “to consider views

that oppose his preconceptions, and remain open to persuasion.”®

4 Burlington 966, Blue Bank 59.

5 Burlington 466, Blue Bank (59.

© Respondent’s 13 February Letter, 66; Claimants’ 20 February Letter, 10.

7 Burlington 67, Blue Bank 960.

® To borrow the language of the US Supreme Court, quoted by Respondent in its 5 March 2018 letter: Republican
Party of Minnesota v. White, 536 U.S. 765, 778 (2002) (Claimants’ Annex 9).

10

53.

54.

55.

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain
ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23

2. Application of the Standard to the Facts of the Case

The Proposal is based upon the proposition that Mr Born’s dissenting opinion in Wirtgen
and his questioning of counsel and witnesses in the Masdar and KS Invest cases indicate—
and would indicate to a reasonable third party—a degree of partiality that means that he

cannot be relied upon to exercise independent judgment.

The Two Members have considered Mr Born’s dissenting opinion in Wirtgen carefully, in
general and with particular attention to the passages identified by Respondent as indicating
Mr Born’s lack of partiality. The dissenting opinion is tightly focused upon the specific
detail of the situation in the Czech Republic and the specific content of Czech legislation
and conduct of the Czech Government. It is a long and detailed dissent, with many
references to the documentary record in the case and extensive quotations from that record.
The dissenting opinion contains a very close and precise analysis, based firmly on the
specific facts of the case before the Wirtgen tribunal. The Two Members do not consider
that it lends any support to the suggestion that Mr Born would not be an impartial arbitrator

in the present case.

The Two Members have considered Mr Born’s questioning of counsel and witnesses in the
Masdar and KS Invest cases. Again, they have considered the transcripts from those case
generally and with particular attention to the passages identified by Respondent as
indicating Mr Born’s lack of partiality and his disdain for Respondent’s witnesses. Mr
Born’s questioning appears to them to be in each case an entirely reasonable attempt to
clarify the points being presented to the tribunal concerned. It is commonly—perhaps
invariably—the case that members of tribunals have in mind some legal or factual issues
that they consider are likely to be important for the decision in the case, and which may
have been left unclear in the written submissions on the record. In the Two Members’ view,
far from being objectionable, it is desirable that members of a tribunal put such issues as
precisely as they can to counsel and witnesses and give them the opportunity to have a
clear answer put on the record. The Two Members see nothing in Mr Born’s questioning

that goes beyond that perfectly proper process.

56.

57.

58.

59.

G.

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain

ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23

In sum, and taking the submissions of the two Parties as a whole, the Two Members are
clearly of the view that there is no basis for the suggestion that Mr Born cannot be relied
upon to exercise independent judgment, or is not impartial, or does not have a mind open
to the arguments to be presented in this case, or has any bias against Respondent in this
case. That finding disposes of the matter, whether the precise formulations of the standard

and the burden of proof advanced by Respondent or by Claimants are preferred.
COSTS

The Two Members invited the Parties to make submissions in their 5 March 2018 filings
regarding the costs flowing from this challenge. Claimants asked for an order that Spain
bear all costs arising out of or in connection with its disqualification application and gave
as an interim figure €124,644.90 for those costs, which they requested permission to update
by 4 April 2018. Respondent submitted a cost figure of €2,515.25, corresponding to non-
refundable travel expenses of Respondent’s counsel and its witness (€1,095.48) and of

Respondent’s experts (€1,419.77).

In addition, the administrative costs associated with cancelling the hearing amount to
US$27,198.90, and €5,220.° These costs have been paid out of the advances made by the

Parties in equal parts.

Before a decision is taken on the costs arising directly from this challenge, the Two
Members wish to receive a more complete and detailed explanation from Claimants of
what those costs are and how they arose directly from the challenge rather than from the
general preparation of the case, and also a further submission from Respondent on the
reasons why the challenge could not have been made earlier. The Two Members invite
each Party to file its submission by 30 April 2018. Those submissions will lie on the record,
and a decision on costs arising specifically from this proposal to disqualify Mr Born will

be taken in due course when other questions of costs are decided. Each Party may respond

° The amounts covered by the cancellation fees, include the following: Interpretation US$27.198,90; venue
cancellation fee: €900; English court reporter: €4.320,00. The Spanish court reporter did not charge for the cancellation
of services.

12

60.

61.

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain
ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23

to the submission made by the other Party at the time that it makes its more general

submissions on costs in due course.

For the reasons given above the Two Members dismiss the proposal to disqualify Mr Born.
The Two Members urge the Parties to make every effort to reschedule the proceedings as

quickly and as soon as possible.

. DECISION

Having considered all the facts alleged and the arguments submitted by the parties, and for

the reasons stated above, the Two Members:
qd) reject Respondent’s Proposal to Disqualify Gary B. Born;

(2) invite both Parties to file by no later than 30 April 2018 supplementary
submissions as specified in paragraph 60 above; and

(3) determine that a final decision on the costs associated with the Proposal will be
made at a later stage.

Mathias Kruck and others v. Kingdom of Spain
ICSID Case No. ARB/15/23

Le pantone Gee

Prof. Vaughan Lowe QC Prof. Zachary Douglas QC

