INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN
M.C.I. POWER GROUP L.C. AND NEW TURBINE, INC.
(CLAIMANTS)

AND

REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
(RESPONDENT)

ICSID Case No. ARB/03/6

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal:
Professor Ratil E. Vinuesa, President
Judge Benjamin J. Greenberg, Q.C., Arbitrator

Professor Jaime Irarrézabal C., Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:

Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Date of dispatch to the parties: July 31, 2007

Claimants’ Representatives

M.C.I. Power Group, L.C. and

New Turbine, Inc.

Mr. Barry Appleton, Esq.

Mr. Robert Wisner, Esq.

Mr. Hernando Otero, Esq.

Appleton & Associates International
77 Bloor Street West, Suite 1800
Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1M2
Canada

Mr. José Astigarraga
Astigarraga Davis

701 Brickell Ave. 16" Floor
Miami, Florida 33131

USA

Respondent’s Representatives

Republic of Ecuador

Dr. José Xavier Garaicoa Ortiz
Procurador General del Estado
Robles 731 y Amazonas
Quito, Ecuador

Mr. Alberto Wray

Mr. Ernesto Alban

Mr. Alvaro Galindo

Ms. Verénica Arroyo
Cabezas & Wray Abogados
Av. Shyris 1240 y Portugal
Ed. Albatros, Piso 8

Quito, Ecuador

Mr. Robert Volterra
Mr. Alejandro Escobar
Latham & Watkins

99 Bishopsgate
London EC2M 3XF
England

Ill.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
JURISDICTION 7
1. INTRODUCTION: OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION ........0.ccccsescesteseeteeeee 7
2. MAIN OBJECTION TO THE COMPETENCE OF THE TRIBUNAL. The

4.

non-retroactivity of the BIT: effect on events alleged to be prior and subsequent
to the entry into force of the BIT.
a. Continuing and composite acts ........00c cece
b. Obligation of parties signing the BIT to act in good faith: scope of
application of Article 18 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties
c. Most-Favored-Nation Clause
d. Acts prior to the entry into force of the BIT relevant in determining
inju
SUBSIDIARY OBJECTIONS
a. First subsidiary objection to the Competence of the Tribunal: existence
of an investment 31
b. Second subsidiary objection to the Competence of the Tribunal: the
“fork-in-the-road” ClaUSe .........ccccscsceseeseetesesteseseseeesesesesseseeeseeneseeseseeneseene 39
CONCLUSIONS 44

 

 

 

 

 

 

MERITS 44

1.

INTRODUCTION TO THE MERITS OF THE DISPUTE..........:0:c0esseees 44
a. Relevant Fact
b. The law applicable to the Merits of the issues raised
c. The relationship between INECEL and Ecuador ..
ACTS ALLEGED AS BEING SUBSEQUENT TO THE ENTRY INTO
FORCE OF THE BIT OVER WHICH THE TRIBUNAL HAS
COMPETENCE
ALLEGATIONS ON BREACHES OF THE BIT .
a. Fair and equitable treatment
b. No discriminatory or arbitrary treatment
c. Full protection and security
d. Expropriation
THE CLAIMANTS’ CONTENTION OF LACK OF GOOD FAITH ON
ECUADOR’S PART WITH RESPECT TO THE ACTS AND OMISSIONS
OF INECEL IN THE LIQUIDATION COMMISSION...
REVOCATION OF SEACOAST’S OPERATING PERMIT AND ITS
EFFECTS
a. Revocation of the permit we
b. The Claimants’ allegation of Ecuador’s bad faith in frustrating an
arbitration process for resolving the questions at issue... cee 67
c. The 1 of the lawsuit 72
ECUADOR’S HARASSMENT OF SEACOAST REPRESENTATIVES........ 78

 

 
 
  
 
 

 

 

 

    

iii

IV.

V.

COSTS

 

DECISION.

 

82

82

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On December 16, 2002, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (hereinafter “ICSID” or “the Centre”) received from M.C.I. Power
Group, L.C. and New Turbine, Inc. (hereinafter “the Claimants”) a request for
arbitration against the Republic of Ecuador (hereinafter “the Respondent” or
“Ecuador’). On December 19, 2002, the Centre acknowledged receipt of the
request, and accompanying documentation, together with the prescribed lodging
fee, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the
Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (hereinafter the
“Institution Rules”). On December 20, 2002, the Centre transmitted a copy of
the request to Ecuador and Ecuador’s Embassy in Washington, D.C. in

accordance with Institution Rule 5(2).

According to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (“the ICSID
Convention”), the Acting Secretary-General of the Centre registered the request
for arbitration on April 8, 2003. In accordance with Institution Rule 7, the
Acting Secretary-General notified the parties on the same date of the registration
of the request and invited them to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as

soon as possible.

In accordance with Rule 2(3) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”), on June 9, 2003, Claimants requested that the
Arbitral Tribunal in this case be constituted in accordance with the provisions of
Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. According to this provision, the
Arbitral Tribunal would consist of three arbitrators, one arbitrator to be
appointed by each party and the third, who shall serve as the President of the
Tribunal, to be appointed by agreement of the parties. The Claimants appointed
the Honorable Benjamin J. Greenberg, Q.C., a Canadian national, and the
Respondent appointed Professor Jaime Irarrézabal, a Chilean national.
However, the parties failed to agree on the appointment of the third, presiding

arbitrator. On July 8, 2003, the Claimants requested that the third, presiding

arbitrator be appointed in accordance with Article 38 of the ICSID Convention

and Rule 4 of the Arbitration Rules.

After consulting the parties, Professor Ratil E. Vinuesa, an Argentinean national,
was appointed by the Centre as the third, presiding arbitrator. In accordance with
Rule 6(1) of the Arbitration Rules, on September 11, 2003, the Acting Secretary-
General notified the parties that all three arbitrators accepted their appointment
and that the Arbitral Tribunal was deemed to be constituted and the proceedings
deemed to begin on that date. On the same date, pursuant to ICSID
Administrative and Financial Regulation 25, the parties were informed that Mr.
Mariano Garcia-Rubio, Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Arbitral
Tribunal. Mr. Rubio was later on replaced by Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson,
Counsel, ICSID. The Tribunal held its first session in Washington, D.C. on
November 7, 2003.

Messrs. Barry Appleton, Robert Wisner and Hernando Otero from Appleton and
Associates, and Messrs. José I. Astigarraga and Edward M. Mullins from
Astigdrraga Davis represented the Claimants at the first session. Messrs. Ivor
Massey and Richard Gorman also attended on behalf of the Claimants. Ms.
Martha Escobar Koziel of the Procuraduria General del Estado and Mtr.
Gustavo Anda of the Embassy of Ecuador in Washington, D.C., represented the

Respondent at the first session.

During the first session, the parties agreed that the Tribunal had been properly
constituted in accordance with the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration
Rules and that they did not have any objections to any members of the Tribunal.
It was also noted that the proceedings would be conducted under the ICSID

Arbitration Rules in force since September 26, 1984.

During the first session, the parties also agreed on several other procedural
matters, which were later reproduced in the written minutes signed by the
President and the Secretary of the Tribunal. In respect of the pleadings to be
filed by the parties, their number, sequence and timing, it was agreed that the

Claimants would file a Memorial by February 6, 2004; the Respondent would

file a Counter-Memorial within 90 (ninety) days of their receipt of the
Claimants’ Memorial; the Claimants would file a Reply within 30 (thirty) days
of their receipt of the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, and the Respondent
would file a Rejoinder within 30 (thirty) days of its receipt of the Claimants’

Reply.

8. The Tribunal further noted that, if there were no objections to Jurisdiction, the
time-limit for the Claimants’ Memorial shall be followed, in accordance with the

ICSID Arbitration Rules.

9. On February 20, 2004, the Claimants filed their Memorial on the Merits and

accompanying documentation.

10. On June 16, 2004, the Respondent informed the Centre and this Tribunal that the
law firm Cabezas & Wray had been appointed as counsel for Ecuador in the
present case, being authorized to represent the Respondent either independently

or jointly with the Procuraduria General del Estado.

11. On June 16, 2004, the Respondent raised some objections to the Jurisdiction of
the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal. In the same communication,
counsel for the Respondent indicated that Messrs Robert Volterra and Alejandro
Escobar of the law firm Herbert Smith, in London, were also appointed as co-

counsel for Ecuador.'

12. On June 18, 2004, the Claimants made preliminary observations on Ecuador’s
objections on Jurisdiction, to which counsel for the Respondent replied by letter

of June 21, 2004.

13. On June 23, 2004, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, suspending the
proceeding with respect to the Merits in accordance with Rule 41(3) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, and fixing a timetable for the Jurisdictional phase,

according to which Respondent would have 30 (thirty) days (by July 26, 2004)

' Mr. Volterra and Mr. Escobar later on joined the law firm Latham & Watkins, in London.

to submit its Memorial on Jurisdiction; Claimants would have 30 (thirty) days
from their receipt of the Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction to file their
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction; the Respondent would file its Reply on
Jurisdiction within 15 (fifteen) days from its receipt of the Claimants’ Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction; and the Claimants would file a Rejoinder on
Jurisdiction within 15 (fifteen) days from their receipt of the Respondent’s

Reply on Jurisdiction.

. In accordance with Procedural Order No. 1, on July 26, 2004, the Respondent

filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction. Thereafter, on August 23, 2004, Claimants
filed their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction; on September 14, 2004, the
Respondent filed it Reply on Jurisdiction; and on October 1, 2004, the Claimants

filed their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction.

. As it had been scheduled, after consultation with the parties, the Hearing on

Jurisdiction was held in Washington, D.C. on December 13 and 14, 2004. At the
Hearing, the Claimants were represented by Messrs. Ivor Massey, Richard
Gorman, Jack Haeflich, Barry Appleton, José I. Astigarraga, Robert Wisner and
Hernando Otero, and as Observers from Appleton & Associates, Nick Gallus,
Ali Ghiassi and Asha Kaushal. The Respondent was represented by Messrs.
Alberto Wray Espinosa, Ernesto Alban Ricaurte, Alvaro Galindo, Alejandro
Escobar, Robert Volterra, Danilo Sylva and Martha Escobar Koziel. During the
Hearing, the Tribunal also put questions to the parties in accordance with ICSID

Arbitration Rule 32(3).

. On April 4 2005, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, joining the

objections to Jurisdiction to the Merits of the dispute, in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41(4) and number 8 in Procedural Order No. 1 of June 23,
2004. A timetable was set for the continuation of the proceeding, according to
which the Respondent was to file its Counter-Memorial by May 19, 2005; the
Claimants would have 30 (thirty) days from their receipt of the Respondent’s
Counter-Memorial to file their Reply; and the Respondent would file its

Rejoinder within 30 (thirty) days after its receipt of the Claimants’ Reply.

17.

20.

21.

22.

23.

On May 5, 2005, after due consideration of the Respondent’s letter of April 25,
2005, as well as of the Claimants’ response of April 26, 2005, the Tribunal
decided to grant an extension of 15 days to counsel for the Respondent to file its

Counter-Memorial (i.e. by June 3, 2005).

. On June 3, 2005, the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on the Merits.

. On July 8, 2005, the Claimants, invoking the principle of equality, requested an

extension to file its Reply, which was due by July 15, 2005. On July 13, 2005,
The Tribunal granted an extension for the Claimants to file their Reply until

August 1, 2005.

On July 13, 2005, the Tribunal, after considering the Respondent’s request for
production of documents (letters of June 23 and July 7, 2005), as well as
Claimants’ response of July 1, 2005, denied such request. However, the Tribunal
noted that it reserved its powers to call upon the parties to produce any
documents, witnesses and experts, if it so deemed necessary at any stage of the

proceeding.

On July 22, 2005, the Claimants filed their Reply on the Merits; and thereafter,
on August 31, 2005, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder on the Merits.

On February 2, 2006, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, concerning

the organization of the Merits Hearing.

As it had been confirmed by the Tribunal to the parties on October 11, 2005, the
Merits Hearing took place on March 20-24, 2006, in Washington, D.C. Present

at the Hearing were:

Members of the Tribunal

Professor Ratil E. Vinuesa, President
The Honorable Benjamin J. Greenberg, Q.C., Arbitrator
Professor Jaime Irarrdzabal C., Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat

Claudia Frutos-Peterson, Secretary of the Tribunal
Tomas Solis, ICSID Secretariat

On behalf of the Claimants

Jack Haeflich,
Ivor Massey,
Richard Gorman,
Jose Astigdrraga,
Barry Appleton,
Robert Wisner,
Ed Mullins,
Hernando Otero,
Nick Gallus,
Asha Kaushal.

As Support Team for the Claimants

Jill Mayer,

Sue Ki,

Damien Charles “Tai” Smith,
Mona Davies,

Elizabeth Lorelei Simpson,
Regis Figur,

Kristine Monet Roche,
Garrett Hooe,

Richard Taylor.

On behalf of the Respondent

24.

25.

Alberto Wray,
Ernesto Alban,
Alvaro Galindo,
Martha Escobar,
Veronica Arroyo,
Robert Volterra,
Alejandro Escobar.

As instructed by the Tribunal, and in accordance with the notification of April 4,

2006, on April 19, 2006 the parties filed their post-Hearing briefs.

On May 31, 2007, the Tribunal declared the proceedings closed in accordance
with Arbitration Rule 38(1).

26.

27.

28.

29.

JURISDICTION

1. INTRODUCTION: OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

As indicated above, on July 26, 2004 Ecuador submitted a Memorial objecting
to the Jurisdiction (hereafter Memorial on Jurisdiction) with respect to the
claims raised by the Claimants, requesting that the Tribunal declare the dispute
not within the Jurisdiction of ICSID, nor the competence of the Tribunal, that it
decline to consider the case on the Merits, and that it order the Claimants to pay

Ecuador the costs of the proceedings and the cost of legal representation.

In its Memorial on Jurisdiction, Ecuador alleges that it had not given its written
consent for this case to be submitted to ICSID arbitration, as required under
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. Ecuador argues that this lack of consent
cannot be overcome by the provisions of the Bilateral Investment Treaty
concluded between Ecuador and the United States of August 27, 1993
(hereinafter the “BIT” or the “Treaty”), because the facts used to support the
Claimants’ allegations arose before the entry into force of that Treaty, that is,

before May 11, 1997.

Ecuador contends that the claims refer to two separate situations, which involve
entirely different legal principles; these situations were consummated and

legally defined before the BIT entered into force.

The first of these situations has to do with a contract signed in Quito on
November 7, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as “the Seacoast Contract”), and the
Memorandum of Clarification for the Execution of the Contract (hereinafter
referred to as “Clarification Contract”) signed on the same date, by which
Seacoast agreed to provide power to the Instituto Ecuatoriano de Electrificacién
(hereinafter referred to as “INECEL”) for six months starting on November 18,
1995, using equipment that it agreed to bring into Ecuador at its own expense
and risk under the temporary admission of imports regime. Ecuador contends
that INECEL communicated to Seacoast that the contract would terminate by

May 1996.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

According to Ecuador, Seacoast claimed that the termination of the contract was
untimely, that it had only been paid for the energy consumed and not for the
energy made available, and that the fines imposed on it for breach of contract
were inapplicable. Ecuador believes that these allegations raised by the
Claimants in the present case are unjustified with respect to the BIT, as Seacoast
had persisted in its claims by suing INECEL before the Ecuadorian courts in
1996.

In the opinion of Ecuador, the second situation referred to in the request has no
connection whatsoever to the first. It relates to the contract that INECEL
entered into on January 24, 1997 with Power Services Ecuador Ecuapower
(hereinafter referred to as “the Ecuapower Contract”) by which the latter agreed

to provide it with power.

According to the Respondent, the original shareholders of Ecuapower, in whose
ownership structure the Claimants say they participated, transferred their shares
in full on March 6, 1997 to four other companies, which were also foreign-
owned. According to Ecuador, the Claimants believed that Ecuadorian officials
caused an unwarranted delay in the signing of the Ecuapower Contract and
because of this delay they were forced to sell their investment under
disadvantageous terms, for which they are seeking compensation in the present

claim.

Ecuador alleges that the disputes caused by the two abovementioned situations
arose before the BIT entered into force, and therefore they did not give rise to
rights in favor of the Claimants, nor have they generated any obligation

whatsoever on the part of Ecuador under the provisions of the BIT.

Moreover, Ecuador alleges that when the BIT entered into force, the Claimants
did not have an investment under that Treaty. It also alleges that the events that
occurred after the entry into force of the BIT simply consisted of successive and
failed attempts to resolve these disputes and therefore they have not given rise to

any rights in favor of the Claimants nor any obligation for Ecuador.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

Ecuador argues that the BIT is not retroactive, nor are there any circumstances
that would justify its retroactive application. Even under the assumption that the
BIT was applicable to this case, Ecuador contends that the dispute would still
not fall under the Competence of the Tribunal because it did not arise directly
out of an investment under the terms of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and
Article I(1)(a) of the BIT at the time when the latter entered into force; or

because the arbitration option was precluded under Article VI(3)(a) of the BIT.

In summary, Ecuador argues that the dispute submitted does not fall within the
Jurisdiction of the Centre ratione temporis and subsidiarily, that the dispute does
not arise out of an investment and that there was a preclusion of the arbitral
option, owing to the Claimants’ submission of the dispute to the domestic courts

of Ecuador (“‘for-in-the-road”’).

On August 23, 2004 the Claimants filed their Counter-Memorial on Objections

to Jurisdiction (hereinafter referred to as “the Counter-Memorial’).

In the Counter-Memorial, the Claimants contend that the Tribunal has
Competence based on the following reasons: the Claimants had an investment
within the terms of the ICSID Convention and the BIT at all relevant times; the
Tribunal must consider events before the BIT’s entry into force; events
subsequent to that date attributable to Ecuador violated the BIT; and the
Claimants have not triggered the “fork-in-the-road” provision of the Treaty. The
Claimants therefore ask the Tribunal to reject Ecuador’s objections to

Jurisdiction and award costs to the Claimants.

The Claimants allege that as legal entities of the United States of America they
own and control Seacoast. In their view, Seacoast, in turn, is a United States
corporation that invested in Ecuador through a branch operation. This branch
carried on the business of acquiring, assembling and installing two electricity

generating plants and selling their power to INECEL, an Ecuadorian state-

owned entity. After these operations were completed and the power generating
assets sold, Seacoast continued to hold and manage its accounts receivable and
other contractual rights against INECEL. Thus, the Seacoast branch and its
intangible assets in Ecuador were an investment before and after the entry into

force of the BIT.

40. After the entry into force of the BIT, the Claimants allege that they continued to
own the Seacoast branch in Ecuador. This branch had a legal representative, an
office in Ecuador, and an operating permit. Seacoast held and managed
substantial accounts receivable and other contractual rights against INECEL.
Consequently, the Claimants allege that Ecuador violated the BIT through acts

subsequent to its entry into force.

41. The Tribunal, having examined the submissions put forward by the parties in
these arbitration proceedings with respect to the question of its Competence to
hear the Merits of the present dispute, and having evaluated the relevant
arguments on the Merits put forward by both parties, has decided to deal first
with the main objection of the non-retroactivity of the BIT, and then deal with
each of the subsidiary objections relating to the non-existence of an investment

and the preclusion of the BIT’s “‘fork-in-the-road” provision.

42. The Tribunal will decide on the objections to Jurisdiction raised by the
Respondent and rejected by the Claimants in accordance with the provisions of
the ICSID Convention, the BIT, and the applicable norms of general
international law, including the customary rules recognized in the Final Draft of
the International Law Commission of the UN (hereinafter referred to as “the
ILC”) Draft Articles on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful

Acts with commentaries (hereinafter referred to as “the ILC Draft’).”

? Available at http://www ¢jil.org/journal/Vol12/NoS/art2.html.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

For purposes of interpreting the treaties applicable to the objections submitted,
the Tribunal will be guided by the rules contained in the 1969 Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties (hereafter “the Vienna Convention”) that

reflect the customary law on the subject.

The Tribunal will refer to precedents that state the legal implications of binding
norms of conventional and customary international law that are applicable only

to the extent that and insofar as they specifically relate to the present case.

2. MAIN OBJECTION TO THE COMPETENCE OF THE
TRIBUNAL. THE NON-RETROACTIVITY OF THE BIT: EFFECT ON
EVENTS ALLEGED TO BE PRIOR AND SUBSEQUENT TO THE ENTRY INTO
FORCE OF THE BIT.

Ecuador alleges that the BIT is not retroactive. By the terms of the Treaty, it
entered into force thirty days after exchange of the respective instruments of

ratification, that is, on May 11, 1997.

Ecuador cites as precedents the preliminary decisions adopted in the Marvin Roy
Feldman Kapra v. United Mexican States and the Mondev v. United States of
America cases in order to put forward the argument that before the BIT entered
into force there was no consent to be bound and therefore no obligation arising

from the Treaty can be attributed to a State Party.

In support of its argument, it cites Article 28 of the Vienna Convention, which
states:

Unless a different intention appears from the treaty or is
otherwise established, its provisions do not bind a party in
relation to any act or fact which took place or any situation
which ceased to exist before the date of the entry into force
of the treaty with respect to that party.

Ecuador also invokes Article XII of the BIT which sets out the treaty’s temporal

application to investments in existence at the time it entered into force as well as

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

investments made or acquired thereafter. Thus, according to Ecuador, the scope

of the treaty excludes any investment that had ceased to exist at that date.

Ecuador concludes that the only factual grounds of the claims put forward in the
request refer to acts consummated and legally defined before the entry into force
of the BIT. It maintains that neither in the framework of the Seacoast Contract
nor in that of the Ecuapower Contract did the Claimants own shares in the
investment within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. But even
assuming that they did, such alleged investments had ceased to exist before the

BIT entered into force.

According to Ecuador, the Seacoast Contract terminated in May 1996 upon
expiry of the term. Even if we accept Seacoast’s argument with regard to the
term of the Contract, the latter would in any event have terminated before the

BIT entered into force.

Ecuador contends that when the BIT entered into force there was a dispute in
existence that had been submitted to the Ecuadorian courts, for the untimely
termination of the Seacoast Contract, payment for the installed capacity of

power, return of the fines imposed, and reimbursement of the cost of fuel.

In support of this argument about the existence of a dispute Ecuador cites the
Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain precedent regarding the importance of the critical
date for purposes of deciding whether a dispute falls within the consent
necessary to warrant ICSID Jurisdiction under a BIT. Ecuador maintains that in
the present case the critical date, that is the date when the dispute arose, is prior

to the entry into force of the BIT.

According to Ecuador, when the BIT entered into force, Seacoast had sold all its
equipment, its operations had ceased, and it had submitted the dispute with
INECEL to the Ecuadorian tribunals. It had no investment whatsoever, nor
rights substantiated in titles or registers to which the status of investment could

possibly be attributed prima facie.

54.

55.

56.

57.

As for the Claimants’ demand for compensation for the supposedly wrongful
conduct on the part of Ecuadorian authorities in the signing of the contract
between Ecuapower and INECEL on January 24, 1997 and the allegation that
those events caused the forced sale of their investment on March 6, 1997,
Ecuador maintains that, on the assumption that the facts invoked as grounds for
the claim were true, they would not fall within the temporal provisions of the
BIT as they would have occurred before the Treaty entered into force. With
regard to subsequent events alleged by the Claimants to be in violation of the
BIT, Ecuador considers them to be merely pleadings concerning disputes that

had already been raised prior to the entry into force of the BIT.

For their part, the Claimants do not deny the date of entry into force of the BIT,

nor do they deny the non-retroactive nature of the BIT.

The Claimants put forward the arguments that the Tribunal must consider events
occurring before the BIT entered into force because Ecuador’s actions before the
BIT entered into force were continuing or composite breaches; Ecuador had a
duty to act in good faith following its signature of the BIT; and moreover, the
BIT’s most-favored-nation clause and Article VII of the Argentina-Ecuador BIT
demonstrate Ecuador’s intention that the US—Ecuador BIT would have limited
retrospective effect. The Claimants are also claiming as violations of the BIT
acts attributable to Ecuador subsequent to the entry into force of the BIT.
Finally, the Claimants submit that events occurring before the BIT came into
force are important in determining the damage caused by Ecuador’s actions after

that date.

The Claimants maintain that this Tribunal’s consideration of events occurring
before the BIT’s entry into force in the aforementioned circumstances is not a
breach of the principle of non-retroactivity recognized in the Vienna Convention

and the ILC Draft. The Claimants allege that Article XII of the BIT does not

58.

59.

60.

61.

limit its temporal application to disputes arising subsequent to its entry into

force.

The Claimants contend that the Tribunal can examine conduct occurring before
the BIT came into force when that conduct continues beyond that date. They
maintain that Article 28 of the Vienna Convention only curtails a tribunal’s
ability to examine conduct occurring before a treaty comes into force to the
extent that that conduct ceased to exist before the date on which the treaty

entered into force.

From the analysis of the text and background of the BIT, the Tribunal holds that
the intention of the contracting Parties with respect to its retrospective
application is not evident from its clauses or in any other manner. In accordance
with the norms of general international law codified in the Vienna Convention,
and particularly in Article 28, the Tribunal notes that because of the fact that the
BIT applies to investments existing at the time of its entry into force, the

temporal effects of its clauses are not modified.

The Tribunal notes the temporal requirements under Article XII of the BIT,
which states:

[This Treaty] shall apply to investments existing at the time

of entry into force as well as to investments made or

acquired thereafter.
The non-retroactivity of the BIT excludes its application to disputes arising prior
to its entry into force. Any dispute arising prior to that date will not be capable
of being submitted to the dispute resolution system established by the BIT. The
silence of the text of the BIT with respect to its scope in relation to disputes prior
to its entry into force does not alter the effects of the principle of the non-

retroactivity of treaties.

62. The Tribunal distinguishes acts and omissions prior to the entry into force of the
BIT from acts and omissions subsequent to that date as violations of the BIT.
The Tribunal holds that a dispute that arises that is subject to its Competence is
necessarily related to the violation of a norm of the BIT by act or omission

subsequent to its entry into force.

63. The Tribunal recognizes that under the general international law applicable, a
dispute means a disagreement on a point of fact or of law, a conflict of legal
opinions or of interests as between the parties.* The existence of a dispute
determines the critical date after which the parties cannot fail to recognize its

existence.

64. With respect to acts or omissions alleged by the Claimants to be breaches of the
BIT subsequent to its entry into force, the Tribunal considers that it has
Competence insofar and as those facts are proven to be a violation of the BIT.
This determination of the Tribunal does not prejudge the subsequent evaluation
of the allegations of both parties on the existence or not of a violation at the time

of a decision on the Merits.

65. The Tribunal likewise distinguishes disputes arising prior to the entry into force
of the BIT from disputes arising after that date that have the same cause or

background with those prior disputes.*

66. The Tribunal observes that a prior dispute may evolve into a new dispute,> but
the fact that this new dispute has arisen does not change the effects of the non-
retroactivity of the BIT with respect to the dispute prior to its entry into force.
Prior disputes that continue after the entry into force of the BIT are not covered

by the BIT.

> Mavommatis Palestine Concessions (Greece v. U.K.), Jurisdiction (1924), PSIJ Series A, No. 2, p. 11;
Northern Cameroons (Cameroons y. United Kingdom), Judgment (1963), ICJ Reports 1963, p. 27;
Applicability of the Obligation to Arbitrate under Section 21 of the United Nations Headquarters
Agreement of 26 June, 1947, Advisory Opinion (1988), ICJ Reports 1988, p. 27.

+ Jan de Nul N.V.and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No.
ARB/04/13), Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction of June 16, 2006, para. 127.
> Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/19), Decision of
the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction of October 17, 2006, para. 53.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

The Tribunal notes the Parties agree that the BIT in principle does not have
retroactive effect. Nevertheless, they do not agree as to the scope of the BIT
with regard to certain acts or omissions attributable to Ecuador, prior and

subsequent to its entry into force.

As regards the allegations put forward by the Claimants on the issue of non-
retroactivity of the BIT in response to the objections to Jurisdiction raised by the
Respondent, the Tribunal will now evaluate the relevance of the arguments
concerning the scope and extent of continuing and composite acts (point a),
obligations arising under Article 18 of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties (point b), most-favored-nation clause (point c), and acts relevant in

determining injury (point d).

a. Continuing and composite acts

The Claimants allege that Ecuador breached its BIT obligations by continuing
and composite wrongful acts. They contend that Ecuador’s policy of
discriminating against Seacoast began on April 8, 1996 when INECEL defaulted
on the first invoice from Seacoast. The act then continued until Ecuador relied on
the arbitrary and illegal revocation of Seacoast’s operating permit to reject

Seacoast’s claim in the Ecuadorian courts and refuse to arbitrate.

The Claimants allege that Ecuador’s final refusal to pay occurred when the
Liquidation Commission proceedings were considered terminated, after the BIT
had entered into force. That Commission was an integral element of the Seacoast
Contract. Therefore, the Claimants argue, expropriation of Seacoast’s contractual
rights was only complete after the Liquidation Commission proceedings were

concluded.

The Claimants maintain that Articles 14 and 15 of the ILC Draft recognize that an
act commencing before a treaty enters into force can breach the treaty if the act

continues past that date or has composite elements occurring beyond that date.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

Despite the written text of Article 14(2) of the ILC Draft, the Claimants submit
that the breach of an international obligation by a continuing act of a State does
not exclude the possibility that a series of acts will constitute a continuing
wrongful act. In this regard they make reference to the Tecmed v. Mexico case in
which, according to the Claimants, the Tribunal referred to “the conduct” that
continues in the time before and after the entry into force of the BIT, as a factor

in determining if there had been a breach of that treaty.

The Claimants cite a number of cases in which the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights as well as the European Court of Human Rights have accepted the

notion of a continuing act from a succession of acts attributable to a State.

With respect to the continuing or composite character of events prior to the entry
into force of the BIT, Ecuador maintains that, assuming the facts presented in the
request contain the necessary elements to amount to an internationally wrongful

act, such act would be neither composite nor continuing.

Ecuador rejects the arguments in the Claimants’ Memorial on the composite and
continuing nature of the alleged wrongful acts attributed to the Ecuadorian
authorities with respect to the Seacoast Contract. Ecuador contends that even if
there were indeed an internationally wrongful act that had commenced prior to
the entry into force of the BIT, such act did not continue after that date so as to
fall under the Treaty’s provisions relating to internationally wrongful acts of a

continuing and composite nature occurring prior to May 1997, as alleged.

According to Ecuador, by using this argument the Claimants are trying to elude
the main issue of the non-existence of an investment at the time the Treaty
entered into force. Ecuador contends that the Claimants erred in relying on the
Tecmed case because in that case the existence of an investment at the time the

treaty entered into force was not an issue.

77. Ecuador contends that in the Tecmed case the tribunal held that its competence
extended to events that occurred prior to the date the treaty entered into force, but
only after the issue of Jurisdiction had been resolved, not by reason of the
retroactive application of any provision of the BIT, but because an investment

actually existed at the time the BIT entered into force.

78. Ecuador argues that the Claimants failed to make a distinction between the
existence of a continuing wrongful act and the effects of a consummated breach.
It cites the International Law Commission’s Commentaries on the ILC Draft,
which states that an act does not have a continuing character merely because its
effects or consequences extend in time. It must be the wrongful act as such which

continues.°

79. According to Ecuador, the dispute concerning the payment of amounts
supposedly owed by INECEL to Seacoast bears no relationship at all to the
concept of an internationally wrongful act or to wrongful acts of a continuing
character. Even assuming the existence of a wrongful act, such act was
consummated by the alleged disregard of rights, which is clearly distinguishable

from a mere consequence thereof.

80. Ecuador contends that the existence of a composite act requires a series of actions
or omissions defined as a whole as wrongful. It cites the Commentary of the ILC
with respect to composite acts to the effect that similar considerations apply as for
completed and continuing wrongful acts in determining when a breach of
international law exists; the matter is dependent upon the precise facts and the

content of the primary obligation.’

81. Ecuador concludes that the offence alleged by the Claimants was consummated
prior to the entry into force of the BIT in a completed act by which INECEL

refused to recognize the rights that Seacoast claimed.

© Crawford, J., The International Law Commission’s Articles on State Responsibility, Cambridge
University Press, 2002, p. 135 et seq.
7 Ibid, p. 141 et seq.

 

82. The Tribunal holds that, in accordance with customary international law, the
relevant element to determine the existence of a continuing wrongful act or a
composite wrongful act is the violation of a norm of international law existing at

the time when that act that extends in time begins or when it is consummated.

83. The line of reasoning adopted by intergovernmental bodies for the protection of
human rights as well as human rights tribunals in order to typify acts of a
continuing wrongful nature, stresses the continuity of those acts after the treaty

giving rise to the breached obligation entered into force.

84. With respect to the various positions taken by the Parties regarding the case
Tecmed y. the United Mexican States, the Tribunal holds that the only
interpretation possible is that which is consistent with the international law
applicable to the case. In light of this, it is arguable that the Tecmed tribunal
determined its jurisdiction on the basis of allegations that an internationally
wrongful act had occurred after the treaty had entered into force. Thus, the
tribunal understood that in order to determine its jurisdiction it should consider
the necessary existence of a dispute that arose under the terms of the BIT after the
treaty had entered into force. In the view of that tribunal, events or situations
prior to the entry into force of the treaty may be relevant as antecedents to

disputes arising after that date.

85. The Tribunal takes note of the content of the norms of customary international
law set out in the ILC Draft in order to clarify the scope of continuing wrongful

acts as well as composite wrongful acts.

86. With respect to continuing wrongful acts, Article 14 of the ILC Draft provides:

The breach of an international obligation by an act of a
State having a continuing character extends over the entire

® Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2),
Award of May 29, 2003, available at <http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/laudo-051903%20-
English.pdf>.

period during which the act continues and remains not in
conformity with the international obligation...

87. In its Commentary to this Article the ILC states:

In accordance with paragraph 2, a continuing wrongful
act, on the other hand, occupies the entire period during
which the act continues and remains not in conformity with
the international obligation, provided that the State is
bound by the international obligation during that period.”

88. With regard to composite wrongful acts, Article 15 of the ILC Draft states as
follows:
Breach consisting of a composite act

The breach of an international obligation by a State
through a series of actions or omissions defined in
aggregate as wrongful occurs when the action or omission
occurs which, taken with the other actions or omissions, is
sufficient to constitute the wrongful act.

In such a case, the breach extends over the entire period
starting with the first of the actions or omissions of the
series and lasts for as long as these actions or omissions
are repeated and remain not in conformity with the
international obligation.

89. In its Commentary to the Draft Articles, the ILC states that in accordance with the
principle of the inter-temporality of law:

the State must be bound by the international
obligation for the period during which the series of acts
making up the breach is committed. In cases where the
relevant obligation did not exist at the beginning of the
course of conduct but came into being thereafter, the
“first” of the actions or omissions of the series for the
purposes of State Responsibility will be the first
occurring after the obligation came into existence.!

90. The Tribunal finds that the wrongful acts defined as continuing or composite
referred to in Articles 14 and 15 of the ILC Draft are internationally wrongful
acts. This means that they are identified with the violation of a norm of
international law. According to Article 13 of the Draft Articles, in order for a
wrongful act or omission to constitute a breach of an international obligation

° Crawford, J., op.cit., p. 136 para. (3).
10 Ibid, p. 144, para. (11).

20

there must have been a breach of a norm of international law in force at the time

that the act or omission occurs.

91. Article 13 of the ILC Draft states:
International obligation in force for a State

An act of a State does not constitute a breach of an
international obligation unless the State is bound by the
obligation in question at the time the act occurs.

92. In its Commentary to Article 13 the ILC states that:

The evolutionary interpretation of treaty provisions is
permissible in certain cases but this has nothing to do with
the principle that a State can only be held responsible for
breach of an obligation which was in force for that State at
the time of its conduct. "

93. The Claimants’ arguments with respect to the relevance of prior events
considered to be breaches of the Treaty posit a contradiction since, before the
entry into force of the BIT, there was no possibility of breaching it. The Tribunal
holds that it has Competence over events subsequent to the entry into force of the
BIT when those acts are alleged to be violations of the BIT. Prior events may
only be considered by the Tribunal for purposes of understanding the
background, the causes, or scope of violations of the BIT that occurred after its

entry into force.

94. The non-retroactivity of treaties as a general rule postulates that only from the
entry into force of an international obligation does the latter give rise to rights and
obligations for the parties. Therefore, for any internationally wrongful act to be
considered as consummated, continuing, or composite, there must be a breach of

a norm of international law attributed to a State.

95. The Tribunal holds that the Claimants’ allegations in respect of Ecuador’s acts
and omissions after the entry into force of the BIT serve to affirm the

Competence of this Tribunal to determine whether there was a violation of the

"" Thid, p. 134, para. (9).

21

96.

97.

98.

99.

BIT independently of whether those acts or omissions were composite or

continuing.

The Tribunal observes that the existence of a breach of a norm of customary
international law before a BIT enters into force does not give one a right to have
recourse to the BIT’s arbitral Jurisdiction. A case in point is the Mondev v.
United States of America case in which the tribunal pointed out the difference
between a claim made under a Treaty and a diplomatic protection claim for

conduct contrary to customary international law.'?

For the above reasons, and in accordance with the principle of non-retroactivity
of treaties, the Tribunal holds that the acts and omissions alleged by the
Claimants as being prior to the entry into force of the BIT do not constitute

continuing and composite wrongful acts under the BIT.

b. Obligation of parties signing the BIT to act in good faith: scope
of application of Article 18 of the Vienna Convention on the

Law of Treaties

The Claimants contend that Ecuador breached its obligation to act in good faith
starting from the signing of the BIT. This argument is based on the wording of
Article 18 of the Vienna Convention and on application of the principle set out in
a passage from the Tecmed award characterizing the wording of Article 18 as an

expression of the principle of good faith. 8

Article 18 of the Vienna Convention provides:

Obligation not to defeat the object and purpose of a treaty prior
to its entry into force

° The Tribunal held that: “Nor do Articles 1105 or 1110 of NAFTA effect a remedial resurrection of
claims a Canadian investor might have had for breaches of customary international law occurring before
NAFTA entered into force. It is true that Articles 1105 and 1110 have analogues in customary
international law. But there is still a significant difference, substantive and procedural, between a
NAFTA claim and a diplomatic protection claim for conduct contrary to customary international law”,
Mondev International LTD. United States of America (Mondev) (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2),
Award of October 11, 2002, available at <http://Avww.state.gov/documents/organization/14442.pdf>,
para. 74.

'. Tecmed, para. 70.

22

A State is obliged to refrain from acts which would defeat the
object and purpose of a treaty when:

a) it has signed the treaty or has exchanged instruments
constituting the treaty subject to ratification, acceptance or
approval, until it shall have made its intention clear not to
become a party to the treaty; or

b) it has expressed its consent to be bound by the treaty, pending
the entry into force of the treaty and provided that such entry
into force is not unduly delayed.

100. With reference to Article 18 of the Vienna Convention, the Claimants state that

10

102.

103.

the Tribunal in Tecmed based its decision on the Megalidis v. Turkey case. The
Claimants argue that the tribunal in Megalidis, applying customary international
law, rejected Turkey’s argument that it was not obliged to restore the property
claimed because that obligation arose from the Treaty of Lausanne, which it had

signed, but which was not yet in force.

. The Claimants also referred to the Opel Austria v. Council of the European Union

case in which, according to them, the European Court of First Instance invoked
the application of Article 18 of the Vienna Convention to establish the liability of
the Council of the European Union when it imposed certain tariffs on Austrian
products after having signed a treaty (but before ratifying it) that established the

European Economic Area which prohibited the imposition of those tariffs.

The Claimants conclude that the conduct of Ecuador after it had signed the BIT,
and before the BIT had entered into force, amounted to a breach of its obligation

to act in good faith imposed by Article 18 of the Vienna Convention.

Ecuador contends that Article 18 of the Vienna Convention cannot be invoked as
the basis for the retroactive application of the BIT. Ecuador rejects the allegation
in the Claimants’ Memorial that when the BIT comes into force, its provisions

produce effect from the time the parties signed the Treaty.

23

104.

105.

10

a

10

a

108.

Ecuador argues that the obligation imposed upon the Contracting States by
Article 18 of the Vienna Convention does not constitute an exception to the
principle of the non-retroactivity of treaties, nor to the other norms of the Vienna

Convention on the entry into force of treaties.

Ecuador contends that Article 18 only admits two exceptions expressly set out in
the Vienna Convention on the provisional application of a treaty and the treaty
provisions regulating the authentication of its text and other issues inevitably

arising before the treaty enters into force.

. Ecuador further contends that in the Tecmed v United Mexican States case the

BIT between Spain and Mexico applied because there was an existing investment
at the time the treaty entered into force. According to the Respondent, the
tribunal ruled that its competence also extended to certain acts that took place
before the BIT entered into force, provided such conduct or acts, upon
consummation or completion of their consummation after the entry into force of
the treaty, constitute a breach of the BIT. According to Ecuador, the approach
taken by the tribunal in Tecmed does not involve or give rise to retroactive

application of the BIT.

. Ecuador argues that events occurring after the BIT entered into force did not give

rise to rights in favor of the Claimants nor obligations on the part of Ecuador,
given that those events do not constitute an investment, nor are they related to any
investment that existed on the date when the BIT entered into force. Moreover, it
contends that the dispute alleged by the Claimants is prior to the entry into force

of the BIT.

The Tribunal holds that Article 18 of the Vienna Convention is an application of
the principle of good faith to ensure that the object and purpose of a treaty are not
defeated by acts or omissions of the Contracting Parties prior to its entry into

force. The wording of Article 18 is not aimed at triggering the early application

24

of the clauses of a treaty, that is, it does not warrant retroactive application of the

treaty.

109. The precedents cited by the Claimants in support of their arguments have their
own specific facts that distinguish them from the factual situations that are

relevant in the present case.

110. In Megalidis v. Turkey, the Greek-Turkish arbitral tribunal in its award of July 26,
1928 held that the ownership of certain property, rights and interests of Megalidis
were expropriated by Turkish authorities in August 1923, that is, shortly after the

Treaty of Lausanne had been signed, but before it had entered into force.'*

11

. The Tribunal observes that the Treaty of Lausanne of July 24, 1923 applied to
situations that arose, starting from October 29, 1914, having to do with property,
rights and interests of nationals of Allied Powers that were still in existence on
the date that the treaty entered into force and could be identified in the territories

that continued to be Turkish.

112. The Tribunal understands that Article 65 of the Treaty of Lausanne created an
obligation on the part of Turkey to restore certain properties, rights, and interests
affected by consummated acts or omissions prior to the Treaty’s entry into force.

In other words, the Parties clearly intended this Article to have retroactive effect.

113. The Treaty of Lausanne contemplated a retroactive supplementary provision to
facilitate performance of the required obligation of Turkey to restore those
properties, rights, and interests that, at the date of signing of the Treaty, had

already been liquidated by the authorities of the Contracting Parties.'°

114. The Tribunal holds that the reference in the Megalidis case to the obligation of
Contracting States to refrain from prejudicing a treaty or the validity of its clauses
from the time it is signed to its entry into force was not the basis for the

retroactive application of certain clauses of the Treaty. The Tribunal notes that

'4 Aristotelis A. Megalidis v. Turkey, 8 Recueil des Decisions des Tribunaux Mixtes (1927-1928).
'S Treaty of Lausanne, Article 66.

25

the retroactive enforcement of the Treaty of Lausanne was the direct consequence
of that tribunal’s enforcement of the retroactive clauses of the treaty for purposes
of determining the existence of an obligation on the part of Turkey to make

reparation.

115. With regard to the other relevant case cited by the Claimants, the Tribunal notes
that in Opel Austria v. Council of the European Union the Court of First Instance
of the European Union held that the principle of good faith is a rule of customary
international law which was codified in Article 18 of the Vienna Convention. '°
The Tribunal notes that the application of Article 18 was based on the exceptional
circumstances arising from the adoption of measures that contradicted and
defeated the object and purpose of the treaty after it was signed and before it
entered into force but after the treaty had been ratified and when a specific date
had been set for its entry into force. The decision of that tribunal pointed to the
fact that the tariffs prohibited under the treaty were imposed when the
Contracting States had already deposited their instruments of ratification and a
specific date set for the treaty’s entry into force. Another relevant point was the

allegation that the date of the measure imposed had been falsified.'”

116. In the opinion of the Tribunal, the distinction between the extent of the obligation
not to defeat the object and purpose of a treaty and the retrospective application
of clauses of that treaty to situations prior to the date of entry into force of the
treaty should not be confused. It has not been proven in the present case that the
actions and omissions prior to the entry into force of the BIT and attributable to
the Respondent had defeated the object and purpose of the Treaty. The case law
precedents cited demonstrate, on one hand, that the retroactive enforcement of the
treaty provisions were based on its own retroactive clauses: The other case
demonstrates the extraordinary nature of the enforcement of the customary norm

set out in Article 18 of the Vienna Convention.

117. The Tribunal is mindful of the fact that Article 18 of the Vienna Convention is an

application of the general principle of good faith, it being understood that its

'® Opel Austria v. EU Council, Case T-115/94; pg | [1997] All ER, 90, 97.
"" Ibid, para. 94.

26

118.

11

xo

120.

121.

scope is limited to not defeating the object and purpose of the treaty, and not to

the retroactive application of its clauses.

c.  Most-Favored-Nation Clause

The Claimants allege that Article II(1) of the BIT sets out the Treaty’s aim to
have limited retrospective effects. This Article gives recognition to the most-
favored-nation clause (hereinafter referred to as the MFNC), which the Claimants

associate with Article VII of the Argentina-Ecuador BIT.

. Article II(1) of the BIT provides as follows:

Each Party shall permit and treat investment, and activities
associated therewith, on a basis no less favorable than that
accorded in like situations to investment or associated
activities of its own nationals or companies, or of nationals
or companies of any third country, whichever is the most
favorable...

In the Claimants’ opinion, Article VII of the Argentina-Ecuador BIT grants to
Argentine investors part of the protection offered by the Ecuador-United States
BIT from December 1995. The Claimants contend that they are simply seeking

the protection afforded by this Article.

Article VII of the 1994 Treaty between Argentina and Ecuador states:
Application of other rules

If the provisions of the law of either Contracting Party or
obligations under international law existing at present or
that are established in the future between the Contracting
Parties in addition to this Treaty or if any Agreement
between an investor of one Contracting Party and the other
Contracting Party contain rules, whether general or
specific entitling investments by investors of the other
Contracting Party to treatment more favorable than is
provided for in this Treaty, such rules shall, to the extent
that they are more favorable, prevail over this Treaty.
(Tribunal’s Translation).

27

122.

123.

12.

£

125.

126.

127.

The Claimants contend that their claim under the MFNC is substantially different
from that referred to by the claimant in the Tecmed case, as they are simply

seeking the protection offered by a key clause of another BIT.

In interpreting the abovementioned Article VII, the Claimants contend that the
reference made to treaties entered into “between the Contracting Parties” refers
to Contracting Parties of treaties that had not yet entered into force, and not the

Contracting Parties of the Argentina-Ecuador BIT.

. Ecuador rejects the Claimants arguments on the scope of Article VII of the Treaty

between Argentina and Ecuador as they are seeking to assert the retroactive effect

of the BIT by invoking the MFNC.

Ecuador contends, following the precedent of the Tecmed case, that the clause
cannot be invoked in the particular circumstances of the present case since the
application of the investment treaty goes to the core of matters that must be

deemed to be specifically negotiated by the Contracting Parties.

Ecuador contends that what Article VII states is simply that the rules of
international law which may be established in the future “between the
Contracting Parties” (Ecuador and Argentina) “shall to the extent that they are
more favourable, prevail over this Treaty.” Thus, Ecuador concludes, there is no
reason to incorporate the provisions of the Ecuador-United States BIT, nor does

the Article deem its application to be retroactive.

From the wording of Article VII of the Argentina-Ecuador BIT, the Tribunal
concludes that, in accordance with the interpretation rules of Article 31 of the

Vienna Convention, the references made in the text of that Article to “either

28

128.

Contracting Party,” “between the Contracting Parties,” “an investor of one
Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party,” and “the other Contracting
Party” unquestionably refer to the Contracting Parties of the Argentina-Ecuador

BIT.

Consequently, the Tribunal rejects the possibility of considering the application
of the most-favored-nation clause, in the terms, and with the effects, claimed by

the Claimants.

d. Acts prior to the entry into force of the BIT relevant in

determining injury

129. The Claimants allege that the events prior to the entry into force of the BIT are

130.

13

relevant in determining injury. Article 18 of the Vienna Convention as well as
Article 13 of the ILC Draft do not limit the powers of a tribunal to examine
events that occurred prior to the entry into force of a treaty for purposes of

determining the extent of injury caused by the events that occurred after that date.

In their Memorial the Claimants allege that Ecuador had breached its obligations
to negotiate in good faith at the Liquidation Commission and frustrated other
dispute resolution attempts by relying on the arbitrary revocation of the operating
permit of Seacoast’s branch in Ecuador. The Claimants contend that the Tribunal
must examine the contractual breaches occurring before the BIT came into force

in order to determine the injury caused by these breaches.

- Ecuador alleges that acts prior to the entry into force of the BIT cannot be

invoked as violations of a treaty that had not yet generated obligations for the
Contracting States. Consequently, neither can they be invoked for purposes of

determining compensation for a non-existent wrongful act.

29

132. The Tribunal finds that the Claimants’ argument regarding the relevance of
events occurring before the BIT entered into force in determining the injury
caused is restricted to the ILC’s Commentary on Article 13 in fine of its Draft
Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts with

commentaries.

133. In referring to the inter-temporality of law in ensuring that a State will only be
found liable for breach of an obligation in force for a State at the time of the
breach, the ILC commented:

Nor does the principle of the inter-temporal law mean that
facts occurring prior to the entry into force of a particular
obligation may not be taken into account where these are
otherwise relevant. For example, in dealing with the
obligation to ensure that persons accused are tried without
undue delay, periods of detention prior to the entry into
force of that obligation may be relevant as facts, even
though no compensation could be awarded in respect of the
period prior to the entry into force of the obligation. 1s

134. On this matter the ILC also stated:

In cases where the relevant obligation did not exist at the
beginning of the course of conduct but came into being
thereafter, the “first” of the actions or omissions of the
series for the purposes of State responsibility will be the
first occurring after the obligation came into existence.
This need not prevent a court taking into account earlier
actions or omissions for other purposes (e.g. in order to
establish a factual basis for the later breaches or to provide
evidence of intent). "

135. This Tribunal, following the opinion of the ILC in its Commentaries on the
customary norms set out in Articles 13, 14 and 15 of its Draft Articles on State

Responsibility, will take into account events prior to the date of entry into force

'8 Crawford, J., op. cit., p. 135.
'° Ibid, p. 144, para. (11).

30

136.

13

x

138.

of the BIT solely in order to understand and determine precisely the scope and

effects of the breaches of the BIT after that date.

The Tribunal reiterates its views on the possibility of exercising Competence over
all acts or omissions alleged by the Claimants to have occurred after the entry
into force of the BIT and as having been in violation thereof. Acts or omissions
prior to the entry into force of the BIT may be taken into account by the Tribunal
in cases in which those acts or omissions are relevant as background, causal link,
or the basis of circumstances surrounding the occurrence of a dispute from the
time the wrongful act was consummated after the entry into force of the norm that
had been breached. The Tribunal, however, finds that it has no Competence to
determine damages for acts that do not qualify as violations of the BIT as they

occurred prior to its entry into force.

3. SUBSIDIARY OBJECTIONS

a. _ First subsidiary objection to the Competence of the Tribunal:

existence of an investment

. Ecuador alleges that the Seacoast Contract does not fit the concept of investment

as understood within the framework of the ICSID Convention. It states that it had
not given its written consent to submit the dispute to ICSID arbitration because
when the BIT took effect beginning on May 11, 1997, the Claimants did not have
any investment whatsoever, so that the treaty relied on in the claim to make up
for the lack of express consent, is not applicable in this case. Ecuador alleges that
the Seacoast Contract had expired in July 1996 and the Claimants had sold all

their shares in Ecuapower in March 1997.

Ecuador contends that neither the ICSID Convention nor the BIT defines the
actual meaning of the concept of investment. Ecuador admits that in the absence
of a definition, case law has tended to give the term “investment” a broad
interpretation. Nevertheless, it contends that no matter how broad the definition,
it cannot go so far as to distort the meaning of the term itself. Ecuador argues,

therefore, that for an investment to be deemed to exist in the terms of Article 25

31

139.

140.

14

142.

of the ICSID Convention, certain requirements must be present, such as that the
project must have duration, the expectation of return or the obtaining of profits,
the assumption of risks, the existence of a substantial commitment, and

significance for the host State’s development.

According to Ecuador, in the Seacoast Contract the requirements of duration and
shared risk do not exist. It is in fact a supply contract of uncertain duration,
conceived as a response to a temporary emergency. The power generators were
imported into the country under the temporary admission of imports regime. The
supplier charges for the power it sells and the buyer pays for the power it buys.
According to Ecuador, given that this transaction is purely commercial, it is

excluded from the Jurisdiction of ICSID.

Ecuador contends that neither does the BIT contain a definition of “investment.”
There has not been an intention to define the term with exactitude. The
enumeration contained in Article I(1)(a) of the BIT continues to refer to the term
“investment” by referring to relationships or property often included in the whole

complex of operations known as investment.

. Ecuador summarizes its position by stating that the list in Article I(1)(a) of the

BIT in no way modifies its conclusions on the scope of the term “investment” in
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. The Seacoast Contract expired before the
entry into force of the BIT and after that date Seacoast had nothing but
expectations in respect of a contractual claim that was neither recognized, nor

could in any way be considered an investment under the ICSID Convention.

Ecuador contends, moreover, that the dispute concerning the Ecuapower Contract
did not arise directly out of an investment. The Claimants’ allegations concerning
the intentional delays of the Ecuadorian officials in the signing of the contract
between INECEL and Ecuapower and the alleged subsequent forced sale of the
supposed interests of the Claimants in Ecuapower have no bearing on the matter

and therefore do not arise directly out of any investment.

32

143. Ecuador argues that there is no connection between the Seacoast Contract and the

14.

14:

14

aN

5.

a

Ecuapower Contract and that any transaction with the latter cannot amount to an
intention, or offer, to renew the former. Ecuador was under no obligation to
renew the Seacoast Contract. Ecuador contends that Seacoast and Ecuapower are
two distinct legal entities, and hence the rights and obligations of one are not

transferable to the other.

. Ecuador alleges that Seacoast’s operating permit cannot be deemed to be

connected to an existing investment protected or covered by the BIT, nor can it be
considered in itself as an investment. Ecuador moreover asserts that the
revocation of Seacoast’s operating permit cannot have any impact on its
activities, since the company was not running any operation whatsoever and
found it manifestly impossible to do so, having transferred all its assets to another

company.

Faced with the Claimants’ allegation regarding the existence of an investment
consisting of rights which they have against INECEL and the State at the time of
entry into force of the BIT, Ecuador alleges that what really exists are mere
claims, not rights. It asserts that in a bilateral relationship, a right does not exist
simply because one of the parties claims it for itself. If the other party denies the
very existence of the alleged right, what really exists is a claim, not a right.
According to Ecuador, that fact was corroborated by Seacoast’s filing of a claim
on July 31, 1996, against INECEL before the Ecuadorian courts. Ecuador alleges
that the substance of this claim and the reply submitted by INECEL
unquestionably demonstrate that the existence of the alleged rights of Seacoast

was not recognized by INECEL.

. Ecuador referred to the events that occurred after the entry into force of the BIT,

insofar as they are related in the claim, and relates them to three aspects (i)
negotiations on the liquidation of the contract; (ii) negotiation aimed at resolving
the dispute through arbitration; and (iii) revocation of Seacoast’s so-called
“operating permit.” According to Ecuador, none of these events constitutes an
investment, therefore, the BIT is not applicable to the events that occurred after it

entered into force.

33

147.

148.

149.

150.

The Claimants, for their part, allege that when the BIT entered into force there
was an investment in place under that Treaty and in this regard they contend that
the Seacoast branch in Ecuador and its intangible assets qualify as investments
under the broad definition of “investments” in the BIT. That is the definition
applicable for purposes of complying with the provisions of the ICSID

Convention.

The Claimants base their contention on the fact that ICSID tribunals have
repeatedly interpreted the term “investments” in a broad sense when determining
their jurisdiction. They cite as precedents the Fedax v. Republic of Venezuela and
the CSOB v. Slovakia cases to affirm that the ICSID Convention does not limit
the scope and extent of the term “investments,” which is also broadly defined in

the BIT.

The Claimants maintain that the BIT defines the investments that can be brought
to ICSID. The decision on jurisdiction in the Tokios Tokéles v. Ukraine case is
cited in support. In that case the tribunal found that as the ICSID Convention did
not define the term “investment” the parties have a broad discretion to decide
what transactions do or do not constitute an investment. Evidence of this
discretionary power lies in the wording of the definitions accepted under the BIT.
Thus, any transaction falling within the definition of “investment” under the BIT,

also qualifies as an investment under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

The Claimants contend that Ecuador appears to confuse the relationship between
the ICSID Convention and Article I(1)(a) of the BIT when, in order to determine
the existence of an investment, it demands that certain requirements such as the
existence of returns, a certain duration, risk, commitment and contribution to the
economic development of the host State must exist. In any event, the Claimants
argue that the requirements of duration and risk were present in the conception

and design of the Seacoast project and investment in Ecuador.

34

151.

152.

153.

154.

155.

According to the Claimants, at the date on which the BIT entered into force there
existed an investment in intangible assets, in an existing branch, and in other
contractual rights against INECEL. Ecuapower acquired only Seacoast’s power
generating assets. Seacoast kept its rights concerning INECEL’s commitment to
negotiate a long term contract. The negotiations continued through the
establishment of the Liquidation Commission and until the annulment of

Seacoast’s lawsuit in October 1999.

The Claimants allege that their investment falls within the definition of
investment in the BIT. They contend that the Seacoast branch and its intangible
assets qualified as investments under the BIT both before and after the sale of the
power generating plants because: Seacoast had a contract; Seacoast had an
operating permit; Seacoast had a branch that owned assets in Ecuador; and the

BIT applies to investments existing at the time of its entry into force.

The Claimants contend that the Seacoast contract also qualifies as an investment
under Article I(1)(a)(iii) and I(1)(a)(v). Under these provisions, a claim for

money and any right conferred by contract are investments.

The Claimants also argue that Seacoast’s operating permit falls within the
definition of investment in the BIT. Article I(1)(a)(v) of the BIT describes “any
licenses or permits pursuant to law” as investments. The granting and subsequent
revocation of the permit were more than mere administrative acts because the
Attorney General and the Civil Judge of Ecuador used the revocation of the
permit as grounds to annul Seacoast’s lawsuit and the Attorney General also used
the revocation to refuse to sign the arbitration agreement that had been previously

negotiated.

According to the Claimants, their interests in Seacoast fall within the definition of
investment under Article I(1)(a)(ii) of the BIT. The Claimants are the owners of
the Seacoast branch in Ecuador. The branch owned rights in Ecuador against
INECEL both under the Seacoast Contract and under the Clarification Contract.

Seacoast actively pursued those rights through its legal representative’s efforts at

35

the Liquidation Commission to have Seacoast’s accounts receivable paid, and

also to manage Seacoast’s lawsuit against INECEL.

156. Consequently, the Claimants assert that, pursuant to Article XII(1), the BIT
applies to investments in existence. Moreover, they allege that Article I(3)
confirms that any alteration of the form in which the assets are invested or

reinvested shall not change their character as investments.

157. The Tribunal reiterates that the main rules to be borne in mind for purposes of
determining its own Competence in the present case are to be found basically in

the ICSID Convention and in the Ecuador-United States BIT.

15

oo

. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention states as follows:

The Jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal
dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a
Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency
of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that
State) and a national of another Contracting State, which
the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no
party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

159. From a simple reading of Article 25(1), the Tribunal recognizes that the ICSID
Convention does not define the term “investments”. The Tribunal notes that
numerous arbitral precedents confirm the statement in the Report of the Executive
Directors of the World Bank that the Convention does not define the term
“investments” because it wants to leave the parties free to decide what class of

disputes they would submit to the ICSID.””

°° Report of the Executive Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development on the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States,
18/03/1965, 1 ICSID Reports, p. 28.

36

160. The BIT indicates in its Article 1 which investments are to be protected under it.
Thus, the BIT complements Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, for purposes of
defining the Competence of the Tribunal with respect to any legal dispute arising

directly out of an investment.
161. Article I of the BIT provides as follows:

1. For the purposes of this Treaty.

(a) “investment” means every kind of investment in the
territory of one Party owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by nationals or companies of the other Party,
such as equity, debt, and service and investment contracts;
and includes:

(i) tangible and intangible property, including rights, such
as mortgages, liens and pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a
company or interests in the assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having
economic value, and associated with an investment;

(iv) intellectual property ...;

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses
and permits pursuant to law,...

3. Any alteration of the form in which assets are invested or
reinvested shall not affect their character as investment.

162. The Tribunal also notes that the temporal requirements of Article XII of the BIT
apply to investments existing at the time of its entry into force. The Tribunal
therefore has to determine if prima facie the investment continued to exist upon

entry into force of the BIT, as alleged by the Claimants.

163. The Tribunal concludes that for purposes of determining if it has Competence it is
sufficient to consider the events as alleged by the Claimants insofar and inasmuch
as, if proven true, they would constitute a breach of the BIT.”! This statement
does not preclude the right of the Respondent to question the occurrence of the
alleged events for purposes of determining whether the Tribunal has Competence.
However, any allegation about the scope of events alleged and the legal

2! Consistent with Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No.

ARB/81/1), Decision on Jurisdiction of September 25, 1983, 23 ILM 351 (1984), para. 38; Azurix Corp.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Decision on Jurisdiction of December 8, 2003, para.

 

<hitp:/www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/emilio_DecisiononJurisdiction.pdf>, para. 69.

37

164.

165.

166.

167.

168.

consequences thereof are matters that should be discussed when the Merits of the

issues submitted are being analyzed and evaluated.

The Tribunal concludes that Article I(a) of the BIT gives a broad definition of
investment and that the rights and interests alleged by the Claimants to have
subsisted as a consequence of the Seacoast project, after the entry into force of
the BIT—such as the intangible assets of accounts receivable, the existence of an

operating permit—would fit that definition.

The Tribunal states that the requirements that were taken into account in some
arbitral precedents for purposes of denoting the existence of an investment
protected by a treaty (such as the duration and risk of the alleged investment)
must be considered as mere examples and not necessarily as elements that are
required for its existence. Nevertheless, the Tribunal considers that the very
elements of the Seacoast project and the consequences thereof fall within the
characterizations required in order to determine the existence of protected

investments.

Regarding the events that the Claimants allege are breaches of the BIT by
Ecuador, the Tribunal holds that as it is impossible to make distinction between
the events that, if proven, would be breaches of the BIT, and those that, even if

proven, would not constitute breaches of the BIT.

Considering that the Seacoast Contract was an investment prior to the entry into
force of the BIT, the subsistence of that investment on the date of its entry into
force should be taken into account. Additionally, the principle of non-
retroactivity of treaties limits the application of the BIT and its clauses on
jurisdiction to those disputes that are alleged to be violations of that Treaty after it

entered into force.

For all these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that claims relating to the Seacoast
Contract and the Clarification Contract, as well as the Ecuapower Contract, could
not involve breaches under the BIT as the latter was not in force at the time that

those alleged contractual breaches occurred. Applying the customary rules

38

169.

17

Ss

17

172.

173.

relating to State Responsibility, the contractual breaches prior to the entry into
force of the BIT do not contain the elements necessary to amount to violations of

the BIT.

Regarding the events alleged by the Claimants to be breaches of the BIT after it
entered into force, the Tribunal finds that the effects of an investment that was in
existence before the treaty entered into force, continued, prima facie, after that
date. The Tribunal, therefore, has Competence to hear the Claimants’ arguments
alleging breaches of the BIT by Ecuador for acts or omissions after it entered into

force, which affected their investment.

|. It will fall to the Tribunal, in analyzing the arguments and the evidence of the

Merits of the dispute, to determine whether the Claimants’ allegations founded on
Ecuador’s breaches of the BIT by acts or omissions after it entered into force

have, in fact, been proven to constitute breaches of the BIT.

b. Second subsidiary objection to the Competence of the

Tribunal: the “fork-in-the-road” clause

- Ecuador alleges that the arbitration option under the BIT has been precluded,

owing to the submission of the dispute to its domestic courts.

Ecuador maintains that pursuant to Articles VI(2)(a) and VI(3)(a) of the BIT,
there had been consent to the “fork-in-the-road” option. That means that once a
Jurisdiction has been chosen, it remains the forum, regardless of the results of the
proceedings. According to Ecuador, once the claim had been submitted for
resolution to the Ecuadorian administrative tribunals, the claiming party gives up
the possibility of resorting to international arbitration; because once the national

court option is chosen, this choice becomes definitive and irrevocable.

Ecuador alleges that the claims submitted by Seacoast before the Ecuadorian

tribunals in 1996 are the same claims that serve now as the basis of the present

39

174.

175.

176.

177.

claim, which have been submitted, for a second time, by the Claimants to an

ICSID tribunal.

In support of its arguments, Ecuador maintains that the grounds for annulment of
the claim submitted to the Ecuadorian tribunals arose after the submission of its
claim; instead of objecting to the nullity plea, Seacoast accepted it in a letter
dated October 15, 1999. The fact that Seacoast accepted the grounds for
annulment would not prevent it from initiating a complementary action that could

lead to a decision on the Merits.

The Claimants allege that they have not triggered the “fork-in-the-road” clause
because the claim before the Ecuadorian tribunals involved different parties and
different issues and that the claim was not a free election of forum and was

annulled without a decision being made on the Merits.

According to the Claimants, the ICSID jurisprudence is consistent to the effect
that a party to a dispute triggers the “fork-in-the-road” clause if the proceedings
initiated involve the same parties, have the same issues and are based on the same
cause of action. The Claimants cite the Benvenuti v. Republic of the Congo case
which makes reference to the existence of lis pendens. They cite the Azurix
Corp. v. Argentine Republic and the CMS v. Argentine Republic cases. They
allege that in the latter case the tribunal distinguished the fact that the claim
before the domestic tribunals referred to contractual breaches whereas the claim
before the ICSID referred to treaty breaches. They argue that the same reasoning

was followed in numerous ICSID arbitration cases.

The Claimants state that they were not parties in the proceedings before the
Ecuadorian courts. The proceedings in the domestic courts and before the ICSID
involve different causes of action and different issues. In the former, Seacoast
sought damages for breach of contract; in the latter, the Claimants are seeking

damages for breach of the BIT. Furthermore, the proceedings before the ICSID

40

178.

179.

180.

address actions taken by Ecuador before and after the entry into force of the BIT.
Seacoast’s claim before the Ecuadorian courts did not include claims for arbitrary
and discriminatory acts on the part of Ecuador; for breach of promise to negotiate
a long-term contract; for breach of the obligation to negotiate in good faith at the
Liquidation Commission; for revocation of Seacoast’s operating permit, for its

refusal to agree to arbitration; and for annulling the claim presented to the

 

domestic tribunals. The Claimants insist that they have not triggered the “fork-in-
the-road” mechanism because the proceedings were ultimately annulled before

the judge could make a decision on the Merits of the dispute.

The Claimants allege that they did not elect freely to initiate domestic legal
proceedings. That decision was taken under pressure from the incoming
Ecuadorian authorities in order to facilitate the parties reaching a settlement in the
future. They cite the precedent of Occidental v. Ecuador in which the tribunal
declared that the “fork-in-the-road” rule pre-supposes that the investor has made a
choice between alternative avenues without any form of pressure. They allege
that when the claim was presented to the Ecuadorian tribunals the possibility of

making a choice of forum did not exist.

In response to Ecuador’s allegation that mere submission of the suit to the
domestic courts triggers the “fork-in-the-road” mechanism, the Claimants
contend that the rule reflects the domestic and international law principle of lis
pendens. According to the Claimants, the purpose of the principle is to ensure
efficiency and avoid inconsistent decisions. The annulment of the proceedings in
the local courts and Ecuador’s contention that Seacoast may still present a claim
to the Ecuadorian tribunals, do not, in the opinion of the Claimants, alter the

effects of the lis pendens rule.

The Tribunal takes due note of the fact that the Claimants’ first submission to the
ICSID, that is, the first request for arbitration, was in 1998, at which time the

proceedings before the Civil Judge of Ecuador had not yet been annulled, which

41

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.

event occurred on October 21, 1999. Seacoast’s consent to have the proceedings
annulled took place after the first request for ICSID arbitration had been

withdrawn.

The Tribunal holds that the “fork-in-the-road” rule is different from the lis
pendens rule because the former rule refers to an option, expressed as a right to
choose irrevocably between different jurisdictional systems. Once the choice has
been made there is no possibility of resorting to any other option. The right to

choose once is the essence of the “fork-in-the-road” rule.

The Claimants’ allegation that the “fork-in-the-road” mechanism was not
triggered because the proceedings were ultimately annulled without a decision on
the Merits having been made by the judge, is not relevant for purposes of
determining Jurisdiction because if there had been a right to choose an option and
if that right had in fact been exercised that would in any case have been

irrevocable, whether or not there had been a final decision on the Merits.

Thus, the submission of the Claimants as to why they did not again commence
proceedings under Ecuadorian law after the nullity of the proceedings in 1999, is
irrelevant for purposes of determining the issue of the triggering of the “fork-in-
the-road” provision since, in the Tribunal’s view, the Claimants’ arguments on
the likely ruling of the Ecuadorian tribunal, when the submissions of the Attorney

General are taken into account, are purely subjective speculation.

Independently of the foregoing observations, the Tribunal finds that Seacoast’s
claim before the Ecuadorian courts does not constitute the exercise of the

“alternative” referred to in Article VI(2) of the BIT.

Article VI (2) of the BIT states:

In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the
dispute should initially seek a_ resolution through
consultation and negotiation. If the dispute cannot be
settled amicably, the national or company concerned may
choose to submit the dispute, under one of the following
alternatives, for resolution: (a) to the courts or
administrative tribunals of the Party that is a party to the

42

dispute; or (b) in accordance with any applicable,
previously agreed dispute-settlement procedures; or (c) in
accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

186. The Tribunal holds that the claim before the Ecuadorian courts could never have
been based on violations of the Treaty since the latter was not then in force, but
was based instead on allegations of contractual breaches. Seacoast could not then
exercise any choice under the BIT but commenced proceedings for breach of
contract in the domestic court. The Tribunal notes that in the Vivendi v.
Argentine Republic case on partial nullity it was inferred that having recourse to
the domestic forum for breaches of contract does not involve exercising the right
to choose an alternative under the BIT, unless the claim in the domestic forum is

based on a breach of the BIT.””

187. The Tribunal finds that the Claimants are aware that part of the dispute submitted
to the ICSID had already been submitted to the Ecuadorian courts by Seacoast.
Consequently, the Claimants recognized that they had no right of choice at that

time, as the BIT was not in force.

188. The Tribunal is aware that in the proceedings commenced before the Ecuadorian
courts, Seacoast claimed for contractual breaches under the Seacoast Contract and
the Clarification Contract. On the other hand, the present action submitted to the
ICSID by the Claimants is based on breach of contract and of the BIT and takes
account of events before, as well as after, the submission of the claim to the

Ecuadorian courts.

189. The Tribunal considers that the Respondent’s reliance on the Claimants exercise
of the option of the jurisdiction of the Ecuadorian courts is irrelevant in view of
the special circumstances of the present case. Indeed, the Tribunal is of the view
that the suits submitted by Seacoast to the jurisdiction of the Ecuadorian Courts
related to disputes that arose prior to the entry into force of the BIT. Thus, in
accordance with the principle of the non-retroactivity of treaties, those disputes

remain outside the temporal Competence of this Tribunal. It is not necessary to

» Compaiita de Aguas de Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal (previously CGE) v. Argentine Republic,
Decision on Annulment, para. 55.

4B

190.

19

Il.

192.

determine if a breach of the contract implies a breach of the BIT because the BIT
was not in force and therefore, it did not give rise to obligations on the part of
Ecuador on the date those disputes arose. Furthermore, the Respondent’s
invocation of the “fork-in-the-road” rule is also irrelevant with respect to the
Claimants’ allegations regarding acts and omissions of Ecuador constituting

violations of the BIT after its entry into force.

The Tribunal holds that it does not have Competence over disputes that arose
prior to the entry into force of the BIT. The Tribunal confirms that it does have
Competence over acts that are alleged by the Claimants to have given rise to
disputes that arose or became evident after the entry into force of the BIT,
independently of whether they had a causal link with, or served as the basis of,

allegations concerning acts or disputes prior to the entry into force of the BIT.

4, CONCLUSIONS

. For the reasons given above, the Tribunal concludes:

1. To allow the Respondent’s main objections to the Tribunal’s

Competence in respect of the non-retroactivity of the BIT; and

2. To reject the objections to the Tribunal’s Competence with
respect to the non-existence of an investment and the preclusion of the
“fork-in-the-road” provision and consequently exercise its Competence
over the Respondent’s alleged violations of the BIT by acts or omissions

after the entry into force of the BIT.

MERITS

1. INTRODUCTION TO THE MERITS OF THE DISPUTE

After conducting an exhaustive analysis of each of the arguments submitted by
the Parties with respect to the matters on which it determined it had Competence,
the Tribunal will refer here only to those arguments that it deems essential for

determining the rights and obligations of the parties.

44

193.

194.

19.

n

196.

197.

198.

The Tribunal believes that its conclusions on Competence indicated in paragraph
191 above in no way pre-judge the rights and obligations of each of the Parties
with respect to the issues that do not fall under the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal,

and on which the Tribunal will express no opinion in this Award.

a. _ Relevant Facts

The Claimants, M.C.I. Power Group L.C. and New Turbine Inc., are companies
incorporated in the United States of America. They maintain that they own and
control Seacoast, a company established in 1922 under the laws of the State of

Texas, originally controlled by Briggs-Cockerham LLC.

. Against the background of an energy crisis in Ecuador in 1995, on November 17,

1995 the INECEL signed a contract with Seacoast for the sale of electricity for a
period of six months (Seacoast Contract). Seacoast agreed to install and operate
two electrical power generation plants in Santa Elena and in Santo Domingo

(Ecuador), and sell that energy to INECEL.

On that same day, the parties signed a Memorandum of Clarification for the
Execution of the Contract (Clarification Contract) relating to the scope of some of

the clauses of the Seacoast Contract.

After signing the Seacoast Contract, and for purposes of its execution, the owners
of Seacoast decided to enter into a “joint venture” with three other American

companies.

The “joint venture” brought together the Claimants in this arbitral proceeding,
M.C.I. Power Group L.C. (hereinafter called MCI), and New Turbine Inc., as
well as Old Dominion Electric Cooperative (hereinafter ODEC). New Turbine at

that time operated under the name Energy Services Inc. (hereinafter called ESI).

45

199.

200.

20

202.

203.

204.

205.

206.

. At the end of 1995, MCI, ESI, and ODEC, as investors in Seacoast, established
two limited companies under the laws of the State of Virginia, identified
collectively in the Claimant’s Memorial as Power Ventures. Power Ventures
incorporated Power Services Ecuador Ecuapower Cia. Ltda (Ecuapower), as its

subsidiary under the laws of Ecuador

At the beginning of 1996, differences arose between the Parties herein with
respect to the execution of the Seacoast Contract relating to the date of
commencement, the duration of the contract, the payment for energy under the
“Take or Pay’ modality, reimbursement for the cost of fuel, and the imposition of

fines and penalties.

-On April 12, 1996 Seacoast suspended the operation of the two plants and
delivery of power, invoking the non-payment by INECEL for invoiced amounts

payable under the terms of the Seacoast Contract.

On May 26, 1996 INECEL declared the Seacoast Contract to be terminated,

alleging the expiration of the agreed term of six months.

In June 1996, upon the original investors withdrawing from the “joint venture,”
Seacoast and Ecuapower continued under the joint control of MCI, ESI, and

ODEC.

On July 12, 1996, the Seacoast equity interests in power generation were

transferred to Ecuapower.

On July 31, 1996, Seacoast submitted a claim against INECEL to the
Administrative Court of the District of Quito requesting approximately 25 million

USS. dollars for damages for breach of contract.
On December 1, 1996, Seacoast’s accounts receivable were sold to MCI, ESI,

and ODEC, with Seacoast retaining the responsibility to recover the amounts

claimed against INECEL.

46

207.

208.

209.

21

o

21

212.

213.

214.

On December 17, 1996, the shares of the MCI, ESI, and ODEC “joint venture” in

Ecuapower were sold to a third party, the Anglo Energy Company.

On January 24, 1997, INECEL and Ecuapower signed a contract for the provision

of electrical power for three years.

On April 7, 1997 the first meeting of the Liquidation Commission contemplated

in the Seacoast Contract was held.

. In 1998, ODEC transferred all the rights and interest that it had in the “joint

venture” to MCI and ESI, these latter companies remaining as the only owners of

the accounts receivable and other claims of Seacoast against Ecuador.

. On February 8, 1999, the Superintendent of Companies by “Nota” Resolution.

99.1.2.1.00372 notified Seacoast of the revocation of its operating permit.

On March 31, 1999, the meetings of the Liquidation Commission were

considered terminated.

On October 21, 1999 the Pichincha Civil Judge held that the claim submitted by

Seacoast against INECEL was null and void.

b. The law applicable to the Merits of the issues raised

The Claimants contend that the only law applicable in the present case is
international law. They argue that the BIT includes an implicit agreement on the
applicability of international law, and that the first part of Article 42(1) of the
ICSID Convention must therefore be respected. They argue further that, if the
Tribunal should consider that no such agreement exists, the force of the second
part of Article 42(1) of the Convention is such that international law must be

applied.

47

215

21

a

217.

218.

. Ecuador argues that the law applicable to the disputes submitted by the Claimants

is exclusively the domestic law of Ecuador, because that is the law agreed to by

the parties for dealing with alleged default under the contract.

. Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:

The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with
such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties. In the
absence of such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the
law of the Contracting State party to the dispute (including
its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of
international law as may be applicable.

From the supporting documentation supplied by the parties during the
proceedings, the Tribunal finds no evidence of any agreement on the law
applicable to this dispute. Therefore, the Tribunal considers that it must respect
the provisions of the second part of Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, i.e.,
in the absence of an agreement, the Tribunal shall apply Ecuadorian law,
including its rules of private international law and such rules of international law
as may be applicable. With respect to the latter rules, the Tribunal finds that the
tules contained in the BIT, as well as the other pertinent rules of general
international law, are applicable in the present case. The Tribunal’s Competence
over the Merits of the disputes submitted is limited, in this respect, to considering
the contentions of the Claimants relating to violation of the BIT after it came into

force.

In the event of possible contradictions between the rules of Ecuadorian law and
the BIT and other applicable rules of general international law, the Tribunal will

decide on their compatibility, bearing in mind the contents and purpose of those

48

tules in light of the precedence that international rules take over the domestic

legislation of a State.

c. The relationship between INECEL and Ecuador

219. The Claimants contend that INECEL is an organ of the Ecuadorian State, directed
and controlled by Ecuador through its government officials. The Claimants
maintain that the object and functions of INECEL include those reserved

generally to State regulatory bodies.

220. Among other points, the Claimants maintain that, upon liquidating INECEL, the
Attorney General (Procurador General) became, by law, the State’s

representative with respect to all its rights and obligations.

221. The Claimants also insist that there is a contradiction in the Respondent’s
argument that INECEL enjoyed special prerogatives in the contracts it signed in

its capacity as a State entity.

222. Ecuador contends that the BIT does not apply to the Seacoast contract because,
among other reasons, that contract was not signed with the State but rather with

INECEL, an autonomous entity that is legally independent of the State.

223.The Respondent maintains that a distinction must be drawn between the
sovereign obligations assumed by the State and the commercial obligations
assumed by INECEL under the Contract. It cites recent ICSID awards” to the

effect that not all defaults under a contract result in breach of the BIT.

3 CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Award of May
12, 2005, available at <http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/CMS_Award.pdf>, para. 269 and ss.;
Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID No. ARB/03/3), Decision on Jurisdiction of
April 22, 2005, available at < http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/ impregilo-decision.pdf>, para. 220 y

 

 

49

224. In its Rejoinder, Ecuador accepts that INECEL was a public-sector agency and
that official representatives or delegates constituted a majority of its board. It also
recognizes that INECEL was empowered to exercise certain public powers.
Nevertheless, Ecuador argues that, because it had a separate legal personality, its
own capital, and autonomous management, INECEL must not be confused with

the State.

225.The Tribunal finds that INECEL, in light of its institutional structure and
composition as well as its functions, should be considered, in accordance with
international law, as an organ of the Ecuadorian State. In this case, the customary
tules codified by the ILC in their Articles on Responsibility of States for
Internationally Wrongful Acts are applicable. Therefore, any acts or omissions of
INECEL in breach of the BIT or of other applicable rules of general international

law are attributable to Ecuador, and engage its international responsibility.”4

2. ACTS ALLEGED AS BEING SUBSEQUENT TO THE ENTRY
INTO FORCE OF THE BIT OVER WHICH THE TRIBUNAL HAS
COMPETENCE

226. The Tribunal considers that the Claimants allege, mainly, as breaches of the BIT
subsequent to its entry into force, the bad faith and discrimination demonstrated
by Ecuador in settling the disputes in question, through its acts and omissions in
various areas. They allege, in the first place, the illegality, under the BIT, of the
acts and omissions of INECEL within the Liquidation Commission stipulated in

the Contract.

227. In the second place, the Claimants contend, because the procedures expected of

the Liquidation Commission were frustrated, that they attempted to resolve the

*4 See, International Law Commission, Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts, Article 5.

50

228.

229.

230.

23

232.

disputes in question through an arbitration agreement. According to the
Claimants, Ecuador promised to sign an arbitration agreement but renounced their

promise after Seacoast’s operating license was revoked.

The Claimants also contend that the revocation of that license was expropriatory.
In addition, they argue that the revocation was used by Ecuador to provoke and
obtain annulment of the only other possible route for the remedy of grievances,

through a legal action before the Ecuadorian courts.

The Claimants argue further that Seacoast and its legal representative were
subject to constant harassment, as part of Ecuador’s policy of discrimination

against Seacoast.

The Tribunal will consider each of these questions raised by the Claimants on the
grounds that, in accordance with its conclusions on Competence, any act or
omission attributable to Ecuador, subsequent to the BIT’s entry into force, is in
principle sufficient to constitute a breach of the BIT, and consequently engages

the Jurisdiction of this Tribunal to consider the Merits of those claims.

. After analyzing these questions, the Tribunal will consider the contents and the

scope of the BIT rules that the Claimants consider to have been violated by acts
or omissions attributable to the Respondent, in order to evaluate the latter’s legal

position with regard to those rules.

3. ALLEGATIONS ON BREACHES OF THE BIT
The Claimants base their position with respect to the issues over which the

Tribunal decided to exercise Competence on the failure of the Respondent to

comply with the obligations imposed by the BIT with respect to: (a) fair and

Sl

equitable treatment; (b) no discriminatory or arbitrary treatment; (c) full

protection and security; and (d) expropriation.

a. _ Fair and equitable treatment

233. The Claimants argue that Ecuador violated its obligation under the BIT to grant to
the investors of the other contracting party treatment no less favorable than that
required by the standards of international law. They cite Article II(3)(a), which

provides:

Investments shall at all times be accorded fair and
equitable treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security
and shall in no case be accorded treatment less than that
required by international law.

234. The Claimants maintain that Article II(3)(a) sets out a minimum requirement
upon States to provide treatment at least as favorable as that required by
international law to investments of foreign investors. This international level of

treatment includes fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security.

235. According to the Claimants, ICSID jurisprudence confirms that the minimum
standards of international law are independent of the domestic law of the State
hosting an investment. On this point, they cite the award in the case of Genin v.
Estonia,” in which the Tribunal held that “under international law, the
requirement of fair and equitable treatment is generally understood as a treatment
that provides a basic and general standard which is different from the standards
under domestic laws”. Examples of acts that violate this treatment would be “a
willful neglect of duty, an insufficiency of action falling far below international

standards and even subjective bad faith.”

236. The Claimants contend that the fair and equitable treatment required by the BIT
includes the obligation to act in good faith. Good faith, according to the

Claimants, is then an essential element of fair and equitable treatment.

°5 Alex Genin et al. v. the Republic of Estonia (Genin) (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/2), Award of June 25,
2001, available at < http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/genin.pdf>.

52

237. The Claimants maintain that the obligation to act in good faith implies respect for
the basic assumptions on which the investor made the investment. They cite the
award in the Tecmed case, where the Tribunal held that as part of those
expectations are included that the State will conduct itself in a coherent manner,
without ambiguity and transparently, in order for the investor to be able to plan its
activities and adjust its conduct to the statutes or regulations that will govern
them, the policies embedded therein, and relevant practices and administrative

directives.”°

238. The Claimants maintain that good faith has to do with legal security, in the sense
that the investor must expect that the government will act in such a way that it
may enforce its own rights. The State may not act capriciously to abuse the rights
of investors and it may not obstruct access to an independent review when those

tights have been violated.

239. The Claimants argue that the requirement for fair and equitable treatment also
protects investors from threats and other abuse of authority on the part of
government officials. They refer to the conclusion of the tribunal in Pope &
Talbot, with respect to an unjustified and invasive audit of the investor that was

undertaken after a complaint was filed in the NAFTA system.?”

240. The Claimants maintain that violation of fair and equitable treatment includes
abusive exercise of State powers, which may manifest itself through the
malicious application of law. They cite in particular the tribunal that heard and
decided the Azinian v. United Mexican States case, which held that there would
be a fourth type of denial of justice, namely clear and malicious misapplication of

the law.®

°6 Tecmed, para. 154.

27 Pope & Talbot, Award on the Merits of Phase Two of April 10, 2001, para. 181, available at
<http://www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/Pope-Canada-Award- 10Apr2001.pdf>.

°8 Robert Azinian, Kenneth Davitian y Ellen Baca v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB
(AF)/97/2), Award of November 1, 1999, available at
<http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/robert_award.pdf >, para. 103.

53

241.

242.

243.

244.

245.

b. No discriminatory or arbitrary treatment

The Claimants contend that Ecuador is in breach of its obligation under the BIT

not to treat them in a discriminatory or arbitrary manner.

Article II(3)(b) of the BIT provides:

Neither Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or
discriminatory measures the management, operation,
maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion, or
disposal of investments. For purposes of dispute resolution
under Articles VI and VII, a measure may be arbitrary or
discriminatory notwithstanding the fact that a party has
had or has exercised the opportunity to review such
measure in the courts or administrative tribunals of a
Party.

The Claimants maintain, following the precedent of the Lauder v. Czech Republic
case, that the government has conducted itself arbitrarily if its act was not

- , 2
founded on reason or fact, or on the law.”

The Claimants refer to the ruling of the International Court of Justice in the ELST
case, which defined an arbitrary act as a willful disregard of due process of law,
an act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of juridical propriety.” They
cite arbitral precedents in which an arbitrary act on the part of government was
defined as inequitable treatment, regardless of whether there was denial of

justice.’ '

c. Full protection and security

The Claimants contend that Article II(3)(a) of the BIT refers expressly to the
obligation of the contracting parties to grant full protection and security to the

investors of the other contracting party.

* Ronald S. Lauder v. the Czech Republic, Final Award of September 3, 2001, available at
<http://www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/Lauder-Czech-FinalAward-3Sept2001 pdf>, para. 308.

*° Case concerning Elettronica Sicula (ELSI), Judgment, ICJ Reports 1989, available at <http://www.icj-
cij.org/docket/files/76/6707.pdf>, p. 76, para. 128.

5" Pope & Talbot, para. 177-181; Mondev, para. 125.

54

246. On this point, the Claimants cite the case of CME v. Czech Republic, in which the
Tribunal held that a government is only obliged to provide protection which is
reasonable in the circumstances.” They also cite, among other precedents, the
case of AAP v. Sir Lanka Due diligence is nothing more nor less than the
reasonable measures of prevention which a well-administered government could

: aoe . 3
be expected to exercise under similar circumstances.”

d. Expropriation
247. The Claimants allege violation of article III(1) of the BIT, which provides:

Investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized either
directly or indirectly through measures tantamount to
expropriation or nationalization (“expropriation”) except:
for a public purpose; in a nondiscriminatory manner; upon
payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation;
and in accordance with due process of law and the general
principles of treatment provided for in Article II(3).

248. The Claimants cite the definition of expropriation used by the Iran-United States
Claims Tribunal in the Sola Tiles case where it was indicated that a right cannot
be affected through interference by a State in the use of the property or the
enjoyment of its benefits amounting to a deprivation of the fundamental rights of

ownership.

249. Citing the decision in Pope & Talbot, the Claimants contend that, for a
government act to be deemed an expropriation, that act must have substantially
deprived the investor of his fundamental rights of ownership and disposal of

property.

* CME Czech Republic B.V. v. the Czech Republic, Partial Award of September 13, 2001, available at
<http://www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/CME-Czech-PartialA ward-13Sept2001.pdf>, para. 353.

*} Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. v. the Republic of Sri Lanka (ICSID Case No. ARB/87/3), Award of
June 27, 1990, available at <http://www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/AsianA gricultural-SriLanka-
FinalAward-27Jun1990.pdf >, para. 558.

* Sola Tiles v. Iran (1987), Iran US C.T.R., para. 29.

Pope & Talbot, Interim Award of June 26, 2000, paragraph 103, available at
http: inv lai decisi pe-Canada-InterimA ward-26June2000.pdf.

 

 

55

250. In maintaining that the applicable law is Ecuadorian law, Ecuador rejects the
application of the BIT or other international law to the issues raised by the
Claimants. However, Ecuador recognizes the principles of fair and equitable
treatment as an obligation contained within the minimum standards required by
international law. It refers to the contents of customary international law in this
matter, and its evolving nature, citing precedents in the cases of Genin®®
Mondev,”" Azinian®® and ELSI? to conclude that none of the Claimants’
arguments based on events subsequent to entry into force of the BIT exhibit the
nature or the characteristics required to be deemed in international law as
arbitrary or discriminatory, or to reflect bad faith or overt negligence, or in any

way to fall short of the standards required by international law.

25

. Ecuador does not deny the scope of Article III of the BIT on expropriation, but

rejects its application to the facts alleged by the Claimants.

252. On the basis of the positions taken by the Parties, the Tribunal notes that there is
no discrepancy between them as to the contents of the rules invoked, but rather to
their scope and effects with respect to the situations and circumstances of the
points in dispute. The Tribunal will refer, first, to each of the Parties’ contentions
on the questions over which it has determined it has Competence. The Tribunal
will then determine, for each contention and in the context of its circumstances

and particular features, whether or not the BIT has been breached.

°° Genin, para. 367.

57 Mondev, para. 125.

*8 Azinian, para. 99, cited in Mondev, para. 126.
* ELSI, para. 128; cited in Mondev, para. 127.

56

4, THE CLAIMANTS’ CONTENTION OF LACK OF GOOD FAITH
ON ECUADOR’S PART WITH RESPECT TO THE ACTS AND
OMISSIONS OF INECEL IN THE LIQUIDATION COMMISSION

253. The Claimants maintain that the Seacoast Contract and Ecuadorian legislation
alike provide for the creation of a Liquidation Commission so that the parties may
negotiate in good faith to resolve any disputes arising from execution of the
Contract. They argue that the treatment granted by Ecuador to Seacoast in the
Liquidation Commission was neither fair and equitable nor in good faith.
Consequently, Ecuador has violated the rules both of customary international law
and of Ecuadorian law and the Contract, by not acting in good faith during the

liquidation process.

254. Clause 17 of the Contract provides that:

LIQUIDATION OF THE CONTRACT. 17. 01. Once the
term of this contract has expired, or if it has not been
possible to continue with the relationship arising from this
instrument, the parties shall prepare an act of liquidation,
which shall contain a detailed account of the technical and
economic aspects of the contract, recording the volume of
power and energy supplied during the term, the values that
INECEL has paid to the contractor, and those that have yet
to be paid, those that must be deducted or refunded for any
reason, with the appropriate adjustments. For this purpose,
any compensation owing may be made. If there is no
agreement on liquidating the contract, the parties shall
proceed in accordance with Articles 87 and 88 of the
Public Procurement Law, wherever applicable. This act of
liquidation will be deemed as the act of delivery and receipt
and must be signed by the representative of the contractor
and in the name of INECEL, a commission appointed by
the General Manager shall be present, constituted by the
Operations Director of the SIN, the Director of Planning
and Rates, and a technical expert who has not been
involved in execution of this contract. The administrator of
this contract shall appear as an observer, providing any
appropriate information. If necessary, INECEL shall
appoint other delegates to appear on its behalf at the
signature of the act of liquidation stipulated in this clause.
The members of the commission who, on behalf of INECEL,
sign the act referred to in this clause shall have

S7

administrative, civil and criminal liability for the data and
information contained therein.

255. The Claimants interpret Clause 17 of the Contract as producing an obligation for
the Parties to the Contract to negotiate in good faith with the object of resolving

any dispute over enforcement and execution of the Contract.

256. The Claimants assert that Seacoast accepted establishment of the Liquidation
Commission on August 12, 1996, i.e. after the date on which it deemed the
Contract to have expired. They argue that INECEL did not activate the
Commission procedure as required in the Contract, until April 7, 1997,

constituting a delay of almost seven months.

257.The Claimants maintain that Ecuador violated its contractual obligation to
negotiate in good faith in the Liquidation Commission. They also argue that
INECEL did not give Seacoast a reasonable explanation of its position, thereby

demonstrating greater intransigence.

258. They also contend that, since December 1997, the Commission had remained
inactive with respect to the claims submitted by Seacoast, and that it ceased to

exist on or before March 31, 1999.

259. The Claimants assert that the Liquidation Commission met approximately 11
times. While the Claimants affirm that at various meetings they accepted several
of the demands of INECEL, they maintain that INECEL at no time recognized

any claim submitted by Seacoast.

260. The Claimants maintain that a delegate of INECEL on the Liquidation
Commission gave a promise that was never fulfilled. That promise was to request
an opinion from the Attorney General as to the validity of the Clarification
Contract, and Seacoast was to be permitted to examine and comment on the

contents of the consultation document before it was sent.

58

261.

26:

Nv

263.

264.

26:

an

266.

The Claimants declare expressly that the Liquidation Commission was supposed
to resolve differences over the term of the contract, over Seacoast’s claims for
unpaid invoices, and over the penalties imposed unilaterally on Seacoast by

INECEL.

. In their Reply, the Claimants cited the recognition by the Contract Administrator

of the debts resulting from the failure by INECEL to pay for fuel.

Ecuador argues that the Liquidation Commission is not a mechanism for
resolving disputes over the interpretation and enforcement of the Contract, but is
rather a mechanism for settling outstanding accounts. Ecuador affirms that
INECEL convened the first meeting of the Liquidation Commission. That
commission was fully constituted on August 16, 1996 with the appointment of the
Seacoast representatives subsequent to the date on which Seacoast understood the

contract to have terminated.

Ecuador contends that INECEL did not activate the mechanisms stipulated in the
Liquidation Commission because on August 28, 1996 it was notified of the
lawsuit filed by Seacoast, from which it concluded that the differences over the

Contract between the parties were now converted formally into a judicial dispute.

- Ecuador also maintains that, as the judicial complaint remained inactive, it again

moved for action in the Liquidation Commission in April 1997.

Ecuador complains of lack of transparency on the part of Seacoast for having
presented itself at meetings of the Liquidation Commission as the holder of rights
to accounts receivable deriving from the Contract, despite the fact that in
December of 1996 it had sold those accounts to third parties. This lack of

transparency, Ecuador argues, was an indicator of bad faith.

59

267.

268.

26:

©

270.

271.

272.

Ecuador maintains that Seacoast evidenced its intention to reject any settlement
not based on the recognition of its judicial claims. Ecuador considers that the
settlements proposed by the two parties constituted no more than a reiteration of
their respective positions. It contends that the negotiations in the Liquidation

Commission were called off at the request of Seacoast.

Ecuador denies the existence of any unfulfilled obligation allegedly assumed in
the negotiations in the Liquidation Commission relating to a consultation to be

addressed to the Attorney General on the scope of the Clarification Contract.

. Ecuador also denies the Claimants’ argument that in the Liquidation Commission

the Contract Administrator recognized Seacoast’s claim for unpaid fuel bills.
Ecuador maintains that the Claimants were referring to a draft minute that was

never agreed to by INECEL.

Ecuador asserts that those involved in the liquidation cannot assume the function
of resolving disputes, and that neither party was authorized to impose its view of

the liquidation on the other party.

The Tribunal notes that at the first meeting of the Liquidation Commission there
was agreement on the issues that should be considered for liquidating the
Contract. Among those issues were a series of questions over the differences
arising prior to entry into force of the BIT, and relating to interpretation and

enforcement of the Contract.

The Tribunal considers that there was no agreement on the divergent positions of
each party with respect to the effects of the Clarification Contract, the date for
initiation of the Seacoast Contract, and the date for its termination, nor with
respect to the characteristic of the Contract as generating an obligation of “Take

or Pay”.

60

273. The Tribunal considers that, with the entry into force of the BIT on May 22,
1997, the lack of agreement on outstanding questions became clear in the refusal
to sign the minutes of any of the Liquidation Commission’s meetings which took
place after that date. Consequently, in December 1997, each party presented its
own settlement proposal. According to Seacoast, the total amount owing from
INECEL on November 30, 1997 was US$19,753,874. According to the
settlement proposal prepared by INECEL, Seacoast owed it the amount of
US$1,104,486.

274. The Tribunal considers the Claimants’ argument that final settlement or
liquidation of the Contract produces its termination, as well as the Respondent’s
argument that liquidation is a post-contract stage, to be irrelevant for purposes of
determining if there was a breach of the BIT, in light of the alleged lack of fair
and equitable treatment and nondiscriminatory treatment on the part of Ecuador
during negotiations within the Liquidation Commission subsequent to the BIT’s

entry into force.

275. The Tribunal interprets Clause 17 of the Contract as establishing a mechanism for
liquidation of the Contract, once its term has expired. The Liquidation
Commission is not intended to implement a dispute settlement mechanism. The
intransigent positions of both parties during the Commission’s meetings reflected
the positions they took before the Ecuadorian courts. Clause 17 of the Contract
provides the possibility to activate the remedies that are available to both parties

in case of lack of agreement on liquidation.

276. The Tribunal finds no evidence from the actions of the Liquidation Commission
that would prove or even suggest bad faith on the part of INECEL in not

accepting Seacoast’s claims.

277. The Tribunal considers that the failure to agree on liquidation of the Contract was
due to the prior existence of an unresolved dispute between the parties. The
Claimants cannot base their claim of bad faith on the part of INECEL, and hence

of Ecuador, on the Liquidation Commission’s failure to recognize their claims.

61

278. The investor’s expectations of fair and equitable treatment and good faith, in
accordance with the BIT, must be paired with a legitimate objective. The
legitimacy of the expectations for proper treatment entertained by a foreign
investor protected by the BIT does not depend solely on the intent of the parties,

but on certainty about the contents of the enforceable obligations.”

279. Consequently, Seacoast’s legitimate expectations as to the outcome of the
negotiations in the Liquidation Commission cannot be disassociated from the
scope and legal effects of the applicable rules, i.e. Clause 17 of the Contract. This
clause does not give rise to an obligation to resolve existing disputes between the
parties relating to the interpretation and application of the Contract. The fact that
the parties did not achieve a definitive settlement at the Liquidation Commission
could not give rise to a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standards by
Ecuador based on Seacoast’s expectation, not based on a valid and binding

obligation.

280. Likewise, Ecuador was unable to substantiate or prove bad faith on the part of
Seacoast on the grounds that it concealed information on its legal status as
representative rather than owner of the contractual rights submitted to the

Liquidation Commission.

5. REVOCATION OF SEACOAST’S OPERATING PERMIT AND
ITS EFFECTS

281. The Claimants maintain that the revocation of Seacoast’s operating permit was
contrary to the fair and equitable treatment required by the BIT. They cite that

revocation as grounds for claiming expropriation of their investment.

# See MTD Equity Snd. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile—Annulment Proceeding (ICSID
Case No. ARB/O1/7), Decision on Annulment of the ad hoc Committee of March 21, 2007, available at
<http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/MTD-Chile_Ad_Hoc_Committee_Decision.pdf>, para. 67: “The
obligations of the host State towards foreign investors derive from the terms of the applicable investment
treaty and not from any set of expectations investors may have or claim to have. A tribunal which sought
to generate from such expectations a set of rights different from those contained in or enforceable under
the BIT might well exceed its powers, and if the difference were material might do so manifestly.”

 

 

62

282.

283.

284.

285.

281

a

287.

288.

As a result of the revocation of that permit, the Claimants maintain that Ecuador
violated its obligation to act in good faith, as part of fair and equitable treatment,
with respect to the negotiations to reach an arbitration agreement to settle the

outstanding differences.

Also as a result of that revocation, the Claimants maintain that Ecuador sought
and obtained cancellation of judicial proceedings initiated by Seacoast before the
Ecuadorian courts, contrary to its obligations to foreign investors protected by the

BIT.

The Tribunal will now consider each of these arguments, beginning with that

relating to revocation of the permit.

a. Revocation of the permit

According to the Claimants, Seacoast had received a note from the
Superintendent of Companies on February 8, 1999, notifying it that its permit was
being cancelled because it was no longer conducting activities related to the

business purpose for which it had been incorporated.

. While the Claimants admit that Seacoast was aware of some administrative

problems with the operating permit, Seacoast did not realize that those problems
had anything to do with its ability to assert its rights. Thus, according to the
Claimants, Seacoast filed a petition on February 8, 1999 requesting that its
operating permit be extended until the end of the process under way for reaching

an arbitration agreement.
The Claimants maintain that, according to Ecuadorian law, cancellation of the
operating permit should have had no effect on the settlement of Seacoast’s affairs,

including the possibility of pursuing outstanding accounts receivable.

The Claimants clarified in their Reply that they are not challenging the power of

the Superintendent of Companies to cancel the Seacoast permit, as according to

63

289.

290.

29

292.

Ecuadorian legislation they continued to have the legal capacity to liquidate their
affairs. They maintain that the cancellation of the permit took on a new
dimension with the effects it had on the negotiations for an arbitration agreement

and on the judicial proceedings.

The Claimants contend that the operating permit is a license to invest. They
maintain that this license is in itself an investment and that its revocation

therefore constitutes an expropriation.

The Claimants maintain that Seacoast’s operating permit falls within the
definition of investment of Article I of the BIT. Consequently, Ecuador’s actions
in cancelling that permit imply an expropriation according to the jurisprudence of
international tribunals and courts. Citing the decision in the Sola Tiles case, as
was argued by the tribunal that decided Pope & Talbot, the Claimants declare that
Ecuador interfered with the rights flowing from Seacoast’s operating permit,
thereby interfering with Seacoast’s rights of ownership when it revoked
Seacoast’s license, and then unlawfully relied on the revocation of the license to

refuse to arbitrate and to reject Seacoast’s judicial claim.

ok

. Ecuador contends that the operating permit cannot be considered an investment,

since it has no economic or financial content in itself. Ecuador maintains that its
revocation was legal and did not affect Seacoast’s rights or those of the
Claimants. Ecuador argues that Seacoast continued to be the owner of all its
rights, excluding the accounts receivable that had been sold to the Claimants.
What Seacoast could not do was to act through its legal representative in
Ecuador, because its Ecuadorian branch was in the process of liquidation.
Consequently, for Ecuador, this was a problem of representation and not one of

ownership of rights.

Ecuador maintains that the operating permit is a simple certificate of
domiciliation and is therefore inseparable from the establishment of the foreign

company’s branch in Ecuador. The operating permit bears no relation to the

64

293.

294.

29:

n

296.

297.

licenses, permits, or concessions to which the Claimants refer in their Reply.
According to the Respondent, Ecuadorian law requires, for contracting with
public-sector institutions, that a foreign company must be previously domiciled in
Ecuador. Consequently, there is no requirement to obtain any permit or
authorization. A foreign company may also conduct business in Ecuador through

an agent, without the need to be domiciled.

Even if such rights could qualify as an investment, Ecuador argues, revocation of
the operating permit produced no permanent impairment of the investor’s rights,

a requirement for claiming expropriation.

Ecuador maintains that cancellation of Seacoast’s operating permit was based, in
accordance with the Companies Act, on the fact that the company had advised the
Superintendent of Companies that it had no assets after July 12, 1996, and that

consequently it had no operations of any kind in Ecuador.

. Ecuador declares that the granting of an operating permit implies recognition by

the Superintendent of Companies that a foreign company has a branch within
Ecuadorian territory and that it is capable of conducting regular business in
Ecuador; it is not a question of a State concession or a permit to exploit or make

use of productive assets or State resources.

Ecuador argues that if Seacoast felt that the Superintendent’s decision was
unlawful or arbitrary, it could have appealed that decision to the Administrative
Tribunal (Tribunales en lo Contencioso Administrativo), as provided by law, but

it did not do so.

The Tribunal concludes, from the grounds cited in the Resolution of the
Superintendent of Companies (Resolution 99.1.2.1.00374) revoking the Seacoast
permit, that there is no element to justify qualifying that measure as a breach of

fair and equitable treatment per se or as being an expropriation under the BIT.

65

298.

299.

300.

301.

302.

The Tribunal notes that the introductory clauses of the Resolution of the
Superintendent of Companies stated that from the reports of the Directorate of
Inspection and Audit it appeared that Seacoast Inc. was not carrying out activities
related to the purposes of the company for which it had obtained an Ecuadorian
domicile, as a result of which the branch was implicated in the reasons for the
cancellation of the operating permit granted under Law 31 of the Company Law

Reform Law.

The Tribunal holds that the operating permit is fundamentally related to the
requirement to install, put into operation, and operate the electricity generating
plants. At the time that the permit was revoked Seacoast had transferred its rights

over the plants and was therefore not the owner, nor did it manage said plants.

The Tribunal holds that, in accordance with Article III of the BIT, and under
general international law, among the requirements necessary for an expropriation
there must definitely be a substantial interference on the part of the State that
affects the use and enjoyment of the protected investment. Consequently, as
there was no ownership of the investment relating to the installation and
operation of the plants, the possibility of alleging a revocation of the operating

permit as an expropriation is limited.

The facts cited in the introductory portion of the Resolution of the Superintendent
of companies correspond with the information supplied by Seacoast to the
Ecuadorian authorities. Seacoast was promptly informed of the Resolution and,
while it requested an extension of its effects because Seacoast was negotiating an

arbitration agreement, at no time was the Resolution contested by Seacoast.

In addition, the Tribunal considers that Seacoast acquiesced in cancellation of the
permit by not seeking an administrative review of the decision. The fact that
Seacoast argues that it was not aware of the effects of the cancellation on the
capacity of its legal representative to take action through the courts did not

prevent it from appealing the order of the Fifth Court with respect to the effects of

66

303.

304.

305.

306.

307.

cancellation of the permit on the capacity to litigate in defense of its alleged

rights or those of the persons it represented.

Among the legitimate expectations that Seacoast might invoke in arguing a
violation of the fair and equitable treatment and good faith, the Tribunal cannot
consider relevant the mere claim of ignorance of the legal effects of the

revocation or of the existence of a remedy for challenging it.

The Tribunal notes that the Claimants recognize the power of the Superintendent
of Companies to revoke the permit. What the Claimants are challenging, in fact,
is the effect that that revocation had on the negotiations for an arbitration
agreement and on the annulment of the lawsuit initiated before the Ecuadorian
courts. In this context, the Tribunal deems unfounded the claim that the

revocation of the permit constitutes an expropriation.

Consequently, the Tribunal finds that the action of the Ecuadorian authorities in
revoking Seacoast’s permit to operate in Ecuador did not in itself constitute an act
in conflict with domestic law or with the BIT. However, the legality of that
revocation order does not authorize the Tribunal to prejudge the legality or
illegality of its effects, in light of the obligations assumed by Ecuador through the
BIT with respect to the consequences of that order for the negotiations

concerning an arbitration agreement and on the annulment of the lawsuit.

The Tribunal will now examine these allegations of the Claimants with respect to

the effects and scope of the revocation of Seacoast’s operating permit.

b. The Claimants’ allegation of Ecuador’s bad faith in frustrating

an arbitration process for resolving the questions at issue

With the failure of the Liquidation Commission, the Claimants maintain that
Ecuador reneged on its promise to submit the dispute to arbitration, and then
obstructed judicial proceedings before the courts of Ecuador, thereby denying the

possibility of resolving the dispute in any forum.

67

308. According to the Claimants, Seacoast had suggested to the Attorney General of
Ecuador that there could be recourse to private arbitration under the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules. On this point, the Claimants contend that the Attorney General
gave an official opinion, in a note dated January 29, 1999, that arbitration was the

preferred way of proceeding to resolve the dispute.

309. According to the Claimants, negotiations began in April 1999 and draft
arbitration agreements were exchanged without reaching agreement on the

content of an arbitration agreement.

310. The Claimants refer to a ninth draft of the arbitration agreement that, having been
approved by the Attorney General in June 1999, was awaiting signature by the
President of the Republic. They claim that in a meeting held in Washington on
August 2, 1999, representatives of the Attorney General advised Seacoast that it
was impossible to sign that agreement, because Seacoast’s permit to operate in

Ecuador had been revoked and it therefore no longer had legal standing.

311. The Claimants maintain that on August 13, 1999 the Deputy Attorney General
(Procurador General Subrogante) sent a note to Seacoast confirming that
signature of the arbitration agreement was not possible, because its operating

permit had been cancelled.

312. Moreover, the Claimants contend that although Seacoast had transferred the right
to its accounts receivable, it continued to be responsible for collecting those
accounts and was therefore the appropriate party to enter into the arbitration

agreement.

313.In their Reply, the Claimants maintain that, contrary to the arguments of the
Respondent, they did not consider that they had an assured right to resort to
international arbitration. What they argued was the bad faith on the part of the

Attorney General in reversing his position to conclude an arbitration agreement.

68

314.

315.

316.

317.

The Claimants contend that Seacoast made concerted efforts to obtain public
support for reaching an arbitration agreement, but those efforts were in vain, in
the face of Ecuador’s opposition. Instead, the Claimants maintain, Ecuador
responded by moving to annul Seacoast’s lawsuit and initiating various

proceedings against Seacoast and its representatives.

The Claimants maintain that, in light of this situation, Seacoast first considered
resorting to ICSID arbitration, filing a Request for Arbitration against Ecuador on
March 25, 1998. Seacoast then withdrew its claim on a “without prejudice” basis

on April 17, 1998, and finally submitted a new claim.

For its part, Ecuador maintains that the State Attorney General considered that
domiciliation of a foreign company was a prerequisite for signing an arbitration
agreement. Ecuador argues that Seacoast had never revealed that it was a
collection agent acting on behalf of third parties. If Seacoast, MCI and New
Turbine had proceeded transparently, the revocation of Seacoast’s operating
permit, which was considered in this case a formal requirement for signing the
agreement, could not have posed an obstacle to MCI and New Turbine, because it
affected Seacoast exclusively, and only in its capacity to sign an arbitration
agreement with the State at that time. Ecuador also contended that Seacoast was
no longer the owner of rights to the accounts receivable to which the drafts of the
arbitration agreement referred, because it had sold those rights, among others, to

the Claimants in December 1996.

Ecuador contends that international law does not recognize a right to arbitration

in the absence of the necessary consent of the parties involved in the dispute.

69

318. The Tribunal finds that the only evidence provided by the Claimants with respect
to an alleged promise by Ecuadorian officials to reach an arbitration agreement is
the statement of the Seacoast representative, Charles Moseley, and in the e-mails
he sent to other members of Seacoast on the feasibility, but not the certainty, of

signing an agreement.

319. The Tribunal considers that the note from the Attorney General of January 29,
1999 was addressed to INECEL in response to a request for an opinion on the
feasibility of arbitration. The contents of that note do not reveal any obligation to
sign an arbitration agreement, but rather the possibility of such an agreement

under Ecuadorian Law.

320. The Tribunal finds that, in the note of August 13, 1999, the Attorney General
included a copy of the Resolution of the Superintendent of Companies, No.
99.1.2.1.00374, dated February 8, 1999, reporting that the operating permit
granted to Seacoast had been cancelled. The note stated that “under the
circumstances, it is not appropriate to proceed with arbitration, because of the
effects of cancellation of the operating permit for the company’s branch, and had
that cancellation been known sufficiently in advance its petitions would not have

been processed.”"!

32

-In the Tribunal’s view, the alleged obligation of Ecuador to negotiate an
arbitration agreement would be an obligation of means and not of result. If there
was an intention, it was to negotiate the possibility of an arbitration agreement,
not to reach an arbitration agreement. From the evidence produced before the
Tribunal, there is no proof of bad faith on the part of the Attorney General in

refusing to sign an arbitration agreement.

322. Seacoast’s expectations with respect to signature of an arbitration agreement
cannot be based on any acquired right to reach that agreement as a consequence

of an obligation assumed by Ecuador. The Claimants did not prove the existence

+ Letter No. 06767 of August 13, 1999 from Dr. Leonello Bertini Arbeléez. Deputy State Attorney
General (Procurador del Estado Subrogante) to Charles Moseley, Seacoast Inc., para. 5.

70

of the obligation on the part of the Ecuadorian authorities to reach an arbitration

agreement.

323. Under general international law, any obligation to submit for arbitration a dispute
involving a State requires the existence of an agreement. That agreement, which

may be verbal, must be proven by the party alleging it?

324. In the Tribunal’s view, the failure of the negotiations for an arbitration
agreement did not violate the BIT standard of fair and equitable treatment, and
hence did not engage Ecuador’s responsibility for any expectations that Seacoast

might have entertained for reaching such agreement.

325. Seacoast could not ignore that the arbitration agreement implied for Ecuador the
acceptance of an exception to the jurisdiction in favor of its courts for resolving
the dispute existing at that time. Nor can the Claimants argue that they were
unaware that the State was free to give or withhold its consent to bind itself
through an arbitration agreement. All that could be proven in the present
arbitration procedure was that Seacoast was firmly resolved to achieve this
agreement, and that the Attorney General recognized the feasibility of such an
agreement under Ecuadorian law. It has also been proven that there was no
enforceable obligation on Ecuador’s part to sign an arbitration agreement, but
only to negotiate such an agreement. The Claimants recognize this in limiting
their complaints to bad faith on the part of the Attorney General in the handling
of the negotiations, and not the failure to fulfill an obligation of reaching an
arbitration agreement. The mere possibility or intent of achieving an arbitration
agreement did not in itself create an enforceable obligation for Ecuador, nor could
Seacoast entertain a legitimate expectation on that basis, given the absence of an

unfulfilled obligation to proceed steadily to signature of an arbitration agreement.

® Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/13), Award of January 31, 2006, available at
<http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/SalinivJordanAward_IncludingAnnex.pdf>, para. 70, “It is a well
established principle of law that it is for a claimant to prove the facts on which it relies in support of his.
claim — Actori incumbat probation.”

  

71

326.

32)

x

328.

329.

330.

c. The annulment of the lawsuit

The Claimants maintain that revocation of Seacoast’s permit was the pretext used
by Ecuador to deny Seacoast any opportunity to resolve its dispute. Not only did
Ecuador use this argument to set aside its promise to sign an arbitration
agreement, but it also sought and obtained annulment of the lawsuit filed by
Seacoast before the Ecuadorian courts. The Claimants assert that the lawsuit,
which had been filed several years earlier, was the only remaining option that

Seacoast had for resolving its contract dispute.

. Seacoast filed the lawsuit against INECEL on July 31, 1996, claiming

approximately US$25 million in damages for breach of contract. The Claimants
argue that the lawsuit was presented at the suggestion of the future Minister of
Economy of Ecuador, for whom there could be no solution of the dispute unless

Seacoast were to file a lawsuit before he took office.

According to the Claimants, after INECEL responded to the lawsuit on
September 25, 1996, the parties took no judicial action for more than two years.
The Claimants maintain that Seacoast’s primary interest was to exhaust remedies
through the Liquidation Commission and then negotiate an arbitration agreement

under the UNCITRAL Rules.

According to the Claimants, on August 7, 1999 the Attorney General made a
submission to the Fifth Court in which he contended that cancellation of
Seacoast’s permit meant loss of its legal standing, and he claimed that the lawsuit
had not been properly filed, because it lacked a signed authorization by the

Seacoast representative.

The Claimants maintain that on September 1, 1999, Mr. Moseley notified the
court of his position that cancellation of the permit did not imply the loss of
Seacoast’s legal standing. They contend however that, according to legal advice
received by Seacoast, the alternative ground presented by the Attorney General
for annulling the lawsuit, i.e. the absence of an authorizing signature, was

technically valid.

72

331. Consequently, on September 23, 1999 Seacoast asked the judge to determine
whether the lawsuit had been validly lodged and whether Mr. Moseley continued
to be Seacoast’s legal representative. On October 15 Seacoast told the judge that
it would accept a ruling of annulment based solely on inappropriate submission of
the lawsuit by Seacoast’s lawyers, but he did not admit that he had lost his
powers of legal representation. Thus, Mr. Moseley, in a letter addressed to the
judge, declared that, confirming the request in his previous letter, “I expressly
agree to such a ruling, and accept in advance your judgment, and would ask you

to declare the lawsuit annulled as of the date it was submitted.”

332. On October 21, 1999, the judge declared the lawsuit annulled as of the day of its
presentation. In the Claimants’ contention, that decision did not distinguish
between annulment based on the technical arguments agreed to by Seacoast and
annulment based on the Attorney General’s objections over the continued legal

standing of Seacoast’s branch.

333. The Claimants argue that on October 10, 2002, the representative of the Attorney
General appealed the judge’s decision and that on December 12, 2002, the
Superior Court of Justice of Quito declined jurisdiction because the Attorney
General was not the party to have been detrimentally affected by the decision and

had not reasoned its request for appeal.

334.In their Reply, the Claimants contend, contrary to Ecuador’s position, that
Seacoast had not agreed to withdraw the lawsuit on the basis of its lack of legal
standing. Nevertheless, they recognized that Seacoast had agreed to withdraw the
lawsuit on the basis of the absence of an authorized signature by its legal
representative. The Claimants, however, consider that the judge’s decision
annulling the lawsuit was based on recognition of the two objections presented

and argued by the Attorney General.

® Note to Juez Quinto de lo Civil de Pichincha (Judge of the Fifth Civil Court of Pichincha) signed by
Mr. Charles Moseley Hall and Yolanda Vinuesa, Esq. Mat. 1726-Quito, para. 3.

73

335.

336.

337.

338.

339.

In their Reply, the Claimants recognize that they are not challenging the judge’s
decision to annul the lawsuit as a denial of justice, but rather as indicating bad
faith on the part of the Attorney General in submitting formal objections to

Seacoast’s claim.

For its part, Ecuador maintained that on the date the BIT entered into force the
Claimants had agreed that their claim against INECEL should be pursued through
the local courts of Ecuador, which should decide on the Claimants’ litigious and

contingent rights, if any.

In Ecuador’s view, the Ecuadorian judges did not issue any ruling on the
pertinence of the Attorney General’s argument as to the impact of the operating
permit’s revocation on continuation of the legal proceedings. Ecuador maintains

that the judge’s decision was based exclusively on the agreement of the parties.

In Ecuador’s view, then, the cancellation of the legal proceedings came not as a
consequence of revocation of the permit itself, but rather as a result of agreement
among the parties, based on Seacoast’s express acquiescence in the Respondent’s
petition. Cancellation of the legal proceedings, Ecuador argues, does not imply a

denial of justice through an arbitrary court ruling.

Ecuador argues that in the worst of cases, revocation of the operating permit
might have limited temporarily the agent’s capacity for action, but not the right of
the Claimants. MCI and New Turbine could have taken action directly, for which
they would not have required either domicile or permits. In the same manner as
they are pursuing this claim, they could by themselves have filed suit before the
competent Ecuadorian courts. If they could do so, that means that their legitimate
expectations, in keeping with the law, were in no way frustrated or limited by

liquidation of Seacoast’s branch in Ecuador.

74

340. From the arguments and documentation supplied by the parties, the Tribunal
notes that on March 23, 1999, as a result of liquidation of INECEL, the Attorney
General’s Office took over the defense in the judicial proceedings initiated by

Seacoast.

341.The Tribunal also notes that, in the application of decisions regarding the
administration of justice, the Administrative Tribunal that heard the case

transferred it on April 12, 1999 to the Judge of the Fifth Civil Court of Pichincha.

342. The Tribunal finds that the lawsuit filed by Seacoast challenged an official notice
from the General Manager of INECEL in which he declared that the contract
signed between Seacoast and INECEL on November 7, 1995 terminated on May
26, 1996. Seacoast also demanded payment for available energy, under the “Take
or Pay” provisions of the Contract; payment for the fuel consumed, which
INECEL had not settled; return of amounts improperly withheld as penalties
imposed by INECEL; payment of interest; and payment of all damages

sustained.“

343. The Tribunal notes that in its response to the lawsuit of September 25, 1996,
INECEL addressed the issues put forward and invoked the absence of legal
representation of Seacoast, and the absence of a signature by the legal

representative of Seacoast.

344. The Tribunal considers that the decision of the judge of the Fifth Civil Court of
Pichincha was issued in the first considerandos of his Order, on Mr. Charles
Moseley’s lack of legal standing in the proceedings. In the later considerandos of
that Order, the judge ruled: ‘6) The last written submission [...] by Mr. Charles
Moseley Hall, legal representative of Seacoast Inc. and of Seacoast Inc., Ecuador
branch, in which he expressly acquiesces in the annulment requested by the
Attorney General, is relevant; and 7) this legal situation noted in those

considerandos means omission of one of the substantial formalities that must

 

Claim submitted by Seacoast before the First District Tribunal of Quito for Administrative Disputes
(First Chamber), July 31, 1996.

75

definitively influence the decision of the case, for which reason, on the basis of
Article 355(3) of the Code of Civil Procedure, all proceedings are declared null

and void, as of the date of submission of the suit, which may not be reinstated.”*>

345. Consequently, the Tribunal assumes that the Judge of the Fifth Civil Court of
Pichincha ruled in favor of the objections brought by the Attorney General in his

letter demanding annulment of the lawsuit presented by Seacoast.

346. The Tribunal finds a degree of confusion in the arguments advanced by the judge
as to the effects of the revocation on the capacity of Seacoast’s representative to
take action before the courts. From the decision of the Judge of the Fifth Civil
Court of Pichincha it appears that Mr. Moseley was not Seacoast’s legal
representative, and yet in sections 6 and 7 of that decision he accepted as valid
Mr. Moseley’s acquiescence with respect to the lack of signature on the claim for
purposes of cancelling the proceedings. The Tribunal takes note of the fact that, if
Mr. Mosley was no longer the legal representative of Seacoast, his acquiescence

could not have produced a valid withdrawal of Seacoast’s lawsuit.

347. The Tribunal takes note of the appeal of the Order of the Judge of the Fifth Civil
Court of Pichincha filed by the Attorney General on October 10, 2002.

348. The Tribunal understands that, on this appeal, the Superior Court of Justice of
Quito ruled that the right of appeal lies with the person who has suffered
irreparable harm as a result of the ruling. The court found that the ruling affected
Seacoast Inc. and that it had not filed any appeal against the annulment ruling.
Consequently, the court ruled that it lacked jurisdiction to hear the appeal filed by

the Attorney General.*°

349. The Tribunal holds that the alleged legitimate expectations of an investor with
respect to the behavior required of a host State cannot include merely subjective

assessments as to the impossibility of achieving a viable solution through the

“5 Numbers 6 and 7 of the decision of October 21, 1999, Fifth Civil Court of Pichincha.
*© Decision of the Superior Court of Quito in civil case No. 194-2000 filed December 12, 2000 by
Seacoast against INECEL.

 

76

350.

351.

352.

State’s domestic judicial remedies, when those remedies have not been properly
pursued. Seacoast accepted cancellation of the lawsuit containing its claims over
INECEL’s contractual breaches and it did not challenge any portion of the
justifications for the cancellation Order issued by the Ecuadorian judge with
jurisdiction to settle the disputes in question. It is clear that Seacoast agreed to the
cancellation of its lawsuit. Nor did Seacoast show any interest in investigating the
possibilities of submitting a new claim on behalf of the owners of the rights that

Seacoast had transferred, i.e. on behalf of the Claimants in the present case.

It is evident to the Tribunal that Seacoast, through its acts and omissions, desisted
from the legal action it had initiated before the Ecuadorian courts. Nevertheless,

that move did not prejudge the viability of future actions or recourses.

The Tribunal considers that the fact that the injured party did not question the
annulment ruling, even in part, and that it did not attempt to file a new claim does
not prevent the Claimants from pursuing their asserted rights through the

Ecuadorian courts.

The Tribunal notes that the statements of the parties contained in the arbitration
proceedings express, in specific circumstances, the recognition of a pre-existing
obligation or create a new enforceable obligation of the other party. This was the
case in Joy Mining v. Egypt, where the Tribunal decided that the respondent was
obligated by the statement of its legal counsel, expressed during the oral hearing,
that it would comply fully with the UNCITRAL proceeding agreed in the
contract, and that the award would be the basis on which a decision would be
taken to release, or not, the bank guarantee that was the object of the dispute.*”
Similarly, the Ad Hoc Committee in the case of CMS v. Argentina decided to stay
enforcement of the award on the basis of a statement by the respondent’s agent

committing the respondent to honor the annulment decision.

47 Joy Mining Machinery Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11), Award on
Jurisdiction of August 6, 2004, available at <_ http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/joy-mining-
award.pdf >, para. 95.

48 CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8)-Annulment
Proceeding,, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the
Award (September 1, 2006), para. 49.

77

353. In this context, the Tribunal interprets the Respondent’s statements on the judicial
remedies available in Ecuador” as formal recognition that the Claimants have a
right to appeal to the Ecuadorian courts. Consequently, the Claimants may file
suit before the Ecuadorian courts with respect to all the disputes over which the

Tribunal, in its Decision on Competence, decided that it did not have

Competence.
6. ECUADOR’S HARASSMENT OF SEACOAST
REPRESENTATIVES

354. The Claimants maintain that cancellation of the operating permit was part of a
broader campaign by Ecuador to frustrate Seacoast’s attempts to enforce its
rights. They argue that, in the course of just a few weeks after petitioning for
nullification of the lawsuit, Ecuador threatened Seacoast with a tax audit, began
to investigate its legal representative, and opened judicial proceedings through a

lawsuit submitted by the State-owned oil company.

355. On this point, the Claimants contend that on July 22, 1999, a few days after
publication of their claims in the newspapers of Quito, the Ministry of Labor
informed Seacoast that the dividends that should be paid to the employees must
be distributed by March 31 each year, according to the Labor Code, and that

failure to do so would result in penalties.

356. They also claim that a representative of the Ministry of Labor showed up
unannounced at Seacoast’s offices to inspect the documentation of two travel
agencies-- represented by Mr. Moseley and his wife-- with which Seacoast shared
offices, and that on August 8, 1999 a representative of the Social Security Office
went to Mr. Moseley’s home to investigate the labor relationship of his
housemaid. They also argue that on August 16, 1999 the State oil company
launched collection proceedings to recover penalties, although the dispute over
the fuel charges was dormant, and that it gave notice a few days later it could

seize its property.
* Respondent’s Reply, para. 200.

78

357. The Claimants consider the threat of a tax audit of Seacoast to be part of this

35

35

360.

36

36!

8.

9.

Nv

harassment.

The Claimants maintain that these events were not mere coincidence, but part of a
policy of discrimination to which Seacoast had been subjected since first making

its investment in Ecuador.

The Claimants summarize their argument by stating that, in the circumstances,
after annulment of the lawsuit on October 21, 1999, Seacoast decided that further
effort to pursue its claims in Ecuador would be fruitless. They maintain that, since
the establishment of the Liquidation Commission in August 1996, Seacoast had
been trying to resolve its contractual disputes with Ecuador in the Liquidation
Commission, through the negotiation of an arbitration agreement and in the

domestic courts, but that these efforts had proved unsuccessful.

The Claimants conclude that Seacoast reasonably believed that the government,
by its responses in late July and early August 1999, was sending it a message that

it was unwelcome in Ecuador and that it could not expect justice in its courts.

. For its part, Ecuador argued that the exercise of State powers established by law

for the enforcement of labor and fiscal obligations does not constitute persecution
or harassment, since those measures can themselves be subjected to judicial

review.

. With respect to the tax audit requested by the Superintendent of Companies in its

resolution declaring Seacoast’s permit expired, Ecuador maintains that this
constitutes compliance with a valid legal requirement. In turn, it denies the
allegations that the activation of judicial remedies could be considered

harassment.

79

363. As to the allegations of harassment by the Ecuadorian authorities concerning
labor issues, a simple reading of the note of July 22, 1999 persuades the Tribunal
that this was a routine notice from the Ministry of Labor, issued pursuant to
Articles 105, 626 and 627 of the Labor Code. Article 105 sets the time limit for
the payout of profits and imposes fines for nonobservance of that time limit,

consistent with Article 626 of the Labor Code.

364. As to the Claimants’ allusions to the visit of an inspector to the offices that
Seacoast shared with two tourism agencies, and the visit of another inspector to
Mr. Moseley’s home, the Tribunal does not consider these visits to constitute
significant evidence of systematic discrimination, because the Claimants’
Memorial asserted that, a few days after those events, the Social Security Office

issued a certificate to the effect that Seacoast had no outstanding obligations.

365. With respect to the threat of audits, the Tribunal finds that, in his note of August
13, 1999, the Attorney General referred to Seacoast’s claims concerning its debts
with the Internal Revenue Service (SRI). In that note, the Attorney General
declared that “the Resolution of the Superintendent of Companies orders that the
Director General of the SRI be notified for purposes of a tax audit of the branch
of Seacoast Inc. in Ecuador, which SRI will perform immediately for the fiscal
years 1996, 1997 and 1998, including the sale of Seacoast’s equity interests in

Ecuapower, and the transfer of the associated assets.”>”

366. The Tribunal notes that the audits mentioned in the Resolution of the
Superintendent of Companies of February 1999 represent a routine procedure
related to revocation of the permit. From the information contained in that
Resolution, no unfair or inequitable, arbitrary or discriminatory treatment can be

inferred that would violate the standards of general international law required by

* Letter No. 06767 of August 13, 1999 from Dr. Leonello Bertini Arbeléez, Deputy State Attorney
General (Procurador del Estado Subrogante) to Charles Moseley, Seacoast Inc.

80

Article II(3)(a) of the BIT. Moreover, the documentation supplied by the parties
offers no proof that those audits were conducted or, if they were, that they

violated those standards of international law.

36)

x

. Finally, the Tribunal finds that the claim by the State oil company for unpaid
debts does not constitute a discriminatory or arbitrary act. From a simple reading
of the note claiming those payments, the Tribunal considers that this demand falls
within the normal and routine activity of public administration. Moreover, the
mention of a possible embargo for default on debts due and payable flows from
existing legislation. The documentation supplied by the parties provides no
evidence that the debt was executed or that embargoes were constituted that
might have affected the Claimants’ rights to fair and equitable treatment under

the BIT.

368. As to the Claimants’ assertions that Seacoast believed it could not obtain justice
through the Ecuadorian courts, the Tribunal considers that such subjective
assessments point to a certain degree of negligence in Seacoast’s decisions

concerning the eventual resolution of its disputes.

369. The Tribunal notes that fair and equitable treatment conventionally obliges States
parties to the BIT to respect the standards of treatment required by international
law. The international law mentioned in Article II of the BIT refers to customary
international law, i.e., the repeated, general, and constant practice of States,
which they observe because they are aware that it is obligatory. Fair and equitable
treatment, then, is an expression of a legal rule. Inequitable or unfair treatment,
like arbitrary treatment, can be reasonably recognized by the Tribunal as an act

contrary to law.*!

370. In this sense, fair and equitable treatment cannot be confused with the application
of the rule of ex aequo et bono, which presupposes the broad exercise of
discretion by arbitrators in seeking a solution to a dispute. In the Mondev case,

the tribunal held that:

5! Tecmed, para. 102.

81

. Article 1105(1) did not give a NAFTA tribunal an
unfettered discretion to decide for itself, on a subjective
basis, what was ‘fair’ or ‘equitable’ in the circumstances of
each particular case.... The Tribunal is bound by the
minimum standard as established in State practice and in
the jurisprudence of arbitral tribunals. It may not simply
adopt its own idiosyncratic standard of what is ‘fair’ or
eaganle without reference to established sources of
law.”

371. The Tribunal concludes that the acts alleged by the Claimants as continuing
harassment by Ecuador against Seacoast may betray an unfriendly attitude but,
when evaluated individually or as a whole, they do not constitute unfair or
inequitable, discriminatory or arbitrary treatment in violation of the parameters

established by international law as reflected in the BIT.

Iv. COSTS

372. On the basis of reasonableness and prudence, the Tribunal, having no valid
grounds to depart from precedent and general trends on the assessment of costs
and expenses incurred in arbitration proceedings, considers that each party should
pay its own costs and expenses for legal representation and that the parties should
each pay half of the costs and expenses incurred by the Centre with regard to the

present arbitration proceedings, both on Jurisdiction and on the Merits.

Vv. DECISION
373. For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal decides:

a. To allow the Respondent’s main objections to the Tribunal’s Competence in

respect of the non-retroactivity of the BIT;

* Mondev, para. 119

82

b. To reject the other objections to the Tribunal’s Competence and consequently
exercise its Competence over the Respondent’s alleged violations of the BIT by
acts or omissions after the entry into force of the BIT;

c. To reject the Claimants’ claims on which the Tribunal previously decided that
it had Competence, for it considers that the Claimants have failed to prove
violation of the standards of fair and equitable treatment, including the
obligation to act in good faith, or the standards of non-discriminatory or non-
arbitrary treatment that the BIT requires of Ecuador as a State party.

d. To reject the Claimants’ claim relating to the expropriation of their rights to
the investment as a result of revocation of Seacoast’s permit to operate in
Ecuador.

e. To formally take note of the statements of the Respondent’s attorneys as to the
Claimants’ right to take judicial action before the Ecuadorian courts to settle the
outstanding disputes over what they allege to be contractual breaches.

f. Each party shall bear in equal portions the costs and expenses incurred in the
arbitration proceedings on Jurisdiction and on the Merits.

g. Each party shall bear its own costs and expenses incurred for legal

representation in the arbitration proceedings on Jurisdiction and on the Merits.

83

Made in Washington D.C., in English and Spanish, both versions equally authentic.

[Signed] [Signed]
Judge Benjamin J. Greenberg, Q.C. Professor Jaime Irarrazabal C.
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: July 16, 2007 Date: July 18, 2007
[Signed]

Professor Ratil E. Vinuesa
President

Date: July 26, 2007

84

