INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

 

M.C.I. POWER GROUP L.C. AND NEW TURBINE INC.
Applicants

v.

REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/03/6
Annulment Proceeding

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

Members of the ad hoc Committee:
Judge Dominique Hascher, President
Judge Hans Danelius
Judge Peter Tomka

Secretary of the Committee: Ms. Natali Sequeira

Representing M.C.I. Power Group L.C. and Representing the Republic of Ecuador:
New Turbine Inc.:

Mr. Barry Appleton Mr. Diego Garcia Carrion

Mr. Martin Endicott Procurador General del Estado

Appleton & Associates International Lawyers

Mr. Alvaro Galindo
Mr. Edward M. Mullins Director de Patrocinio Internacional de la
Mr. José Astigarraga Procuraduria General del Estado
Astigarraga Davis Mullins & Grossman, P.A.

Mr. Alberto Wray

Mr. Ernesto Alban-Ricaurte

Ms. Veronica Arroyo

Cabezas & Wray Abogados

Mr. Paul Reichler

Mr. Ronald Goodman
Foley Hoag L.L.P.

Date of dispatch to the parties: October 19, 2009

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

 

Il. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

 

Il. THE COMMITTEE'S POWERS UNDER ARTICLE 52 OF THE WASHINGTON
CONVENTION

 

A) PARTIES' SUBMISSIONS

 

IV. ARTICLE 52(1)(B): MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS .........csccscssesseseeseseeseseeeseeness

A) PARTIES' SUBMISSIONS:

 

B) ANALYSIS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE.........ccccssccceseesesesseseeseseesesteseseessseenssnensseeness

V. ARTICLE 52(1)(E): FAILURE TO STATE REASONS ........ccsecsesseseeseseeteseeseseeseseeness

 

A) PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS:

VI. COSTS

 

VII. DECISION

 

27

27

30

40

41

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On November 26, 2007, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID or the Centre) received from M.C.I. Power Group L.C. and New
Turbine Inc. (jointly referred to as the Applicants) an application for the partial
annulment of the Award rendered on July 31, 2007 (hereinafter the Award) by the
Arbitral Tribunal in the arbitration proceeding between M.C.I. Power Group L.C. and
New Turbine Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/6), composed of
Professor Raul E. Vinuesa, (Argentine), President; Judge Benjamin J. Greenberg,
Q.C., (Canadian); and Professor Jaime Irarrazabal (Chilean). The Application for
Annulment was submitted within the time period provided for by Article 52(2) of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States of 18 March 1965 (Washington Convention or the Convention).

The Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application for Annulment on
December 6, 2007 and on the same date transmitted the Notice of Registration to the
parties, in accordance with Rule 50(2) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (the Arbitration Rules).

By letter of April 7, 2008, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the Arbitration Rules, the
parties were notified by the Centre that the ad hoc Committee (the Committee)
composed of Judge Hans Danelius (Swedish), Judge Dominique Hascher (French),
and Judge Peter Tomka (Slovak), had been constituted and that the annulment
proceeding had begun on that date. The parties were also notified that Ms. Claudia
Frutos-Peterson, Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Committee. By
letter of April 11, 2008, the parties were notified that the Members of the ad hoc
Committee had designated Judge Dominique Hascher as the President of the
Committee. On May 15, 2009, Ms. Natali Sequeira, Counsel, ICSID, was assigned as
new Secretary of the Committee.

The First Session of the Committee and the parties was held at the offices of the World
Bank in Paris on May 16, 2008. During the Session the Committee and the parties
discussed a number of procedural matters, including the schedule for the written
pleadings. It was also agreed that the annulment proceeding would be conducted in
accordance with the ICSID Arbitration Rules in force since April 10, 2006.

In accordance with the agreed schedule, the Applicants filed their Memorial on
Annulment on August 15, 2008, and the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on
Annulment on November 24, 2008. At the request of the Applicants, and with the
Respondent’s agreement, the Committee granted a 21-day hiatus (from December 15,
2008 through January 2, 2009). The filings of the parties were accordingly postponed.
The Applicants filed their Reply on February 6, 2009 and the Respondent filed its
Rejoinder on April 27, 2009.

The Hearing on Annulment took place at the seat of the Centre in Washington D.C. on
June 8, 2009. The Applicants were represented by Mr. Barry Appleton, Mr. Martin

3

Endicott, Appleton & Associates International Lawyers; Mr. Edward Mullins,
Astigarraga Davis Mullins & Grossman, P.A.; Mr. Frank Borowicz, QC, Mr. Ivor
Massey, and Mr. Richard Gorman. The Respondent was represented by Dr. Diego
Garcia Carrion, Procurador General del Estado, Dr. Alvaro Galindo Cardona, Dr.
Luis Felipe Aguilar, Procuraduria General del Estado; Mr. Alberto Wray, Mr. Ernesto
Alban, Ms. Paola Delgado, Ms. Verénica Arroyo, Cabezas & Wray; Mr. Paul S.
Reichler, Mr. Ronald Goodman, Ms. Paz Zarate and Ms. Clara Elena Brillembourg,
Foley Hoag, L.L.P.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

M.C.I. Power Group L.C. and New Turbine Inc. are legal entities of the United States
of America (U.S.) which own and control Seacoast, Inc. (Seacoast), also a U.S. entity,
which on November 17, 1995 entered with the Instituto Ecuatoriano de Electrificacion
(INECEL), a state organ of Ecuador,' into a Contract (Seacoast Contract) for the sale
of electricity and also a Memorandum of Clarification for the Execution of the
Contract (Clarification Contract), relating to the scope of some of the clauses of the
Seacoast Contract.

For purposes of the execution of the Seacoast Contract, M.C.I. Power Group L.C. and
New Turbine Inc. (at that time operated under the name of Energy Services Inc. (ESJ))
entered into a “joint venture” with Old Dominion Electric Cooperative (ODEC). At
the end of 1995, MCI, ESI and ODEC, as investors in Seacoast, constituted two
companies under the laws of the State of Virginia, collectively identified during the
original arbitration proceeding as Power Ventures. Power Ventures incorporated
Power Services Ecuador Ecuapower Cia. Ltda. (Ecuapower), a local subsidiary
constituted under the laws of Ecuador.

As early as the beginning of 1996, the parties encountered differences with the
execution of the Seacoast Contract relating to the date of commencement, the duration
of the Contract, the payment for energy under the “take or pay” clause, the
reimbursement for the cost of fuel and the imposition of fines and penalties.

On April 12, 1996, Seacoast suspended the operation of the plants and delivery of
power, invoking the non-payment of invoiced amounts payable under the Seacoast
Contract. On May 26, 1996, INECEL declared the Seacoast Contract terminated.

On July 12, 1996, the Seacoast equity interests were transferred to Ecuapower and on
July 31, 1996, Seacoast submitted a claim before the Administrative Court of the
District of Quito against INECEL, challenging the termination of the Contract and
requesting the payment of approximately US$ 25 million of damages for breach of
contract. The case was transferred on April 12, 1999 to the Judge of the Fifth Civil

Award, para, 225: “The Tribunal finds that INECEL, in light of its institutional structure and composition as well as its functions,
should be considered, in accordance with international law, as an organ of the Ecuadorian State. In this case, the customary rules
codified by the ILC in their Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts are applicable. Therefore, any acts or
omissions of INECEL in breach of the BIT or of other applicable rules of general international law are attributable to Ecuador, and
engage its international responsibility.”

4

Court of Pichincha who held on October 21, 1999 that the claims submitted by
Seacoast against INECEL were null and void due to the lack of standing of Seacoast's
legal representative. The Superior Court of Justice of Quito decided on December 12,
2000 that it lacked jurisdiction to hear the appeal filed by the Attorney General.”

Pending judicial proceedings, the Liquidation Commission contemplated by Article 17
of the Seacoast Contract was established in August 1996. It held its first meeting on
April 7, 1997 on the differences relating to the interpretation and enforcement of the
Contract but, due to the intransigent positions of the parties, ceased to hold its
meetings on or before March 31, 1999.

On December 1, 1996, Seacoast's accounts receivable were sold to M.C.I., New
Turbine and ODEC (subsequently ODEC transferred all its rights to M.C.I. and New
Turbine in 1998), with Seacoast retaining responsibility to recover the amounts
claimed against INECEL‘. INECEL signed a contract with Ecuapower on January 24,
1997 after M.C.I., New Turbine and ODEC had sold their shares in Ecuapower to a
third party (The Anglo Energy Company).

On December 16, 2002, M.C.I. and New Turbine started an ICSID arbitration against
the Republic of Ecuador. M.C.I and New Turbine claimed having invested in Ecuador
both before and after the Treaty between the United States of America and the
Republic of Ecuador Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investment (the U.S.-Ecuador BIT or the BIT) entered into force on May 11, 1997.
They affirmed that the Tribunal was required to apply the provisions of the U.S.-
Ecuador BIT to the actions and omissions of Ecuador that harmed Seacoast after the
signature of the BIT on August 27, 1993. They further argued that the Republic of
Ecuador had breached its BIT obligations by continuous and composite acts. M.C.I.
and New Turbine declared that the Republic of Ecuador acted in a manner inconsistent
with Article II(3)(c) of the BIT” in that its actions and omissions constituted a failure
to observe its contractual obligations. They claimed that the Republic of Ecuador
breached the BIT through the actions of INECEL, its state organ, which did not
observe its contractual obligations. In this regard, they alleged that the Republic of
Ecuador failed to abide by the “take or pay” obligation because INECEL failed to pay
Seacoast for the energy capacity of the plants, that the Republic of Ecuador failed to
respect the duration of the Contract, unjustifiably imposed penalties, failed to pay fuel
charges necessary to generate electricity and to fulfill the Liquidation Commission
obligation in good faith. They further claimed that the Republic of Ecuador failed to
negotiate the renewal of the Contract, yet immediately renewed it on even more
favorable terms as soon as an Ecuadorian national bought the company. They claimed
US$ 24,242,784 million as damages and interest from the initial Contract as well as
losses from the failure to renew the Contract.

Id., paras. 341-348,

Id., paras. 256, 258, 263, 271-275,

Id., paras. 194-213,

Article I(3)(c) of the BIT provides that: “Each Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments.”

5

15. M.C.I. and New Turbine also submitted that the Republic of Ecuador had breached the
BIT through the actions of its Cabinet of Ministers which interfered with the Seacoast
Contract and with Seacoast's ability to enforce its contractual rights. They pointed out
that the Republic of Ecuador granted more favorable treatment to Ecuadorian nationals
and their investments, breached its obligation to protect the Claimants' legitimate
expectations in refusing to pay sums clearly due under the Contract and that they were
forced to mitigate their damages by selling their interests in the power plants to the
brother of the Ecuadorian Undersecretary of Energy and Mines. M.C.I. and New
Turbine argued that the Republic of Ecuador had frustrated Seacoast's pursuit of its
contractual remedies, first before the Liquidation Commission, then under a promised
arbitration agreement, and finally in the Ecuadorian courts, when it obtained
annulment of the lawsuit filed by Seacoast because of the cancellation of Seacoast's
operating permit. They submitted that the Republic of Ecuador had acted in a manner
inconsistent with Articles m()° and II(3)(a) and (b)’ of the BIT in that such acts and
omissions constituted a breach of its national treatment obligation, a failure to provide
treatment in accordance with international law, including fair and equitable treatment
and full protection and security, as well as a failure to provide treatment free from
arbitrary and discriminatory conduct. M.C.I. and New Turbine also submitted that the
Republic of Ecuador had acted inconsistently with Article III of the BIT in that its
actions or omissions in expropriating Seacoast's contractual rights by its final refusal
to pay at the Liquidation Commission in December 2007 and revoking Seacoast's
operating permit constituted a taking of Seacoast's interests in property without just
compensation and in violation of the international law standards of treatment required
by Article I1(3)(b) of the BIT.

16. The Republic of Ecuador raised objections to the jurisdiction of the ICSID Tribunal. It
declared that the BIT has no retroactive effect and in support of its argument submitted
that Article 18 (Obligation not to defeat the object and purpose of a treaty prior to its
entry into force) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties may not be used to
impose specific norms of the BIT retroactively in violation of Article 28 (Non-
retroactivity of treaties) of the same Convention, that the most-favored nation clause
in other investment treaties cannot be invoked as a basis for the retroactive application
of the U.S.-Ecuador BIT and that there is no internationally wrongful continuing or
composite act. It contended that, at the time when the BIT came into force, the

Article II(1) of the BIT provides that: “Each Party shall permit and treat investment, and activities associated therewith, on a basis no
sss favorable than that accorded in like situations to investment or associated activities of its own nationals or companies, or of nationals or
companies of any third country, whichever is the most favorable, subject to the right of each Party to make or maintain exceptions falling
within one of the sectors or matters listed in the Protocol to this Treaty. Each Party agrees to notify the other Party before or on the date of
entry into force of this Treaty of all such laws and regulations of which it is aware concerning the sectors or matters listed in the Protocol.
Moreover, each Party agrees to notify the other of any future exception with respect to the sectors or matters listed in the Protocol, and to
limit such exceptions to a minimum. Any future exception by either Party shall not apply to investment existing in that sector or matter at the
time the exception becomes effective. The treatment accorded pursuant to any exceptions shall, unless specified otherwise in the Protocol, be
not less favorable than that accorded in like situations to investments and associated activities of nationals or companies of any third
countr

     
  

 

 

 

 

 

Article II) of the BIT provides that: “(a) Investment shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment, shall enjoy full
protection and security and shall in no case be accorded treatment less than that required by international law. (b) Neither Party shall in any
way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory measures the management, operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion, or
disposal of investments. For purposes of dispute resolution under Articles VI and VIL, a measure may be arbitrary or discriminatory
notwithstanding the fact that a party has had or has exercised the opportunity to review such measure in the courts or administrative
tribunals of a Party.

   

Claimants had no investments in Ecuador because the Seacoast Contract was
terminated in May 1996 and they had sold their interests. The Republic of Ecuador
added that the accounts receivable do not qualify as an investment under Article 25 of
the Washington Convention. The Republic of Ecuador also alleged that had the BIT
been applied, the arbitration option of the BIT would have been foreclosed because the
Claimants had already presented their claim to an Ecuadorian court. In the event that
the BIT was applicable, the Republic of Ecuador pleaded that the Claimants had not
proved that it breached any of its obligations arising from that Treaty and even less
that such breach occurred after the Treaty had entered into force.

In its Award of July 31, 2007 the Arbitral Tribunal decided:

“a. To allow the Respondent's main objections to the Tribunal's Competence in respect
of the non-retroactivity of the BIT;

b. To reject the other objections to the Tribunal's Competence and consequently
exercise its Comp over the R dent's alleged violations of the BIT by acts or
omissions after the entry into force of the BIT;

c. To reject the Claimants’ claims on which the Tribunal previously decided that it had
Competence, for it considers that the Claimants have failed to prove violation of the
standards of fair and equitable treatment, including the obligation to act in good faith,
or the standards of non-discriminatory or non-arbitrary treatment that the BIT
requires of Ecuador as a State party.

d. To reject the Claimants' claim relating to the expropriation of their rights to the
investment as a result of revocation of Seacoast's permit to operate in Ecuador.

e. To formally take note of the statements of the Respondent's attorneys as to the
Claimants’ right to take judicial action before the Ecuadorian courts to settle the
outstanding disputes over what they allege to be contractual breaches.

ff. Each party shall bear in equal portions the costs and expenses incurred in the
arbitration proceedings on Jurisdiction and on the Merits.

g. Each party shall bear its own costs and expenses incurred for legal representation
in the arbitration proceedings on Jurisdiction and on the Merits.”

The Applicants request annulment of the Award for the alleged failure of the Arbitral
Tribunal to “/ajddress the Claimants' US$ 24.2 Million claim that Ecuador breached
the Ecuador-US BIT through its failure to pay accounts receivable that it owes to the
Claimants - whether on a continuous basis or otherwise”. In the alternative, they
request that “the Committee annul for manifest excess of powers and failure to state
reasons the Tribunal's implicit decision that it had no jurisdiction over the treaty
aspects of the claims under Article VI(1)(c) of the Ecuador-US BIT on the basis that it
involved a dispute arising before the Treaty came into force. Finally, and in any event,
they request that “the Committee annul for manifest excess of powers and failure to
state reasons the Tribunal's decision that it had no jurisdiction over contractual

20.

Til.

aspects of the claim under Article VI(1)(a) of the Ecuador-US BIT on the grounds that
it involved a dispute that arose before the Treaty came into force.”*

In their Application for Annulment, the Applicants sought partial annulment of the
Award on two grounds, set out in paragraphs (b) and (e), out of the five grounds
provided for in Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. The relevant parts of Article 52
read as follows: “Either party may request annulment of the award by an application
in writing addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following
grounds: [...] (b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers; [...] (e) that the
award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.”

Initially, the Applicants presented their request for annulment under Article 52(1)(b)
of the Washington Convention as an alternative to annulment under Article 52(1)(e)
and dependent on a finding that the Tribunal was considered to have implicitly dealt
with the issue of the accounts receivable. Subsequently, the Applicants, when
answering a question from the Tribunal, specified that they do not require a specific
finding regarding Article 52(1)(e) of the Washington Convention as a precondition to
annul the Award under Article 52(1)(b) and that their allegations relating to sub-
paragraphs (b) and (e) of Article 52(1) are independent from each other. The
Applicants also clarified at the hearing that they are finally seeking full annulment of
the Award because the Tribunal’s excess of power contaminated the whole award’.
The Committee will first review its powers under Article 52 of the Convention. It will
then turn to the grounds invoked by the Applicants in the order in which they are set
out in Article 52.

THE COMMITTEE'S POWERS UNDER ARTICLE 52 OF THE
WASHINGTON CONVENTION

A) PARTIES' SUBMISSIONS

21.

0

The Applicants argue that the Committee should exercise wide
discretion to annul the Award. They also point out that the grounds for
annulment under Article 52 are not mutually exclusive. They refer to
the Annulment Committee decision in MTD v. Chile which noted that
“annulment committees have a role to perform within the ICSID
system in ensuring 'the fundamental justice of the arbitral process lo
and to the decision of the Committee in K/éckner (I) which also noted
that the ICSID system and rules of the Convention are designed to
prevent “in one of the parties an impression of injustice.”"!

Applicant’s Memorial on Annulment (Memorial), para. 150,
Transcripts of the Annulment Hearing held on June 8, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as Tr.), pp. 193, 199.
MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/7), Decision on Annulment, March 21,

2007, 13 ICSID Reports 516, para. 54 (hereinafter referred to as MTD v. Chile).

uw

Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others v. United Republic of Cameroon and Société Camerounaise des Engrais, (ICSID Case

No. ARB/81/2), Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, 2 ICSID Reports, para. 78 (hereinafter referred to as Kldckner (1)).

8

22. The Applicants consider that, if not annulled, the decision of the
Tribunal would gravely compromise the coherence and legitimacy of
bilateral investment treaties and the ability of ICSID tribunals to
properly resolve BIT disputes. Moreover such a decision would create
a divide between international investment law and _ well-settled
international law on the point of the retroactive application of treaties
and create false and dangerous precedents.’

23. The Republic of Ecuador contends that the Applicants are attempting
to have the Committee act as though it were faced with an appeal and
not only examine the Tribunal's conclusions with respect to the
meaning and scope of applicable law but also reexamine the facts.
Such an aim is foreign to the nature of annulment proceedings and
violates the provisions of Article 53 of the Convention under which the
award is binding on the parties and “not be subject to any appeal.”"*

B) ANALYSIS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE:

24. It appears clearly from Article 53 of the Washington Convention that the only
permissible remedies against an award are those provided for in the Convention,
which include a request for annulment but not an appeal. Ad hoc committees are
therefore not courts of appeal. Their mission is confined to controlling the legality of
awards according to the standards set out expressly and restrictively in Article 52 of
the Washington Convention. It is an overarching principle that ad hoc committees are
not entitled to examine the substance of the award but are only allowed to look at the
award insofar as the list of grounds contained in Article 52 of the Washington
Convention requires.“ This was reaffirmed by many committees, whose decisions are
relied upon by the parties.'* Consequently, the role of an ad hoc committee is a limited
one, restricted to assessing the legitimacy of the award and not its correctness. The
committee cannot for example substitute its determination on the merits for that of the
tribunal and, as the Lucchetti v. Peru Committee emphasized: “ /...] it is no part of the

‘2 The Applicants give an example of an award which cites with approval a certain passage from the M.C.I. Power Award, i.e. the award
rendered in Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2), May 8, 2008, para. 611
(hereinafter referred to as Pey Casado v. Chile),

'8 Article 53(1) of the Washington Convention.

‘The Kléckner (I) Committee already explained that Article 52 “is in no sense an appeal against arbitral awards” and that “[t]his
provision permits each party in an ICSID arbitration to request annulment of the award on one or more of the grounds listed exhaustively in
the first paragraph of Article 52 of the Convention.” Klockner (1), Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, 2 ICSID Reports 97, para. 3
(emphasis in the original).

'S CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8), Decision on Annulment, September 25, 2007,
paras. 43, 135-136 (hereinafter referred to as CMS v. Argentina), Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, para. 62 (hereinafter referred to as Vivendi v. Argentina); Amco
Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1), Decision on Annulment, May 16, 1986, | ICSID Reports
509, para. 23 (hereinafter referred to as Amco 1); Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No
ARB/84/4), Decision on Annulment, December 22, 1989, 4 ICSID Reports 79, paras. 5.04-5.08 (hereinafter referred to as MINE); Wena
Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, paras. 34-37 (hereinafter
referred to as Wena v. Egypt); Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7), Decision on Annulment,
November 1, 2006, para. 19 (hereinafier referred to as Patrick Mitchell v. Congo); MTD v. Chile, supra note 10, paras. 31, 52; Hussein
Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7), Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007, para. 20 (hereinafter referred
to as Soufraki v. UAE); Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Perti, S.A. (formerly Empresas Lucchetti, S.A. and Lucchetti Pert
S.A) v. Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4), Decision on Annulment, September 5, 2007, para. 101 (hereinafter referred to as
Lucchetti v. Peru).

  

“

 

  

 
     

Committee's functions to review the decision itself which the Tribunal arrived at, still
less to substitute its own views for those of the Tribunal, but merely to pass judgment
on whether the manner in which the Tribunal carried out its functions met the
requirements of the ICSID Convention.”"*. The annulment mechanism is not designed
to bring about consistency in the interpretation and application of international
investment law. The responsibility for ensuring consistency in the jurisprudence and
for building a coherent body of law rests primarily with the investment tribunals. They
are assisted in their task by the development of a common legal opinion and the
progressive emergence of “une jurisprudence constante”, as the Tribunal in SGS v.
Philippines declared.”

25. In their submissions, the parties have relied on the arbitral jurisprudence of ICSID and
other investment tribunals, even though according to Article 53 of the Washington
Convention the award is only binding on the parties to the dispute. It does not
constitute a binding precedent on other tribunals.'* Nevertheless, an increasing number
of awards and decisions of tribunals and annulment committees are published by
ICSID with the parties' consent, as required by Article 48(5) of the Washington
Convention and Rule 48(4) of the ICSID Rules. As a result, the reporting of cases and
the commentaries of scholars and practitioners are extensive and undeniably promote
the consistent application of investment law. The parties in the present case have also
relied on past decisions of ad hoc committees which are referred to in this decision.
Although there is no hierarchy of international tribunals, as acknowledged in SGS v.
Philippines,” the Committee considers it appropriate to take those decisions into
consideration, because their reasoning and conclusions may provide guidance to the
Committee in settling similar issues arising in these annulment proceedings and help
to ensure consistency and legal certainty of the ICSID annulment mechanism, thereby
contributing to ensuring trust in the ICSID dispute settlement system and predictability
for governments and investors.

IV. ARTICLE 52(1)(b): MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS
A) PARTIES' SUBMISSIONS:

26. The Applicants contend that the Tribunal failed to apply the proper law
of the dispute by improperly refusing jurisdiction over the accounts
receivable claim under the BIT. Although it recognized the accounts
receivable as an investment under Article I(1)(a) of the BIT,” the

Lucchetti v. Peru, supra note 15, para. 97. See also MTD y. Chile, supra note 10, para. 54.

Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6), Decision of the Tribunal on
Objections to Jurisdiction of January 29, 2004, para. 97 (hereinafter referred to as SGS v. Philippines).
i

  

 

2 Article 1(1)(a) of the BIT provides: “/. For the purposes of this Treaty, (a) "investment" means every kind of investment in the territory
of one Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and
ment contracts; and includes: (i) tangible and intangible property, including rights, such as mortgages, lions and pledges; (ii) a
company or shares of stock or other interests ina company or interests in the assets thereof: (iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance
having economic value, and associated with an investment; (iv) intellectual property which includes, inter alia, rights relating to: literary
and artistic works, including sound recordings; inventions in all fields of human endeavor; industrial designs; semiconductor mask works,
trade secrets, know-how, and confidential business information; and trademarks, service marks, and trade names; and (v) any right

10

 

   

 

  
  
 

   

 

Tribunal failed to address how the BIT, once it came into force,
applied to the accounts receivable. The Applicants assert that
jurisdiction over the accounts receivable is obvious from a review of
Articles v4)! and XII” of the BIT which together grant the Tribunal
jurisdiction over “any investment dispute” in relation to an investment
existing at the time of entry into force of the BIT. Pursuant to Article
XII of the BIT, the Treaty certainly applied to a situation which clearly
did not cease to exist when the BIT took effect on May 11, 1997 and
the Applicants point out that, from the Tribunal's own findings, it
appears that the disputes arising out of the investment agreements
actually went on long after the Treaty entered into force.

27. The Applicants point out that, unlike other Ecuadorian and U.S. BITs,
the U.S.-Ecuador BIT does not limit the temporal scope of the term
“investment dispute” defined at Article VI(1) of the BIT.”> The
Applicants compare the language of Article VI(1) with that of other
BITs such as the Argentina-Spain BIT, the Panama-U.S. BIT and
several other Ecuador BITs which contain specific clauses precluding
their application to disputes arising prior to their entry into force. The
absence of such temporally limited language in the U.S.-Ecuador BIT
indicates in their opinion that the Contracting Parties did not intend to
limit the temporal application of the Treaty in the way decided by the
Tribunal. They further underline that Article XII of the U.S.-Ecuador
BIT which prevents a tribunal from taking jurisdiction over disputes
that have ceased to exist before the BIT came into force, is similar to
that of the Honduras-U.S. BIT which has been explained by the U.S.
Secretary of State as confirming that the principle of non-retroactivity
of treaties simply prevents a tribunal from taking jurisdiction over
disputes with respect to acts occurring before the treaty came into
force, or to situations ceasing to exist before that time, but not from
taking jurisdiction over a dispute arising before the treaty came into
force, so long as the underlying cause of the dispute continued or

 

conferred by law or contract, and any license and permits pursuant to law.”
2! Article VI(4) of the BIT provides: “Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment dispute for settlement by binding
arbitration in accordance with the choice specified in the written consent of the national or company under paragraph 3. Such consent,
together with the written consent of the national or company when given under paragraph 3 shall satisfy the requirement for: (a) written
consent of the parties to the dispute for purposes of Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (jurisdiction of the Centre) and for purposes of the
Additional Facility Rules; and(b) an ‘agreement in writing’ for purposes of Article II of the United Nations Convention on the Recognition
and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York, June 10, 1958 (‘New York Convention ).”

* Article XII of the BIT provides:

“I. This Treaty shall enter into force thirty days after the data of exchange of instruments of ratification. It shall remain in force for a period
of ten years and shall continue in force unless terminated in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article. It shall apply to investments
existing at the time of entry into force as well as to investments made or acquired thereafter. 2. Either Party may, by giving one year's written
notice to the other Party, terminate this Treaty at the end of the initial ten year period or at any time thereafter.3. With respect to investments
made or acquired prior to the date of termination of this Treaty and to which this Treaty otherwise applies, the provisions of all of the other
Articles of this Treaty shall thereafier continue to be effective for a further period of ten years from such date of termination. 4. The Protocol
and Side Letter shall form an integral part of the Treaty.”

® Article VI(1) of the BIT provides: “/. For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute between a Party and a national or
company of the other Party arising out of or relating to (a) an investment agreement between that Party and such national or company; (b)
an investment authorization granted by that Party's foreign investment authority to such national or company; or (c) an alleged broach of
any right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to an investment.”

11

  

 

 

  

otherwise culminated past that date. The Applicants also add that the
U.S.-Ecuador BIT is not written only in the future tense, in particular
Article VI(1) to (3)."4 The Applicants conclude that neither Ecuador
nor the United States included an implicit limitation on their consent to
ICSID jurisdiction to disputes arising after the U.S.-Ecuador BIT came
into force.

28. The Applicants argue that as a result of its erroneous interpretation of
the principle of non-retroactivity of treaties, the Tribunal failed to
apply Article V1(4) of the BIT through which the Contracting Parties
agreed to submit to binding arbitration “any” investment dispute
unmodified by the express temporal restrictions that appear in other
BITs. They state that the Tribunal adopted a principle of treaty
interpretation which overrides the express wording of Article XII of
the BIT and abrogates the Treaty itself and runs counter to the most
fundamental rule of treaty interpretation set out in Article 31(1) of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.> They contend that in
such case the misinterpretation of the treaty is so grave that the
distinction between ignoring the law and interpreting it incorrectly
breaks down.

29. The Applicants next assert that, in addition to failing to apply the terms
of the U.S.-Ecuador BIT, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers
by citing no authority in support of its false legal conclusion that the
principle of non-retroactivity of treaties prevented it from taking
jurisdiction over disputes arising before the U.S.-Ecuador BIT came
into force. The Applicants state that the Tribunal relied solely and
exclusively on Article 28 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties”® even though nothing in Article 28 prevents a tribunal from
taking jurisdiction over disputes arising before a treaty comes into
force, provided they do not cease to exist before such time. The
Applicants argue that the Tribunal's incorrect statement of law finds no

* Article VI(2) and VI(3) of the BIT provides: “2. In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute should initially seek a
resolution through consultation and negotiation. If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national or company concerned may choose to
submit the dispute, under one of the following alternatives, for resolution: (a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party that is a
party to the dispute; or (b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute-settlement procedures; or (c) in accordance with
the terms of paragraph 3.

3. (a) Provided that the national or company concerned has not submitted the dispute for resolution under paragraph 2 (a) or (b) and that six
months have elapsed from the date on which the dispute arose, the national or company concerned may choose to consent in writing to the
submission of the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration: (i) 0 the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(‘Centre’) established by the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, done at
Washington, March 18, 1965 (‘ICSID Convention’), provided that the Party is a party to such Convention; or (ii) to the Additional Facility
of the Centre, if the Centre is not available; or (iii) in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), or (iv) to any other arbitration institution, or in accordance with any other arbitration rules, as may
be mutually agreed between the parties to the dispute. (b) Once the national or company concerned has so consented, either party to the
dispute may initiate arbitration in accordance with the choice so specified in the consent.”

 

Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention: “4 treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be
given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.”

2 Article 28 of the Vienna Convention: “Non-retroactivity of treaties: Unless a different intention appears from the treaty or is otherwise
established, its provisions do not bind a party in relation to any act or fact which took place or any situation which ceased to exist before the
date of the entry into force of the treaty with respect to that party.”

  

 

 

12

support in the International Law Commission commentary to Article
28 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, the drafting
history of the Washington Convention,” the position adopted by the
Permanent Court of International Justice in the Mavrommatis case,”*
commentaries by legal scholars, including the President of the
International Court of Justice,”? State treaty practice*” and investment
treaty jurisprudence. The Applicants in particular state that Mondev v.
United States*' and other awards such as UPS v. Canada™ and SGS v.
Philippines” accepted jurisdiction over disputes that arose before the
relevant treaty came into force and are not at all consistent with the
erroneous ruling of the Tribunal. The Applicants distinguish the facts
of the present case from the factual situation in Lucchetti v. Peru** or
in Jan de Nul v. Egypt,” Pey Casado v. Chile,” and Tradex v.
Albania® and the determination of the Tribunal on the principle of
non-retroactivity of treaties from the findings in IJmpregilo v.
Pakistan*®® and Salini v. Jordan.*’ There is no justice, they argue, in a
process through which an unsupported and arbitrary reference to a
non-existent rule of law is used to resolve a dispute.

 

30. In addition, the Applicants contend that the Tribunal failed to address
the question of whether Ecuador breached the terms of its Contract
with them according to the terms of the Contract itself. The Applicants
underline that there are two types of investment disputes at issue in
their claim. The first is an investment dispute arising under Article

27 Article 25(1): “The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising out of an investment, between a Contracting State

[...] and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre ...”
*8 “The Court is of the opinion that, in case of doubt, jurisdiction based on an international agreement embraces all disputes referred to it
afier its establishment [...] The reservation made in many arbitration treaties regarding disputes arising out of events previous to the
conclusion of the treaty seems to prove the necessity for an explicit limitation and, consequently, the correctness of the rule of interpretation
enunciated above,” Case of the Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions, PCIJ (1924) Series A, No. 2, p. 35 (hereinafter referred to as
Mavrommatis).

” — Stanimir Alexandrov, “The ‘Baby Boom’ of Treaty-Based Arbitrations and the Jurisdiction of ICSID Tribunals,” 4 Laws and Practice
of Int'l Courts and Tribunals 19; Lauterpacht, “The Development of International Law by the International Court” (1958, Stevens & Sons); J
Pauwelyn, “The concept of a ‘continuing violation’ of an international obligation: selected problems,” (1995) 66 British Yearbook of
International Law 415; Rosalyn Higgins, “Time and the Law: International Perspectives on an Old Problem” (1997) 46 Int'l & Comp. L. Q
501

 

 

3 Herbert Briggs, “Reservations to the Acceptance of Compulsory Jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice,” 93 Recueil des
Cours 1 (1958).

3 Mondev International Lid. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/99/2), Award of October 11, 2002, para. 57
(hereinafter referred to as Mondev v. United States),

United Parcel Service of America Inc. v. Government of Canada, Award of May 24, 2007, paras. 22-28 (hereinafter referred to as UPS
v. Canada).

* SGS v. Philippines, supra note 17, para. 167,

*  Lucchetti v. Peru, supra note 15.

Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB 04/13), Dec’
June 16, 2006, para. 116 (hereinafter referred to as Jan de Nul v. Egypt).

°° Pey Casado v. Chile, supra note 12, paras. 369, 613-623.

Tradex Hellas S.A. v. Republic of Albania (ICSID Case No. ARB/94/2), Decision on Jurisdiction, December 24, 1996, 14 ICSID Rev.—
FILJ 161 (1999), pp. 179-180 (hereinafter referred to as Tradex v. Albania),

%*  Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3), Decision on Jurisdiction, April 22, 2005, paras. 300,
313-315 (hereinafter referred to as Jmpregilo v. Pakistan),

%  Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/13), Decision on Juri
November 29, 2004, para. 170 (hereinafter referred to as Salini v. Jordan).

13

6 non Jurisdiction,

  

 

 

”

 

VI(1)(c)*° which is a dispute over an alleged violation of the terms of
the BIT. The second is a dispute arising under Article VI(1)(a)"! of the
BIT, which is a dispute over the Seacoast Contract. They later
specified in the Reply Memorial that there are two separate channels at
issue, namely the BIT and the Contract, for resolving one dispute.

31. The Applicants submit that since contractual disputes must be resolved
in accordance with the proper law of the contract or otherwise by
customary international law (or the law of the host State), as opposed
to the substantive provisions of the BIT, such disputes, so long as they
continued to exist after the treaty entered into force, are unconstrained
by the temporal limitations of the BIT which apply to Article VI(1)(c)
but not to Article VI(1)(a) of the BIT. The Applicants assert that, based
on normal treaty interpretation principles, the Tribunal has competence
over the contractual claims because it is entirely irrelevant for the
purpose of the Tribunal's jurisdiction under Article VI(1)(a) whether
the act took place before or after the BIT entered into force so long as
the dispute continued after its entry into force. Article VI(1)(a) cannot
confine the Tribunal to applying the substantive provisions of the BIT
which are temporally limited. Unlike Article VI(1)(c), Article VI(1)(a)
functions in their view as a purely jurisdictional provision unrelated to
the substantive provisions of the BIT. The Applicants argue that the
Tribunal had an obligation to scrutinize its jurisdiction under all
paragraphs of Article VI but, unfortunately, failed to do so. Because of
its failure to apply the terms of the BIT, the Tribunal also failed to
apply the proper law over the contractual aspect of the dispute to the
alleged breaches of the umbrella clause of Article II(3) of the BIT
which would have applied to the dispute regardless of when the Treaty
entered into force. The Applicants conclude that the refusal to assume
jurisdiction under the terms of the contract amounts to adopting an
erroneous principle of treaty interpretation that overrides the express
wording of the treaty itself.

32. The Applicants conclude by submitting that to properly exercise
jurisdiction, a tribunal must first address its mind to each of the
questions that it is called upon to answer. To not answer each question
with a clear indication of its deliberation is to fail to exercise its
jurisdiction and thereby to manifestly exceed its powers. A tribunal
cannot avoid exercising jurisdiction. It must apply its powers properly.
To not do so is to abuse its discretion and to manifestly exceed its
powers. The Applicants state that they are arguing about an error of
jurisdiction so fundamental that it undermines the entire analysis of the

“© Article VI(1)(c) of the BIT provides: “For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute between a Party and a national or

company of the other Party arising out of or relating to [...] (c) an alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty with
respect to an investment.”

“Article VI(1)(a) of the BIT provides: “For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute between a Party and a national or
company of the other Party arising out of or relating to (a) an investment agreement between that Party and such national or company [...].”

14

case which is a type of error that falls within Article 52(1)(b). They
allege that the test for the Tribunal to be deemed to have manifestly
exceeded its powers is that the error must be textually obvious and
substantively serious, as is apparent on the face of Article VI(1)(a) and
Article VI(1)(c) of the BIT. It does not matter whether the mistake is
readily noticeable or obvious at first sight, so long as it is obvious from
the text.

33. In reply, the Republic of Ecuador indicates that in deciding that the
BIT does not extend to disputes arising before it entered into force, the
Tribunal has not manifestly exceeded its powers. The basic premise is
that BITs must be interpreted in a manner consistent with the general
principles and rules of international law. The general rule of
interpretation of Article 31 of the Vienna Convention leads to the
conclusion of the Tribunal that the BIT does not cover disputes which
arose prior to the date of entry into force. In particular, Article XII of
the BIT says absolutely nothing about retroactive application. For all
events, the interpretation of the temporal scope is the direct application
of the principle of non-retroactivity which is, according to the
Respondent, “a primary source of international law” that does not
require the support of any other source or authority. The Tribunal
decided that there was no jurisdiction over this dispute because the test
of application of Article 28 of the Vienna Convention and Article XII
of the BIT is not whether a dispute arose before the BIT entered into
force or continued thereafter but whether the facts or acts which gave
rise to the dispute were committed and completed before the treaty
entered into force or thereafter. Ecuador further points out that the
whole of the U.S.-Ecuador BIT was clearly intended to govern the
future. , Abundant case-law, Tecmed v. Mexico,” Pey Casado v.
Chile,” Salini v. Jordan“ and Tradex v. Albania,” also demonstrates
that even when treaties are silent regarding the temporal scope of an
ICSID tribunal's jurisdiction, the language used in the BIT has
constituted a strong indication that the parties agree that the treaty is
directed at the future. Some tribunals (Mondev v. United States,“ Pey
Casado v. Chile,” Impregilo v. Pakistan,” Generation Ukraine v.
Ukraine® and S.G. v. Dominican Republic) have applied the

“Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States, (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2), Award of May 29, 2003, paras
62-64 (hereinafter referred to as Tecmed v. Mexico).

Pey Casado v. Chile, supra note 12, paras. 582-584.

Salini v, Jordan, supra note 39, paras. 170-171

*© Tradex v. Albania, supra note 37, pp. 179-180

Mondev v, United States, supra note 31, para. 68.

“7 Pey Casado v. Chile, supra note 12, paras. 369, 611, 613-623.

Inpregilo v. Pakistan, supra note 38, para. 313-315.

” Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9), Award of September 16, 2003, para. 8.13 (hereinafter referred to as
Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine).

© Société Genérale In respect of DR Energy Holdings Limited and Empresa Distribuidora de Electricidad del Este S.A. v. The Dominican
Republic, LCIA Case No. UN 7927, Award on Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction of September 19, 2008, paras. 70, 74 and 87
(hereinafter referred to as S.G. v. Dominican Republic).

15

principle of non-retroactivity of treaties to disputes arising prior to the
entry into force of a BIT with the same meaning as the Tribunal in this
case which clearly demonstrates that its interpretation is not absurd or
so irrational that no sensible person could accept it. The Republic of
Ecuador considers that the Applicants' reliance on the judgment of the
PCIJ in Mavrommatis is misplaced and they invoke the judgment of
the International Court of Justice in Ambatielos*' rejecting retroactive
application of a treaty to earlier events. The Republic of Ecuador
argues that it is not necessary to know whether the Tribunal should
have accepted certain contractual claims or not; it is sufficient to
establish that this is a reasonable position that has been adopted by
other tribunals or by part of the legal doctrine.

34, The Republic of Ecuador also alleges that the terms of the dispute
resolution clause should not be understood to embody a broad consent
to treaty-based arbitration of contracts and other claims based on local
laws, as demonstrated in the decisions of other tribunals such as SGS v.
Pakistan.’ Contractual claims that are brought before a treaty-based
tribunal must also amount to a violation of the treaty standards as
emphasized in Lesi-Dipenta v. Algeria®® and, therefore, in the absence
of a specific provision, an arbitration clause, albeit broadly worded,
cannot provide a basis for the jurisdiction of such tribunal over purely
contractual claims. Ecuador also asserts that contractual jurisdiction
under a BIT may only be in respect of an investment contract with the
State itself and not with a separate entity such as INECEL and that an
investor invoking contractual jurisdiction pursuant to an offer made by
the State must itself comply with the contractual arrangements for
dispute settlements with that State.

35. The Republic of Ecuador further submits that the temporal limitations
of the BIT are applicable to both classes of disputes and adds that the
decisions in Lucchetti v. Peru,*’ Jan de Nul v. Egypt®’ and Pey Casado
v. Chile™ indicate that if there was a dispute between M.C.I. and New
Turbine, on the one side, and Ecuador, on the other, prior to the entry
into force of the BIT, it would be necessary to consider the origin of
the BIT claim and to establish whether the claim arose on or after the
date of entry into force of the BIT. If the new claim and the old claim
have the same origin or subject-matter, i.e., an act that took place
before the entry into force of the BIT, a decision by the Tribunal not to

3 Ambatielos Case (jurisdiction), Greece v. United Kingdom, Judgment of July 1, 1952: ICJ Rep. 1952, p. 28 (hereinafter referred to as

Ambatielos)

2 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/13), Decision of the Tribunal on
Objections to Jurisdiction, August 6, 2003, paras. 161-162 (hereinafter referred to as SGS v. Pakistan).

8 Consorzio Groupement L.E.S.L- Dipenta v. People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/8), Award of January
10, 2005, para. 25 (hereinafter referred to as Lesi-Dipenta v. Algeria)

4 Lucchetti v. Peru, supra note 15.

Jan de Nul v. Egypt, supra note 35, para. 116.
Pey Casado v. Chile, supra note 12.

s6

exercise jurisdiction ratione temporis is well supported. Whether the
case has been about a single dispute or whether it is related to two
different disputes, the Tribunal's decision encompasses both situations
because they both fall into the category of disputes that the Tribunal
excluded from its jurisdiction, those arising prior to the entry into force
of the Treaty. The claims related to a contract that had been terminated
before the BIT entered into force and were therefore outside the
jurisdictional scope of the Tribunal. Article VI is a merely introductory
clause which is normally found in BITs and cannot be taken as a
substantive clause that contains a broad consent to arbitration, whether
on a treaty or contract basis. It would be curious if what had been
intended was to provide an umbrella clause subject to Article 28, while
at the same time considering Article VI(1)(a) as a jurisdictional
provision that would not be subject to Article 28.

36. The Republic of Ecuador finally declares that, even assuming that the
Tribunal had erroneously applied the principle of non-retroactivity of
treaties and therefore had incorrectly interpreted the BIT, such an error
of interpretation would not constitute an excess of power because this
would otherwise amount to admitting an appeal of the arbitral award.
The Republic of Ecuador declares that the non-application of the
proper law is a question of interpretation which cannot constitute a
ground for annulment. As the history of the Washington Convention
reveals, an incorrect application of the law is not a basis for annulment.
Moreover, the Republic of Ecuador argues that the excess of power
must be manifest, obvious at first sight, and that, if an elaborate
interpretation is necessary, the excess of powers is not evident. In this
case, there was no error so outrageous that no reasonable person could
admit it.

B) ANALYSIS OF THE 4D HOC COMMITTEE

37. Failure to apply the proper law is not an independent ground for annulment under
Article 52 of the Washington Convention. Ad hoc committee decisions however
recognize that a tribunal's failure to apply the applicable law may constitute a manifest
excess of powers pursuant to Article 52(1)(b).*” In K/éckner (1), the ad hoc Committee
thus ruled that “/e/xcess of powers may consist of the non-application by the
arbitrator of the rules contained in the arbitration agreement.”** While Article 42(1)
of the Washington Convention is concerned with the law applicable to the merits of
the dispute,” issues of jurisdiction are addressed in Article 25 of the Washington

*7 See e.g., Decisions of the Annulment Committees in Kléckner (I), supra note 14, para. 59; Amco I, supra note 15, paras. 23 and 95;
MINE, supra note 15, para. 6.40; CMS v. Argentina, supra note 15, para. 49; Soufraki v. UAE, supra note 15, paras. 37 and 85

“8 Klockner (1), supra note 14, para. 59.

In its Award, para. 217, the Tribunal held that there was no evidence of any agreement in the BIT on the law applicable to the dispute.
Article 42(1) of the Washington Convention invites the Tribunal to “decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as may be agreed
by the parties.” The second sentence of Article 42(1) of the Washington Convention reads: “In the absence of such agreement, the Tribunal
shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute (including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international
law as may be applicable.” Regarding the law applicable to the merits, the Award states: “[...] the Tribunal considers that it must respect the

17

   

Convention which provides: “The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal
dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by
that State), and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the
dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their
consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.” In the present case, Article
VI(3)(a)(i) of the U.S.-Ecuador BIT identifies ICSID as a possible forum to be
selected by the investor. According to this provision, the investor “may choose to
consent in writing to the submission of the dispute for settlement by binding
arbitration: (i) to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(‘Centre’) established by the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States, done at Washington, March 18, 1965
(‘ICSID Convention’), provided that the Party is a party to such Convention [...],” as
is the case for both Ecuador and the United States. When a unilateral offer of ICSID
arbitration is given in a BIT to qualified investors by the Contracting States, such as in
Article VI(4) of the U.S.-Ecuador BIT,” the Tribunal which is established bases its
competence on both Article 25 of the Washington Convention and the BIT for the
conditions of consent. °!

38. The main jurisdictional issue raised by Ecuador before the Tribunal was that of the
temporal scope of its offer of arbitration. The crucial question concerned the effect of
the BIT on events alleged to be prior and subsequent to its entry into force. The U.S.-
Ecuador BIT which came into force on May 11, 1997 does not contain any provision
on retroactivity apart from Article XII(1) which provides that the Treaty “shall apply
to investments existing at the time of entry into force as well as to investments made or
acquired thereafter.” The Tribunal noted in para. 57 of its Award M.C.I.’s and New
Turbine’s argument that the application of the U.S.-Ecuador BIT is not limited to
disputes arising subsequent to its entry into force. Relying on Article 28 in the
Convention on the Law of Treaties, the Tribunal concluded as follows: “The non-
retroactivity of the BIT excludes its application to disputes arising prior to its entry
into force. Any dispute arising prior to that date will not be capable of being submitted
to the dispute resolution system established by the BIT. The silence of the text of the
BIT with respect to its scope in relation to disputes prior to its entry into force does
not alter the effects of the principle of the non-retroactivity of treaties.””

39. Relying on previous jurisprudence, the Tribunal further distinguished “acts and
omissions prior to the entry into force of the BIT from acts and omissions subsequent
to that date as violations of the BIT” and held that “a dispute that arises that is subject

 

provisions of the second part of Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, ie., in the absence of an agreement, the Tribunal shall apply
Ecuadorian Law, including its rules of private international law and such rules of international law as may be applicable. With respect to the
latter rules, the Tribunal finds that the rules contained in the BIT, as well as the other pertinent rules of general international law, are
applicable in the present case. The Tribunal's Competence over the Merits of the disputes submitted is limited, in this respect, to considering
the contentions of the Claimants relating to violation of the BIT after it came into force.”

® Article VI(4) of the BIT provides that: “[eJach Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment dispute for settlement by
binding arbitration in accordance with the choice specified in the written consent of the national or company under paragrap

©! CMS v. Argentina, supra note 15, para. 68 “the applicable jurisdictional provisions are only those of the Convention and of the BIT, not
those which might arise from national legislation.” Salini v. Jordan, supra note 39, para. 62, 63. Award, paras. 157-160.

© Award., para. 61

18

40.

Al.

to its Competence is necessarily related to the violation of a norm of the BIT by act or
omission subsequent to its entry into force.”® The Tribunal also distinguished
“disputes arising prior to the entry into force of the BIT from disputes arising after
that date that have the same cause or background with those prior disputes”™* and
observed: “/...] a prior dispute may evolve into a new dispute, but the fact that this
new dispute has arisen does not change the effects of the non-retroactivity of the BIT
with respect to the dispute prior to its entry into force. Prior disputes that continue
after the entry into force of the BIT are not covered by the BIT.”>

The Tribunal finally held “that it has Competence over events subsequent to the entry
into force of the BIT when those acts are alleged to be violations of the BIT” and that
“[p]rior events may only be considered by the Tribunal for purposes of understanding
the background, the causes, or scope of violations of the BIT that occurred after its
entry into force.” Furthermore, the Tribunal accepted that Article XII of the BIT
applies to investments existing at the time of its entry into force when it turned to
Ecuador's subsidiary objection regarding the existence of an investment within the
meaning of Article 25 of the Washington Convention” but decided that the suits
submitted by Seacoast to the Ecuadorian courts on allegations of contractual breaches
related to disputes which arose prior to the entry into force of the BIT and therefore
remained outside its temporal competence.** In their oral arguments before the
Committee, the Applicants clarified that their criticism of the Tribunal's failure to
apply the proper law of the dispute to jurisdiction concerns the failure to apply Article
VI(1)(a) of the BIT.® In this respect, the Committee notes that the law applicable to
the merits of the dispute is without effect on the issue of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
which is to be determined exclusively on the basis of Article 25 of the Washington
Convention, the relevant jurisdictional clauses of the BIT and any applicable
principles of international law.

In examining the implications of the principle of non-retroactivity of treaties for the
temporal and jurisdictional provisions of the U.S.-Ecuador BIT, the Tribunal can be
considered to have complied with its earlier declaration: “The Tribunal will decide on
the objections to Jurisdiction raised by the Respondent and rejected by the Claimants
in accordance with the provisions of the ICSID Convention, the BIT, and the
applicable norms of general international law, including the customary rules
recognized in the Final Draft of the International Law Commission of the UN [...]
Draft Articles on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts with
commentaries. [...] For purposes of interpreting the treaties applicable to the
objections submitted, the Tribunal will be guided by the rules contained in the 1969
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties [....] that reflect customary law on the
subject. [...] The Tribunal will refer to precedents that state the legal implications of

 

Id., para. 93
Id., para. 162
Id, para. 189,
Tr. pp. 177-178, 200-202.

42.

43.

44.

10

1

binding norms of con ional and ‘y inte ional law that are applicabl
only to the extent that and insofar as they specially relate to the present case.”” It is
another matter — over which the ad hoc Committee has only a very limited competence

— whether the Tribunal’s application of the law was well-founded and legally tenable.

The non-application of the proper law which may be sanctioned by Article 52(1)(b)
should indeed not be confused with the erroneous or incorrect application of the
proper law which is not a ground for annulment as consistently underlined in
numerous decisions of ad hoc committees.’! The Amco I Committee, for example,
held: “The law applied by the Tribunal will be examined by the ad hoc Committee, not
for the purpose of scrutinizing whether the Tribunal committed errors in the
interpretation of the requirements of applicable law or in the ascertainment or
evaluation of the relevant facts to which such law has been applied. Such scrutiny is
properly the task of a court of appeals, which the ad hoc Committee is not. The ad hoc
Committee will limit itself to determining whether the Tribunal did in fact apply the
law it was bound to apply to the dispute. Failure to apply such law, as distinguished
from mere misconstruction of that law, would constitute a manifest excess of powers
on the part of the Tribunal and a ground for nullity under Article 52(1)(b) of the
Convention”. A distinction should therefore be drawn between, on the one hand,
what was decided by the tribunal, which concerns a manifest excess of powers, and,
on the other hand, how it was decided by the tribunal, which in principle escapes the
scrutiny of annulment under Article 52(1)(b) as concerning the reasoning of the
tribunal.

However, the freedom which the tribunal enjoys in the application of the law is not
unlimited, since the arbitrators are required to remain within their terms of reference as
remarked upon in the MINE annulment decision”? and not to exceed their powers. The
Soufraki v. UAE ad hoc Committee recognized that “/m/Jisinterpretation or
misapplication of the proper law may, in particular cases, be so gross or egregious as
substantially to amount to failure to apply the proper law.”™* The Applicants agree
that ignoring the law and interpreting the law incorrectly must be distinguished, but
they argue that the Tribunal's interpretation of the principle of non-retroactivity of
treaties was egregiously wrong and so grave as to be tantamount to an abrogation of
the BIT.

In the Applicants’ view, the relevant “omission” is Ecuador's failure to fulfill its
obligation to pay US$ 24.2 million in respect of the “accounts receivable.” The alleged
payment obligation is essentially based on the Seacoast Contract. The alleged

Award, paras. 42-44
Soufraki v. UAE, supra note 15, para. 85; Kldckner (I), supra note 14, para. 60; Amco I, supra note 15, para. 23; MTD v. Chile, supra

note 10, para. 47; CMS v. Argentina, supra note 15, paras. 49-52. In MINE, supra note 15, paras. 5.03-5.04, the ad hoc Committee expressed
the view that: “/a] tribunal's disregard of the agreed rules of law would constitute a derogation from the terms of reference within which the
tribunal has been authorized to function. Examples of such a derogation include the application of rules of law other than the ones agreed by
the parties, or a decision not based on any law unless the parties had agreed on a decision ex aequo et bono. If the derogation is manifest, it

entails a manifest excess of power.”

“

Ameo I, supra note 15, para. 23
MINE, supra note 15, paras.5.03-5.04,
Soufraki v. UAE, supra note 15, para, 86.

20

4S.

46.

 

payment obligation started before the BIT had entered into force on May 11, 1997 but
continued beyond that date. In the absence of special rules in the U.S.-Ecuador BIT,
the only relevant temporal restriction is the limitation applicable to treaties in general,
as reflected in Article 28 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties which
excludes the retroactive application of a treaty to “any act or fact which took place or
any situation which ceased to exist before the entry into force of the treaty.” Ecuador
relied upon Article 28 in support of its main objection to the competence of the
Tribunal because of the non-retroactivity of the BIT,”” while M.C.I. and New Turbine
pleaded that Article 28 only bars a tribunal's ability to examine conduct occurring
before a treaty came into force to the extent that that conduct ceased to exist before the
date on which the treaty came into force.”°

Although Article 28 refers to an “acf”, it must be assumed that an “omission” which is
claimed to be a breach of treaty obligations is to be assimilated to an “act”. Several
paragraphs of the Award in which the Tribunal refers to “acts or omissions” show that
the Tribunal also assimilated “omissions” to “acts” (see for instance para. 97 of the
Award). It is important to note that the relevant point in time in Article 28 is not when
a dispute arose but the time when an act or fact took place or a situation ceased to
exist. This is a distinction of considerable importance in the present case as the
Republic of Ecuador acknowledged in the course of the oral hearing. ™ Th its Award,
the Tribunal nevertheless attached special weight to the fact that the dispute about the
“accounts receivable” arose before the BIT entered into force. The Tribunal stated,
inter alia, as follows: “The non-retroactivity of the BIT excludes its application to
disputes arising prior to its entry into force." [...] Prior disputes that continue after
the entry into force of the BIT are not covered by the BIT?”

If it is accepted that the “accounts receivable” are protected as an “investment” under
the BIT,*° the Applicants contend that it would be logical to consider their alleged
right to receive payment to be protected under the BIT as from the date of its entry into
force. As stated above, the BIT was made applicable to investments already existing at
the time of its entry into force.*! Moreover, according to Article VI(1)(a) of the BIT, a
dispute arising out of an investment agreement was to be regarded as an investment
dispute. In response to a question from the Committee, the Applicants declared that
“Article VI(1)(a) is a prime rule” which expresses “a different intention [...] under
Article 28” of the Vienna Convention.® It would follow that, while the dispute arose
before the BIT entered into force, Ecuador's failure to pay its alleged debt, which the
Applicants consider to be a breach of both the Seacoast Contract and the BIT,
continued after the entry into force of the BIT. In other words, the “claim to money”,
which before May 11, 1997 was exclusively a contractual claim, became an existing

Award, para, 47
Id., para, 58

Tr. p. 215.
Award, para. 61
Id., para. 66
Id, para. 164,
Id., para. 162
Tr. pp. 194-195,

21

“investment” protected under the BIT after its entry into force. Having regard to the
language of Article 28 of the Vienna Convention, the situation regarding the “accounts
receivable” could be considered not to have ceased to exist before the date of the entry
into force of the BIT.

47. The said reasoning presupposes that Ecuador’s failure to pay its alleged debt is not
considered an instantaneous omission but is accepted as a continuous omission or as a
durable situation. However, this is not the way the facts are interpreted by the
Tribunal. On the contrary, after referring to Ecuador’s conclusion that the alleged
offence was consummated prior to the entry into force of the BIT in a completed act of
refusal to recognize the rights claimed by Seacoast,*? and after commenting on
previous case-law™ and the ILC Draft Articles on the Responsibility of States for
Internationally Wrongful Acts,*° the Tribunal concluded that the acts and omissions
alleged by the Claimants as having occurred prior to the entry into force of the BIT did
not constitute continuing and composite acts under the BIT.

48. It thus appears that the Tribunal did regard Ecuador’s refusal to pay the alleged
accounts receivable as an instantaneous act occurring before the date of the entry into
force of the BIT rather than as a continuing omission extending beyond that date. This
may explain the Tribunal’s further conclusion that the present dispute falls outside the
temporal limitations of the BIT, although the relevant element under Article 28 of the
Vienna Convention would be the date when the act occurred or the situation ceased to
exist rather than the date when the dispute arose.

49. In any case, what is required for annulment under Article 52(1)(b) of the Washington
Convention is a “manifest excess of powers” which should be understood as
tantamount to a safety valve allowing for the rejection of arbitrary or unreasonable
decisions. In MINE, the ad hoc Committee ruled that “Article 52(1)(b) does not
provide a sanction for every excess of its powers by a tribunal but requires that the
excess be manifest which necessarily limits an ad hoc Committee's freedom of
appreciation as to whether the tribunal has exceeded its powers.”*" In Wena v. Egypt,
the ad hoc Committee specified that “/t/he excess of power must be self-evident rather
than the product of elaborate interpretations one way or the other” and that, when
such interpretations are needed, “the excess of power is no longer manifest.”** In CDC
v. Seychelles, the Committee also pointed out that “the term ‘manifest’ means clear or
‘self evident’” and added: “Thus, even if a Tribunal exceeds its powers, the excess
must be plain on its face for annulment to be an available remedy. Any excess
apparent in a Tribunal's conduct, if susceptible of argument ‘one way or the other’ is
not manifest.” The decision of the ad hoc Committee in Patrick Mitchell v Congo

Award, para. 81
“ Id., para. 84.

% Id., paras. 85-92.

“6 i Para 97.

” "supra note 15, para. 4.06. See also CDC Group ple v. Republic Md Seychelles (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision on
Annulment "june 29, 2005, para, 39 (hereinafter referred to as CDC ¥. Seychelles

“Wena v. Egypt, supra note 15, para. 25.
* CDC v. Seychelles, supra note 87, para. 41

22

50.

Sl.

also lends credence to such view: “Jf an excess of powers is to be the cause of an
annulment, the ad hoc Committee must find with certainty and immediacy, without it
being necessary to engage in elaborate analyses of the award.”®° In sum, the manifest
excess requirement in Article 52(1)(b) suggests a somewhat higher degree of proof
than a searching analysis of the findings of the Tribunal.

The parties in the present case accept the principle of non-retroactivity of treaties as
set out in Article 28 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. The Tribunal
noted in its Award that the Claimants did not “deny the non-retroactive nature of the
BIT.”*! The Tribunal also noted, however, the Claimants’ argument that the Tribunal
must consider events occurring before the BIT entered into force because Ecuador's
actions, although starting before the BIT's entry into force, were of a continuing or
composite nature, and thus were taking place also after the BIT had entered into force.
The Claimants further submitted that events occurring prior to the entry into force of
the BIT were important for determining the damages caused by Ecuador's actions after
that date.°* The Tribunal concluded that “{...] the intention of the contracting Parties
[of the BIT] with respect to its retrospective application is not evident from its clauses
or in any other manner. In accordance with the norms of general international law
codified in the Vienna Convention, and particularly in Article 28, the Tribunal notes
that because of the fact that the BIT applies to investments existing at the time of its
entry into force, the temporal effects of its clauses are not modified.”** It is common
ground that Article 28 is a dispositive rule and that the Contracting States may wish to
derogate from it by conferring retroactive applicability to their BIT. The Applicants
have for example expressly admitted during the hearing that it is not an intangible
principle.”*

The present case is not a case where the Tribunal admitted a legal principle and then
willfully decided to disregard it. In MTD v. Chile, the ad hoc Committee emphasized
that “/t/he error must be ‘manifest’, not arguable, and a misapprehension (still less
mere disagreement) as to the content of a particular rule is not enough.”®> As the ad
hoc Committee in Soufraki v. UAE declared, “fs/uch gross and consequential
misinterpretation or misapplication of the proper law which no reasonable person
(‘bon pére de famille’) could accept needs to be distinguished from simple error —
even a serious error — in the interpretation of the law which in many national
jurisdictions may be the subject of ordinary appeal as distinguished from, e.g., an
extraordinary writ of certiorari.”°° An egregious violation of the law would assume
that there is a departure from a legal principle or legal norm which is clear and cannot
give rise to divergent interpretations. Any other type of violation would not amount to
a manifest excess of powers. Should more than one interpretation of a legal norm or
tule be possible, no serious violation can ensue where one of these interpretations has

Patrick Mitchell v. Congo, supra note 15, para. 20.
Award, para, 55.

Id., para. 56

Id., para. 59

Tr. pp. 194-196

MTD v. Chile, supra note 10, para. 47

Soufraki v. UAE, supra note 15, para, 86

23

52.

53.

been chosen. As the Lucchetti v. Peru Committee remarked, “/t/reaty interpretation is
not an exact science, and it is frequently the case that there is more than one possible
interpretation of a disputed provision, sometimes several.”

Construction of the BIT has been approached by the Tribunal in terms of treaty
interpretation. Both parties, which had already staked out irreconcilable positions
before the Tribunal, have in these annulment proceedings exchanged contradictory
pleadings on the retroactive application of the U.S.-Ecuador BIT and invoked, inter
alia, the authority of ICSID awards and those of other investment tribunals as well as
the judgment of the PCIJ in Mavrommatis in support of their respective interpretations
of the BIT. The Applicants have relied on Mondev v. United States, UPS v. Canada
and SGS v. Philippines to show that tribunals have accepted jurisdiction over a dispute
that arose before its governing treaty came into force. The Republic of Ecuador has
invoked the awards in Lucchetti v. Peru, Jan de Nul v. Egypt, Pey Casado v. Chile,
Mondev v. United States, Impregilo v. Pakistan and Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine as
well as the judgment of the ICJ in Ambatielos, to demonstrate that the Tribunal was
right in declining jurisdiction over a dispute arising before the BIT came into force.
The parties have argued over the significance of these awards and judgments and their
relevance to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal over the accounts receivable dispute under
the U.S.-Ecuador BIT and have also invoked legal doctrine. The Applicants further
rely on the decision of the Soufraki v. UAE Committee which stated: “/ndeed, the
Tribunal cited no authority whatsoever for its conclusion. But if the principle on which
the Award is based does exist, there is in reality no ground for annulment [...].°* The
Applicants interpret such statement as meaning that, in the reverse, if the principle for
which the Tribunal failed to provide authority was not in fact justifiable, the Tribunal's
reliance on that principle would have involved a manifest excess of powers. The
Applicants do not indicate why and how an opinion possibly different from those they
rely upon is untenable and could not be supported by reasonable arguments. The
parties' competing contentions and the investment cases referred to in one way or
another in support of their positions provide sufficient evidence that temporal
applicability of consent to disputes that arose before the coming into force may be
subject to debate. Moreover, the Applicants’ interpretation of Article VI of the BIT is
not the only reasonable interpretation of the Treaty. Other views are also possible and
could not necessarily be discarded as being fundamentally wrong. The refusal of the
Tribunal to exercise jurisdiction over the accounts receivable appears to the ad hoc
Committee to be a debatable solution, and notwithstanding that another solution would
have been possible, the Committee cannot find in this respect any egregious violation
of the law on the part of the Tribunal.

The Applicants suggest another interpretation of the principle of non-retroactivity of
treaties which would be consonant with their own understanding that, absent an
express non-retroactivity clause in the BIT, the Treaty governs disputes that arose
before it came into force, provided that such disputes continued to exist at the time of
its entry into force. The Applicants point out that the U.S.-Ecuador BIT differs from

Lucchetti v, Peru, supra note 15, para. 112.
Soufraki v. UAE, supra note 15, para, 63.

24

54.

55.

100

tot

tos

many BITs which provide that disputes arising before the entry into force of the BIT
are excluded from the application of the BIT. In support of their interpretation, they
make a comparison with the language of these other investment treaties, in particular
with those signed by Ecuador or the United States. However, whilst it is not the task of
the Committee to make its own choice between different interpretations of the
applicable BIT, special weight must be given to the Tribunal’s interpretation which the
Committee can only set aside in the narrow circumstances provided by Article 52 of
the Washington Convention. The plain reading of Article VI(1)(a) and Article VI(1)(c)
suggested by the Applicants is in fact an invitation to the Committee to revise the
Tribunal's conclusions on the interpretation of the temporal application of the BIT; the
Committee is, however, not free to do so on the basis of Article 52(1)(b).

More generally, the Committee would be treating the request as an appeal and not as a
request for annulment if it accepted the Applicants' invitation to review the Tribunal's
findings in light of the rules of interpretation set out in Article 31 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties or to discuss the Applicants' interpretation of
Article VI(1)(a) whose language,” they also assert, extends to contractual disputes
without any temporal limitation as opposed to Article VI(1)(c) which concerns
violations of the BIT. The ad hoc Committee in CMS v. Argentina held that it had “no
jurisdiction to control the interpretation [...] given by the Tribunal to [an applicable
provision].”'*” The Committee has also in mind that the K/éckner (I) annulment
decision cautioned about “the fine distinction between ‘non-application’ of the
applicable law and mistaken application of such law”'*' and that in Wena v. Egypt, the
ad hoc Committee subsequently declared that it was mindful of “the distinction
between failure to apply the proper law and the error in judicando drawn in Kléckner
(I), and the consequential need to avoid the reopening of the merits in proceedings
that would turn annulment into appeal.”'” In combating the Tribunal's failure to
“properly” apply the terms of the BIT which, in their opinion, place no temporal
limitation on jurisdiction with respect to disputes arising out of or in relation to the
Seacoast Contract, the Applicants are seeking a remedy which cannot be provided by
the Committee acting under Article 52. The Committee would otherwise be
superimposing its own views about the correct solution. As stated by the ad hoc
Committee in CMS v. Argentina, “the Committee cannot simply substitute its own view
of the law and its own appreciation of the facts for those of the Tribunal.”'®

It makes no difference that the issue in this case is about the Tribunal’s jurisdiction,
since jurisdiction does not give the ad hoc Committee a wider competence to assess
the validity of the award under Article 52 but must be dealt with as any other issue.
The standards for reviewing the Tribunal's decision about competence are therefore
the same as those which ad hoc committees should apply when they review any other
matters. In Soufraki v. UAE, the ad hoc Committee stated that it saw “no reason why
the rule that an excess of power must be manifest in order to be annullable should be

Article VI(1)(a) of the BIT, supra note 41
CMS y, Argentina, supra note 15, para. 85.
Klockner (1), supra note 14, para. 60.

Wena v. Egypt, supra note 15, para. 22
CMS y, Argentina, supra note 15, para.

25

56.

57.

tot

tos

10s

disregarded when the question under discussion is a jurisdictional issue.” The
Committee added: “Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention does not distinguish between
findings on jurisdiction and findings on the merits [...]. It follows that the requirement
that an excess of power must be ‘manifest’ applies equally if the question is one of
jurisdiction. A jurisdictional error is not a separate category of excess of power.”'* In
the already mentioned decision of the ad hoc Committee in Lucchetti v. Peru, a
number of pertinent observations were made concerning the standard of “manifest
excess of powers” in relation to the competence of the Tribunal to which this
Committee adheres: “/...) the requirements in Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention is not only that the Tribunal has exceeded its powers but that it has done
so ‘manifestly’. From the writings of legal scholars it appears that there are divergent
views on the impact of this additional requirement of ‘manifestness’. On the one hand,
the view has been expressed that where an ad hoc Committee finds that a tribunal has
wrongly either exercised or failed to exercise jurisdiction, the award should be
annulled, wholly or partly, without any further examination of whether the excess was
manifest. On the other hand, it has been held by others that there should be no
annulment when the tribunal has wrongly assumed, or failed to assume, jurisdiction,
but its decision on this point was tenable, since in such a case the tribunal would not
have manifestly acted contrary to the BIT. [...] The ad hoc Committee, for its part,
attaches weight to the fact that the wording of Article 52(1)(b) is general and makes
no exception for issues of jurisdiction. Moreover, a request for annulment is not an
appeal, which means that there should not be a full review of the tribunal's award.
One general purpose of Article 52, including its sub-paragraph (1)(b), must be that
annulment should not occur easily. From this perspective, the Committee considers
that the word ‘manifest’ should be given considerable weight also when matters of
jurisdiction are concerned.”'

   

A decision that there is no jurisdiction may result in a manifest excess of powers when
the Tribunal has acted outside the proper bounds of its competence. The Lucchetti v.
Peru Committee declared: “Where a tribunal assumes jurisdiction in a matter for
which it lacks competence under the relevant BIT, it exceeds its powers. The same is
true in the inverse case where a tribunal refuses or fails to exercise jurisdiction in a
matter for which it is competent under the BIT. The Ad hoc Committee considers that
these situations are analogous and should be assessed according to the same legal
standards.”"

In view of the above, the ad hoc Committee concludes that the Applicants have not
shown that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by failing to exercise
jurisdiction over the accounts receivable. Consequently, the Tribunal’s Award cannot
be annulled on the basis of Article 52(1)(b) of the Washington Convention.

Soufraki v. UAE, supra note 15, paras 118-119.
Lucchetti v, Peru, supra note 15, paras. 100-101
Id., para. 99)

26

Vv.

ARTICLE 52(1)(e): FAILURE TO STATE REASONS

A) PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS:

58.

59.

60.

on

Award, para, 97

The Applicants first contend that the Tribunal failed to state reasons
for the Award by forgetting to address the question whether Ecuador
breached the BIT by continuously refusing to pay the US$ 24.2 million
outstanding accounts receivable owed to them whether on a continuous
basis or only after the entry into force of the Treaty, which is,
according to the Applicants, a failure to address an issue of sufficient
importance affecting the outcome of the Award. The Applicants
submit that, because the Tribunal found that the accounts receivable
were a protected investment at the time the BIT came into force, the
Tribunal was obliged to apply the procedural and substantive
protection of the BIT to that investment. The Tribunal however did not
deal with this matter on the merits and offered no reasons whatsoever
for this deliberate omission. The Applicants contend that had the
Tribunal turned its mind to the fact of Ecuador's refusal to honor the
debt it owed to them for their accounts receivable, it may well have
concluded that Ecuador violated the obligations observance clause
under the BIT. This error was in the Applicants’ view, of the utmost
significance for the legal rights of the parties, and as a result they were
denied a chance of redress and reparation.

The Applicants submit that their arguments on the continuous failure
to pay the accounts receivable would have required the Tribunal to
make a determination of when the refusal began, and more
importantly, when it was consummated. They complain that the
Tribunal, nonetheless, neglected to turn its mind to this important
factual issue and, instead of looking at the concrete elements of this
case, developed an analysis restricted to an esoteric discussion on the
law of continuing and composite acts. The Applicants allege that the
Tribunal, without engaging in any type of application of the legal rules
concerning continuous breach to the facts of the case, dismissed their
arguments in a perfunctory manner in ruling that the “acts and
omissions alleged by the Claimants as being prior to the entry into
force of the BIT do not constitute continuing and composite wrongful
acts under the BIT.”\®"

The Applicants next assert that, if the Tribunal is deemed to have
implicitly addressed the question of its jurisdiction over the accounts
receivable claim, yet to have rejected it because the dispute arose
before the U.S.-Ecuador BIT came into force, the reasoning is
incoherent, frivolous and therefore amounts to a failure to state
reasons. The Applicants argue in this regard that there is no connection

27

61.

62.

63.

tos

Id., para. 189.

between the Tribunal's decision and its unsubstantiated reliance on
Article 28 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, where
nothing suggests that tribunals do not have jurisdiction over disputes
arising before the treaty came into force.

The Applicants finally contend that, to the extent that the Tribunal
failed to assume jurisdiction over the contractual side of the dispute,
the Tribunal also failed to state reasons on which the award is based.
Instead, the Tribunal simply treated the channels for resolving the
contractual and BIT disputes as one-and-the-same, and held that the
principle of non-retroactivity of treaties precluded it from taking
jurisdiction over the dispute. The Tribunal concluded that it need not
determine whether Ecuador breached the Seacoast Contract because
the U.S.-Ecuador BIT was not in force at the time when the alleged
breaches took place. According to the Applicants, it gave no indication
as to how it reached that conclusion and simply parroted its earlier
finding that “in accordance with the principle of non-retroactivity of
treaties, [contractual] disputes remain outside the temporal
Competence of this Tribunal.”'** The Applicants point out that such
conclusion is inadequate, incoherent and patently wrong in law
according to the plain language of Article VI(1)(a) of the BIT.

The Republic of Ecuador affirms that the Tribunal ruled clearly and
explicitly on the issue of the accounts receivable. At the hearing before
the ad hoc Committee, the Republic of Ecuador alleged that the
Applicants made a contract claim and invoked Article VI(1)(a) of the
BIT for the first time in the annulment proceedings and that
furthermore the request for arbitration did not include such claim. The
Republic of Ecuador nonetheless held that the Tribunal decided the
claim under the Contract, even though it could have been excused for
not deciding a question that was not presented to it by M.C.I. and New
Turbine.

The Republic of Ecuador states that, with respect to everything that
happened prior to the BIT's entry into force, including the accounts
receivable, the Tribunal decided that it lacked jurisdiction because
these were allegations that, if they came to be proven, would constitute
“intangible assets” considered prima facie as an investment but which
could not give rise to violations of the BIT because the BIT was not in
force at the time the alleged contractual breaches took place. Their
resolution does not fall within the scope of the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal. The Republic of Ecuador observes that the Tribunal found
that the accounts receivable were one of the points in a dispute that
arose and ended prior to the entry into force of the BIT and that, in
accordance with the principle of the non-retroactivity of treaties,

28

64.

65.

disputes that arose before the BIT came into force are outside its
jurisdiction. The Republic of Ecuador affirms that the Tribunal dealt
with the issue of the dismissal of the accounts receivable claim when
asserting that, in accordance with customary international law, the
relevant element to determine the very existence of an internationally
wrongful act is the violation of a norm of international law existing at
the time when the act begins. The BIT does not apply to acts or facts
which are completed or to situations which have ceased to exist before
the Treaty came into force.

The Republic of Ecuador maintains that the Tribunal considered the
arguments of M.C.I. and New Turbine and expressly determined that
the refusal to pay was not a continuous act, and that, therefore, there
could be no beginning or consummation. Such a distinction is
impossible when the act, such as Ecuador's refusal to recognize
M.C.L's alleged right, is instantaneous. As case-law in Mondev v.
United States'® and Impregilo v. Pakistan''® demonstrates, a conduct
which gives rise to a dispute must be distinguished from its final
effects. Ecuador's refusal to acknowledge Seacoast's rights constitutes
only the final effects of a conduct which arose before the entry into
force of the BIT. The fact that Seacoast insisted on its claim several
times over the years and that Ecuador repeatedly responded each time
that the claims were unfounded does not mean that the refusal was a
continuing act. The Republic of Ecuador considers that the Applicants,
by insisting on the same argument, only try to have the Committee
review and reconstruct facts. However, the Tribunal’s findings of fact
are not the subject of annulment proceedings. The contractual claim is
based on the same dispute, involving the same underlying facts which
the Tribunal found to have occurred prior to the entry into force of the
BIT and therefore fails for the same reasons as the treaty-based claim.

The Republic of Ecuador finally considers that the reasons provided by
the Tribunal are sufficient, that the reasoning is clear and coherent and
devoid of contradiction, and that this characteristic does not disappear
even if it were to be admitted hypothetically that the Tribunal's point
of departure that an express rule is required to make Article VI(4) of
the BIT retroactive was mistaken, because it is not in the nature of the
annulment proceedings to correct the supposed error''!. The Republic
of Ecuador asserts that the Applicants confuse absence of reasons with
a discrepancy over the correctness of the reasons invoked, but the
Tribunal has expressed its reasons which unquestionably make it
possible to understand the grounds for its decision, and the fact that the

 Mondev v. United States, supra note 31, para. 58.

'° Impregilo v. Pakistan, supra note 38, para. 313,

uw

Award, para

 

59-97.

29

Applicants do not agree with them does not constitute grounds for
annulment.

B) ANALYSIS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE:

66.

67.

68.

ha

Failure to state reasons is a ground for annulment frequently invoked in applications
for annulment. Although failure to deal with questions submitted to the Tribunal is not
a separate ground for annulment under Article 52 of the Washington Convention, there
is a pattern of past decisions of ad hoc committees that have considered that such
failure amounts to a failure to state reasons. For example, the ad hoc Committee in
MINE annulled the award for failure to deal with questions presented by the parties.!
The Applicants concede that, “for the purposes of annulment, just as a tribunal's
excess of power must be substantially serious, so too must a tribunal's failure to
address a question at issue be more than a trivial or otherwise inconsequential
oversight.”'? Their statement accords with the ad hoc Committee decision in Wena v.
Egypt which specified that “/t/he ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(e)
includes therefore the case where the Tribunal omitted to decide upon a question
submitted to it to the extent such supplemental decision may affect the reasoning
supporting the Award.”'"*

According to Article 48(3) of the Washington Convention, “/t/he award shall deal
with every question submitted to the Tribunal, and shall state the reasons upon which
it is based.” The obligation in Article 48(3) of the Washington Convention to deal
with every question applies to every argument which is relevant and in particular to
arguments which might affect the outcome of the case. On the other hand, it would be
unreasonable to require a tribunal to answer each and every argument which was made
in connection with the issues that the tribunal has to decide, as acknowledged in the
Kléckner (1) decision.''* This explains why the tribunal must address all the parties’
“questions” (“pretensiones”) but is not required to comment on all arguments when
they are of no relevance to the award.

The Wena v. Egypt Committee also declared that Article 48(3) makes a distinction
between the tribunal's duty to deal with every question submitted to it and the
requirement that the award shall state the reasons upon which it is based: “The ground
for annulment of Article 52(1)(e) only refers to the latter element. In case a Tribunal
has omitted to decide a question in the award, a party may request the Tribunal to
decide such question, in an additional proceeding pursuant to Article 49(2) which is
distinct from an annulment proceeding under Article 52.7"! The remedy in case of an
omission to decide a question is not therefore always a request for the annulment of

MINE, supra note 15, para. 6.101, “The Tribunal either failed to consider them, or it did consider them but thought that Guinea's

arguments should be rejected. But that did not free the Tribunal from its duty to give reasons for its rejection as an indispensable component
of the statement of reasons on which its conclusion was based.” See also Kldckner (I), supra note 14, paras. 141, 151, 164; MINE, para

6.108.

13

is

Lis

Memorial, para. 60.
upra note 15, para. 101, See also, MINE, supra note 15, para. 6.99.

 

Klockner (1), supra note 14, para, 131
Wena v. Egypt, supra note 15, para. 100.

30

69.

70.

ur

us

us

*

9

0

q

Award, p
d., para. 225.

the award; there is another remedy in Article 49(2) of the Washington Convention
when there is an omission or error that can be corrected without reconsideration of the
tribunal's award.

According to Article 49(2) of the Washington Convention, a request for a
supplementary decision or correction has to be made within 45 days of the date when
the award was rendered. The relationship between the annulment proceedings and the
proceedings for completion or correction of an award has been analyzed in the Amco I
decision. The ad hoc Committee stated that the obligation set out in Article 48(3) of
the Convention can find its sanction under Article 52(1)(e) while Article 49 offers a
remedy for unintentional omissions to decide any question.''’ In the present case, the
Applicants did not initiate Article 49(2) proceedings, as pointed out by the Republic of
Ecuador.''® Answering a question from the Committee as to why they had not asked
the Tribunal to render a supplementary decision, the Applicants explained that the
findings of the Tribunal were an insurmountable obstacle to an application under
Article 49(2).!!

In their Notice for arbitration, M.C.I. and New Turbine specified that their request
concerned an “investment dispute” within the meaning of Article VI of the BIT.'”°
They stated in their Memorial that the Tribunal had jurisdiction under Article VI(2) of
the BIT to hear their claim “to pay sums properly due and owing under the Contract
and to provide compensation upon expropriation.”'*' M.C.I. and New Turbine
claimed damages of US$ 24,242,784 in total for losses from the Seacoast Contract, !7
and they submitted that Ecuador had acted in a manner inconsistent with the umbrella
clause of Article II(3)(c) of the U.S.-Ecuador BIT, which states that “/eJach Party
shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments.”
They claimed that Ecuador's actions and omissions constituted a failure to observe its
contractual obligations as required by the BIT and international law.'?? This
submission was reiterated in their Reply.'"* There is some confusion between the
parties about the introduction of the non-payment of the accounts receivable as a
contractual claim before ICSID,'?° while claims based on breach of the Seacoast
Contract had already been raised against INECEL before the Administrative Court of
the District of Quito on July 31, 1996.'?° In elevating the breach of a contractual
obligation to treaty level, an umbrella clause increases the Contracting States'
accountability, and this is particularly the case when the contract is signed by a State
entity, such as here, INECEL, which the Tribunal recognized as an organ of the
Republic of Ecuador.'” When an umbrella clause exists, such as in the U.S.-Ecuador

Ameo I, supra note 15, paras. 32-34.
Counter-Memorial, para. 30.

Tr. pp. 175-176, 197-199.

Notice for arbitration, para. 13.

Claimants’ arbitration Memorial, para. 275(¢) and (4).
Id., para. 519.

Id., para. 522(i)

Claimants’ arbitration Reply, para. 275(b).

Tr. pp. 121-125, 202-206,

 

05.

31

71.

72.

bs

9

bo

BIT in Article II(3), the distinction between a treaty claim and a contract claim loses
much of its interest. In oral argument, the Republic of Ecuador specifically stated that
the Tribunal decided all questions regarding both treaty-based and contract-based
claims.

The Applicants seek to have the Award annulled with reference to Article VI(1)(c) as
well as Article VI(1)(a) of the BIT, and it appears from the following passage of the
Award that the Tribunal took cognizance of alleged Treaty breaches as well as
contractual breaches: “The Tribunal is aware that in the proceedings commenced
before the Ecuadorian courts, Seacoast claimed for contractual breaches under the
Seacoast Contract and the Clarification Contract. On the other hand, the present
action submitted to the ICSID by the Claimants is based on breach of contract and of
the BIT and takes account of events before, as well as after, the submission of the
claim to the Ecuadorian courts.”'” In fact, according to Article VI(4) of the BIT,'"°
the treaty-based Tribunal has competence on “any investment dispute,” regardless of
the legal basis of the claim. As regards its jurisdiction, the Tribunal decided “J. To
allow the Respondent's main objections to the Tribunal's Competence in respect of the
non-retroactivity of the BIT; and 2. To reject the objections to the Tribunal's
Competence with respect to the non-existence of an investment and the preclusion of
the ‘fork-in-the-road’ provision and consequently exercise its Competence over the
Respondent's alleged violations of the BIT by acts or omissions after the entry into
force of the BIT.”"*' The Applicants’ complaint is nonetheless that the Tribunal failed
to address the issue of jurisdiction over their claims for the outstanding accounts
receivable and for breach of the contract, which, they affirm, is an issue of sufficient
significance, with the consequence that the Tribunal failed to state the reasons on
which the Award is based.

  

As the Applicants emphasized in their oral argument, Article VI(2) which offers
investors jurisdictional alternatives, including ICSID arbitration, presupposes that
there must be an investment dispute before a claim can be raised.'** Article VI(4) of
the BIT allows the submission to arbitration of “any investment dispute” within the
broad meaning of Article VI(1), regardless of whether the investment dispute is based
on a violation of the BIT as envisaged by Article VI(1)(c) or originates in a violation
of contract as foreseen by Article VI(1)(a). M.C.I. and New Turbine alleged in the
arbitration that Seacoast and its intangible assets in Ecuador were an investment before
and after the entry into force of the Treaty." Ecuador replied that the requirements of
the BIT and of Article 25 of the Washington Convention were not met, the concept of
investment not being defined, or not being defined with precision, in either the
Washington Convention or the BIT.'*4 As pointed out in the Award,'* Seacoast had

Tr. p. 125
Award, para. 188.
Article VI(4) of the BIT provides that: “Zach Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment dispute for settlement by

binding arbitration {...].”

Award, para, 191
Tr. p. 204,

Award, para, 39.

Id., paras, 137-146. In its ruling in fa

 

or of M.C.L and New Turbine on that count, the Tribunal answered the arguments of Ecuador that

 

the existence of an investment presupposes certain conditions when it clarified that “the requirements that were taken into account in some

32

filed a suit with the Ecuadorian administrative courts on July 31, 1996 to request
damages of approximately US$ 24.2 million for breach of contract. The claim
included payment for available energy under the “take or pay” contract, payment for
fuel consumed which had not been settled, return of amounts improperly withheld for
fines, payment of interest and damages sustained. The “accounts receivable” are
financial claims connected with the Applicants' investment, and the Tribunal accepted
that they fall in principle under the definition of “investment” in Article 1(a) of the
BIT. This Article contains the following language: “(a) ‘investment’ means every kind
of investment in the territory of one Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by
nationals or companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and
in contracts; and ii : fi) ible and ii ible property, ludi
rights, such as mortgages, liens and pledges; (ii) a company or shares of stock or
other interests in a company or interests in the assets thereof; (iii) a claim to money or
a claim to performance having economic value, and associated with an investment;
(iv) intellectual property [...] (v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any
licenses and permits pursuant to law [...].” The Tribunal thus interpreted Article 1(a)
of the BIT as giving a broad definition of investment and decided that the rights and
interests alleged by the Applicants to have subsisted after the entry into force of the
BIT, including the intangible assets of “accounts receivable,” would fit that
definition.'*° The inclusion of their claims within the definition of “investment” in
Article 1(a) did not mean that the “accounts receivable” were necessarily valid legal
claims. Whether or not this was the case was in dispute between the parties. This did
not exclude the Tribunal's competence but would be a matter to be examined at the
stage of the merits of the proceedings. Indeed, the Tribunal found that “for purposes of
determining if it has Competence it is sufficient to consider the events as alleged by
the Claimants insofar and inasmuch as, if proven true, they would constitute a breach
of the BIT.””'*7

72. When addressing the question of the temporal application of the BIT to the
investments of Seacoast in Ecuador, the Tribunal remarked that “/t/he Claimants'
arguments with respect to the relevance of prior events considered to be breaches of
the Treaty posit a contradiction since, before the entry into force of the BIT, there was
no possibility of breaching it.”'** While recognizing that the subsistence of an
investment on the date of entry into force of the BIT should be taken into account, the
Tribunal did not conclude that it had competence over all claims of M.C.I. and New
Turbine. The claims for breach of the Seacoast Contract, which included the failure to
pay the alleged US$ 24.2 million outstanding accounts receivable that was presented
to the Liquidation Commission sitting between April 1997 and March 1999,'*? had

 

arbitral precedents for purposes of denoting an investment protected by a treaty (such as the duration and risk of the alleged investment)
must be considered as mere examples and not necessarily as elements that are required for its existence” and that “[nJevertheless, the
Tribunal considers that the very elements of the Seacoast project and the consequences thereof fall within the characterizations required in
order to determine the existence of protected investments.” (para. 165).

  

85 Td., paras. 205 and 342.
86 Td., para. 164.

87 Jd., para, 163

BS Td., para. 93.

8° Td., paras. 209, 212.

33

74.

75.

 

Id.,

arisen before the entry into force of the BIT as recognized in the statement of the
Tribunal in paragraph 277 of the Award where it considered “that the failure to agree
on liquidation of the Contract was due to the prior existence of an unresolved dispute
between the parties.”

The Award records the allegation of M.C.I. and New Turbine that Ecuador breached
its BIT obligations by continuing and composite wrongful acts.'4° The Applicants’
argument is more specifically expounded in paragraph 70 of the Award: “Ecuador's
final refusal to pay occurred when the Liquidation Commission proceedings were
considered terminated, afier the BIT had entered into force. That Commission was an
integral element of the Seacoast Contract. Therefore, the Claimants argue,
expropriation of Seacoast's contractual rights was only complete after the Liquidation
Commission proceedings were concluded.” The Award also notes that Ecuador
disagreed and replied that the dispute concerning the payment of amounts supposedly
owed by INECEL to Seacoast had no relation at all to the concept of an internationally
wrongful act or to wrongful acts of a continuing character and asserted that the offence
alleged by the Claimants was consummated prior to the entry into force of the BIT ina
completed act by which INECEL refused to recognize the rights claimed by
Seacoast. '!

The Tribunal examined the ILC Draft Articles on the Responsibility of States for
Internationally Wrongful Acts which had been invoked by M.C.I. and New Turbine, '
in particular Articles 14 and 15 thereof.'* It explained that wrongful acts must be
internationally wrongful acts which, in its view, meant that “they must be identified
with the violation of a norm of international law”' existing at the time when the act
extending in time begins or when it is consummated.'* It further found that “[t]he
non-retroactivity of treaties as a general rule postulates that only from the entry into
force of an international obligation does the latter give rise to rights and obligations
for the parties” and that “[herefore, in any internationally wrongful act to be

idered as , there must be a breach of a
norm of international law attributed to a State eons In addition, the Tribunal examined
the possible breach of a norm of customary international law before the entry into
force of the BIT, but concluded, by reference to the NAFTA award in Mondev v.
United States which distinguished from a substantive and procedural point of view
between a NAFTA claim and a diplomatic protection claim for conduct contrary to
customary international law, that the existence of such breach before a BIT enters into
force would not give M.C.I. and New Turbine a right to have recourse to the treaty-
based Tribunal.'*” Closing the discussion on the existence of continuing and
composite acts, the Tribunal decided that “/fJor the above reasons, and in accordance

. para, 69.

para, 96.
34

76.

77.

us

M9

with the principle of non-retroactivity of treaties, the Tribunal holds that the acts and
omissions alleged by the Claimants as being prior to the entry into force of the BIT do
not constitute continuing and composite wrongful acts under the BIT?”

There is no reason to believe that the Tribunal's aforementioned conclusion in
paragraph 97 did not include the refusal to pay the outstanding accounts receivable
and, consequently, the Tribunal cannot be considered to have failed to give reasons in
this respect. The ad hoc Committee in Wena v. Egypt declared: “Neither Article 48(3)
nor Article 52(1)(e) specify the manner in which the Tribunal's reasons are to be
stated. The object of both provisions is to ensure that the Parties will be able to
understand the Tribunal's reasoning. This goal does not require that each reason be
stated expressly. The Tribunal's reasons may be implicit in the considerations and
conclusions contained in the award, provided they can be reasonably inferred from
the terms in the decision [...]. It is in the nature of this ground of annulment that in
case the award suffers from a lack of reasons which can be challenged within the
meaning and scope of Article 52(1)(e), the remedy need not be the annulment of the
award. The purpose of this particular ground for annulment is not to have the award
reversed on its merits. It is to allow the parties to understand the Tribunal's decision.
If the award does not meet the minimal requirement as to the reasons given by the
Tribunal, it does not necessarily need to be resubmitted to a new Tribunal. If the ad
hoc Committee so concludes, on the basis of the knowledge it has received upon the
dispute, the reasons supporting the Tribunal’s conclusions can be explained by the ad
hoc Committee itself”

According to the above-mentioned passages of the Award on continuing and
composite acts,'°° the Tribunal opined that the existence of such acts would have
required a breach of the BIT, and this would not have been possible before the Treaty
came into force on May 11, 1997. In addition, the breach of another norm of
international law existing before the entry into force of the BIT would not, according
to the Tribunal, have given a right to recourse to the BIT’s arbitral jurisdiction.'*' The
Tribunal’s finding that the acts and omissions accepted by the Claimants as being prior
to the entry into force of the BIT did not constitute continuing and composite wrongful
acts under the BIT’? would seem to imply acceptance of Ecuador’s view that the
refusal to pay the accounts receivable was an instantaneous and not a continuing act.
While this is not clearly stated in the Award, it can be deduced from the Tribunal’s
reasoning. Thus, the Tribunal's finding that acts and omissions prior to May 11, 1997
cannot constitute continuing and composite wrongful acts under the BIT was “not
bereft of any reference to the specific issue of the outstanding accounts receivable

Id., para. 97
Wena v. Egypt, supra note 15, paras. 81 and 83. See also CMS v. Argentina, supra note 15, paras. 54-57, and Soufraki v, UAE, supra

note 15, para. 24,

150

Ist

Award, paras. 82-97
Id., para. 96.
Id., para. 97,

35

78.

79.

80.

claim,” as alleged by the Applicants.'** It is of course another matter whether or not
the reasons given by the Tribunal were convincing.

The Tribunal ended the discussion on acts and omissions prior to the entry into force
of the BIT by stating: “This Tribunal, following the opinion of the ILC in its
Commentaries on the customary norms set out in Articles 13, 14 and 15 of its Draft
Articles on State Responsibility, will take into account events prior to the date of entry
into force of the BIT solely in order to understand and determine precisely the scope
and effects of the breaches of the BIT after that date. [...] The Tribunal reiterates its
views on the possibility of exercising Competence over all acts or omissions alleged by
the Claimants to have occurred after the entry into force of the BIT and as having
been in violation thereof. Acts or omissions prior to the entry into force of the BIT may
be taken into account by the Tribunal in cases in which those acts or omissions are
relevant as background, causal link, or the basis of circumstances surrounding the
occurrence of a dispute from the time the wrongful act was consummated after the
entry into force of the norm that had been breached. The Tribunal, however, finds that
it has no Competence to determine damages for acts that do not qualify as violations
of the BIT as they occurred prior to its entry into force.”'**

The opinion of the Tribunal, which it expressed in the discussion of Ecuador's
subsidiary objection on the existence of an investment, contains the following
statement: “/...] the principle of non-retroactivity of treaties limits the application of
the BIT and its clauses on jurisdiction to those disputes that are alleged to be
violations of that Treaty after it entered into force. [...] For all these reasons, the
Tribunal concludes that claims relating to the Seacoast Contract and the Clarification
Contract, as well as the Ecuapower Contract, could not involve breaches under the
BIT as the latter was not in force at the time that those alleged contractual breaches
occurred. Applying the customary rules relating to State Responsibility, the
contractual breaches prior to the entry into force of the BIT do not contain the
elements necessary to amount to violations of the BIT. [...] Regarding the events
alleged by the Claimants to be breaches of the BIT after it entered into force, the
Tribunal finds that the effects of an investment that was in existence before the treaty
entered into force, continued, prima facie, after that date. The Tribunal, therefore, has
Competence to hear the Claimants' arguments alleging breaches of the BIT by
Ecuador for acts or omissions after it entered into force, which affected their
investment.” ~~

The Applicants allege that the Tribunal's analysis “was restricted to a wholly esoteric
discussion on the law of composite and continuing acts.”'** However, for the purposes
of Article 52(1)(e) of the Washington Convention, it is sufficient to point out that the
Tribunal must be considered to have answered the Applicants’ argument regarding
continuing breaches by indicating that, in the Tribunal’s opinion, there was no

Memorial, para. 75.
Award, paras. 135-136.
Id., paras. 167-169,
Memorial, para. 76.

36

81.

82.

continuing or composite act in respect of the refusal to pay the alleged accounts
receivable. The Applicants actually criticize the Tribunal’s interpretation of continuing
and composite acts and propose another interpretation of the ILC Articles than that of
the Tribunal. This Committee cannot from such a divergence of opinions conclude that
the Tribunal failed to state reasons in its Award.

In the context of Article 52(1)(e), the ad hoc Committee in MINE declared as follows:
“The adequacy of the reasoning is not an appropriate standard of review under
paragraph (1)(e), because it almost inevitably draws an ad hoc Committee into an
examination of the substance of the tribunal's decision, in disregard of the exclusion of
the remedy of appeal by Article 53 of the Convention. A Committee might be tempted
to annul an award because that examination disclosed a manifestly incorrect
application of the law, which, however, is not a ground for annulment.”'*’ In Vivendi
vy. Argentina, also, the ad hoc Committee carefully observed: “A greater source of
concern is perhaps the ground of ‘failure to state reasons’, which is not qualified by
any such phrase as ‘manifestly’ or ‘serious’. However, it is well accepted both in the
cases and the literature that Article 52(1)(e) concerns a failure to state any reasons
with respect to all or part of an award, not the failure to state correct or convincing
reasons. It bears reiterating that an ad hoc committee is not a court of appeal.
Provided that the reasons given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues
that were before the tribunal, their correctness is beside the point in terms of Article
52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons may be stated succinctly or at length, and different legal
traditions differ in their modes of expressing reasons. Tribunals must be allowed a
degree of discretion as to the way in which they express their reasoning. [...] In the
Committee's view, annulment under Article 52(1)(e) should only occur in a clear case.
This entails two conditions: first, the failure to state reasons must leave the decision
on a particular point essentially lacking in any expressed rationale; and second, that
point must itself be necessary to the tribunal's decision.”

Contrary to the Applicants' complaint, the Tribunal answered that it had no jurisdiction
to entertain claims relating to disputes arising before May 11, 1997 and gave reasons
for this conclusion. In the examination of the present case in relation to Article
52(1)(e) of the Washington Convention, the Committee cannot review this conclusion,
or express its agreement or disagreement with it, or examine whether or not the
reasons given by the Tribunal are convincing. According to the CDC v. Seychelles
Committee, Article 52(1)(e) “does not provide us with the opportunity to opine on
whether the Tribunal's analysis was correct or its reasoning persuasive.”'”’ Further,
as stressed by the ad hoc Committee in Wena v. Egypt, “[t]he ground for annulment of
Article 52(1)(e) does not allow any review of the challenged Award which would lead
the ad hoc Committee to reconsider whether the reasons underlying the Tribunal's
decisions were appropriate or not, convincing or not.”'® The ad hoc committee can
only take the award as it is,” it may not substitute its judgment for that of the

MINE, supra note 15, para. 5.08.
Vivendi v. Argentina, supra note 15, paras. 64-65.
supra note 87, para. 70.

   
 

 

upra note 15, para. 79.
Klackner (1), supra note 14, para. 73.

37

83.

84.

85.

tribunal. Otherwise, this would make the award the commencement and not the end of
litigation.

Insofar as the Applicants allege that the Tribunal did not state reasons for declining
jurisdiction in respect of their contractual claims, it should be noted that the Tribunal,
when commenting on the Applicants’ alleged “fork-in-the-road” choice, stated that, in
accordance with the principle of the non-retroactivity of treaties, the contractual
disputes which had been submitted to the Ecuadorian courts remained outside the
Tribunal’s temporal competence.'® It thus appears from the Award that the Tribunal’s
reasons for declining jurisdiction in regard to the BIT claim also applied to the
contractual claims. Once the Tribunal decided that it did not have temporal
jurisdiction, its decision applied to all claims concerning acts or omissions prior to the
entry into force of the BIT, regardless of whether the claim was based on the Treaty or
on contract. Consequently, no lack of reasons can be found in this regard.

Ad hoc committees have considered that insufficient, inadequate or contradictory
reasons may be assimilated to a failure to state reasons. The K/éckner (I) ad hoc
Committee, for example, declared: “The text of [Article 52(1)(e)] requires a statement
of reasons on which the award is based. This does not mean just any reasons, purely
formal or apparent, but rather reasons having some substance, allowing the reader to
follow the arbitral tribunal's reasoning, on facts and on law. [...] [T]here would be a
‘failure to state reasons’ in the absence of a statement of reasons that are ‘sufficiently
relevant’, that is, reasonably sustainable and capable of providing a basis for the
decision.”'® The decision of the ad hoc Committee in MINE also stated: “The
Committee is of the opinion that the requirement that an award has to be motivated
implies that it must enable the reader to follow the reasoning of the Tribunal on points
of fact and law. It implies that, and only that. [...] In the Committee's view, the
requirement to state reasons is satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow
how the tribunal proceeded from Point A to Point B and eventually to its conclusion,
even if it made an error of fact or of law. This minimum requirement is in particular
not satisfied by either contradictory or frivolous reasons.”'™ In Soufraki v. UAE, the
ad hoc Committee added that there may be a ground for annulment in the case of “a
total absence of reasons for the award, including the giving of merely frivolous
reasons; a total failure to state reasons for a particular point, which is material for the
solution; contradictory reasons; and insufficient or inadequate reasons, which are
insufficient to bring about the solution or inadequate to explain the result arrived at by
the Tribunal.”'®

However, contradictory reasons should be distinguished from reasons which are
claimed to be legally or factually wrong, the latter escaping, as already pointed out,

Award, para. 189.
Klockner (1), supra note 14, paras. 119-120. See also Amco 1, supra note 15, para, 43, “Stated a little differently, there must be a

reasonable connection between the bases invoked by a tribunal and the conclusions reached by it. The phrase ‘sufficiently pertinent reasons’
appears to this ad hoc Committee to be a simple and usefil clarification of the term ‘reasons’ used in the Convention.”

Ist

MINE, supra note 15, paras. 5.08-5.09. See also CMS v. Argentina, supra note 15, paras. 55, 97; Patrick Mitchell v, Congo, supra note

15, para. 21; and Lucchetti v, Peru, supra note 15, para. 127

Soufraki v. UAE, supra note 15, para. 126.

38

86.

87.

from review by an ad hoc committee. The ad hoc Committee in Kléckner (I)
explained: “As for ‘contradiction of reasons’, it is in principle appropriate to bring
this notion under the category ‘failure to state reasons’ for the very simple reasons
that two genuinely contradictory reasons cancel each other out. Hence the failure to
state reasons. The arbitrator's obligation to state reasons which are not contradictory
must therefore be accepted.”'® In MTD vy. Chile, the ad hoc Committee opined that
“outright or unexplained contradictions can involve a failure to state reasons.”'®" In
Vivendi v. Argentina, the ad hoc Committee cautiously declared: “It is frequently said
that contradictory reasons cancel each other out, and indeed, if reasons are genuinely
contradictory so they might. However, tribunals must often struggle to balance
conflicting considerations, and an ad hoc committee should be careful not to discern
contradiction when what is actually expressed in a tribunal's reasons could more truly
be said to be a reflection of such conflicting considerations.”'

The Applicants consider that the Award rests on contradictory reasons because none of
the reasons given by the Tribunal can be identified as an adequate ground for its
conclusion. However, to the extent that the Applicants’ complaint is based on an
alleged improper interpretation and application by the Tribunal of Article 28 of the
Vienna Convention, it is not within the ambit of Article 52(1)(e) but that of Article
52(1)(b). The Award may reflect reasoning and contain a conclusion that is legally
correct or incorrect, but the Committee’s opinion on this matter is irrelevant for the
scrutiny of the award under Article 52(1)(e) of the Washington Convention. The
Tribunal answered — rightly or wrongly but without any apparent contradiction — the
parties' respective contentions on jurisdiction regarding the accounts receivable, which
is sufficient for the purposes of Article 52(1)(e).

Having found itself without competence to deal with the Applicants’ claims regarding
the accounts receivable, the Tribunal also implicitly rejected as a necessary
consequence all factual or legal implications of these claims and examined only other
acts subsequent to May 11, 1997.' In doing so, the Tribunal must be considered to
have answered the arguments of the Applicants in respect of their accounts receivable
claim, whether based on Treaty or contract. The Committee has not found that the
Tribunal overlooked any particular point affecting the outcome of the Award.
Consequently, the Committee finds no reason for annulling the Award on the basis of
Article 52(1)(e) of the Washington Convention.

Klackner (1), supra note 14, para. 116. See also Soufraki v. UAE, supra note 15, paras. 122, 125; and CMS v. Argentina, supra note 15,

para, 54,

16

MTD v. Chile, supra note 10, para, 78.
Vivendi v. Argentina, supra note 15, para. 65. See also MTD v. Chile, supra note 10, para. 50; and CMS v. Argentina, supra note 15,

para. 54,

19

Award, paras. 95, 226-229.

39

VI.

88.

89.

0

co

  

The parties have submitted their cost claims upon the invitation of the ad hoc
Committee at the hearing and each party maintains that the other should be required to
meet the total costs. It appears from Article 53 of the Washington Convention that an
award becomes immediately binding on the parties who are therefore required to abide
by and comply with its terms. The annulment action under Article 52 is an
extraordinary means of recourse and cannot be considered as a normal continuation of
the arbitration. At the financial level, in derogation from the rule that advances on
costs are equally shared between the parties in arbitration proceedings, Regulation
14(3)(e) of the Administrative and Financial Regulations directs the applicant for
annulment to make the whole advance payment to ICSID for the costs referred to in
Regulation 14(2) of the said Regulations. A consequence of this rule, which imposes
on the party who applies for annulment the financial burden of advancing the costs,
should normally be that the applicant, when annulment is refused, remains responsible
for these costs. In the present case, the ad hoc Committee therefore finds that M.C.I.
and New Turbine shall finally bear the full costs and expenses incurred by ICSID in
connection with this annulment proceeding. '”

The Committee acknowledges that the annulment case was presented by both parties
in an efficient and courteous manner and recognizes the great assistance it received
from counsel on both sides. The parties’ own costs for their representation are
comparable in size, and there is no element in the conduct of the proceedings by either
side that should justify an uneven division of these costs. The ad hoc Committee finds
that each party shall bear its own costs for legal representation and expenses in the
annulment proceeding.

See CDC v. Seychelles, supra note 87, para. 90; Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador)
(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/10), Decision on Annulment, January 8, 2007, para. 88.

40

VII.

DECISION

For the foregoing reasons, the ad hoc Committee decides:

(1) to reject, pursuant to Article 52(1) of the Washington Convention, the
application for annulment of the ICSID Tribunal's Award of July 31, 2007
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/6),

(2) that M.C.I. Power Group L.C. and New Turbine Inc. shall jointly bear the
full costs incurred in connection with this annulment proceeding,

(3) that each Party shall bear its own costs for legal representation and
expenses in the annulment proceeding.

[Signed] [Signed]
Judge Hans Danelius Judge Peter Tomka
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee
[Date] [Date]
[Signed]

Judge Dominique Hascher
President of the ad hoc Committee
[Date]

41

