IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER 11 OF THE
NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT, CONCLUDED ON
DECEMBER 17, 1992 (“NAFTA”)

-and-

THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW
RULES OF ARBITRATION (“UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES”)

ADMINISTERED BY THE PERMANENT COURT OF ARBITRATION (“PCA”)
PCA CASE NO. 2009-21

-between-

MELVIN J. HOWARD,
CENTURION HEALTH CORP. &
HOWARD FAMILY TRUST

(“Claimants’’)

-and-

THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

(“Respondent,” and together with the Claimants, the “Disputing Parties”)

 

ORDER FOR THE TERMINATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS
AND AWARD ON COSTS

August 2, 2010

 

Arbitral Tribunal: HE. Judge Peter Tomka (President)
Professor Marjorie Florestal
Mr. Henri Alvarez, Q.C.

Secretary to the Tribunal: Mr. Dirk Pulkowski

PCA 41082

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY...

 

 

 

   

III. ARGUMENTS OF THE DISPUTING PARTIES .......scsssssssssssssessessensessensesees -13-
A. Respondent’s Arguments. -13-
B. Claimants’ Argument: 14-

Iv. ANALYSIS OF THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL 15-

A. Request for Termination of the Proceedings .. :
B. Request for Award Of Costs .........ccccccececsesecsesessesesnesesesesseeeeeeseenesesssieseeseseeseeeenene
Cc Place of Arbitration.

V. DISPOSITIF

 

PCA 41082

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

I. INTRODUCTION

The Claimants are Melvin J. Howard, the Centurion Health Corp., and the Howard
Family Trust. The Claimants are represented by Mr. Melvin J. Howard, 2436 E.
Darrel Rd, Phoenix, AZ 85042, United States of America. According to the

Claimants, all entities are nationals of the United States. !

The Respondent is the Government of Canada. The Respondent is represented by the
Government of Canada’s Trade Law Bureau, Department of Foreign Affairs and

International Trade, 125 Sussex Drive, Ottawa K1A 0G2, Canada.

The dispute between the Disputing Parties arises from the planned construction by the
Claimants of a private healthcare facility, which was intended to offer a wide range of
surgical services, in Vancouver, British Columbia. The completion of the project was
allegedly impeded by a range of legislative and administrative measures adopted by
the local, provincial and federal governments, which the Claimants consider to be
inconsistent with the Respondent’s obligations under NAFTA. The Claimants have

alleged breaches of the following NAFTA provisions:
- Article 1102 (National Treatment);”
- Article 1103 (Most-Favored Nations Treatment);?

- Article 1105 (Minimum Standard of Treatment):*

In Section IL.c of the Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration dated July 11, 2008 (“Notice of

Intent”), the Claimants indicated that the “disputing investors” had the nationality of the United States.
In Section II.B of the Revised Amended Statement of Claim dated February 2, 2009, the Claimants
noted that “Melvin J. Howard is an American citizen”, while “Centurion Health Corporation and
Regent Hills Health Centre Inc. each are investments of Melvin J. Howard, and The Howard Family
Trust is the Trustee of the investor of the Party, of the United States of America, within the meaning of
NAFTA Article 1139.”

Section VI of the Notice of Intent; Revised Amended Statement of Claim, p. 5.
Id.
Notice of Arbitration dated January 5, 2009, p. 2.

PCA 41082 -1-

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

- Article 1110 (Expropriation and Compensation);>
- Article 1503, paragraph 2 (State Enterprises);°

- Article 1502, paragraph 3(a) (Monopolies and State Enterprises).”

4. Specifically, the Claimants argue that the Respondent breached its obligations under

Article 1102 of NAFTA by failing to provide the investor “through clear guidance
from the Government of Canada with the best treatment available to US competitors
in the monopoly health care services market, and in particular, US surgical services”;
that the Respondent acted inconsistently with Article 1103 of NAFTA “by failing to
accord the Investor and its enterprises of Canada most favored nation treatment by
providing treatment to Canadian Investors that is better than the treatment provided to
the Claimant”; that the Respondent violated Article 1105 of NAFTA by failing to
accord the Investor and its enterprises treatment in accordance with international law,
including fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security; and that the
Respondent acted inconsistently with Articles 1502, paragraph 3(a) and 1503,
paragraph 2, of NAFTA by failing to ensure that the Provinces of British Columbia,
Alberta, and their regional health authorities refrain from acting in a manner

inconsistent with Canada's obligations under Section A of NAFTA Chapter 1 18

To substantiate their claims, the Claimants inter alia aver that there are “serious
inconsistencies” between the Canada Health Act and Canadian provincial health care
programs. The Claimants further allege that their planned construction of a healthcare
facility “suffered numerous set-backs”, including through zoning requirements and
legal hurdles imposed by municipalities and city officials. The Claimants also

contend that they suffered “a major loss” because the Respondent’s actions caused

Revised Amended Statement of Claim, p. 6.

PCA 41082 -2-

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

their “medical technology” to be shipped back to the United States. Accordingly, the
Claimants “seek to be compensated for damages for barriers to entry and

expropriation.”
6. The Claimants seek the following relief:

“1, A sum not less than U.S. $160,000,000.00[,] One Hundred Sixty Million
United States Dollars in compensation for the damages caused by Canada's failure
to accord the Investor the minimum standard of treatment and in expropriating of
its medical technology. ...;

2. Costs associated with these proceedings, including all professional fees and
disbursements;

3. Pre-award and post-award interest at a rate to be fixed by the Tribunal; and

4. Such further relief that counsel may advise and that the Tribunal may deem
appropriate.

5. Tax consequences of the award to maintain the integrity of the award.”"”
7. According to the Claimants’ submissions, the claim for damages includes, in
particular:
“1. Loss of value of its investments in Canada
2. Loss of business opportunities
3. Fees and expenses of $ 4,700,000.00 Four Million Seven Hundred Thousand ...
4. Loss of Goodwill

5. Loss of Profits."
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

8. In accordance with Article 1119 of NAFTA, the Claimants submitted a Notice of

Section VII of the Notice of Intent; Revised Amended Statement of Claim, p. 9.
Revised Amended Statement of Claim, p. 11.
"Td. at p. 12.

PCA 41082 -3-

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

Intent under NAFTA Chapter 11 dated July 11, 2008, which the Respondent received
on July 16, 2008. On January 5, 2009, the Claimants submitted a Notice of
Arbitration and, thus, initiated arbitration proceedings against the Respondent
pursuant to Articles 1116 and 1120 of NAFTA and Article 3 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules concerning alleged breaches by the Respondent of its obligations

under NAFTA.

9. In their Notice of Arbitration, the Claimants, pursuant to Article 1121 of NAFTA,
consented to arbitration and also waived their right to initiate or continue before any
administrative tribunal or court, or other dispute settlement procedures, any
proceedings with respect to the measures that they allege to be breaches of the
Respondent’s obligations under NAFTA. The Claimants stated that this waiver
applied except with respect to proceedings for injunctive, declaratory or other
extraordinary relief not involving the payment of damages before an administrative
tribunal or court under the Respondent’s laws. In accordance with Article 3,
paragraph 4(c), of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the Claimants included their
Statement of Claim with the Notice of Arbitration. On February 2, 2009, the

Claimants submitted a Revised Amended Statement of Claim to the Respondent.

10. In a letter dated November 2, 2009 to Judge Peter Tomka, Vice-President of the
International Court of Justice, the Disputing Parties informed Judge Tomka that the
Claimants had appointed Professor Marjorie Florestal and the Respondent had
appointed Mr. Henri C. Alvarez, Q.C. as members of the Tribunal for the arbitral
proceedings between them and invited Judge Tomka to act as the Presiding Arbitrator
of the Tribunal. On November 11, 2009, Judge Tomka notified the Disputing Parties
of his agreement to act as the President. On November 23, 2009, the Tribunal
suggested to the Disputing Parties several dates during which the Tribunal was
available to hold the First Procedural Meeting and provided the Disputing Parties
with a Draft Agenda for that Meeting. Further, the Tribunal invited the Disputing

Parties to consider that the Permanent Court of Arbitration administer the arbitral

PCA 41082 -4-

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

proceedings.

. The Disputing Parties agreed on December 4, 2009 that the PCA administer the
arbitral proceedings and that the First Meeting of the Tribunal be held at the Peace
Palace, The Hague, on March 19, 2010. The Disputing Parties also agreed to pay a
deposit of US$ 100,000 each by March 1, 2010. Finally, the Disputing Parties jointly

proposed to remunerate the arbitrators as follows:

“a fee of US $3,000.00 per day, or such other fee as may be set forth from time to
time in the ICSID Schedule of Fees, for each day of participation in meetings of
the Tribunal or 8 hours of work performed in connection with the proceeding, or
[pro rata]; and (b) subsistence allowances and reimbursement of travel (in
business class) and other expenses with[in] the limits set forth in Regulation 14 of
the ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations and the Memorandum on the
Fees and Expenses of ICSID Arbitrators.”

N

In a letter to the Disputing Parties dated December 11, 2009, the President confirmed
that the First Procedural Meeting with the Tribunal would be held on March 19, 2010.

»

On December 14, 2009, the Tribunal requested the Disputing Parties to pay an initial
deposit of US$ 100,000 each by March 1, 2010 pursuant to their procedural
agreement dated December 4, 2009 and in accordance with Article 41, paragraph 1,
of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The Tribunal also provided the Disputing
Parties with details regarding case administration, hearing and meeting facilities, and

the First Procedural Meeting.

5

. The Tribunal sent the Disputing Parties draft Terms of Appointment on January 27,
2010. At the same time, it also circulated to the Disputing Parties a signed Statement
of Impartiality and Independence and a current curriculum vitae/résumé from each

member of the Tribunal.

“

In a letter to the Respondent on February 1, 2010, which was copied to the Tribunal,

the Claimants stated that they were formally challenging Mr. Alvarez’s appointment

PCA 41082 -5-

ag

s

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

pursuant to Article 11 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.’

On February 2, 2010, the Respondent informed the Claimants and the Tribunal that it
disagreed with the Claimants’ challenge to Mr. Alvarez’s appointment and requested
the Claimants to withdraw their challenge. Further, the Respondent argued that the
Claimants had failed to comply with the requirement in Article 11, paragraph 1, and
(2) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules that a challenge be filed within fifteen days

after the circumstances giving rise to the challenge are known.

. On February 3, 2010, the President of the Tribunal invited the Respondent to submit

by February 5, 2010 additional comments on the Claimants’ letter dated February
1,2010. The President of the Tribunal also invited Mr. Alvarez to submit by
February 10, 2010 any comments or provide additional information that he wished to
bring to the Disputing Parties’ attention. The Tribunal then requested the Claimants to
indicate by February 17, 2010 whether they would withdraw their challenge or
request a decision on the challenge in light of the Respondent’s and Mr. Alvarez’s
comments. Finally, the Tribunal referred the Claimants to Article 12, paragraph 1, of
the UNCITRAL Apbitration Rules, which provides that a decision on such a challenge
is made by the appointing authority. The Tribunal also noted that, pursuant to Article
1124, paragraph 1, of NAFTA, the Secretary-General of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) serves as appointing authority for any

arbitration under Section B of NAFTA Chapter 11.

In a letter to the Tribunal and the Claimants dated February 5, 2010, the Respondent

The Tribunal was informed in the course of the following days of correspondence between the

Claimants and the Respondent that had taken place earlier in January 2010. On January 7, 2010, the
Claimants informed the Respondent that, in their view, there was “an important issue of conflict”
between Mr. Alvarez’s duties as an arbitrator and certain other client matters dealt with by the law
firm, Fasken Martineau DuMoulin LLP at which Mr. Alvarez is a partner. The Claimants then asked
that Mr. Alvarez resign as an arbitrator from the Tribunal. On January 12, 2010, the Respondent
informed the Claimants that none of the circumstances raised by the Claimants in their letter dated
January 7, 2010 required Mr. Alvarez to resign as an arbitrator. The Respondent also advised the
Claimants that, if they wished to challenge Mr. Alvarez’s appointment, the appropriate procedure was
stipulated in Article 11 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The relevant correspondence on this
matter had not been copied to the Tribunal at the time that it had been exchanged.

PCA 41082 -6-

20.

21.

22.

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

argued that the Claimants’ challenge should not be allowed to proceed because it had
not been filed within the time limit stipulated under the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules. The Respondent also argued that no reasonable person would conclude that the
circumstances which the Claimants had cited gave rise to justifiable doubts as to
Mr. Alvarez’s independence and impartiality as an arbitrator and that therefore, the

Claimants should withdraw their challenge.

Writing to Mr. Alvarez on February 9, 2010, the President noted that it was for the
ICSID Secretary-General to decide on the challenge in accordance with the provisions
of Article 1124 of NAFTA. In a letter to the Tribunal, dated February 9, 2010, which
was copied to the Disputing Parties, Mr. Alvarez addressed the issues raised by the
Claimants regarding his impartiality and independence as an arbitrator in the current

proceedings.

In their letter to the Tribunal on February 15, 2010, which was copied to the

Respondent, the Claimants reaffirmed their challenge to Mr. Alvarez’s appointment.

On February 17, 2010, the Tribunal reminded the Claimants that, if they wished to
request a decision on their challenge, the appropriate course of action under Article
12, paragraph 1(b), of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and Article 1124, paragraph
1, of NAFTA would be for them to submit a request to the ICSID Secretary-General.
The Tribunal also reminded the Claimants that, pursuant to the ICSID Schedule of
Fees, “[a] fee of US$ 10,000.00 is payable to the Centre by the party requesting the
Secretary-General to appoint, or to decide on the challenge of, an arbitrator for any
arbitration not conducted under the Convention or Additional Facility Rules.” The
Tribunal requested the Claimants to inform the Tribunal by February 26, 2010 if they

had filed a request for a decision with the ICSID Secretary-General.

Addressing the Disputing Parties in a letter dated February 24, 2010, the Tribunal
acknowledged receipt of the Respondent’s share of the initial deposit for the current

proceedings in the amount of US$ 100,000. The Tribunal also clarified that the

PCA 41082 -7-

24.

»

=

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

Disputing Parties’ obligation to pay their share of the deposit was independent of the
Claimants’ challenge to Mr. Alvarez’s appointment because, in any event, the current
arbitral proceedings continued. To that end, the Tribunal requested the Claimants to
pay their share of the deposit to the PCA by March 1, 2010 regardless of whether or
not they intended to seek from the ICSID Secretary-General a decision on their

challenge.

On February 26, 2010, the Claimants requested the Tribunal to postpone the First
Procedural Meeting because they had made preparations to file on March 1, 2010 a
request to the ICSID Secretary-General that she decide on their challenge to Mr.
Alvarez’s appointment. The Claimants also provided the Tribunal with a copy of their
correspondence that they had previously exchanged with ICSID, and in which they
had raised a possible conflict between Secretary-General Meg Kinnear’s previous
position as the Senior General Counsel and Director General of the Trade Law
Bureau of Canada and her current role as the appointing authority under Article 1124
of NAFTA. In response to that concern, ICSID Deputy-Secretary General Nassib G.
Ziadé assured the Claimants that he was prepared to act as the appointing authority
and that he would “take all necessary measures to avoid [potential] conflicts of
interest.” The Claimants also informed the Tribunal that they disagreed with the
Tribunal’s conclusion that their obligation to pay the deposit was independent of their
decision to file a challenge with the Secretary-General. According to the Claimants,
the procedural agreement dated December 4, 2010 was silent on that matter and the

agreement was “predicated on other issues being met.”

On March 1, 2010, the Tribunal informed the Disputing Parties that it intended to
suspend the arbitral proceedings once it had received confirmation that a challenge
had been filed with the Secretary-General and until the appointing authority had
rendered a decision on the challenge. The Tribunal also noted that, pursuant to Article
41, paragraph 1, of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, it was competent to request the

Disputing Parties to deposit an equal amount as an advance for costs once the

PCA 41082 -8-

25.

26.

27.

28.

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

Tribunal was established, that is, upon the President’s acceptance of his appointment.
In light of that, the Tribunal again requested the Claimants to pay their share of the
deposit. Finally, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to submit by March 5, 2010 its
comments regarding the matters that the Claimants raised in their letter dated

February 26, 2010.

On March 2, 2010, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that it had confirmed with
ICSID that the Claimants had not filed a challenge to Mr. Alvarez as of that date,
notwithstanding the Claimants’ assertion that they had made preparations to file the
challenge on March 1, 2010. Because the Respondent was concerned as to whether
the Claimants had the intention or the ability to proceed with the arbitral proceedings,
it requested the Tribunal to postpone the First Procedural Meeting unless the

Claimants paid their share of the deposit by March 3, 2010.

In a letter dated March 2, 2010, the Tribunal informed the Disputing Parties that the
Claimants had still not paid the required deposit and that the Tribunal would postpone
the First Procedural Meeting sine die unless the Claimants presented a bank

confirmation by March 5, 2010 evidencing their payment of the deposit to the PCA.

On March 5, 2010, the Claimants requested the ICSID Secretary-General to decide on
their challenge to Mr. Alvarez’s appointment. On the same day, the Secretary-General
recused herself from deciding on the challenge and informed the Disputing Parties
and the Tribunal that the ICSID Deputy Secretary-General would resolve the
challenge. The Respondent also requested the Secretary-General to confirm receipt of
the Claimants’ challenge and the required fee before establishing a schedule to

receive submissions on what the Respondent considered to be a frivolous challenge.

On the day that the Claimants filed their challenge with the ICSID Secretary-General,
the Claimants sent the Tribunal a copy of that challenge and also informed the
Tribunal that “further arrangements [were] being made to wire transfer the

[Claimants’] share of [costs] while the challenge [was] in progress.”

PCA 41082 -9-

29.

30.

3

32.

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

Addressing the Disputing Parties in a communication dated March 5, 2010, the
Tribunal acknowledged receipt of a copy of the Claimants’ challenge. In light of that,
the Tribunal cancelled the First Procedural Meeting and suspended the proceedings
until the Deputy Secretary-General had decided on the challenge. The Tribunal then
reminded the Claimants of their duty to pay the required deposit and also clarified
that, once the ICSID Deputy Secretary-General had decided on their challenge, the
Tribunal would be unable to fix a new date for the First Procedural Meeting unless

they had paid the required deposit.

On March 8, 2010, the Claimants informed the Tribunal that, although they had
informed the Tribunal that they had made arrangements to pay the required deposit
while the challenge was being resolved, the Claimants’ insurer advised them to “halt
all activity so that these issues of conflict can be reassessed if need be to other
authorities [sic].” In response, the Tribunal informed the Disputing Parties on
March 9, 2010 that it would wait for the Deputy Secretary-General to decide on the

Claimants’ challenge.

. Ina letter to the ICSID Deputy Secretary-General on March 16, 2010, the Claimants

asserted that the Respondent’s communication to the ICSID Secretary-General on
March 5, 2010, “less than 24 hours after the Claimants submitted [their] challenge,”
had in their view “cast doubt on the fairness and transparency [of the challenge

proceedings].”

On March 19, 2010, the ICSID Deputy Secretary-General informed the Disputing
Parties that ICSID had not, as of that day, received any hard copy and annexes of the
Claimants’ challenge despite their assurances that these were forthcoming. In
addition, according to the Deputy Secretary-General, the Claimants had not yet paid
the required fee “to institute the challenge.” In light of that, the Deputy Secretary-
General encouraged the Claimants to send this required fee as soon as possible “so
that the procedure for deciding the challenge can start without further delay.” Finally,

the Deputy Secretary-General stated that when the Secretary-General is unable to act

PCA 41082 -10-

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

within the meaning of Article 10, paragraph 3, of the ICSID Convention, the Deputy
Secretary-General shall act as the Secretary-General and perform his or her functions,

including those of an appointing authority.

33. In the Claimants’ letter to the ICSID Deputy Secretary-General on April 7, 2010, the
Claimants suggested that the President of the World Bank should designate an
appointing authority, who should then decide on their challenge to Mr. Alvarez’s
appointment. The Claimants recognized that, under Article 10, paragraph 3, of the
ICSID Convention, the Deputy Secretary-General was to act as the Secretary-General
if he or she was unable to act. However, the Claimants averred that the Respondent

had cast doubt on the fairness and transparency of the challenge proceedings.

34. On April 12, 2010, the Respondent wrote to the ICSID Deputy Secretary-General,
asking him to confirm whether or not the Claimants had taken any steps to pursue
“this arbitration, including with respect to their challenge to Mr. Alvarez.” In reply to
that inquiry, the Deputy Secretary-General informed the Respondent on April 13,
2010 that the Claimants had not yet deposited the fee “required to institute the

challenge” as of that date.

35. On April 14, 2010, the ICSID Deputy Secretary-General explained to the Claimants,
in an e-mail copied to the Respondent, that he was required to act as the appointing
authority in the Claimants’ challenge to Mr. Alvarez, because the ICSID Secretary-
General was unable to act within the meaning of Article 10, paragraph 3, of the
ICSID Convention. To that end, the Deputy Secretary-General informed the
Claimants that he was “acting with full authority and complete independence” and as
such, the Claimants had no basis to request that the President of the World Bank
designate another appointing authority. Replying on the same day, the Claimants
stated that they disagreed with the points raised by the Deputy Secretary-General and

that they “will seek to address this issue by other means.”

36. On April 29, 2010, the Respondent submitted a Written Submission on Termination

PCA 41082 -ll-

37.

38.

39.

40.

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

and Costs (“Submission”), in which it requested the Tribunal to terminate the current
arbitral proceedings and to issue an award on costs in its favor. Specifically, the

Respondent requested that:

“1. The Tribunal issue a termination order pursuant to Article 41(4) of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules;

2. The Tribunal issue an award of costs in favour of Canada, requiring the
Claimants to pay (a) all of the arbitration costs incurred by the arbitrators and the
Permanent Court of Arbitration, to be determined by the Tribunal prior to the
termination of the arbitration; (b) Canada's costs of legal representation and
assistance, in the amount of $227,651.69 CAD; and (c) Canada's disbursements in
the amount of $4,667.99 CAD.”
On May 10, 2010, the Tribunal invited the Claimants to submit by May 21, 2010 any
comments that they might have regarding the Respondent’s request that the Tribunal
terminate the current proceedings and issue an award on costs in the Respondent’s
favor. The Tribunal further reminded the Claimants of their obligation to pay the

deposit pursuant to Article 41, paragraph 1, of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

On May 10, 2010, the Tribunal requested the ICSID Deputy Secretary-General to
provide official confirmation as to whether the Claimants had properly instituted their
challenge to Mr. Alvarez’s appointment. In a letter dated May 11, 2010, the ICSID
Deputy Secretary-General confirmed to the Tribunal that the Claimants “[had] still
not deposited the fee required to properly institute their challenge to the appointment

of Mr. Alvarez as [an] arbitrator.”

On May 18, 2010, the Claimants submitted their comments on the Respondent’s
request that the proceedings be terminated and an award on costs be rendered in its

favor. The Claimants did not present any claims for costs.

On July 5, 2010, the Tribunal informed the Parties of its intention to issue an order for
the termination of the proceedings in accordance with Articles 41, paragraph 4, and
34, paragraph 2, of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, unless the Claimants paid the
requested deposit of costs by July 19, 2010.

PCA 41082 -12-

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

41. On July 19, 2010, Mr. Howard informed the Tribunal that he would “be appointing

42.

44.

45.

Ss

»

as

a

counsel to [proceed] on our behalf with this matter” and that his “first meeting with
proposed counsel was only on July 12, 2010.” Mr. Howard requested a continuation

of the proceedings.

The Tribunal notes that no deposit was made by the Claimants within the extended
time period provided to them by the Tribunal in its letter dated July 5, 2010, and that

the Claimants have indicated no intention to make the required deposit.

III.ARGUMENTS OF THE DISPUTING PARTIES

A. Respondent’s Arguments

In its Submission, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to issue a termination order
pursuant to Article 41, paragraph 4, of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and an

award on costs in its favor.

The Respondent argues that, pursuant to Article 41, paragraph 4, of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal should terminate the proceedings because the
Claimants have failed to pay the required deposit more than thirty days after they
were obligated to do so. The Respondent notes that the Claimants have neither paid
the required deposit to the PCA nor pursued their challenge to Mr. Alvarez’s
appointment. According to the Respondent, the Tribunal should not let the —
apparently abandoned — challenge to Mr. Alvarez’s appointment impede the

termination of these proceedings.

In the Respondent’s view, it is entitled to an award requiring the Claimants to
shoulder the costs of arbitration and the Respondent’s legal costs. The Respondent
notes that it has expended significant resources in order to respond to the Claimants’
purportedly frivolous and broad allegations. The Respondent cites Article 40,
paragraph 3, of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules which requires a tribunal to “fix

the costs of arbitration referred to in Article 38 and Article 39, paragraph 1, in the text

PCA 41082 -13-

46.

a

47.

a

48.

oo

49.

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

of that order or award.” The Respondent notes that the costs covered by Article 38
include the costs of the arbitral proceedings and the costs that the Disputing Parties

incur for legal representation and assistance.

The Respondent contends further that costs serve the “dual function of reparation and
dissuasion,”"? especially in the case of frivolous or vexatious claims.'* The
Respondent observes that no NAFTA tribunal has decided on costs in relation to a
termination order issued as a result of a claimant’s failure to make progress on the
arbitration or to pay the deposit. However, the Respondent notes that NAFTA
tribunals that have considered the issue of costs have endorsed the “loser pays”
principle. Accordingly, the Respondent argues that the Tribunal should award costs to
the Respondent because the Claimants have failed to advance even the first deposit
required by the Tribunal. The Respondent points out that the Claimants initiated this
arbitration, which has resulted in great expense, and “[let it] grind to a halt because of

their unwillingness or inability to proceed.”

The Respondent states that the costs that it has incurred as a result of the current
proceedings include: arbitral fees to be determined by the Tribunal,
CANS$ 227,651.69 in legal fees, and CAN$ 4,667.99 in disbursements for consultant

fees, travel, court and document costs.

B. Claimants’ Arguments

The Claimants oppose the Respondent’s request to terminate the arbitral proceedings

stating that they take these proceedings “seriously.”

The Claimants note that, in a letter to the ICSID Deputy Secretary-General on

Submission, p. 6 (quoting Azinian, Davitian & Baca v. Mexico, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2,

Award, November 1, 1999, {] 125).

Submission, p. 6 (citing S.D. Myers v. Canada, UNCITRAL Final Award, December 30, 2002, {1 44;
Bayview Irrigation District et al. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)05/1, Award,
June 19, 2007, | 125; Possible Improvements of the Framework for ICSID Arbitration, 1CSID
Secretariat Discussion Paper, October 22, 2004, p. 7, 1 9).

PCA 41082 -14-

50.

5

52.

wn
Oo

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

April 7, 2010, they had requested that the President of the World Bank designate an
appointing authority, which should then decide on their challenge to Mr. Alvarez’s
appointment. The Claimants argue that it would be improper for the Deputy
Secretary-General himself to rule on the admissibility of their request to the World
Bank President, considering that the Deputy Secretary-General would thus be in a
position to determine whether he or another entity designated by the President of the
World Bank should act as appointing authority. In the Claimants’ view, the ICSID

Deputy Secretary-General thus faced a situation of conflict of interest.

In their submission of May 18, 2010, the Claimants request the “International Court
of Arbitration [sic] to request the President of the World Bank to take over the role of
appointing authority of arbitrators and a new arbitrator be appointed to replace Mr.

Alvarez.”"°

. The Claimants argue that it would not be appropriate for the Tribunal to render an

award on costs in the Respondent’s favour because “no judgment has been made” and
the Respondent has not provided a “fair and reasonable” explanation in support of its

Submission.

IV. ANALYSIS OF THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

A. Request for Termination of the Proceedings

The Tribunal starts with the observation that international arbitral proceedings under
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules can effectively advance only if the claimant
pursues its claims in a professional way and if the parties to the proceedings are
willing to meet their obligations in relation to the costs of the arbitral proceedings by

paying, in a timely fashion, the advances required by the tribunal.

3. Article 41, paragraph 1, of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides:

Letter from the Claimants dated May 18, 2010.

PCA 41082 -15-

5:

5:

5

5

-

La)

a»

a

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

“The arbitral tribunal, on its establishment, may request each party to deposit an
equal amount as an advance for the costs referred to in Article 38, paragraphs (a),
(b) and (c).”
Article 38, paragraph (a), concerns the fees of the arbitrators, paragraph (b) relates to
the travel and other expenses incurred by the arbitrators, and, finally, paragraph (c) is
relevant for the costs of expert advice and of other assistance required by the arbitral

tribunal.

On December 14, 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal requested the Disputing Parties to pay
the initial deposit of US$ 100,000 each by March 1, 2010. This date and the amount
were agreed between the Claimants and the Respondent in their procedural

agreement, dated December 4, 2009.

While the Respondent paid its share of the advance in full and on time (on February
24, 2010), the Claimants have not done so to this date, despite the repeated invitations
from the Tribunal on February 24, 2010, March 1, 2010, March 2, 2010, March 5,
2010, May 10, 2010 and July 5, 2010.

The Tribunal notes that the Claimants have been in default on their payment

obligation since March 1, 2010.

. The Tribunal further observes that the Claimants who raised, in their communications

to the Respondent and to the Tribunal, certain issues relating to the participation of
one of the arbitrators in these proceedings, failed to properly institute the challenge
with the appointing authority under Article 12, paragraph 1, of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, despite having been informed by the Tribunal in its letters of
February 3 and February 17, 2010 about the proper procedure. The Claimants limited
themselves to e-mail communications with ICSID, having failed to submit a formal,
duly signed challenge, and to pay the required fee of US$ 10,000 to ICSID, again
despite repeated requests and information from the Deputy Secretary-General of the

ICSID.

PCA 41082 -16-

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

58. The Tribunal cannot accept the complaints of the Claimants against the ICSID

5'

60.

6

©

S

Deputy Secretary-General’s exercise of the function of the appointing authority and to
accede to their request that the Tribunal and the President of the World Bank “take

over the role of appointing authority.”

In accordance with Article 12, paragraph 1, of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
which are applicable in the present proceedings, the decision on a challenge shall be
made by the appointing authority. NAFTA Article 1124, paragraph 1, provides that
the Secretary-General of ICSID shall serve as appointing authority under Section B of

NAFTA Chapter 11.

Under Article 10, paragraph 3, of the ICSID Convention, during the Secretary-
General’s inability to act the Deputy Secretary-General shall act as Secretary-General.
This would have been the case in the present proceedings had the Claimants properly
instituted the challenge against the Arbitrator and had they paid the required fee under
the ICSID schedule of fees. Neither NAFTA, nor the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
provide for any role of the President of the World Bank to act as, or to designate, the

appointing authority.

. The ICSID Deputy Secretary-General confirmed to the Claimants his readiness to

decide on the challenge in case it had been properly instituted and the payment
requirement met by them. The Tribunal has no reason to doubt that he would have
performed the role of the appointing authority in an impartial, independent, highly
competent and professional manner, as he has done so in the past (see e.g. his
Decision of October 14, 2009, on the challenge to Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, QC, in
NAFTA Arbitration Vito G. Gallo v. Government of Canada).

62. Article 41, paragraph 4, of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides:

“Tf the required deposits [of costs] are not paid in full within thirty days after the
receipt of the request, the arbitral tribunal shall so inform the parties in order that
one or another of them may make the required payment. If such payment is not
made, the arbitral tribunal may order the suspension or termination of the arbitral

PCA 41082 -17-

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

proceedings.”

63. All conditions for the application of this rule are met in the case at hand. The

64.

65.

66.

67.

z

a

a

a

Claimants did not pay the deposit required by the Tribunal on December 14, 2009 by
March 1, 2010, as was required and earlier agreed upon. The Claimants have been
given ample opportunity to pay the requested deposit. The Parties were informed of
the Claimant’s default. The Respondent requested that the arbitration proceeding be
terminated because the Claimants have failed to make the required deposit of costs of

the arbitration proceedings.

In light of the above, in particular in view of the persistent refusal of the Claimants to
make the required deposit of costs, the Tribunal is convinced that the time has come
for it to terminate these proceedings, and that this would be the proper course of

action in view of the particular circumstances of the case at hand.

B. Request for Award of Costs

The Tribunal is entitled, pursuant to Article 1135, paragraph 1, of NAFTA to “award
costs in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules.” The applicable rules in

these proceedings are the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.
Article 40, paragraph 3, of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides:

“When the arbitral tribunal issues an order for the termination of the arbitral
proceedings or reaches an award on agreed terms, it shall fix the costs of
arbitration referred to in Article 38 and Article 39, paragraph 1, in the text of that
order or award.”

Article 39, paragraph 1, provides that
“(Qhe fees of the arbitral tribunal shall be reasonable in amount, taking into

account the amount in dispute, the complexity of the subject-matter, the time
spent by the arbitrators and any other relevant circumstances of the case.”

The Parties agreed, on December 4, 2009, that they would propose to the Arbitrators a

fee of US$ 3,000 per day or per 8 hours of work performed in connection with the

PCA 41082 -18-

68.

69.

70.

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

proceeding (or pro rata). This is the standard fee currently applicable under the
ICSID Schedule of Fees and the Parties agreed to calculate the Tribunal’s fees on this
basis. The Tribunal notes that there are arbitral tribunals, including NAFTA tribunals,
which apply higher fees. Accordingly, the Tribunal considers fees assessed on this

basis to be reasonable.

Under Article 38 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the costs of arbitration include

only:

“(a) The fees of the arbitral tribunal to be stated separately as to each arbitrator
and to be fixed by the tribunal itself in accordance with article 39;

(b) The travel and other expenses incurred by the arbitrators;

(c) The costs of expert advice and of other assistance required by the arbitral
tribunal;

(d) The travel and other expenses of witnesses to the extent such expenses are
approved by the arbitral tribunal;

(e) The costs for legal representation and assistance of the successful party if
such costs were claimed during the arbitral proceedings, and only to the
extent that the arbitral tribunal determines that the amount of such costs is
reasonable;

(f) Any fees and expenses of the appointing authority as well as the expenses of
the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague.”

. In the present arbitration proceedings, there have been no costs occasioned under

paragraphs (d) and (f) of Article 38. Therefore it remains for the Tribunal to decide on

the costs under paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (e).

Having regard to the agreement of the Parties on the remuneration of the arbitrators,
the Tribunal fixes the fee at US$ 3,000 per 8 hours of work (i.e. hourly fee of

US$ 375). The fees of individual arbitrators are as follows:
President Judge Tomka: US$ 13,687.50 for 36.5 hours of work;
Arbitrator Professor Florestal: US$ 6,000 for 16 hours of work;

Arbitrator Mr. Alvarez, Q.C.: US$ 9,562.50 for 25.5 hours of work.

PCA 41082 -19-

71.

72.

74.

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

The total costs under Article 38, paragraph (a), thus amount to US$ 29,250.

The costs under Article 38, paragraph (b), consist of office expenses incurred by the

Members of the Tribunal in the amount of US$ 275.32.

The costs under Article 38, paragraph (c), in the present proceedings consist of
payment for assistance rendered to the Tribunal by the PCA. The Parties agreed that
the administrative support and registry services to the Tribunal would be provided by
the PCA. The PCA applies the fees set out in its Schedule of Fees. In the present
proceedings, the costs for the services provided by the PCA amount to US$ 8,076.25
in fees for 35.5 hours of work by the Secretary to the Tribunal, and US$ 303.88 in

expenses for express courier deliveries.

3. Article 40 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides some guidance to the

arbitral tribunal with respect to allocating the costs of the arbitration. Article 40,

paragraphs 1 and 2, of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provide:

“1, Except as provided in paragraph 2, the costs of arbitration shall in principle be
borne by the unsuccessful party. However, the arbitral tribunal may apportion
each of such costs between the parties if it determines that apportionment is
reasonable, taking into account the circumstances of the case.

2. With respect to the costs of legal representation and assistance referred to in
article 38, paragraph (e), the arbitral tribunal, taking into account the
circumstances of the case, shall be free to determine which party shall bear such
costs or may apportion such costs between the parties if it determines that
apportionment is reasonable.”
The Tribunal agrees with the view, recently expressed by another NAFTA tribunal,
that “[iJn these [paragraphs], both a general principle and arbitral discretion can be
found. Article 40(1) adopts the general principle that the unsuccessful party should
bear arbitration-related costs, though, in light of the circumstances of the case, the
tribunal has the discretion to otherwise apportion the costs. Complete discretion,

however, is provided to the Tribunal to apportion the costs of legal representation and

PCA 41082 -20-

75.

76.

77.

BB.

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

assistance in light of case circumstances under Article 40(2).7!°

No award on the merits has been issued in these arbitration proceedings, as a result of
the Claimants’ failure to make the required deposit and otherwise advance their
claims as provided in the Rules. Nevertheless, in light of the Claimants’ failure to
meet their basic obligations and to orderly prosecute their claims, the Tribunal is of

the view that the Claimants are to be perceived as the unsuccessful Party.

With respect to the apportionment of costs between the Parties, in view of the
circumstances of this case described above, and in view of the conduct of the
Claimants, the Tribunal does not consider it reasonable to apportion the costs of the
arbitration (under Article 38, paragraphs (a) and (c)). These costs were incurred as a
result of the Claimants’ decision to commence this arbitration and their subsequent
refusal to pursue their claims in an efficient manner in accordance with the applicable
arbitration rules. It would not be fair or reasonable, in the Tribunal’s view, if these
costs were to be borne or partially shared by the Respondent, the Government of

Canada.

Accordingly, the Tribunal decides that the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the
costs of assistance required by the Tribunal, as specified above, in the amount of
US$ 37,905.45, shall be borne by the Claimants. The Tribunal orders the Claimant to
reimburse the Government of Canada for these costs within 30 days from the receipt

of this Order.

In addition, the Respondent claims in this arbitration the costs of its legal
representation in accordance with Article 38, paragraph (e). These claimed costs
consist of CAN$ 227,651.69 in legal fees and CAN$ 4,667.99 in disbursements for
consultant fees, travel and court and document costs. The legal fees have been
calculated by the Respondent on the basis that four lawyers working for the

Government of Canada, either in the Department of Foreign Affairs or the

'© Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. United States of America, Award, June 8, 2009, para. 832.

PCA 41082 -21-

79.

80.

81.

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

Department of Justice, were assigned to the case. They spent, according to the
submission by the Respondent, a total of 1,123.95 hours working on the case. The
cost of their time spent on this arbitration has been assessed by applying the “billable”

rate used by its Department of Justice.

Article 38, paragraph (e), concerns the costs for legal representation and assistance of
the successful party, and only to the extent that the arbitral tribunal determines that
the amount of such costs is reasonable. Further, the Tribunal notes that under Article
40, paragraph 2, of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal is free to
determine which party shall bear the costs of legal representation and assistance or
may apportion such costs between the parties if it determines that apportionment is

reasonable.

The Tribunal is of the view that it would not be reasonable to award the costs of legal
representation to the Respondent. Although the Tribunal has concluded that the
Claimants are to be perceived as the unsuccessful party in view of their failure to
prosecute their claims, and the Respondent, accordingly, can be regarded as
successful at least in respect of its request for the termination of the proceedings, the

Tribunal must assess the reasonableness of those costs before they can be awarded.

As noted above, this arbitration never proceeded beyond the preliminary stages. The
procedure did not even advance to the initial procedural meeting, although such a
meeting was scheduled. Accordingly, participation in the arbitration proceedings
required neither Disputing Parties to deploy any disproportionate resources: the
principal matters to be attended to since the commencement of the proceedings were
the negotiation of the Parties’ procedural agreement dated December 4, 2009; the
review of draft documents circulated by the Tribunal in preparation for the initial
procedural meeting; correspondence in the context of the Claimants’ stated intention
to challenge one of the Members of the Tribunal; and the preparation of the
Respondent’s Written Submission on Termination and Costs. Attendance to these

matters during the preliminary procedural stages of the proceedings did not result in

PCA 41082 -22-

8

N

»

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

any particular burden on the Disputing Parties. While a respondent is of course free to
conduct a thorough review of the claims advanced by a claimant early on, before the
constitution of the tribunal, and the figure of 1,123.95 hours of time spent collectively
by four in-house lawyers suggests that the Government of Canada may have chosen
to do so in the present case, the Tribunal does not consider it reasonable to order the
reimbursement of the costs incurred by such a review at the preliminary stages of the
present proceedings. Accordingly, the Tribunal, in the exercise of its discretion,
declines to order the Claimants to reimburse the Government of Canada for the costs

of its legal representation.

A different situation arises with respect to the disbursements for consultant fees,
travel and court and document costs claimed by the Government of Canada in the
amount of CAN$ 4,667.99. These costs were clearly incurred as a result of the
Claimants’ institution of the arbitral proceedings and the Tribunal considers them to
be reasonable. Therefore, the Tribunal awards these costs to the Respondent. The
Tribunal orders the Claimants to pay to the Government of Canada CAN$ 4,667.99

on account of the costs of legal and other assistance.

C. Place of Arbitration

Having regard to Article 1130 of NAFTA and Article 16, paragraph 1, of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, and considering the Disputing Parties’ agreement that
the first procedural meeting be held at the premises of the PCA in The Hague, the
Tribunal determines that the place of arbitration for the present arbitration shall be

The Hague, the Netherlands.

PCA 41082 -23-

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

V. DISPOSITIF

For these reasons the Tribunal DECIDES:

1. The Arbitral proceedings instituted by Melvin J. Howard, Centurion Health
Corp. and Howard Family Trust against the Government of Canada are
terminated in accordance with Article 41, paragraph 4, of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules on the day of the adoption of the present Order.

2. The Claimants (Melvin J. Howard, Centurion Health Corp. and Howard
Family Trust) are jointly and severally liable to reimburse the Respondent
(the Government of Canada) the costs of the arbitration proceedings in the
amount of US$ 37,905.45 and disbursements in the amount of
CAN$ 4,667.99.

3. Accordingly, the Claimants (Melvin J. Howard, Centurion Health Corp. and
Howard Family Trust) shall pay to the Respondent (the Government of
Canada) the sums of US$ 37,905.45 and of CAN$ 4,667.99 within 30 days of
the adoption of this Award.

4. The Respondent’s other requests set out in its Submission dated April 29,
2010 - including for the reimbursement of costs of legal fees incurred by

lawyers working for the Government of Canada — are dismissed.

PCA 41082 -24-

Order for the Termination of the Proceedings
and Award on Costs
August 2, 2010

Done in The Hague on August 2, 2010:

a

Professor Marjorie Florestal Mr. Henri Alvarez, Q.C.

 

“Li Sou

Judge Peter Tomka
President

PCA 41082 -25-

