PUBLIC VERSION

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT
DISPUTES

IN THE ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN
OF THE NORTH AMERICA FREE TRADE AGREEMENT (“NAFTA”)

BETWEEN:

MERCER INTERNATIONAL INC.

Claimant

CANADA

Respondent
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/3)

 

Supplementary Decision

 

Members of the Tribunal:
Mr V. V. Veeder (President)

Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia
Professor Zachary Douglas QC

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Ms Alicia Martin Blanco

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 10 December 2018

PUBLIC VERSION

Representing the Claimant:

c/o Mr Michael T. Shor

Ms Gaela K. Gehring Flores

Mr Samuel Witten

Mr Csaba Rusznak

Arnold & Porter Kaye Scholer LLP
601 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, D.C. 20001-3743
US.A.

Mr Harj Sangra

Sangra Moller LLP

1000 Cathedral Place

925 West Georgia Street

Vancouver, British Columbia V6C 3L2
Canada

Representing the Respondent:

c/o Mr Michael Owen
Mr Adam Douglas

Mr Stephen Kurelek

Ms Krista Zeman

Mr Andrew Mason

Ms Lori Di Pierdomenico
Trade Law Bureau
Global Affairs Canada
125 Sussex Drive
Ottawa, Ontario KIA 0G2
Canada

Mr Jonathan Eades

Mr Bruce I. Macallum

Legal Services Branch
Ministry of Attorney General
1001 Douglas Street
Victoria, BC V8W 9J7
Canada

Ms Vicki Antoniades
Legal Services

BC Hydro

333 Dunsmuir Street
Vancouver, BC V6B 5R3
Canada

PUBLIC VERSION

Table of Contents
A: Introducti

 

 

1
B: The Parties’ Cases 2
C: Article 57 of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules .........ccscscssssssssssssssssssesseesseees 6
D: The Tribunal’s Analysis 9

 

E: The Tribunal’s Decision

PUBLIC VERSION

Mercer International Inc. v. Canada
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/3)

 

N

»

Supplementary Decision

: Introduction

By its Request dated 20 April 2018 and Observations dated 25 June 2018, the Claimant
requests a Supplementary Decision under Article 57 of the ICSID Additional Facility
Rules on its claim alleging discrimination by the Respondent under NAFTA Articles

1102 and 1103 with respect to BCUC Order G-48-09 (its “G-48-09 Claim”).

By its Reply dated 4 June 2018 and Response dated 16 July 2018, the Respondent

denies the Claimant’s Request.

On 2 October 2018, the Centre informed the Parties that Professor Orrego Vicufia had
passed away. On 11 November 2018, Mr. Veeder and Professor Douglas raised with
the Parties the possibility that they might wish jointly to consent (in writing) to
receiving the Decision signed by the two remaining members of the Tribunal as if it
were a decision by the full Tribunal. The two remaining members of the Tribunal

explained the situation as follows:

“The Claimant's request was discussed by all three members
of the Tribunal during a telephone-conference call held on
24 July 2018 based upon a draft decision and draft reasons
for that decision prepared by the President of the Tribunal
(preceded by earlier deliberations). The conference-call was
also attended by the Tribunal’s Secretary. At those
deliberations, the three members of the Tribunal reached a
consensus, unanimously, on a revised version of the draft
decision and draft reasons. This consensus is recalled by
each of the two remaining members of the Tribunal and the
Secretary.

Subsequently, the revised version was sent to Professor
Orrego Vicufia by the Tribunal’s President on 9 August 2018
followed, later, by the final document from ICSID for
Professor Orrego Vicuna’s formal signature. There was no
response from Professor Orrego Vicufa in regard to his
signature; he was by then already unwell; and it remains
unknown to ICSID whether or not he signed the final
document. In these circumstances, it must be presumed that

1

PUBLIC VERSION

Mercer International Inc. v. Canada
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/3)

 

4.

B:

a

Supplementary Decision

he did not do so. In the meantime, the remaining two

members of the Tribunal had formally signed the final

document, ready for issuance (subject to Professor Orrego

Vicuna’s signature) to the Parties.”
By joint communication submitted on 28 November 2018, the Parties provided their
written consent to receiving a decision on the Claimant’s request for a supplementary

decision signed by Mr. Veeder and Professor Douglas as if it were a decision by the

full Tribunal.
The Parties’ Cases

The Claimant's Case: In brief, the Claimant contends that it expressly claimed damages
for its G-48-09 Claim; the Tribunal’s Award of 6 March 2018 appears not to have
decided that Claim; instead the Tribunal mistakenly stated: “the Claimant only claims
damages arising from the Respondent’s alleged liability regarding Celgar’s GBL”; and
it decided that the Claimant’s G-48-09 Claim was “otiose” in light of the Tribunal’s
dismissal of the “Claimant’s case regarding Celgar’s GBL .. . .”. (referring to

Paragraph 7.40 of the Award).

Paragraph 7.40, with Paragraphs 7.38 and 7.39 of the Award for immediate context,

state (with original footnotes here omitted):

“7.38 BCUC G-48-09: As regards the Claimant’s claims for
‘discriminatory treatment’ regarding BCUC G-48-09, the
Tribunal can decide these claims with relative succinctness.
As regards such treatment, the Claimant’s complaint is
effectively directed at BC Hydro and the BCUC for
precluding Celgar’s ability to arbitrage with sales of energy
to third parties, including its ability to access (via Fortis BC)
BC Hydro’s low cost energy. However, the effect of that
complaint is limited, according to the Claimant’s own case.

7.39 In summary, the Claimant submitted (inter alia) in its

Reply that hc rr

does allow Celgar 7 is

rr

Eee 22 its Reply, the Claimant
2

PUBLIC VERSION

Mercer International Inc. v. Canada
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/3)

Supplementary Decision

 

pleaded: ‘Mercer does not claim additional or separate
damages resulting from Order G-48-09's net-of-load
restriction, because, as Canada correctly contends, |

“7.40 Thus, the Claimant only claims damages arising from
the Respondent's alleged liability regarding Celgar’s GBL.
The Claimant does not seek further or separate damages
resulting from Order G-48-09 itself. Given that the Tribunal
has dismissed the Claimant’s case regarding Celgar’s GBL
(see above),! the Claimant’s claim for ‘discriminatory
treatment’ under NAFTA Articles 1102 and 1103 regarding
BCUC Order G-48-09 becomes otiose. The Tribunal
therefore dismisses this claim.”

7. The Claimant submits that Order G-48-09 was a measure attributable to the Respondent
resulting in discriminatory treatment under NAFTA Articles 1102 and 1103; its claim
constituted an independent claim with an independent request for damages not
dependent upon its GBL claim; and thus the Tribunal’s decision on the Claimant’s GBL
claim did not render its G-48-09 Claim “moot”. The Claimant concludes that the
Tribunal thus failed to render a decision regarding its G-48-09 Claim. The Claimant
requests the Tribunal to remedy that omission by issuing a supplementary decision on

that Claim under Article 57 of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules.

8. The Respondent's Case: In brief, the Respondent contends that the Tribunal, after
reviewing the evidence adduced by the Parties, dismissed the Claimant’s G-48-09

Claim under NAFTA Articles 1102 and 1103 in several passages in the Award.

9. As submitted by the Respondent, these passages in the Award included the following

(in material part, with footnotes here omitted):?

“7.17 Treatment: It is common ground that the treatments

' This is a reference to Paragraphs 7.4 to 7.37 of the Award (The BCUC Order G-48-09 is expressly addressed
in Paragraphs 7.4, 7.5, 7.17, 7.23 and 7.33)
2 The Respondent also relied upon Paragraphs 7.22, 7.23, 7.33 and 7.66 to 7.75 of the Award.

3

PUBLIC VERSION

Mercer International Inc. v. Canada
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/3)

 

Supplementary Decision

at issue under NAFTA Articles 1102 and 1103 are the
assessment of “discriminatory treatment” by BC Hydro
(which the Claimant compares both to other GBLs and to the
load displacement agreements offered to other mills) and the
BCUC by Order G-48-09.”

“7.45 Summary. In summary, as regards the Claimant’s
claims under NAFTA Articles 1102 and 1103 relating to
“discriminatory treatment”, the Claimant has established
that Celgar was treated differently from other self-
generating pulp mills in the Province, including Howe
Sound and Tembec. However, in the different circumstances
pertaining to Celgar and each of these other mills, that
different treatment is not proven to be “discriminatory
treatment” in violation of NAFTA Articles 1102 or 1103.
Whilst ostensibly comparators, none were “in like
circumstances” for the purposes of NAFTA Articles 1102
and 1103; and their different treatment can best be
explained on the basis of their individual circumstances
under BC Hydro’s consistent application of its GBL
methodology. The Claimant here bore the legal burden of
proving its case; the evidential burden never shifted to the
Respondent; and the Claimant did not discharge its
burden.”

“7.46 Conclusion: For these several reasons, the Tribunal
dismisses the Claimant’s remaining claims as regards
“discriminatory treatment” under NAFTA Articles 1102 and
1103 (together with, as assumed, NAFTA Article 1503).”

“7.63 As regards the first measure [i.e. BCUC Order G-49-
09], the Tribunal has decided that that the Claimant’s claims
for ‘discriminatory treatment’ based upon NAFTA Articles
1102, 1103 and 1105(1) in relation to BCUC Order G-48-
09 must be rejected.”

“7.79: More specifically [under “The Tribunal’s Analysis
on BCUC Order G-48-09"], it is clear from the
contemporaneous documents produced by the BCUC,
Celgar, FortisBC and BC Hydro that BCUC Order G-48-09
did not ‘prevent [] FortisBC from selling Celgar any
embedded cost electricity from Fortis’ pre-existing resource
stack while Celgar is selling electricity. [Original
Emphasis]. Such prevention is the factual premise for the

PUBLIC VERSION

Mercer International Inc. v. Canada
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/3)

 

Supplementary Decision

Claimant's claim, as to which it bore the legal burden of
proof. Indeed, as the Respondent pointed out, Celgar
acquired a right that no other mill in British Columbia had,
which was the ability to sell all of its self-generation below
its GBL to the market and to supply its Mill from FortisBC
resources so long as that supply did not include BC Hydro
supply to FortisBC under their PPAs.”

“7.84. In summary [under “Conclusion”’], for the reasons
above, the Tribunal (by a majority) has decided that the
Respondent has not violated NAFTA Articles 1102, 1103 and
1105(1). Nor did BC Hydro. It therefore follows that the
Respondent also did not violate Article 1503(2) (even
assuming its application as a matter of jurisdiction) by
failing to ensure that BC Hydro did not act contrary to
NAFTA Articles 1102, 1103 and 1105(1).”

“7.85 The Tribunal (by a majority) therefore dismisses on
the merits as to liability all the Claimant's remaining claims
under NAFTA Articles 1102, 1103, 1105 and 1503. It follows
that no issues related to compensation under these
provisions requires the decision of the Tribunal and, also,
that the Claimant's claims for compensation and its related
claims for interest are dismissed.”

“8.5 Liability: The Tribunal (by a majority) dismisses the
Claimant’s remaining claims as to which it has and may
exercise jurisdiction; namely: (i) the Claimant’s claims
relating to BCUC Order G-48-09 under NAFTA Articles
1102, 1103, 1105...”.

10.5: “As to the merits of the claims made by the Claimant
(for itself and ZCL), concerning BCUC Order G-48-09, the
Tribunal dismisses all such claims under NAFTA Articles
1102, 1103, and 1105(1);”

10. In these circumstances, the Tribunal having dismissed the Claimant’s G-48-09 Claim
in several passages of its Award, the Respondent submits that the Claimant’s Request
seeks to re-argue the Tribunal’s decisions. The Respondent concludes that such
Request therefore lies beyond the scope of Article 57 of the ICSID Additional Facility
Rules.

PUBLIC VERSION

Mercer International Inc. v. Canada
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/3)

Supplementary Decision

 

C: Article 57 of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules
11. Article 57 of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules provides (in material part):*

“(1) Within 45 days after the date of the award either
party, with notice to the other party may request the
Tribunal, through the Secretary-General, to decide any
question which it had omitted to decide in the award.”

12. There is no issue between the Parties that the Claimant’s Request was timely, being
made within 45 days of the date of the Award. However, there is an issue as to the

scope of Article 57 of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules.

13. The Claimant and the Respondent both rely upon the decision in ADM v Mexico
(2008):*

“72. In relation to Article 57, the power to supplement is
limited to the situation in which the Tribunal omitted ‘to
decide any question’. Article 57 does not empower a
Tribunal to issue a supplementary decision as a means to
consider new evidence, to hear new arguments, to rehear an
issue, or to modify or supplement its original reasoning. In
short, Article 57 does not empower the Arbitral Tribunal to
make a new decision, or to modify its existing decision, or
even to supplement the reasoning of its existing decision. The
applicant under Article 57 must clearly identify a ‘question’
that the award had failed to decide.”

14. The Respondent also refers to the decision in Loewen v USA (2004):5

“19. We agree that, apart from the dismissal in the Award of
June 26, 2003 of all the claims ‘in their entirety’, there is no

3 Article 57 of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules has materially the same text as Article 49(2) of the ICSID
Convention, which provides: “The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45 days after the date
on which the award was rendered may after notice to the other party decide any question which it had
omitted to decide in the award...”

4 Archer Daniels Midland Company and Tate & Lyle Ingredients Americas, Inc. v. United Mexican States,
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/04/05, Decision on the Requests for Correction, Supplementary Decision and
Interpretation (redacted version), 10 July 2008, Paragraph 12.

> Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. USA, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, Decision on
Respondent's Request for a Supplementary Decision, 6 September 2004, Paragraphs 19-21.

6

PUBLIC VERSION

Mercer International Inc. v. Canada
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/3)

Supplementary Decision

 

distinct reference in the Award to a discussion of Raymond
Loewen’s claim under art. 1116. We agree also that, as there
was no jurisdictional objection to his claim under art. 1116,
that claim fell to be determined by the decision on the merits.

“20. But the dismissal of all the claims ‘in their entirety’
following the examination of the merits was necessarily a
resolution of the art. 1116 claim. That dismissal was a
consequence of the reasoning expressed in paras 213-216.
We therefore reject the argument that the Award did not deal
with the art. 1116 claim. “21. It follows that Respondent is
correct when it argues that Raymond Loewen is asking the
Tribunal to reconsider its decision to dismiss that claim and
to reconsider the reasoning (described by Raymond Loewen
as ‘obiter dicta’) which led the Tribunal to dismiss the claim.
In the context of the dismissal of Loewen’s claims, that
reasoning was not merely ‘obiter dicta’. It was the reasoning
on which that part of the Award was based; and it is not open
to the Tribunal to reconsider it. There is no logical basis on
which the Tribunal can draw a distinction between the
relationship of that reasoning to the dismissal of the Loewen
claims on the one hand and to the Raymond Loewen claim
under art. 1116 on the other hand.”

15. In its Response, the Respondent also cited LG&E v Argentina (2008);° Vivendi v
Argentina (2003);’ and Schreuer, The ICSID Convention (1* ed.).®

16. The Tribunal finds no material legal issue between the Parties as regards the

interpretation of Article 57 of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules. Both Parties cite

© LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp., LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Claimants’ Request for Supplementary Decision, 8 July 2008, Paragraph 16:
“[T] he supplementation process is not a mechanism by which parties can continue proceeding on the merits
or seek a remedy that calls into question the validity of the Tribunal’s decision.” (This request was decided
under Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention).

7 Compaitia de Aguas Del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal (formerly Compagnie Generale des Eaux)
v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3 (Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Request for
Supplementation and Rectification of its Decision Concerning Annulment of the Award, 28 May 2003),
Paragraph 11: “[AJny supplementary decision or rectification as may result, in no way consists of a means
of appealing or otherwise revising the merits of the decision subject to supplementation or rectification.”
(This request was also decided under Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention).

8 Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, (2001), p. 849. (The Tribunal has checked
the second edition of this work which has a passage to similar effect on Article 49(2) of the ICSID
Convention, see p. 853ff).

  

  

PUBLIC VERSION

Mercer International Inc. v. Canada
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/3)

 

Supplementary Decision

the decision in ADM v Mexico. It merits citing further, beyond the passage cited by the

Parties (set out above):

“13. The Claimants’ submissions in the present case link the
reference to a ‘question’ in Article 57 to the requirement in
Article 52(1)(i) that the Award contains ‘the decision of the
Tribunal on every question submitted to it.’ ‘Question’ can
be presumed to have the same meaning in both contexts. The
meaning of ‘question’, and particularly the level of
abstraction at which a ‘question’ should be conceived, are
matters that the Tribunal is required to address in the
present Decision.”

“14. Article 52(1)(i) also requires a Tribunal in its Award to

provide ‘the reasons upon which the decision is based’. The
Claimants relate the requirement of reasons in Article
52(1)(i) to the power to make a supplementary decision in
Article 57, suggesting that a decision on any question and
the requirement of reasons are inextricably linked. This is
true in Article 52, but not in Article 57. The Claimants argue,
in effect, that the requirement for reasons for a decision on
a question in Article 52(1)(i) means that a failure to give
reasons, or to give sufficient reasons, ipso facto means the
Tribunal has omitted to decide a question. This is not
necessarily so ...”.

 

 

“15. ...The failure to provide an adequate statement of
reasons does not necessarily mean that the Tribunal has
omitted to decide a question (the only basis of an Article 57
application). Article 57 empowers the Tribunal to ‘decide a
question which it had omitted to decide in the award,’ but
not to modify or supplement its reasoning on a question it
did in fact decide.”

17. The Tribunal endorses this analysis of Article 57 in ADM. It is clear that the issue
between the Parties does not relate to the interpretation of Article 57 but rather its
application to the text of the Award. In particular, it is common ground between the
Parties that Article 57 cannot be interpreted to apply to a decision or reasoning made
by a tribunal in its award, read as a whole. In the present case, therefore, the material

question is whether or not the matter raised by the Claimant’s Request was decided in

PUBLIC VERSION

Mercer International Inc. v. Canada
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/3)

Supplementary Decision

 

the Award.
D: The Tribunal’s Analysis

18. The Tribunal accepts, as the Claimant contends, that the Claimant made separate claims
comprising its G-48-09 Claim and its GBL Claim. As regards the former, albeit
advanced as a subsidiary claim, this distinction is clear from (inter alia), the text of the
Award, the transcript of the Hearing recording the Claimant’s position and the

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions.”

19. Nevertheless, the Claimant expressly did not contend that there were separate damages

under these two claims. Indeed, the Claimant expressly contended the opposite.

20. For example, Mr Kaczmarek was called by the Claimant as its expert witness on
quantum, testifying in writing and orally at the Hearing. In his second written report

(standing as part of his direct examination), Mr Kaczmarek testified: !°

“16. ... As the Measures [i.e. BCUC Order G-48-09 and
Celgar’s GBL] have the same practical impact on Celgar
together and separately [Footnote 7: see below], we
constructed only one But-For Scenario to calculate
Mercer’s historical and future cash flows and the fair market
value of Mercer’s investment in Celgar as of 31 December
2013 absent the Measures. ...”

“Footnote 7: “BCUC Order G-48-09 indirectly prevents
Celgar from selling its below load self-generation because it
cannot access replacement power as FortisBC is prevented
from selling embedded-cost utility electricity that includes
BC Hydro PPA electricity to self-generators that are selling
electricity below their load. Similarly, the BC Hydro EPA’s
GBL of 349 GWh/vear (set at Celgar’s 2007 load) and its
exclusivity provisions prevent Celgar from selling electricity
below the assigned GBL to third parties. BCUC Order G-
48-09 and the BC Hydro EPA’s GBL (together and
separately) have the same effective impact of holding Celgar

° Hearing D8.2216; Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submission dated 7 January 2016, Paragraphs 3-5.
© Kaczmarek ER2, Paragraph 16 and Footnote 7.

PUBLIC VERSION

Mercer International Inc. v. Canada
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/3)

 

2

2)

2:

2:

Supplementary Decision

to a ‘net-of-2007-load’ standard by preventing it from
selling 349 GWh/year of its self-generated electricity.”

1. More significantly, this matter was also addressed by the Tribunal during the
Claimant’s closing oral submissions at the Hearing, as recorded in the verbatim

transcript:!!

[The Claimant]: Now, this is a little bit of a complicated
point, but I think this is one point of common agreement
between us and Canada. There are no separate damages
stemming from the G-48-09 discrimination that are distinct
from the damages that flow from the discriminatory setting
of Celgar's GBL.

[The Tribunal]: To pick up the point by Professor Douglas,'?
so that point it doesn’t matter whether we deal with the
Measures separately or collectively.

[The Claimant] That’s correct. I think we deal with them
collectively.”
2. As stated above, the present question is whether or not the Tribunal decided the
Claimant’s G-48-09 claim as to liability and/or quantum in its Award. The Claimant
subtly poses this question as: “whether the Tribunal’s statement that Mercer’s [G-48-

09] claim was otiose was itself otiose”.!7

o

. In the circumstances, in the Tribunal’s view (then and now), it was appropriate to
address the Claimant’s G-48-09 Claim “collectively” with the Claimant’s GBL Claim

as regards both liability and quantum.

&

. Read as a whole, the Tribunal does not consider that it failed to address and answer the
material question posed by the Claimant’s G-48-09 Claim. As recorded in the Award,

the Tribunal decided (by a majority) to dismiss that Claim as to both liability and

4 Hearing D8.2207-2208.
'2-This refers to the exchange between the Tribunal and the Claimant’s Counsel, Hearing D8.2216 cited

B

above.
Claimant’s Observations, Paragraph 5.

PUBLIC VERSION

Mercer International Inc. v. Canada
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/3)

 

2!

Supplementary Decision

damages under NAFTA Articles 1102, 1103 and 1105(1). As to liability, the Tribunal
decided to dismiss the G-48-09 Claim along with the Claimant’s primary GBL Claim
on the basis (inter alia) that there was no unlawful discriminatory treatment. That was
a considered and deliberate decision. As to damages, it followed, with the dismissal of
the Claimant’s GBL and G-48-09 Claims as to liability, that the Tribunal (by a
majority) had also to dismiss the latter Claim on the further basis (inter alia) that, as
contended by the Claimant, both Claims had “the same practical effect” as to damages.

That too was a considered and deliberate decision.

n

. Moreover, “otiose” does not mean “moot.” Nonetheless, as often with a “complicated
point” (to use the Claimant’s phrase), it is possible with hindsight to supplement the
wording of the reasons for a tribunal’s decision. However tempting that might be, that
step is clearly impermissible under Article 57 of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules,

as interpreted with the decision in ADM.

E: The Tribunal’s Decision'*

2

2

a

. Accordingly, for these reasons, the Tribunal dismisses the Claimant’s Request.

x

. As to the costs related to this proceeding for a supplementary decision of the Award,
the Tribunal considers it inappropriate to make any order for costs, save to order each
Party to bear its own costs and for the Parties to bear in equal shares ICSID’s own
administrative fees and expenses, to be notified in writing separately to the Parties by

the ICSID Secretariat.'>

4 The Tribunal has designated this Decision as “Restricted Access” until the Parties have had an opportunity

15

to review it and propose redactions pursuant to the Confidentiality Order. Mr. Veeder and Professor
Douglas will remain seized of this matter to resolve any disputes over confidentiality designations in this
Decision for a period of 60 days after the Decision.

A statement of account will be sent to the Parties in due course by the ICSID Secretariat.

ll

  

PUBLIC VERSION

Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuna:
(Subject to my dissent from the Tribunal’s Award of 6 March 2018)

Signed:
Dated:

Professor Zachary Douglas:

Signed:
Dated: 10 December 2018

V.V. Veeder (President):

Signed:
Dated:10 December 2018

12

