CORTE PERMANENTE DE ARBITRAJE PERMANENT COURT OF ARBITRATION

 

PCA Case No. AA442
IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER THE TREATY BETWEEN THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR CONCERNING
THE ENCOURAGEMENT AND RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF INVESTMENT

- and -

THE ARBITRATION RULES OF THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON
INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW, 1976

- between -

MERCK SHARP & DOHME (I.A.) CORPORATION

- and -

THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR

 

DECISION ON CHALLENGE TO ARBITRATOR
JUDGE STEPHEN M. SCHWEBEL

 

August 8, 2012

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012

 

 

 

Page 2 of 19

TABLE OF CONTENTS
IL PROCEDURAL HISTORY 3
II. | THE CHALLENGE TO JUDGE SCHWEBEL 5
a. The Respondent’s Position 5
1. Judge Schwebel’s late and incomplete disclosures . ad

 

2. Judge Schwebel’s past appointments on behalf of parties represented by counsel. for
the Claimant

 

3. The circumstances considered in the aggregate.
b. The Claimant’s Position
1. Judge Schwebel’s past appointments on behalf of parties represented by counsel for
the Claimant 10
2. Judge Schwebel’s late and incomplete disclosures ...........

 

3. The circumstances considered in the aggregate.
c. Judge Schwebel’s C

III. REASONING. 15

a. Legal Standard.
b. The Respondent’s Challenge to Judge Schwebel ..

 

 

 

 

1. Judge Schwebel’s late and incomplete disclosure.

2. Judge Schwebel’s past appointments on behalf of parties represented by counsel for
the Claimant 18

3. The circumstances considered in the aggregate.

IV. DECISION. 19

 

PCA 74822

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 3 of 19

L PROCEDURAL HISTORY

This challenge arises out of an arbitration between Merck Sharp & Dohme (I.A.) Corporation
(the “Claimant”) and the Republic of Ecuador (the “Respondent” or “Ecuador’”) under the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, December 15,
1976 (the “UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules” or “UNCITRAL Rules”) pursuant to the Treaty
between the United States of America and the Republic of Ecuador concerning the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment, signed on August 27, 1993 and
entered into force on May 11, 1997 (the “Treaty”).

The Claimant is represented in this case by Mr. Gary B. Born, Mr. David W. Ogden, Ms.
Rachael D. Kent, Mr. Charles S. Beene, and Mr. Claudio Salas of Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale
and Dorr LLP, as well as by Mary E. Bartkus of Merck Sharpe Dohme (I.A.) Corp. The
Respondent is represented by Dr. Diego Garcia Carrion, Dra. Christel Gaibor, Ms. Diana Teran,
and Mr. Juan Francisco Martinez of the Procuraduria General del Estado of Ecuador, as well as
by Mr. Paul Reichler, Mr. Mark Clodfelter, Mr. Ronald Goodman, Mr. Alberto Wray, Ms. Janis
Brennan, Ms. Diana Tsutieva, and Mr. Constantinos Salonidis of Foley Hoag LLP.

By a Notice of Arbitration dated November 29, 2011 and received by the Respondent on
December 2, 2011, the Claimant commenced an arbitration against the Respondent pursuant to
Article VI(3)(a)(iii) of the Treaty and Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The
Claimant, a company incorporated under the laws of the state of Delaware in the United States,
claims that Ecuador breached the Treaty with respect to the Claimant’s investment in the
pharmaceutical industry. In its Notice of Arbitration, the Claimant appointed Judge Stephen M.
Schwebel as arbitrator.

By letter dated December 30, 2011, the Respondent appointed Judge Bruno Simma as
arbitrator.

By letters dated February 14, 2012, the Claimant and the Respondent jointly requested that the
Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration (“PCA”) act as appointing authority to
appoint a presiding arbitrator.

By letter to the Claimant dated February 23, 2012, the Respondent subsequently challenged the
Claimant’s appointment of Judge Schwebel under Article 10 of the UNCITRAL Rules on the
basis of bias against counsel for the Respondent demonstrated in an article recently published
by Judge Schwebel.

On the same date, the Respondent requested that the Secretary-General of the PCA suspend the
process for the appointment of the presiding arbitrator until the challenge to Judge Schwebel
had been resolved. The Claimant expressed its opposition to the Respondent’s request for a
suspension by letter dated February 25, 2012.

By letter dated February 27, 2012, the Acting Secretary-General of the PCA suspended the
appointment process until the resolution of the challenge.

By letter dated March 15, 2012, after Judge Schwebel declined to withdraw and the Claimant
declined to agree to the challenge, the Respondent requested that the Secretary-General of the
PCA decide its challenge to the Claimant’s appointment of Judge Schwebel.

By letter dated March 16, 2012, the PCA acknowledged receipt of the Respondent’s Request
and established a schedule for further submissions on the challenge.

PCA 74822

1

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 4 of 19

By his “Decision on the Challenge to Judge Stephen M. Schwebel” dated April 12, 2012, the
Acting Secretary-General of the PCA rejected the challenge to Judge Schwebel.

On May 8, 2012, the Acting Secretary-General of the PCA appointed Sir Franklin Berman
KCMG QC as presiding arbitrator.

By e-mail of May 22, 2012, the presiding arbitrator convened a telephone conference-call with
the Parties and circulated a “Statement of disclosure by the Members of the Arbitral Tribunal”
(the “Joint Disclosure Statement”), stating, inter alia, as follows:

3. Judge Schwebel has been previously appointed as arbitrator by the firm of Wilmer Cutler
Pickering Hale and Dorr as follows:

— Red Sea Islands Arbitration, Eritrea/Yemen, 1997;
—  Abyei Arbitration, Sudan/Sudan People's Liberation Movement, 2008.

4. Judge Schwebel rendered an expert opinion at the request of Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale
and Dorr in Shell Oil Company v. Sonia Eduardo Franco Franco et al., 2005.

5. Judge Simma currently serves as an arbitrator in the case Copper Mesa Mining Corporation
(Canada) v. Republic of Ecuador (PCA Case No. 2012-2) appointed by the Republic of
Ecuador through the law firm of Lalive, Geneva.

Nothing in the above affects the impartiality of the Tribunal or any of its Members or their
independence of the Parties to this Arbitration. '

By e-mail of June 6, 2012, counsel for the Claimant informed counsel for the Respondent as
follows:

Per your request on our call yesterday, I am attaching the expert opinion on Nicaraguan
Special Law 364 submitted by Judge Schwebel in Shell Oil v Sonia Eduarda Franco Franco
et al. (2005), where Wilmer was counsel for Shell. Judge Schwebel submitted the same
opinion in a subsequent litigation, Miguel Angel Sanchez Osorio v. Dole Food Co., et al
(2008), where he was retained by four co-defendants, including our client, Shell.”

By letter dated June 7, 2012, the Respondent notified the Claimant and Judge Schwebel of its
second challenge to Judge Schwebel.

By letter dated June 8, 2012, the Claimant responded to the Respondent’s challenge of Judge
Schwebel, declining to agree to his removal from the Tribunal.

On June 10, 2012, Judge Schwebel rejected the challenge and declined to withdraw as
arbitrator.

By letter dated June 21, 2012, the Respondent requested that the PCA Secretary-General, in his
capacity as the appointing authority in this case, decide its second challenge to Judge Schwebel
(“Respondent’s Request”).

By letter dated June 22, 2012, the PCA acknowledged receipt of the Respondent’s Request and
established a schedule for further submissions on the challenge.

Joint Disclosure Statement, May 22, 2012 (RCE-4).

E-mail from Mr. Charles S. Beene to Mr. Mark Clodfelter, June 6, 2012 (RCE-5).

PCA 74822

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 5 of 19

By letter dated July 9, 2012, the Claimant submitted its Response to the Respondent’s Request
(“Claimant’s Response”).

By letter dated July 10, 2012, Judge Schwebel submitted his Comments on the second challenge
(“Judge Schwebel’s Comments”).

By letter dated July 17, 2012, the Respondent submitted its Rebuttal to the Claimant’s Response
(“Respondent’s Rebuttal”).

By letter dated July 24, 2012, the Claimant submitted its Rejoinder to the Respondent’s
Response (“Claimant’s Rejoinder”).

Il. THE CHALLENGE TO JUDGE SCHWEBEL
a. The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent’s challenge to Judge Schwebel’s appointment arises out of his non-disclosure
“for almost six months after his appointment” of two earlier appointments as arbitrator and one
appointment as expert witness by parties represented by counsel for the Claimant, as well as his
non-disclosure of another appointment as expert witness by a party represented by counsel for
the Claimant.

According to the Respondent, Judge Schwebel did not make any disclosure upon his
appointment by the Claimant on November 29, 2011 and until the presiding arbitrator
transmitted the Joint Disclosure Statement on May 22, 2012. In the Joint Disclosure Statement,
Judge Schwebel disclosed that he had been appointed through Claimant’s counsel, Wilmer
Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP (“WilmerHale”), as arbitrator in the Red Sea Islands
Arbitration (Eritrea/Yemen) and in the Abyei Arbitration (Sudan/Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement) and had been retained to render an expert opinion in Shell Oil Company v. Sonia
Eduardo Franco Franco et al. According to the Respondent, two weeks after receiving the
Joint Disclosure Statement, and in the course of its assessment of Judge Schwebel’s disclosures,
the Respondent was informed by the Claimant that Judge Schwebel had also been retained
through counsel for the Claimant in 2008 to render an expert opinion in Miguel Angel Sanchez
Osorio et al v. Dole Food Company, Inc., The Dow Chemical Company, Occidental Chemical
Corporation and Shell Oil Company.

The Respondent asserts that “[e]ach of the foregoing circumstances and their accumulation —
the substance of the now-revealed relationship between Judge Schwebel and Claimant’s counsel
and Judge Schwebel’s late disclosure and failure to disclose those relationships — raise
justifiable doubts as to his impartiality and independence to serve as an arbitrator in this case”
under the applicable UNCITRAL standards, specifically, from the perspective of a “reasonable
and informed third party.”°

1. Judge Schwebel’s late and incomplete disclosures

The Respondent first argues that Judge Schwebel’s late and incomplete disclosure in itself gives
rise to justifiable doubts concerning his independence and impartiality in this arbitration. The
Respondent submits that under Article 9 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Judge Schwebel

Respondent’s Request, p. 9; Joint Disclosure Statement, May 22, 2012 (RCE-4).
Respondent’s Request, p. 10; e-mail from Mr. Charles $. Beene to Mr. Mark Clodfelter, June 6, 2012 (RCE-
5).
Respondent’s Request, pp. 2, 9; Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 3.

PCA 74822

28.

29.

30.

ul

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 6 of 19

had a duty to disclose “any circumstances likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his
impartiality and independence” upon his appointment by the Claimant on November 29, 2011.
The Respondent cites General Standard 3(c) of the IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in
International Arbitration (“IBA Guidelines”) to the same effect and adds that these require that
“[a]ny doubt as to whether an arbitrator should disclose certain facts or circumstances should be
resolved in favor of disclosure.”®

The Respondent further refers to international commentators and case law to argue that a failure
to disclose circumstances that should have been disclosed may give rise to justifiable doubts.
The Respondent quotes Article 4.1 of the IBA Rules of Ethics for International Arbitrators
(“IBA Rules of Ethics”) to the effect that “[flailure to make [full] disclosure creates an
appearance of bias, and may of itself be a ground for disqualification even though the non-
disclosed facts or circumstances would not of themselves justify disqualification.” It submits
that “[w]hether nondisclosure raises such doubts depends on whether the failure to disclose was
inadvertent or intentional, whether it was the result of an honest exercise of discretion, whether
the facts that were not disclosed raised obvious questions about impartiality and
independence, and whether the nondisclosure is an aberration on the part of a conscientious
arbitrator or part of a pattern of circumstances raising doubts as to impartiality.”*

  

The Respondent also points to General Standard 3(a) of the IBA Guidelines to argue that “at the
time of Respondent’s challenge, Judge Schwebel was no more justified in considering that his
prior appointments by Claimant’s counsel would not corroborate or independently establish, in
the eyes of Respondent, facts or circumstances giving rise to doubts as regards his impartiality
or independence.” It stresses that Judge Schwebel’s assessment of his previous appointments as
“few, [...] years ago and [...] unrelated to the instant case” do not “comport with the
explanation to the General Standard 3,” which clarifies that with regard to disclosure “the
parties have an interest in being fully informed about any circumstances that may be relevant in
their view. [...] the Working Group in principle accepted [...] a subjective approach for
disclosure.”

The Respondent contends that the “fact that [Judge Schwebel] may have considered that his
professional relationships with WilmerHale did not merit disclosure is irrelevant: he was
required to reveal any circumstances likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his
impartiality and independence.”'' The Respondent disagrees with Judge Schwebel’s
justification that it did not occur to him to make disclosures while the first challenge against
him was pending, because by then Judge Schwebel “should have been more not Jess attuned to
circumstances so obviously relevant to his appointment” and “his untimely and incomplete
disclosure was deliberate and exposes an inclination [...] to suppress relevant circumstances
that had the potential of further compounding circumstances at the time of the first challenge
which [...] gave rise to justifiable doubts.”"”

 

Respondent’s Request, pp. 4, 11, quoting /BA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International
Arbitration, General Standard 3(c), Disclosure by the Arbitrator, p. 9 (RCL-3); Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 6.
Respondent’s Request, p. 5, quoting /BA Rules of Ethics for International Arbitrators, Article 4.1 (RCL-8).
Respondent’s Request, p. 15, quoting S.A. Baker & M. D. Davis, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules in
Practice: The Experience of the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal (1992), p. 50 (RCL-31). Emphasis
added by the Respondent.

Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 6.

Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 6.

Respondent’s Request, pp. 10-11. Emphasis added by the Respondent.

Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 5.

     

   

PCA 74822

31.

32.

33.

34,

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 7 of 19

The Respondent also notes that Judge Schwebel’s Comments do not address the lack of a
disclosure in the “approximately twelve weeks” prior to the first challenge.'? In response to the
Claimant’s argument that the appointments were matters of public record, the Respondent cites
Tidewater v. Venezuela for the proposition that “in considering the scope of [his] duty of
disclosure, the arbitrator may not count on the due diligence of the parties’ counsel.” It further
argues that an obligation to research the record of U.S. District Courts, as would be necessary in
this case, would be “unreasonable” and that Judge Schwebel’s engagement in Shell Oil v.
Franco was “not a matter of public record at all.”"*

According to the Respondent, a “history of repeated selections constitutes precisely the kind of
circumstances that are most relevant to the assessment of a party-appointed arbitrator’s
impartiality and independence” and their disclosure “promptly after an arbitrator’s appointment
is indispensable to afford the other party an opportunity to assess the suitability of an appointee
and exercise of its procedural rights under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules in case it finds
such appointee unsuitable.”'® The Respondent emphasizes that by not making the disclosures
“Judge Schwebel denied Respondent the opportunity to be fully informed, at the time of its first
challenge, about any other circumstances that may be relevant in its view to the independence
and impartiality of Judge Schwebel.”"”

The Respondent notes, further, that both of Judge Schwebel’s expert engagements concern
“issues of denial of justice, allegations which feature prominently in the instant case.”'* The
Respondent submits further that even if that were not the case, the “prior appointments
evidenc[e] instances of close cooperation between [Judge Schwebel and the Claimant’s
counsel].”'” The Respondent rejects that the 2008 and 2005 Opinions may be conflated. It states
that Judge Schwebel was “remunerated separately” for the engagements and that both opinions
required “deliberate and conscious effort on his part, as is reflected in the specific differences
between the [opinions].””” The Respondent argues that the non-disclosure of “this additional
financial relationship” raises justifiable doubts “on its own right.””"

The Respondent also argues that similar non-disclosures have been found to constitute grounds
for the annulment of awards, and points in particular to two decisions of the French courts. In
Raoul Duval vy. Markuria Sucden, an award was set aside, because the arbitrator had not
disclosed that “he would start working for the respondent one day after the award was
rendered.”” In J&P Avax SA vy. Société Tecnimont, an award was first annulled by the Paris
Court of Appeal for lack of disclosure by the presiding arbitrator of the extent of his law firm’s
work for the respondent, which raised concerns with regard to his independence, although he
had not personally been involved in the work for the respondent. Later, on remand from the
Cour de Cassation, the Reims Court of Appeal agreed that the failure of full disclosure may
serve as grounds for annulment of an award, even if the information revealed as such does not

Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 5.
Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 9, quoting Tidewater v. Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/5, Decision on
Claimant's Proposal to Disqualify Professor Brigitte Sten, Arbitrator, December 23, 2010, para. 51 (CCL-
7).

Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 9.

Respondent’s Request, p. 10.

Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 8.

Respondent’s Request, p. 11; Respondent’s Rebuttal, pp. 8, 10.

Respondent’s Request, p. 11.

Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 8.

Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 8.

Respondent’s Request, p. 12, citing P. Fouchard, Note Cour d’appel de Paris (Ire Ch. C.) 12 octobre 1995,
V. v. Société Raoul Duval, Revue de I’ Arbitrage (1999), p. 327-328 (RCL-23).

PCA 74822

35.

36.

37.

38.

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 8 of 19

raise reasonable doubts as to the challenged arbitrator’s impartiality and independence.” The
Respondent notes that non-disclosure has also been considered grounds for annulment in the
United States, the Claimant’s country of nationality.

Finally, the Respondent stresses that enforcement by arbitral institutions of the duty of
disclosure is important to “encourage private entities and States to have confidence in the
integrity of the investor-State arbitration process,” and to ensure “the finality of awards and in
general the effectiveness of international arbitration,” as well as the “credibility” of the system
of investor-State arbitration.“ In its Rebuttal, the Respondent emphasizes that this is
particularly necessary in case involving “denial of justice due to judicial bias” and submits that
in cases where the PCA is acting as both registry and appointing authority it “has a special duty
to assure [its] reliability.””*

2. Judge Schwebel’s past appointments on behalf of parties represented by
counsel for the Claimant

The Respondent argues that the four earlier appointments of Judge Schwebel by parties
represented by counsel for the Claimant, twice as arbitrator and twice as expert “on issues of
denial of justice in a manner favorable to the Claimant’s counsel and [...] to Claimant in this
case fall outside of the normal contacts among professionals in the international arbitration
arena.”

The Respondent points to the IBA Guidelines’ Orange List 3.3 and argues that “a close
relationship between an arbitrator and counsel can raise justifiable doubts regarding the
independence and impartiality of an arbitrator.””” According to the Respondent, it is immaterial
that the present situation is not expressly listed in the IBA Guidelines; the IBA Guidelines are
“not exhaustive, and legal commentators have long recognized that the Red and Orange Lists do
not cover all possible scenarios” and the Guidelines’ drafters acknowledged that the three-year
time limits of the IBA Guidelines “may be too long in certain circumstances and too short in
others.””* In this context, the Respondent also notes that Judge Schwebel’s engagement in the
Abyei Arbitration ended only in July 2009 and his engagement as expert in Sanchez Osorio v.
Dole et al. continued until the U.S. District Court’s judgment on July 7, 2010.”

The Respondent argues that “the nature of the collaborative efforts that exist in counsel-expert
relationships [...] may constitute circumstances giving rise to justifiable doubts [...],
particularly when the legal opinions rendered by the arbitrator relate to the issues relevant to
this arbitration,” and that the “failure to disclose one of the expert opinions only aggravates the
circumstances.”*” The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s and Judge Schwebel’s argument that
the expert opinions are unrelated to the present case and contends that they reject a principle
which “is central to Respondent’s jurisdictional and merits defenses,” namely “that a court
decision, against which there remains further recourse through the judicial process, does not

Respondent’s Request, pp. 12-13, citing S.A. J&P Avax S.A. v. Société Tecnimont SPA, Paris Court of

Appeal, February 12, 2009, Revue de l’Arbitrage (2009), p. 186 (RCL-24), Société Tecnimont SPA v. Société
J&P Avax, Cour de Cassation, 1" Civil Chamber, November 4, 2010 (RCL-25), and Bertrand Derains &
Yves Derains, Note on S.4.J & P Avax v. Société Tecnimont SPA AS, Reims Court of Appeal, Case No.
10/02888, November 2, 2011 (RCL-26).

Respondent’s Request, p. 14.

Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 1.

Respondent’s Request, p. 15. Emphasis added by the Respondent.

Respondent’s Request, p. 15.

Respondent’s Request, p. 16; Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 12.

Respondent’s Rebuttal, pp. 12-13.

Respondent’s Request, p. 16.

  

PCA 74822

39.

40.

41.

42.

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 9 of 19

amount to a denial of justice.”*' It also submits in response to the Claimant that while the
expert-counsel relationship is not comparable to a client-counsel relationship, “the giving and
receiving of [an expert opinion] assignment[] requires trust between the parties” and, in the
present case, led to a “long-standing financial and professional ‘relationship of trust’ [which]
gives rise to justifiable doubts.”*”

The Respondent draws a comparison with the facts of the challenge to Professor Gaillard in
Telekom Malaysia Berhad v. Ghana, where The Hague District Court held that there were
justifiable doubts as to Professor Gaillard’s ability to carry out his task as arbitrator impartially
and independently due to his involvement as counsel in another arbitration, RFCC v. Morocco,
which concerned the same BIT protection against expropriation.” The Respondent relies on the
argument submitted by Ghana, which the court agreed with, that “Professor Gaillard, who in his
capacity of counsel opposes a specific notion or approach, cannot be unbiased in his judgment
of that same notion or approach in a case in which he acts as an arbitrator.”™*

According to the Respondent, “Judge Schwebel’s services as legal expert in two cases favoring
the positions of Claimant’s counsel and Claimant’s stated and likely positions in this case a
fortiori give rise to the appearance that it will not be possible for him, as arbitrator, to disengage
fully from his preconceived opinions and his willingness to take the side advanced by Claimant
and its counsel.”** The Respondent relies on LCIA Reference No. 5660 to argue that “the
arbitrator’s partiality is established when there is a risk that he may favor one of the parties or
the party’s counsel. There can be no question but that the risk of bias exists here, and
accordingly, that Respondent’s challenge of Judge Schwebel should be sustained.”*°

Finally, the Respondent rejects the “test of ‘economic dependence’” relied upon by the
Claimant, as it “fails to capture the circumstances that present themselves in [this] case” and
sets too high a threshold. It further notes that the cases relied upon by the Claimant in this
regard, Universal Compression v. Venezuela and OPIC Karimum vy. Venezuela, are inapposite,
as they were decided under Article 57 of the ICSID Convention, which by requiring a “manifest
lack of the qualities required of an arbitrator” applies a stricter test than Article 10(1) of the
UNCITRAL Rules.”

3. The circumstances considered in the aggregate

In the alternative, the Respondent argues that “[w]hile each basis articulated above
independently raises justifiable doubts as to the propriety of Judge Schwebel’s service as an
arbitrator in this case, in the aggregate they evince a pattern that, a fortiori, gives rise to
justifiable doubts as to his reliability to exercise independent and impartial judgment in this
arbitration. [...] The relevant circumstances, viewed globally, confirm the existence of a close

Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 11.

Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 12, citing Case KKO 2005:14, Decision of the Finnish Supreme Court, discussed
in: Bond and Bachand (eds.), International Arbitration Court Decisions (3" ed., 2011), para. 24. Emphasis
added by the Respondent (CCL-2).

Respondent’s Request, p. 17.

Respondent’s Request, p. 17, quoting Republic of Ghana v. Telekom Malaysia Berhad, District Court of The
Hague, October 18, 2004, available in ASA Bulletin 2005(1), p. 186, 189 (RCL-35).

Respondent’s Request, p. 19; Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 11.

Respondent’s Request, p. 19.

7 Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 10, citing Universal Compression International Holdings, S.L.U. v. Bolivarian

   

Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/9, Decision on Claimant’s Proposal to Disqualify Professor
Brigitte Stern and Professor Guido Tawil, May 20, 2011, para. 71 (RCL-6), OPIC Karimum Corp. v.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, CSID Case No. ARB/10/14, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify
Professor Philippe Sands, May 5, 2011, para. 45 (RCL-4).

PCA 74822

43,

44,

45.

46.

47.

48.

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 10 of 19

professional relationship and combined efforts, including efforts on legal issues similar to those
in this case, between Claimant’s counsel and Judge Schwebel, on the basis of which any
reasonable third party would conclude the he either is, or appears to be, partial and non-
independent.”*

b. The Claimant’s Position

According to the Claimant, the challenge is “without any credible factual or legal basis” and
should be dismissed. Specifically, the Claimant argues that Judge Schwebel’s previous
appointments as arbitrator and expert witness by parties represented by WilmerHale do not
exceed the “normal contacts among professionals in the international arbitration arena,” and that
the Respondent cannot rely on these grounds in the aggregate.”

1. Judge Schwebel’s past appointments on behalf of parties represented by
counsel for the Claimant

The Claimant maintains that “WilmerHale’s prior appointments of Judge Schwebel as arbitrator
and expert witness cannot objectively give rise to justifiable doubts about his impartiality or
independence” under any relevant standard.“°

With regard to Judge Schwebel’s two earlier appointments as arbitrator, the Claimant argues
that the appointment in the Red Sea Islands Arbitration occurred in 1997, approximately fifteen
years ago, and the appointment in the Abyei Arbitration occurred in 2008, approximately four
years ago. In sum, “[nJeither case involved, in any conceivable fashion, either the Claimant
MSDIA (or any Merck entity) or Ecuador; neither appointment was within the past three years;
neither case was an investor-state arbitration; neither case involved issues similar to those raised
in the present arbitration; both cases were matters of public record, well-known to counsel for
Ecuador; and both cases involved only service as an independent and impartial arbitrator.’
The Claimant further notes that the Red Sea Islands Arbitration and the Abyei Arbitration differ
significantly from the present arbitration. They were “territorial and boundary disputes
governed by public international law,” adjudicated by a five-member tribunal and unconnected
to the parties or issues arising in the present arbitration.”

The Claimant further asserts that the challenge is untimely, because both appointments were
“matters of public record” and Ecuador’s counsel must have been “fully aware” of them since
the time of Judge Schwebel’s appointment in this case.*

With regard to Judge Schwebel’s two engagements through WilmerHale as expert witness in
two cases before U.S. federal courts, the Claimant notes that the cases were interconnected.
Judge Schwebel was retained to consider the same question in both cases and submitted
“substantively identical expert opinions.” In addition, in the second case, WilmerHale’s client
was one of four defendants who jointly retained and remunerated Judge Schwebel.“*

The Claimant points to the IBA Guidelines Orange List 3.3.7 and argues that the present
situation is not encompassed by the provision, because Judge Schwebel received only two and

pondent’s Request, pp. 19-20.

mant’s Response, p. 1.

mant’s Response, p. 4.
“laimant’s Response, p. 2.

Claimant’s Response, pp. 2, 4.

Claimant’s Response, p. 4.

Claimant’s Response, p. 5.

 

   

 

  

PCA 74822

49.

50.

51.

 

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 11 of 19

not “more than three appointments by the same counsel” and neither is within the three year
period stipulated by the IBA Guidelines. The Claimant points out that a similar challenge based
on repeat appointments was rejected on the basis of this provision in Universal Compression
Holdings Inc. v. Venezuela. The Claimant argues that the date of the conclusion of the
proceedings, relied upon by the Respondent, is irrelevant because the “IBA Guidelines clearly
and intentionally focus on the appointment of the arbitrator.’ It also points out that the
standard established by the IBA Guidelines would not be met even if “all four prior
engagements and appointments should be treated the same, i.e., as the equivalent of arbitrator
appointments.”*” Likewise, the Claimant notes that the Respondent fails to show why a different
standard than that established by the IBA Guidelines should apply in this case and that the
Respondent’s argument that the IBA Guidelines are non-exhaustive contradicts its arguments as
the “situation here is directly addressed by the Guidelines.”

Based on arbitral case law, the Claimant contends that the “mere fact that an arbitrator was
regularly nominated (by different arbitral parties) on the recommendation of the same Counsel
or the same firm of solicitors ought not of itself to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his
independence and impartiality.” Further, the Claimant argues that repeat appointments are
only relevant where they lead to a dependency of the arbitrator from counsel or to an “obvious
professional importance to the arbitrator of his relationship with [counsel ... which] would
reasonably suggest a real possibility of bias.”’ Otherwise, it asserts that the “system of
international arbitration would be unworkable.”

 

The Claimant emphasizes that, in OPIC Karimum Corp. v. Venezuela, the tribunal rejected a
challenge based on a significantly larger number of repeat appointments, both in absolute
figures and in proportion of total appointments, of Professor Philippe Sands by Curtis Mallet-
Prevost Colt & Mosle LLP. The tribunal rejected the challenge on the basis that the repeat
appointments did not by themselves d ate a lack of independ and the clai were
unable to show that Professor Sands was financially dependent on the repeat appointments.”
The Claimant submits that, in the present case, there is no “relationship of dependence”
between Judge Schwebel and WilmerHale, because the two earlier appointments as arbitrator
constitute “barely three percent” of Judge Schwebel’s publicly known appointments as
arbitrator in more than 60 cases, without even considering Judge Schwebel’s “serv[ice] as
counsel or expert in countless other cases,” or his previous position at the International Court of
Justice.

The Claimant adds that “[t]here is no legal basis for Respondent’s position that the standard
here should be lower than potential dependence [...] Indeed, Respondent does not even attempt
to articulate an alternative standard.”™ In this context, the Claimant stresses the relevance of the
ICSID decisions it relies upon, because the Respondent referred to them as well, and they “are
matters in which challenges were evaluated considering the principles articulated in the IBA

Claimant’s Response, p. 6, citing Universal Compression v. Venezuela, supra note 37, para. 86.

Claimant  Rejoinder, p. 6.

 

mant’s Rejoinder, p. 5.
c mant’s Rejoinder, pp. 5-6.

Claimant's Rejoinder, p. 3, quoting LCIA Reference No. 81160, Decision Rendered August 28, 2009, in
Arbitration International, Special Edition On Arbitration Challenges, Volume 27, Issue 3 (2011), p. 451,
4.6 (CCL-5).

Rejoinder, p. 7.
Claimant’s Response, pp. 7-8, citing OPIC Karimum Corp. v. Venezuela, supra note 37, para. 21 (RCL-4).
Claimant’s Response, pp. 2, 8; Claimant’s Rejoinder, p. 3.

Claimant’s Rejoinder, p. 3.

 

PCA 74822

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

 

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 12 of 19

Guidelines, principles that Respondent seeks to apply to this case.”*° The Claimant also points
to the non-ICSID case law it relies upon to confirm the applicability of the test of economic
dependence and claims that the Respondent fails to address or refute it.°°

According to the Claimant, Judge Schwebel’s services as expert for Shell Oil do not impact this
assessment, because Judge Schwebel was retained as an “independent witness, with duties of
honesty and integrity.”*’ Moreover, the engagements did not occur in the past three years and
Judge Schwebel has received numerous other appointments as expert over this period.** The
Claimant stresses that “Judge Schwebel has long been among the most sought-after and oft-
appointed arbitrators and experts in public international law. It is not credible to allege that the
past retention of Judge Schwebel to provide an expert witness opinion in two related matters on
a single legal issue would affect impartiality or independence in this case today.”

The Claimant further rejects the allegation that there was a “pattern of joint efforts by Judge
Schwebel and the Claimant’s counsel,” considering that “Judge Schwebel’s service as an
arbitrator or expert witness involved independent roles that he performed with integrity.””

The Claimant argues that the Ghana v. Telekom Malaysia case “has no bearing on the present
case,” because it “involved a situation in which an arbitrator was poised to take “simultaneous,
arguably incompatible positions on a single treaty provision in separate proceedings.”"

The Claimant also contradicts the Respondent’s argument that the content of Judge Schwebel’s
expert opinions bears any relevance upon the present case. It submits that the opinion concerned
the legality of the Nicaraguan Special Law 364 under international standards of due process,
and that Judge Schwebel’s opinion “principally provided an analysis of the law itself.”
According to the Claimant, “[t]he opinion did not involve Ecuador or its courts, did not address
the U.S.-Eeuador BIT, and did not involve issues of a lack of objectivity or bias by a judicial
tribunal.”

In addition, the Claimant points to the challenges to Professor Stern in Tidewater v. Venezuela
and to Professor Campbell McLachlan in Urbaser S.A. v. Argentina to argue that “even if Judge
Schwebel had previously expressed opinions on issues relevant here, which he did not, that
could not serve as a basis for disqualification."™ According to the Claimant, “prior legal
opinions, even on a similar issue, cannot serve as a basis for disqualification.”

Claimant’s Rejoinder, p. 4.
Claimant's Rejoinder, pp. 4-5, citing LCIA Reference No. 81224, Decision Rendered March 15, 2010, in
Arbitration International, Special Edition On Arbitration Challenges, Volume 27, Issue 3 (2011), p. 467,
para. 4.4 (CCL-6), LCIA Reference No. 81160, supra note 49, para. 87, Suez and others v. Argentina, ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/19, Decision on a Second Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral
Tribunal, May 12, 2008, para. 24 (RCL-11).

Claimant’s Response, p. 8.

Claimant’s Response, pp. 8-9, citing LCIA Reference No. 97/X27, Decision Rendered October 23, 1997
(CCL-4).

Claimant’s Response, p. 8.

Response, p. 9.

Response, p. 9, note 25; Claimant’s Rejoinder, p.8, note 17. Emphasis
Response, p. 5; Claimant’s Rejoinder, p. 6.

Response, p. 9; Claimant’s Rejoinder, pp. 7-8.

Claimant’s Response, p. 10, citing Tidewater v. Venezuela, supra note 14, para. 67, Urbaser S.A. v.
Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/26, On Claimants’ Proposal to Disqualify Professor Campbell
McLachlan, Arbitrator, August 12, 2010, paras. 23, 41 (CCL-8).

Claimant’s Rejoinder, p. 6.

   

added by the Claimant.

 

 
  

PCA 74822

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

66

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 13 of 19

2. Judge Schwebel’s late and incomplete disclosures

The Claimant denies that the late and incomplete disclosure by Judge Schwebel in itself can
sustain the Respondent’s challenge or that it in any way aggravates the other grounds for the
challenge.

According to the Claimant, a “failure to disclose is not itself a ground for challenge” under the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. Further, the Claimant points to commentary, arbitral case law,
and the IBA Guidelines to argue that only the facts and circumstances that were not disclosed
can raise doubts regarding the arbitrator’s impartiality and independence, not the fact of the
non-disclosure itself.” It submits that under the applicable standards of the UNCITRAL Rules
Judge Schwebel was not obliged to disclose any of the circumstances and that, accordingly, the
disclosures he made exceed his obligations under the UNCITRAL Rules.”

The Claimant likewise dismisses the Respondent’s reliance on the IBA Rules of Ethics in this
regard. It contends that the IBA Rules of Ethics “were explicitly superseded by the later IBA
Guidelines.”

The Claimant further argues that “even if [the Respondent’s] arguments about the governing
legal standard had any merit, which they do not, Judge Schwebel in fact made timely disclosure
in the Tribunal’s Common Disclosure Statement circulated to the parties on 22 May 2012.” It
adds that the previous appointments as arbitrator and as expert witness were publicly known
and easily discoverable.” In any event, the Claimant considers the omission of the second
appointment by Judge Schwebel as expert witness “‘a mere oversight” given the substantive
identity of the two expert opinions of 2005 and 2008.” The Claimant submits that the
Respondent’s “allegation that Judge Schwebel intentionally gamed the timing of his disclosures
in an effort to deceive Respondent is no more than reckless conjecture” and “without any
evidentiary support.””"

The Claimant notes that the arbitrator appointed by the Respondent, Judge Bruno Simma, made
an equally “late” disclosure of a previous appointment by Ecuador in a pending investment
arbitration. While the Claimant emphasizes that it does not doubt Judge Simma’s independence
and impartiality, it “does note, however, the inconsistency of Ecuador’s argument that Judge
Schwebel’s disclosure in the Common Disclosure Statement of contacts with counsel more than
three years ago constitutes grounds for disqualification when its own appointed arbitrator
disclosed a concurrent appointment by a party to this arbitration at the very same time.” '~

Finally, the Claimant rejects the Respondent’s reference to the model disclosure statement of
the 2010 UNCITRAL Rules, because the rules are inapplicable in the present case and, because
“Judge Schwebel has had no relationship with MSDIA or Respondent, and so even under the
model disclosure statement of the 2010 Rules, his disclosure of his prior appointments by
WilmerHale was not required.””

Claimant’s Response, pp. 11-12; Claimant’s Rejoinder, pp. 12-13, citing LCIA Reference No. 81160, supra
note 49, para. 4.16 (CCL-5).
7 Claimant’s Response, p. 3. Claimant’s Rejoinder, p. 10.
Claimant’s Response, p. 12.
Claimant’s Response, pp. 12-13.
Claimant’s Response, pp. 13-14.
Claimant’s Rejoinder, p. 10.
Claimant’s Response, pp. 3, 13; Claimant’s Rejoinder, pp. 2, 9.
Claimant’s Rejoinder, p. 12.

PCA 74822

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 14 of 19

3. The circumstances considered in the aggregate

Regarding the Respondent’s argument that the facts and circumstances described above also
give rise to justifiable doubts if considered in the aggregate, the Claimant argues that “[t]his is
not a serious argument” and submits that the Respondent not only fails to “elaborate
meaningfully” on it, but also does not provide “any authority whatsoever in support of it.””* The
Claimant adds that “it makes no sense that a challenge could succeed by aggregating allegations
that are themselves of no weight” and stresses that the individual reasons relied upon by the
Claimant have been rejected as basis for a challenge in earlier case law.”°

Finally, the Claimant refutes the Respondent’s invocation of the grounds for its first challenge,
stating that the grounds previously proffered to support an inference of bias against
Respondent’s counsel are completely irrelevant to the present challenge.” In this context, the
Claimants also considers exaggerated and unfounded the Respondent’s references to an alleged
ridiculing of the Respondent by Judge Schwebel in a publication two years ago, and to an
alleged “frequent ... academic collaboration between the Judge Schwebel and a member of
Claimant’s legal team.”””

c Judge Schwebel’s Comments
In his comments dated July 10, 2012, Judge Schwebel asserts that the challenge is groundless.”*

Judge Schwebel presents a summary of the facts of his earlier appointments by parties
represented by counsel for the Claimant. First, he states that he was appointed in 1997 as
arbitrator in the Red Sea Islands Arbitration (Eritrea/Yemen) by the Eritrean Government. He
notes that Mr. Gary Born of WilmerHale (then Wilmer Cutler) only acted as co-counsel to lead
counsel Professor Brilmayer and emphasizes that “Mr. Born and the firm of Wilmer Cutler did
not act in the second phase of the case.”

He then states that he was appointed in 2008 as arbitrator by the Sudan’s People Liberation
Movement (the “SPLM”) in the Abyei Arbitration (Government of Sudan/Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement) and that Mr. Gary Born acted as the SPLM’s lead counsel in the case."

Third, he states that, on January 14, 2005, upon request by WilmerHale on behalf of Shell Oil
Company, he submitted a Declaration to a United States District Court in California in the case
Shell Oil Company v. Sonia Eduardo Franco Franco et al. concerning the compatibility with
Nicaragua’s international legal obligations of the Nicaraguan Special Law 364 and a
Nicaraguan court judgment against Shell Oil Company based thereon.*!

Fourth, Judge Schwebel states that, in 2008, he was requested by the same counsel and on
behalf of the same company “to give the very same opinion in the closely related case [...]
Miguel Angel Sanchez Osorio et al. v. Dole Food Company, The Dow Chemical Company,

Claimant’s Response, p. 14.
Claimant’s Response, p. 14.
Claimant’s Response, p. 14.

7 Claimant’s Rejoinder, pp. 8-9.

Judge Schwebel’s Comments, p. 3.
Judge Schwebel’s Comments, p. 1.
Judge Schwebel’s Comments, p. 1.
Judge Schwebel’s Comments, p. 2.

PCA 74822

70.

71.

TI.

72.

73.

74.

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 15 of 19

Occidental Chemical Company, and Shell Oil Company,” which he submitted to the Circuit
Court in Miami-Dade County on June 6, 2008.

Judge Schwebel argues that due to the identity of the opinions submitted in 2005 and 2008,
“TiJn substance, I had given a single opinion used twice by Shell in the course of litigation over
the same Nicaraguan law, and did not think to list separately two opinions” in the Joint
Disclosure Statement.® In his view, reliance on his accidental conflation of the two identical
opinions as grounds for a challenge is “disproportionate.”™

Judge Schwebel argues that the allegation of a late disclosure should take into account
Respondent’s previous challenge of his appointment. According to Judge Schwebel, “[t]hat
strongly pressed challenge naturally consumed my attention. I was preoccupied with it and, in
view of it, it did not occur to me while it was pending to disclose prior appointments by
WilmerHale, the moreso because those appointment were few, made years ago, and in matters
unrelated to the instant case.”** He notes that Judge Simma also thought reasonable to withhold
disclosure or inadvertently failed to disclose his earlier and current appointments by the
Respondent until shortly after the rejection of the Respondent’s challenge when the Tribunal
members issued their Joint Disclosure Statement.*°

REASONING
a. Legal Standard

The Parties agree that the applicable standards for the resolution of the Respondent’s challenge
are found in Articles 9 and 10(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules.*’ Article 10(1) states that an
“arbitrator may be challenged if circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to the
arbitrator’s impartiality or independence.” Article 9 of the UNCITRAL Rules requires an
arbitrator to disclose “any circumstances likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his
impartiality or independence.” The disclosure shall be made to the parties at the time that the
arbitrator is appointed or chosen, “unless they have already been informed by him of these
circumstances.”

Both sides further recognize that the “justifiable doubts” standard established by Article 10(1) is
an objective one: it requires that a reasonable and fair-minded third person, having knowledge
of the relevant facts deems that “circumstances exist which give rise to justifiable doubts as to
[the arbitrator’s] impartiality or independence.”**

The Parties disagree, however, on the applicable standard and scope of disclosure required by
Article 9. The Respondent argues that the standard is subjective and cites the test established by
General Standard 3 of the IBA Guidelines that “[i]f facts or circumstances exist that may, in the
eyes of the parties, give rise to doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence, the
arbitrator shall disclose such facts or circumstances [...], prior to accepting his or her

Judge Schwebel’s Comments, p. 2.

Judge Schwebel’s Comments, p. 2.
Judge Schwebel’s Comments, p. 2.
Judge Schwebel’s Comments, p. 3.
Judge Schwebel’s Comments, pp. 2-3.

 

7 Respondent’s Request, p. 6; Claimant’s Response, p. 4.

Respondent’s Request, pp. 6-8; Respondent’s Rebuttal, p. 3, note 11; Claimant’s Response, p. 4. National
Grid PLC v. Republic of Argentina, LCIA Case No. UN 7949, Decision on the Challenge to Mr. Judd L.
Kessler, December 3, 2007.

PCA 74822

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 16 of 19

appointment.” According to the Respondent, an arbitrator must therefore disclose “any
circumstances that are relevant to the parties’ evaluation of the arbitrator’s reliability to act with
requisite impartiality and independence.”” The Claimant, meanwhile, argues that the test
established by Article 9 is objective and “presents a higher threshold for disclosure than the IBA
Guidelines which provide a subjective test.””! The Claimant submits, in any event, that the IBA
Guidelines “do not adopt a purely subjective test” as reflected in the Green List of situations
that never give rise to justifiable doubts.”

It should be noted that the IBA Guidelines and Rules of Ethics (i) are promulgated by a private
body that cannot purport to legislate for international arbitration generally; and (ii) in the IBA
Guidelines themselves, it is expressly recognized that they “are not legal provisions and do not
override any applicable national law or arbitration rules chosen by the parties.””* In the absence
of an agreement of the parties to a dispute on the application of the IBA Guidelines to a
challenge, the IBA Guidelines represent only the non-binding views of one group of
practitioners on arbitrator conflicts of interest.

While the IBA Guidelines look to the facts or circumstances that “may, in the eyes of the
parties, give rise to doubts,” Article 9 of the UNCITRAL Rules requires that an arbitrator
disclose “any circumstance likely to give rise to justifiable doubts concerning his impartiality or
independence.” Any doubt should be resolved in favor of disclosure.

Non-disclosure nevertheless does not automatically give rise to justifiable doubts pursuant to
Article 10(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules. As argued by the Respondent, this depends on the
circumstances of the case, including “whether the failure to disclose was inadvertent or
intentional, whether it was the result of an honest exercise of discretion, whether the facts that
were not disclosed raised obvious questions about the impartiality and independence, and
whether the nondisclosure is an aberration on the part of a conscientious arbitrator or part of a
pattern of circumstances raising doubts as to impartiality.””*

Lastly, expert appointments, although different in nature from arbitrator appointments, remain
relevant to the consideration of arbitrator independence and impartiality. The direct financial
relationship and interaction between the party or its counsel and the expert renders such
relationships relevant for disclosure under Article 9 and for consideration in the event of a
challenge.

b. The Respondent’s Challenge to Judge Schwebel

In evaluating this challenge, I have considered all the submissions of the Parties and the
comments of Judge Schwebel. In ruling on the challenge, however, I will address only the
issues that I consider necessary to arrive at my decision.

The Respondent challenges Judge Schwebel’s impartiality and independence on three grounds:
first, late and incomplete disclosure by Judge Schwebel; second, multiple appointments of

Respondent’s Request, p. 3, quoting /BA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration,
General Standard 3(c), Disclosure by the Arbitrator, p. 9 (RCL-3). Emphasis added by the Respondent.
Respondent’s Request, p. 3.

Claimant’s Response, p. 11, note 30.

Claimant’s Rejoinder, p. 11.

IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration, Introduction, para. 6 (RCL-3).

S.A. Baker & M. D. Davis, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules in Practice: The Experience of the Iran-
United States Claims Tribunal (1992), p. 50 (RCL-31).

 

 

PCA 74822

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 17 of 19

Judge Schwebel as arbitrator and expert on behalf of parties represented by counsel for the
Claimant; and, third, an aggregate of the previous two grounds.

Judge Schwebel made disclosures on May 22, 2012 in the Joint Disclosure Statement and on
June 6, 2012, the Respondent learned by correspondence from the Claimant’s counsel of Judge
Schwebel’s additional engagement as expert witness in Miguel Angel Sanchez Osorio et al. v.
Dole Food Company, Inc. et al.”* Given that the Respondent gained knowledge of the additional
expert engagement on June 6, 2012, the challenge, viewed on its face, meets the timeliness
requirements of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

1. Judge Schwebel’s late and incomplete disclosures

The Respondent asserts that Judge Schwebel’s late and incomplete disclosure is in violation of
the duty of disclosure under Article 9 and gives rise to justifiable doubts as to his impartiality
and independence under Article 10(1).

Full disclosure by an arbitrator upon appointment is indispensable, not only to ensure the
general legitimacy of arbitral proceedings, but also to allow the parties to assess whether they
wish to exercise their rights to challenge an arbitrator under the UNCITRAL Rules if they are of
the view that the arbitrator does not meet the requisite standard of independence and
impartiality.’ Judge Schwebel was appointed as arbitrator by the Claimant on November 29,
2011. Yet, it was only on May 22, 2012 that he disclosed two earlier appointments as arbitrator
in boundary arbitrations involving States on behalf of parties represented by counsel for the
Claimant, as well as an engagement as an expert witness on behalf of a party represented by
counsel for the Claimant in a U.S. district court proceeding. In addition, on June 6, 2012, the
Respondent learned that Judge Schwebel had acted as an expert on behalf of the same party
represented again by counsel for the Claimant in another case in a U.S. district court.

Even if the Respondent and its counsel knew or should be presumed to have known of Judge
Schwebel’s appointments in two public and high-profile arbitrations, this would not exonerate
Judge Schwebel from his duty to make prompt and full disclosure. Judge Schwebel should have
disclosed all his recent appointments as arbitrator or expert on behalf of parties represented by
counsel for the Claimant promptly upon his appointment in this case. These circumstances
clearly fall within the scope of his disclosure obligation, which Judge Schwebel failed to meet
in this case.

However, the circumstances of Judge Schwebel’s late and incomplete disclosure do not support
the inference that he lacks independence or impartiality. The precedents relied upon by the
Respondent principally deal with non-disclosure, rather than the distinct situation of late
disclosure. The disclosures made in the Joint Disclosure Statement, if late, were nonetheless of
the Tribunal’s own initiative. Judge Schwebel’s non-disclosure of the second expert opinion
also appears to be an inadvertent omission in an otherwise honest exercise of discretion,
resulting from the connection between the two expert engagements and the nearly identical
content of the two opinions. I therefore find this late and incomplete disclosure to be an
aberration on the part of the arbitrator rather than part of a pattern of circumstances that could
raise doubts about his impartiality.

  

°5 Respondent’s Request, p. 10; E-mail from Charles S. Beene to Mr. Mark Clodfelter, June 6, 2012 (RCE-5).

96

Gary Born, International Commercial Arbitration (2011), Vol. 1, p. 1620.

PCA 74822

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

7

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 18 of 19

2. Judge Schwebel’s past appointments on behalf of parties represented by
counsel for the Claimant

The Respondent further bases its challenge on the fact that Judge Schwebel was appointed as
arbitrator and as expert by the Claimant’s counsel in four earlier cases and argues that these
establish “a pattern of joint efforts by Judge Schwebel and Claimant’s counsel.”*”

The issue of multiple appointments involves, but is not limited to, a consideration of financial
dependence arising from the significance of the multiple appointments—and expectation of
future appointments—to the arbitrator’s income. The issue of multiple appointments also
engages the question of an affinity developed by the arbitrator for the party or the counsel that
has repeatedly appointed him or her. It should therefore not be limited to an examination of
financial dependence arising from the arbitrator’s income from the appointments. The question
remains: do the number and significance of the appointments considered in context, and in light
of the period of time over which the appointments were made, raise justifiable doubts in the
eyes of a reasonable and fair-minded third person as to the arbitrator’s independence or
impartiality?

The previous appointments of Judge Schwebel as arbitrator on behalf of parties represented by
counsel for the Claimant occurred in 1997 and 2008, and those as expert in 2005 and 2008,
approximately fifteen, seven, and three and a half years prior to his appointment in this case.

Considered in the context of Judge Schwebel’s total number of publicly known appointments as
arbitrator or expert, the four prior appointments on behalf of parties represented by counsel for
the Claimant do not give rise to justifiable doubts as to Judge Schwebel’s financial
independence. In terms of the potential effect that the appointments might hold for an
appearance of bias on the part of Judge Schwebel, a closer look is warranted.

Judge Schwebel’s appointment in the Red Sea Islands Arbitration is remote in time—the
appointment being some fifteen years prior to the one under consideration. On the other hand,
Judge Schwebel’s appointment in the Abyei Arbitration is an important and relatively recent
appointment. The retainer of Judge Schwebel as expert in the first Shell Oil matter is also
significant. This potential conflict is however not significantly augmented by the second
opinion. The submission of a nearly identical opinion in a related case involving the same party,
counsel, and subject matter renders the second retainer akin to a continuation of the first.

The second opinion could, nonetheless, enhance an appearance of prejudgment to the extent that
its contents are relevant to the present matter. However, beyond a general summary and analysis
of the law on denial of justice at international law, the opinion focuses on the examination of a
particular Nicaraguan law and judgments rendered pursuant thereto. It does not therefore
express an opinion on any matter distinctly put in issue in the present arbitration. Nor does it
demonstrate an unwillingness or apparent inability to consider alternative viewpoints and
arguments that may be presented in the course of this arbitration. Indeed, the second opinion is
almost identical to the first, except for the removal of a few paragraphs where Judge Schwebel
had explicitly analyzed and drawn conclusions as to the compliance of the Nicaraguan law and
proceedings with international due process. The second opinion therefore restricts itself more
closely to a simple analysis of the relevant doctrine and jurisprudence on denial of justice,
drawing principally on sources relied upon by the Respondent itself in these proceedings.

Taking all relevant circumstances into account, the prior appointments of Judge Schwebel—
while relevant disclosure items—do not give rise to justifiable doubts in the eyes of a

Respondent’s Request, p. 15.

PCA 74822

93.

94.

PCA Case No. AA442
August 8, 2012
Page 19 of 19

reasonable and fair-minded third person. The earlier appointments are limited in number and
were spread over a significant period. They do not support the inference that Judge Schwebel
has developed a particular affinity or close professional relationship with the counsel for the
Claimant. Nor does the content of the expert opinions suggest that he has prejudged issues in
the present case.

3. The circumstances considered in the aggregate

Third, the Respondent argues that the above-circumstances, if viewed in the aggregate,
“confirm the existence of a close professional relationship and combined efforts [...] between
Claimant’s counsel and Judge Schwebel, on the basis of which any reasonable third party would
conclude the he either is, or appears to be, partial and non-independent.””*

There is merit in the argument that several circumstances can, considered in the aggregate, give
rise to justifiable doubts concerning an arbitrator’s independence and impartiality, even when
each of the circumstances, if viewed separately, does not give rise to justifiable doubts. As
previously discussed, neither the cir of Judge Schwebel’s late and i 1
disclosure, nor the circumstances of his previous appointments on behalf of parties represented
by counsel for the Claimant, give rise to justifiable doubts on their own. This assessment does
not, in this case, change when considered in the aggregate. The earlier appointments coupled
with the inadvertent omission of a previous appointment as expert in a case before a U.S.
district court to render an opinion which is largely identical to a voluntarily-disclosed prior
appointment does not, in the eyes of a reasonable, objective, and informed third person amount
to a “close professional relationship” giving rise to justifiable doubts as to Judge Schwebel’s
impartiality or independence.

DECISION

NOW THEREFORE, I, Hugo Hans Siblesz, Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration, having considered the submissions of the Parties and the comments of Judge
Stephen M. Schwebel, and having established to my satisfaction my competence to decide this
challenge in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,

HEREBY REJECT the challenge brought against Judge Stephen M. Schwebel under
Article 10(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

Done at The Hague on August 8, 2012.

Hugo Hans Siblesz

98

Respondent’s Request, pp. 19-20.

PCA 74822

