1717 K Street, N.W.
F Oo L EY Washington. DC 20036-5342
H OAG up 202 223 1200 main

202 785 6687 fax

Mark A. Clodfelter

Partner

202 261 7363 direct
mclodfelter@foleyhoag.com

13 August 2016
VIA E-MAIL
Sir Franklin Berman KCMG QC
Essex Court Chambers
24 Lincoln's Inn Fields
London WC2A 3EG
United Kingdom

Judge Stephen Schwebel

399 Park Avenue, Suite 3432
New York, N.Y. 10022
US.A.

Judge Bruno Simma
Parsbergerstrasse 5a
D-81249 Munich
Germany

Mr. Martin Doe

Legal Counsel

Permanent Court of Arbitration
Peace Palace

Carnegieplein 2

2517 KJ The Hague, The Netherlands

Re: Merck Sharp & Dohme (I.A.) Corp. v. The Republic of Ecuador -- UNCITRAL
Arbitration -- PCA Case No. 2012-10

Dear Members of the Tribunal:

We write in connection with the PCA’s letter dated 11 August 2016, in which the
Tribunal requested Respondent to (a) “respond as rapidly as possible” to the question raised
in Claimant’s letter of 10 August 2016 as to whether the Tribunal’s Decision on Interim
Measures applies to the 4 August 2016 judgment of the National Court of Justice (“NCJ” or
the “Court”) and (b) “indicate to the Tribunal [...] the steps it had taken to comply with
paragraph 2 of the Tribunal’s Decision on Interim Measures,”! as well as “any further steps it

' Paragraph 2 of the Tribunal’s Decision on Interim Measures reads: “Orders further that Ecuador is under the
obligation to communicate this Order without delay to the National Court of Justice and any other authority with
jurisdiction to enforce the judgments [of the Trial Court or the Court of Appeals in the litigation by PROPHAR
against MSDIA]” (emphasis in the original text).

ATTORNEYS AT LAW WASHINGTON | BOSTON | FOLEYHOAG.COM

13 August 2016
Page 2

has undertaken in the light of paragraph 1.A of the same Decision.” In response to the
Tribunal’s requests, Ecuador submits the following.

In response to the Tribunal’s first request: Ecuador does not consider that the
Tribunal’s Decision on Interim Measures applies to the NCJ’s judgment of 4 August 2016
because that decision does not “reinstat[e] in whole or in part the judgments of the Trial Court
or the Court of Appeals.” For this reason, Ecuador has not taken any steps in connection
therewith, nor does it consider being under an obligation to take any steps, in light of
paragraph 1.A of the Tribunal’s Decision on Interim Measures.

Claimant has admitted that as a matter of Ecuadorian law, “when the NCJ annuls a
lower court decision, the NCJ can then act as a court of instance and render a new decision.”*
Indeed, according to Claimant’s expert Prof. Paez, when “the NCJ sets aside the challenged
judgment [...] [it] must issue a new judgment or order in its place,”” which “replace[s] the
one it has annulled.” Given that the 4 August judgment granted in part MSDIA’s cassation
petition, the NCJ judgment does not, as a matter of Ecuadorian law, reinstate, either in whole
or in part, the judgments of the Trial Court or the Court of Appeals.

Nor does it “affirm” the Court of Appeals’ judgment “in most material respects,” as
Claimant now contends.” In particular:

e It is not true that the NCJ “affirm[ed] [the] liability holding [of the Court of Appeals]”
by “reject[ing] MSDIA’s grounds for cassation challenging it).* It may be recalled
that the Court of Appeals had held MSDIA liable “exclusively on antitrust grounds.”
Although the NCJ also found MSDIA liable, it did so for the commission of an
unintentional tort, and not on antitrust grounds.'°

? PCA letter to the Parties (11 Aug. 2016), p. 3. Paragraph 1.A of the Tribunal’s Decision on Interim Measures
reads: “Ecuador shall forthwith ensure, by means of its own choosing, that all further proceedings and actions
directed towards the enforcement of the judgments [of the Trial Court or the Court of Appeals in the litigation
by PROPHAR against MSDIA] are suspended pending delivery by the Tribunal of its final Award, and shall
inform the Tribunal of the action that has been taken to that effect.”

    

5 Decision on Interim Measures, paragraph | (chapeau).

+ Claimant's Reply, { 402. Claimant's expert Prof. Péez acknowledges that the NCJ acting as a cassation court
is called to review and annul judicial decisions containing errors provided for in the cassation law, and that after
“annulling the challenged decision, the court of cassation must [...] issue a replacement decision.” Opinion of
Prof. Carlos Paez Fuentes (1 Oct. 2013), | 8 (emphasis added).

* Opinion of Prof. Carlos Péez Fuentes (1 Oct. 2013), {| 17 (emphasis added).

© Id. (emphasis added).

7 Claimant's letter (10 Aug. 2016), p. 1.

Sid. pp. 1-2.

° Claimant's Memorial, {| 139 (emphasis added). See also id., {9 10, 137, 142, 243, 314 (“[a violation of
antitrust law] was the only legal basis for the court of appeals’ judgment” (emphasis added)), 349, 385;
Claimant’s Reply, {{ 4 ({the judgments issued against MSDIA by the trial court and the court of appeals]
imposed liability against MSDIA for purported antitrust violations”), 23, 291, 326 (“the two lower courts found
MSDIA liable only on antitrust” (emphasis added)), 333, 503, 537.

'° NCJ Judgment of 4 August 2016, Considerando Six, pp. 32-33 [Claimant’s English Translation]. For the
NCJ, the only relevance of Article 244(3) of the Ecuadorian Constitution (the provision relied by the Court of

 

  

 

 

13 August 2016

Page 3

It is not true that the NCJ “did not independently assess the evidence in the record but
instead wholly accepted the evidentiary findings of the court of appeals.”"! In support
of its erroneous proposition, Claimant points to two passages from the 4 August
judgment. However, when stating that in examining the merits of the underlying case
it would “refrain[] from weighing any evidence or determining any of the facts of the
trial and appeal,” the NCJ merely traced the language of Article 16 of the Cassation
Law, which asks that the Court issues its replacement decision “on the substance of
the facts established in the [annulled] judgment.”! That provision has not prevented
the Court from evaluating evidence, when acting as an instance court, in the past, and
it certainly did not prevent it from doing so now. Indeed, the NCJ recounted the
evidence submitted by the parties,'* assessed it to conclude that such evidence
“reveal[ed] concurrence, at least with regard to [...] important facts,”'> and drew
certain factual conclusions therefrom,!° which it then subjected to the rules of law it
found applicable.'” The Court reviewed the evidence in the lower courts’
proceedings, which it interpreted to establish several facts supporting its liability
findings, including when “reconsider[ing] th[e] case from the point of the pre-
contractual process,”"* Even when it expressly stated that the “dispute between the
parties cannot lead [it] to weigh evidence,” the Court proceeded to do precisely that: It
dismissed the probative value of testimony because it was “mostly procured from
persons involved in the negotiation process, having held positions or engagements
with [MSDIA], at various levels and at various times”; it based certain “findings of
fact” on the “copious documentation exchanged via email between the parties, which
are considered authentic and have probative value in the proceedings”; and it analyzed
documents ultimately rejecting them as having no bearing on the negotiation between
Prophar and MSDIA."°

It is not true that the NCJ was “not permitted to second-guess the court of appeals’
decision [...] to credit [the Cabrera] report.””° Even though Cabrera’s report was
“weighed and accepted,” i.c., was deemed to be admissible (“calificado” in the
Spanish original text), by the lower courts, that did not “stand in the way of [the

 

Appeals

for its finding on liability) served only “to underscore the unilateral attitude of the defendant.” /d.,

Considerando Five, p. 32 [Claimant’s English Translation].

"' Claimant's letter (10 Aug. 2016), p. 3.

" NCJ Judgment of 4 August 2016, Considerando Two, p. 27 [Claimant's English Translation].
'S Cassation Law, Article 16 (CLM-185).

"4 Td., Considerando Three, pp. 27-30 [Claimant's English Translation].

'S Td., Considerando Four, pp. 30-32 [Claimant’s English Translation].

6 Td., Considerando Five, p. 31 [Claimant's English Translation].

'T Id., Considerando Six, pp. 32-33 [Claimant's English Translation].

'8 Td., Considerando Seven, pp. 33-34 [Claimant's English Translation].

'° Td., Considerando Nine, p. 34 [Claimant's English Translation].
?° Claimant's letter (10 Aug. 2016), p. 4.

13 August 2016
Page 4

NCJ’s] review,””! which eventually resulted in the correction of “the error committed
by the Court of Appeals, in relation to the exaggerated amount of compensation it
ordered.”””

e Finally, it is not true that in its judgment the NCJ “expressly considered and rejected
the application of the Tribunal’s Decision on Interim Measures.””* First, the
Tribunal’s Decision did not impose any constraints on the NCJ’s judicial function, but
only to the enforcement of its judgment “in the event of [it] reinstating in whole or in
part the judgments of the Trial Court of the Court of Appeals,” i.e., in the event of the
NCJ judgment dismissing the parties’ cassation petitions and leaving the Court of
Appeals’ judgment in place, which did not happen. Second, the NCJ held only that, to
the extent the Tribunal’s Decision sought to interfere with the NCJ’s “internal” and
“external autonomy,””! it violates provisions of the Ecuadorian Constitution.> The
Court said nothing about the actions of the enforcing trial court, nor did it preempt
them in any way.

The Tribunal’s Decision on Interim Measures imposes on Ecuador a tremendous, even
disproportionate,”° burden if triggered. It therefore cannot be assumed that the Tribunal’s use
of the terms “reinstating in whole or in part the judgments of the Trial Court or the Court of
Appeals” was casual or non-intentional. But that is exactly what Claimant’s strained
interpretation of those terms does assume. That is, Claimant’s position is that the terms were
meant to capture, not only an NCJ decision that legally reinstated one of the two lower court
judgments (as would have been the case if the NCJ had denied cassation, for example), but
any decision of the NCJ that found liability and awarded damages. Of course, had that been
the intent, one can easily imagine innumerable phrases that would have expressed such a
result, which would be quite different from the particular words chosen by the Tribunal.

Each of the members of the Tribunal knows in his own mind what he intended in
agreeing to the terms of paragraph | of the Tribunal’s Decision on Interim Measures. But it
would be untenable to presuppose that a Party could reasonably have understood them to
have a meaning so drastically more broad than the actual terms used.

Thus, Ecuador does not consider that the NCJ’s judgment of 4 August 2016
“reinstat[es] in whole or in part the judgments of the Trial Court or the Court of Appeals,”
and that it is under an obligation to take any steps in connection therewith, in light of
paragraph 1.A of the Tribunal’s Decision on Interim Measures.

2! NCJ Judgment of 4 August 2016, Considerando Ten, p. 37 [Claimant's English Translation].

” Id.

5 Claimant's letter (10 Aug. 2016), p. 5.

** As Ecuador understands the Tribunal’s Decision, this was not the intention of the Tribunal because the
Decision did not ask any “governmental official from any other branch of the Government or other judicial body
[to] interfere in the administration of justice [by the NCJ],” nor “any government official that is part of the
Judicial Branch itself [to] interfere with the jurisdiction [of the NCJ].” NCJ Judgment of 4 August 2016, p. 4
[Claimant's English Translation]. The NCJ’s reference to the sanctions under Article 86(4) of the Ecuadorian
Constitution must be understood in this context.

Id.

26

 

See, e.g., Respondent’s Opposition to Claimant's First Request for Interim Measures, {| 176-195.

13 August 2016
Page 5

In response to the Tribunal’s second request: The Tribunal will recall that, as
Ecuador informed the Tribunal on 12 March 2016, by way of letter of the Procurador General
del Estado dated 11 March 2016 to the Associate Judges of the Civil and Commercial
Chamber of the National Court of Justice and to the Presiding Judge of the Civil Judicial Unit
of the Metropolitan District of Quito (and copies to the Presidents of the National Court of
Justice, the Constitutional Court, and the Council of the Judiciary), transmitting the
Tribunal’s Decision on Interim Measures and the Spanish version thereof, Ecuador complied
with its obligation under paragraph 2 of the Tribunal’s Decision.?”

Respondent thanks the Tribunal for its attention to this correspondence.

Respectfully submitted,

a /) /
/ ue ch pole / Vad Lepfls —

Dra. Blanca Gémez de la Torre Mark Clodfelter
Directora Nacional, Direccién Nacional de Foley Hoag LLP
Asuntos Internacionales y Arbitraje
Procuraduria General del Estado

ce: Gary Born: by email: Gary.Born @wilmerhale.com
David Ogden: by email: David.Ogden @wilmerhale.com
Rachael D. Kent: by email: Rachael.Kent@ wilmerhale.com
Dr. Diego Garcia Carrion: by email: dgarcia@ pge.gob.ec
Dra. Christel Gaibor: by email: cgaibor@pge.gob.ec
Ab. Diana Teran: by email: dteran@pge.gob.ec

*7 Respondent's Letter to the Tribunal (12 Mar. 2016), p. 1.

