August 4, 2008
Ms. Meg Kinnear
Mr. Barry Appleton

Reference: Document production letters of July 28, 2008 (Canada)
and July 29, 2008 (Merrill & Ring Forestry L. P.)

Dear Ms. Kinnear and Mr. Appleton,

The Tribunal has examined your letters of reference and has decided as follows.

1. Clarification concerning Canada’s Documents Requests 4 (a to d), 22, 23 (a and c).
The Tribunal sees no need to clarify its decision directing the Respondent to produce such
documents. The submission of documents containing confidential commercial
information is of course governed by the Tribunal’s Confidentiality Order. Moreover, the
Investor has agreed to such production in its letter of reference.

2. Clarification concerning Canada’s Documents Request 67 (3).
The Order on Production of Documents indeed intended to include also Document 67 (3)
and the Investor has agreed to produce it in its letter of reference.

3. Clarification concerning Canada’s Documents Request 7 (a to c).
In addition to Documents 7 (a and b), the Order explicitly includes Document 7 (c). The
same reasons concerning compelling confidential commercial information applies to all
three and accordingly refusal to produce on this ground was upheld in respect of all such
requests. The Tribunal is not privy to the discussions of the parties in which the Investor
might have agreed to produce documents presently identified as 7 (c). If this was done the
Tribunal would expect the parties to honour their agreements in good faith and proceed

accordingly.

4. Deadline for redefining certain document requests the production of which has been
ordered.
The Tribunal appreciates Canada’s redefinition of some such documents in Annex | to its
submission of reference. The Tribunal did not set a specific deadline to this effect and
agrees with the Investor’s suggestion to have them redefined by August 5, 2008, the same
date on which the explanations concerning Cabinet Privilege are due from Canada. In
view of the dates of the letters of reference, and of this answer of the Tribunal, any date
earlier than August 5 would in fact not have been practicable.

5. Reconsideration concerning Document Requests 7 (a and b).
Canada requests the Tribunal to reconsider its decision to uphold the Investor’s refusal to
produce these documents. In the light of the conclusion in paragraph 3 above the Tribunal
assumes that the same request would extend to Document 7 (c). The Tribunal does not
believe that document production is the occasion to debate the reasons each party may
have to arrive at certain conclusions, such as the choice of figures. The parties will have
such an occasion in their Reply and Rejoinder and indeed at the hearing. The request is
accordingly denied. For the same reason, the Tribunal could not allow the Investor to
cross-examine, at this stage of the proceedings, the experts who have submitted affidavits
in support of Canada’s requests.

6. Reconsideration concerning Document Requests 8, 56, 60, 70 and 71.
Canada has also requested the Tribunal to reconsider its decision in respect of these
documents. For the reasons given in paragraph 5 above, the Tribunal also denies these

other requests for reconsideration and again notes that Canada may submit alternative

3
estimates, or oppose those of the Investor, in its forthcoming submissions and at the
hearing.

Redefined schedule.

In view of the complexity characterizing the document production phase of this
arbitration, the Tribunal agrees with the parties on the need to redefine the schedule to be
followed. That suggested by the Investor as Items 1, 2 and 3 of its redefined schedule best
meets the time demands needed to handle document production and its consideration by
the parties. The Tribunal accordingly accepts these new dates.

In respect of Item 4, however, the Tribunal believes 15 days for letter a) and 30 days for
letter b) to be sufficient to this effect.

As for Items 5 and 6, concerning the dates for the Reply and the Rejoinder, the Tribunal
concludes that it is necessary to keep with the full 60 days that each such submission was
allotted in the Minutes of the First Procedural Meeting. The 60 days allowed for the
Reply shall be counted from the date Canada will produce the documents the production
of which was previously refused on the ground of Cabinet Privilege, provided this
production process shall not exceed September 15, 2008. The Tribunal notes that the
reference to the Counter-Memorial made in paragraph 13 (9) should be to the Reply.

New Schedule.

In accordance with the above considerations the Tribunal sets the following schedule for

the continuation of the proceedings:

 

Time

Event

 

August 5, 2008

Canada to submit any claim for privilege as
a ground for refusing the production of a
document ordered by the Tribunal

The Investor to submit its redefined
document requests

 

August 18, 2008

The parties produce the documents pursuant
to the SRDP, with the exception of the
documents to the production of which
objections have been made, and the
documents that need to be redacted

 

August 20, 2008

The Investor to submit objections to
Canada’s refusal to produce on the ground
of Cabinet Privilege in the form of a
Redfern Schedule to the Tribunal

 

September 3, 2008

The parties produce the redacted non-
refused documents

The parties produce the documents ordered
by the Tribunal in its July 18, 2008
Decision, except for those that need to be
redacted

 

September 17, 2008

The parties produce the redacted ordered
documents

 

15 days after the Tribunal’s decision
on Cabinet Privilege

Canada to produce documents the
production of which was previously refused
on the ground of Cabinet Privilege, except
for those that need to be redacted

 

 

30 days after the Tribunal’s decision
on Cabinet Privilege

 

Canada to produce redacted documents the
production of which was previously refused
on the ground of Cabinet Privilege

 

 

 

60 days after the date Canada Reply to be filed by the Investor
produces documents the production
of which was previously refused on
the ground of Cabinet Privilege not
exceeding September 15, 2008.

 

60 days after the Reply Rejoinder to be filed by the Respondent

 

 

 

 

Thanking the parties for their cooperation, I remain

Yours Sincerely

 

Francisco Orrego Vicufia
On behalf of the Tribunal

