IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER 11 OF
THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
AND THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

BETWEEN:

MERRILL & RING FORESTRY L. P.

CLAIMANT

AND

THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

RESPONDENT

(ICSID Administered Case)

 

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON PRODUCTION OF
DOCUMENTS IN RESPECT OF WHICH CABINET
PRIVILEGE HAS BEEN INVOKED

 

Background

1.

On January 21, 2008, the Tribunal issued an Order Concerning Requests for
Documents and Certain Evidentiary Matters (the Document Production Order),
which was reissued, with amendments, on June 24, 2008. In compliance with the
Document Production Order the parties exchanged their respective requests for
documents and also raised objections to the production of some such documents.
The Order envisaged that a party might object on the basis of any of the reasons
set forth in para. 6 therein. To the extent that disagreement between the parties
would persist following discussions, it was for the Tribunal to determine the
admissibility, relevance, materiality and weight of evidence, and to exclude from
evidence or production any document, statement or oral testimony for any of the
reasons indicated in para. 6.

Among other reasons, para. 6 of the Order includes the following: “(f) grounds
of special political or institutional sensitivity (including evidence that has been
classified as secret by a government or a public international institution) that the
Tribunal determines to be compelling.”

On June 20, 2008, the parties exchanged their lists of refusals to each other’s
request for production of documents. Some of Canada’s refusals were based on
Cabinet Privilege. On June 26, 2008, in a letter to the President of the Tribunal,
the Investor objected to Canada’s refusals based on such Privilege. On July 2,
2008, Canada submitted to the Tribunal a letter explaining its refusals to produce
documents on the grounds of relevance and of special political or institutional
sensitivity.

On the basis of these exchanges, on July 18, 2008, the Tribunal issued its

Decision on the Production of Documents, noting that the question of Cabinet

' Section 9 of the Bri

Privilege had not been sufficiently explained by Canada. Accordingly, Canada
was directed that if it believed that a document required to be protected under
paragraph 6 (f) of the Document Production Order, it should identify such
document specifically and its date, as well as provide a description of its general
contents. At the same time, Canada was required to provide an appropriate
explanation as to why it considered that a claim of privilege could properly be
asserted.

Following the schedule established by the Tribunal to this effect, Canada
submitted on August 4, 2008, the list of specific documents for which it was
asserting Cabinet Privilege, all of them relating to documents originating in the
Government of British Columbia. Five documents were concerned at that stage
(Canada’s Documents No. 1-5). The Investor submitted its objections to such
assertion by letter of August 20, 2008.

Although all documents for which Cabinet Privilege was asserted should have
been produced by August 4, 2008, in accordance with the Tribunal’s defined
schedule, Canada submitted a list of four additional documents on August 25,
2008, in respect of which it was asserting Cabinet Privilege (Canada’s
Documents 6-9). These documents had only recently been found during the
search for document production directed by the Tribunal and in the view of
officials of the British Columbia Attorney General’s office the documents
contain Cabinet privileges as defined in the British Columbia Crown

Proceedings Act.' The Associate Deputy Minister for the Office of the Premier

 

h Columbia Crow Proceedings Act provides:

“(1) In proceedings against the government and proceedings in which the government is a party, if there
are, in the rules of the court in which the proceedings are brought, rules relating to one or more of
discovery and inspection of documents, examinations for discovery and interrogatories, those rules apply
as if the government were a corporation. (Continued)

of British Columbia accordingly instructed Counsel for Canada, on August 22,
2008, to claim Cabinet privilege for these documents as they contain
information that should be protected in the public interest.

7. The Investor objected to this additional assertion of Cabinet privilege on August
25, 2008, first on the ground that it was untimely and, second, on the ground
that, like the first assertion, it did not comply with the requirements of the
Crown Proceedings Act or the relevant judicial decisions in this respect.

8. The Tribunal will now examine these requests together.

The Tribunal’s Authority

9. The Investor first raises the question of Canada having informed the Tribunal
that the determination on Cabinet privilege had been made by officials of the
British Columbia government, when under British Columbia law this issue is for
the adjudicator to determine.

10. The Tribunal does not consider that Canada’s submission was in any way
intended to substitute the British Columbia officials’ views for the Tribunal’s
authority. In fact, the second request of August 25, 2008 clearly indicates that
British Columbia officials had instructed Counsel for Canada to claim such
privilege, not to convey a determination made by them. The Tribunal

accordingly considers this issue moot.

 

(2) Subsection (1) does not affect a rule of law that authorizes or requires the withholding of a document,
or the refusal to answer a question, on the ground that the disclosure of the document or the answering of
the question would be injurious to the public interest.

(3) If the government claims that the disclosure of the documents or the answering of the question would
be injurious to the public interest, the court may, after holding an inquiry it considers necessary and
reasonable, and on finding that the public interest in the administration of justice should prevail over the
public interest in withholding the document or answering the question, order, subject to conditions or
restrictions it considers appropriate, production and discovery of the document or that the question be
answered.”

 

Tardiness

11. The Respondent explained in its submission of August 25, 2008 concerning the

1

2.

second set of documents, that it recognized the deadline of August 4, 2008
established by the Tribunal for asserting Cabinet privileges, but that the
documents concerned were only discovered after that date and that, in the
circumstances, it has asserted this privilege at the earliest possible moment. The
Respondent further argues that the Tribunal has the authority to conduct the
proceedings with discretion and flexibility on the basis of Article 15 (1) of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

The Investor objects to this late submission in view of the Tribunal’s
determination in paragraph 23 of the Document Production Decision that the
process for claiming privilege cannot be open-ended because of the potential
disruption of the procedural timetable, which was the reason for establishing
specific deadlines to this effect. The Investor further argues that in any event,
Article 15 (1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules requires that the parties be
treated with equality, which equality would also be affected if the late request

were granted.

13. The Tribunal cannot say that the continuing modifications of the timetable are

satisfactory. At the same time, it realizes that certain unforeseen situations need
to be considered to the extent that they do not seriously interfere with the
progress of the arbitration proceedings. Canada’s reasons for its late submission
are understandable and the Tribunal will accordingly consider the refusal to
produce the second set of documents on the ground of Cabinet privilege together

with the refusal regarding the first set of documents.

Governing Legal Standards

14.

The first legal standard governing a finding on the refusal to produce documents
based on the asserted privilege is to be found in para. 6 (f) of the Document
Production Order, as amended, which refers to “grounds of special political or
institutional sensitivity (including evidence that has been classified as secret by a
government or a public international institution) that the Tribunal determines to
be compelling.” Political and institutional sensitivity, including material
classified as secret, is thus the standard to be examined. If the Tribunal
determines that the grounds invoked are compelling, it will then uphold the

refusal on this basis.

. As the sensitivity in question is normally assessed by the government concerned,

subject to the determination of the Tribunal, Canada has rightly related the
standard of paragraph 6 (f) discussed above to the Cabinet privileges as defined
by section 9 (3) of the British Columbia Crown Proceedings Act. The latter
provides that “(3) If the government claims that the disclosure of the documents
or the answering of the question would be injurious to the public interest, the
court may, after holding an inquiry it considers necessary and reasonable, and on
finding that the public interest in the administration of justice should prevail
over the public interest in withholding the document or answering the question,
order, subject to conditions or restrictions it considers appropriate, production

and discovery of the document or that the question be answered”.

. Canada has asserted its claim for Cabinet privilege on the basis that the

documents concerned contain information that should be protected in the public
interest, particularly because they contain highly sensitive Ministerial and

Cabinet advice on current political issues. In Canada’s view, the injury that the

release of these documents would cause outweighs the public interest in the
administration of justice.

17. The Investor believes differently. It explains that pursuant to the balancing test
established in the law, as interpreted by the Supreme Court of British Columbia
in the Health Services case (Health Services and Support-Facilities Subsector
Bargaining Assn. v. British Columbia, B. C. J. No. 2464, 2002 BCSC 1509), the
documents concerned should be produced not merely because they are prima
facie relevant to the Investor’s ability to make out the case, but because they are
in all likelihood critical to this effect. It is further argued that the interest in the
administration of justice should prevail in this case over and above the
government’s interest in not producing the requested documents.

18. The Tribunal notes that both parties are in agreement about the need to apply the
balancing test discussed above. They reach, however, the opposite conclusion as
to which interest ought to prevail over the other. The Tribunal will accordingly
apply this test with reference to the specific documents envisaged in this
discussion.

Nature of the Documents Concerned

19. The first question the Tribunal needs to examine is that of the nature of the
documents concerned. To the extent that a document might contain information
on actual Cabinet discussions or deliberations, the sensitivity might of course be
greater than if a document simply relates to material prepared for the
consideration of the Cabinet. The distinction was made, the Investor explains, in
the Health Services case, which dismissed the argument that the fact that the
issues envisaged were related to matters of “ongoing concern” was sufficient to

refuse the production of the pertinent documents. Indeed, future discussion by

the Cabinet of the information contained in the documents would not be
compromised by the disclosure of a document previously brought to its
attention.

20. The Tribunal is convinced that this distinction is appropriate in this case.
Documents brought to the attention of the Cabinet in preparation of eventual
discussions or deliberations do not in fact inhibit at all such exercise. Some
documents at hand originate in the work of governmental officials, including
ministers, while some other are contributed by private entities unrelated to the
government. None of them concern actual discussions or deliberations of the
Cabinet, let alone a decision on such recommendations. In practice some
documents may not even get to be considered by the Cabinet or may be
discarded.

2

. The second question the Tribunal needs to consider is the extent to which the
availability of such documents might be crucial for the adequate preparation of
the Investor’s memorials and the presentation of its case. The interest in the
proper administration of justice is evident in this connection.

2)

Nv

. While it is not possible for the Tribunal at this stage to assess such influence, it
is nonetheless to be noted that all the documents concerned relate to matters that

are at the heart of the Investor’s argument in support of its claim, as evidenced

 

 

 

23. It follows that at least prima facie the production of these documents, with the

exception noted, will weigh in favour of the interest in the administration of
justice, particularly in view that they do not compromise the sensitivity of
Cabinet discussions and deliberations which would be protected by a public
interest in non-disclosing. The Tribunal will accordingly order the production of

such documents with the exception noted.

Confidentiality

24. Canada’s concern about the injurious effects that an open disclosure could entail

is not unwarranted because such documents could eventually be used for
purposes entirely unrelated to the interest in the administration of justice that
prevails in this case. The Investor has acknowledged this fact in suggesting that
the documents produced could be designated as confidential under the terms of
the Tribunal’s Confidentiality Order, which are also compatible with the
applicable British Columbia law. This is a reasonable precaution that the

Tribunal adopts.

Decision

In accordance with the above considerations, the Tribunal decides as follows:
Canada shall produce Documents No. 1-4 and No. 6-9 in respect of which
Cabinet privilege has been asserted.

. The production of these documents shall take place within a period of 15 days

following the date of this Decision in the case of non-redacted documents, and

10

within a period of 30 days following the date of this Decision in respect of
redacted documents, in accordance with the Tribunal’s schedule.
. The documents so produced shall be designated as Confidential and are to be

used solely in the context of this arbitration.

September 3, 2008

 

Francisco Orrego Vicufia

President, on behalf of the Tribunal

