International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
Telephone: (202) 458-1534 Faxes: (202) 522-2615/2027
Website: www.worldbank.org/icsid

December 13, 2007.5 , ne - :
Mae KR ST Low
cB Ts

By courier
(advance copy of cover letter by e-mail)

Ms. Meg Kinnear

Merrill & Ring Forestry L.P.

c/o Mr. Barry Appleton

Appleton & Associates International
Lawyers

77 Bloor Street West, Suite 1800
Toronto, Ontario MSS 1M2

Senior General Counsel 5sS75-¥?
Trade Law Bureau .
Department of Foreign Affairs

and International Trade

125 Sussex Drive

Canada Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0G2
Canada

Re: Merrill & Ring Forestry L.P. v. Government of Canada
NAFTA/UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules Proceeding
Dear Ms. Kinnear, Dear Mr. Appleton,

Further to our letter of December 12, 2007, please find enclosed a hard copy of
the Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision on the Place of Arbitration of the same date.

Sincerely yours,

he HA
—
Eloise M. Obadia
Senior Counsel
Enclosure

cc (with enclosure):

Members of the Tribunal

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
Telephone: (202) 458-1534 Faxes: (202) 522-2615 / (202) 522-2027
Website: http://www.worldbank.org/icsid

CERTIFICATE

UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN OF THE NAFTA
AND THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

BETWEEN:

Merrill & Ring Forestry L.P.
Claimant
AND
GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Respondent

I hereby certify that the attached is a true copy of the Decision on the Place of Arbitration of the
Arbitral Tribunal dated December 12, 2007.

Eten De

Eloise Obadia
Senior Counsel

Washington, D.C., December 13, 2007

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER 11 OF
THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
AND THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

 

 

BETWEEN:
MERRILL & RING FORESTRY L. P.
Claimant/Investor
and
THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
Respondent/Party
(ICSID Administered Case)
DECISION ON THE PLACE OF ARBITRATION
1. The Tribunal is called upon to determine the place of arbitration in this case, the

Parties not having agreed on one. This arbitration is conducted under the Arbitration
Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (“UNCITRAL
Rules”), except to the extent that they are modified by the provisions of Section B of
NAFTA Chapter 11.

2. Article 16(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules provides as follows:

Unless the parties have agreed upon the place where the arbitration is to
be held, such place shall be determined by the arbitral tribunal, having
regard to the circumstances of the arbitration.

3. Article 1130 of the NAFTA Agreement provides in turn that:

Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, a Tribunal shall hold an
arbitration in the territory of a Party that is a party to the New York
Convention, selected in accordance with:

(b) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules if the arbitration is under
those Rules.

4. As the NAFTA Rules have not introduced a modification to the UNCITRAL
Rules in this connection and, on the contrary, have reaffirmed the application of those
Rules, the determination of the Place of Arbitration is to be made in accordance with

Article 16(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

5. In addition, the Tribunal may be guided by the UNCITRAL Notes on Organizing
Arbitral Proceedings (“Notes”), as a number of other tribunals have done, although
these Notes are not binding on either the parties or the Tribunal. (See UPS v. Canada,
Decision on the Place of Arbitration, Oct. 17, 2001, available at
http://www. international.gc.ca/assets/trade-agreements-accords-
commerciaux/pdfs/PA:oct.pdf; ADF Group Inc. v. United States of America,
Procedural Order No. 2 Concerning the Place of Arbitration, July 11, 2001, available at
http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/5965.pdf; Methanex Corp. v. United
States of America, Written Reasons for the Tribunal’s Decision of 7" September 2000
on the Place of Arbitration, available at
http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/6038.pdf; Ethyl Corp. v. Canada,
Decision Regarding the Place of Arbitration, Nov. 28, 1997, 38 I.L.M. 702; Pope &
Talbot, Inc. v. Canada, Minutes of Procedural Meeting, October 29, 1999; Canfor
Corp. v. United States, Decision on the Place of Arbitration, Filing of a Statement of
Defence and Bifurcation of the Proceedings, January 23, 2004, available at
http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/28637.pdf).

6. Paragraph 22 of the Notes reads as follows:

Various factual and legal factors influence the choice of the place of
arbitration, and their relative importance varies from case to case.
Among the more prominent factors are: (a) suitability of the law on
arbitral procedure of the place of arbitration; (b) whether there is a
multilateral or bilateral treaty on enforcement of arbitral awards between
the State where the arbitration takes place and the State or States where
the award may have to be enforced; (c) convenience of the parties and
the arbitrators, including the travel distances; (d) availability and cost of
support services needed; and (e) location of the subject-matter in dispute
and proximity of evidence.

7. The Tribunal must also refer to the fact that the Notes do not include the “perception
of a place as being neutral” as a pertinent factor. However, as noted by the Ethyl

tribunal:

The fact that the UNCITRAL Notes omitted . . . “perception of a place as being
neutral” from its list of criteria for selection of a place of arbitration because it
was “unclear, potentially confusing” does not mean that such criterion cannot be
considered. UNCITRAL, taking this step, itself indicated “that the tribunal
before deciding on the place of arbitration might wish to discuss that with the
parties.” (Ethyl, n. 12).
8. Two NAFTA tribunals have specifically considered the question of neutrality in
determining the place of arbitration (Feldman v, Mexico, Procedural Order No. 1
Concerning the Place of Arbitration, ICSID ARB (AF)99/1, April 3, 2000 available at
http://www.economia.gob.mx/work/snci/negociaciones/Controversias/Casos_Mexico/M
arvin/ordenes/Order_1.pdf; Waste Management, Inc. v. Mexico, Decision on Venue of

the Arbitration, ICSID ARB (AF)/00/3, September 26, 2001, 6 JCSID Rep. 541 (2004)).

9. As previously agreed with the Tribunal, both parties simultaneously presented
submissions on the place of arbitration and other matters on November 9, 2007. They
also addressed this question at the first meeting held on November 15, 2007, and
provided the Tribunal with additional documentation in support of their respective

arguments.

10. | Claimant’s Submission urged Washington, D.C. as the place of arbitration,
because in its view it satisfies the various guidelines provided by the UNCITRAL
Notes, with particular reference to the decision taken in favour of this venue in the UPS
case (para. 18) and the tribunal’s decision in the Ethyl NAFTA case referring to
Washington, D.C. as a possible place of arbitration for NAFTA Chapter 11 arbitration
(at 703). The Claimant has also argued about the need to preserve the equality of
treatment of the parties in the light of Article 15 (1) of the UNCITRAL Rules and the
reaffirmation of this principle in the Pope & Talbot case (Decision on Cabinet
Confidence, September 6, 2000, para. 1.5 available at
http://www. international.gc.ca/assets/trade-agreements-accords-
commerciaux/pdfs/pubdoc8.pdf).

11. The Respondent proposed that the place of arbitration should be Ottawa, Ontario

or Vancouver, British Columbia, particularly in view of the fact that the Claimant is a

partnership from the State of Washington that has invested in timberlands in coastal
British Columbia and challenges Canadian federal measures governing log exports from
British Columbia. In the Respondent’s view, most of the evidence is to be found

primarily in Ottawa and secondarily in Vancouver.

12. In referring to the tests on which the UNCITRAL Notes are based, the
Respondent believes that Ottawa or Vancouver meet the suitability of the law on arbitral
procedure in the light of the Commercial Arbitration Act, which implements the
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration of 1985, and the
Commercial Arbitration Code that is specifically applicable to NAFTA Chapter 11
investor-State disputes to which Canada is a disputing party. Yet, the Respondent
accepts that also the United States has equally suitable laws on arbitral procedure and as
a result this particular criterion is not determinative of the place of arbitration in this
case. The Respondent asserts that neither a Treaty governing enforcement of arbitral
awards is determinative as both Canada and the United States are party to the New York
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (opened
for signature on June 10, 1958, 21 UST 2517, 330 UNTS 3 (“New York Convention”)).
The availability and costs of support services in the various cities proposed are roughly

equivalent.

13. In the Respondent’s argument, convenience of the place of arbitration to the
parties and the arbitrators, including travel distances, is a test that speaks in favour of
Ottawa or Vancouver. So does, the Respondent maintains, the location of the subject
matter in dispute and the proximity of evidence, as all such elements are to be found

mostly in Ottawa and Vancouver.

14. Regarding the first two factors cited in the Notes ((a) and (b)), the Tribunal
agrees with the views of both parties that all of the venues proposed have “a suitable lex
arbitrii,” and notes that Canada and the United States are Parties to the New York
Convention. Such criteria are thus not determinative of a finding about the most

appropriate place of arbitration.

15. As regards the third factor cited in the Notes ((c)), it was common ground that
the Presiding Arbitrator resides in Santiago, Chile and the co-arbitrators in Chicago and

Washington, D.C., in one case, and Toronto and London, in the other; that the parties

have offices in Seattle (Claimant) and Ottawa (Respondent); and that counsel in this
case have their offices, in the case of the Claimant, in Toronto and Washington, D.C.
and, in the case of the Respondent, in Ottawa. Both Ottawa and Washington, D.C. have
convenient air travel connections, a factor that will be discussed in greater detail further
below; these connections are somewhat better than those offered for Vancouver. This

factor suggests that Vancouver is less convenient than the other venues proposed.

16. The Notes’ fourth factor ((d)) — “availability and cost of support services
needed” ~ is not a basis in this case for choosing one proposed venue over the other.
All suggested venues offer appropriate facilities to this effect, including certified

stenographic reporters, videoconferencing and other requirements.

17. The Tribunal also believes that most of these services are necessary in respect of
the place of a hearing, but as this place is different from the place of arbitration, as
argued by the Respondent, neither does this factor offer determinative guidelines for the
Tribunal to choose one over the other. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent accepts

that the hearings take place in Washington, D.C.

18. The Respondent has argued that the “location of the subject-matter in dispute”,
the fifth and final factor listed in the Notes ((e)), favours choosing either Ottawa or
Vancouver over Washington, D.C., particularly in the light of the reasons offered by the
tribunals in the Ethyl, ADF and Canfor cases, which assigned priority to the place where
the Respondent adopted the measures challenged by the Claimant. A similar argument
is made by the Respondent in respect of the “proximity of evidence”, a factor also

included in this Note.

19. The Claimant, however, believes differently and considers that the subject-
matter of the dispute does not favour either country, and that should a site visit be
necessary this could be accomplished by the Tribunal independently from the place of

arbitration in such a place.

20. The parties have also addressed the question of neutrality of the place of
arbitration in connection with the suitability of the law on arbitral procedure. As noted
above, although this factor is not included in the UNCITRAL Notes it has been

considered by the tribunals in Feldman and Waste Management.

21. The Claimant has argued that this factor is closely connected to the principle of
equality of the parties (David D. Caron, Lee M. Caplan and Matti Pellonpad: The
Uncitral Arbitration Rules: A Commentary, 2006, at 78-79) (First Meeting transcripts,
at 61-62).

22. The Claimant has also expressed its concern in respect of this particular criterion
in view that in the challenge of Metalclad before the Supreme Court of British
Columbia, Canada’s Attorney General argued that in interpreting NAFTA Chapter 11
tribunals “should not attract extensive judicial deference and should not be protected by
a high standard of judicial review” (Outline of Argument of Intervenor Attorney
General of Canada, Vancouver Registry No. L002904, February 16, 2001, para. 30), a
view likely to be followed by the courts.

23. In addition, the Claimant asserts that, contrary to the situation in the United
States, the sovereign powers of the State interfere in Canada with the necessary
neutrality because some key governmental information cannot be challenged or

reviewed by the courts (First Meeting transcripts, at 68-69).

24. The Respondent asserts that neutrality is not an evident factor in determining the
place of arbitration in the light of NAFTA Article 1130 (First Meeting transcripts, at
73), but if neutrality were to be taken into consideration for determining the place of
arbitration, Vancouver should be favoured because Washington, D.C. is the capital city
of the Claimant’s home State as Ottawa is of the Respondent. It is also submitted by the
Respondent that the fact that arguments have been made in favour of the challenge of
awards before the Canadian courts responds to a normal litigation strategy and in no
way affects the independence of the Canadian judiciary or the deference to arbitration. It
is also explained that the safeguards surrounding government information apply to

every place of arbitration independently of its location.

25. In any event, the Respondent notes, Washington, D.C. has been favoured as the
place of arbitration in cases against the United States and there would be no reason not
to apply the same standard to Ottawa. Moreover, as noted, the Respondent argues
correctly that the place of arbitration is different from the location of hearings
submitting that this particular factor should not influence the determination of the place

of arbitration.

26. The Tribunal harbours no doubt about the fact that the Canadian judiciary is
fully independent and realizes that it is only normal for counsel for a party to argue in
litigation in favour of the challenge of an award that has been brought by that party
before those courts, or for that matter any other court. The Tribunal’s determination is

thus not influenced by this particular event.

27. Both Ottawa and Washington, D.C. end-up, after all elements having been
considered, in an almost identical situation from the point of view of their suitability as
the place of arbitration. In order to arrive at a determination the Tribunal thus needs to
weigh further some particular arguments made by the parties in support of their

respective proposals.

28. The first such argument concerns the location of the subject matter in dispute
and the proximity of evidence. While these factors are likely to be more readily
available in Ottawa as the place where many or most of the challenged measures have
been adopted by the Canadian government and its services, a criterion accepted by
several NAFTA tribunals (Ethyl (at 705), ADF (para. 20) and Canfor (para. 35), the
Tribunal does not believe that this is a crucial factor in the age of electronic

communications and availability of records.

29. The second argument to be taken into account relates to the travel facilities
servicing one or other venue. Although this particular aspect is related more to the place
of hearings than to the place of arbitration, the Tribunal will consider it for the sake of
completeness, particularly in view that both the UNICTRAL Rules and the parties’

submissions refer to it in connection with the place of arbitration.

30. In consideration of the fact that one arbitrator has a residence in Washington,
D.C. or will be traveling from Chicago, that another arbitrator shall be coming from
either Toronto or London, that the Presiding arbitrator will be arriving either from New
York or Miami as the most convenient ports of entry to the United States coming from
Santiago, that one party will be traveling from Seattle and its counsel from Toronto, the
Tribunal is persuaded that flight connections with Washington, D.C. are more readily
available than with Ottawa. In this last case travel is many times routed through
Toronto. In any event, connections between Ottawa and Washington, D.C. are also

adequate enough so as not to inconvenience counsel for the Respondent.

31. In addition to the above considerations, the Tribunal also notes that Washington,
D.C. is the seat of ICSID, the administering institution of this case, that it has been
accepted on various occasions as the place of arbitration and that it has developed the
reputation of being an independent venue for many international organizations (See
UPS (para. 18), ADF (para. 21); Methanex (para. 39)). While some cases were brought
under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules of Arbitration, and hence were held at and
administered by ICSID itself, there are also cases brought under the UNCITRAL Rules

that have been held in the ICSID facilities, just as the present case.

32. Having considered all the arguments made in favour of the different venues

indicated, the Tribunal can conclude, like the UPS tribunal, that,

While the matter is finely balanced, the Tribunal considers that the balance
does favour the United States of America as the place of arbitration and in
particular Washington, DC (UPS, para. 19).
33. The Tribunal appreciates, of course, that the Claimant is a national of, and
distinct from, the United States, and that this factor is sufficient guarantee that the
impartiality of the courts will not be in any way affected as the United States Federal
judiciary is also fully independent. In this connection, Washington, D.C. is favoured,
not because of being the capital of the United States but because it is the seat of ICSID

and offers some advantages in terms of practical conveniences.

34. The Tribunal also wishes to refer to the fact that NAFTA Article 1130 provides
that “a Tribunal shall hold an arbitration in the territory of a Party that is a party to the
New York Convention”, as both Canada and the United States are, and thus does not
exclude a venue in the territory of the Respondent party. As noted by the Claimant,
however, the situation here is distinguishable from state-to-state arbitration under
NAFTA Chapter 20, where Rule 22 of the Model Rules of Procedure prescribes that the
place of arbitration shall be the capital of the respondent state.

35. Ideally, a Tribunal would search for a neutral place different from the territory of
both Claimant and Respondent, but in this case the Tribunal is constrained by Article
1130 to choose the territory of one Contracting Party and cannot choose a place of
arbitration elsewhere. As Mexico is excluded as a venue in the instant case because of

the language of the arbitration being English, the choice is thus reduced to either a

venue in Canada or the United States, and here the questions of convenience discussed

have a prominent role.

36. It is for the foregoing reasons that the Tribunal determines that Washington,
D.C. shall be the place of arbitration of this dispute.

For the Tribunal,

Francisco Orrego Vicufia
Presiding Arbitrator

December 12, 2007.

