Mesa Power Group LLC v. Government of Canada

In the Matter of an Arbitration Under Chapter Eleven of the North
American Free Trade Agreement and the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules

Between :

Mesa Power Group, LLC

Claimant

and:

Government of Canada

Respondent

 

Government of Canada

Observations on the Award on Jurisdiction and Merits in William Ralph
Clayton, William Richard Clayton, Douglas Clayton, Daniel Clayton and Bilcon
of Delaware, Inc. v. Canada

May 14, 2015

 

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Trade and Development
Trade Law Bureau

Lester B. Pearson Building
125 Sussex Drive

Ottawa, Ontario

K1A 0G2

CANADA

e 1. The Award on Jurisdiction and Merits in the Bilcon v. Canada arbitration (the
“Bilcon Award”) is of limited relevance in this arbitration because of the different
nature of the measures in dispute. Moreover, as is explained below,
the Bilcon Award should be given limited weight in light of the fundamental errors
made by the Tribunal in considering whether Canada breached its obligations
under Articles 1102 and 1105.

The Bilcon Tribunal's Conclusions Regarding Its Jurisdiction

I. The Bilcon Tribunal’s Conclusions With Respect to the Attribution to
Canada of the Acts of the Joint Review Panel Are Both Wrong and Irrelevant
in this Arbitration

e 2. The Claimant has argued in this arbitration that certain acts of the Ontario
Power Authority (OPA) in implementing and administering Ontario’s Feed-in Tariff
(FIT) Program are attributable to Canada. As Canada has explained in its
submissions, the OPA is a state enterprise, and as such, under the /ex specialis in
Article 1503(2) of NAFTA, its conduct is only attributable to Canada if it is
exercising delegated governmental authority.°°°te1 The conduct of a state
enterprise was not the issue in theBilcon arbitration. In Bilcon, the Claimants
alleged that certain acts of the Joint Review Panel (the “JRP”) set up to provide
recommendations to government in the course of the environmental assessment
of Bilcon’s proposed project violated Canada’s Chapter 11 obligations. The JRP
was not a state enterprise, and as a result, most of the analysis of
the Bilcon Tribunal on the issue of state responsibility is not directly applicable
here. f2tte2 However, to the extent that this Tribunal does consider these same

 

 

principles, the conclusions reached by the Bilcon Tribunal with respect to whether
the acts of the JRP could be attributed to Canada as a matter of international law
are in error and should not be followed.

e 3. In assessing the responsibility of Canada for actions of the JRP,
the Bilcon Tribunal appears to base its analysis on Article 4, dealing with conduct
of organs of a State, and Article 5, dealing with conduct of persons or entities
exercising elements of governmental authority, of the International Law
Commission's Articles on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful
Acts. ®22t9"28 Yet, in its reasons, the Tribunal is entirely unclear as to which legal
standard it is applying. Indeed, theBilcon Tribunal’s reasoning moves from
alluding that the JRP is a de facto organ of the Government of Canada, 224 to

ng the JRP is a de jure organ of the Government of Canada, 2225 to
landing on a finding that the JRP is part of the “apparatus of Canada”. ®22t&2te® This
last finding uses a term put forward by the Claimants in Bi/con that has no basis
in customary international law. It is not found in the ILC’s Articles themselves,
their commentaries, any jurisprudence of the International Court of Justice or any
other legal authority.

e 4. Moreover, the Tribunal’s analysis under Article 4 is entirely lacking in
substance. The Bilcon Tribunal fails to even discuss, for example, the tests laid
out by the International Court of Justice in the Genocide Convention case or apply
those tests to the JRP. Instead, the Bilcon Tribunal references the “clear statutory
role”£22t"2te7 of the JRP in making “formal and public recommendations,” and the

 

 

 

int

 

 

“statutorily mandated and important role”®2"2e® of the JRP. Neither of these

 

factors is the correct legal standard for an analysis of state responsibility at
customary international law.

e 5. The surprising failure of the Bilcon Tribunal to rigorously apply the appropriate
framework for analyzing questions of state responsibility led it to the erroneous
conclusion that it had jurisdiction to consider the acts of the JRP. Neither its

Il. The Bilcon Tribunal’s Reasoning with respect to Arti

conclusions nor its approach should be endorsed by this Tribunal. However, even
if this Tribunal were to consider the Bilcon Tribunal’s reasoning, many of the
factors it identified as relevant to its analysis fail to support the Claimant’s
position in this arbitration that the acts of the OPA can be attributed to Canada.
6. For example, the Bilcon Tribunal relied on the fact that the JRP was not a
“body with an existence that precedes the assessment of a particular project or
survives after its tasks are completed.”=22"*°° To the extent that this Tribunal

 

believes this to be a relevant factor in an analysis of state responsibility under
customary international law, Canada notes that the OPA is a statutory state
enterprise with independent legal personality that existed well before the FIT
Program did and continues to exist to this day.°°°"*'° The OPA is not a transitory

 

entity.

7. The Bilcon Tribunal also emphasized the fact that the report of the JRP had to
be considered by the Government of Canada in making its decisions and that the
JRP was, thus, a “mandated part of the environmental deliberation process”
undertaken by the Minister of the Environment.®22°"2"" The Bilcon Tribunal

 

explained further that the JRP was established to “contribute to government
decision-making, rather than pursuing its own mission.”2222!2 Again, to the
extent this Tribunal agrees that such factors are relevant, they are not true of the
OPA. The OPA carries out its purposes independently of the Government of
Ontario. As discussed in Canada’s Counter-Memorial, the “principle purpose [of
the OPA] is to, among other things, ‘engage in activities in support of the goal of
ensuring adequate, reliable and secure electricity supply and resources in
Ontario.’ In doing so, the OPA acts independently, and not as an agent of the
Crown.” £ootnotei3

 

8. Finally, the Bilcon Tribunal distinguished the findings in the Jan de Nu/ Award,
upon which Canada has relied on in this arbitration, °°"°*"* on the grounds that

 

the “JRP neither generally engaged in commercial activities nor did it display any
commercial character in conducting its hearings”.®2°"**15 To the extent such

 

factors are considered relevant by this Tribunal, Canada notes that the OPA does
engage in commercial activities. Much like the Suez Canal Authority in the Jan de
Nul case, the OPA designed a procurement program pursuant to which it entered
into contracts with energy generators for the procurement of renewable energy.
There was nothing governmental about any of its acts.*°t""*16 Accordingly, even
if this Tribunal were to look at the reasoning of the Bilcon Tribunal, that reasoning
actually supports a finding that the acts of the OPA here should not be attributed
to the Government of Canada.

 

 

je 1116(2) Supports

Canada’s Arguments Concerning Article 1120

9. As Canada indicated in its Objection to Jurisdiction, °°™"*12 its Counter-
Memorial and Reply on Jurisdiction, ©°°"**"® and its Post-Hearing
Submission®2°*2 this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the dispute due to the
Claimant's failure to comply with Article 1120 of the NAFTA. While

 

 

the Bilcon Tribunal did not have to decide whether the requirements of Article
1120 had been met in that case, the Bilcon Award does provide guidance on the
timing requirements under Article 1116 of the NAFTA which are relevant to the
case at hand and this Tribunal’s application of Article 1120.

10. In particular, the Bilcon Tribunal explained, relying upon well-settled
principles that have been endorsed by numerous other NAFTA tribunals, that it is
appropriate to “separate a series of events into its distinct components” when
applying the timing requirements under the NAFTA. 22!9!*2° While the Tribunal
was speaking to Article 1116, the analysis is equally applicable to other timing
requirements, including those under Article 1120. Applying the reasoning of

the Bilcon Tribunal, it is for this Tribunal then to look at each individual
component of an event and answer two questions: (1) is that component on its
own an “event giving rise to a claim” such that alleged damages were suffered by
the Claimant; and (2) did that component of the event occur more than six
months prior to the submission of the claim to arbitration. It is only when both of
these questions can be answered in the affirmative that a claim can validly be
submitted to arbitration and Canada’s consent perfected.

11. As Canada has explained in its submissions, the only event in this arbitration
that could possibly answer the first of these questions in the affirmative is the
OPA’s failure to offer the Claimant a FIT Contract on July 4, 2011.F22tmote21 It is
only on this date that the Claimant could have suffered damage. "°°'"°"°22 However,

 

 

that event cannot answer the second question in the affirmative. Pursuant to
Article 1120, the Claimant's claim could have been submitted to arbitration no
earlier than January 4, 2012. As the Claimant failed to wait until that date,
Canada has not consented to arbitrate this claim.

The Bilcon Tribunal’s Conclusions Regarding Article 1105

12. The finding of the majority of the Bilcon Tribunal that there was a breach of
Article 1105 is inapposite here because of both the differences in the facts at
issue and the measures that are being challenged. Moreover, the finding is wrong
on both the facts of that case, and as a matter of international law. In reaching
the conclusion it did, the majority ignored relevant facts, engaged in unjustifiable
speculation, failed to accord Canada due process, improperly intruded into the
right of the Government to regulate, failed to appropriately apply the customary
international law minimum standard of treatment, and exceeded its jurisdiction.
13. Amongst its many errors, the majority of the Tribunal in Bilcon gave itself
jurisdiction to act as a Canadian court and make a determination that Canadian
domestic law had been breached. As Professor McRae notes in his dissent, it had
no jurisdiction to do so.*#°!°28 Further, the decision of the majority that the
purported breach of Canadian law amounted to a breach of Article 1105 of NAFTA
was made without considering the content of the applicable standards under the
customary international law minimum standard of treatment. ©2224 In short,
and as is explained below, the majority in Bilcon ignored its mandate, ignored

 

 

customary international law and exceeded its jurisdiction in making the findings it
did. However, while there are significant errors in the legal analysis and
conclusion of the majority award in Bilcon with respect to Article 1105, Canada
notes that theBilcon Tribunal nevertheless correctly rejected some of the same
arguments regarding the proper legal interpretation of Article 1105 that have
been advanced by the Claimant in this arbitration.

I. The Bilcon Tribunal Unanimously and Correctly Dismissed the Claimant’s
Arguments with respect to the Note of Interpretation of the Free Trade
Commission

e 14. In this arbitration, the Claimant argues that the Tribunal should be the first
NAFTA tribunal to ignore the content of the NAFTA Free Trade Commission’s
2001 Notes of Interpretation of Certain Chapter 11 Provisions (the “FTC
Note”) £22!2te28 and its binding effect. It makes three arguments in support of its
claim £22!2te26__all of which were also made by the Claimants in
the Bilconarbitration. «22 Each and every one of those arguments was flatly

 

 

rejected by a unanimous tribunal in Bilcon. In particular, the Tribunal

in Bilcon reiterated what all previous NAFTA tribunals have held, that “NAFTA
Article 1105 is...identical to the minimum international standard”<!"228 and that
“NAFTA tribunals are bound to interpret and apply the standard in accordance
with customary international law.”*t0229 The Bilcon Tribunal further explained
that “the Tribunal agrees with Canada...‘fair and equitable treatment’ and ‘full
protection and security’ cannot be regarded as ‘autonomous’ treaty norms that
impose additional requirements above and beyond what the minimum standard
requires.”£22lmte20 This Tribunal should do the same and reject the attempts of the
Claimant here to distort the obligations in Article 1105.

 

 

Hl. The Bilcon Tribunal Unanimously and Correctly Acknowledged that the
Threshold for Demonstrating a Violation of Article 1105 Is High

e 15. The Bilcon Tribunal also correctly noted, consistent with all previous NAFTA
tribunals, that “there is a high threshold for Article 1105 to apply”®2!2e21 and
that the customary international law minimum standard of treatment:

 

is not supposed to be the continuation of domestic politics and litigation by other
means. Modern regulatory and social welfare states tackle complex problems...Even
when state officials are acting in good faith there will sometimes be not only
controversial judgments, but clear cut mistakes in following procedures, gathering and
stating facts and identifying the applicable substantive rules. State authorities are
faced with competing demands on their administrative resources and there can be
delays or limited time, attention and expertise brought to bear in dealing with issues.

The imprudent exercise of discretion or even outright mistakes do not, as a rule, lead
Footnotes?

 

to a breach of the international minimum standard.

e 16. This Tribunal should reject the Claimant’s attempts to lower the threshold for
a violation of Article 1105, and refuse to sit in judgment of complex political and
discretionary decisions such as whether or not to enter into the Green Energy
Investment Agreement with the Korean Consortium, how to award the capacity
that would be created on the Bruce-to-Milton line, and how to procure electricity
generation in general.

HII. The Bilcon Tribunal Failed to Assess Customary International Law for the
Purpose of Determining the Content of Article 1105

e 17. After acknowledging that it was bound to apply the high threshold set by
customary international law, the majority of theBilcon Tribunal then failed to
determine the positive content of Article 1105 by looking to customary
international law. Instead, the majority looked to the decisions of other
international tribunals in order to conclude that the “international minimum
standard has evolved over the years towards greater protection for
investors.” 22mste88 As Canada noted in its pleadings in this arbitration, and as all
three NAFTA parties have consistently agreed, decisions of arbitral tribunals can
describe and examine customary international law, but they are not themselves a
source of customary international law. ®2"°**4 The decisions upon which

 

the Bilcon majority relied, and in particular, the decision of the tribunal in Merrill
and Ring v. Canada,™t2t285 do not conduct the required analysis of customary
international law. This Tribunal should not ignore the standard that the NAFTA
Parties have mandated it to apply. In order to establish a breach of Article 1105
the Claimant must prove, using state practice and opinio juris, that the
complained of treatment falls below the treatment required by customary
international law. 22m2tes6

 

IV. The Bilcon Tribunal Had No Jurisdiction to Decide Alleged Violations of
Domestic Law and Incorrectly Concluded that Such Alleged Vi
Amounted to a Violation of the Customary International Law Minimum

lations

 

Standard of Treatment

e 18. The majority in Bilcon facially acknowledged that “the mere breach of
domestic law or any kind of unfairness does not violate the international
minimum standard”®2"*"227 and that “errors, even substantial errors, in applying

 

national laws do not generally, let alone automatically, rise to the level of

 

international responsibility vis-a-vis foreign investors.” However, it then
completely disregarded this point and went on to base its entire decision on the
mere fact that, in its view, the JRP erred in its application of the criteria it was
required to consider under Canadian law. Indeed, the majority says in

the Bilcon Award that the “problem” in that arbitration that it was assessing was
“whether [Bilcon’s] application was assessed in a manner that complied with the
laws that Canada and Nova Scotia chose to adopt.”*"°"*22 In addition, not only
did it consider the problem as being one of compliance with the domestic laws of

Canada, it also based all of its conclusions on factors related exclusively to
Canadian law. 2t°te40 For example, its reference to the “legitimate expectations”
of Bilcon — a principle which is not part of the customary international law
minimum standard of treatment — is entirely based on the conclusion that Bilcon
had the expectation that Canadian law would be properly

applied. ®!™te41 Similarly, its conclusion that the treatment of Bilcon was arbitrary

 

 

is based on nothing more than its own conclusion that Canadian law had not been
complied with. f2tste42

e 19. As Professor McRae notes in his dissent, the majority did not evaluate
whether the purported breach was inconsistent with customary international
law. ®e2tote48 Instead, despite its protestations to the contrary, the way the
majority applied Article 1105 makes it clear that in its view a “[b]reach of NAFTA
Article 1105...is equated with a breach of Canadian law.”'2t"te44 As Professor
McRae indicates, this is inappropriate. In fact, it is a perversion of the standards
embodied in Article 1105. NAFTA tribunals are not courts of appeal, and nor are
they domestic courts charged with judicially reviewing administrative
recommendations for compliance with Canadian law. Essentially, the analysis of
the majority in the Bilcon Award transforms Article 1105 into grounds for
undertaking a de novo review of any and all judicial or administrative action. In
so doing, the majority decision inBilcon applies a standard not found in customary
international law and grossly oversteps the authority given to Chapter 11
tribunals. This Tribunal should not follow suit. NAFTA Chapter 11 tribunals have
no jurisdiction to make determinations with respect to whether Canadian law has
been respected. That authority rests only with Canadian courts. This Tribunal
should instead analyse only whether or not Canada has respected the customary
international law minimum standard of treatment. For all of the reasons already
explained in Canada’s submissions to date in this arbitration, there should be no
doubt that it has.

 

 

 

The Bilcon Tribunal’s Conclusions Regarding Article 1102

* 20. The award of the majority of the Bilcon Tribunal with respect to Article 1102
should be given no weight here because it fundamentally misapplies that
obligation. In particular, the majority ignored the underlying objective of Article
1102, which is to protect against nationality-based discrimination.‘2"°'°*° Indeed,
the majority in Bilcon found Canada in breach of its national treatment obligation
on the basis of mere differences in treatment between Bilcon and certain other
investors, with no consideration of whether these differences in treatment were
nationality-based. The majority also, inappropriately and without notice, shifted
the burden to Canada to demonstrate that the differences in treatment that it had
identified could be justified. Each of these errors represents a fundamental defect
in the majority’s Article 1102 analysis. Further, as Canada has explained in its
submissions in this arbitration and explains again below, each of these errors is at

 

odds with the consistent positions of the NAFTA Parties and the decisions of other
NAFTA tribunals. 222246

 

I. The Bilcon Tribunal Improperly Expanded Article 1102 Beyond Protection
Against Nationality Based Discrimination

e 21. The majority of the Bilcon Tribunal disregarded the central purpose of Article
1102, which is to protect NAFTA investors against nationality-based
discrimination. As Canada explained in its submissions in this arbitration, the
unanimous position of the NAFTA Parties, representing the authentic
interpretation of this provision, is that a national treatment violation must be
founded upon a finding of discrimination based on a foreign investor's
nationality. ©2%°'°47 Notwithstanding that the Vienna Convention on the Law of

 

Treaties requires that such an interpretation be taken into account — a rule which
the Bilcon Tribunal acknowledges elsewhere=2%"*48 — the Bilcon majority simply

 

ignored it. Further, as Canada pointed out in its submissions in this arbitration,
past NAFTA tribunals have also consistently held that Article 1102 is only about
nationality-based discrimination. 22"*°42 The majority in Bilcon also failed to heed

 

these authorities.

e 22. Instead, at the outset of its analysis, it merely observed that it needed to give
“the reasonably broad language of Article 1102 its due” and that it “must also
take into account the objects of NAFTA, which include according to Article
102(1)(c) “to increase substantially investment opportunities in the territories of
the Parties.”£22"9t59 And at the end of its analysis, the majority noted only that
the difference in treatment that it had identified as giving rise to NAFTA liability

Footnotes1

 

 

“was not consistent with the investment liberalizing objectives of NAFTA.”
* 23. Article 102(1)(c) and the investment liberalizing objectives of NAFTA certainly
provide relevant context to an Article 1102 analysis. However, contrary to
the Bilcon majority’s approach, they are not the only relevant objectives, they do
not justify ignoring the interpretation of this specific provision by the NAFTA
Parties, they cannot expand or override the ordinary meaning of the text of
Article 1102, and they do not trump the requirement that NAFTA tribunals must
interpret and apply the Article 1102 in light of its underlying purpose.
e 24. After correctly acknowledging that a regulatory process can legitimately result
in different outcomes for different proponents, 252 the majority
in Bilcon determined that the JRP departed from the standards required of it by
Canadian law. Then, solely on the basis of this determination, it found that Bilcon
had been accorded less favourable treatment than other proponents in like

 

circumstances. The majority’s approach ignored the issue of whether the
difference in treatment that it identified was based upon Bilcon’s nationality.
Indeed, nowhere in the majority’s award is there any consideration of whether
other U.S. proponents were assessed in accordance with what it determined was
the applicable standard under Canadian law or whether they were subject to the
same treatment accorded to Bilcon. In the end, while the majority may have
found that the JRP misapplied Canadian law and that Bilcon was treated

differently than other proponents as a result, this is not sufficient to find a
violation of Article 1102. By concluding to the contrary, the majority of

the Bilcon Tribunal erred in its interpretation and application of Article 1102. This
Tribunal should not do the same. Instead, it should respect the mandate given to
it by the NAFTA Parties in Article 1102 and limit its consideration to whether the
Claimant has proven that it was the subject of nationality-based discrimination.

Il. The Bilcon Tribunal Inappropriately Shifted the Burden of Proof to Canada

* 25. In its decision on Article 1102, the majority of the Bilcon Tribunal first
endorsed the approach set down by the Tribunal inUPS v. Canada “that Bilcon
had the affirmative burden of proving” that: (1) it was accorded “treatment”; (2)
the treatment was “less favourable” than that accorded to domestic investors;
and, that (3) the treatment was accorded “in like circumstances.”£22=52 Yet,
rather than applying this affirmative burden, the majority then explained its
“view that once a prima facie case is made out under the three-part UPS test, the
onus is on the host state to show that a measure is still sustainable within the
terms of Article 1102.”Foetnotes4

* 26. Not only was Canada given no prior notice that it would have to discharge this
burden, the approach of the majority in theBilcon Award is neither supported by
the wording of Article 1102 nor by the requirement of Article 24(1) of
the UNC/TRAL Arbitration Rules that the Claimant bears the burden of making out
its claim. 295° |t is also contrary to the UPS Tribunal’s unequivocal statement

 

 

 

that the “legal burden...rests squarely with the Claimant. That burden never shifts
to the Party, here Canada.”"2™te5° |t was fundamentally unfair for the majority to
impose this burden on Canada without notice and to then base its liability finding
on the very fact that Canada had not discharged its burden. In light of these
defects, the majority’s approach to its Article 1102 analysis should not be
endorsed in this or in any future NAFTA Chapter Eleven arbitration.

 

The Non-disputing NAFTA Parties Have the Right to Make
Submissions With Respect to the Bilcon Award

*¢ 27. NAFTA Article 1128 grants non-disputing NAFTA Parties the right to make a
submission to the Tribunal on a question of interpretation of the NAFTA. The right
of the NAFTA Parties to do so is also reflected in Paragraph 17.1 of Procedural
Order No. 1 which states that “[t]he Governments of Mexico and the United
States may make submissions to the Tribunal within the meaning of Article 1128
of the NAFTA”.

* 28. Article 1128 does not limit the number of submissions that a non-disputing
party may make in the course of a NAFTA Chapter 11 arbitration. Indeed, it is
often the case that multiple submissions are made. Moreover, Article 1128 does
not limit the timing of non-disputing Party submissions — they can be made
throughout the arbitral process, including following the oral hearing.

«29. The applicability of the Bilcon Award to the current arbitration is very much a
question related to the proper legal interpretation of the NAFTA. Indeed, the
Claimant has acknowledged as much when it requested the Tribunal consider
theBilcon Award as the Tribunal was “interpreting the very same NAFTA
provisions” that are at issue in this arbitration. *22tt°57 Given that the Tribunal has
asked for the disputing parties’ views on the Bilcon Award, the United States and
Mexico have the right to make submissions on the issues of interpretation of the
NAFTA arising out of the submissions made by the disputing parties.

May 14, 2015

Respectfully submitted on behalf of Canada,

Sylvie Tabet

Shane Spelliscy
Scott Little

Heather Squires
Rodney Neufeld
Raahool Watchmaker
Susanna Kam

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Trade and Development
Trade Law Bureau

Lester B. Pearson Building
125 Sussex Drive

Ottawa, Ontario

K1A 0G2
CANADA
Footnotes
Footnote 1
Canada’s Counter-Memorial, | 291-293; Canada’s Post-Hearing
Submission, p. 7, Lines 10-12.
Footnote 2

For example, while the Bilcon Tribunal assessed the responsibility of
Canada for actions of the JRP pursuant to ILC Article 11, this provision is
not applicable in the case at hand due to the /ex specialis nature of
NAFTA Article 1503(2). As a result, Canada offers no further comment
on the Bilcon Tribunal’s analysis under Article 11. In any event, Canada
also notes that the Claimant has not advanced an argument in these
proceedings that the Government of Canada is responsible for the
actions of the OPA under ILC Article 11, despite the fact that it

Footnote 3

Footnote 4

Footnote 5

Footnote 6

Footnote 7

Footnote 8

Footnote 9

Footnote 10

Footnote 11

Footnote 12

Footnote 13

Footnote 14

Footnote 15

Footnote 16

Footnote 17

highlighted the paragraphs of the Bilcon Award discussing this Article as

particularly relevant in its letter of April 6, 2015.

Bilcon Award, § 306.

Bilcon Award, § 315, referring to the Commentary to ILC Article 4(2).

Bilcon Award, § 319.

Bilcon Award, {I 308, 313, 321.

Bilcon Award, § 319.

Bilcon Award, § 320.

Bilcon Award, § 308.

Canada notes that on January 1, 2015, amendments to the Electricity
Act, 1998 came into force to provide for the amalgamation of the OPA
and the Independent Electricity System Operator (“IESO”). The
amalgamated entity was continued under the IESO name. Accordingly,
references to the OPA in these submissions are to this entity as it was
prior to January 1, 2015.

Bilcon Award, 4§ 310-312.

Bilcon Award, § 318.

Canada’s Counter-Memorial, | 276; Canada’s Post-Hearing Submission,
p. 6, Line 9.

Bilcon Award, § 316.

Bilcon Award, | 316. Canada wonders as to why the Tribunal even
entered into this analysis given its apparent findings with respect to
Article 4. Finding attribution pursuant to Article 5 would be unnecessary

once a finding is made pursuant to Article 4.

Canada’s Counter-Memorial, 9] 294-296, 302-305; Canada’s Rejoinder,
4 23; Canada’s Post-Hearing Submission, p. 8, Line 12.

Footnote 18

Footnote 19

Footnote 20

Footnote 21

Footnote 22

Footnote 23

Footnote 24

Footnote 25

Footnote 26

Footnote 27

Footnote 28

Footnote 29

Footnote 30

Footnote 31

Footnote 32

Footnote 33

Footnote 34

Footnote 35

Canada’s Objection to Jurisdiction, 4 18-38.

Canada’s Counter-Memorial, 234-259.

Canada’s Post-Hearing Submission, pp. 2-3, Lines 3-6.

Bilcon Award, § 266.

Canada’s Post-Hearing Submission, p. 3, Line 5.

Canada’s Counter-Memorial, 9] 247-248, 251-252; Canada’s Post
Hearing Submission, p. 3, Line 5.

Dissenting Opinion of Professor Don McRae, {J 34-36, 43.

Dissenting Opinion of Professor Don McRae, {{ 36-43.

RL-063, NAFTA Free Trade Commission, Notes of Interpretation of
Certain Chapter Eleven Provisions, 31 July 2001.

Claimant's Reply Memorial, 1 543, 553, 572, 596.

Bilcon Award, {§ 430-431.

Bilcon Award, § 433.

Bilcon Award, § 441.

Bilcon Award, § 432.

Bilcon Award, § 441.

Bilcon Award, § 437.

Bilcon Award, § 435.

Canada’s Counter-Memorial, | 390; Submission of the United States of
America Pursuant to NAFTA Article 1128, 25 July 2014, 4 6; CL-

138, Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. United States of America (UNCITRAL) Award,
8 June 2009, J] 605-607; See alsoRL-045, Cargill, Incorporated v.
United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/05/2) Award, 18

September 2009, { 277.

Bilcon Award, § 436.

Footnote 36

Footnote 37

Footnote 38

Footnote 39

Footnote 40

Footnote 41

Footnote 42

Footnote 43

Footnote 44

Footnote 45

Footnote 46

Footnote 47

Footnote 48

Footnote 49

Footnote 50

Footnote 51

Footnote 52

Footnote 53

Footnote 54

Footnote 55

Canada’s Counter-Memorial, {| 389-393; Canada’s Post-Hearing
Submission, pp. 41-42, Lines 65-66.

Bilcon Award, § 436.

Bilcon Award, § 738.

Bilcon Award, § 600.

Bilcon Award, {§ 446-452.

Dissenting Opinion of Professor Don McRae, §] 33.

Dissenting Opinion of Professor Don McRae, {| 34.

Dissenting Opinion of Professor Don McRae, {{ 36-43.

Dissenting Opinion of Professor Don McRae, §] 37.

Canada’s Post-Hearing Submission, p. 18, Line 32.

Canada’s Counter-Memorial, 9 351-353, 355; Canada’s Rejoinder, 9
91-92; Canada’s Post-Hearing Submission p. 18, Line 32.

Canada’s Counter-Memorial, §] 354; Canada’s Rejoinder, 9] 91-92;
Canada’s Post-Hearing Submission, p. 18, Line 32.

Bilcon Award, § 430.

Canada’s Counter-Memorial, 9] 354-355; Canada’s Rejoinder, 4 93-
100; Canada’s Post-Hearing Submission, p. 18, Line 32.

Bilcon Award, § 692.

Bilcon Award, § 724.

Bilcon Award, § 705.

Bilcon Award, {717-718 (emphasis added).

Bilcon Award, § 723.

See also CL-194, /nternational Thunderbird Gaming Corporation v.
United Mexican States (UNCITRAL) Final Award, 26 January 2006, 4]

Footnote 56

Footnote 57

176, wherein the Tribunal explained that in a claim under Article 1102
“[t]he burden of proof lies with Thunderbird, pursuant to article 24(1) of
the UNITRAL Rules. In this respect, Thunderbird must show that its
investment received treatment less favourable than Mexico has
accorded, in like circumstances, to investments of Mexican Nationals.”

RL-075, United Parcel Service of America, Inc. v. Government of
Canada (UNCITRAL) Award on the Merits, 24 May 2007, 9] 83-84 (“UPS
— Award”).

Letter from the Claimant to the Tribunal dated April 16, 2015.

