PUBLIC VERSION

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN
OF THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
AND THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

MESA POWER GROUP, LLC
Investor

GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
Respondent

 

INVESTOR’S SUBMISSION ON THE BILCON V. CANADA AWARD

May 14, 2015

 

Appleton & Associates
International Lawyers

77 Bloor St West Suite 1800
Toronto, Ontario MSS 1M2
Tel.: (416) 966-8800

Fax: (416) 966-8801
Counsel for the Investor

Astigarraga Davis Mullins & Grossman, P.A.
1001 Brickell Bay Dr., 9" Fl

Miami, Florida 33131

Tel.: (305) 372-8282

Fax: (305) 372-8201

Mesa Power v. Canada
Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | i

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. FACTUAL SUMMARY OF BILCON

 

Il. CLARIFICATION OF THE NATIONAL TREATMENT TEST UNDER NAFTA
ARTICLE 1102 2
1. Legal Determinations in Relation to National Treatment in Bilcon
i) No Requirement to Establish Discriminatory Intent

 

 

 

 

  

ii) Onus of Proof. 3
iii) The Test for Like Cir is Broadly Applied

2. The dissent Agrees with the National Treatment Legal Test...

3. Application of the Bilcon Award on National Treatment in Mesa Power v v. “Canada... severe O

Il. THE INTERNATIONAL LAW STANDARD OF TREATMENT UNDER NAFTA
ARTICLE 1105
1. Significant Legal Determinations about Article 1105 made by the Bilcon Tribunal ...................

i) NAFTA Article 1105 Threshold

ii) FTC Interpretive Note Confirms Broad Protections for Investors...........

iii) Elements of NAFTA Article 1105 Breached i in Bilcon

a) Breach of Legitimate Exp

b) Procedural & Substantive Fairness and Protection Against Arbitrarines:

2. Dissenting Opinion of Professor McRae...

i) The Tribunal is Unanimous on the Waste Management Standard...

ii) The Majority’s Determination is Based on the NAFTA — Not Domestic Law.

iii) The NAFTA Does Not Require the Exhaustion of Local Remedies

 

 

 

  

  
 
  

IV. THE SCOPE OF STATE RESPONSIBILITY FOR CANADA UNDER NAFTA
ARTICLE 105
1. The Bilcon Award’s Application to the Mesa Power Case.......

 

 

V. CONCLUSION 18

Mesa Power v. Canada
Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 1

1. The Investor wrote to the Tribunal advising of the release of the NAFTA Liability and
Jurisdiction Award in Bilcon of Delaware, Inc. et al. v. Canada (Bilcon) on April 6,
2015.* The Investor notified the Tribunal of the award but did not file any detailed
comments on the award. The Investor simply pointed out areas of argument in its Post
Hearing Submission that related to issues that were considered within the Bilcon award.
The Investor stands by these April 6, 2015, comments and incorporates them by
reference into this submission.

2. On May 4, 2015, the Tribunal invited both parties to make submissions on the NAFTA
Tribunal award in Bilcon by May 14, 2015.

3. This submission contains the Investor’s submissions with respect to the relevance of the
Bilcon award, and including observations on the dissenting opinion of Prof. Donald
McRae.

4. — This submission will address the following areas:
a. The clarification of the law of National Treatment;

b. The International Minimum Standard of Treatment in the NAFTA;

c. State Responsibility.

 

5. The Tribunal in Bilcon carefully reviewed the facts presented by both parties and
concluded that Canada’s conduct was inconsistent with the international law standard of
treatment in NAFTA Article 1105. The Bilcon Tribunal also concluded that Canada
provided better treatment to others in like circumstances in contravention of the NAFTA
national treatment obligation in NAFTA Article 1102.

6. Bilcon of Delaware (and its controlling American shareholders, collectively referred to
in this submission as Bilcon) owned an existing gravel quarry in the Canadian province
of Nova Scotia through a local company. The US Investors sought to expand its quarry
for the purpose of obtaining gravel for its American operations.

7. The Investors were encouraged by officials of the provincial government to invest in
Nova Scotia, and were led to believe by the officials that the project was appropriate for
the location it had chosen.

8. Bilcon complied with all local environmental requirements, which included the
requirement to obtain permits for its quarry expansion. The permit application was
referred to an ad-hoc three person fact finding panel known as a Joint Review Panel
(JRP). The JRP members were non-governmental officials appointed jointly by the
Canadian federal and provincial governments and operated under the terms of Canadian
law and by terms in a special agreement governing this particular permit request.

' Appleton & Associates International Lawyers acted as legal counsel for the Investors in the Bilcon claim. The
comments made in this submission made by Appleton & Associates International Lawyers are solely in their
capacity as legal counsel for Mesa Power Group. These comments are not to be construed, in any way, as
constituting statements attributable to the Investors in the Bilcon claim.

Mesa Power v. Canada
Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 2

 

II. CLARIFICATION

The Investors were subject to an array of arbitrary and seemingly politically motivated
decisions prior to the JRP process and decision, to which the Investor included in its
claim including the referral to the JRP process itself. While the Tribunal considered the
factual elements of these actions, the Tribunal decided that breaches arising at this time
frame were completed acts that fell outside of the three year limitation period contained
in the NAFTA.

The Bilcon Tribunal found that the JRP did not dispose of the Investors’ environmental
assessment on the basis of the stated criteria — which was the federal or provincial law
on environmental assessment or the JRP’s own Terms of Reference. Instead, the Bilcon
Tribunal identified the JRP’s reliance in its report entirely on what the JPR termed
"community core values", which was a concept not part of the relevant legal and
regulatory framework.’

The majority NAFTA award held that the Investor had no advance notice about the
employment of this extralegal analytic or any opportunity to confront it.* At the same
time, the majority found the JRP also failed to analyze Bilcon’s proposed environmental
mitigation measures, a requirement pursuant to Canadian environmental legislation. *

On this basis, the JRP recommended that the quarry project would cause “significant
adverse environmental effects”; a recommendation that was subsequently accepted by
ministerial act by both the relevant Nova Scotia and Canadian Federal government
ministers.*

The Bilcon Tribunal thus found that the Bilcon was treated unfairly throughout the JRP
process.

The Bilcon Tribunal also reviewed the differences in treatment provided by governments
in Canada to applicants for environmental permissions in similar circumstances. The
Bilcon Tribunal considered all those who sought environmental permissions to be in like
circumstances with the American Investors in Bilcon. After carefully reviewing a
number of other environmental approval processes, the Bilcon Tribunal identified other
environmental review procedures in which more favourable treatment had been
provided to Canadian applicants in like circumstances, especially with respect to
reliance on applicable Canadian environmental law, and the ability of the companies to
provide environmental mitigation plans. The Bilcon Tribunal concluded that the
evidence of such better treatment to Canadian companies in like circumstances to
Bilcon, constituted a violation of national treatment under NAFTA Article 1102.

1s OMAN

 

NAL TREATMENT TEST

 

UNDER NAFTA ARTICLE 1102

15.

The Bilcon Tribunal carefully reviewed the jurisprudence with respect to the NAFTA
National Treatment obligation in Article 1102. Its award was carefully reasoned and it

? Bilcon Award at 4503.
> Bilcon Award at 4534.
4 Bilcon Award at 9535.
* Bilcon Award at §220.

20.

21.

22.

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bileon v. Canada Award | 3

provides a helpful approach to making determinations in regards to the consistency of
government measures with the National Treatment obligation.

In relation to the legal test applicable to National Treatment, the Tribunal decision is
unanimous.

The approach to NAFTA National Treatment applied by the Bilcon Tribunal is relevant
to how this Tribunal should analyze the Most Favoured Nation Treatment analysis under
NAFTA Article 1103.

1. LEGAL DETERMINATIONS IN RELATION TO NATIONAL TREATMENT IN BILCON

i) No Requirement to Establish Discriminatory Intent

The Bilcon Tribunal states in no uncertain terms that National Treatment under the
NAFTA does not require any “demonstration of discriminatory intent.”° The Tribunal
stated that this was the test elaborated in the Feldman decision, and confirmed in the
UPS decision.”

The Investor made similar arguments in the Mesa Power case. In its Memorial* and
Reply Memorial,’ the Investor argued that that National Treatment under the NAFTA
does require any proof of discriminatory intent. Specifically, the Investor relied upon
the Feldman award while noting that National Treatment under NAFTA contains no
distinction between de facto and de jure discrimination.

A finding in this arbitration that a violation of National Treatment under the NAFTA
does not require any demonstration of discriminatory intent would be consistent with
awards in Feldman, UPS and now Bilcon. As the Investor noted in its pleadings this
also would be consistent with WTO law."

ii) _Onus of Proof

The Bilcon Tribunal sets out the appropriate onus of proof at each stage of a National
Treatment analysis. The Bilcon Tribunal stated that

...once a prima facie case is made out under the three-part UPS test, the onus is on the host

state to show that a measure is still sustainable within the terms of Article 1102. It is the host

state that is in a position to identify and substantiate the case, in terms of its own laws,

policies and circumstances that an apparently discriminatory measure is in fact compliant with

the “national treatment” norm set out in Article 1102.'
Hence, once it is established that a local comparator (an investor or investment) is in like
circumstances to the investor/ investment based on the nature of the
regulatory framework, and that the host state has afforded objectively less favourable

° Bilcon Award at 4719.

7 Bilcon Award at 719.

* Investor's Memorial at [272-288 and 678- 684.

° Investor’s Reply Memorial at 4280-281 and 442-447.
'° Investor’s Memorial at 4279.

" Bilcon Award at $723.

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bileon v. Canada Award | 4

 

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

treatment to an investor/investments in relation to domestic investors/investments in like
circumstances, the onus shifts to the Respondent state to show that detrimental treatment
can be explained as required by legitimate policy objectives.”

Similarly, in this case, the Investor also argued that the onus shifted to Canada once a
prima facie case was made by it. Given the nature of investor-state cases, this is the
appropriate and principled analysis. The Investor pleaded in paragraph 280 and 281 of
the Memorial in Mesa that:

After an investor has demonstrated that the different results stem from different competitive

opportunities, the evidentiary burden shifts to the Government to excuse the prima facie

violation of national treatment. And the burden on the government is a strict one. It requires

the government to show that the less favorable treatment was necessary.

So, where there is different treatment in like circumstances, the burden is on Canada to show

that the different treatment was not less favourable, or not necessary.'*
Such an approach is consistent with the National Treatment test in the Feldman, Pope &
Talbot awards and now the Bilcon award." Further, the Investor noted that such a test is
supported by WTO jurisprudence.'*

iii) The Test for Like Circumstances is Broadly Applied

 

In carrying out its National Treatment analysis, the Bilcon Tribunal noted that in finding
investors and investments ‘in like circumstances’ that the NAFTA’s language is “not
restricted as it is in some other trade liberalizing agreements, such as those that refer to
‘like-products.””"®
More specifically, the Bilcon Tribunal noted:
Article 1102 refers to the way in which either the investor or investment is treated, rather than
confining concerns over discrimination to comparisons between similar articles of trade.oss
Moreover, the operative word in Article 1102 is “similar”, not “identical”. In addition to
giving the reasonably broad language of Article 1102 its due, a Tribunal must also take into
account the objects of NAFTA, which include according to Article 102(1)(c) “to increase
substantially investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties”.'”
In determining the comparators for its Article 1102 analysis, the Bilcon majority noted
that likeness required a consideration of “all enterprises affected by the environmental
assessment regulatory process,” but in this case specifically focused on projects
presented by the Investor.'* The Tribunal rejected Canada’s attempts to narrow
categories of comparators relating to specific project differences."

”? Bilcon Award at $723.

'3 Investor’s Memorial at (4280-281.

'§ Bilcon Award at §§ 719-723, referring to Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Government of Canada at 4 78 (Investor’s
Schedule of Legal Authorities at CL-273) and Marvin Feldman v. United Mexican States at 181 (Investor’s
Schedule of Legal Authorities at CL-40).

'S Investor’s Memorial at (9282-285.

'© Bilcon Award at $692.

" Bilcon Award at $692.

'8 Bilcon Award at $695.

'° Bilcon Award at $701.

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bileon v. Canada Award | 5

 

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

After determining that at least three projects were in like circumstances with Bilcon’s
project, and that all such projects were afforded better treatment, the Tribunal found that
Canada could in no way justify the treatment that Bilcon received.

A similar approach should be adopted in this arbitration. The task is much simpler in
this case. Canada, as it must, has admitted that the Investor is in like circumstances with
all FIT proponents.” Yet, this is too narrow an admission in light of the facts and the
Bilcon Tribunal’s analysis. The Bilcon approach to likeness establishes that the proper
comparator that should be adopted by this Tribunal for the purposes of both National
Treatment and MFN; that all proponents seeking renewable energy contracts from
Ontario (such as FIT Contracts awarded under the GEIA or the FIT) are in like
circumstances.

2. _ THE DISSENT AGREES WITH THE NATIONAL TREATMENT LEGAL TEST

 

Professor McRae dissented from the majority view on National Treatment and Most
Favoured Nation Treatment but only on how to apply the law to the facts. In relation to
these two NAFTA obligations, the dissent is only one paragraph long.

This short statement is based on a difference between the dissenting arbitrator and the
majority on the application of the specific facts to the law in the Bilcon claim. Professor
McRae makes no mention of, or disagreement with, the legal test set out by the majority
for National Treatment. He says:
...the actions of the JRP could not constitute a violation of Articles 1102 and 1103. In my view,
the Claimants were treated in accordance with Canadian law, which all investors are entitled to
expect, and thus there is no basis for a claim that there has been a violation of obligations of
national treatment or most-favored nation treatment.”!

Professor McRae’s continues to say:

In all other matters | agree with the results reached by my colleagues and thus have nothing
further to add.

 

Hence, the Bilcon Tribunal was unanimous in setting out the legal test for National
Treatment. In particular, all three arbitrators on the Bilcon Tribunal confirmed that the
appropriate legal test for National Treatment and for Most Favoured Nation Treatment
under the NAFTA has the following elements:

a. A broad conceptualization of “likeness”

b. A requirement that the Respondent state has the burden of proof once a prima
facie case is made by the Investor; and

c. A complete absence to prove a governmental intention to discriminate to establish
a violation of National Treatment or Most Favoured Nation Treatment.

°° Investor’s Post Hearing Brief at 4261 referencing Canada’s Counter Memorial at (364.
2! Bilcon Dissenting Opinion of Donald McRae at 453.
 Bilcon Dissenting Opinion of Donald McRae at 454.

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 6

3. APPLICATION OF THE BILCON AWARD ON NATIONAL TREATMENT IN MESA POWER V.
CANADA

34. In the Mesa claim, the Investor has demonstrated a prima facie case. As the Investor
established,” and as Canada has admitted,” the Investor is in like circumstances with all
FIT proponents.”> Hence, there is no question that the Investor is, at a minimum, in like
circumstances with the following FIT proponents:

a. International Power Canada (IPC);
b. Boulevard Associates;
c. NextEra Energy Canada (the Canadian subsidiary of NextEra).

35. Proponents seeking FIT renewable energy contracts who sought contracts outside of the
FIT process but through the GEIA also were in like circumstances with Mesa. All were
competing for the same limited pool of available electricity transmission capacity which
was necessary to obtain FIT contracts. Thus the following are also in like circumstances
with Mesa for the purposes of National Treatment.

a. Samsung Canada, the Canadian subsidiary of the Korean Consortium;
b. Pattern Renewable Holdings Canada, the Canadian joint venture partner of the
Korean Consortium.

36. For the same reason, the following are also in like circumstances with Mesa for the

purposes of Most Favoured Nation Treatment:
a. Samsung C&T and KEPCO, the Korean parties to the Korean Consortium;
b. Pattern Energy, the American joint venture partner of the Korean Consortium;
c. NextEra.

37. There is no question that Ontario afforded all such proponents better treatment than it
did to the Investor. In relation to Boulevard Associates, and NextEra Energy Canada,
Canada admitted they were afforded better treatment to the extent that these companies
“sought FIT contracts from the OPA in the same regions as Mesa.””*

38. Sue Lo confirmed in her sworn cross-examination testimony at the NAFTA hearing that

Ontario government was
|| at the time of the June 2011 rule change.”’

39. Similarly, the better treatment provided to Samsung Canada through the GEIA is
uncontested. As pleaded throughout this arbitration, the GEIA does not differentiate the
Korean Consortium from others also seeking FIT contracts. It simply is better

°3 Investor’s Post-Hearing Submission at 4258.

*4 Investor’s Post-Hearing Submission at 261 citing Canada’s Counter Memorial at 4364.

°5 Investor’s Post-Hearing Submission at 4258-262.

°6 Canada’s Counter Memorial at 4364.

*’ Testimony of Sue Lo, Hearing Transcript, Day 3, at pp.183-184, Ins.9-10; Email from Sue Lo (Ministry of
Energy) to Andrew Mitchell (Ministry of Energy), May 12, 2011 (Investor’s Schedule of Exhibits C-0629)
[CONFIDENTIAL].

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award |7

treatment. Pattern Renewable Holdings Canada similarly benefitted from that better
treatment.”

40. On the basis of the National Treatment test in Bilcon, and as supported by the Feldman,
and the Pope & Talbot awards, the onus then shifts to Canada to justify the preferential
treatment that it afforded to those proponents.

41. Canada has provided no principled, or reasonable, justification for the difference in
treatment. As canvassed throughout the Investor’s pleadings, at the hearing and in the
Post-Hearing Submission, nothing that Canada asserts plausibly could be considered
anything but an after-the-fact attempt to insert a form of distinction into a regulatory
system where there was none.

42. Applying the approach set forth in the Bilcon Award, the positions taken by the Investor
in its Post Hearing Submission, that it was not afforded similar treatment in like
circumstances, are even more clear:

a. Investment Agreements do not make competitors unlike. In fact, the Investor’s
competitor, Pattern, treated the programs as two paths to the same result both in
its own investment and with respect to other competing investors;”

b. The GEIA and FIT were regulated in the same manner. The projects ran
contemporaneously and, throughout the life of the FIT program, FIT and GEIA
projects were interchangeable;

c. The obligations imposed on the Korean Consortium through the GEIA did not
achieve any of Canada’s stated policy objectives. There was no actual
requirement to build manufacturing plants in Ontario in the GEIA and jobs were
going to be created by both programs and would, as admitted by Canada’s
witnesses, be produced by both programs simultaneously without distinction- as
they relate to green economy manufacturing- not to any particular regulatory
stream. The Korean Consortium failed to meet the obligations in any event and
suffered no true repercussions as further evidence of the programs’ likeness under
Bilcon.*'

d. Canada’s attempt to distinguish the programs — that the Korean Consortium was
an anchor tenant- does not survive the factual scrutiny used in Bilcon. The
Korean Consortium was not an anchor tenant. The MOU, and GEIA were
effectively kept secret. Ontario was not seeking such a deal, and this deal did not
benefit other FIT proponents. The Korean Consortium had no experience in the
field, and nothing contemporaneous supports this assertion.”

43. The less favourable treatment afforded to Mesa’s investments was a result of Ontario
allowing for two regulatory systems to exist for the same purpose, with one being
exclusive and both facially and substantially preferential. This is a clear and non-
justifiable violation of the National Treatment obligation under the Bilcon analysis.

°8 Investor’s Post-Hearing Submission at 44266.

?° Investor’s Post-Hearing Submission at 4193-203; 4263.
*” Investor’s Post-Hearing Submi:
>! Investor’s Post-Hearing Subm
* Investor’s Post-Hearing Submission at 4248-249.

 

   
 

Mesa Power v. Canada
Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 8

Il. THE INTERNATIONAL LAW STANDARD OF TREATMENT

UNDER NAFTA ARTICLE 1105

 

44. The majority of the Bilcon Tribunal found that Canada had taken measures that were
inconsistent with Canada’s obligations in NAFTA Article 1105. The Tribunal was
unanimous in its statement on the meaning of NAFTA 1105.*

45. The Bilcon Tribunal unanimously made significant determinations in relation to the
standard of NAFTA Article 1105, the FTC Statement of Interpretation, and the elements
of NAFTA Article 1105.

1. SIGNIFICANT LEGAL DETERMINATIONS ABOUT ARTICLE 1105 MADE BY THE BILCON
TRIBUNAL

i) NAFTA Article 1105 Threshold

46. The Bilcon Tribunal unanimously re-affirmed that the appropriate standard for a breach
of NAFTA Article 1105 is that which is set out by the Waste Management IT Tribunal.*
After quoting the relevant passage from that case, the majority of the Bilcon Tribunal
stated:

While no single arbitral formulation can definitively and exhaustively capture the meaning of
Article 1105, the Tribunal finds this quote from Waste Management to be a particularly apt
one. Acts or omissions constituting a breach must be of a serious nature. The Waste
Management formulation applies intensifying adjectives to certain items—but by no means all
of them — in its list of categories of potentially nonconforming conduct. The formulation
includes “grossly” unfair, “manifest” failure of natural justice and “complete” lack of
transparency.

The list conveys that there is a high threshold for the conduct of a host state to rise to the level
of a NAFTA Article 1105 breach, but that there is no requirement in all cases that the
challenged conduct reaches the level of shocking or outrageous behaviour. The formulation
also recognises the requirement for tribunals to be sensitive to the facts of each case, the
potential relevance of reasonably relied-on representations by a host state, and a recognition
that injustice in either procedures or outcomes can constitute a breach.**

47. While coming to this conclusion, the majority of the Tribunal specifically stated that
“NAFTA tribunals have . . . tended to move away from the position more recently
expressed in Glamis, and rather move towards the view that the international minimum
standard has evolved over the years towards greater protection for investors.”**

48. In rejecting the standard set out in Glamis the Bilcon majority referred to both ADF and
Merill & Ring stating:
Thus, the NAFTA tribunal in ADF Group in 2003 held that the customary international law
referred to in Article 1105(1) is not “frozen in time” and that the minimum standard of

3 While Professor McRae differed on the application of the law to the specific factual situation in Bilcon, the
Tribunal was unanimous in its legal determinations

* Bilcon Award, at 4442.

* Bilcon Award at 49443-444.

*° Bilcon Award at 9435.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bileon v. Canada Award | 9

treatment does evolve. The tribunal in Merrill & Ring, in 2010, referred to practice, decisions

and commentary within both NAFTA and in the wider world...”
In this arbitration, the Investor made similar submissions in its pleadings advocating for
the standard ultimately adopted in Bilcon. In its Memorial, the Investor noted that
“Many other Tribunals — NAFTA and non-NAFTA alike”** have moved away from the
Neer standard, relying on a significant amount of case law which supports a standard
based on the reasonableness of conduct, while noting that the test is a flexible one to be
applied in the circumstances as stated by the Waste Management I Tribunal”

In its Reply Memorial, the Investor, similar to the Bilcon Tribunal, set out as stated in
Merill & Ring as well as Waste Management II, noting that the Article 1105 standard is
an evolutionary standard to be applied as customary international law applies “as it
stands today.

  

ii) _FTC Interpretive Note Confirms Broad Protections for Investors

The Bilcon Tribunal found that the International Law Standard of Treatment in NAFTA
Article 1105 did not limit NAFTA Tribunals to conclude that only outrageous conduct
constituted a violation of Article 1105.

The Tribunal concluded, as did other NAFTA Tribunals, that the basis to establish a
violation of NAFTA Article 1105 provides more protection to Investors. The Bilcon
Tribunal held:

In light of the FTC Notes and in the specific context of NAFTA Chapter Eleven in which this
Tribunal operates, “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and security” cannot be
regarded as “autonomous” treaty norms that impose additional requirements above and
beyond what the minimum standard requires.

NAFTA Article 1105 is, then, identical to the minimum international standard. The crucial
question—on which the Parties diverge—is what is the content of the contemporary
international minimum standard that the tribunal is bound to apply. NAFTA awards make it
clear that the international minimum standard is not limited to conduct by host states that is
outrageous. The contemporary minimum international standard involves a more significant
measure of protection.”

The Bilcon Tribunal went further to state that:

In light of the FTC Notes, it is important to emphasize that the trend in the wider world
outside NAFTA is only relevant to the extent that such trend has affected the international
minimum standard under customary international law. There have been different abstract
formulations of the kind of conduct that constitutes a breach of the international minimum
standard. Yet all authorities agree that the mere breach of domestic law or any kind of
unfairness does not violate the international minimum standard.**

>? Bilcon Award at 9435.

*§ Investor’s Memorial at 423.

* Investor’s Memorial at 424- 431.

4° Investor’s Reply Memorial at 525; see also Investor’s Reply Memorial at §{]524 to 53; Investor’s Memorial at
49336 to 344, 423.

4! Bilcon Award at §433.

® Bilcon Award at 9432-433.

4 Bilcon Award at 436.

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 10

 

54. In this arbitration, the Investor advanced a similar position in its Memorial where it
relied on the Pope & Talbot, Mondev, Tecmed and Merill & Ring awards to argue that
the NAFTA Article 1105 standard was not static but rather evolved in relation to
contemporaneous standards.“*

iii) Elements of NAFTA Article 1105 Breached in Bilcon

 

55. The overall decision in respect to NAFTA Article 1105 in Bilcon is summarized by the
Bilcon Tribunal at paragraphs 588 to 604. There, the majority of the Tribunal clearly
states that the basis of the violations of NAFTA Article 1105 are:

a. A breach of the Investors’ legitimate expectations; and

b. Procedural and substantive unfairness and arbitrariness.

a) Breach of Legitimate Expectations

 

56. The Bilcon Tribunal confirmed the Waste Management standard on legitimate
expectations which considers “representations made by the host state which an investor
relied on to its detriment.”"* The Tribunal confirmed that “what is needed are specific
representations” rather than an abstract or general statement.“

57. Throughout their decision, the majority noted the following specific representations and
encouragement that was given to Bilcon:

a. The official public policy of Nova Scotia was to welcome investment in mining.”’

b. Bilcon’s local Nova Scotia representative, Paul Buxton met with Nova Scotia
Cabinet Minister Gordon Balser who encouraged the quarry project and stressed
the need for new jobs in the area.“*The minister made available to the investors
Nova Scotia government investment promotional material stating that “Nova
Scotia was open for business.”

c. Ina letter to the Investors, Nova Scotia Minister Balser specifically stated “I hope
that you and your company will continue to move the project forward as I feel it
had potential to benefit both you and our area.*”

d. The Nova Scotia Premier personally told the Claytons (the investors who owned
Bilcon) that Nova Scotia was “open for business” and was supportive of the
quarry."

e. Specific criteria in the law and regulations of Nova Scotia were to be taken into
account.

 Investor’s Memorial at §4128-138.
45 Bilcon Award at 4589.
46 Bilcon Award at 4589.
47 Bilcon Award at §456.
48 Bilcon Award at ]466.
* Bilcon Award at 4468.
* Bilcon Award at 4468.
*! Bilcon Award at 9469.

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 11

 

f. Nova Scotia officials referred Bilcon’s geologist Mr. Lizak to a document entitled
“Industrial Minerals in Nova Scotia,” which promoted the quality of production in
Nova Scotia.

g. Nova Scotia technical officials gave “tremendous encouragement” for the quarry
project.*

h. A 1996 policy statement by the Nova Scotia government on minerals which
“extols the benefits of mineral exploration and production” to be Nova Scotia
economy, including jobs and tax revenues.

i. The Nova Scotia policy also states, “The provincial government ‘will promote the
province’s mineral resource potential at the community level and encourage
municipalities and local economic development groups to consider exploration
and mining as positive components in local economic development.’””**

58. In Bilcon, these representations made in various government documents and by
governmental officials gave the Investor a specific expectation as to how it and its
investments would be treated, or should be treated, by Canada.

59. The Bilcon majority noted that it was fundamentally unfair for the government officials
to encourage the pursuit of the project while other officials later determine that
development could not take place. The Tribunal held:

Viewing the actions of Canada as a whole, it was unjust for officials to encourage coastal
mining projects in general and specifically encourage the pursuit of the project at the Whites
Point site, and then, after a massive expenditure of effort and resources by Bilcon on that
basis, have other officials effectively determine that the area was a “no go” zone for this kind
of development rather than carrying out the lawfully prescribed evaluation of its individual
environmental merits.”*°

 

60. The majority therefore concluded that the Investor’s legitimate expectation formed part
of those interests which were protected as part of the international law standard of
treatment under NAFTA Article 1105.

61. Here, in this arbitration, the Investor made submissions in relation to legitimate
expectations at paragraph 395 of the Memorial and paragraph 681 of the Reply
Memorial and in the witness statement”’ and subsequent testimony of T. Boone Pickens
and Cole Robertson.

62. Mr. Pickens testified at the hearing that he expected “above board and transparent”
treatment in Canada as a result of the NAFTA. He stated:

I remember I sat on the front row and I listened to what they had to say and it made a great
deal of sense to me, NAFTA did, that we would work back and forth in North America, and I
think from there, that was where I started to think about the North American Energy Alliance,
that North America could work together and cut out a lot of red tape and everything else if

* Bilcon Award at 461.

* Bilcon Award at 49463 and 464.

* Bilcon Award at 9457.

* Bilcon Award at 9458.

*6 Bilcon Award at 592.

*7 Witness Statement of T. Boone Pickens at 4417-19.

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 12

 

they -- if everything was above board and transparent, to companies that wanted to work back
and forth.
63. More specifically, in relation to this particular project he stated “I felt that we were going
to be treated fairly.”

64. Similarly, Cole Robertson testified, in response to a question by arbitrator Landau that
he expected a rule based system that would follow a fair course. He stated:
I thought that the Feed-in Tariff process was the best avenue for us, to receive Feed-in Tariff
contracts, because of the process that was defined in the rules, and we thought it was, quite
frankly, a very complete set of rules and would be followed, based on the rules that were
established and we felt good about that process.
65. Mesa identified the following examples of legitimate expectations that would fit within
those identified by the Bilcon Tribunal:

a. FIT rules would be followed fairly and without preferential treatment;
b. Contracts would be awarded on the basis of the rule of law;

c. Boone Pickens relied upon his knowledge of the NAFTA’s investment protections

263

in making his investment in Ontario;

d. Ontario Deputy Premier Pupatello confirmed in a call to Boone Pickens that
Ontario was a good place to invest.“

66. It is clear that all of these legitimate expectations were breached by Ontario’s
subsequent measures and actions. Similar to the investor in Bilcon, Mesa invested
millions of dollars in the FIT program and would have been awarded valuable FIT
contracts pursuant to the procedures of those programs but for preferences given to its
competitors noted above including the Korean Consortium, NextEra, and IPC, a
domestic competitor.

b) Procedural & Substantive Fairness and Protection Against Arbitrariness

 

67. The Bilcon majority confirmed that both procedural and substantive fairness form part
of NAFTA Article 1105 and that both were breached by Canada in the Bilcon case.

68. Specifically, assessment criteria of “core community values” used by the JRP as the
basis to outright reject Bilcon’s environmental assessment plan was not a criteria in
either federal or provincial law or regulations regarding environmental assessments.
Neither was it part of the Terms of Reference provided to the Joint Review Panel for the
assessment.

69. In this regard, the Bilcon majority stated:

** Testimony of T. Boone Pickens, Hearing Transcript, Day 1, p. 263-4, lines 22-6.

* Testimony of T. Boone Pickens, Hearing Transcript, Day 1, p. 264, lines 15-16.

© Testimony of Cole Robertson, Hearing Transcript, Day p. 93 lines 18-25.

°' Investor’s Memorial at 4807. Witness Statement of T. Boone Pickens at 417.

© Investor’s Memorial at 4815; Witness Statement of T. Boone Pickens at 420.

© Witness Statement of T. Boone Pickens at §20.

* Witness Statement of T. Boone Pickens at 418; Testimony of T. Boone Pickens, Hearing Transcript, Day | at
p.264, Ins, 10-15.

5 Bilcon Award at 4590.

 

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 13

Bilcon was denied a fair opportunity to know the case it had to meet. It had no reason to
expect, under the law or any notice provided by the JRP, that “community core values” would
be an overriding factor; that this factor would pre-empt a thorough “likely significant adverse
effects after mitigation” analysis of the whole range of project effects; and that this factor
would contain elements that would effectively preclude any real possibility that an application
could succeed, even if Bilcon showed in each and every respect mentioned in the EIS
Guidelines that the project would, after mitigation, likely have no significant adverse effects
on environmental, social and economic conditions.”

70. More specifically, the Bilcon majority stated that such action by Canada
..was a serious breach of the law on procedural fairness that Bilcon was denied reasonable
notice of the “community core values” approach as taken by the Tribunal, and the opportunity
to seek clarification and respond to it, In that case, the “community core values” approach
was not a criteria in the law and was not previously communicated to Bilcon prior to a
recommendation being issued by an environmental assessment panel and adopted as final by
both Canadian federal and provincial ministers.”

71. Further, the majority noted that, at the JRP hearing itself, Bilcon and its expert were

ignored.”

72. The majority determined that such measures constituted a clear breach of fairness.”

73. With respect to arbitrariness, the Bilcon majority of a NAFTA tribunal found that an
environmental assessment panel acted arbitrarily when basing their recommendation to
the government minister who were to make the final decision on allowing a project on a
criteria that was not existent in the law, while at the same time not considering key
criteria that were required in the environmental review legislation.”

74. Here, the Investor made submissions in relation to procedural and substantive fairness at
paragraphs 350-374 of the Memorial and paragraphs 675-739 of the Reply Memorial
and in the Post Hearing Submissions.”

75. The Investor made submissions in relation to arbitrariness at paragraph 366 of the
Memorial and paragraph 471 of the Reply Memorial and in the Post Hearing
Submissions.”

2. _ DISSENTING OPINION OF PROFESSOR IVICRAE

i) The Tribunal is Unanimous on the Waste Management Standard

76. Professor McRae dissents from the majority of the Tribunal only in regards to their
analysis of whether the Article 1105 threshold was met under the facts in Bilcon.
Professor McRae agrees with the majority that the standard as set out in Waste

° Bilcon Award at 4590.

© Bilcon Award at 4534.

8 Bilcon Award at ]553-554.

© Bilcon Award at 4590.

 Bilcon Award at 4591.

7! Investor’s Memorial at 4350-374; Investor’s Reply Memorial at 675-739; Investor’s Post-Hearing Submission at
p. 62-71.

” Tnvestor’s Memorial at 366; Investor’s Reply Memorial at 471; Investor’s Post-Hearing Submission at 443 10-

311.

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 14

Management is the appropriate standard against which governmental action should be
assessed.”*

77. Therefore, the Tribunal is unanimous in their adoption of the Waste Management
standard of NAFTA Article 1105.

ii) The Majority’s Determination is Based on the NAFTA — Not Domestic Law

78. The majority made their determinations on the basis of their assessment of the facts in
relation to international law obligations in the NAFTA.

79. Incoming to his conclusions on the application of the test, Professor McRae suggests
that the majority should not have considered domestic law in coming to their conclusion
about fairness. For Professor McRae, a breach of domestic law does not necessarily
constitute a breach of the Waste Management standard.

80. The Investor respectfully disagrees with Professor McRae’s position and suggests the
majority’s position is the better reasoned view.

81. It is common place for international tribunals to consider domestic laws and
regulations.” Domestic laws and regulations are considered regularly in the course of
WTO disputes for example.” In this circumstance, it is not surprising to find that a
foreign investor legitimately would expect that the rule of law would be followed in
Canada and one could argue that such laws are the best examples of what expectations
are legitimate. It is not inappropriate for a foreign investor investing in Canada to
expect the rule of law to be applied. The failure of Canadian authorities to properly
follow the law and act in such a non-transparent and unfair manner in such a respect was
not only a breach of applicable Canadian laws but also itself a clear breach of
international law to the extent that by failing to satisfy the domestic law the government
necessarily has not met the legitimate expectations of the investor. It was upon that
basis that the Bilcon majority came to its decision.

82. As was done by the majority of the Bilcon Tribunal, the domestic laws and regulations
were considered from an international law perspective, or more specifically as they
relate to the NAFTA breaches claimed by the Investor. In this context, an international
tribunal does not displace a domestic decision maker, but considers the laws and

® See Bilcon Dissenting Opinion of Donald McRae at {32 “am in agreement with the majority that the appropriate
standard to apply in the application of Article 1105 is that set out in Waste Management”

™ See, for example, GAMI Investments v Mexico, in which the tribunal held that maladministration of a
government’s own laws would likely violate Article 1105 (Investor’s Schedule of Legal Authorities at CL-195).

75 For example in US — Shrimp, the U.S. import prohibition of shrimp and shrimp products from certain countries
violated GATT Art. XI and could not be saved by GATT Art. XX(g) (Investor’s Schedule of Legal Authorities at
CL-083); In US — Tuna, the Appellate Body found the U.S. “dolphin safe” labeling regulation was inconsistent
with TBT Art. 2.1 (Investor’s Schedule of Authorities at CL-047); In Brazil — Retreaded Tyres, Brazilian
regulations on the importation, marketing, transportation, and storage of retreaded tyres was inconsistent with
GATT Arts. XI, III:4, and could not be justified under Art. XX(d) (Investor’s Schedule of Legal Authorities at
CL-359); In Canada — Renewable Energy/Canada ~ Feed-in Tariff Program, the domestic content requirements
of Ontario’s FIT program violated TRIMS Agreement Art. 2.1 and GATT Art. III:4 (Investor’s Schedule of Legal
Authorities at CL-002).

  

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 15

 

regulations in a separate forum and through a separate lens than would a domestic court
or regulatory body.

83. Such an approach is necessary for any international tribunal or adjudicative body, to
make a decision on the laws and regulations in relation to a state’s international
obligations.

84. The Bilcon majority carefully addressed this point raised by the dissenting arbitrator.
We believe that it is best to leave it in their words. The majority stated:

738. It may bear reiterating, therefore, the Tribunal’s view that under NAFTA, lawmakers
in Canada and the other NAFTA parties can set environmental standards as
demanding and broad as they wish and can vest in various administrative bodies
whatever mandates they wish. Errors, even substantial errors, in applying national
laws do not generally, let alone automatically, rise to the level of international
responsibility vis-a-vis foreign investors. The trigger for international responsibility
in this particular case was the very specific set of facts that were presented, tested
and established through an extensive litigation process.

739. In the present case the evidence shows that some of the individual factual elements
were highly unusual in their own right. The unprecedented nature of the JRP’s
approach is confirmed by remarks of the Chair of the Panel. Extensive and detailed
expert testimony confirmed that the approach was not only at variance with the
existing legal framework, but also with the actual treatment provided in comparable
cases. The comparators included situations involving coastal mining and marine
terminals as well as situations where a local community was politically divided over
the project.

740. The distinctive and exceptional overall set of facts that came together to produce a
finding of liability in this particular case include:

+ representations from state officials that welcomed investors to pursue coastal
quarry and marine terminal projects, and to these investors specifically to do so
at the particular site;

* — reliance by the Investors on those encouragements to devote very substantial
resources to engaging in the statutorily mandated environmental assessments,
including the attempt to design the project to meet all legal requirements
concerning environmental protection;

+ an approach to the assessment by the JRP that effectively found the area to be a
“no go” zone for projects of this kind, rather than including, as at least a major
part of its work, a proper assessment of likely significant adverse effects on the
environment and of the means by which these effects might have been
mitigated;

+ lack of prior notice to the investor of the unprecedented approach the JRP was
going to adopt, thereby denying the investor a fair opportunity to seek
clarification and respond;

+ the role of the JRP in the overall system as legislated includes providing in its
report an impartial and thorough assessment of facts and of mitigation options
that can be used by the ultimate decision makers in government and that can
inform public opinion.

 

iii) The NAFTA Does Not Require the Exhaustion of Local Remedies

 

85. The NAFTA does not contain any provision requiring the exhaustion of local remedies
if that is what is suggested by Professor McRae in his dissent.

Mesa Power v. Canada
Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 16

 

86.

87.

88.

Professor McRae suggests that the panel would have benefitted from a decision of a
Canadian court or that the Investor could have pursued this option.” However, such a
suggestion does not properly consider the specific process taken in the NAFTA which
does not require exhaustion of local remedies, unlike the customary international law
regarding the state espousal of claims or other investment agreements.

This is clear within the text of the NAFTA which in Article 1121 requires an Investor to
waive rights to seek damages before domestic courts as a pre-condition for arbitration.
All Investors must file such waivers along with their consents to arbitration to initiate a
claim. When this waiver is added to the existing and relatively short three-year time
limitation in the NAFTA, this effectively represents an election of remedy for an
investor.

The Investor had the option of pursuing rights domestically or through international
processes. Both were viable options which provided for different processes and with the
potential for differing remedies. The Investor made a choice to seek an independent and
impartial review by an international tribunal following international law. Professor
McRae would punish Bilcon for making the election to obtain international law review.
Bilcon was required to make this election under the terms of the NAFTA and it should
not be deprived of its treaty remedy simply on account of the fact that it followed the
mandatory terms of the treaty.

IV. THE SCOPE OF STATE RESPONSIBILITY FOR CANADA
UNDER NAFTA ARTICLE 105

 

89.

The Bilcon Tribunal properly applied the international law of state responsibility in
establishing responsibility for Canada for actions taken by a three-person fact finding
panel (the Joint Review Panel). That panel was composed of non-governmental
members but reported to Government ministers for eventual governmental decision.
The Bilcon Award concluded that:

a. the Joint Review Panel was a de jure organ of the government and thus there was
state responsibility for Canada under Article 4 of the ILC Articles of State
Responsibility,”

b. Even if the Joint Review Panel was not a de jure organ of the state, it was
alternatively a de facto agency of the state that was exercizing a governmental
foundation and thus there was state responsibility for Canada under Article 5 of
the ILC Articles of State Responsibility,” and

c. Federal Canadian and Nova Scotia Cabinet Ministers specifically ratified
recommendations of the Joint Review Panel, resulting in state responsibility for
Canada under Article 11 of the ILC Articles of State Responsibility.”

7 Bilcon Dissenting Opinion of Donald McRae at 34, 42, 47.
7 Bilcon Award at 9319.
*8 Bilcon Award at 319.
” Bilcon Award at 319.

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 17

 

1. THE BILCON AWARD’S APPLICATION TO THE MESA POWER CASE

 

90. The approach taken to state responsibility by the Bilcon Tribunal confirms that Canada
has state responsibility for the types of specific activities of the Ontario Power Authority
at issue in the Mesa Power arbitration. This is a much more simpler case on this point
than Bilcon.

91. Canada has assumed responsibility under NAFTA Article 105 for all measures taken by
subnational and local governments in Canada. Measures taken by the government of
Ontario are subnational government measures.

92. The Electricity Act, 1998 empowers the Minister to issue binding mandatory directives
and directions to the Ontario Power Authority.”

93. The measures at issue all were done at the direction of the Ontario Minister of Energy
pursuant to the Ontario Electricity Act. As a result of the operation of Ontario law, the
Ontario Power Authority had no option but to comply with the terms of the Ontario
Energy Minister. This mandatory instruction included all actions taken under an Ontario
government directive or direction. Through such instructions, the Minister compelled
the Ontario Power Authority to implement the FIT program and to carry out the other
measures at issue, including the GEIA, the last minute rule change.*!

94. Canada has admitted, as it must, that Canada has state responsibility for all measures
taken by the Government of Ontario.”

95. Measures taken by the Ontario Power Authority under the mandatory direction of the
Ministry of Energy pursuant to the Electricity Act constitute measures taken by the
Government of Ontario. Canada also admits state responsibility for such measures. *

96. Canada contends that the ranking decisions made by the Ontario Power Authority were
not acts in furtherance of a government instruction, but such a position is illogical, and
contrary to the evidence. The Minister issued a directive to the Ontario Power Authority
to create a FIT Program and to issue FIT contracts." The Minister also issued a
directive limiting the amount of transmission that could be awarded for FIT Contracts.
Rick Jennings admitted in his cross-examination at the hearing that the Ministry of
Energy was aware that there were substantially more applications for FIT Contracts than
available capacity.*° Accordingly, there can be no question that the government
instruction to issue FIT contracts in a transmission-constrained market resulted in an

*° Ontario Electricity Act, 1998, ss. 25.32, 25.35 (Investor’s Schedule of Legal Authorities at CL-247).

‘| Investor’s Post-Hearing Submission at 4358 — 359.

® Investor’s Post-Hearing Submission at [358 — 359 relying upon Canada’s admissions in its Closing Statement.

'3 Investor’s Post-Hearing Submission at [358 — 359 relying upon Canada’s admissions in its Closing Statement.

** | etter from Minister George Smitherman (Minister of Energy) to Colin Anderson (OPA), Direction to the OPA,
dated September 24, 2009 (Investor’s Schedule of Exhibits, C-0051).

‘5 The Minister of Energy directed the OPA to limit priority access for FIT contracts in the Bruce and West of
London transmission areas to 750 MW and 300 MW, respectively. See letter from Minister Brad Duguid
(Ministry of Energy) to Colin Andersen (OPA), Direction to the OPA, June 3, 2011 (Investor’s Schedule of
Exhibits, C-0046).

‘6 Testimony of Rick Jennings, Hearing Transcript, Day 2, at p.162, Ins. 22-25; Testimony of Sue Lo, Hearing
Transcript, Day 3, at p. 78, Ins 7-14; FIT/Micro FIT Announcement, December 15, 2009, p. 10 (Investor’s
Schedule of Exhibits at C-0669).

   

Mesa Power v. Canada
Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 18

instruction to create a priority system (which would include a ranking) and in fact the
Ministry of Energy later specifically would intervene in the ranking process with the
respect to the Bruce Region

97. Accordingly, there can be no question that all aspects of the FIT process at issue in this
arbitration are government measures for which Canada has state responsibility. There
are no longer any remaining “open questions” with respect to state responsibility.
Canada is fully responsible for all the measures at issue in the Mesa claim.

98. The OPA should thus be properly regarded as an organ of Canada and consequently
Canada must under international law have state responsibility for the actions at issue in
this arbitration.

CONCLUSI

99. In respect to the case at hand, the determinations made in Bilcon are important. The
Bilcon award may assist the Mesa Power Tribunal in respect with the following:

a. Canada is responsible for all actions at issue in this arbitration. While Canada has
admitted responsibility for the majority of its actions, it is specifically responsible
for the OPA and its actions.

b. Canada breached its National Treatment obligations. The test set out by the
Bilcon Tribunal is logical and clarifies the National Treatment legal test in respect
to the Article 1105 standard, the onus of proof, and a broader like circumstances
analysis. All proponents seeking renewable energy contracts from Ontario should
be considered to be in like circumstances with Mesa. Once that determination is
made, it is clear that the specific comparators identified were given preferential
treatment. The burden should then shift to Canada to justify its actions.

c. The Investor's legitimate expectations were breached. The Investor expected a
fair and rule based system. It did not expect a web of secret deals and special
treatment to its competitors. Canada’s conduct violated the Investor's legitimate
expectation. Further, at the hearing it became clear that the June 3, 2011 directive
in which Ontario limited the capacity awarded to avoid paying FIT prices which
was the Investor’s original, main incentive to invest in Ontario also breached the
Investor's legitimate expectations. This was clearly set out in the Investor's Post-
hearing brief at paragraphs 337-41.

d. There was a flagrant violation of procedural and substantive fairness to the FIT
proponents. As has been noted by the Investor on numerous occasions, creating
one competitive renewable energy program and then giving one proponent a
significantly better deal to access contracts in that program is fundamentally
unfair. This was argued by the Investor throughout its pleadings," at the

*7 Investor’s Memorial at 4685, 763-776; Investor’s Reply Memorial at §§]655-660.

Mesa Power v. Canada
Submission Relating to the Bilcon v. Canada Award | 19

 

hearing,“ and in its post-hearing brief.” The Bilcon decision simply confirms the
importance of substantive fairness as an element of NAFTA Article 1105.

e. There is a substantial breach of procedural fairness. This is without question, as it
was admitted by Canada's own witnesses that there were significant and
substantial procedural irregularities in the period before the contract awards in the
Bruce region on July 4, 2011.” This was clearly laid out in the Investor's Post
Hearing Submission at paragraphs 310 to 341.

f. Moreover, the special access and unfairly beneficial treatment given to NextEra
and the protection afforded to a local Canadian competitor which also obtained
special treatment, IPC, constituted an additional violation of the NAFTA Article
1105 standard of substantive fairness.

g. Ontario acted in a completely arbitrary manner in relation to the contract awards
in the Bruce region. This was detailed in the Investor's Post-Hearing Submission
at paragraphs 310 to 336.

100. For the reasons set up above, this Tribunal should consider and apply the approach
advanced by the Bilcon Tribunal when deciding the matters at issue in the Mesa Claim.

ALL OF WHICH IS RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED

Appleton & Associates International Lawyers Date: May 14, 2015
Astigarraga Davis Mullins & Grossman, P.A.

‘8 Investor’s Opening Statements, Hearing Transcript, Day 1, at p. 66, Ins. 17-25. Among others, this was confirmed
in the Testimony of Jim MacDougall, Hearing Transcript, Day 3, at pp. 207, Ins, 8-23.

* Investor’s Post-Hearing Submission at 4290-291.

°° Testimony of Shawn Cronkwright, Hearing Transcript, Day 4, at p. 66-67, Ins. 23-9 and p. 80, Ins. 9-24;
Testimony of Jim MacDougall, Hearing Transcript, Day 3, at p. 219, Ins. 17-19 and p. 271, Ins, 2-4 and p. 273,
Ins. 4-9.

