2001BCSC0664 Page | of 30

Citation: The United Mexican States v. Date: 20010502
Metalclad Corporation
2001 BCSC 664 Docket: 1002904

Registry: Vancouver

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BRITISH COLUMBIA

BETWEEN:
THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES
PETITIONER
AND
METALCLAD CORPORATION
RESPONDENT
AND
ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA AND
LA PROCUREURE GENERALE DU QUEBEC
ON BEHALF OF THE PROVINCE OF QUEBEC
INTERVENORS
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
OF THE
HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE TYSOE
Counsel for the Petitioner: Patrick G. Foy, Q.C.,

J. Christopher Thomas

And Robert J.C. Dean

Counsel for the Respondent: D. Geoffrey Cowper, Q.C.

Henri C.A. Alvarez,

B.J. Greenberg

and M.D. Parrish

Counsel for the Intervenor, Attorney Joseph C. de Pencier
General of Canada:

Counsel for the Intervenor, La Procureure Jack M. Giles, Q.C.

general du Québec on behalf of the and Victoria Colvin
Province of Québec:

Dates and place of hearing: February 19 - 23, 26 - 28

and March 1 - 2, 2001

Vancouver, B.C.

HEADIN PARAGRAPH NO

 

INTRODUCTION 1

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664

UNDERLYING FACTS
NAFTA PROVISIONS

THE AWARD

(a) Applicable Law

(b) Fair and Equitable Treatment

(c) Expropriation — Pre Ecological Decree

(d) Expropriation — Post Ecological

Decree

(e) Damages

APPLICABLE STATUTE

STANDARD OF REVIEW

ARTICLE 1105 - MINIMUM STANDARD

ARTICLE 1110 - PRE-ECOLOGICAL DECREE
ARTICLE 1110 - POST-ECOLOGICAL DECREE 81
(a) Consideration of the Ecological
Decree

(b) Beyond the Scope of Submission

(c) Patently Unreasonable Error

(d) Conclusion

METALCLAD'S IMPROPER ACTS106

(a) Corruption

(b) Excess Damage Claim

(c) Conclusion
FAILURE TO ADDRESS ALL QUESTIONS

CONCLUSION

INTRODUCTION

Page 2 of 30

19

23

24
27
31

34
37

39
50
57
77

81
86

92
96
105

110
113
118

[1] This proceeding involves a challenge by the Petitioner, the United Mexican

States, ("Mexico") of an arbitration award

(the

"Award")

issued on August 30, 2000

by a tribunal (the "Tribunal") constituted under Chapter 11 of the North American

 

Free Trade Agreement ("NAFTA

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/0 1/06/2001 BCSC0664.htm

) between the United States of America, Mexico and

08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 3 of 30

Canada (the "Parties" or the "NAFTA Parties"). In the Award, the Tribunal granted
damages in the amount of $16,685,000 (U.S.) against Mexico in favour of the
Respondent, Metalclad Corporation ("Metalclad"), an American corporation
established under the laws of the State of Delaware. Mexico seeks to set aside the
Award. The matter comes before this Court because the place of the arbitration was
designated to be Vancouver, B.C.

UNDERLYING FACTS

[2] I will set out the underlying facts which are not disputed. In a proceeding of
this nature, it would not be appropriate for this Court to make its own findings of
fact and I do not purport to make any such findings. I am not endeavouring to set
out all of the facts. Instead, I will review the core undisputed facts in order to
give the reader the general framework of circumstances. I will refer to further
facts or allegations during my discussion of the issues to the extent it is
required to deal with the issues.

[3] The subject matter of the Award is a site (the "Site") in La Pedrera, a valley
located within the municipality of Guadalcazar (the "Municipality"), in the State
of San Luis Potosi (the "State of SLP"), Mexico. The Site is approximately 70
kilometres away from the city of Guadalcazar and approximately 800 people live
within 10 kilometres of it.

[4] The Site has been owned at all material times by a company incorporated under
the laws of Mexico, Confinamiento Tecnico de Residous Industriales, S.A. de C.V.
("COTERIN"), or its shareholders. The Site and COTERIN were initially owned by
Mexican nationals who sold COTERIN to a subsidiary of Metalclad in 1993 (at which
time ownership of the Site was transferred into COTERIN). To be consistent with the
approach utilized in the Award, a reference in these Reasons for Judgment to
Metalclad after 1993 will include COTERIN; although COTERIN may have taken an
action in question, Metalclad was the operating mind and decision maker for
COTERIN.

[5] COTERIN began operating a hazardous waste transfer station at the Site in 1990
pursuant to an authority granted by the federal government of Mexico. However
20,000 tons of waste were not transferred from the Site and were deposited on the
Site without treatment or separation. The federal government of Mexico ordered the
closure of the transfer station on September 26, 1991 and this closure remained in
effect until February 1996

[6] COTERIN applied to the Municipality for a permit to construct a hazardous waste
landfill at the Site in 1991. The application was refused at the time and the
refusal was confirmed when a newly elected municipal government came into office in
1992.

[7] In 1993, COTERIN received three permits in respect of a hazardous waste
landfill at the Site. Two of the permits were environmental impact authorizations
issued by the National Institute of Ecology, an agency of Mexico's Secretariat of
the Environment, National Resources and Fishing (the "Secretariat of the
Environment"), in respect of the construction and operation of the landfill. The
third permit was a land use permit issued by the State of SLP.

[8] In April 1993, Metalclad entered into an option agreement to purchase COTERIN.
The option agreement (as amended) provided that the payment of the purchase price
was subject to, among other things, the condition that either (a) a municipal
permit was issued to COTERIN or (b) COTERIN had received a definitive judgment from
the Mexican courts that a municipal permit was not required for the construction of
the landfill. Metalclad completed its purchase of COTERIN without either of these

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 4 of 30

conditions being satisfied (although Metalclad alleged in the arbitration, and the
Tribunal found, that Mexican federal officials had assured Metalclad that COTERIN
had all the authorities required to undertake the landfill project).

[9] COTERIN commenced construction activities at the Site in the absence of a
municipal construction permit. After the construction began, COTERIN received a
further construction permit from the federal authorities; it was issued in January
1995 and authorized the construction of the final aspects of the facility.

[10] On October 26, 1994, the Municipality issued a stop work order due to the
absence of a municipal permit. COTERIN made application for a municipal
construction permit on November 15, 1994. The Municipality officially denied this
application over a year later, on December 5, 1995.

[11] In the meantime, COTERIN continued with construction of the landfill facility
at the Site. It was completed by March 1995. On March 10, 1995, COTERIN held an
opening or facility tour and demonstrators blockaded the Site for several hours.
The landfill facility was not actually opened and it has not subsequently been
operated.

[12] Metalclad entered into further negotiations with federal authorities regarding
the operation of the landfill facility. The negotiations resulted in an agreement
called the Convenio. It was entered into by Metalclad on November 25, 1995 with two
sub-agencies of the Secretariat of the Environment. The Covenio contained numerous
provisions, the most important of which were that Metalclad would be permitted to
operate the landfill for an initial period of five years and that it would
remediate the previous contamination during the first three years of this period.
After the Convenio was entered into, the federal authorities issued a further
permit to COTERIN; it was issued in February 1996 and increased the annual
permitted capacity of the facility from 36,000 tons to 360,000 tons.

[13] It was shortly after the Convenio was entered into that the Municipality
formally denied COTERIN's application for a construction permit on December 5,
1995. The considerations taken into account by the municipal council in denying the
application were that (i) COTERIN had been denied a construction permit in 1991/2
(ii) COTERIN had commenced construction before applying for the permit and finished
the construction while the permit application was pending, (iii) there were
environmental concerns and (iv) a great number of the Municipality's inhabitants
were opposed to the granting of the permit.

[14] The Municipality then challenged the Convenio by first making an
administrative complaint to the Secretariat of the Environment and by subsequently
filing a writ of amparo with the Federal Court in January 1996. In the amparo
proceeding, the Municipality obtained an injunction in respect of the Convenio in
February 1996. The amparo proceeding was ultimately dismissed in May 1999 on the
basis that such a proceeding was not available to a municipal body (as opposed to a
private person) for the purpose of challenging a decision of another level of
government and that the proper method for the Municipality to have challenged the
Convenio was a proceeding called a Constitutional Controversy.

[15] COTERIN requested the Municipality to reconsider the application for a
construction permit but the Municipality rejected the request in April 1996
COTERIN then filed a writ of amparo in a Mexican federal court in respect of the
Municipality's refusal to issue a permit. The proceeding was dismissed without a
hearing of the merits on the basis that COTERIN had not exhausted its
administrative remedies. COTERIN appealed to the Mexican Supreme Court but
subsequently abandoned its appeal as a sign of good faith to the Municipality for
the purpose of negotiations.

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/0 1/06/2001 BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 5 of 30

[16] Further negotiations were not fruitful and Metalclad delivered a Notice of
Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration under Article 1119 of the NAFTA to Mexico
in October 1996. It commenced the arbitration proceeding by filing a Notice of
Claim in January 1997 with the Secretariat of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes ("ICSID"). Article 1120 of the NAFTA gives a
choice of three sets of arbitration rules to govern the arbitration and Metalclad
selected the Additional Facility Rules of ICSID (which are properly called the
Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules).

[17] After the arbitration proceeding was underway, but before the hearing in the
arbitration was held, the Governor of the State of SLP issued an ecological decree
(the "Ecological Decree") on September 20, 1997, which was three days prior to the
expiry of the Governor's term. The Ecological Decree declared an area of 188,758
hectares within the Municipality, which included the Site, to be an ecological
preserve for the stated purpose of protecting species of cacti.

[18] A three person tribunal was constituted as the Tribunal to decide the
arbitration. It was proposed by the Tribunal, and agreed by the parties, that the
place of the arbitration would be Vancouver, B.C. Written witness statements and
submissions were exchanged, and an oral hearing took place before the Tribunal
between August 30 and September 9, 1999 in Washington D.C. Further written
submissions were filed and the Tribunal rendered the Award on August 30, 2000.

NAFTA PROVISIONS,

[19] A review of some of the provisions of the NAFTA will assist in understanding
the Award. Paragraph 1 of Article 1116 gives the right to investors to submit
certain disputes to arbitration:

An investor of a Party may submit to arbitration under this Section
a claim that another Party has breached an obligation under:

(a) Section A [of Chapter 11] or Article 1503(2)
(State Enterprises), or

(b) Article 1502(3) (a) (Monopolies and State
Enterprises) where the monopoly has acted in a manner
inconsistent with the Party's obligations under
Section A,

and that the investor has incurred loss or damage by
reason of, or arising out of, that breach.

[20] Section A of Chapter 11 is comprised of Articles 1101 through 1114. Metalclad
asserted in the arbitration that Mexico had violated Articles 1105 and 1110, both
of which are contained in Section A. Paragraph 1 of Article 1105 reads as follows:

Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party
treatment in accordance with international law, including fair and
equitable treatment and full protection and security.

Paragraph 1 of Article 1110 reads as follows:
No Party may directly or indirectly nationalize or expropriate an
investment of an investor of another Party in its territory or take

a measure tantamount to nationalization or expropriation of such an
investment ("expropriation"), except:

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/0 1/06/2001 BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 6 of 30

(a) for a public purpose
(b) on a non-discriminatory basis;

(c) in accordance with due process of law and Article
1105(1); and

(d) on payment of compensation in accordance with
paragraphs 2 through 6.

The term "measure" is defined in Article 201 to include “any law, regulation,
procedure, requirement or practice".

[21] Article 102 sets out the objectives of the NAFTA. Paragraph 1 reads, in part,
as follows:

The objectives of this Agreement, as elaborated more specifically
through its principles and rules, including national treatment,
most-favored-nation treatment and transparency, are to:

(c) increase substantially investment opportunities
in the territories of the Parties

Paragraph 2 of Article 102 reads as follows:

The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this
Agreement in the light of its objectives set out in paragraph 1 and
in accordance with applicable rules of international law.

To similar effect, Article 1131 provides that a tribunal in an arbitration pursuant
to Chapter 11 is to decide the issues in dispute in accordance with the NAFTA and
applicable rules of international law.

[22] Chapter 18 of the NAFTA contains provisions promoting the concept of
transparency. Article 1801 provides that each Party is to designate a contact for
facilitating communication. Article 1802 requires each Party to ensure that its
laws, regulations, procedures and administrative rulings of general application are
published or otherwise made available to enable interested parties to become
acquainted with them. Article 1803 requires each Party to notify any other
interested Party of a proposed or actual measure that might materially affect the
operation of the NAFTA or substantially affect the other Party's interests under
the NAFTA.

THE AWARD

[23] I will summarize the Tribunal's reasons in some detail because arbitral awards
are not as widely published as decisions of courts. I will not mention all of the
reasons (for example, I will not refer to matters which were not in issue before
this Court) but I have had regard to the reasons in their entirety in making my

decision.

(a) Applicable Law

[24] After setting out the general facts and allegations of the parties, making

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/0 1/06/2001 BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 7 of 30

some findings of fact and giving its reasons for considering issues relating to the
Ecological Decree (which was enacted after the arbitration proceeding was
commenced), the Tribunal set out the law which it considered to apply to the
arbitration. It made reference to Article 1131(1) of the NAFTA (which provides that
a tribunal must decide the issues in accordance with the NAFTA and applicable rules
of international law) and Article 102(2) (which I have quoted above). It then
stated that the objectives referred to in Article 102(2) specifically include
transparency and the substantial increase in investment opportunities in the
territories of the Parties.

[25] The Tribunal next made reference to various provisions of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties, including Article 31(1) (which provides that a
treaty is to be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning
to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in light of the
treaty's object and purpose) and Article 27 (which provides that a state party to a
treaty may not invoke the provisions of its internal law as justification for its
failure to perform the treaty).

[26] The Tribunal made reference to one of the preambles of the NAFTA stating that
the Parties had resolved to ensure a predictable commercial framework for business
planning and investment. Finally, the Tribunal quoted Article 1802(1) of the NAFTA.

(b) Fair and Equitable Treatment

[27] After quoting Article 1105, the Tribunal stated that an underlying objective
of the NAFTA is to promote and increase cross-border investment opportunities and
ensure the successful implementation of investment initiatives. It referred to
"transparency" as being prominent in the statement of the principles and rules
which introduce the NAFTA. The Tribunal understood "transparency" to include the
idea that all relevant legal requirements for the purpose of initiating, completing
and successfully operating investments should be capable of being readily known to
all affected investors of a Party and that there should be no room for doubt or
uncertainty. The Tribunal held that, if the authorities of the central government
of a Party become aware of any scope for misunderstanding or confusion in this
connection, it is their duty to ensure that the correct position is promptly
determined and clearly stated.

[28] The Tribunal considered that a central point in the case was whether a
municipal permit for the construction of a hazardous waste landfill was required.
It briefly reviewed the opposing views of the expert opinions presented by
Metalclad and Mexico, and found that if a municipal construction permit was
required, the federal authority's jurisdiction was controlling and the authority of
the Municipality only extended to appropriate construction considerations (i.e.,
those related to the physical construction or defects in the Site). The Tribunal
found that Metalclad had been led to believe by federal authorities that the
federal and state permits issued to COTERIN allowed for the construction and
operation of the landfill, and it made reference to Metalclad's position (which the
Tribunal appeared to have implicitly accepted) that it was also told by federal
officials that if it submitted an application for a municipal construction permit,
the Municipality would have no legal basis for denying the permit. The Tribunal
found that the Municipality's denial of the construction permit was improper
because it did not have reference to construction aspects or flaws of the physical
facility.

[29] The Tribunal went on to hold that Mexico failed to ensure a transparent and
predictable framework for Metalclad's business planning and investment. It said
that the totality of the circumstances demonstrated a lack of orderly process and
timely disposition in relation to an investor acting in the expectation that it

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/0 1/06/2001 BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 8 of 30

would be treated fairly and justly in accordance with the NAFTA. The Tribunal
stated that, moreover, the acts of the State of SLP and the Municipality (which
were attributable to Mexico) failed to comply with or adhere to the requirements of
Article 1105.

[30] Accordingly, the Tribunal held that Metalclad had not been treated fairly or
equitably under the NAFTA and succeeded on its claim under Article 1105.

(c) Expropriation - Pre Ecological Decree

[31] The Tribunal defined expropriation under Article 1110 of the NAFTA as the
open, deliberate and acknowledged taking of property, as well as covert or
incidental interference with the use of property which has the effect of depriving
the owner, in whole or in significant part, of the use or reasonably-to-be-expected
economic benefit of property even if not necessarily to the obvious benefit of the
host State.

[32] The Tribunal held that Mexico took a measure tantamount to expropriation in
violation of Article 1110 by permitting or tolerating the conduct of the
Municipality in relation to Metalclad (which the Tribunal had already held was
unfair and inequitable treatment) and by thus participating or acquiescing in the
denial to Metalclad of the right to operate the landfill.

[33] The Tribunal made reference to (i) its holding that the exclusive authority
for permitting a hazardous waste landfill rested with the Mexican federal
government and (ii) its holding that the Municipality acted outside its authority
by denying the construction permit without any basis in the physical construction
or any defect in the Site. It stated that the improper denial of the construction
permit, as extended by the Municipality's subsequent administrative and judicial
actions regarding the Convenio, effectively and improperly prevented Metalclad's
operation of the landfill. The Tribunal held that these measures, together with the
representations of the Mexican federal authorities and the absence of a timely,
orderly or substantive basis for the denial of the construction permit, amounted to
an indirect expropriation.

(d) Expropriation — Post Ecological Decree

[34] Earlier in its decision, the Tribunal held that it could consider issues
relating to the Ecological Decree. It relied in this regard on Article 48 of the
ICSID Additional Facility Rules, which allows the parties to present incidental or
additional claims. The Tribunal stated that the Ecological Decree directly related
to the investment at issue and that Mexico had ample notice and opportunity to
address issues relating to the Decree and had suffered no prejudice. The Tribunal
held that consideration of the Ecological Decree was within its jurisdiction. It
stated that, as would be seen, the Tribunal did not attach controlling importance
to the Decree.

[35] After finding the breach of Article 1105 and holding that the actions of
Mexico and the Municipality amounted to an indirect expropriation, the Tribunal
went on to hold that the Ecological Decree was a further ground for a finding of
expropriation, but stated that it was not strictly necessary for its conclusion.

[36] The Tribunal found that the Ecological Decree had the effect of barring
forever the operation of Metalclad's landfill. It rejected Mexico's representations
to the contrary by making reference to provisions of the Decree. The Tribunal
stated that it considered that the implementation of the Decree would, in and of
itself, constitute an act tantamount to expropriation.

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/0 1/06/2001 BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 9 of 30

(e) Damages

[37] The Tribunal awarded Metalclad damages in the amount of $16,685,000 (U.S.)
inclusive of interest up to the time of the Award. This assessment of damages
reflected the Tribunal's conclusion as to the amount of Metalclad's investment in
the project.

[38] Metalclad had claimed that it had invested approximately $20.5 million in the
project (exclusive of interest). The Tribunal rejected two aspects of the claimed
expenses. First, it agreed with Mexico's position that costs incurred prior to
Metalclad's acquisition of COTERIN were too far removed and it reduced the award by
the amount of costs claimed for 1991 and 1992. Second, the Tribunal did not allow
costs related to the development of other Metalclad projects in Mexico which had
been "bundled" into this project. The Tribunal also made a third deduction by way
of making an allowance for the fact that the Site may require remediation.

APPLICABLE STATUTE

[39] A threshold issue is the determination of which of two statutes governs this
Court in its review of the Award. As a result of the choice of Vancouver as the
place of the arbitration, the two potentially applicable statutes are both British
Columbia Acts, the International Commercial Arbitration Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 233
(the "International CAA") and the Commercial Arbitration Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 55
(the "CAA"). Neither party challenged the jurisdiction of this Court on the basis
of the legitimacy of naming Vancouver as the place of arbitration. The choice
between the statutes depends, not on the interpretation of the word "international"
as one might expect from the difference in the names of the two statutes, but on
the meaning of the word "commercial". The most important distinction between the
two statutes, for the purposes of this proceeding, is that the CAA allows the court
to review points of law decided by the arbitral body, while the International CAA
is more restrictive.

[40] In the definition of "arbitration agreement" in the CAA, an agreement to which
the International CAA applies is specifically excluded. This means that it is first
necessary to consider whether the International CAA applies to the arbitration
agreement in this case. If it is found to apply, its provisions will govern and the
CAA need not be considered. If the International CAA is not found to apply, the
provisions of the CAA will govern by default.

[41] As its name indicates, the International CAA applies to international
commercial arbitrations. There is no dispute that the arbitration between Mexico
and Metalclad was an international arbitration. Whether the arbitration was a

commercial arbitration depends on s. 1(6) of the International CAA, the relevant
portions of which read as follows:

An arbitration is commercial if it arises out of a relationship of a
commercial nature including, but not limited to, the following:

(d) an exploitation agreement or concession

(p) investing.

In its definition of the term "arbitration agreement", s. 7 of the International

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 10 of 30

CAA confirms that the relationship need not be contractual in nature.

[42] The International CAA is based on a model law for international commercial
arbitrations developed by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
("UNCITRAL"). The model law has been adopted in large part in all Canadian
jurisdictions and in many other jurisdictions. The model law was contained in a
report prepared by UNCITRAL and it was accompanied by a commentary providing
explanations of the model law provisions. Section 6 of the International CAA
specifically authorizes the court to refer to these documents in construing the
legislation.

[43] In the UNCITRAL report, the term "commercial" is explained by the following
footnote:

The term "commercial" should be given a wide interpretation so as to
cover matters arising from all relationships of a commercial
nature.

This footnote was discussed in the commentary as follows:

The content of the footnote reflects the legislative intent to
construe the term "commercial" in a wide manner. This call for
wide interpretation is supported by an illustrative list of
commercial relationships. Although the examples listed include
almost all types of contexts known to have given rise to disputes
dealt with in international commercial arbitrations, the list is
expressly not exhaustive. (p. 106, Supplement Canada Gazette, Part I
(1986))

»

The Ontario Court (General Division) relied on these and other provisions of the
UNCITRAL report and commentary in the case of Carter v. McLaughlin (1996), 27 O.R.
(3d) 792 in holding that the sale of a residential property was commercial in
nature when done in a business-like fashion.

[44] Counsel for Mexico submits that despite the wide meaning to be given to the
term "commercial", the relationship between Mexico and Metalclad was not commercial
in nature but, instead, was a regulatory relationship. With respect, I do not
agree. Clause (p) of s. 1(6) of the International CAA requires that the phrase "a
relationship of a commercial nature" be interpreted to include a relationship of
investing. In my view, the arbitration in this matter arose out of a relationship
of investing. Metalclad was investing in Mexico when it acquired COTERIN and caused
the landfill facility to be constructed, and the arbitration arose out of this
relationship between them.

[45] Support for this conclusion is found in the agreement pursuant to which the
arbitration took place; namely, Chapter 11 of the NAFTA, which is divided into two
sections. Section A sets out the requirements imposed on each of the NAFTA Parties.
Section B sets out the arbitration agreement which entitles an investor of one
Party to make a claim that another Party has breached an obligation under Section A
(or two sections of Chapter 15). The heading of Chapter 11 is "Investment". The
obligations imposed on each Party in Section A are related to the treatment
accorded to "investors" of the other Parties. Article 1115 states the purpose of
Section B to be the establishment of a mechanism for the "settlement of investment
disputes".

[46] It is true that the dispute between Metalclad and the Municipality arose
because the Municipality was purporting to exercise a regulatory function. However
the primary relationship between Metalclad and Mexico was one of investing and the

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 11 of 30

exercise of a regulatory function by the Municipality was incidental to that
primary relationship. The arbitration did not arise under an agreement between
Metalclad and the Municipality in connection with regulatory matters. Rather, the
arbitration was between Metalclad and Mexico pursuant to an agreement dealing with
the treatment of investors.

[47] In addition, it must be remembered that Metalclad qualified to make a claim
against Mexico by way of arbitration under Chapter 11 because it was an investor of
Mexico. If Metalclad was not considered to be an investor of Mexico, the
arbitration could not have taken place.

[48] Counsel for Mexico makes reference to the fact that Parliament found it
necessary to amend the federal statute implementing the model law to expressly
provide that an arbitration under Chapter 11 of the NAFTA is to be considered to be
a “commercial arbitration". As a matter of statutory interpretation, I do not
believe that the intent of one legislative body can be properly determined by
subsequent actions of another legislative body. In addition, the amendment of the
federal statute is prefaced with the phrase "[f]lor greater certainty". This
suggests that Parliament was of the view that an arbitration under Chapter 11
qualified as a commercial arbitration prior to the amendment but it wanted to
remove any uncertainty on the point.

[49] Accordingly, I hold that the review of the Award is governed by the provisions
of the International CAA.

STANDARD OF REVIEW

[50] The extent to which this Court may interfere with an international commercial
arbitral award is limited by the provisions of International CAA. Section 5 of the
Act reads as follows:

In matters governed by this Act,

(a) a court must not intervene unless so provided in this
Act, and

(b) an arbitral proceeding of an arbitral tribunal or an
order, ruling or arbitral award made by an arbitral
tribunal must not be questioned, reviewed or restrained by
a proceeding under the Judicial Review Procedure Act or
otherwise except to the extent provided in this Act.

Subsection 34(1) of the Act states that recourse to a court against an arbitral
award may only be made in accordance with subsections (2) and (3). Subsection (3)
contains a limitation period which is not relevant to this matter. The pertinent
portions of subsection (2) read as follows:

An arbitral award may be set aside by the Supreme Court only if

(a) the party making the application furnishes proof that

(iv) the arbitral award deals with a dispute not
contemplated by or not falling within the terms of
the submission to arbitration, or it contains
decisions on matters beyond the scope of the

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 12 of 30

submission to arbitration ..., or

(v) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the
arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the
agreement of the parties ..., or

(b) the court finds that

(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the
public policy in British Columbia.

[51] The leading British Columbia authority on s. 34 is Quintette Coal Limited v.
Nippon Steel Corporation, [1991] 1 W.W.R. 219 (B.C.C.A.), a decision which has been
followed by several other courts in Canada. In that case, the B.C. Court of Appeal
refused to interfere with an arbitration award setting prices to be paid for the
supply of coal. After referring to numerous authorities, Gibbs J.A., on behalf of
the majority of the Court, commented on the standard of review in the following
terms:

It is important to parties to future such arbitrations and to the
integrity of the process itself that the court express its views on
the degree of deference to be accorded the decision of the
arbitrators. The reasons advanced in the cases discussed above for
restraint in the exercise of judicial review are highly persuasive.
The "concerns of international comity, respect for the capacities of
foreign and transnational tribunals, and sensitivity to the need of
the international commercial system for predictability in the
resolution of disputes" spoken of by Blackmun J. [in Mitsubishi
Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth Inc., 473 U.S. 614 (1985)]
are as compelling in this jurisdiction as they are in the United
States or elsewhere. It is meet therefore, as a matter of policy, to
adopt a standard which seeks to preserve the autonomy of the forum
selected by the parties and to minimize judicial intervention when
reviewing international commercial arbitral awards in British
Columbia. (p. 229)

Gibbs J.A. also stated that unless the arbitral award contained decisions beyond
the scope of the submission to arbitration, the court has no jurisdiction to set
the award aside under s. 34(2) (a) (iv) even if it could be shown that the
arbitration tribunal had erred in interpreting the contract.

[52] In concluding that the arbitrators in that case did not decide on matters
beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration, Gibbs J.A. said the following:

They were called upon to construe cls. 7 and 9 of the contract
within their context and they did so. Even applying the domestic
test (Shalansky v. Regina Pasqua Hosp. Bd. of Gov. (1983), 83
C.L.L.C.14,026, 145 D.L.R. (3d) 413, 22 Sask. R. 153, 47 N.R. 76
(S.C.C.)), their interpretation is one which the words of the
contract can reasonably bear. (pp. 229-30)

Counsel for Mexico submits that in making reference to the domestic test, Gibbs
J.A. left open the question of review under s. 34(2) (a) (iv) on the basis of the
domestic standard for patently unreasonable error. I do not agree. What Gibbs J.A.
meant was that even if the domestic test applied (which it did not), it was still

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 13 of 30

not shown that the award should be set aside because the arbitrators'
interpretation of the contract was not unreasonable.

[53] Counsel for Mexico and counsel for the Intervenor, Attorney General of Canada
urge this Court to utilize the "pragmatic and functional approach" to determine the
appropriate standard of review under the CAA and the International CAA. This
approach has been developed by the Supreme Court to Canada to apply to the review
of decisions of domestic administrative tribunals in place of the previous approach
which involved a somewhat artificially applied test of jurisdictional error. The
new approach began with the decision in U.E.S., Local 298 v. Bibeault, [1988] 2
S.C.R. 1048 and has been developed by the Supreme Court of Canada in a number of
cases over the past dozen years.

[54] I need not decide whether it is appropriate to use the "pragmatic and
functional approach" to determine the standard of review under the CAA. With
respect to the International CAA, it is my view that the standard of review is set
out in ss. 5 and 34 of that Act and that it would be an error for me to import into
that Act an approach which has been developed as a branch of statutory
interpretation in respect of domestic tribunals created by statute. It may be that
some of the principles discussed by the Supreme Court of Canada in this line of
authorities will be of assistance in applying ss. 5 and 34 but the "pragmatic and
functional approach" cannot be used to create a standard of review not provided for
in the International CAA. I note that since the "pragmatic and functional approach"
was fully articulated by the Supreme Court of Canada in Pushpanathan v. Canada
[1998] 1 S.C.R. 982, the approach has not been utilized in Canadian cases involving

international commercial arbitrations (e.g., Corporacion Transnacional de
Inversiones, S.A. de C.V. v. STET International, S.p.A. (1999), 45 O.R. (3d) 183
(Ont. S.C.J.); affirmed (2000), 49 O.R. (3d) 414 and D.L.T. Holdings Inc. v. Grow

Biz International, Inc. (2000), 194 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 206 (P.E.I.S.C.T.D.)).

[55] During the course of their submissions, counsel made reference in general
terms to the issue of whether the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction. The concept
of "excess of jurisdiction" is the standard which was previously applied to
decisions of administrative tribunals and arbitral bodies. The International CAA
does not utilize the term "excess of jurisdiction" or the like but, instead, sets
out with particularity the grounds on which the court may set aside an arbitral
award. Rather than making reference to terms like "excess of jurisdiction" and
"jurisdictional errors", I prefer to utilize the wording contained in the
International CAA (although I will use such terms when reciting submissions of
counsel).

[56] As the scope of the submission to arbitration is critical to a consideration
of s. 34(2) (a) (iv), it is appropriate to set out the question put to the Tribunal.
Article 1122 of the NAFTA provides that each Party (in this case, Mexico) consents
to the submission of a claim to arbitration under the NAFTA. The question which
Metalclad posed was whether Mexico had breached its obligations under Chapter 11 of
the NAFTA "guaranteeing national treatment; most favoured nation treatment; minimum
treatment in accord with international law, fair and equitable treatment, and full
protection and security, prohibiting performance requirements; and, depriving
{Metalclad] of its investment through [Mexico's] actions that directly and
indirectly resulted in, and were tantamount to, expropriation of that investment
without due process and full compensation". Metalclad relied on the events which
had occurred up to the time of the commencement of the arbitration proceeding and,
as noted above, it also relied on the Ecological Decree which was announced after
the arbitration process had been initiated by Metalclad.

ARTICLE 11 MINI ‘STANDARD

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 14 of 30

[57] Before I turn to a specific examination of Article 1105, I wish to make some
general comments about the structure of arbitration under Chapter 11. Under most
agreements containing arbitration provisions, it is provided that a dispute between
the parties to the agreement may be resolved through arbitration. Strangers to the
agreement cannot invoke the arbitration procedure because it is only the parties to
the agreement who consented to resolve disputes between themselves by arbitration.
This normal type of arbitration provision is found in Chapter 20 of the NAFTA,
which is the general section in the NAFTA dealing with arbitrations of disputes
between the NAFTA Parties.

[58] Section B of Chapter 11 establishes a separate arbitration procedure. It
allows investors of a NAFTA Party (who are not themselves a party to the NAFTA) to
make claims against other NAFTA Parties by way of arbitration. However, the right
to submit a claim to arbitration is limited to alleged breaches of an obligation
under Section A of Chapter 11 and two Articles contained in Chapter 15. It does not
enable investors to arbitrate claims in respect of alleged breaches of other
provisions of the NAFTA. If an investor of a Party feels aggrieved by the actions
of another Party in relation to its obligations under the NAFTA other than the
obligations imposed by Section A of Chapter 11 and the two Articles of Chapter 15,
the investor would have to prevail upon its country to espouse an arbitration on
its behalf against the other Party.

[59] I now turn to a consideration of Article 1105. It is a companion provision to
Articles 1102 and 1103. In simple terms, Article 1102 provides that a NAFTA Party
must treat the investors of another NAFTA Party and their investments no worse than
it treats its own investors and their investments. This is referred to as "national
treatment". Article 1103 provides that a Party must treat the investors of another
Party and their investments no worse than it treats the investors of any other
Party or of a non-party and their investments. This is referred to as "most-
favored-nation treatment".

[60] Articles 1102 and 1103 are both framed in relative terms by way of a
comparison to the way in which the NAFTA Party treats other investors. On the other
hand, Article 1105 is framed in absolute terms. In considering Article 1105, the
way in which the Party treats other investors is not a relevant factor. Article
1105 is intended to establish a minimum standard so that a Party may not treat
investments of an investor of another Party worse than this standard irrespective
of the manner in which the Party treats other investors and their investments.

[61] The rationale of Article 1105 was discussed in a partial arbitration award
issued shortly after the Tribunal issued the Award in this case. In S.D. Myers,
Inc. v. Government of Canada (13 November 2000), the Tribunal said the following
about Article 1105:

The minimum standard of treatment provision of the NAFTA is similar
to clauses contained in [bilateral investment treaties]. The
inclusion of a "minimum standard" provision is necessary to avoid
what might otherwise be a gap. A government might treat an investor
in a harsh, injurious and unjust manner, but do so in a way that is
no different than the treatment inflicted on its own nationals. The
"minimum standard" is a floor below which treatment of foreign
investors must not fall, even if a government were not acting in a
discriminatory manner. (para. 259)

[62] The tribunal in the Myers partial award went on to discuss the proper approach
to the interpretation of Article 1105:

Article 1105(1) expresses an overall concept. The words of the

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 15 of 30

article must be read as a whole. The phrases ... fair and equitable
treatment ... and ... full protection and security ... cannot be
read in isolation. They must be read in conjunction with the
introductory phrase ... treatment in accordance with international
law. (para. 262)

What the Myers tribunal correctly pointed out is that in order to qualify as a
breach of Article 1105, the treatment in question must fail to accord to
international law. Two potential examples are "fair and equitable treatment" and
"full protection and security", but those phrases do not stand on their own. For
instance, treatment may be perceived to be unfair or inequitable but it will not
constitute a breach of Article 1105 unless it is treatment which is not in
accordance with international law. In using the words “international law", Article
1105 is referring to customary international law which is developed by common
practices of countries. It is to be distinguished from conventional international
law which is comprised in treaties entered into by countries (including provisions
contained in the NAFTA other than Article 1105 and other provisions of Chapter 11).

[63] The Myers tribunal also discussed the level of treatment which violates
Article 1105:

The Tribunal considers that a breach of Article 1105 occurs only
when it is shown that an investor has been treated in such an unjust
or arbitrary manner that the treatment rises to the level that is
unacceptable from the international perspective. That determination
must be made in the light of the high measure of deference that
international law generally extends to the right of domestic
authorities to regulate matters within their own borders. The
determination must also take into account any specific rules of
international law that are applicable to the case. (para. 263)

[64] After these Reasons for Judgment had been prepared in draft, counsel for
Metalclad provided a copy of the arbitral award in Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Canada
(April 10, 2001), in which the tribunal declined to follow the interpretation of
Article 1105 given by the Myers tribunal. The Pope & Talbot tribunal concluded that
"investors under NAFTA are entitled to the international law minimum, plus the
fairness elements". The tribunal based its interpretation on the wording of the
corresponding provision in the Model Bilateral Investment Treaty of 1987, which has
been adopted by numerous countries. The provision states that investment shall be
accorded fair and equitable treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security and
shall in no case be accorded treatment less than that required by international
law. The tribunal rejected the submission of the United States (as intervenor) that
the language of Article 1105 demonstrated that the NAFTA Parties did not intend to
diverge from the customary international law concept of fair and equitable
treatment. The tribunal reasoned that the United States relied solely on the
language of Article 1105 and did not offer any other evidence that the NAFTA
Parties intended to reject the "additive" character of bilateral investment
treaties.

[65] With respect, I am unable to agree with the reasoning of the Pope & Talbot
tribunal. It has interpreted the word "including" in Article 1105 to mean "plus",
which has a virtually opposite meaning. Its interpretation is contrary to Article
31(1) of the Vienna Convention, which requires that terms of treaties be given
their ordinary meaning. The evidence that the NAFTA Parties intended to reject the
"additive" character of bilateral investment treaties is found in the fact that
they chose not to adopt the language used in such treaties and I find it surprising
that the tribunal considered that other evidence was required. The NAFTA Parties
chose to use different language in Article 1105 and the natural inference is that
the NAFTA Parties did not want Article 1105 to be given the same interpretation as

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 16 of 30

the wording of the provision in the Model Bilateral Investment Treaty of 1987.

[66] Counsel for Mexico maintains that the Tribunal committed two acts in excess of
jurisdiction in connection with Article 1105. First, counsel says that the Tribunal
used the NAFTA's transparency provisions as a basis for finding a breach of Article
1105. Second, counsel maintains that the Tribunal went beyond the transparency
provisions contained in the NAFTA and created new transparency obligations.
Further, counsel submits that these excesses of jurisdiction were compounded by the
Tribunal improperly making decisions of Mexican domestic law and mistakenly
interpreting Mexico to concede during the arbitration that Metalclad was not
required to exhaust its local remedies before commencing the NAFTA arbitration.
Counsel for Metalclad responds that the Tribunal did not exceed its jurisdiction
and that it simply interpreted Article 1105 to include a minimum standard of
transparency.

[67] In the framework of the International CAA, the issue is whether the Tribunal
made decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration by
deciding upon matters outside Chapter 11. In my opinion, the Tribunal did make
decisions on matters beyond the scope of Chapter 11.

[68] On my reading of the Award, the Tribunal did not simply interpret Article 1105
to include a minimum standard of transparency. No authority was cited or evidence
introduced to establish that transparency has become part of customary
international law. In the Myers award, one of the arbitrators wrote a separate
opinion and surmised an argument that the principle of transparency and regulatory
fairness was intended to have been incorporated into Article 1105. The arbitrator
crafted the argument by assuming that the words “international law" in Article 1105
were not intended to have their routine meaning and should be interpreted in an
expansive manner to include norms that have not yet technically passed into
customary international law. However, the arbitrator did not decide the point
because it had not been fully argued in the arbitration and he was not aware of the
argument having been made in any earlier case law or academic literature. In my
view, such an argument should fail because there is no proper basis to give the
term "international law" in Article 1105 a meaning other than its usual and
ordinary meaning.

[69] Although I do not agree with the argument posed by the arbitrator in the Myers
award, it may be argued that the court would have no ability to set the award aside
under the International CAA if the arbitrator had based the award on that argument.
While the interpretation of Article 1105 would have been flawed, it may be that the
arbitrator would not have decided a matter outside the scope of the submission to
arbitration.

[70] In the present case, however, the Tribunal did not simply interpret the
wording of Article 1105. Rather, it misstated the applicable law to include
transparency obligations and it then made its decision on the basis of the concept
of transparency.

[71] In addition to specifically quoting from Article 1802 in the section of the
Award outlining the applicable law, the Tribunal incorrectly stated that
transparency was one of the objectives of the NAFTA. In that regard, the Tribunal
was referring to Article 102(1), which sets out the objectives of the NAFTA in
clauses (a) through (f£). Transparency is mentioned in Article 102(1) but it is
listed as one of the principles and rules contained in the NAFTA through which the
objectives are elaborated. The other two principles and rules mentioned in Article
102, national treatment and most-favored nation treatment, are contained in Chapter
11. The principle of transparency is implemented through the provisions of Chapter
18, not Chapter 11. Article 102(2) provides that the NAFTA is to be interpreted and

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 17 of 30

applied in light of the objectives set out in Article 102(1), but it does not
require that all of the provisions of the NAFTA are to be interpreted in light of
the principles and rules mentioned in Article 102(1).

[72] In its reasoning, the Tribunal discussed the concept of transparency after
quoting Article 1105 and making reference to Article 102. It set out its
understanding of transparency and it then reviewed the relevant facts. After
discussing the facts and concluding that the Municipality's denial of the
construction permit was improper, the Tribunal stated its conclusion which formed
the basis of its finding of a breach of Article 1105; namely, Mexico had failed to
ensure a transparent and predictable framework for Metalclad's business planning
and investment. Hence, the Tribunal made its decision on the basis of transparency.
This was a matter beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration because there
are no transparency obligations contained in Chapter 11.

[73] The Tribunal went on to state that the acts of the State of SLP and the
Municipality, for which Mexico was responsible, also failed to comply with the
requirements of Article 1105 but it did not state any reasons for this conclusion.
Based on the preceding discussion, the Tribunal must have been referring to the
acts of the State of SLP and the Municipality which contributed to the perceived
failure to provide a transparent and predictable framework for Metalclad's business
planning and investment.

[74] I should add that I would have reached the same conclusion even if I had
agreed with the analysis of Article 1105 by the Pope ¢ Talbot tribunal. Even with
the broader interpretation of Article 1105, the Tribunal still made a decision on a
matter outside the scope of the submission to arbitration by basing its finding of
a breach on the concept of transparency.

[75] Counsel for Metalclad submits that Mexico should not be entitled to challenge
the Tribunal's excess of jurisdiction because it did not comply with s. 16(3) of
the International CAA, which provides that a plea that a tribunal is exceeding the
scope of its authority shall be raised as soon as the matter alleged to be beyond
the scope of its authority is raised during that arbitration. In my view, Mexico
raised a sufficient objection during the arbitration. It submitted in its counter-
memorial that there was no authority for interpreting Article 1105 to extend to
transparency requirements and it pointed out that transparency matters are
addressed in Chapter 18 of the NAFTA.

[76] As I have concluded that the Tribunal decided a matter beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration in connection with its finding that there was a failure
of transparency, it is not necessary to decide whether the Tribunal went beyond the
scope of the submission to arbitration by creating obligations beyond the NAFTA's
transparency provisions. It is also unnecessary to decide whether the Tribunal made
decisions of Mexican domestic law or whether the Tribunal was incorrect in its
understanding that Mexico had conceded that Metalclad was not required to exhaust
its local remedies before resorting to the arbitration.

ARTICLE 1110 - PRE ECOLOGICAL DECREE

[77] Prior to its consideration of the Ecological Decree, the Tribunal concluded
that the actions of Mexico constituted a measure tantamount to expropriation in
violation of Article 1110. The Tribunal based this conclusion on its view that
Mexico permitted or tolerated the conduct of the Municipality, which amounted to
unfair and inequitable treatment breaching Article 1105, and that Mexico therefore
participated or acquiesced in the denial to Metalclad of the right to operate the
landfill. The Tribunal subsequently made reference to the representations by the
Mexican federal authorities and the absence of a timely, orderly or substantive

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 18 of 30

basis for the denial of the construction permit by the Municipality in concluding
that there had been indirect expropriation. It is unclear whether the Tribunal
equated a "measure tantamount to expropriation" with "indirect expropriation" or
whether it made two separate findings of expropriation.

[78] I agree with the submission of counsel for Mexico that the Tribunal's analysis
of Article 1105 infected its analysis of Article 1110. I have held that the
Tribunal decided a matter beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration when it
concluded that Mexico had breached Article 1105. The Tribunal's statement that
Mexico took a measure tantamount to expropriation was directly connected to its
finding of a breach of Article 1105. The statement that Mexico permitted or
tolerated the conduct of the Municipality is a clear reference to the Tribunal's
view that Mexico failed to ensure a transparent and predictable framework for
Metalclad's business planning and investment. Similarly, the Tribunal relied on the
absence of a timely, orderly and substantive basis for the denial of the
construction permit by the Municipality in making its statement that there had been
indirect expropriation. This is also a reference to a lack of transparency.

[79] The Tribunal based its conclusion that there had been a measure tantamount to
expropriation/indirect expropriation, at least in part, on the concept of
transparency. In finding a breach of Article 1105 on the basis of a lack of
transparency, the Tribunal decided a matter beyond the scope of the submission to
arbitration. In relying on the concept of transparency, at least in part, to
conclude that there had been an expropriation within the meaning of Article 1110,
the Tribunal also decided a matter beyond the scope of the submission to
arbitration.

[80] In reaching this conclusion that there had been an expropriation within the
meaning of Article 1110, the Tribunal made a comparison to the arbitration decision
of Biloune v. Ghana Investments Centre (1990), 95 I.L.R. 183, which did not involve
the concept of transparency. The Tribunal recognized that the Biloune decision was
not binding on it but found the decision to be persuasive authority and agreed with
it. In my view, the Tribunal did not independently rely on Biloune in concluding
that there had been an expropriation prior to the issuance of the Ecological
Decree. The Tribunal simply relied on Biloune as support for the conclusion it had
already made that there had been an expropriation (which conclusion was based, at
least in part, on the concept of transparency). There are substantial differences
between the situation in the present case and the circumstances in Biloune. The
main two distinctions are that in Biloune (i) the building was partially destroyed
and then closed by government officials, and (ii) the investor was deported from
the country and was not allowed to return. Apart from the Ecological Decree, the
circumstances in the present case fall considerably short of those in Biloune and
it would not logically follow that Biloune could be an independent basis for
concluding that the actions in this case prior to the issuance of the Decree
amounted to an expropriation.

ARTICLE 1110 - POST ECOLOGICAL DECREE

[81] Counsel for Mexico submits that the Tribunal improperly considered the
Ecological Decree but that, in any event, it did not base its decision on the
Decree. With respect, I cannot agree.

[82] It is true that the Tribunal stated that it did not attach controlling
importance to the Ecological Decree and that a finding of expropriation on the
basis of the Decree was not strictly necessary or essential to its finding of a
violation of Article 1110. However, the Tribunal made these statements because it
also made a finding of expropriation on the basis of the events preceding the
announcement of the Decree. It now becomes potentially important because I have

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 19 of 30

held that the Tribunal decided a matter beyond the scope of the submission to
arbitration in finding that the events preceding the announcement of the Decree
amounted to an expropriation.

[83] Although the Tribunal used an incorrect tense in the Award when it stated that
it considered that the implementation of the Ecological Decree would, in and of
itself, constitute an act tantamount to expropriation, it is clear from another
passage of the Award that the Tribunal considered that the implementation of the
Decree did constitute expropriation. In the second paragraph preceding the misuse
of the future tense, the Tribunal stated that the Decree had the effect of barring
forever the operation of the landfill.

[84] Counsel for Mexico submits that the comments of the Tribunal with respect to
the Ecological Decree were obiter dicta. I agree that they were obiter dicta in
view of the Tribunal's conclusion that the events preceding the announcement of the
Decree constituted an expropriation of the Site. However, that does not detract
from the fact that the obiter dicta comments of Tribunal represent an alternative
finding of expropriation on the basis of the Decree, which alternative finding
becomes the governing finding in the event that the primary finding is set aside.

[85] In view of my conclusion that the Tribunal did find that the Ecological Decree
amounted to an expropriation of the Site, it is necessary to decide the following
issues:

(a) was the Tribunal correct in its conclusion that it could
consider the Ecological Decree?

(b) did the Tribunal decide a matter beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration when it concluded that the
announcement of the Ecological Decree constituted an act
tantamount to expropriation?

(c) if a patently unreasonable error is a basis under the
International CAA for setting aside an arbitral award, was it
patently unreasonable for the Tribunal to conclude that the
announcement of the Ecological Decree constituted an act
tantamount to expropriation?

(a) Consideration of the Ecological Decree

[86] This issue can lead to a setting aside of the Award under s. 34(2) (a) (v) of
the International CAA if the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the
agreement of the parties.

[87] In considering the Ecological Decree, the Tribunal relied on Article 48 of the
ICSID Additional Facility Rules, which are the arbitration rules selected by
Metalclad pursuant to Article 1120 of the NAFTA. Article 48 reads as follows:

(1) Except as the parties otherwise agree, a party may present an
incidental or additional claim or counter-claim, provided that such
ancillary claim is within the scope of the arbitration agreement of
the parties.

(2) An incidental or additional claim shall be presented not later
than in the reply and a counter-claim no later than in the counter-
memorial, unless the Tribunal, upon justification by the party

presenting the ancillary claim and upon considering any objection of

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 20 of 30

the other party, authorizes the presentation of the claim at a later
stage in the proceeding.

[88] Counsel for Mexico submits that the claim based on the Ecological Decree was a
separate claim and does not qualify as an ancillary claim. Although the term
"ancillary claim" is used in both paragraphs of Article 48, the operative language
is the phrase “incidental or additional claim". The use of the term “ancillary
claim" was a shorthand method to refer back to the earlier-used phrase "incidental
or additional claim". In my view, Metalclad's claim based on the Ecological Decree
was an additional claim which, as required by Article 48, fell within the scope of
the agreement to arbitrate (as contained in Section B of Chapter 11 of the NAFTA).

 

[89] Article 48 allows for additional claims if they are presented not later than
in the reply. Metalclad complied with this requirement because it asserted the
claim based on the Ecological Decree in its memorial, which was the first written
submission in the arbitration. The Tribunal was of the view that Mexico had ample
notice and opportunity to address issues relating to the Decree. There is no
requirement in Article 48 that the event giving rise to an additional claim must
have occurred prior to the initiation of the arbitration process.

[90] Mexico complains that after an objection to the Tribunal's jurisdiction to
deal with the claim based on the Ecological Decree was made during the arbitration,
the Tribunal did not make its ruling until it issued the Award. Mexico says that it
did not introduce all of the available evidence with respect to the Decree during
the arbitration in view of its pending objection. In my opinion, there was no
requirement for the Tribunal to have made an immediate ruling on the objection. It
is not uncommon for courts and tribunals to reserve their rulings on objections
until making their overall decision. Mexico knew that the ruling on its objection
could be unfavourable and it should have governed itself accordingly when deciding
upon the evidence to introduce during the arbitration.

[91] I conclude that no error has been demonstrated in the arbitral procedure as a
result of the Tribunal considering the claim based on the Ecological Decree.

(b) Beyond the Scope of the Submission

[92] Counsel for Mexico cites authority for the proposition that a patently
unreasonable error can amount to an excess of jurisdiction but I will deal with
this assertion under the next heading. Under the present heading, I will restrict
my consideration to whether the Tribunal made a decision on a matter beyond the
scope of the submission to arbitration by holding that the announcement of the
Ecological Decree constituted an act tantamount to expropriation.

[93] I have held that the Tribunal did decide a matter beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration when it concluded that the acts preceding the
announcement of the Ecological Decree amounted to an expropriation within the
meaning of Article 1110 because it based its conclusion, at least in part, on a
lack of transparency. The issue now is whether the conclusion that the announcement
of the Ecological Decree amounted to an expropriation similarly involved a decision
on a matter beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration.

[94] In my opinion, the Tribunal's conclusion with respect to the Ecological Decree
stands on its own and is not based on a lack of transparency or on the Tribunal's
finding of a breach of Article 1105. The Tribunal considered the Decree in
isolation of its other findings of breaches of the NAFTA. It specifically
identified the issuance of the Decree as a further ground for a finding of
expropriation.

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 21 of 30

[95] No other basis was advanced for finding that the Tribunal's conclusion with
respect to the Ecological Decree involved a decision on a matter beyond the scope
of the submission to arbitration.

(c) Patently Unreasonable Error

[96] Counsel for Mexico relies on the decision in Navigation Sonamar Inc. v. Algoma
Steamships Ltd., [1987] R.J.Q. 1346; (1995), 1M.A.L.Q.R. 1 (Que. S.C.) as
authority for the proposition that patently unreasonable error can be seen as one
variety of excess of jurisdiction or can be seen as an independent ground for
setting aside an award on the basis that it conflicts with public policy (s. 34(2)
(b) (ii) of the International CAA). In this regard, I believe that counsel was
referring to the reference by Gonthier J. to the decision in Blanchard v. Control
Data Canada Ltd., [1984] 2 S.C.R. 476. Gonthier J. stated that in the Blanchard
decision, Beetz J. had described a patently unreasonable error as an abuse of
authority amounting to fraud and of such a nature as to cause a flagrant injustice.
Gonthier J. also referred to the fact that Beetz J. had quoted from the decision
under appeal, which stated that the arbitrator had committed an excess of
jurisdiction by giving an unreasonable interpretation to the facts, with the result
that the award was contrary to public order. Gonthier J. went on to hold that the
decision of the arbitral panel was not patently unreasonable.

[97] As I similarly do not believe in this case that the Tribunal made a patently
unreasonable error with respect to the Ecological Decree, I need not decide whether
a patently unreasonable decision is a ground for setting aside an arbitral award
pursuant to the International CAA. Although the issue need not be decided, I note
that the Blanchard decision, upon which Gonthier J. relied, dealt with a domestic
arbitral award at a time before the Supreme Court of Canada developed the
"pragmatic and functional approach" to the determination of the standard of review
applicable to decisions of administrative tribunals. I also note that in Quintette
Coal, supra at paras. 51-2, the reasoning of Gibbs J.A. indicates that it was his
view that the domestic test of patently unreasonable error did not apply to the
International CAA.

[98] Counsel for Mexico identifies 19 areas in respect of which it is asserted that
the Tribunal failed to have regard to relevant evidence and thereby made patently
unreasonable findings. Only one of these areas relates to the Ecological Decree. I
do not propose to deal with the other 18 areas because they have been rendered
academic by my conclusions that the Tribunal decided on matters beyond the scope of
the submission to arbitration when it found a breach of Article 1105 and when it
found that the acts preceding the announcement of the Decree amounted to an
expropriation under Article 1110.

[99] The Tribunal gave an extremely broad definition of expropriation for the
purposes of Article 1110. In addition to the more conventional notion of
expropriation involving a taking of property, the Tribunal held that expropriation
under the NAFTA includes covert or incidental interference with the use of property
which has the effect of depriving the owner, in whole or in significant part, of
the use or reasonably-to-be-expected economic benefit of property. This definition
is sufficiently broad to include a legitimate rezoning of property by a
municipality or other zoning authority. However, the definition of expropriation is
a question of law with which this Court is not entitled to interfere under the
International CAA.

[100] The Tribunal reviewed the terms of the Ecological Decree and concluded that
it had the effect of barring forever the operation of Metalclad's landfill and
constituted an act tantamount to expropriation. It made reference to the Ninth
Article of the Decree, which requires that all activities in the area are subject

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 22 of 30

to guidelines established by the management plan for ensuring ecological
preservation of the cacti reserve. The Tribunal also made reference to the
Fourteenth Article of the Decree, which forbids the spillage or discharge of
polluting agents on the soil, subsoil or water of the reserve area. In my view, the
Tribunal's conclusion that the issuance of the Decree was an act tantamount to
expropriation is not patently unreasonable.

[101] Although the Tribunal did not make reference in the Award to the transitional
provision of the Ecological Decree stating that all permits, licenses or
authorizations granted before the date of the Decree were legal, it is not at all
clear how any such permits, licenses or authorizations would interact with the
Fourteenth Article. It is implicit in the Award that the Tribunal concluded that
the Fourteenth Article prevailed over any such permits, licenses or authorizations,
and this conclusion is not patently unreasonable.

[102] In its review of the facts, the Tribunal set out the allegations of Metalclad
that there had been media reports that (i) the Governor of the State of SLP had
stated that the Ecological Decree cancelled any possibility of opening the
industrial waste landfill at the Site and (ii) a high level official of the State
of SLP had expressed confidence that all possibility for Metalclad to operate its
landfill was closed, irrespective of the outcome of the NAFTA arbitration. Counsel
for Mexico says that these media reports were denied in testimony during the
arbitration and asserts that the Tribunal relied upon this inadmissible evidence. I
do not agree that the Tribunal relied upon the media reports in reaching its
conclusion. The Tribunal based its conclusion on a review of the terms of the
Decree and specifically stated that it need not consider the motivation or intent
of the adoption of the Decree.

[103] Counsel for Mexico also says that the Tribunal ignored a letter from an
official with the Secretariat of the Environment stating that the operation of a
hazardous waste landfill was consistent with the Fourteenth Article of the
Ecological Decree. While it is true that the Tribunal did not explicitly make
reference to this letter, it reviewed the terms of the Decree and came to its own
conclusion. The actual terms of the Decree have more probative value than the
interpretation given to the Decree by an official of Mexico. The Tribunal
considered Mexico's representation that the Decree did not prevent the operation of
the landfill and stated that it was not persuaded by the representation.

[104] Counsel for Mexico further says that the Tribunal did not make reference to
Article 1114(1) of the NAFTA, which reads as follows:

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from
adopting, maintaining or enforcing any measure otherwise consistent
with this Chapter that it considers appropriate to ensure that
investment activity in its territory is undertaken in a manner
sensitive to environmental concerns.

Although the Tribunal did not mention Article 1114(1) in connection with the
Ecological Decree, it did comment on the Article earlier in the Award. It pointed
out that the conclusion of the Convenio and the issuance of the federal permits
showed that Mexico was satisfied that Metalclad's project was consistent with, and
sensitive to, environmental concerns. In any event, any error by the Tribunal in
this regard is not patently unreasonable.

(d) Conclusion

[105] There is no ground under s. 34 of the International CAA to set aside the
Award as it relates to the conclusion of the Tribunal that the issuance of the

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 23 of 30

Ecological Decree amounted to an expropriation of the Site without compensation.
METALCLAD'S IMPROPER ACTS

[106] Counsel for Mexico submits that there were two categories of improper acts on
the part of Metalclad which were not explicitly addressed by the Tribunal. Counsel
says that these improper acts render the Award in conflict with the public policy
in British Columbia and that the Award should be set aside pursuant to s. 34 (2) (b)
(ii) of the International CAA.

[107] The two categories of alleged improper acts are as follows:

(a) it was alleged that a former federal environmental officer
and one of Metalclad's chief witnesses regarding
representations made by Mexican federal officials to Metalclad
Humberto Rodarte Ramon, was improperly affiliated with
Metalclad. It was alleged that Mr. Rodarte's wife improperly
received approximately $150,000 worth of Metalclad stock and
two payments of $10,000 each from Metalclad (the two $10,000
payments were part of the expenses which Metalclad was
reimbursed by the Award). It was also alleged that Mr. Rodarte
was due a commission for his role in arranging the sale of
COTERIN to Metalclad;

(b) it was alleged that Metalclad attempted to deceive the
Tribunal by representing that it had incurred $20.5 million of
expenses for the construction of the landfill facility.

[108] Counsel for Mexico relies on the decision in Transport de Cargaison (Cargo
Carriers) (Kasc-Co) Ltd. v. Industrial Bulk Carriers, [1990] R.D.J. 418 (Que. C.A.)
for the proposition that an award is contrary to public policy if it provides for
the reimbursement of a bribe. Counsel also relies on the UNCITRAL report for
comments to the effect that corruption, bribery or fraud is a ground for setting
aside an arbitral award on the basis that the award is in conflict with public
policy. In connection with the alleged misrepresentation as to the amount of
expenses required to construct the landfill facility, counsel cites the decision in
Société European Gas Turbines SA v. Westman International Ltd., 2 Revue de
l'arbitrage 359 (1994) (Paris C.A.) for the proposition that the discovery of
deception in the presentation of a claim for damages is a ground for setting aside
an arbitral award.

[109] Both of these matters were canvassed extensively during the arbitration. The
Tribunal did not deal directly with the allegations involving Mr. Rodarte but it
effectively held that Metalclad had proceeded in good faith when it relied upon
representations of federal officials and constructed the landfill facility. The
Tribunal made reference to the assertion of Metalclad that it had invested $20.5
million in the landfill project. It rejected some of the claimed expenses and made
its award in the amount of $16,685,000 (which included interest at a rate of 6% per
annum for approximately five years).

(a) Corruption

[110] I have reviewed the evidence from the arbitration relating to the alleged
corruption of Mr. Rodarte, including the alleged bribes to his wife, and I am not
persuaded that Mexico proved any corruption in which Metalclad participated. The
Tribunal presumably came to the same conclusion because it found that federal
officials had made the representations asserted by Metalclad and that Metalclad
relied on the representations.

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 24 of 30

[111] The most damning allegations were that Mr. Rodarte's wife received $150,000
worth of Metalclad stock and two payments of $10,000 each. On the surface, these
benefits appear to be evidence of corruption in which Metalclad was involved.
However, the evidence does not establish that the transactions were bribes on
behalf of Metalclad. Mr. Rodarte's wife was a shareholder in a company called Eco-
Administracion, which had plans to build a hazardous waste incineration facility in
Mexico. Through a subsidiary, Metalclad acquired part of the shares in Eco-
Administracion in 1991 and the remainder of the shares in 1993. The Metalclad stock
and the two $10,000 payments were received by Mr. Rodarte's wife as consideration
for the transfer of her shares in Eco-Administracion to Metalclad. Although the
initial acquisition of the shares in Eco-Administracion by Mr. Rodarte's wife may
have been improper, the acquisition was prior to Metalclad's involvement and
Metalclad was not party to any corruption.

[112] The other principal allegation against Mr. Rodarte was that while he was a
federal official, he had played a role in arranging the sale of COTERIN from its
former owners to Metalclad and had negotiated an improper commission to be paid by
the former owners. If this is true, it may undermine Mr. Rodarte's credibility, but
it is not evidence of corruption on the part of Metalclad. The Tribunal implicitly
accepted the evidence of Mr. Rodarte and this Court should not interfere with its
determination in this regard (in any event, Mr. Rodarte's credibility goes to the
finding of a breach of Article 1105 and I have held that the Tribunal made a
decision on a matter beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration when it made
this finding) .

(b) Excess Damage Claim

[113] Metalclad asserted in the arbitration that it had invested $20.5 million in
the landfill project. This amount included all expenses which it had incurred in
connection with all of its projects in Mexico from 1991 through 1996. The Tribunal
rejected two aspects of these claimed expenses. It first rejected the expenses
incurred in 1991 and 1992, prior to Metalclad's acquisition of COTERIN, as being
too remote. Second, the Tribunal rejected the application of a concept called
bundling, which involves the allocation against one project of the aggregate of
expenses for a series of related projects. In the result, the Tribunal only
accepted the expenses which were directly related to the landfill facility at the
site.

[114] In my opinion, the decision of the Paris Court of Appeal in the European Gas
Turbines case is distinguishable from the present case. In European Gas Turbines, a
fraudulent claim of expenses was accepted by the arbitral tribunal and included in
its award. The award was partially set aside when fresh evidence disclosed the
fraud. It was appropriate to partially set aside the award insofar as it was based
on the fraudulent accounts because the award was in conflict with public policy to
the extent that it encompassed the fraudulent expenses. In the present case, the
excessive claim was not accepted by the Tribunal and it is my view that the Award
is not in conflict with the public policy in British Columbia.

[115] It is important to note that in the European Gas Turbines decision, the Paris
Court of Appeal did not rely on the fraud to set aside the award in its entirety.
It only set aside the portion of the award that was based on the fraudulent claim.
In the present case, the Award does not include any damages based on the expenses
which Mexico asserts were fraudulently claimed.

[116] Counsel for Mexico submits that it should make no difference that Metalclad's
deception attempt was discovered before the Tribunal issued the Award. I do not
read s. 34(2) (b) (ii) of the International CAA to mean that arbitral awards should
be set aside in their entirety whenever it is shown that there was a deception

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 25 of 30

which was not relied upon by the arbitral tribunal in making its award.

[117] In addition, I am not satisfied that the overstatement of the expenses was a
deliberate attempt to deceive the Tribunal. The total amount of Metalclad's
expenses for its unsuccessful projects in Mexico was $20.5 million and it is
debatable from an accounting point of view whether the capital costs of various
related projects may be allocated to one of the projects. There was an arguable
basis for claiming the full $20.5 million expended by Metalclad in Mexico. On my
review of the relevant evidence, I am not persuaded that Metalclad claimed expenses
which it knew it had no legal justification to receive. While Metalclad was
aggressive in its claim for damages, I am not satisfied that it was fraudulent.

(c) Conclusion

[118] It has not been established that there were any improper acts on behalf of
Metalclad which put the Award in conflict with the public policy in British
Columbia.

FAILURE TO ADDRESS ALL QUESTIONS

[119] The final basis on which Mexico seeks to set aside the Award (other than
errors in the interpretation of Articles 1105 and 1110 which are questions of law
that are not reviewable under the International CAA) is that the Tribunal failed to
answer all questions raised by it which could have affected the result. Counsel for
Mexico maintains that the failure of the Tribunal to answer all such questions
included the following:

(a) the failure of the Tribunal to deal with numerous questions
related to the finding by the Tribunal of a breach of Article
1105;

(b) the failure of the Tribunal to address the question of
whether Metalclad acted in bad faith in bringing the claim;

(c) the failure of the Tribunal to deal with deceptions in
Metalclad's memorial when it asserted that it did not become
aware of the need for a municipal construction permit until
December 1995 and when it asserted that it had expended $20.5
million in connection with the landfill facility at the Site
and

(d) the failure of the Tribunal to set out the precise manner
in which it calculated the damages to which Metalclad was
entitled, including the failure to address the evidence that
the value of COTERIN's assets was declared by Metalclad in 1996
for tax purposes to be only $136,339

[120] Counsel for Mexico relies for this ground on three decisions of ad hoc
annulment committees reviewing arbitral awards made pursuant to the ICSID
Convention, Kléckner v. Cameroon (3 May 1985), 2 ICSID Reports 95, Amco v.
Indonesia (16 May 1986), 1 ICSID Reports 508, and MINE v. Guinea (22 December 1989)
4 ICSID Reports 79. These decisions are said to stand for the proposition that an
arbitral award should be set aside if it does not address all arguments made by the
parties which would have changed the outcome of the award if the arguments had been
accepted. Article 53(1) of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules reads as follows:

The award shall be made in writing, shall deal with every question

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 26 of 30

submitted to the Tribunal and shall state the reasons upon which it
is based.

Counsel points out that Article 53(1) is equivalent to the relevant Article in the
ICSID Convention (Article 48) and submits that, as a result, these decisions are
applicable to this case.

[121] To the extent that these three decisions of the annulment committees have
interpreted the phrase "every question submitted to the Tribunal" to mean “every
argument made to the Tribunal which could have changed the outcome of the award",
it is my opinion that the interpretation is overly broad. When there is a
submission to arbitration, there are questions or basic issues which the arbitral
tribunal is asked to answer, and this is the type of question to which Article 53
refers. For instance, Article 1119 of the NAFTA requires that a notice of intention
to submit a claim to arbitration specify, among other things, the issues and
factual basis for the claim. Article 3 of the Additional Facility Rules requires
that a notice of arbitration contain information concerning the issues in dispute
and an indication of the amount involved.

[122] The tribunal must answer the questions that have been submitted to it and
give its reasons for its answers. In other words, the tribunal must deal fully with
the dispute between the parties and give reasons for its decision. It is not
reasonable to require the tribunal to answer each and every argument which is made
in connection with the questions which the tribunal must decide. In the present
case, the questions submitted to the Tribunal were essentially whether Article 1105
or Article 1110 had been breached and, if so, what measure of damages would
compensate Metalclad for the breach or breaches. The Tribunal answered these
questions and gave reasons for its answers in the Award. In answering the
questions, the Tribunal explicitly or implicitly dealt with each argument that had
been made.

[123] Article 49 is the only other Article in the Additional Facility Rules which
refers to "questions submitted" to a tribunal (there is an Article which refers to
questions of procedure and another Article which refers to questions which the
tribunal has omitted to answer). Article 49 provides that if a party fails to
appear or to present its case at any stage of the proceeding, the other party may
request the tribunal to deal with the questions submitted to it and to render an
award. If a "question" were to be interpreted as the equivalent of an "argument",
one would think that a word different from "question" would have been used in
Article 49 because the circumstances contemplated by Article 49 could well arise
before the arguments by both of the parties had been made.

[124] These three decisions of annulment committees have not been universally
accepted. In commenting on the decisions in Commentary on the ICSID Convention:
Article 52 (Fall 1998), ICSID Review: Foreign Investment Law Journal, Vol. 13, No.
2, Professor Schreuer pointed out (at p. 529) that the first two of these decisions
have attracted severe criticism for crossing the line between annulment and appeal
by re-examining the merits of the cases. Professor Schreuer also set out the
conflicting policy considerations:

There are two potentially conflicting principles at work in the
review process. One is the principle of finality; the other is the
principle of correctness. Finality is designed to serve the purpose
of efficiency in terms of an expeditious and economical settlement
of disputes. Correctness may be an elusive goal that takes time and
effort and may involve several layers of control, a phenomenon that
is well known from domestic court procedure. In international
arbitration the principle of finality is often seen to take

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 27 of 30

precedence over the principle of correctness. The desire to see a
dispute settled is regarded as more important than the substantive
correctness of the decision. (pp. 520-1)

[125] Although Article 53(1) of the Additional Facility Rules is essentially
identical to the corresponding Article of the ICSID Convention (Article 48(3)),
there is a significant difference between the two sets of rules. The normal method
of challenging an award arising from an arbitration which is not governed by the
ICSID Convention is through the national courts and the grounds for setting aside
the award are typically set out in legislation (in the present case, the
International CAA). By contrast, the ISCID Convention contains a mechanism for
review of arbitral awards by ad hoc annulment committees. The grounds for annulling
awards are set out in Article 52(1) of the ISCID Convention, two of which are as
follows:

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental
rule of procedure; or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it
is based.

The annulment committee in Kléckner stated that reference must be made to both of
clauses (d) and (e) of Article 52(1) when addressing a failure to deal with
questions submitted to the tribunal. In MINE, the annulment committee pointed out
that while clause (e) of Article 52(1) only deals with the requirement of Article
48(3) to state reasons, a failure to deal with every question submitted to the
tribunal may also constitute a failure to state reasons.

[126] Hence, there is a specific provision in the ICSID Convention for annulling an
arbitral award when a failure to deal with every question submitted to the tribunal
constitutes a failure to state reasons. On the other hand, the only potential basis
for setting aside an arbitral award under the International CAA for failure to deal
with all questions is s. 34(2)(a)(v) ("the arbitral procedure was not in accordance
with the agreement of the parties").

[127] The importance of the distinction is illustrated in a decision of this Court,
Food Services of America Inc. v. Pan Pacific Specialities Ltd. (1997), 32 B.C.L.R.
(3d) 225. The principal issue in that case was whether an international arbitral
award should be enforced in British Columbia when the arbitrators failed to deliver
reasons for their award. Such a failure would clearly be a ground for annulling the
award under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention. Section 36 of the
International CAA sets out the grounds for the court to refuse enforcement of an
international award. Clause 36(1) (a) (v) sets out the same ground as is contained in
s. 34(2) (a) (v); namely, the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the
agreement of the parties.

[128] Drossos J. first held that the parties had waived their right to oppose
enforcement of the award under s. 36. In the alternative, he also held that the
award should be enforced despite the failure of the arbitrators to give reasons as
required by the applicable rules (the International Arbitration Rules). His
reasoning was as follows:

The respondent relies on the argument of the parties to have their
claims determined by an arbitration which is in accordance with the
Rules. The plain meaning of this is that the arbitration itself,
that is the hearing and the process of deciding the matter, be in
accord with the Rules. The issuing of reasons after the fact is not
part of the arbitration itself. Further, s. 36(1) (a) (v) provides a

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 28 of 30

basis for opposition to enforcement when the arbitral procedure did
not accord with the parties' agreement. In this case, the procedure
of the arbitration is not in question, it was in accord with the
parties' agreement. Even if the failure to give reasons were
considered part of the arbitral procedure, the failure does not
bring into question the fairness of the hearing or of the decision
making process and is, therefore, not sufficiently serious to
violate the parties' agreement to have an arbitration in accord with
the Rules. The respondent has failed to bring itself under s. 36 to
warrant the court exercising its discretion to refuse enforcement on
this basis. (p. 232)

[129] I have reservations about the correctness of the conclusion of Drossos J.
that the giving of reasons is not part of the arbitral procedure when the rules of
procedure governing the arbitration stipulate that reasons are to be given.
However, in the absence of an express ground of annulment in the terms of Article
52(1) (e) of the ICSID Convention, I agree with Drossos J. that the seriousness of
the defect in the arbitral procedure should be considered when this Court is
deciding whether to exercise its discretion to either set aside an award under s.
34 or refuse to enforce an award under s. 36. Like s. 36(1), s. 34(2) is permissive
in nature because it states that an arbitral award may be set aside if one of the
conditions contained in clauses (a) or (b) is met.

[130] In this regard, I comment as follows on the questions which Mexico maintains
should have been answered by the Tribunal:

(a) the questions related to Article 1105 are academic in view
of my conclusion that the Tribunal decided on a matter outside
the scope of the submission to arbitration when it found a
breach of Article 1105;

(b) the Tribunal effectively found that Metalclad had acted in
good faith when it relied on the representations of the federal
authorities;

(c) the alleged deceptions did not affect the Award; and

(d) the Tribunal did give general reasons for its method of
calculating the damages and it implicitly rejected Mexico's
submission that the damages should be based on the declared tax
value of COTERIN's assets.

In my view, the Tribunal adequately dealt with the principal issues before it and
the failure of the Tribunal to explicitly deal with all of Mexico's arguments is
not sufficiently serious to justify the exercise of this Court's discretion to set
aside the Award.

[131] Even if one were to interpret the word "question" in Article 53(1) of the
Additional Facility Rules as broadly as counsel for Mexico submits, there is
another reason why I would not exercise my discretion to set aside the Award. The
reason is that there was an arbitral procedure available to remedy the procedural
error of which Mexico complains. Article 58 of the Additional Facility Rules
provides that within 45 days of the date of an award, either party may request the
tribunal to decide any question which it had omitted to decide in the award. It was
open to Mexico to have requested the Tribunal to answer the arguments which it now
complains that the Tribunal did not answer. In these circumstances, I decline to
exercise my discretion to set aside the Award for the failure of the Tribunal to
answer these arguments.

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/0 1/06/2001 BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 29 of 30

[132] Counsel for Mexico submits that it was not necessary to make a request under
Article 58 for the Tribunal to decide questions which it omitted to answer. Counsel
relies on the decision in Amco v. Indonesia where it was held that the party
seeking annulment of an award does not have to first make a request of the tribunal
to answer questions it omitted to answer under a provision similar to Article 58.
The rationale was that the full or partial annihilation of the reasoning and
conclusion of an award is the task which the ICSID Convention allots to ad hoc
annulment committees, and not to the tribunal which rendered the award. This
rationale may properly apply under the ICSID Convention, which contains a process
for the review of awards and which includes a failure to give reasons as a specific
ground of annulment. However, in my view, it does not apply within the framework of
the Additional Facility Rules and the International CAA. There is a mechanism
within the Additional Facility Rules to remedy an alleged failure of the tribunal
to answer all questions submitted to it. There should be recourse to that mechanism
before going outside of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules and asking a court to
set aside the award on the basis of a failure to follow the proper arbitral
procedure.

CONCLUSION

[133] In order to have this Court set aside the Award in its entirety, Mexico was
required to successfully establish that all three of the Tribunal's findings of
breaches of Articles 1105 and 1110 of the NAFTA involved decisions beyond the scope
of the submission to arbitration or that the Award should be set aside in view of
Metalclad's allegedly improper acts or the Tribunal's alleged failure to answer all
questions submitted to it. Although Mexico succeeded in challenging the first two
of the Tribunal's findings of breaches of Articles 1105 and 1110, it was not
successful on the remaining points. Accordingly, the Award should not be set aside
in its entirety.

[134] Nevertheless, the Award should be partially set aside. In calculating the
damages to be paid by Mexico, the Tribunal included interest at the rate of 6%
compounded annually from December 5, 1995 (the date on which the Municipality
denied Metalclad's application for a construction permit) until 45 days after the
issuance of the Award. The date of December 5, 1995 was selected by the Tribunal on
the basis of its finding of the first two breaches of Articles 1105 and 1110, and I
have held that the Tribunal made decisions on matters beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration with respect to its findings of the first two breaches.
The finding of a breach in respect of which there is no basis to set it aside is
the breach of Article 1110 by the expropriation of the Site through the issuance of
the Ecological Decree without payment of compensation. The Ecological Decree was
issued on September 20, 1997.

[135] The result is that the amount of compensation ordered to be paid by Mexico to
Metalclad includes interest from December 5, 1995 to September 20, 1997 (plus the
compounding effects thereafter). As I would have set aside the Award in its
entirety if it had been based solely on the first two of the Tribunal's findings of
breaches of the NAFTA, the Award should be set aside insofar as it includes
interest which flows only from those two findings. Therefore, I set the Award aside
to the extent that it includes interest prior to September 20, 1997 (and any
consequential compounding effects). If the parties are unable to agree on the
interest re-calculation, the matter is remitted back to the Tribunal.

[136] Although I have concluded that the Tribunal made decisions on matters outside
the scope of the submission to arbitration when it found the first two breaches of
Articles 1105 and 1110, I should not be taken as holding that there was no breach
of Article 1105 and no breach of Article 1110 until the issuance of the Ecological
Decree. The function of this Court is limited to setting aside arbitral awards if
the criteria set out in s. 34 of the International CAA are shown to exist. I

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/01/06/2001BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

2001BCSC0664 Page 30 of 30

express no opinion on whether there was a breach of Article 1105 or a breach of
Article 1110 prior to the issuance of the Decree on grounds other than those relied
upon by the Tribunal. If Metalclad wishes to pursue the portion of the interest
contained in the Award which I have set aside, by establishing a breach of Article
1105 or Article 1110 prior to the issuance of the Decree without regard to the
concept of transparency, the matter is remitted to the Tribunal.

[137] Despite the fact Mexico was successful in establishing that two of the
Tribunal's findings of breaches of the NAFTA involved decisions on matters beyond
the scope of the submission to arbitration, Metalclad carried the day in resisting
Mexico's application to have the Award set aside in its entirety. However, the
partial success of Mexico did lead to the Award being set aside to the extent that
it included interest prior to September 20, 1997. In these circumstances, I grant
Metalclad 75% of its costs of this proceeding.

"D.F. Tysoe, J."
The Honourable Mr. Justice D.F. Tysoe

http://www.courts.gov.be.ca/jdb-txt/SC/0 1/06/2001 BCSC0664.htm 08/05/2001

