 

 

a
ot
8
rt
og
wD
@
i

a
OCTOBER 27, 1997

 

DECISION ON A REQUEST BY THE RESPONDENT
FOR AN ORDER PROHIBITING THE CLAIMANT
FROM REVEALING INFORMATION REGARDING
1CSLD CASE ARBK(AF)/97/1

kL On September 10 1997, the Respondent, the Government of Mexico,
recuested the Tribunal to issue a formal order declaring that the proceedings
are confidential and that breach of such order would permit the Respondent
to request the Tribunal to enforce sanctions. The request was expressed as
being made pursuant to Article 1134 of the NAFTA and Article 28 of the
ICSID Additional Facility Rules. The Respondent's request was
communicated to the Claimant for comment and cormuments were sent ta the

Tribunal on October 9, 1997.

2 The Respondent complains, first, of a telephone conference call
conducted on August 19 1997, by the Chief Executive Officer (C.E.O) of the
Ciaimant which (to use the Respondent's description) “apparently was
intended to provide information to shareholders, investment analysts, and
other members of the public, who are interested in the Claimants’ activities”
The C.E.O. first described the formal procedural steps involved in the case
ané then went on to discuss the content and possible effect of certain
newspaper articles, as well as the possibility of a settlement and its terms.
The Respondent also complains of what it describes as “a publicity campaign
by the Claimant"; of a suggestion, as the Respondent sees it, by the Claimant
that steps may be taken under the law of one of the NAFTA Parties to obtain

he record of the proceedings and, finally, of what the Respondent’ sees asa”

 

EEE

OCT 27 "97 @7+20PM WB ICSID P.477

oO
serious Question as to the Claimants’ motives in invoking the NAFTA

Chapice Eleven dispute settlement procedure. Ny

3. ‘Vhe Respondent invokes in support of its application certain remarks
made by the President of the Tribunal in the course of the first procedural
session held an 15 July 1997 which the Respondent interprets as declaring the
existence of a general principle of confidentiality of the proceedings. The
remarks in question, as transcribed from the tape recording of the session,

were as follows:

“So we come to item 7, Records of Hearings, which is governed by the
Arbitration Rules, Article Forty-four. And that Article provides that the
Secretariat shall keep minntes of hearings and specifies what is expected. It
requires the minutes to be signed by myself and the Secretary General, and I
note the point that they shall not be published without the consent of the
parties. On this point of, if I can put it this way, confidentiality of the
proceedings, it is one which is to be borne in mind by all concerned. And
then, in the third paragraph of Article Forty-four, it provides that the Tribunal
may, and at the request of a party shall, order that the hearings be more fully
recorded, in which event certain items may be omitted from the minutes.
Now, the current proceedings of today are being fully recorded and,
therefore, to that extent the minutes can be abbreviated. But again, I think
thal there’s nothing for us to do except to note that point”.

A The Tribunal considers that the reference in the Minutes to the
“confidentiality of the proceedings” cannot by itself be taken as expressing a
general requirement that the Parties refrain entirely from every public
utterance mentioning the existence, or speculating upon the possible outcome,
of the proceedings. Read in their context, the words used by the President,

“ the confidentiality of the proceedings”, are no more than a paraphrase of the
words immediately preceding them, namely, that the minules of the hearing
“shall not be published without the consent of the parties”. The prohibition
must be read as one upon ie publication of the contents of any particular

minule, except in so far as the minute is merely a restatement of a:paint

   

 

Ww

 

rc7 27°27 @7Z1PM WB ICSID P.SV7

aiready.covered by the content of a public document e.g. the NAFTA itself or
the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules. a

5. Accordingly, the Claimant's mention of the specific time-limits
established by the Tribunal for the exchange of written pleadings and for

ceztain subsequent action was not made in accordance with the Rules.

 

However, this departure from the Rules dees not appear to the Tribunal to be
: of major significance. Though as a matter of principle regrettable, it appears,
® in the circumstances to be de minimis. The Tribunal will disregard it, bul
expresses the hope that no other departures from the Rules will occur.
é As to the other matters to which the Respondent refers, the Tribunal
finds that none of them involve a publication of any aspect of the minutes.

7. The Tribunal notes, however, that the Respondent states that ils
request is made pursuant to Article 1134 of the NAFTA as well as Article 28 of
the ICSTD Additional Facility Rules. The former provision empowers the
Tribunal to order interim measures of protection to preserve the rights uf a

@ disputing party or to ensure that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is made fully
effective. The latter provision only prescribes that the Tribunal shall make the
orders required for the conduct of the hearing. The complaint does not
invoke Article 47 of the Additional Facility Rules which deals with
provisional measures of protection. Even so, the reference to Article 1134 of
NAETA is sufficient to oblige the Tribunal to consider whether the situation is

one requiring an order for provisional measures of protection.

& In order to succeed in a request for provisional measures an applicant

party must demonstrate thatthe measures are urgently required in order to -

protect its rights from an injury that cannot be made good by the subsequent, ot
‘

 

 

 

 

h

oul “ "9? 67:22PM WB ICSID S.¢

6816 Pa

- alleged that for certain reasons the Claimants;

payment of damages. The applicant party here (the Respondent) has in fact

activities “affect the integrity of

 

the process, undermine the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and prejudice the

Respondents’ rights”. The Tribunal recalls in this connection the statement

 

made by the Tribunal in the cov Indonesia case te the t that Article <7
of the ICSID Convention “requires the: the party that solicits ¢ provisional
Tncasure to specify the rights that such measure woulc be pursorted to
preserve. Obviously, the rights to which this provisism ‘s relating are the
rights in the dispute, and no such righzs could be threatened by the
publication of articles like those which 2re produced by both parties”.

(See 1 ICISID Reports 410, 411). Though the present case is beg conducted
under the NAFTA dispute settlement procecures and witur 2CSID
Additional Facility and not under the [CSTD Convention, the reasoning
applicable to Article 47 of the latter is ro less applicable to the wording of
Article 1134 of the NAFTA. The Tribural can find nothing in the
Respondent's statement of reasons to support the claim that its rights have
suffered prejudice, let alone serious or irreversible damage.
9. There remains nonetheless a question as to whether there exisis any
general principle of confidentiality that woutd operate to prozzbit public
discussion of the arbitration proceedings by either party. Neither the NAFTA
nor the ICSID (Additional Facility) Rules contain any express restriction on
the freedom of the parties in this respect. Though it is f&equen:ly said that one
of the reasons for recourse to arbitraticn is to avoid publicity, anless the
agreement between the parties incorperates such a limitation, cach of them is
still free to speak publicly of the arbitration. It may be observed tha: no such
limitation is written into such major arditral texts as the UNC/TRAL Rules or

the draft Articles on Arbitt&tion adopted by the Interrationa

 

Conumission. Indeed, as has been pointed out by the Claimart in its

es9318 CONS ILTOF IN JuSiUiTA

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. coTaments, us. ted States security laws, the Claimant, as a public

compen

 

W trace on a public stock exchange in the United States, is under a

ive Guiy co provide certain information about its activities to its

 

po
sharchelders, especiavy regarding its involvement ina process the outcome of

which could perhaps significantly affect ils share value.

 

2 having been said, it still appears te the Tribunal that it
would be of e¢vantage ta the orderly unfolding of the arbitral process and
conducive to the maintenance of working relations between the Parties if

uring the proceedings they were both to limit public discussion of the case to

 

& minimum, ct only to any externally imposed obligation of disclosure

by which eithe: cf them may be legally bound.

aA pA

 

es55.3 LUNSUL HURLH JURIOICA

 

