CASE No. ARB(AF)/97/1

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR
SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
(ADDITIONAL FACILITY)

BETWEEN:

METALCLAD CORPORATION

Claimant
and

THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES
Respondent

AWARD

Before the Arbitral Tribunal constituted
under Chapter Eleven of the North
American Free Trade Agreement, and
comprised of:

Professor Sir Elihu Lauterpacht, QC, CBE
President

Mr Benjamin R. Civiletti

Mr José Luis Siqueiros

Date of dispatch to the parties: August 30, 2000

Ill.

VI.

VIL.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

THE PARTIES

A. The Claimant

B. The Respondent

OTHER ENTITIES

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

FACTS AND ALLEGATIONS

A. The Facilities at Issue

B. Metalclad’s Purchase of the Site and Its
Landfill Permits

C. Construction of the Hazardous Waste Landfill

D. Metalclad is Prevented from Operating
the Landfill

APPLICABLE LAW

THE TRIBUNALS DECISION

A.

Responsibility for the conduct of state
and local governments

NAFTA, Article 1105: fair and equitable
treatment

NAFTA, Article 1110: Expropriation

Paragraph
1

2-5

28-29

30-36
37-44

45-69
70-71

72-112

73

74-101
102-112

CASES,

VIII.

QUANTIFICATION OF DAMAGES

OR COMPENSATION

A. Basic elements of Valuation
B. “Bundling”

C. Remediation

D. Interest

E. Recipient

COSTS

AWARD

113-129

113-125
126
127
128
129

130

131

I. INTRODUCTION

1. This dispute arises out of the activities of the Claimant, Metal-
clad Corporation (hereinafter “Metalclad”), in the Mexican Municipality
of Guadalcazar (hereinafter “Guadalcazar”), located in the Mexican State
of San Luis Potosi (hereinafter “SLP”), Metalclad alleges that Respondent,
the United Mexican States (hereinafter “Mexico”), through its local
governments of SLP and Guadalcazar, interfered with its development and
operation of a hazardous waste landfill. Metalclad claims that this interfe-
rence is a violation of the Chapter Eleven investment provisions of the
North American Free Trade Agreement (hereinafter “NAFTA”). In parti-
cular, Metalclad alleges violations of (i) NAFTA, Article 1105, which
requires each Party to NAFTA to “accord to investments of investors of
another Party treatment in accordance with international law, including
fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security”; and (ii)
NAFTA, Article 1110, which provides that “no Party to NAFTA may
directly or indirectly nationalize or expropriate an investment of an
investor of another Party in its territory or take a measure tantamount to
nationalization or expropriation of such an investment (‘expropriatiom),
except: (a) for a public purpose; (b) on a non-discriminatory basis; (c) in
accordance with due process of law and Article 1105(1); and (d) on
payment of compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2 through 6”.
Mexico denies these allegations.

Il. THE PARTIES
A. The Claimant

2. Metalclad is an enterprise of the United States of America, incor-
porated under the laws of Delaware. Eco-Metalclad Corporation (herei-
nafter “ECO”) is an enterprise of the United States of America,
incorporated under the laws of Utah. ECO is wholly-owned by Metalclad,
and owns 100% of the shares in Ecosistemas Nacionales, S.A. de C.V.
(hereinafter “ECONSA”), a Mexican corporation. In 1993, ECONSA

CASES 5

purchased the Mexican company Confinamiento Tecnico de Residuos
Industriales, S.A. de C.V. (hereinafter “COTERIN”) with a view to the
acquisition, development and operation of the latter’s hazardous waste
transfer station and landfill in the valley of La Pedrera, located in Guadal-
cazar. COTERIN is the owner of record of the landfill property as well as
the permits and licenses which are at the base of this dispute.

3. COTERIN is the “enterprise” on behalf of which Metalclad has,
as an “investor of a Party”, submitted a claim to arbitration under NAFTA,
Article 1117.

4. In these proceedings, Metalclad has been represented by:

Clyde C. Pearce, Esq.

Law Offices of Clyde C. Pearce
1418 South Main Street

Suite 201

Salinas, California 93908
USA.

B. The Respondent

5. The Respondent is the Government of the United Mexican
States. It has been represented by:

Lic. Hugo Perezcano Diaz

Consultor Juridico

Subsecretaria de Negociaciones Comerciales Internacionales
Direccion General de Consultoria Juridica de Negociaciones
Secretaria de Comercio y Fomento Industrial

Alfonso Reyes No.30, Piso 17

Colonia Condesa

Mexico, Distrito Federal, C.P. 06149

Mexico.

III. OTHER ENTITIES

6. The Town Council of Guadalcazar, SLP, is the municipal govern-
ment of Guadalcazar, the site of the landfill project. While neither Guadal-

6 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

cazar nor SLP are named as Respondents, Metalclad alleges that
Guadalcazar and SLP took some of the actions claimed to constitute unfair
treatment and expropriation violative of NAFTA.

IV. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

7. On October 2, 1996, Metalclad delivered to Mexico a Notice of
Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration in accordance with NAFTA, Article
1119, thereby instituting proceedings on behalf of its wholly owned enter-
prise, COTERIN, for purposes of standing under NAFTA, Article 1117.
On December 30, 1996, Metalclad delivered to Mexico a written consent
and waiver in compliance with NAFTA, Article 1121(2)(a) and (b).

8. On January 2, 1997, and pursuant to the NAFTA, Article 1120,
Metalclad filed its Notice of Claim with the International Centre for Sett-
lement of Investment Disputes (hereinafter “ICSID”),! and requested the
Secretary-General of ICSID to approve and register its application and to
permit access to the ICSID Additional Facility.

9. On January 13, 1997, the Secretary-General of ICSID informed
the parties that the requirements of Article 4(2) of the ICSID Additional
Facility Rules had been fulfilled and that Metalclad’s application for access
to the Additional Facility was approved. The Secretary-General of ICSID
issued a Certificate of Registration of the Notice of Claim on that same day.

10. On May 19, 1997, the Tribunal was constituted. The Secretary-
General of ICSID informed the parties that the Tribunal was “deemed to
have been constituted and the proceedings to have begun” on May 19,
1997, and that Mr. Alejandro A. Escobar, ICSID, would serve as Secretary
to the Tribunal. All subsequent written communications between the
Tribunal and the parties were made through the ICSID Secretariat.

' Under NAFTA, Article 1120(1)(b), a disputing investor may submit its claim to arbi-
tration under the Additional Facility Rules of ICSID provided that either the disputing Party
whose measure is alleged to be a breach referred to in Article 1117 (in this case, Mexico) or the
Party of the investor (in this case, the United States of America), but not both, is a party to the
ICSID Convention. The United States of America is a party to the ICSID Convention; Mexico
is not. Hence the Additional Facility Rules of ICSID appropriately govern the administration
of these proceedings.

CASES 7

11. The first session of the Tribunal was held, with the parties’ agree-
ment, in Washington, D.C. on July 15, 1997. In accordance with Article
21 of the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules (hereinafter “the
Rules”), the Tribunal then determined that the place of arbitration would
be Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. The parties accepted that deter-
mination by the Tribunal.

12. Numerous requests for production of documents were exchanged
by the parties, some of which were allowed, and some of which were disal-
lowed, particularly those that came later in the proceedings. Through
instructions given by its President,” the Tribunal issued a ruling on April
27, 1999, relating to Mexico’s April 14, 1999 Request for Production of
Documents. The President of the Tribunal indicated that he could not, at
that stage of the case, decide the extent to which the requested documents
and materials might be relevant to the case, but ordered Metalclad to
produce the documents at issue and noted that Metalclad might seek an
award of costs related to the production should the requests be adjudged
unreasonable or improper. No such finding has been made.

13. On September 10, 1997, pursuant to NAFTA, Article 1134
providing for interim measures of protection and Article 28 of the Rules
providing for Procedural Orders, Mexico filed a Request for a Confiden-
tiality Order seeking a formal order that the proceedings be confidential.
Metalclad filed its response on October 9, 1997. On October 27, 1997,
the Tribunal issued a determination, which in its material part reads as
follows:

“There remains nonetheless a question as to whether
there exists any general principle of confidentiality that
would operate to prohibit public discussion of the arbitra-
tion proceedings by either party. Neither the NAFTA nor
the ICSID (Additional Facility) Rules contain any express
restriction on the freedom of the parties in this respect.
Though it is frequently said that one of the reasons for
recourse to arbitration is to avoid publicity, unless the agree-
ment between the parties incorporates such a limitation,

> Ac the first session of the Tribunal, of July 15, 1997, the parties agreed that the President
of the Tribunal should have the power to determine procedural matters.

8 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

each of them is still free to speak publicly of the arbitration.
It may be observed that no such limitation is written into
such major arbitral texts as the UNCITRAL Rules or the
draft Articles on Arbitration adopted by the International
Law Commission. Indeed, as has been pointed out by the
Claimant in its comments, under United States security
laws, the Claimant, as a public company traded on a public
stock exchange in the United States, is under a positive duty
to provide certain information about its activities to its
shareholders, especially regarding its involvement in a
process the outcome of which could perhaps significantly
affect its share value.

“The above having been said, it still appears to the Arbi-
tral Tribunal that it would be of advantage to the orderly
unfolding of the arbitral process and conducive to the main-
tenance of working relations between the Parties if during
the proceedings they were both to limit public discussion of
the case to a minimum, subject only to any externally
imposed obligation of disclosure by which either of them

may be legally bound”.

14. On October 14, 1997, Metalclad filed its Memorial. On
December 17, 1997, Mexico filed a Request for an Extension of Time for
the filing of its Counter-memorial. Metalclad filed an Opposition to the
requested extension, Mexico filed a Reply and Metalclad filed a Rejoinder.
On January 7, 1998, the Tribunal granted Mexico's request for an exten-
sion and ordered that Mexico’s Counter-Memorial be filed February 17,
1998.

15. On February 17, 1998, Mexico filed its Counter-Memorial
without objection. Certain exhibits of Mexico’s Counter-Memorial were
filed May 22, 1998, and Mexico’s translations of certain exhibits were filed
with the Claimant on July 17, 1998 and with the Secretariat on July 20,
1998.

16. On February 20, 1998, Metalclad filed a Motion for Sanctions
regarding Mexico's “untimely” filing of its Counter-Memorial. Metalclad
objected to Mexico’s failure to submit translations of all pertinent docu-
ments with the Counter-Memorial on the date due and set by previous

CASES 9

Order of the Arbitral Tribunal. Mexico filed an Opposition to the Motion
for Sanctions, to which Metalclad filed a Reply and Rejoinder, to which
Mexico filed an additional Opposition. On March 31, 1998, the Tribunal
denied Metalclad’s Motion for Sanctions and stated that non-acceptance
of the Counter-Memorial and/or the exclusion of certain documents
from consideration would be excessive under the circumstances. The
Tribunal further stated that it had been “unable to identify significant, if
any, harm suffered by the Claimant by reason of the delay in the filing of
the translations”.

17. On April 6, 1998, Metalclad filed a Request to Submit a Reply
to Mexico’s Counter-Memorial, to which Mexico filed an Opposition. On
April 20, 1998, the Tribunal granted Metalclad’s Request to Submit a
Reply, and ordered Metalclad to file the same by June 30, 1998. In its
Order, the Tribunal noted that the date for Mexico’s Rejoinder would be set
after the Tribunal had considered the Reply.

18. On June 22, 1998, Metalclad filed a Motion for Additional Time
to File its Reply, to which Mexico filed a Response. On June 29, 1998, the
Tribunal granted Metalclad’s Motion for Additional Time and ordered the
Reply to be filed August 6, 1998. On July 28, 1998, the Tribunal granted
the Claimant's request for a further extension of the time period for filing
its Reply until August 21, 1998.

19. On August 21, 1998, Metalclad filed its Reply without objec-
tion. Transcriptions of portions of the American Appraisal Associate’s
(“AAA”) Expert Report were filed September 3, 1998. Translations of the
Reply were filed September 22, 1998 and translations of the AAA Expert
Report were filed September 28, 1998.

20. On October 5, 1998, Mexico filed Observations regarding
Metalclad’s Reply. Metalclad filed a Reply to the Observations, to which
Mexico filed a Reply. On November 13, 1998, the Tribunal denied
Mexico's requests for exclusion of certain information submitted with the
Reply and for the award of costs at that point in time. The Tribunal
ordered Mexico to file its Rejoinder by March 19, 1999.

21. On February 22, 1999, Mexico filed a Request for an Extension
of Time for the Filing of its Rejoinder. On March 4, 1999, the Tribunal
granted Mexico's Request for an Extension of Time and ordered Mexico to

10 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

file the Rejoinder by April 19, 1999. In the same Order, the Tribunal set
the pre-hearing conference for the marshalling of the evidence for July 6,
1999 in Washington, D.C. The Tribunal also ordered the parties’ witness
lists to be filed by June 11, 1999, together with an outline of each witness's
testimony and an estimate of time for each party’s presentation of its case
and for the examination of witnesses. The Tribunal further set the hearing
on the merits for August 30, 1999.

22. On March 11, 1999, Mexico filed a Request for Production of
Documents. Metalclad filed a Response to Mexico’s Request, to which
Mexico filed a Reply. On April 14, 1999, Mexico then filed a request for
an extension of one month in the time for filing its Rejoinder. On April 16,
1999, the Tribunal granted in part Mexico’s Request for an Extension and
ordered that the Rejoinder be filed by May 3, 1999. The Tribunal further
extended the time for the parties to submit their marshalling of the
evidence briefs to June 18, 1999. On May 3, 1999, Mexico filed its
Rejoinder.

23. During the written phase of the pleadings, statements from the
following persons were submitted by the Parties: by Metalclad — American
Appraisal Associates, Augustina Armijo Bautista, Kevin C. Brennan,
Gustavo Carvajal Isunza, Francisco Castillo Ayala, Centro JURICI, Ramon
Chavez Quirarte, Anthony Dabbene, Daniel de la Torre, Jorge de la Torre,
Lee A. Deets, William E. Gordon, Javier Guerra Cisneros, Bruce H.
Haglund, Jaime E. Herrera, Ambassador James R. Jones, Grant S. Kesler,
Ariel Miranda Nieto, Paul Mitchener, T. Daniel Neveau, Herbert L. Oakes
Jr., Sandra Ray-Baucom, David Robinson, Sergio Reyes Lujan, Humberto
C. Rodarte Ramon, Mario Salgado de la Sancha, Leland E. Sweetser,
Anthony Talamantez, Mike Tuckett, Roy Zanatta; by Mexico — Luis
Manuel Abella Armella, Sergio Aleman Gonzalez, Rene Altamirano Perez,
Salomon Avila Perez, Antonio Azuela de la Cueva, Fernando Bejarano,
Alan Borner, John C. Butler III, Julia Carabias Lillo, Juan Carrera
Mendoza, José Ramén Cossfo Diaz, Pablo Cruz Llafiez, Kevin Dages,
Jaime de la Cruz Nogueda, Jose Mario de la Garza Mendizabal, Carlos de
Silva, Fernando Diaz-Barriga Martinez, Hector Raul Garcia Leos, Jorge
Adolfo Hermosillo Silva, Francisco Enrique Hernandez Sanchez, Sergio
Lopez Ayllon, Joel Milan, Pedro Medellin Milan, Hermilo Mendez Aguilar,
Angelina Nunez, Santiago Ofiate Laborde, Rogelio Orta Campos, Jose
Antonio Ortega Rivero, Praxedis Palomo Tovar, Officials of PRODIN,
Leonel Ramos Torres, Ronald E. Robertson, Aurelio Romo Navarro, Juan

CASES, 11

Antonio Romo, Horacio Sanchez Unzueta, Leonel Serrato Sanchez, Ulises
Schmill Ordonez, Marcia Williams, Ramiro Zaragoza Garcia, Mark
Zmijewski.

24. As permitted by NAFTA, Article 1128, Canada made a written
submission to the Tribunal on July 28, 1999. Although Canada does not
have any specific commercial interest in the dispute in this case, the
submission addressed the interpretation of NAFTA, Article 1110 relating
to expropriation and compensation. Specifically, Canada rejected Metal-
clad’s suggestion that NAFTA, Article 1110 is a codification of the United
States’ position on the rules of international law regarding expropriation
and compensation.

25. With the agreement of the parties, a hearing was held in
Washington, D.C. from August 30, 1999 through September 9, 1999, at
which both parties appeared and presented witnesses. The Tribunal
directed that only those portions of the written submissions that were
disputed were to be introduced at the hearing. Witnesses called by Metal-
clad for cross-examination were Julia Carabias Lillo, Horacio Sanchez
Unzuetta, Pedro Medellin Milan, Leonel Ramos Torres, Marcia Williams
and John Butler III; witnesses called for cross-examination by Mexico were
Grant S. Kesler, Gustavo Carvajal Isunza, Anthony Dabbene, Lee A. Deets
and Daniel T. Neveau.

26. The Tribunal posed questions to the parties, which were
addressed by the parties in their post-hearing briefs submitted on
November 9, 1999. Full verbatim transcripts were made of the hearing and
distributed to the parties.

27. As permitted by NAFTA, Article 1128, the United States made
a written submission to the Tribunal on November 9, 1999. Although the
United States does not have any specific commercial interest in the dispute
in this case, the submission set forth the United States’ position that the
actions of local governments, including municipalities, are subject to
NAFTA standards. The United States also submitted that the NAFTA,
Article 1110, term “tantamount to expropriation” addressed both measures
that directly expropriate and measures tantamount to expropriation that
thereby indirectly expropriate investments. The United States rejected the
suggestion that the term “tantamount to expropriation” was intended to

12 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

create a new category of expropriation not previously recognized in custo-
mary international law.

V. FACTS AND ALLEGATIONS
A. The Facilities at Issue

28. In 1990 the federal government of Mexico authorized
COTERIN to construct and operate a transfer station for hazardous waste
in La Pedrera, a valley located in Guadalcazar in SLP. The site has an area
of 814 hectares and lies 100 kilometers northeast of the capital city of SLP,
separated from it by the Sierra Guadalcazar mountain range, 70 kilometers
from the city of Guadalcazar. Approximately 800 people live within ten
kilometers of the site.

29. On January 23, 1993, the National Ecological Institute (herei-
nafter “INE”), an independent sub-agency of the federal Secretariat of the
Mexican Environment, National Resources and Fishing (hereinafter
“SEMARNAP”), granted COTERIN a federal permit to construct a hazar-
dous waste landfill in La Pedrera (hereinafter “the landfill”).

B. Metalclad’s Purchase of the Site and its Landfill Permits

30. Three months after the issuance of the federal construction
permit, on April 23, 1993, Metalclad entered into a 6-month option agree-
ment to purchase COTERIN together with its permits, in order to build
the hazardous waste landfill.

31. Shortly thereafter, on May 11, 1993, the government of SLP
granted COTERIN a state land use permit to construct the landfill. The
permit was issued subject to the condition that the project adapt to the
specifications and technical requirements indicated by the corresponding
authorities, and accompanied by the General Statement that the license did
not prejudge the rights or ownership of the applicant and did not authorize
works, constructions or the functioning of business or activities.

32. One month later, on June 11, 1993, Metalclad met with the
Governor of SLP to discuss the project. Metalclad asserts that at this
meeting it obtained the Governor’s support for the project. In fact, the

CASES, 13

Governor acknowledged at the hearing that a reasonable person might
expect that the Governor would support the project if studies confirmed
the site as suitable or feasible and if the environmental impact was consis-
tent with Mexican standards.

33. Metalclad further asserts that it was told by the President of the
INE and the General Director of the Mexican Secretariat of Urban Deve-
lopment and Ecology (hereinafter “SEDUE”)? that all necessary permits
for the landfill had been issued with the exception of the federal permit for
operation of the landfill. A witness statement submitted by the President
of the INE suggests that a hazardous waste landfill could be built if all
permits required by the corresponding federal and state laws have been
acquired.

34. Metalclad also asserts that the General Director of SEDUE told
Metalclad that the responsibility for obtaining project support in the state
and local community lay with the federal government.

35. On August 10, 1993, the INE granted COTERIN the federal
permit for operation of the landfill. On September 10, 1993, Metalclad
exercised its option and purchased COTERIN, the landfill site and the
associated permits.

36. Metalclad asserts it would not have exercised its COTERIN
purchase option but for the apparent approval and support of the project
by federal and state officials.

C. Construction of the Hazardous Waste Landfill

37. Metalclad asserts that shortly after its purchase of COTERIN,
the Governor of SLP embarked on a public campaign to denounce and
prevent the operation of the landfill.

38. Metalclad further asserts, however, that in April 1994, after
months of negotiation, Metalclad believed it had secured SLP’s agree-
ment to support the project. Consequently, in May 1994, after receiving
an eighteen-month extension of the previously issued federal construction

3 SEDUE is the predecessor organization to SEMARNAP.

14 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

permit from the INE, Metalclad began construction of the landfill. Mexico
denies that SLP’s agreement or support had ever been obtained.

39. Metalclad further maintains that construction continued openly
and without interruption through October 1994. Federal officials and state
representatives inspected the construction site during this period, and
Metalclad provided federal and state officials with written status reports of
its progress.

40. On October 26, 1994, when the Municipality ordered the cessa-
tion of all building activities due to the absence of a municipal construc-
tion permit, construction was abruptly terminated.

41. Metalclad asserts it was once again told by federal officials that it
had all the authority necessary to construct and operate the landfill; that
federal officials said it should apply for the municipal construction permit
to facilitate an amicable relationship with the Municipality; that federal
officials assured it that the Municipality would issue the permit as a matter
of course; and that the Municipality lacked any basis for denying the cons-
truction permit. Mexico denies that any federal officials represented that a
municipal permit was not required, and affirmatively states that a permit
was required and that Metalclad knew, or should have known, that the
permit was required.

42. On November 15, 1994, Metalclad resumed construction and
submitted an application for a municipal construction permit.

43. On January 31, 1995, the INE granted Metalclad an additional
federal construction permit to construct the final disposition cell for hazar-
dous waste and other complementary structures such as the landfill’s admi-
nistration building and laboratory.

44, In February 1995, the Autonomous University of SLP (herei-
nafter “UASLP”) issued a study confirming earlier findings that, although
the landfill site raised some concerns, with proper engineering it was
geographically suitable for a hazardous waste landfill. In March 1995, the
Mexican Federal Attorney's Office for the Protection of the Environment
(hereinafter “PROFEPA”), an independent sub-agency of SEMARNAP,
conducted an audit of the site and also concluded that, with proper engi-

CASES, 15

neering and operation, the landfill site was geographically suitable for a
hazardous waste landfill.

D. Metalclad is Prevented from Operating the Landfill

45. Metalclad completed construction of the landfill in March 1995.
On March 10, 1995, Metalclad held an “open house,” or “inauguration,”
of the landfill which was attended by a number of dignitaries from the
United States and from Mexico's federal, state and local governments.

46. Demonstrators impeded the “inauguration,” blocked the entry
and exit of buses carrying guests and workers, and employed tactics of
intimidation against Metalclad. Metalclad asserts that the demonstration
was organized at least in part by the Mexican state and local governments,
and that state troopers assisted in blocking traffic into and out of the site.
Metalclad was thenceforth effectively prevented from opening the landfill.

47. After months of negotiation, on November 25, 1995, Metalclad
and Mexico, through two of SEMARNAP’s independent sub-agencies (the
INE and PROFEPA), entered into an agreement that provided for and
allowed the operation of the landfill (hereinafter “the Convenio”).

48. The Convenio stated that an environmental audit of the site was
carried out from December, 1994 through March, 1995; that the purpose
of the audit was to check the project’s compliance with the laws and regu-
lations; to check the project’s plans for prevention of and attention to
emergencies; and to study the project’s existing conditions, control procee-
dings, maintenance, operation, personnel training and mechanisms to
respond to environmental emergencies. The Convenio also stated that, as
the audit detected certain deficiencies, Metalclad was required to submit an
action plan to correct them; that Metalclad did indeed submit an action
plan including a corresponding site remediation plan; and that Metalclad
agreed to carry out the work and activities set forth in the action plan,
including those in the corresponding plan of remediation. These plans
required that remediation and commercial operation should take place
simultaneously within the first three years of the landfill’s operation. The
Convenio provided for a five-year term of operation for the landfill,
renewable by the INE and PROFEPA. In addition to requiring remedia-
tion, the Convenio stated that Metalclad would designate 34 hectares of its
property as a buffer zone for the conservation of endemic species. The

16 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

Convenio also required PROFEPA to create a Technical-Scientific Com-
mittee to monitor the remediation and required that representatives of the
INE, the National Autonomous University of Mexico and the UASLP be
invited to participate in that Committee. A Citizen Supervision Com-
mittee was to be created. Metalclad was to contribute two new pesos per
ton of waste toward social works in Guadalcazar and give a 10% discount
for the treatment and final disposition of hazardous waste generated in SLP.
Metalclad would also provide one day per week of free medical advice for
the inhabitants of Guadalcazar through Metalclad’s qualified medical
personnel, employ manual labor from within Guadalcazar, and give prefe-
rence to the inhabitants of Guadalcazar for technical training. Metalclad
would also consult with government authorities on matters of remediation
and hazardous waste, and provide two courses per year on the management
of hazardous waste to personnel of the public, federal, state and municipal
sectors, as well as social and private sectors.

49. Metalclad asserts that SLP was invited to participate in the
process of negotiating the Convenio, but that SLP declined. The Governor
of SLP denounced the Convenio shortly after it was publicly announced.

50. On December 5, 1995, thirteen months after Metalclad’s appli-
cation for the municipal construction permit was filed, the application was
denied. In doing this, the Municipality recalled its decision to deny a cons-
truction permit to COTERIN in October 1991 and January 1992 and
noted the “impropriety” of Metalclad’s construction of the landfill prior to
receiving a municipal construction permit.

51. There is no indication that the Municipality gave any considera-
tion to the construction of the landfill and the efforts at operation during
the thirteen months during which the application was pending.

52. Metalclad has pointed out that there was no evidence of inade-
quacy of performance by Metalclad of any legal obligation, nor any
showing that Metalclad violated the terms of any federal or state permit;
that there was no evidence that the Municipality gave any consideration to
the recently completed environmental reports indicating that the site was
in fact suitable for a hazardous waste landfill; that there was no evidence
that the site, as constructed, failed to meet any specific construction requi-
rements; that there was no evidence that the Municipality ever required or
issued a municipal construction permit for any other construction project

CASES, 17

in Guadalcazar; and that there was no evidence that there was an esta-
blished administrative process with respect to municipal construction
permits in the Municipality of Guadalcazar.

53. Mexico asserts that Metalclad was aware through due diligence that
a municipal permit might be necessary on the basis of the case of COTERIN
(1991, 1992), and other past precedents for various projects in SLP.

54. Metalclad was not notified of the Town Council meeting where
the permit application was discussed and rejected, nor was Metalclad given
any opportunity to participate in that process. Metalclad’s request for
reconsideration of the denial of the permit was rejected.

55. In December 1995, shortly following the Municipality's rejection
of Metalclad’s permit application, the Municipality filed an administrative
complaint with SEMARNAP challenging the Convenio. SEMARNAP
denied the Municipality’s complaint.

56. On January 31, 1996, the Municipality filed an amparo procee-
ding in the Mexican courts challenging SEMARNAP?’s dismissal of its
Convenio complaint. An injunction was issued and Metalclad was barred
from conducting any hazardous waste landfill operations. The amparo was
finally dismissed, and the injunction lifted, in May 1999.

57. On February 8, 1996, the INE granted Metalclad an additional
permit authorizing the expansion of the landfill capacity from 36,000 tons
per year to 360,000 tons per year.

58. From May 1996 through December 1996, Metalclad and the
State of SLP attempted to resolve their issues with respect to the operation
of the landfill. These efforts failed and, on January 2, 1997, Metalclad
initiated the present arbitral proceedings against the Government of
Mexico under Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA.

59. On September 23, 1997, three days before the expiry of his term,
the Governor issued an Ecological Decree declaring a Natural Area for the
protection of rare cactus. The Natural Area encompasses the area of the
landfill. Metalclad relies in part on this Ecological Decree as an additional
element in its claim of expropriation, maintaining that the Decree effecti-
vely and permanently precluded the operation of the landfill.

18 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

60. Metalclad also alleges, on the basis of reports by the Mexican
media, that the Governor of SLP stated, that the Ecological Decree “defi-
nitely cancelled any possibility that exists of opening the industrial waste

landfill of La Pedrera”.

61. Metalclad also asserts that a high level SLP official, with respect
to the Ecological Decree and as reported by Mexican media, “expressed
confidence in closing in this way, all possibility for the United States firm
Metalclad to operate its landfill in this zone, independently of the future
outcome of its claim before the Arbitral Tribunals of the NAFTA treaty”.

62. The landfill remains dormant. Metalclad has not sold or trans-
ferred any portion of it.

63. Mexico denies each of these media accounts as they relate to the
Ecological Decree.

64. Mexico also maintains that consideration of the Ecological
Decree is outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal because the Decree was
enacted after the filing of the Notice of Intent of Arbitration. More parti-
cularly, Mexico argues that NAFTA, Article 1119, entitled “Notice of
Intent to Submit a Claim”, precludes claims for breaches that have not yet
occurred, relying on the language in that Article which states that:

“The disputing investor shall deliver to the disputing Party
written notice of its intention to submit a claim to arbitra-
tion at least 90 days before a claim is submitted, which
notice shall specify:

(b) The provisions of [the NAFTA] alleged to have been

breached and any other relevant provisions.

(c) The issues and factual basis for the claim.”

Mexico further invokes NAFTA, Article 1120 which requires that six
months elapse between the events giving rise to a claim and the submission
of the claim. On the basis of these two Articles, Mexico argues that a
claimant must ensure its claim is ripe at the time it is filed. At the same
time, Mexico does not exclude the possibility that amendments to a claim

CASES, 19

may be made. Rather, Mexico initially asserted that in order to ensure
fairness and clarity, amendment of a claim or the presentation of an
ancillary claim within Article 48 of the Additional Facility Rules should
be the subject of a formal application and the required amendment
should be stated clearly. Later, Mexico adjusted its position in its post-
hearing brief in which it argues that Section B of Chapter Eleven does not
contemplate the amendment of ripened claims to include post-claim
events. Mexico contends that Section B of Chapter Eleven modifies the
Additional Facility Rules as regards the amendment of claims and the
filing of ancillary claims, making Article 48 of the Additional Facility
Rules inapplicable.

65. Metalclad’s position is that Mexico's analysis of Articles 1119 and
1120 is artificial, and that the six month rule merely sets forth an initial
rule for claim eligibility designed to foster exhaustion of pre-arbitral
methods of dispute resolution. In support of its position, Metalclad
invokes NAFTA, Article 1118, which provides that disputing parties
should first attempt to settle a claim through consultation or negotiation.
Metalclad further adduces policy reasons in support of its right to base its
claim on acts occurring after submission of its Notice of Claim. First,
Metalclad argues that policies related to the administration of justice
support its position. In particular, it argues that an inability to rely on post-
Notice of Claim acts would deprive parties of redress concerning a period
during which a State might be most inclined to disregard its treaty obliga-
tions. Second, Metalclad argues that requiring a claimant to forego or defer
the airing of subsequent, related, breaches would be inconsistent with
NAFTAS stated aim of creating effective procedures for the resolution of its
disputes. Such an interpretation, Metalclad suggests, would create serious
inefficiencies by requiring the claimant to bring related actions seriatim
and that those actions would be subject to res judicata principles to a
Claimant’s detriment. Metalclad also argues that injustice would result
because claimants will choose, for financial and other reasons, not to start
a fresh NAFTA action and tribunals would be unable to consider acts of
bad faith occurring during the arbitration. Third, Metalclad maintains that
its view is consistent with the ICSID Arbitral Tribunal’s broad jurisdiction.
Metalclad points out that the texts mentioned in NAFTA, Article 1120,
allow for amendment of claims and cites Article 48 of the Rules as allowing
for incidental or additional claims provided that such claims are within the
scope of the arbitration agreement of the parties. Metalclad concludes that
the policies underlying NAFTA, Articles 1119 and 1120, are fulfilled once

20 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

the appropriate periods have passed prior to submission of the claim and
that the Respondent is not prejudiced by the amendments, provided that
they are made no later than the Claimant’s Reply and that the Respondent
is permitted a Rejoinder.

66. The Tribunal accepts Mexico's contention that a case may not be
initiated on the basis of an anticipated breach. However, the Tribunal
cannot accept Mexico’s interpretation and application of the time limits set
out in the NAFTA. Metalclad properly submitted its claim under the Addi-
tional Facility Rules as provided under NAFTA, Article 1120. Article
1120(2) provides that the arbitration rules under which the claim is
submitted shall govern the arbitration except to the extent modified by
Section B of Chapter Eleven. Article 48(1) of the Rules clearly states that
a party may present an incidental or additional claim provided that the
ancillary claim is within the scope of the arbitration agreement of the
parties.

67. The Tribunal does not agree with Mexico's post-hearing position
that Section B of Chapter Eleven modifies Article 48 of the Rules. The
Tribunal believes it was not the intent of the drafters of NAFTA, Articles
1119 and 1120, to limit the jurisdiction of a Tribunal under Chapter
Eleven in this way. Rather, the Tribunal prefers Mexico's position, as stated
in its Rejoinder, that construes NAFTA Chapter Eleven, Section B, and
Article 48 of the Rules as permitting amendments to previously submitted
claims and consideration of facts and events occurring subsequent to the
submission of a Notice of Claim, particularly where the facts and events
arise out of and/or are directly related to the original claim. A contrary
holding would require a claimant to file multiple subsequent and related
actions and would lead to inefficiency and inequity.

68. The Tribunal agrees with Mexico that the process regarding
amendments to claims must be one that ensures fairness and clarity. Article
48(2) of the Rules ensures such fairness by requiring that any ancillary
claim be presented not later than the Claimant’s Reply. In this matter,
Metalclad presented information relating to the Ecological Decree and its
intent to rely on the Ecological Decree as early as its Memorial. Mexico
subsequently filed its Counter-Memorial and Rejoinder. The Ecological
Decree directly relates to the property and investment at issue, and Mexico
has had ample notice and opportunity to address issues relating to that
Decree.

CASES, 21

69. The Tribunal thus finds that, although the Ecological Decree was
issued subsequent to Metalclad’s submission of its claim, issues relating to
it were presented by Metalclad in a timely manner and consistently with
the principles of fairness and clarity. Mexico has had ample opportunity to
respond and has suffered no prejudice. The Tribunal therefore holds that
consideration of the Ecological Decree is within its jurisdiction but, as will
be seen, does not attach to it controlling importance.

VI. APPLICABLE LAW

70. A Tribunal established pursuant to NAFTA Chapter Eleven,
Section B must decide the issues in dispute in accordance with NAFTA and
applicable rules of international law. (NAFTA Article 1131(1)). In addition,
NAFTA Article 102(2) provides that the Agreement must be interpreted and
applied in the light of its stated objectives and in accordance with applicable
rules of international law. These objectives specifically include transparency
and the substantial increase in investment opportunities in the territories of
the Parties. (NAFTA Article 102(1)(c)). The Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties, Article 31(1) provides that a treaty is to be interpreted in good
faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the
treaty in their context and in the light of the treaty’s object and purpose. The
context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in
addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes, any agreement rela-
ting to the treaty which was made between all the parties in connection with
the conclusion of the treaty. (/d., Article 31(2)(a)). There shall also be taken
into account, together with the context, any relevant rules of international
law applicable in the relations between the parties. (/d., Article 31(3)). Every
treaty in force is binding upon the parties to it and must be performed by
them in good faith. (/d., Article 26). A State party to a treaty may not invoke
the provisions of its internal law as justification for its failure to perform the
treaty. (Id., Article 27).

71. The Parties to NAFTA specifically agreed to “ENSURE a predic-
table commercial framework for business planning and investment”.
(NAFTA Preamble, para. 6 (emphasis in original)). NAFTA further requires
that “[e]ach Party shall ensure that its laws, regulations, procedures, and
administrative rulings of general application respecting any matter covered
by this Agreement are promptly published or otherwise made available in

22 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

such a manner as to enable interested persons and Parties to become
acquainted with them”. /d. Article 1802.1.

VII. THE TRIBUNALS DECISION

72. Metalclad contends that Mexico, through its local governments
of SLP and Guadalcazar, interfered with and precluded its operation of the
landfill. Metalclad alleges that this interference is a violation of Articles
1105 and 1110 of Chapter Eleven of the investment provisions of NAFTA.

A. Responsibility for the conduct of state and local governments.

73. A threshold question is whether Mexico is internationally
responsible for the acts of SLP and Guadalcazar. The issue was largely
disposed of by Mexico in paragraph 233 of its post-hearing submission,
which stated that “[Mexico] did not plead that the acts of the Municipality
were not covered by NAFTA. [Mexico] was, and remains, prepared to
proceed on the assumption that the normal rule of state responsibility
applies; that is, that the Respondent can be internationally responsible for
the acts of state organs at all three levels of government”. Parties to that
Agreement must “ensure that all necessary measures are taken in order to
give effect to the provisions of the Agreement, including their observance,
except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, by state and provincial
governments”. (NAFTA Article 105). A reference to a state or province
includes local governments of that state or province. (NAFTA Article
201(2)). The exemptions from the requirements of Articles 1105 and 1110
laid down in Article 1108(1) do not extend to states or local governments.
This approach accords fully with the established position in customary
international law. This has been clearly stated in Article 10 of the draft arti-
cles on state responsibility adopted by the International Law Commission
of the United Nations in 1975 which, though currently still under consi-
deration, may nonetheless be regarded as an accurate restatement of the
present law: “The conduct of an organ of a State, of a territorial govern-
ment entity or of an entity empowered to exercise elements of the Govern-
mental authority, such organ having acted in that capacity, shall be
considered as an act of the State under international law even if, in the
particular case, the organ exceeded its competence according to internal
law or contravened instructions concerning its activity”. (Yearbook of the
International Law Commission, 1975, vol. ii, p.61).

CASES, 23

B. NAFTA Article 1105: Fair and equitable Treatment

74, NAFTA Article 1105(1) provides that “each Party shall accord to
investments of investors of another Party treatment in accordance with inter-
national law, including fair and equitable treatment and full protection and
security”. For the reasons set out below, the Tribunal finds that Metalclad’s
investment was not accorded fair and equitable treatment in accordance with
international law, and that Mexico has violated NAFTA Article 1105(1).

75. An underlying objective of NAFTA is to promote and increase
cross-border investment opportunities and ensure the successful imple-
mentation of investment initiatives. (NAFTA Article 102(1)).

76. Prominent in the statement of principles and rules that intro-
duces the Agreement is the reference to “transparency” (NAFTA Article
102(1)). The Tribunal understands this to include the idea that all relevant
legal requirements for the purpose of initiating, completing and success-
fully operating investments made, or intended to be made, under the
Agreement should be capable of being readily known to all affected inves-
tors of another Party. There should be no room for doubt or uncertainty
on such matters. Once the authorities of the central government of any
Party (whose international responsibility in such matters has been identi-
fied in the preceding section) become aware of any scope for misunderstan-
ding or confusion in this connection, it is their duty to ensure that the
correct position is promptly determined and clearly stated so that investors
can proceed with all appropriate expedition in the confident belief that
they are acting in accordance with all relevant laws.

77. Metalclad acquired COTERIN for the sole purpose of deve-
loping and operating a hazardous waste landfill in the valley of La Pedrera,
in Guadalcazar, SLP.

78. The Government of Mexico issued federal construction and
operating permits for the landfill prior to Metalclad’s purchase of
COTERIN, and the Government of SLP likewise issued a state operating
permit which implied its political support for the landfill project.

79. Avcentral point in this case has been whether, in addition to the
above-mentioned permits, a municipal permit for the construction of a
hazardous waste landfill was required.

24 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

80. When Metalclad inquired, prior to its purchase of COTERIN, as
to the necessity for municipal permits, federal officials assured it that it had
all that was needed to undertake the landfill project. Indeed, following
Metalclad’s acquisition of COTERIN, the federal government extended
the federal construction permit for eighteen months.

81. As presented and confirmed by Metalclad’s expert on Mexican
law, the authority of the municipality extends only to the administration
of the construction permit, “. . .to grant licenses and permits for construc-
tions and to participate in the creation and administration of ecological
reserve zones . . .”. (Mexican Const. Art. 115, Fraction V). However,
Mexico’s experts on constitutional law expressed a different view.

82. Mexico's General Ecology Law of 1988 (hereinafter “LGEEPA”)
expressly grants to the Federation the power to authorize construction and
operation of hazardous waste landfills. Article 5 of the LGEEPA provides
that the powers of the Federation extend to:

V. [t]he regulation and control of activities considered to
be highly hazardous, and of the generation, handling
and final disposal of hazardous materials and wastes for
the environments of ecosystems, as well as for the pres-
ervation of natural resources, in accordance with [the]
Law, other applicable ordinances and their regulatory
provisions.

83. LGEEPA also limits the environmental powers of the municipa-
lity to issues relating to non-hazardous waste. Specifically, Article 8 of the
LGEEPA grants municipalities the power in accordance with the provi-
sions of the law and local laws to apply:

{egal provisions in matters of prevention and control of the
effects on the environment caused by generation, transporta-
tion, storage, handling treatment and final disposal of solid
industrial wastes which are not considered to be hazardous
in accordance with the provisions of Article 137 of [the
1988] law. (Emphasis supplied).

84. The same law also limits state environmental powers to those not
expressly attributed to the federal government. /d., Article 7.

CASES, 25

85. Metalclad was led to believe, and did believe, that the federal and
state permits allowed for the construction and operation of the landfill.
Metalclad argues that in all hazardous waste matters, the Municipality has
no authority. However, Mexico argues that constitutionally and lawfully
the Municipality has the authority to issue construction permits.

86. Even if Mexico is correct that a municipal construction permit
was required, the evidence also shows that, as to hazardous waste evalua-
tions and assessments, the federal authority's jurisdiction was controlling
and the authority of the municipality only extended to appropriate cons-
truction considerations. Consequently, the denial of the permit by the
Municipality by reference to environmental impact considerations in
the case of what was basically a hazardous waste disposal landfill, was
improper, as was the municipality’s denial of the permit for any reason
other than those related to the physical construction or defects in the
site.

87. Relying on the representations of the federal government, Metal-
clad started constructing the landfill, and did this openly and continuously,
and with the full knowledge of the federal, state, and municipal govern-
ments, until the municipal “Stop Work Order” on October 26, 1994. The
basis of this order was said to have been Metalclad’s failure to obtain a
municipal construction permit.

88. In addition, Metalclad asserted that federal officials told it that if
it submitted an application for a municipal construction permit, the Muni-
cipality would have no legal basis for denying the permit and that it would
be issued as a matter of course. The absence of a clear rule as to the requi-
rement or not of a municipal construction permit, as well as the absence of
any established practice or procedure as to the manner of handling appli-
cations for a municipal construction permit, amounts to a failure on the
part of Mexico to ensure the transparency required by NAFTA.

89. Metalclad was entitled to rely on the representations of federal
officials and to believe that it was entitled to continue its construction of
the landfill. In following the advice of these officials, and filing the muni-
cipal permit application on November 15, 1994, Metalclad was merely
acting prudently and in the full expectation that the permit would be
granted.

26 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

90. On December 5, 1995, thirteen months after the submission of
Metalclad’s application — during which time Metalclad continued its open
and obvious investment activity — the Municipality denied Metalclad’s
application for a construction permit. The denial was issued well after
construction was virtually complete and immediately following the
announcement of the Convenio providing for the operation of the landfill.

91. Moreover, the permit was denied at a meeting of the Municipal
Town Council of which Metalclad received no notice, to which it received
no invitation, and at which it was given no opportunity to appear.

92. The Town Council denied the permit for reasons which
included, but may not have been limited to, the opposition of the local
population, the fact that construction had already begun when the appli-
cation was submitted, the denial of the permit to COTERIN in December
1991 and January 1992, and the ecological concerns regarding the environ-
mental effect and impact on the site and surrounding communities. None
of the reasons included a reference to any problems associated with the
physical construction of the landfill or to any physical defects therein.

93. The Tribunal therefore finds that the construction permit was
denied without any consideration of, or specific reference to, construction
aspects or flaws of the physical facility.

94, Moreover, the Tribunal cannot disregard the fact that immedia-
tely after the Municipality's denial of the permit it filed an administrative
complaint with SEMARNAP challenging the Convenio. The Tribunal
infers from this that the Municipality lacked confidence in its right to deny
permission for the landfill solely on the basis of the absence of a municipal
construction permit.

95. SEMARNAP dismissed the challenge for lack of standing, which
the Municipality promptly challenged by filing an amparo action. An
injunction was issued, and the landfill was barred from operation through
1999.

96. In 1997 SLP re-entered the scene and issued an Ecological
Decree in 1997 which effectively and permanently prevented the use by
Metalclad of its investment.

CASES, 27

97. The actions of the Municipality following its denial of the muni-
cipal construction permit, coupled with the procedural and substantive
deficiencies of the denial, support the Tribunal’s finding, for the reasons
stated above, that the Municipality's insistence upon and denial of the
construction permit in this instance was improper.

98. This conclusion is not affected by NAFTA Article 1114, which
permits a Party to ensure that investment activity is undertaken in a
manner sensitive to environmental concerns. The conclusion of the
Convenio and the issuance of the federal permits show clearly that Mexico
was satisfied that this project was consistent with, and sensitive to, its envi-
ronmental concerns.

99. Mexico failed to ensure a transparent and predictable framework
for Metalclad’s business planning and investment. The totality of these
circumstances demonstrates a lack of orderly process and timely disposi-
tion in relation to an investor of a Party acting in the expectation that it
would be treated fairly and justly in accordance with the NAFTA.

100. Moreover, the acts of the State and the Municipality — and there-
fore the acts of Mexico — fail to comply with or adhere to the requirements
of NAFTA, Article 1105(1) that each Party accord to investments of inves-
tors of another Party treatment in accordance with international law, inclu-
ding fair and equitable treatment. This is so particularly in light of the
governing principle that internal law (such as the Municipality’s stated
permit requirements) does not justify failure to perform a treaty. (Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties, Arts. 26, 27).

101. The Tribunal therefore holds that Metalclad was not treated
fairly or equitably under the NAFTA and succeeds on its claim under
Article 1105.

4 ‘The question of turning to NAFTA before exhausting local remedies was examined by
the parties. However, Mexico does not insist that local remedies must be exhausted. Mexico's
position is correct in light of NAFTA Article 1121(2)(b) which provides that a disputing
investor may submit a claim under NAFTA Article 1117 if both the investor and the enterprise
waive their rights to initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court under the
law of any Party any proceedings with respect to the measure of the disputing Party that is
alleged to be a breach referred to in NAFTA Article 1117.

28 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

C. NAFTA, Article 1110: Expropriation

102. NAFTA Article 1110 provides that “[n]o party shall directly or
indirectly . . . expropriate an investment . . . or take a measure tantamount
to... expropriation . . . except: (a) for a public purpose; (b) on a non-
discriminatory basis; (c) in accordance with due process of law and Article
1105(1); and (d) on payment of compensation . . . .” “A measure” is
defined in Article 201(1) as including “any law, regulation, procedure,
requirement or practice”.

103. Thus, expropriation under NAFTA includes not only open, deli-
berate and acknowledged takings of property, such as outright seizure or
formal or obligatory transfer of title in favour of the host State, but also
covert or incidental interference with the use of property which has the
effect of depriving the owner, in whole or in significant part, of the use or
reasonably-to-be-expected economic benefit of property even if not neces-
sarily to the obvious benefit of the host State.

104. By permitting or tolerating the conduct of Guadalcazar in rela-
tion to Metalclad which the Tribunal has already held amounts to unfair
and inequitable treatment breaching Article 1105 and by thus participating
or acquiescing in the denial to Metalclad of the right to operate the landfill,
notwithstanding the fact that the project was fully approved and endorsed
by the federal government, Mexico must be held to have taken a measure
tantamount to expropriation in violation of NAFTA Article 1110(1).

105. The Tribunal holds that the exclusive authority for siting and
permitting a hazardous waste landfill resides with the Mexican federal
government. This finding is consistent with the testimony of the Secretary
of SEMARNAP and, as stated above, is consistent with the express
language of the LGEEPA.

106. As determined earlier (see above, para 92), the Municipality
denied the local construction permit in part because of the Municipality's
perception of the adverse environmental effects of the hazardous waste
landfill and the geological unsuitability of the landfill site. In so doing,
the Municipality acted outside its authority. As stated above, the Muni-
cipality’s denial of the construction permit without any basis in the
proposed physical construction or any defect in the site, and extended by
its subsequent administrative and judicial actions regarding the Convenio,

CASES, 29

effectively and unlawfully prevented the Claimant's operation of the land-

fill.

107. These measures, taken together with the representations of the
Mexican federal government, on which Metalclad relied, and the absence
of a timely, orderly or substantive basis for the denial by the Municipality
of the local construction permit, amount to an indirect expropriation.

108. The present case resembles in a number of pertinent respects that
of Biloune, et al. v. Ghana Investment Centre, et al., 95 1.L.R.183, 207-10
(1993) (Judge Schwebel, President; Wallace and Leigh, Arbitrators). In
that case, a private investor was renovating and expanding a resort restau-
rant in Ghana. As with Metalclad, the investor, basing itself on the repre-
sentations of a government affiliated entity, began construction before
applying for a building permit. As with Metalclad, a stop work order was
issued after a substantial amount of work had been completed. The order
was based on the absence of a building permit. An application was
submitted, but although it was not expressly denied, a permit was never
issued. The Tribunal found that an indirect expropriation had taken place
because the totality of the circumstances had the effect of causing the irre-
parable cessation of work on the project. The Tribunal paid particular
regard to the investor's justified reliance on the government’s representa-
tions regarding the permit, the fact that government authorities knew of
the construction for more than one year before issuing the stop work order,
the fact that permits had not been required for other projects and the fact
that no procedure was in place for dealing with building permit applica-
tions. Although the decision in Bilowne does not bind this Tribunal, it is a
persuasive authority and the Tribunal is in agreement with its analysis and
its conclusion.

109. Although not strictly necessary for its conclusion, the Tribunal
also identifies as a further ground for a finding of expropriation the Ecolo-
gical Decree issued by the Governor of SLP on September 20, 1997. This
Decree covers an area of 188,758 hectares within the “Real de Guadal-
cazar” that includes the landfill site, and created therein an ecological
preserve. This Decree had the effect of barring forever the operation of the

landfill.

110. The Tribunal is not persuaded by Mexico’s representation to the
contrary. The Ninth Article, for instance, forbids any work inconsistent

30 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

with the Ecological Decree’s management program. The management
program is defined by the Fifth Article as one of diagnosing the ecological
problems of the cacti reserve and of ensuring its ecological preservation. In
addition, the Fourteenth Article of the Decree forbids any conduct that
might involve the discharge of polluting agents on the reserve soil, subsoil,
running water or water deposits and prohibits the undertaking of any
potentially polluting activities. The Fifteenth Article of the Ecological
Decree also forbids any activity requiring permits or licenses unless such
activity is related to the exploration, extraction or utilization of natural
resources.

111. The Tribunal need not decide or consider the motivation or
intent of the adoption of the Ecological Decree. Indeed, a finding of expro-
priation on the basis of the Ecological Decree is not essential to the
Tribunal’s finding of a violation of NAFTA Article 1110. However, the
Tribunal considers that the implementation of the Ecological Decree
would, in and of itself, constitute an act tantamount to expropriation.

112. In conclusion, the Tribunal holds that Mexico has indirectly
expropriated Metalclad’s investment without providing compensation to
Metalclad for the expropriation. Mexico has violated Article 1110 of the
NAFTA.

VII. QUANTIFICATION OF DAMAGES OR COMPENSATION
A. Basic Elements of Valuation

113. In this instance, the damages arising under NAFTA, Article
1105 and the compensation due under NAFTA, Article 1110 would be
the same since both situations involve the complete frustration of the
operation of the landfill and negate the possibility of any meaningful
return on Metalclad’s investment. In other words, Metalclad has comple-
tely lost its investment.

114. Metalclad has proposed two alternative methods for calculating
damages: the first is to use a discounted cash flow analysis of future profits
to establish the fair market value of the investment (approximately $90
million); the second is to value Metalclad’s actual investment in the landfill
(approximately $20-25 million).

CASES 31

115. Metalclad also seeks an additional $20-25 million for the nega-
tive impact the circumstances are alleged to have had on its other business
operations. The Tribunal disallows this additional claim because a variety
of factors, not necessarily related to the La Pedrera development, have
affected Metalclad’s share price. The causal relationship between Mexico's
actions and the reduction in value of Metalclad’s other business operations
are too remote and uncertain to support this claim. This element of
damage is, therefore, left aside.

116. Mexico asserts that a discounted cash flow analysis is inappro-
priate where the expropriated entity is not a going concern. Mexico offers
an alternative calculation of fair market value based on COTERIN’s
“market capitalization”. Mexico's “market capitalization” calculations show
a loss to Metalclad of $13-15 million.

117. Mexico also suggests a direct investment value approach to
damages. Mexico estimates Metalclad’s direct investment value, or loss, to
be approximately $3-4 million.

118. NAFTA, Article 1135(1)(a), provides for the award of monetary
damages and applicable interest where a Party is found to have violated a
Chapter Eleven provision. With respect to expropriation, NAFTA, Article
1110(2), specifically requires compensation to be equivalent to the fair
market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expro-
priation took place. This paragraph further states that “the valuation
criteria shall include going concern value, asset value including declared tax
value of tangible property, and other criteria, as appropriate, to determine
fair market value”.

119. Normally, the fair market value of a going concern which has a
history of profitable operation may be based on an estimate of future
profits subject to a discounted cash flow analysis. Benvenuti and Bonfant Srl
v. The Government of the People’s Republic of Congo, 1 ICSID Reports 330;
21 I.L.M. 758; AGIP SPA v. The Government of the People’s Republic of
Congo, 1 ICSID Reports 306; 21 I.L.M. 737.

120. However, where the enterprise has not operated for a sufficiently
long time to establish a performance record or where it has failed to make
a profit, future profits cannot be used to determine going concern or fair

32 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

market value. In Sola Tiles, Inc. v. Iran (1987) (14 Iran-U.S.C.T.R. 224,
240-42; 83 I.L.R. 460, 480-81), the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal pointed to
the importance in relation to a company’s value of “its business reputation
and the relationship it has established with its suppliers and customers”.
Similarly, in Asian Agricultural Products v. Sri Lanka (4 ICSID Reports 246
(1990) at 292), another ICSID Tribunal observed, in dealing with the
comparable problem of the assessment of the value of good will, that its
ascertainment “requires the prior presence on the market for at least two or
three years, which is the minimum period needed in order to establish
continuing business connections”.

121. The Tribunal agrees with Mexico that a discounted cash flow
analysis is inappropriate in the present case because the landfill was never
operative and any award based on future profits would be wholly speculative.

122. Rather, the Tribunal agrees with the parties that fair market value
is best arrived at in this case by reference to Metalclad’s actual investment
in the project. Thus, in Phelps Dodge Corp. v. Iran (10 Iran-U.S. C.T.R.
121 (1986)), the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal concluded that the value of the
expropriated property was the value of claimant’s investment in that
property. In reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal considered that the
property’s future profits were so dependent on as yet unobtained preferen-
tial treatment from the government that any prediction of them would be
entirely speculative. (/d. at 132-33). Similarly, in the Biloune case (see
above), the Tribunal concluded that the value of the expropriated property
was the value of the claimant’s investment in that property. While the
Tribunal recognized the validity of the principle that lost profits should be
considered in the valuation of expropriated property, the Tribunal did not
award lost profits because the claimants could not provide any realistic esti-
mate of them. In that case, as in the present one, the expropriation
occurred when the project was not yet in operation and had yet to generate
revenue. (Biloune, 95 I.L.R. at 228-229). The award to Metalclad of the
cost of its investment in the landfill is consistent with the principles set
forth in Chorzow Factory (Claim for Indemnity) (Merits), Germany v.
Poland, PC.IJ. Series A., No. 17 (1928) at p.47, namely, that where the
state has acted contrary to its obligations, any award to the claimant
should, as far as is possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act
and reestablish the situation which would in all probability have existed if
that act had not been committed (the status quo ante).

CASES 33

123. Metalclad asserts that it invested $20,474,528.00 in the landfill
project, basing its value on its United States Federal Income Tax Returns
and Auditors’ Workpapers of Capitalized Costs for the Landfill reflected in
a table marked Schedule A and produced by Metalclad as response 7(a)A
in the course of document discovery. The calculations include landfill costs
Metalclad claims to have incurred from 1991 through 1996 for expenses
categorized as the COTERIN acquisition, personnel, insurance, travel and
living, telephone, accounting and legal, consulting, interest, office,
property, plant and equipment, including $328,167.00 for “other”.

124. Mexico challenges the correctness of these calculations on several
grounds, of which one is the lack of supporting documentation for each
expense item claimed. However, the Tribunal finds that the tax filings of
Metalclad, together with the independent audit documents supporting
those tax filings, are to be accorded substantial evidential weight and that
difficulties in verifying expense items due to incomplete files do not neces-
sarily render the expenses claimed fundamentally erroneous. See Biloune,
95 L.L.R. at 223-24.

125. The Tribunal agrees, however, with Mexico's position that costs
incurred prior to the year in which Metalclad purchased COTERIN are too
far removed from the investment for which damages are claimed. The
Tribunal will reduce the Award by the amount of the costs claimed for
1991 and 1992.

B. “Bundling”

126. Some of the subsequent costs claimed by Metalclad involve what
has been termed “bundling”. “Bundling” is an accounting concept where
the expenses related to different projects are aggregated and allocated to
another project. Metalclad has claimed as costs related to the development
at La Pedrera earlier costs incurred on certain other sites in Mexico. While
not taking any decision in principle regarding the concept of bundling as
it may be applicable to other situations (for example in the oil industry
where the costs in relation to a “dry hole” may in part be allocated to the
cost of exploring for and developing a successful well), the Tribunal does
not consider it appropriate to apply the concept in the present case. The
Tribunal has reduced accordingly the sum payable by the Government of
Mexico.

34 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

C. Remediation

127. The question remains of the future status of the landfill site, legal
title to which at present rests with COTERIN. Clearly, COTERIN’s subs-
tantive interest in the property will come to an end when it receives
payment under this award. COTERIN must, therefore, relinquish as from
that moment all claim, title and interest in the site. The fact that the site
may require remediation has been borne in mind by the Tribunal and allo-
wance has been made for this in the calculation of the sum payable by the
Government of Mexico.

D. Interest

128. The question arises whether any interest is payable on the
amount of the compensation. In providing in Article 1135(1) that a
Tribunal may award “monetary damages and any applicable interest”,
NAFTA clearly contemplates the inclusion of interest in an award. On the
basis of a review of the authorities, the tribunal in Asian Agricultural
Products v. Sri Lanka (4 ICSID Reports 245) held that “interest becomes an
integral part of the compensation itself, and should run consequently from
the date when the State’s international responsibility became engaged”
(ibid. p.294, para. 114). The Tribunal sees no reason to depart from this
view. As has been shown above, Mexico’s international responsibility is
founded upon an accumulation of a number of factors. In the circums-
tances, the Tribunal considers that of the various possible dates at which it
might be possible to fix the engagement of Mexico's responsibility, it is
reasonable to select the date on which the Municipality of Guadalcazar
wrongly denied Metalclad’s application for a construction permit. The
Tribunal therefore concludes that interest should be awarded from that
date until the date 45 days from that on which this Award is made. So as
to restore the Claimant to a reasonable approximation of the position in
which it would have been if the wrongful act had not taken place, interest
has been calculated at 6% p.a., compounded annually.

E. Recipient

129. As required by NAFTA, Article 1135(2)(b), the award of mone-
tary damages and interest shall be payable to the enterprise. As required by
NAFTA, Article 1135(2)(c), the award is made without prejudice to any
right that any person may have in the relief under applicable domestic law.

CASES 35

IX. COSTS

130. Both parties seek an award of costs and fees. However, the
Tribunal finds that it is equitable in this matter for each party to bear its
own costs and fees, as well as half the advance payments made to ICSID.

X. AWARD

131. For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal hereby decides that,
reflecting the amount of Metalclad’s investment in the project, less the
disallowance of expenses claimed for 1991 and 1992, less the amount
claimed by way of bundling of certain expenses, and less the estimated
amount allowed for remediation, plus interest at the rate of 6%
compounded annually, the Respondent shall, within 45 days from the date
on which this Award is rendered, pay to Metalclad the amount of
$16,685,000.00. Following such period, interest shall accrue on the
unpaid award or any unpaid part thereof at the rate of 6% compounded
monthly.

Made as at Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, in English and

Spanish.

Professor Sir Elihu Lauterpacht, CBE, QC
Date: [August 25, 2000]

Mr Benjamin R. Civiletti Mr José Luis Siqueiros
Date: [August 22, 2000] Date: [August 21, 2000]

