TABLE OF CONTENTS

A - The Disputing Parties and Other Persons

B - The Arbitration Tribunal

C - The Arbitral Procedure

D- The Dispute: Methanex’s Successive Claims

E - The Dispute: Methanex’s Assumed Facts

F - Methanex’s Application to Amend

G - Methanex’s Request for Documentary Disclosure

H - The USA’s Challenges on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

1 - Jurisdiction: The Tribunal’s General Approach

J - The USA’s Jurisdictional Challenge III: Article 1101(1) NAFTA
K - Article 1101(1) NAFTA: Application to the Assumed Facts
L - Legal and Arbitration Costs

M - OPERATIVE PART

Annex

02
03
04
12
18
27
31
32
38
53
63

72

73

76

CHAPTER A -
THE DISPUTING PARTIES AND OTHER PERSONS

Methanex: The Claimant is Methanex Corporation (“Methanex”), a company originally
incorporated under the laws of Alberta, Canada. It is now formed under the Canadian Business
Corporations Act. Methanex produces and markets methanol, with facilities in Canada, the USA,
New Zealand, Chile and Trinidad & Tobago. Its headquarters are in Vancouver, British Columbia,

Canada.

Methanex-US: Methanex Methanol Company (“Methanex-US’’) is a general partnership formed
under the laws of Texas, USA. Its partners are Methanex Inc. and Methanex Gulf Coast Inc., both
incorporated under the laws of Delaware, USA. Methanex owns, indirectly, all the shares of these

two US companies and thereby, also indirectly, Methanex-US.

Methanex-Fortier: Methanex Fortier Inc. (“Methanex-Fortier’) is a company incorporated

under the laws of Delaware, USA. Methanex owns, indirectly, all the shares in this US company.

The United States of America: The Respondent is the USA which, along with Canada and

Mexico, is one of the three Parties to the North American Free Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”).

Page 2 of 94

CHAPTER B -
THE ARBITRATION TRIBUNAL

The Three Arbitrators: The Arbitration Tribunal comprises (i) William Rowley of McMillan
Binch, Royal Bank Plaza Suite 3800, South Tower, Toronto, Ontario M5J 237, Canada, having
been appointed by Methanex; (ii) Warren Christopher of O’Melveny & Myers LLP, 1999 Avenue
ofthe Stars, Los Angeles, California 90067-6035, USA, having been appointed by the USA; and
ii) V. V. Veeder of Essex Court Chambers, 24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London WC2A 3EG,

England, having been appointed as third arbitrator and president of the Tribunal.

The Tribunal’s Secretaries: The Tribunal’s legal secretaries were Sri Srinivasan (until August

2001), Samuel Wordsworth and (from June 2002) Jeremy Maltby.

Administrative Secretary: The Tribunal’ s administrative secretary was Margrete Stevens, Senior

Counsel, ICSID, World Bank, Washington DC.

Page 3 of 94

CHAPTER C -
THE ARBITRAL PROCEDURE

(1) Introduction

8. For reasons that are self-evident to the Disputing Parties and that will become clear below, it is
necessary to set out at length part of the procedural history of these arbitration proceedings. It is
particularly necessary to describe the steps leading to the reformulation of Methanex’s claim in
its draft Amended Statement of Claim of February 2001. (To distinguish between Methanex’s
successive cases, the terms “Original Statement of Claim” and “Amended Statement of Claim’ are
used in this Award). It is not however necessary to repeat here other procedural aspects of these
proceedings, including the Tribunal’s earlier decisions on the place of arbitration and on the

admission of amici curiae to these arbitration proceedings'.

9. For ease of reference, relevant provisions of NAFTA (in the English language version) are set out

in the annex to this Award, together with provisions of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

' These decisions were delivered by the Tribunal to the Disputing Parties, Canada and Mexico (as NAFTA
Parties); and, along with certain other materials in these arbitration proceedings, both decisions have since been
published (but not by the Tribunal) on the worldwide web: e.g. www.naftalaw.org and www.state.gow/s/l/c3439.htm

Page 4 of 94

(2) Notice of Arbitration

On 3 December 1999, Methanex served its Notice of Arbitration, accompanied by its Original
Statement of Claim. Pursuant to Article 3(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules and Article 1137(1)
NAFTA, the arbitral proceedings were deemed to have commenced on the USA’s receipt of the

Notice of Arbitration, i.e. 3" December 1999.

(3) Original Statement of Claim

As formulated in its Original Statement of Claim, Methanex’s claim is based on the alleged breach
of two provisions in Section A of Chapter 11 of NAFTA: (i) the State of California did not accord
a minimum standard of treatment as required by Article 1105(1) NAFTA; and (ii) various actions
taken by the State of California and its Governor directly or indirectly constitute a measure
tantamount to expropriation under Article 1110(1) NAFTA. Methanex’s original claim was

brought under Article 1116(1) NAFTA only.

(4) Amended Statement of Claim

On 12" February 2001, Methanex submitted a draft Amended Statement of Claim. This added
a new claim of discrimination on the basis of nationality as prohibited by Article 1102 NAFTA,
as well as further claims for breaches of Articles 1105 and 1110 NAFTA, with these claims now
being brought pursuant to Articles 1116 and 1117 NAFTA.

Page 5 of 94

(5) Waiver and Article 1121(1) NAFTA

Pursuant to Article 1121(1) NAFTA, Methanex appended to its Notice of Arbitration a consent
to arbitration and waiver dated 2"! December 1999. The USA disputed the validity of the waiver.
However at the oral hearing in July 2001, as discussed further in Chapter H below, the Disputing
Parties resolved the issue of waiver by agreement. Accordingly, the Tribunal is not required to rule

on the issue of the waiver’s validity; and it does not do so in this Award.

(6) The USA’s Defence and Jurisdictional Challenges

In its Statement of Defence of 10" August 2000, the USA raised a series of objections to
jurisdiction and admissibility in respect of Methanex’s Original Statement of Claim. In accordance
with the timetable laid down at the Second Procedural Meeting held on 7" September 2000, the
USA submitted a Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility on 13" November 2000. It was the
first of many submissions which raised substantial objections to Methanex’s claims, quite apart

from the USA’s denial of the merits of those claims.

(7) Pre-Hearing Written Submissions on Challenges

Prior to the oral hearing of July 2001, in accordance with the Tribunal’s orders of 7 September

Page 6 of 94

2000, 22™ December 2000, 8" January, 27" February, and 2"! May 2001, the Disputing Parties
submitted written submissions on jurisdiction and admissibility, including Methanex’s application
to amend its Original Statement of Claim in the form of its Amended Statement of Claim. It is
convenient to list these submissions below, given that reference will be made to them later in this
Award, together with written submissions made by Canada and Mexico as NAFTA Parties

pursuant to Article 1128 NAFTA:

13" November 2000: USA Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility. Also on 13"
November 2000, Methanex and USA Joint Submission of Evidence, Vol 1.

12" January 2001: Methanex Motion to Amend its Original Statement of Claim pursuant
to Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, together with a Draft Outline of its

Amended Statement of Claim.

12" February 2001: Methanex Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and Draft Amended
Statement of Claim.

12" April 2001: USA Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction and Proposed Amendment.

30" April 2001: Second Submission of Canada under Article 1128 NAFTA, addressing

certain jurisdictional issues.

15" May 2001: Mexico Submission under Article 1128 NAFTA also addressing certain

jurisdictional issues.

25" May 2001: Methanex Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction and its Proposed
Amendment.

Page 7 of 94

27" June 2001: USA Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction and the Proposed Amendment.

(8) Jurisdictional Hearing of July 2001

The oral hearing on the USA’s challenges to jurisdiction, admissibility and related issues on

Methanex’s amendment took place at the World Bank, Washington DC, on 11" to 13" July

2001. The Disputing Parties and Parties were represented as follows:

®

a)

(ml

(IV)

Methanex: As Counsel, Christopher F. Dugan, Esq., James A. Wilderotter, Esq., Melissa
D. Stear, Esq., Nancy M. Kim, Esq., all of Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue, 51 Louisiana
Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20001-2113, USA;

The USA: As Counsel, Ronald J. Bettauer, Esq., Mark A. Clodfelter, Esq., Barton
Legum, Esq., Andrea J. Menaker, Esq., Alan Birnbaum, Esq,., all of the U.S. Department
of State, Office of the Legal Adviser, Suite 203, South Building 2430 E Street NW
Washington, DC 20037-2800, USA;

Canada: As Counsel, Mr Boris Uléhla, Counsel, Trade Law Division, Department of
Foreign Affairs and International Trade, Department of Justice, 125 Sussex Drive,

Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0G2, Canada; and

Mexico: As Counsel, Adriana Gonzalez Arce Brilanti Esq., Secretariat of the Economy,

Alfonso Reyes No. 30, Piso 17, Col Condesa, 06179, Mexico DF, Mexico; and Nancy
Fisher, Esq., of Shaw Pittman, 3200 N Street NW, Washington DC 20037-1128, USA.

Page 8 of 94

In addition, each Disputing Party was attended by other persons whose names are recorded in the
files and need not be repeated here, including (for the USA) representatives from the US
Department of State, the Office of the US Trade Representative, the US Department of
Commerce, the US Department of Justice, the US Department of Treasury, the US Department
of Labor, the US Enviromental Protection Agency, the California Environmental Protection

Agency and the California State Water Resources Control Board.
No witness or expert witness testified at this oral hearing; and indeed no factual evidence on any

disputed issue was adduced by any Disputant Party or Party. As appears below, it was a hearing

limited to legal argument, based on alleged and assumed facts.

Page 9 of 94

(9) Post-Hearing Written Submissions on Challenges

18. Following the oral hearing, the Tribunal received further written submissions on jurisdiction and

admissibility:

20" July 2001: Methanex Post-Hearing Submissions.

20" July 2001: USA Post-Hearing Submissions.

27" July 2001: Methanex Reply to Post-Hearing Submissions of the USA.

27" July 2001: USA Response to Post-Hearing Submissions of Methanex.

31" July 2001: USA Letter attaching Interpretation issued by the NAFTA Free Trade

Commission (see further below).

18" September 2001: Methanex Letter in Response to the NAFTA Free Trade

Commission Interpretation.

26" October 2001: USA Response to Methanex’s Submission concerning the NAFTA

Free Trade Commission Interpretation.

11" November 2001: Methanex’s Reply to the USA Response to Methanex’s

Submission concerning the NAFTA Free Trade Commission Interpretation.

Page 10 of 94

21" November 2001: Letter of Mexico concerning the Methanex Reply Submission of
11" November 2001.

17" December 2001: USA Rejoinder to Methanex’s Reply Submission concerning the

NAFTA Free Trade Commission Interpretation.

8" February 2002: Third Submission of Canada pursuant to NAFTA Article 1128.

11" February 2002: Mexico’s further submission under NAFTA Article 1128.

By order dated 11" March 2002, having previously intimated its intentions by order dated 28"
November 2001, the Tribunal closed the file on any further written submissions relating to
jurisdiction and admissibility, unless previously requested by the Tribunal; none were so

requested.; and the file was formally closed by letter dated 25" July 2002.

It is readily apparent from the list of these written submissions alone, quite apart from the oral
hearing itself, that neither Disputing Party left any stone unturned in support of its own case; and
ina document such as this, it is not possible for us to pay sufficient tribute to the enormous industry
and legal scholarship required for such detailed, lengthy and learned submissions. Fortunately,
however, it appears that these submissions lie in the public domain for future reference, along with

the helpful submissions of Canada and Mexico as NAFTA Parties”.

(10) The NAFTA Free Trade Commission Interpretation

? See (inter alia) the web-sites at footnote 1, supra.

Page 11 of 94

20.

21.

As noted above, after the oral hearing, the USA submitted a copy of the Interpretation issued by
the NAFTA Free Trade Commission. Pursuant to this document dated 31‘ July 2001 and signed
by the representatives of Canada, Mexico and the USA, the NAFTA Free Trade Commission
adopted certain ‘interpretations of Chapter Eleven in order to clarify and reaffirm the

meaning of certain of its provisions”.

Part A of the Interpretation concerns “Access to documents”. It is not relevant for present
purposes. Part B concerns Article 1105(1) NAFTA. It is relevant to the USA’s challenges; and

accordingly we set out below its relevant terms:

“B. Minimum Standard of Treatment in Accordance with International Law

I. Article 1105(1) prescribes the customary international law minimum standard of
treatment of aliens as the minimum standard of treatment to be afforded to
investments of investors of another Party.

2. The concepts of “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and security”
do not require treatment in addition to or beyond that which is required by the
customary international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens.

3. A determination that there has been a breach of another provision of the NAFTA,
or of a separate international agreement, does not establish that there has been a
breach of Article 1105(1).

Closing Provision
The adoption by the Free Trade Commission of this or any future interpretation

shall not be construed as indicating an absence of agreement among the NAFTA
Parties about other matters of interpretation of the Agreement.”

This document had not been expressly foreshadowed in the USA’s argument taking place at the
oral hearing earlier that same month; but in the light of Methanex’s submissions on Article 1105

NAFTA, it is possible that the timing was not a complete coincidence.

Page 12 of 94

Page 13 of 94

22.

23.

24.

CHAPTER D -
THE DISPUTE: METHANEX’S SUCCESSIVE CLAIMS

(1) Introduction

In summary, Methanex’s claim is brought in relation to the production and sale of a methanol-
based source of octane and oxygenate for gasoline which is known as methy] tertiary-butyl ether
(“MTBE”). It complains against US measures taken by the State of California restricting the use
of MTBE in gasoline in California. It is convenient to set out the essential characteristics of the
claim, both in Methanex’s Original Statement of Claim and Methanex’s Amended Statement of

Claim.

(2) Methanol, MTBE and Methanex

As stated, MTBE is a methanol-based source of octane and oxygenate for gasoline. As a
product, MTBE competes with ethanol. Ethanol is also a source of octane and oxygenate for
gasoline, generally manufactured from biomass feedstocks such as corn. A major US producer

of ethanol is a US company called Archer Daniels Midland, or “ADM”.
Methanex does not produce or sell MTBE or ethanol. Methanex’s business is the production,
transportation and marketing of methanol. Methanol is a liquid petrochemical made from

feedstocks containing carbon and hydrogen; and it is used to produce MTBE (but not ethanol).

Page 14 of 94

Approximately one third of Methanex’s methanol production is directed at the fuel sector,

principally for use in methanol-based MTBE.

(3) The US Measures

25. For the purposes of Article 1101 NAFTA, the measures adopted or maintained by the USA are
alleged by Methanex in its Original Statement of Claim to be the 1997 California Bill and the 1999

California Executive Order.

26. (i) The California Bill: The California Senate adopted Bill 521 on 9" October 1997. In
summary, the Bill allocated funds for the University of California to conduct an assessment of the

human health and environmental risks and benefits associated with the use of MTBE.

27. Section 2 of the California Bill provided:

“The Legislature hereby finds and declares that the purpose of this act is to provide
the public and the Legislature with a thorough and objective evaluation of the
human health and environmental risks and benefits, if any, of the use of methyl
tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE), as compared to ethyl tertiary-butyl ether (ETBE),
tertiary amyl methyl ether (TAME) and ethanol, in gasoline, and to ensure that the

air, water quality, and soil impacts of the use of MTBE are fully mitigated.”
28. The California Bill appropriated US $500,000 to the University of California to conduct this
evaluation, involving not only MTBE but also (inter alia) ethanol. Methanex and methanol do not

appear, expressly, in the California Bill.

Page 15 of 94

29.

30.

31.

(ii) The California Executive Order: The Executive Order D-5-99 of the Governor of
California of 25'" March 1999 recorded that there was a significant risk to the environment from
using MTBE in gasoline in California. The Governor was then (and remains) Gray Davis, who was
elected Governor of California on 3" November 1998. Prior to his election as Governor, Gray

Davis was Lieutenant Governor of California.

The California Executive Order provided (inter alia):

“The California Energy Commission (CEC), in consultation with the California Air
Resources Board, shall develop a timetable by July I, 1999 for the removal of MTBE
from gasoline at the earliest possible date, but not later than 31" December 2002.”

(Paragraph 4)

“The California Air Resources Board and the State Water Resources Control Board
shall conduct an environmental fate and transport analysis of ethanol in air, surface
water, and groundwater. The Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment

shall prepare an analysis of the health risks of ethanol in gasoline...” (Paragraph 10)

“The California Energy Commission (CEC) shall evaluate by December 31, 1999
and report to the Governor and the Secretary for Environmental Protection the
potential for development of a California waste based or other biomass ethanol
industry. CEC shall evaluate what steps, if any, would be appropriate to foster
waste based or other biomass ethanol development in California should ethanol be

found to be an acceptable substitute for MTBE.” (Paragraph 11)

In addition, the California Executive Order (paragraph 7) required that gasoline containing MTBE

Page 16 of 94

32.

be labelled prominently at the pump to enable consumers to make an informed choice on the type
of gasoline they purchase. Similarly, Methanex and methanol do not appear, expressly, in the

California Executive Order.
The US measures for the purposes of Article 1101 NAFTA, as alleged in the Amended Statement

of Claim, are the California Executive Order, described above, and the CaRFG3 Regulations,

described below. (Methanex no longer seeks to rely on the California Bill).

Page 17 of 94

33.

34.

35.

36.

(iii) The California Regulations: The CaRFG3 Regulations implemented the California
Executive Order: Cal. Code Regs. Tit. 13 §§ 2273 came into force on 16'" December 1999,
requiring gasoline pumps containing MTBE to be labelled in California as follows: “Contains
MTBE. The State of California has determined that use of this chemical presents a
significant risk to the environment.” Cal. Code Regs. Tit. 13 §§ 2260 et seq came into force
on 2™ September 2000. In particular, §§ 2262.6 provided at sub-section (a)(1) that: “Starting
December 31, 2002, no person shall sell, offer for sale, supply or offer for supply California

gasoline which has been produced with the use of methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE)”.

Similarly, Methanex and methanol do not appear, expressly, in the California Regulations. We shall

return below to a more detailed analysis of these three measures.

(4) Breaches of Articles 1102, 1105 and 1110 NAFTA

The claim, as formulated in Methanex’s Original Statement of Claim, alleged that the US measures
were (inter alia) arbitrary and based on a process lacking substantive fairness, penalised only one
component of gasoline, and went far beyond what was necessary to protect any legitimate public
interest. Methanex pleaded that the USA was in breach of Articles 1105 and 1110 and, with its
Amended Statement of Claim, it added a breach of Article 1102 NAFTA based on discrimination.

Article 1105: As to Article 1105 NAFTA, Methanex alleged that California failed to accord to

Methanex-US treatment in accordance with international law, including fair and equitable

treatment (Paragraph 34 of the Original Statement of Claim).

Page 18 of 94

37.

38.

39.

40.

Article 1110: As to Article 1110 NAFTA, Methanex alleged that the US measures would end
the business of Methanex-US in selling methanol for use in MTBE in California, would contribute
to the extended closure of the Fortier plant, and would therefore constitute a substantial taking of
the Methanex-US and Methanex-Fortier business and of Methanex’s investment in those

companies (Paragraph 35 of the Original Statement of Claim).

Article 1102: As to Article 1102 NAFTA, Methanex alleged in the Amended Statement of Claim
that the US measures were measures of intentional discrimination, being defined as an intent to
discriminate against methanol and MTBE to the benefit of the “domestic ethanol industry” (Page

1, footnote | of the Amended Statement of Claim).

(5) Article 1116 NAFTA

In its Original Statement of Claim, Methanex advanced its claims under Article 1116 NAFTA
“Claim by an Investor of a Party on Its Own Behalf’. Methanex therefore claims as an
investor of a NAFTA Party (Canada) that another NAFTA Party (the USA) has breached an
obligation under Section A of Chapter 11 (Articles 1105 and 1110 NAFTA), and that Methanex

has “incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach”.

The loss and damage alleged in the Original Statement of Claim is pleaded by Methanex as

follows:

() “Loss to Methanex, Methanex US and Fortier of a substantial portion of their

customer base, goodwill and market for methanol in California and elsewhere;

Page 19 of 94

Al.

42.

43.

(II) Losses to Methanex, Methanex US and Fortier as a result of the decline in the global

price of methanol;

(III) Loss of return to Methanex, Methanex US and Fortier on capital investments they

have made in developing and serving the MTBE market;

(IV) Loss to Methanex due to the increased cost of capital;

(V) Loss to Methanex of a substantial amount of its investment in Methanex US and

Fortier.”

As already stated, the claim as formulated by Methanex in its Original Statement of Claim was

brought only under Article 1116 NAFTA, without relying on Article 1117 NAFTA.

(6) Article 1117 NAFTA

Methanex’s Amended Statement of Claim also alleges that Methanex satisfies all the elements for
a claim advanced under Article 1117 NAFTA “Claim by an Investor of a Party on Behalf of

an Enterprise”.

Methanex claims here as an investor of a NAFTA Party (Canada), that Methanex indirectly owns
and controls Methanex-US and Methanex-Fortier which are US enterprises, that another NAFTA
Party (the USA) has breached obligations under Section A of Chapter 11 (Articles 1102, 1105
and 1110 NAFTA), and that Methanex-US and Methanex-Fortier have “suffered grave damage

as a result of those breaches” (Amended Statement of Claim, page 71). It is self-evident that

Page 20 of 94

the form of this claim is juridically different from the Original Statement of Claim, although the

particulars of loss as originally pleaded by Methanex are not factually dissimilar.

Page 21 of 94

44.

4S.

CHAPTER E -
THE DISPUTE: METHANEX’S ASSUMED FACTS

(1) Introduction

As already stated, the Tribunal has so far heard no testimony or other evidence; it has determined
no disputed issue of fact; and in this Award it makes no finding of fact. In particular, the Tribunal
has heard no evidence from the Governor of California, the California legislature, California state
officials or ADM. For the legal reasons explained below, the factual materials recited in this
chapter are taken necessarily from the facts alleged by Methanex, albeit disputed as facts by the
USA.

Accordingly, these materials can be only assumed facts for the purpose only of the Tribunal’s
decision in this Award on the USA’s challenges on jurisdiction and admissibility - and nothing
more. Given that the legal burden of proving its disputed factual allegations remains to be
discharged by Methanex, together with the legal presumptions of innocence and the legal doctrine
of omnia praesumuntur rite esse acta, nothing in our recital of factual materials below should be
taken as casting the slightest shadow over the targets of Methanex’s allegations. Nor should this
Award indicate any conclusions held by the Tribunal as to the eventual proof of these assumed

facts because we have formed no view at all as to their merits, one way or the other.

(2) Methanex’s Factual Allegations

Page 22 of 94

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

In brief, Methanex’s factual case, as set out in its Amended Statement of Claim, alleges that the
US measures constitute a disguised trade and investment restriction intended to achieve the
improper goal of protecting and advantaging the domestic ethanol industry through sham
environmental regulations disadvantaging MTBE and methanol (Amended Statement of Claim,
page 53). Methanex’s case is built up with a series of factual allegations, supplemented by other
factual allegations advanced in its other written and oral submissions to the Tribunal, which can be

summarised as follows:

MTBE: MTBE is a safe, effective and economic component of gasoline (Amended Statement of
Claim, page 7). Its use has been approved and encouraged by the US Federal Government after

exhaustive study (Amended Statement of Claim, page 56).

European Union: Regulatory agencies in the European Union, including the European
Commission, have determined that it is not appropriate or environmentally beneficial to ban MTBE

(Amended Statement of Claim, page 34).

Methanol: Methanol is a feedstock for MTBE. In 1998, Methanex shipped approximately
132,000 tons of methanol to California refineries for MTBE production (Amended Statement of
Claim, pages 4-5). Methanex supplies the vast majority of methanol in California (Rejoinder of 25"
May 2001, page 27). California has no methanol industry of its own (Transcript, Day 3, pages
400 and 403).

Ethanol: Ethanol is a fuel and an oxygenate that competes directly with MTBE. Using ethanol
as a gasoline oxygenate may be environmentally harmful; and its use is not energy efficient. Ethanol
may be harmful to human health; and it is, in contrast to MTBE, a carcinogen (Amended Statement

of Claim, pages 10-11).

Page 23 of 94

51.

52.

53.

54.

US Ethanol Industry: The production of ethanol is heavily subsidised by United States Federal
and State Governments. The US ethanol industry is a powerful political lobby that is constantly
seeking legislative and other measures granting higher subsidies and better protection from
competition against alternative fuels and oxygenates. Political campaign contributions are a central

element of the ethanol industry’s lobbying program (Amended Statement of Claim, page 7).

ADM: ADM produces more than 70% of US ethanol. ADM is the force that drives the ethanol
industry’s lobbying machine. ADM has launched a systematic political attack on MTBE and
methanol with a view to removing MTBE from the market so that ethanol can take its place. To
this end, ADM has advanced two consistent themes: (i) methanol and MTBE are “foreign”
products, and any increased use of MTBE increases US reliance on “foreign” energy imports; and

(ii) methanol and MTBE are health hazards (Amended Statement of Claim, pages 12-13).

ADM Strategy: Political contributions and lobbying are the foundation of ADM’s business
strategy (Amended Statement of Claim, page 21). Its lobbying and political contributions have
been the prime mover in creating the heavily protected ethanol industry in the USA. Public officials
have repeatedly and explicitly adopted ADM’s program, supporting a ban on MTBE in order to
increase US ethanol production (Amended Statement of Claim, pages 22-23). Governmental
officials in the United States who support the ethanol industry almost always cast their support in
terms of improper protectionist intent (Transcript, Day 3, p. 392). ADM has even engaged in

criminal activity to pursue its interests (Amended Claim, page 24).

True Solution: California’s drinking water problem is principally caused by leaking underground
storage gasoline tanks. Accordingly, the obvious and reasonable solution is not to ban MTBE, but
to stop gasoline leakages (Amended Statement of Claim, page 24). California State officials are
criticised for not addressing promptly contamination resulting from leaking underground storage

tanks (Amended Statement of Claim, page 26).

Page 24 of 94

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

MTBE as Indicator: MTBE in groundwater often travels more quickly than other gasoline
components; and it is detectable at extremely low threshold levels. It is thus an early indicator of
gasoline leaks. In the mid-1990s, trace amounts of MTBE began to appear in some sources of

California’s drinking water (Amended Statement of Claim, page 28).

ADM’s Opportunity: California’s contaminated groundwater presented ADM with a golden
opportunity to eliminate competition. It did so through its favourite competitive methods: misleading
publicity and massive political contributions. As a result of ADM’s years of publicly characterising
MTBE and methanol as dangerous foreign products, California officials were already receptive to
ADM’s tactics (Amended Statement of Claim, page 28).

California Bill 521: Rather than cure the problem of leaking underground storage tanks, the
Californian response to the problem of gasoline leakage was punitive action against one of the early
symptoms of leaking tanks, i.e. to set in motion a process to ban the use of MTBE in gasoline. On
9" October 1997, Bill 521 was passed appropriating funds to the University of California for a
study on risks associated with the use of MTBE, including a comparative study of the risks of

MTBE’s competitors, including ethanol (Amended Statement of Claim, page 29).

First Contribution: On 2" June 1998, ADM made a contribution of US $5,000 to the Gray

Davis gubernatorial campaign in California (Amended Statement Claim, page 29).

The Secret Meeting: On4" August 1998, Mr Davis flew on an ADM plane to a secret meeting
with ADM at its headquarters in Illinois (Amended Statement of Claim, pages 29-30). This
meeting took place at a critical time in the development of California’s oxygenate policy. At the
time when it was held, the meeting was deliberately kept secret; and the participants still continue

to deny the true subject-matter of their meeting. The meeting was never disclosed by either Mr

Page 25 of 94

60.

61.

62.

63.

Davis’ California state office or his campaign organisation.

In fact, the trip to Illinois was recorded on campaign finance filings as a meeting with labour
representatives in Chicago, as a studied attempt to hide the trip from public scrutiny. ADM has
now said, falsely, that the meeting was a ‘get acquainted session’. This is contradicted by the
responsibilities and job titles of the ADM representatives who attended. As the Wall Street
Journal reported on 30" March 2001, those who attended “were mostly tied to the ethanol
industry” (Rejoinder of 25" May 2001, pages 8-10). ADM’s characterisation is also contradicted
by the draft agenda for the meeting, from which it may be inferred that the purpose of the meeting
was to discuss ethanol (Transcript, Day 3, pp. 480-486).

(This draft agenda has not been seen by the Tribunal; and Methanex has yet to tender the

document into evidence).

Tt would have been extraordinary if ADM had not emphasised to its guest, as a candidate running
for the office of Governor of California, what ADM had stated publicly on many occasions, namely
that methanol and MTBE were “foreign” products and that banning MTBE would be a patriotic
step to reduce US dependence on such products (Amended Statement of Claim, page 20). Later,
once elected, Governor Davis acted on what ADM told him during this meeting (Transcript, Day

1, p. 160).
Second and Third Contributions: On 19" August 1998, ADM made a contribution of US
$100,000 to the Gray Davis gubernatorial campaign. Within the next four months, a further US

$55,000 was paid to the Davis campaign (Amended Statement of Claim, page 30).

The UC Study: On 12" November 1998, the University of California completed its study,

pursuant to California Bill 521. The study failed in significant ways to meet the requirements of

Page 26 of 94

64.

65.

66.

67.

the Bill, omitting the required comparative study of the risks of MTBE’s competitors (Amended

Statement of Claim, page 30).

California Executive Order: On 25" March 1999, seven months after the meeting on 4"
August 1998, Governor Davis made the California Executive Order effectively banning MTBE
after 2002 and requiring MTBE to be labelled at gasoline pumps. The Order also began the
process of developing an ethanol industry based in California(Amended Statement of Claim, page
32).

Fourth Contribution: Following this Order, but long after the gubernatorial campaign had come
to an end, ADM paid a further US $55,000 to Governor Davis. The four contributions totalled
US $215,000. This amount put ADM in the top 1% of Governor Davis’ contributors - despite the
fact that ADM then had minimal business interests in California (Amended Statement of Claim,

page 30).

Cal Regs: Regulations implementing the labelling requirement and prohibiting the use of MTBE
in gasoline went into effect respectively on 16" December 1999 and 2" September 2000. These
regulations also prohibited the use of any gasoline oxygenate other than ethanol unless California’s
Environmental Policy Council determined that use of that oxygenate would not present a significant

risk to public health or the environment (Amended Statement of Claim, pages 32-33).

Governor Davis: The information and political contributions received by Governor Davis from
ADM misled and improperly affected his decision about leaking tanks and MTBE. ADM
promoted the ban on MTBE at its secret meeting with Governor Davis. That meeting led to the
large political contributions thereafter. The MTBE measures were at least in part the result of the
Governor’s political debt to ADM and of his desires to protect and favour ADM, to establish a

Califomia based ethanol industry and to penalise producers of MTBE and methanol, the

Page 27 of 94

68.

69.

70.

71.

“dangerous” and “foreign” MTBE feedstock (Amended Statement of Claim, page 53).

State of California: California officials also perceived methanol and MTBE as “foreign”
products. They were improperly motivated by that perception, and by an intent to promote and
protect the California and US ethanol industries (Rejoinder of 25"" May 2001, page 27). The
measures were intended to discriminate against Methanex and its investments as “foreign”
competitors of the highly protected domestic ethanol industry (Amended Statement of Claim, page
66).

Intent: In its Rejoinder of 25" May 2001 (page 26), Methanex characterises its factual allegations
as follows: ‘Methanex has alleged, and it is certainly reasonable for the Tribunal to infer,
that when ADM executives secretly met with Governor Davis, they repeated their usual
protectionist arguments. Methanex has also alleged that ADM urged the MTBE ban in
order to protect the US ethanol industry. Finally, Methanex has alleged that Governor
Davis acted at least in part on the basis of those arguments...”. Inits Reply Submission of 27"
July 2001 (page 9), Methanex refers to its “allegation that Gov. Davis intended to benefit the

US ethanol industry and to penalise foreign producers of methanol and MTBE”.

Disclaimer: As Methanex has made clear, it does not allege that Governor Davis, officials of the

State of California or ADM violated US or California campaign contribution statutes or US

criminal law (Amended Statement of Claim, footnote 2; and Transcript, Day 3, p. 487).

(3) The California Executive Order dated 14" March 2002

For the sake of completeness, the Disputing Parties forwarded to the Tribunal, without substantive

comment, Executive Order D-52-02 made by the Governor of the State of California on 14"

Page 28 of 94

March 2002. Given that it may qualify the effect of the California Executive Order of 25'" March

1999, it is appropriate to quote here its terms in full:

“WHEREAS, Executive Order D-5-99, issued March 25, 1999, found that,
“on balance,” use of MTBE posed a significant risk to California’s
environment. The State Energy Resource Conservation and Development
Commission (Commission) and the Air Resources Board (Board) were
directed to develop a timetable for removing MTBE from gasoline at the
earliest possible date, no later than December 31, 2002. The Board was
directed to adopt regulations as needed to implement the Executive Order;
and

WHEREAS, on December 9, 1999, the Board adopted regulations prohibiting
the sale of gasoline containing MTBE in California after December 31, 2002;
and

WHEREAS, Senate Bill 989 (Sher) of 1999 requires the Commission to
develop a timetable for removal of MTBE from gasoline “at the earliest
possible date” that will still ensure adequate supply and availability of
gasoline. (Health & Saf. Code §43013.1.); and

WHEREAS, in order to comply with the federal requirements and also
eliminate use of MTBE, California would need to import up to 900 million
gallons of ethanol per year; and

WHEREAS, the current production, transportation and distribution of
ethanol is insufficient to allow California to meet federal requirements and
eliminate use of MTBE on January 1, 2003; and

WHEREAS, on June 12, 2001, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
denied California’s request for a waiver of the federal oxygen content
requirement. As a result, if use of MTBE is prohibited January 1, 2003,
California’s motorists will face severe shortages of gasoline, resulting in
substantial price increases; and

WHEREAS, strengthened underground storage tank requirements and

enforcement have significantly decreased the volume and rate of MTBE
discharges since Executive Order D-5-99 was issued in March of 1999;

Page 29 of 94

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GRAY DAVIS, Governor of the State of California,
by virtue of the power and authority vested in me by the Constitution and
statutes of the State of California, do hereby issue this order to become
effective immediately:

1 FIND that it is not possible to eliminate use of MTBE on January 1, 2003,
without significantly risking disruption of the availability of gasoline in
California. This would substantially increase prices, harm California’s
economy and impose an unjustified burden upon our motorists.

IT IS ORDERED that by July 31, 2002, the board shall take the necessary
actions to postpone for one year the prohibitions of the use of MTBE and
other specified oxygenates in California gasoline, and the related
requirements for California Phase 3 reformulated gasoline.

IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the Board and Commission shall work with
the petroleum industry to ensure that MTBE-free gasoline meeting California
standards continues to be supplied to the Lake Tahoe region and any other
areas of California currently receiving MTBE-free gasoline.

IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the State Water Resources Control Board
and the Department of Health Services shall work with California drinking
water providers to ensure that the providers continue to take all appropriate
measures to prevent discharge of MTBE into surface water reservoirs.”

(For reasons that appear below, it proved unnecessary for the Tribunal’s decisions in this Award
to require the Disputing Parties to make any submissions on this new document. In regard to the
next stages of these arbitration proceedings, the Tribunal may allow further submissions to be made
as to the relevance and effect of both this document and the other documents to which it refers,

in particular the US Environmental Protection Agency’s decision of 12" June 2001).

Page 30 of 94

72.

723.

CHAPTER F -
METHANEX’S APPLICATION TO AMEND

(@) Introduction

On 30" November 2000, Methanex served a Notice of Change of Legal Counsel and Intent to
File an Amended Claim, alongside a Notice of Intent to Submit a Complaint to Arbitration. It was
indicated that Methanex would add a specific claim of discrimination on the basis of nationality
under Article 1102 NAFTA. On 22"! December 2000, Methanex gave written notice of its
intention to amend its claim to include additional claims in relation to breaches of Articles 1102,
1105 and 1110 NAFTA, with the claim now being advanced under both Articles 1116 and 1117
NAFTA. On 12" January 2001 Methanex submitted its Motion to Amend its Original Statement
of Claim pursuant to Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and its Draft Outline of
Amended Claim; and on 12 February 2001 Methanex submitted its Draft Amended Statement

of Claim.

Methanex’s application substantially modified the legal and factual basis of its claim; and it much
affected the conduct and progress of these arbitration proceedings, including the scope of the
USA’s existing challenges on jurisdiction and admissibility made in response to Methanex’s

Original Statement of Claim. The USA opposed Methanex’s attempt to modify its claim.

Page 31 of 94

(2) The Grounds for Methanex’s Application

74. Methanex makes its application to amend the claim on the basis of Article 20 of the UNCITRAL

Arbitration Rules. This provides:

“During the course of the arbitral proceedings either party may amend or
supplement his claim or defence unless the arbitral tribunal considers it
inappropriate to allow such amendment having regard to the delay in making it or
prejudice to the other party or any other circumstances. However, a claim may not
be amended in such a manner that the amended claim falls outside the scope of the

arbitration clause or the separate arbitration agreement.”

75. It is said by Methanex that, under Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, parties have
the right to amend if the amendment is not frivolous or vexatious, if the amendment has not been
unduly delayed, and if the amendment will not cause prejudice to the other party. Methanex
contends that none of these criteria are met in the present case. It is also said that the amendment
raises serious allegations concerning the fairness and equity of the measures at issue; and that,
although additional legal theories and facts now fall to be considered, the underlying complaint is
unchanged and the arbitration will not be unduly disrupted. Methanex further contends that the
alternative to amendment, namely filing the amended claim separately and seeking consolidation

pursuant to Article 1126 NAFTA, would be markedly less efficient.

Page 32 of 94

76.

77.

(3) The USA’s Response

The USA resists the amendment on the basis that it amounts to a new claim: the amendment
identifies an entirely new measure (the CaRFG3 regulations); it is based on new facts; and it adds
new legal theories for recovery; i.e. a national treatment claim under Article 1102 and a
substantially different claim under Article 1105. The USA contends that international tribunals
applying the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules have disallowed claims in such circumstances. It is
argued that there has here been a delay in seeking to make the amendment and a failure to
substantiate the assertion that the claim is based on newly discovered facts. In particular, it is said
that there has been no explanation as to how and when it was discovered by Methanex that the
allegedly secret meeting of 4'" August 1998 had taken place. It is noted that the use ofan ADM
plane was disclosed on Governor Davis’ campaign disclosure forms. It is also said that the bulk

of Methanex’s new allegations are based on public materials available years ago.

The USA also contends that to allow the amendment, after a briefing schedule had already been
set with which the USA had complied, would cause the USA prejudice. However, the USA
accepted, rightly, that the amendment would cause it no irremediable prejudice; or at least no
prejudice which could not be financially compensated by an order from the Tribunal that Methanex.

bear the USA’s wasted costs caused by the amendment.

(4) The Tribunal’s Decision

Page 33 of 94

78.

79.

At the jurisdictional hearing of July 2001, the Tribunal ordered that: “Subject to all jurisdiction
and admissibility issues and subject to any order as to costs, the Tribunal will allow the
Claimant to amend its Statement of Claim in the form of the draft Amended Statement of
Claim” (Transcript, Day 2, p. 339). In short, apart from the jurisdiction and admissibility issues,
the Tribunal decided, in principle, that Methanex should be allowed to amend its Original
Statement of Claim in the form of its Amended Statement of Claim, subject to an order that
Methanex should ultimately bear, regardless of the result of the arbitration on the eventual merits
of its claim, the wasted costs of the arbitration thrown away by its amendment (including the legal
costs of the USA assessed in a reasonable sum). In the Tribunal’s view, subject to recovering such
costs, the USA would suffer no unfair prejudice from such an amendment; and the overall interests
of fairness and procedural efficiency would have supported an order allowing Methanex to amend

its claim, as requested.

However, as is clear from the Tribunal’s order of July 2001, Methanex’s application to amend its
pleading was subject to the Tribunal’s decision on the USA’s challenges on jurisdiction and
admissibility, to which we turn below. We there decide that Methanex’s Amended Statement of
Claim, as a whole, cannot withstand the USA’s jurisdictional challenge based on Article 1101;
but that it is possible that a fresh pleading from Methanex re-stating part of its existing case could
survive that challenge. For these reasons, we cannot here make an order allowing Methanex to
amend its claim to the full extent of its Amended Statement of Claim; and we decline to do so. (We
make it plain, however, that applying Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Methanex.
may include in a fresh pleading reliance on Article 1117 NAFTA, in addition to Article 1116
NAFTA).

Page 34 of 94

80.

81.

CHAPTER G -
METHANEX’S REQUEST FOR
DOCUMENTARY DISCLOSURE

In the light of the decisions made in this Award, we do not think it necessary here to make any
order on Methanex’s application for documentary production, raised by Methanex’s letter of 1*
May 2001, at the jurisdictional hearing of July 2001 (Transcript, Day 1, page 130 et seqg.), and
expanded by Methanex’s letter of 24" September 2001. Such documentation was not relevant
to the decisions in this Award; and if relevant to the future conduct of these arbitration proceedings,

a like application can be renewed by Methanex against the USA.

We take the view, subject to hearing further argument in relation to a specific application, that we
have no general power to order Canada and Mexico as NAFTA Parties to produce any
documentation to Methanex in these arbitration proceedings. We also take the view that we have
a discretion to impose conditions on any documentary production by the USA, relating to

confidentiality and the limited use of the documents.

Page 35 of 94

82.

83.

CHAPTER H -
THE USA’S CHALLENGES ON JURISDICTION
AND ADMISSIBILITY

(@) Introduction

The USA’s challenges on jurisdiction and admissibility were formally set out in the USA’s
Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of 13" November 2000. The respective positions of
the Disputing Parties were then developed with an extensive series of submissions made in writing
as well as orally, such submissions addressing both Methanex’s claim as pleaded in the Original
Statement of Claim and as re-pleaded in the Amended Statement of Claim. The Disputing Parties
made submissions addressing not only the individual challenges raised by the USA but also the
general approach for the Tribunal, at this jurisdictional stage, towards disputed issues of fact and

legal interpretation.

In this Award, the Tribunal does not address each and every submission made by the Disputing
Parties, as well as Canada and Mexico as NAFTA Parties. For the Tribunal’s decisions, as
appears below, it is unnecessary to decide each submission; and it would be quite wrong for us
to do so, given that these arbitration proceedings will continue and may require a decision on many

of these submissions later.

Page 36 of 94

84.

85.

86.

(2) The USA’s Challenges

It is however necessary to list the several challenges made by the USA to indicate what the

Tribunal has and has not addressed in this Award:

Challenge I: Article 1116(1) NAFTA (No proximate cause);

Challenge IT: Articles 1105 & 1110 NAFTA (No legal right impugned by US measures);

Challenge II: Article 1101(1) NAFTA (No legally significant connection between
US measures and Methanex or its investments);

Challenge IV: Article 1116(1) NAFTA (No loss);

Challenge V: Article 1116(1) NAFTA (No claim for subsidiaries’ losses);

Challenge VI: Article 1121(b) NAFTA (No waiver); and

Challenge VII: Article 1102 NAFTA (No possible claim).

Challenge I: The USA’s first objection is based on Article 1116 NAFTA, characterised as
requiring that the alleged breach be the proximate cause of the alleged loss. We decide that this

particular challenge cannot succeed for several cumulative reasons.

First, as a general principle explained in Chapter I below, we cannot address it as a challenge
based on “admissibility”. Second, as a jurisdictional challenge, it fails on the wording of Article
1116(1) because it is an indisputable fact that Methanex has made “a claim ... that [Methanex]
has incurred loss and damage”; and, in our view, the plain meaning of this provision does not
require, as a jurisdictional matter, the claimant to prove loss and damage. Third, even if it qualified
as a jurisdictional challenge (which in our view, it does not), its legal merits are so intertwined with
factual issues arising from Methanex’s case that we would have been minded, as a matter of
discretion, to join that challenge to the merits under Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration

Rules. (This procedure is discussed in Chapter K below).

Page 37 of 94

87.

88.

89.

90.

Challenge II: The USA’s second objection is that Methanex has no legal right infringed by the
measures under Article 1110 and 1105(1) NAFTA. As to the former provision, it is contended
that Methanex has failed to identify an “investment” that could be expropriated; and a customer
base or goodwill cannot qualify as an investment under Article 1139(g)&(h) NAFTA; an
expectation of future profits from methanol sales cannot constitute an investment; and expectations
are not property rights capable of expropriation. As to the latter provision, it is contended that
Methanex has failed to identify any legal right to the allegedly denied standard of treatment; and

this claim is therefore also inadmissible.

We decide that this particular challenge also cannot succeed for several reasons. As with
Challenge I, we cannot address it as a challenge based on “admissibility”; it does not qualify as a
jurisdictional challenge; and even if it did qualify as a jurisdictional challenge (which in our view,
it does not), it is so intertwined with factual issues in Methanex’s case that we would have been

minded to join that challenge to the merits.

Challenge IIT: We address and decide the USA’s third objection in the succeeding chapters of
this Award.

Challenge IV: The USA’s fourth objection is that Methanex has not suffered and could not in
any event suffer any loss as a result of the measures, as required by Article 1116 NAFTA,
because Methanex relies on an alleged ban of MTBE, whereas neither the California Bill nor the
California Executive Order effected such a ban. As with Challenge I, the same comments applies
to this challenge: ie. it fails in principle as a challenge on admissibility; it fails as a jurisdictional
challenge on the plain meaning of the words in Article 1116(1) NAFTA; and even if it qualified as

a jurisdictional objection, it would be joined to the merits.

Page 38 of 94

91.

92.

93.

Challenge V: The USA’s fifth objection in its Memorial is that there is under Article 1116(1)
NAFTA no possible claim by an investor made in its own right for alleged injuries to an enterprise
owned or controlled by that investor: Article 1116(1) allows only claims for loss or damage
incurred by an investor (whereas Article 1117 provides for claims for loss or damage to an
enterprise owned or controlled by an investor). Losses suffered by Methanex-US and Methanex-
Fortier could only be claimed under Article 1117, which was not pleaded in Methanex’s Original
Statement of Claim; and Methanex has otherwise suffered no loss that could be claimed under

Article 1116, the pleaded losses being derivative of losses suffered by Methanex’s subsidiaries.

We decide that this challenge cannot succeed for several cumulative reasons. First, it is moot. As
appears below under the USA’s Challenge III, we decide that there is no jurisdiction to decide
Methanex’s claim as advanced in its Original Statement of Claim; and it is therefore unnecessary
for us here to decide the USA’ further submissions based on Article 1116, limited to that particular
pleading. Second, the jurisdictional challenge is technical and capable of being cured by
Methanex’s reliance on Article 1117. Indeed, Methanex does now rely upon Article 1117 in its
Amended Statement of Claim; Methanex asserts that any defect in its original pleading (which is
denied) would be cured if this particular amendment were allowed by the Tribunal; and as
indicated in Chapter F above, we are sympathetic to Methanex’s reliance on Article 1117 ina
fresh pleading. Third, with Methanex introducing Article 1117 into its case, any new jurisdictional
dispute over Articles 1116 and/or 1117 can be joined to the merits on the grounds of procedural

efficiency.

Challenge VI: As already indicated above, Challenge VI (waiver) was amicably settled by the
Disputing Parties at the hearing in July 2001, as recorded by letter dated 13" July 2001 to the
Tribunal signed for Methanex by Christopher F. Dugan Esq and James A. Wilderotter Esq and
for the USA by Barton Legum Esq, as Chief, NAFTA Arbitration Division, Office of International

Claims and Investment Disputes of the US State Department. Its material terms provide:

Page 39 of 94

94.

“The parties have agreed to the following resolution of the United States’
preliminary objection based on the adequacy of the waivers submitted by Claimant
Methanex Corporation pursuant to NAFTA Article 1121:

J. Although it continues to maintain that the other waivers submitted by Methanex
do not comply with the Article’s requirements, Respondent United States of America
agrees that the waivers submitted by Methanex on May 25, 2001 satisfy the
requirements of Article 1121;

2. Although it continues to maintain that the waivers it previously submitted
complied with the Article’s requirements, Methanex does not now claim in this
proceeding that California Senate Bill 521 is a measure that violates the NAFTA;

3. The parties agree that waivers complying with the requirements of Article 1121
must be submitted as provided in Article 1137, in order for a claim under Chapter
Eleven of the NAFTA to be considered submitted to arbitration and jointly request
that the Tribunal note this agreement in its decision on the United States’
preliminary objections;

4. In consideration of the foregoing, the United States hereby withdraws its
objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction based on the adequacy of the waivers
provided by Methanex pursuant to Article 1121.”

In these circumstances, the issue having been so agreed by the Disputing Parties, it requires no
decision or other action from the Tribunal, save to record (as requested) the terms of their

agreement in this Award.

Challenge VII: The USA submits that Methanex’s claim pleaded in its Amended Statement of
Claim fails to allege, as required by Article 1102, that Methanex or its investments were treated
differently from any US producer or marketer of methanol; that Methanex could make no such
allegation because the USA is home to one of the largest methanol industries in the world; that the
measures accord precisely the same treatment to all investors in the methanol industry, whether

owned or controlled by domestic US or foreign investors; that Article 1102 does not oblige the

Page 40 of 94

USA as a NAFTA Party to treat all products equally, requiring only treatment that is not less
favourable with respect to investors of other NAFTA Parties and their investments that are in like
circumstances with their US counterparts; and that ethanol and methanol are different products
with different properties and uses. As with Challenge II, the same comment applies to Challenge
VII: i.e. it fails in principle as a challenge on admissibility; and even if it had qualified as a

jurisdictional challenge, we would have joined it to the merits.

Page 41 of 94

95.

Conclusion: We therefore dismiss each of the USA’s Challenges I, II, 1V, V and VII; we decide
Challenge II later in this Award; and we are not required to decide Challenge VI. As regards
Challenges I, II, TV, V and VII, we decide nothing else in this Award as to their underlying legal
merits; and to that extent both the USA and Methanex shall remain free to maintain their legal
submissions in these arbitration proceedings. Accordingly, it could not be suggested that the
Disputing Parties’ efforts have been wasted in advancing their extensive submissions on these
issues. The exact opposite is true: in the light of the factual evidence still to be adduced in these
arbitration proceedings, it may be necessary for the Tribunal to address and decide many of these
submissions at a later stage of this arbitration; and we trust that in this regard the research and the

written work have been largely completed by the Disputing Parties and will require no repetition.

Page 42 of 94

96.

97.

CHAPTER I -
JURISDICTION:
THE TRIBUNAL’S GENERAL APPROACH

(@) Introduction

In this chapter, the Tribunal seeks to identify the general approach required to address the several
issues on jurisdiction and admissibility raised by the Disputing Parties. The Tribunal’s decision has
to be made at an early stage of the arbitration; there has been no trial on the merits of Methanex’s
claim; and as we have already stressed several times, no evidence on any disputed issue has yet

been adduced at all by either Disputing Party. It is convenient to begin with general principles.

(2) The 1969 Vienna Convention

Article 31(1): The first general principle relates to the interpretation of the NAFTA provisions at
issue. As was common ground between the Disputing Parties, each provision was to be interpreted
“in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty
in their context and in the light of its object and purpose”, in accordance with customary
international law rules reflected in Article 31(1) of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of

Treaties.

Page 43 of 94

98. Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention (previously article 27(1) of the draft convention) comprises
three separate principles, as noted in the International Law Commission’s Commentary to its Final

Draft Articles:

“The first - interpretation in good faith - flows directly from the rule pacta
sunt servanda. The second principle is the very essence of the textual
approach: the parties are to be presumed to have that intention which
appears from the ordinary meaning of the terms used by them. The third
principle is one both of common sense and good faith; the ordinary meaning
of a term is not to be determined in the abstract but in the context of the
treaty and in the light of its object and purpose. These principles have

repeatedly been affirmed by the Court [i.e. the ICJ].”

99. As to the second of these principles (interpretation in accordance with the ordinary meaning of a
term), various commentators have noted that this is not merely an exercise in uncovering the mere
literal meaning of a term’. As to the third principle of Article 31(1), the Special Rapporteur of the
International Law Commission noted: ‘the ‘ordinary meaning’ of terms cannot properly be
determined without reference to their context and to the objects and purposes of the

treaty”?.

3 Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1966, Vol. Il. Commentary to draft article 27 at para.12.

+ For example, see Sinclair, The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 2" ed., 1984, at p.121. Bin
Cheng, General Principles of Law as Applied by International Courts and Tribunals, 1953 at p.114.

5 Referring to the 1964 report of the International Law Commission: Yearbook of the International Law
Commission, 1966, Vol. II, at p. 95.

Page 44 of 94

100. In accordance with Article 1131(1) NAFTA and Article 33(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules, we have sought to apply these general principles to the interpretation of the disputed
provisions at issue, both in NAFTA and the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

101. Article 31(3): Article 31(3) of the Vienna Convention was the subject of a major debate between
the Disputing Parties before and during the oral hearing, which was later substantially re-
invigorated with the NAFTA Free Trade Commission’s Interpretation of 31° July 2001°. The
particular issue was whether, with respect to the interpretations of Articles 1101 and 1105
NAFTA, the Tribunal should take account of a subsequent agreement and/or subsequent practice
of the NAFTA Parties concerning the meaning of these provisions. It was the USA’s case that
the relevant agreement and practice were to be found in the concordant submissions of the USA,
Canada and Mexico made in these arbitration proceedings. With the Free Trade Commission’s
Interpretation of Article 1105, the USA later contended that the relevant agreement was also to
be found in that Interpretation (subject to the USA’s separate submission based on Article
1131(2) NAFTA). These later submissions do not relate to Article 1101, which is not the subject

of the Interpretation.

102. For reasons explained above, apart from jurisdiction and admissibility, the Tribunal does not
decide in this Award the disputed interpretation of Article 1105 NAFTA. Accordingly, it is
unnecessary to develop any further the USA’s submissions based on Article 31(3) of the Vienna
Convention (or Article 1131(2) NAFTA). (As also explained below, the Tribunal does decide the

© Article 31(3) provides: “There shall also be taken into account, together with the context:(a) any
subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its
provisions;(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the agreement of the
parties regarding its interpretation;(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between
the parties.” For the text of the NAFTA Free Trade Commission’s Interpretation of Article 1105(1), see Chapter C
above.

Page 45 of 94

disputed interpretation of Article 1101(1) NAFTA; but without requiring, for different reasons, any

consideration of Article 31(3) of the Vienna Convention).

(3) Restrictive Interpretation

103. |The USA contends that a doctrine of restrictive interpretation should be applied in investor-state
disputes. In other words, wherever there is any ambiguity in clauses granting jurisdiction over
disputes between states and private persons, such ambiguity is always to be resolved in favour of

maintaining state sovereignty.

104. | Methanex challenges the USA’s invocation of this doctrine on the basis that it has no application
to NAFTA. It relies in particular on the arbitration award in Ethyl Corporation v. Canada
(1998), and the arbitral decision in The Loewen Group, Inc. v. United States (2001)', as
authority for the proposition that a liberal rather than a restrictive interpretation of NAFTA is
appropriate. Methanex also contests the existence of a restrictive interpretation doctrine in
investor-state disputes generally, and it here relies on (inter alia) AMCO Asia Corp. v. Republic
of Indonesia, 1 ICSID Reports 377 (1983), as well as the separate opinion of Judge
Shahabuddeen in Applicability of the Obligation to Arbitrate Under Section 21 of the United
Nations Headquarters Agreement, Advisory Opinion, 1988, ICJ Reports 12, 62 and the
separate opinion of Judge Torres Bernandez in Case Concerning the Land, Island and Maritime

Frontier Dispute (El Salvador/Honduras), 1992, ICJ Reports 351, 728.

Ethyl Corporation v. Canada (Award on Jurisdiction, 24" June 1998), paragraphs 55-56 and 59, 38 ILM
708 (1999) and The Loewen Group, Inc. v. United States, ICSID Case No. ARB (AF) 98/3, 5® January 2001. (For these
materials, see the web-sites at footnote 1, supra.)

Page 46 of 94

105.

106.

The Tribunal rejects the contention of the USA for reasons which can be stated briefly, given that
the point did not greatly influence our decision in this Award. In short, the legal materials invoked
by Methanex clearly support its submissions in regard to the dispute resolution provisions
contained in NAFTA’s Chapter 11. Albeit in a slightly different context, as Judge Higgins decided
in the Oil Platforms Case (paragraph 35 of her separate opinion): ‘It is clear from the
jurisprudence of the Permanent Court and of the International Court that there is no rule

that requires a restrictive interpretation of compromissory clauses.” We accept that the
NAFTA Parties intended that the provisions of Chapter 11, particularly Article 1101(1) NAFTA,
should be interpreted in good faith in accordance with their ordinary meaning (in accordance with
Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention), without any one-sided doctrinal advantage built in to their

text to disadvantage procedurally an investor seeking arbitral relief.

(4) The Tribunal’s Power

The Tribunal’s power to rule on the USA’s challenges necessarily derives from Chapter 11

NAFTA. In this respect, the scheme of Chapter 11 may be described as follows:

@i) Article 1101(1): This is the gateway leading to the dispute resolution provisions of

Chapter 11. Hence the powers of the Tribunal can only come into legal existence if the

requirements of Article 1101(1) are met;

(i) Articles 1116-1117: If Chapter 11 applies, an investor of a NAFTA Party has the right

to submit a claim to arbitration in accordance with Articles 1116-1117;

Page 47 of 94

(ii) Article 1122: Consent to the submission of the claim to arbitration is found in Article

1122;

(iv) Article 1120: The procedural framework for the claim is established by Article 1120. In
the present case, the claim is submitted under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules as
provided by Article 1120(1)(c). Pursuant to Article 1120(2), the UNCITRAL Abbitration
Rules are “the applicable arbitration rules” and “govern the arbitration except to

the extent modified by” Section B of Chapter 11; and

(v) Article 21(1): Article 21(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules constitutes the

Tribunal’s starting-point for jurisdictional challenges. It provides:

“The arbitral tribunal shall have the power to rule on objections that it has
no jurisdiction, including any objections with respect to the existence or

validity of the arbitration clause or of the separate arbitration agreement.”

Article 21(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules is not modified or supplemented by the
provisions of Section B of Chapter 11 NAFTA.

107. It follows from the text of Article 21(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules that the Tribunal has the express,

power to rule on objections that it has “no jurisdiction”. This text, however, confers no separate

m8

 

power to rule on objections to “admissibility’

8 The French and Spanish texts of Article 21(1) are consistent with this interpretation: “Le tribunal peut
statuer sur les exceptions prises de son incompétence ...” and “El tribunal arbitral estard facultado para decidir
acerca de las objeciones de que carece de competencia ...”. The English text of Article 41(2) of the ICSID
Convention is materially similar (repeated in Rule 41(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules): see Schreuer The ICSID
Convention, A Commentary (2001), p.520ff.

 

 

Page 48 of 94

108.

109.

(5) The Dual Nature of the USA’s Challenges

The USA has raised two distinct classes of challenge: first, as to the Tribunal’s “jurisdiction”; and
second, as to the “admissibility” of Methanex’s claims. In its Memorial of 13" November 2000,
the USA did not separately categorise its challenges in this way. However, it became clear in
subsequent submissions that the USA’s challenges to jurisdiction primarily concerned Article
1101(1) and other provisions of Section B of Chapter 11 (Articles 1116-1117 and 1121), whilst
the USA’s challenges to admissibility concerned substantive provisions under Section A of
Chapter 11, namely Articles 1102, 1105 and 1110, which are the individual provisions in respect
of which Methanex alleges breach by the USA.

The USA’s challenges to admissibility are based upon the legal submission that, even assuming all
the facts alleged by Methanex to be true, there could still never be a breach of the individual
provisions pleaded by Methanex; and hence Methanex’ claims are bound to fail, regardless of any
factual evidence to be adduced by Methanex. Thus with regard to the challenge to Methanex’s

claim under Article 1102, the USA submitted:

“.. our 1102 objection is an admissibility objection. In other words, that taking all
of the allegations of fact made to be true, including uncontested facts, that as a
matter of law, there can be no claim, and that the claim is ripe for dismissal at this

stage for that reason’”®.

° Mr Clodfelter for the USA, Transcript Day 2, p. 218. Similarly, Mr Legum, Transcript Day 2, p. 267,

regarding Article 1105 NAFTA, and Mr Birnbaum, Transcript Day 2, p. 315, regarding Articles 1102, 1105 and 1110

NAFTA.

Page 49 of 94

110.

111.

112.

In the Tribunal’s view, this form of challenge is not a jurisdictional challenge; and indeed if the
Tribunal had no jurisdiction, it could not be invited by the USA (as it was) to dismiss the individual

claim for lack of legal merit. We return to this important distinction below.

(6) The Practical Problem

The Tribunal faces an obvious practical problem in addressing the USA’s various challenges. The
parties’ respective cases raise a large number of disputed issues of fact and law. Apart from any
jurisdictional challenge, such issues would be decided by the Tribunal after a full hearing on the
merits and a complete investigation of the relevant factual evidence and the legal principles to be
applied specifically to such evidence. This arbitration, however, has only reached the jurisdictional
phase. The Disputing Parties have not adduced any factual evidence on disputed issues (nor have
they been entitled to do so); and the Tribunal cannot pre-judge any eventual decision on the merits,

still less pre-determine any issue of disputed fact.

There is therefore a preliminary question as to the standard to which Methanex is required, in the
face of the USA’s several challenges, to establish the two essential components of its claim: (i) its
allegations of fact and (ii) its allegations as to the legal meaning of the provisions of NAFTA

Chapter 11 on which its case depends.

(i) Fact: It was common ground between the Disputing Parties that, for the purpose of this
jurisdictional phase, Methanex was not obliged to prove its allegations of fact and that it was
sufficient that Methanex should credibly allege the factual elements of its claim (Counter-Memorial
on Jurisdiction, page 2; Reply of 12" April 2001, page 5). According to Methanex, this means
that its allegations suffice unless the Tribunal determined that these allegations were incredible,

frivolous or vexatious. If there was a material difference in these submissions from the submissions

Page 50 of 94

made by the USA, albeit in different terms, it was not perceptible to the Tribunal; and in any event,
the Tribunal accepts Methanex’s submissions. It follows that the correct approach is to assume
that Methanex’s factual contentions are correct (insofar as they are not incredible, frivolous or
vexatious) and to apply, under whatever appropriate test, the relevant legal principles to those

assumed facts.

113. (ti) Law: This test proved highly contentious between the Disputing Parties; and it raised two
successive questions. First, in applying the relevant legal principles to the assumed facts, does the
Tribunal have definitively to decide the legal meaning of the relevant provisions of Chapter 11? Or
is it sufficient for the Tribunal to establish that Methanex’s interpretation is “arguable” or (since
such interpretations were indeed argued by Methanex) “‘well arguable” or argued to some higher
standard ? There is then a second question: is the same test to be applied to the provisions of
Chapter 11 creating jurisdiction, i.e. Articles 1101, 1116, 1117 NAFTA as to those creating
substantive obligations, ie. Articles 1102, 1105 and 1110 NAFTA?

114. There are significant differences between the Disputing Parties on these two questions. For
Methanex, relying on the separate opinion of Judge Shahabuddeen in Case Concerning Oil
Platforms", it is sufficient that its interpretations of the relevant provisions of Chapter 11 should
be “arguable”. It may also be that Methanex adopted the conclusion of Judge Shahabuddeen in
the Oil Platforms case to the effect that the International Court of Justice there had to decide
definitively (and not provisionally) that the particular dispute was within the category of disputes
for which the respondent had accepted the jurisdiction of the Court''. In other words, whilst an

“arguable” interpretation would suffice in relation to provisions creating substantive obligations, it

'© Case Concerning Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), 1996, ICI
Reports 803 and Ambatielos, Preliminary Objections, 1952, 1CJ Reports 28. (The Oil Platforms case is to be found
on the web at http://www icj-cij.org/icjwww/ido../iop_ijudgment 19961212 Preliminary%20Objection.ht.)

 

'l 1996, ICJ Reports 831.

Page 51 of 94

115.

116.

117.

might not suffice in respect of procedural provisions creating jurisdiction: the interpretation would

there have to be conclusively correct.

According to the USA, the correct approach was to ascertain whether on the basis of the assumed
facts there could be a violation of the relevant provisions; and this exercise required the Tribunal
to make a definitive interpretation of all relevant NAFTA provisions. The USA rejected the
reasoning of Judge Shahabuddeen; and the USA maintained that even on the basis of such
reasoning, it would remain necessary for the Tribunal definitively to determine the meaning of the

relevant jurisdictional clauses: e.g. Article 1101(1) NAFTA.

(7) The ICJ’s Oil Platforms Case

The Oil Platforms case is a recent and important decision as to how contested issues of fact and
legal interpretation can be treated in jurisdictional challenges. It is not of course the only example
of the problem and it does not provide the only possible solution to every case. In our view,

however, it does help point the way towards the answers required in the present case.

The International Court of Justice, in order to decide its jurisdiction to hear the case, interpreted
each treaty provision as to which breach was alleged by the claimant (Iran), so as to establish

whether the facts alleged by Iran were capable of leading to a breach of the provision:

“\.. the Parties differ on the question whether the dispute between the two
States with respect to the lawfulness of the actions carried out by the United
States against the Iranian oil platforms is a dispute ‘as to the interpretation

or application’ of the Treaty of 1955. In order to answer that question, the

Page 52 of 94

Court cannot limit itself to noting that one of the Parties maintains that such
a dispute exists, and the other denies it. It must ascertain whether the
violations of the Treaty of 1955 pleaded by Iran do or do not fall within the
provisions of the Treaty and whether, as a consequence, the dispute is one
which the Court has jurisdiction ratione materiae to entertain, pursuant to

Article XXI, paragraph 2.” (ICJ Reports 1996 (II), p. 810, paragraph 16).

118. Inher separate opinion, Judge Higgins explains the reasoning behind the ICJ’s approach:

“The only way in which, in the present case, it can be determined whether the
claims of Iran are sufficiently plausibly based upon the 1955 Treaty is to
accept pro tem the facts as alleged by Iran to be true and in that light to
interpret Articles I, IV and X for jurisdictional purposes, that is to say, to see
if on the basis of Iran's claims of fact there could occur a violation of one or

more of them.” (Paragraph 32)'?

(This approach is to be contrasted with the ICJ’s approach towards provisional measures, where
a claimant need only establish prima facie jurisdiction, for which purposes it is sufficient to show
that the breaches of a given treaty ‘are capable of falling within the provisions of that
instrument”: Legality of Use of Force (Yugoslavia v. Belgium), paragraph 38 expressly

contrasting the jurisdictional approach in the Oil Platforms case).

'2 Judge Higgins’ use of the word ‘could’ as opposed to ‘would’ is explained in the next paragraph of her
opinion (referring to Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions, Judgment No. 2, 1924, P.C.I.J., Series A, No. 2): “It is
interesting to note that in the Mavrommatis case the Permanent Court said it was necessary, to establish its
jurisdiction, to see if the Greek claims "would" involve a breach of the provisions of the article. This would seem
to go too far. Only at the merits, after deployment of evidence, and possible defences, may "could" be converted to
"would". The Court should thus see if, on the facts as alleged by Iran, the US actions complained of might violate
the Treaty articles.”

Page 53 of 94

119.

120.

121.

The decision in the Oil Platforms case was reached in the context of an inter-state dispute subject
to settlement pursuant to the Statute and Rules of Procedure of the International Court of Justice.
The question whether the parties had there consented to the Court’s jurisdiction could not be
answered by accepting that the claimant’s interpretation of the treaty’s provisions was merely
“arguable”. It could only be answered in the affirmative if the claimant could show (i) that the
legality of the parties’ actions fell within the treaty (containing a clause conferring compulsory
jurisdiction on the Court) and (ii) that the requirements of that clause were definitively met. As
quoted above, the Court expressly rejected Iran’s argument that there was inevitably a dispute
within the jurisdiction clause once Iran contended that the treaty applied or that its provisions had
certain meanings and the USA contended the opposite. Under the treaty, the answer to issue (i)
required the interpretation of the substantive provisions of the treaty invoked by the claimant to
determine if the alleged facts could amount to a breach of the treaty before the treaty (with its

jurisdiction clause) could apply at all.

This Tribunal is faced with the same issue of whether the necessary consensual base for its
jurisdiction is present. However, as appears from the scheme of NAFTA Chapter 11 outlined
above, the jurisdictional requirements of Chapter 11 are (of course) different from the requirements
of the 1955 Treaty. In order to establish the necessary consent to arbitration, it is sufficient to
show (i) that Chapter 11 applies in the first place, i.e. that the requirements of Article 1101 are
met, and (ii) that a claim has been brought by a claimant investor in accordance with Articles 1116
or 1117 (and that all pre-conditions and formalities required under Articles 1118-1121 are
satisfied). Where these requirements are met by a claimant, Article 1122 is satisfied; and the

NAFTA Party’s consent to arbitration is established.

Accordingly, there is no necessity at the jurisdictional stage for a definitive interpretation of the

substantive provisions relied on by a claimant: the jurisdiction of the arbitration tribunal is

established without the need for such interpretation. Indeed a final award on the merits where a

Page 54 of 94

122.

123.

NAFTA tribunal determines that the claimant has failed to prove its case within these substantive
provisions cannot signify that the tribunal lacked jurisdiction to make that award. On the other
hand, in order to establish its jurisdiction, a tribunal must be satisfied that Chapter 11 does indeed
apply and that a claim has been brought within its procedural provisions. This means that it must
interpret, definitively, Article 1101(1) and decide whether, on the facts alleged by the claimant,
Chapter 11 applies. Similarly, insofar as the point is in issue, the tribunal must establish that the
requirements of Articles 1116-1121 have been met by a claimant, which will similarly require a
definitive interpretation of those provisions (as we have decided, in Chapter H above, in regard

to Article 1116).

(8) The Admissibility Challenges

‘We now address the question whether the USA can seek at this jurisdictional stage a definitive
interpretation of the substantive provisions of Chapter 11, Section A (namely Articles 1102, 1105
and 1110) to show that even on Methanex’s alleged facts, there could never be a breach of the
provisions; and that Methanex’s claim is therefore “inadmissible”. As noted above, in the case of
a bilateral treaty providing for compulsory dispute resolution where there is a dispute as to the
interpretation or application of the treaty, such a challenge could be jurisdictional in nature. But,

in our view, that is not the case here.

Article 21(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules does not accord to the Tribunal any power to
tule on objections relating to admissibility. There is no express power; and it is not possible to infer
any implied power. The most analogous procedure under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules would

be a partial award on a preliminary issue tried on assumed facts, pursuant to Article 32 of the

Page 55 of 94

UNCITRAL Atbitration Rules'’, or possibly a motion to strike (or “strike out”) a pleading for
failure to state a cause of action, taken from national court procedures. The first procedure,
however, does not relate to jurisdiction; it necessarily assumes the exact opposite; and its existence
confirms that it would be inappropriate to imply a like procedure into Article 21. The same is true
of the second procedure, even if it were permissible to import that court procedure into a
transnational arbitration. The contrary position would produce a curious result in an arbitral
procedure where the tribunal’s awards on the merits are intended to be “final and binding” (Article
32 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules'’). As contended by the USA, a decision on
“inadmissibility’ under Article 21 would be more easily reviewable, de novo, before the state
courts of NAFTA Parties; and in that event the procedure before the tribunal would be duplicated

at least twice over, for no obviously good purpose.

124. Nor is such a power to be found elsewhere in Chapter 11 NAFTA. Where the procedures set
out in Chapter 11 are met, the NAFTA Party consents to arbitration; and such consent takes effect
under Article II of the UN’s 1958 New York Arbitration Convention (Article 1122). There is
here no express power to dismiss a claim on the grounds of “inadmissibility”, as invoked by the
USA; and where the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules are silent, it would be still more inappropriate
to imply any such power from Chapter 11.

125. This position may be contrasted with the position of a dispute before the International Court of
Justice. Article 79(1) of the ICJ Rules of Procedure conceming preliminary objections expressly

provides:

'S article 32(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules: “Jn addition to making a final award, the arbitral tribunal shall
be entitled to make interim, interlocutory or partial awards.”

'4 article 32(2): “The award ... shall be final and binding on the parties. The parties undertake to carry
out the award without delay.”

Page 56 of 94

126.

915.

“Any objection by the respondent to the jurisdiction of the Court or to the
admissibility of the application, or other objection the decision upon which is
requested before any further proceedings on the merits, shall be made in writing
within the time-limit fixed for the delivery of the Counter-Memorial. ...” (emphasis

added.)

This terminology has given rise to fine distinctions between jurisdiction and admissibility'>; and a

notorious example is the Barcelona Traction Case'®.

It can also give rise to equally fine
distinctions between a preliminary objection to the admissibility of the claim and a defence on the
merits. According to Rosenne (ibid): “As a rough rule-of-thumb, it is probable that when the
facts and arguments in support of the objection are substantially the same as the facts and
arguments on which the merits of the case depend, or when to decide the objection would
require decision on what, in the concrete case, are substantive aspects of the merits, the plea
is not an objection but a defence to the merits.” It may therefore be doubted whether the
USA’s challenges would qualify before the ICJ as objections to admissibility falling within Article
79(1) of its Rules of Procedure. As we have already indicated, however, there is no equivalent

tule on admissibility in the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

Conclusion: It is unnecessary to develop these materials further. This Tribunal has no express
or implied power to reject claims based on inadmissibility. Accordingly, we reject the USA’s

admissibility challenges generally.

'S Rosenne in Law and Practice of the International Court, 1920-1996, Volume II, Jurisdiction, pp. 883,

'© Case Concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited (Belgium v. Spain),

Preliminary Objections, 1964, IC Reports, 4.

Page 57 of 94

We also reject as jurisdictional challenges the USA’s submissions on Articles 1102, 1105 and
1110 NAFTA; but as appears above, we do not otherwise decide the underlying legal merits of
the USA’s submissions on the interpretation and application of these provisions.

Only the challenge based on Article 1101 NAFTA now remains as a jurisdictional challenge, to

which we turn below.

Page 58 of 94

CHAPTER J -
THE USA’S JURISDICTIONAL CHALLENGE III:
ARTICLE 1101(1) NAFTA

(1) Introduction

127. The Scope and Coverage of Chapter 11 NAFTA is limited expressly by Article 1101(1) NAFTA.

It provides that Chapter 11

“\. applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to'’: (a)
investors of another Party [or] (b) investments of investors of another Party

in the territory of a Party”.

There is no dispute as to the existence of “measures” falling within Article 1101(1): i.e. the California
Executive Order and the California Regulations (US Memorial on Jurisdiction, pages 48-49;
Methanex Rejoinder of 25" May 2001, page 70). Similarly, there is no dispute that Methanex falls

within the rubric of “investors of another Party”.

128. The issue that divides the Disputing Parties is whether these US measures, on the assumed facts,
“relate to” Methanex because, as recited above, neither measure was expressly directed at

methanol, methanol producers or Methanex. Applying the approach described in the previous

'" ‘The French and Spanish texts, equally authentic, of NAFTA render this phrase respectively as:
“concernant” and “relativas a” (see www.nafta-sec-alena.org and www.sice.oas.org/trade/nafta), Neither is
synonymous with “affect”.

 

Page 59 of 94

129.

130.

chapter, it is necessary first to interpret definitively this phrase; and second to determine on the basis

of the assumed facts, whether or not any of these measures relate to Methanex and its investments.

(2) The Meaning of the Phrase: “relating to”

It is a short phrase; and it might be thought, as with many issues of linguistic interpretation, that the
answer was a matter of first impression. In order not to lengthen an already long document, we shall
again refrain from dealing here with every submission on the issue made by the Disputing Parties and
the NAFTA Parties, Canada and Mexico. We have nonetheless considered all those submissions;
and in deciding here that the matter can properly be decided on a more limited basis, we intend no

discourtesy to any person.

The USA: In summary, the USA contends that, in the context of Article 1101(1), the phrase
“relating to” requires a legally significant connection between the disputed measure and the investor.
Tt argues that measures of general application, especially measures aimed at the protection of human
health and the environment (such as those at issue here), are, by their nature, likely to affect a vast
range of actors and economic interests. Given their potential effect on enormous numbers of
investors and investments, there must be a legally significant connection between the measure and
the claimant investor or its investment. It would not be reasonable to infer that the NAFTA Parties
intended to subject themselves to arbitration in the absence of any significant connection between
the particular measure and the investor or its investments. Otherwise, untold numbers of local, state
and federal measures that merely have an incidental impact on an investor or investment might be
treated, quite wrongly, as “relating to” that investor or investment (USA Memorial on Jurisdiction,

pages 48-49.)

Page 60 of 94

(In response to submissions made by Methanex, the USA also relies on the common consensus of
the NAFTA Parties that the phrase “relating to” in Article 1101(1) is not to be interpreted as
meaning “affecting”, as argued by Methanex. For reasons given in regard to Article 31(3)(b) of the

Vienna Convention, we do not think it here necessary to develop this argument further).

131. Methanex: In summary, Methanex contends that it is sufficient that the measures “affect” the
investor or its investment. It argues that the requirement for a legally significant connection between

the measure and the investment is not supported by an interpretation of Article 1101(1) or other

 

legal materials. Methanex relies on various dictionary definitions of the phrase, the separate opinion
of Dr Schwartz in the SD Myers case (paragraphs 49-59 thereof) and the separate opinion of Judge
Shahabuddeen in the Headquarters Agreement case'*, which refers in turn to the dissenting
opinion of Judge Schwebel in the Yakimetz case (where “relating to” is interpreted as meaning “‘has
reference to” or “is connected with”!°). Methanex also contends that past statements of the USA
and Canada support its interpretation and contradict the USA’s current submissions. It cites the
USA’s interpretation of the words “relating to” put forward before the WTO appellate body in
United States Standards for Reformulated and Conventional Gasoline. There, the phrase
“relating to” was interpreted as merely suggesting “any connection or association existing between
two things’®°. Methanex also refers to Canada’s reformulation of “related to” as “affecting” in its

Statement of Implementation of NATFA.

132. Intent: In any event, Methanex contends that the “relating to” requirement is easily satisfied where
a discriminatory intent is alleged against the maker of the measure; and it alleges that the measures

are primarily aimed at eliminating methanol and MTBE from the market and at favouring the US
'8 4 pplicability of the Obligation to Arbitrate under Section 21 of the United Nations Headquarters
Agreement of 26 June 1947, 1988 ICJ Rep. 12, Separate Opinion of Judge Shahabuddeen, at 63.

'9 Application for Review of Judgment No. 333 of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal, 1987 1C3
Rep. 18, Dissenting Opinion of Judge Schwebel, at 113-114.

20 Submissions of the US (Appellant) 1996 WL 112677 (WTO), paras. 32-33.

Page 61 of 94

133.

134.

domestic ethanol industry. Accordingly, if that amendment were allowed in the form of the Amended
Statement of Claim, Methanex submits that the USA’s challenge must to this extent fail. It submits
that the measures targeted Methanex in three ways: (i) there was an intention to restrict imports from.
suppliers such as Methanex; (ii) there was an intention to benefit directly Methanex’s competitor,
the US ethanol industry; and (iii) the measure had such a significant impact on Methanex that the
measure should be treated as relating to Methanex and its investments in circumstances where the

harm was foreseeable and direct.

Canada: In summary, Canada expressly disagrees with Methanex’s interpretation of the phrase.
Canada submits that this interpretation fails to conform to the rules of the Vienna Convention; and
it agrees with the USA that the phrase requires a significant connection between the measure at issue
and the essential nature of the investment (Article 1128 submission of 30" April 2001, at paragraphs
11 and 23). In its Second Submission”, Canada places particular reliance on Article 31(3)(b) of
the Vienna Convention and notes its agreement with the USA that interpretations of NAFTA in
respect of which all three NAFTA Parties concur are authoritative. As indicated already, we do

not think it here necessary to develop this submission in this Award.

Mexico: In summary, Mexico also disagrees with Methanex’s interpretation of the phrase; and it
agrees with the position of the USA (Article 1128 submission of 15" May 2001 at paragraphs 6-
7). Mexico contends that the drafters of NAFTA required a ‘more direct nexus between the
measure and the investor or its investment than mere effect’; and that this clearly appears from
other provisions of NAFTA where the term “affecting” is used instead of “relating to” in order to
indicate a broader scope of obligation. Like Canada, Mexico states its agreement with the USA on
the authoritative nature of an agreement by the three NAFTA Parties as to the meaning of a

particular provision pursuant to Article 31(3) of the Vienna Convention; and in this case Mexico

2! Canada’s First Submission pursuant to Article 1128 NAFTA related to the issues on amicus curiae (10"

November 2000).

Page 62 of 94

submits that the consensus of the USA, Canada and Mexico constitutes a subsequent agreement
on interpretation and reflects their common practice, from which a NAFTA tribunal should not

diverge. Again, beyond recording this submission, we think it unnecessary here to develop it further.

Page 63 of 94

135.

136.

(3) The Ordinary Meaning

These rival interpretations can each be advanced in good faith; and under Article 31(1) of the
Vienna Convention, the first issue turns on the ordinary meaning of the phrase “relating to”.
Methanex relies on definitions of “relate” and “related” contained in three English language
dictionaries: American Heritage Dictionary (‘related” defined as “connected, associated”), the
Oxford English Dictionary (“‘related” defined as “having relation to, or relationship with, something
else”), and Funk & Wagnalls New Comprehensive International Dictionary of the English
Language (“related” defined as “standing in relation; connected”). In each case, the word “relate”

has an associated definition.

In the Tribunal’s view, none of these dictionary definitions decide the issue. To a limited extent, they
support the USA’s reliance on the requirement of a “connection”. These definitions imply a
connection beyond a mere impact, which is all that the term “affecting” involves on Methanex’s
interpretation. Nevertheless, we do not consider that this issue can be decided on a purely semantic
basis; and there is a difference between a literal meaning and the ordinary meaning of a legal phrase.
It is also necessary to consider the ordinary meaning of the term in its context and in the light of the
object and purpose of NAFTA and, in particular, Chapter 11 (as required by Article 31(1) of the

Vienna Convention).

(4) Context, Object and Purpose

Page 64 of 94

137.

138.

For Methanex, the phrase “relating to” should be interpreted in the context of a treaty chapter
concerned with the protection of investors; and hence, a broad interpretation is appropriate.
Because of its simple application, it is an attractive interpretation; but it is also a brave submission.
Ifthe threshold provided by Article 1101(1) were merely one of “affecting’”’, as Methanex contends,
it would be satisfied wherever any economic impact was felt by an investor or an investment. For
example, in this case, the test could be met by suppliers to Methanex who suffered as a result of
Methanex’s alleged losses, suppliers to those suppliers and so on, towards infinity. As such, Article
1101(1) would provide no significant threshold to a NAFTA arbitration. A threshold which could
be surmounted by an indeterminate class of investors making a claim alleging loss is no threshold at
all; and the attractive simplicity of Methanex’s interpretation derives from the fact that it imposes
no practical limit. It may be true, to adapt Pascal’s statement, that the history of the world would
have been much affected if Cleopatra’s nose had been different, but by itself that cannot mean that
we are all related to the royal nose. The Chaos theory provides no guide to the interpretation of this

important phrase; and a strong dose of practical common-sense is required.

Ina legal instrument such as NAFTA, Methanex’s interpretation would produce a surprising, if not
an absurd, result. The possible consequences of human conduct are infinite, especially when
comprising acts of governmental agencies; but common sense does not require that line to run
unbroken towards an endless horizon. In a traditional legal context, somewhere the line is broken;
and whether as a matter of logic, social policy or other value judgment, a limit is necessarily imposed
restricting the consequences for which that conduct is to be held accountable. For example, in the
law of tort, there must be a reasonable connection between the defendant, the complainant, the
defendant’s conduct and the harm suffered by the complainant; and limits are imposed by legal rules
on duty, causation and remoteness of damage well-known in the laws of both the United States and
Canada. Likewise, in the law of contract, the contract-breaker is not generally liable for all the
consequences of its breach even towards the innocent party, still less to persons not privy to that

contract. It is of course possible, by contract or statute, to enlarge towards infinity the legal

Page 65 of 94

139.

140.

consequences of human conduct; but against this traditional legal background, it would require clear

and explicit language to achieve this result.

The approach here can be no different. Methanex’s interpretation imposes no practical limitation;
and an interpretation imposing a limit is required to give effect to the object and purpose of Chapter
11. The alternative interpretation advanced by the USA does impose a reasonable limitation: there
must a legally significant connection between the measure and the investor or the investment. With
such an interpretation, it is perhaps not easy to define the exact dividing line, just as it is not easy in
twilight to see the divide between night and day. Nonetheless, whilst the exact line may remain
undrawn, it should still be possible to determine on which side of the divide a particular claim must

lie.

UN New York Convention: This interpretation is supported by the reference to the UN 1958
New York Convention in Article 1222 NAFTA , whereby the consent of the NAFTA Party to
arbitration under Article 1122(1) is to be treated as satisfying the requirement of Article II of the
New York Convention. Article II(1) of the New York Convention limits the recognition of written

agreements to arbitrate differences that may arise “in respect of a defined legal relationship”:

“Each Contracting State shall recognize an agreement in writing under which the
parties undertake to submit to arbitration all or any differences which have arisen or
which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship *, whether

contractual or not, concerning a subject matter capable of settlement by arbitration.”

> The equivalent phrase in the French and Spanish texts are: “au sujet d’un rapport de droit déterminé”

and “respecto a una determinada relacion juridica”.

Page 66 of 94

It is therefore not sufficient for the purpose of Article II(1) that there be a limitless agreement to
arbitrate any future disputes that may ever arise between the parties. More is required for a valid

arbitration agreement: the dispute must arise in respect of “a defined legal relationship’.

3 See van den Berg, The New York Arbitration Convention of 1958 (1 ed), p.149.

Page 67 of 94

141.

142.

143.

(5) Other NAFTA Awards

As to authority, Methanex relies on two arbitration awards decided under NAFTA Chapter 11:
Pope & Talbot v. Canada (award of 26" January 2000) and S. D. Myers v. Canada (award of
13 November 2000, separate opinion of Dr Schwartz dated 12" November 2000)". These are
not sources of law; and neither can be regarded as authority legally binding upon this Tribunal.

Nonetheless Methanex is entitled to adopt their legal reasoning as part of its case.

Pope & Talbot: In Pope & Talbot, Canada contended that a measure could only relate to an
investment if it was “primarily directed” at that investment and, in particular, that an allocation quota
was not related to an investor whose trade was nevertheless directly affected by that quota. As is
clear from paragraphs 33-34 of the award, the tribunal did not reject Canada’s argument that it was
insufficient that a measure “affect” an investor. The tribunal did reject the contention that the
measure must be primarily directed at the investment; but this is not what the USA now contends;

and the case is therefore only of limited assistance to Methanex’s submissions.

S.D. Myers: As to the separate opinion of Dr Schwartz, one of three arbitrators in the S. D. Myers
arbitration, the author was apparently departing from the tribunal’s collegiate consideration of the
specific case. He agreed that the investment had there been the specific target of a measure, such
that the “relating to” requirement was met by the investor; and in his separate opinion this
distinguished arbitrator was volunteering only his general comments (especially at paragraphs 48-
49). Without being shared by his two arbitral colleagues or forming part of their award’s reasoning,
this opinion carries no special status; and whilst the low threshold envisaged by Dr Schwartz
appears to support Methanex’s submissions, the Tribunal finds no persuasive support in his

reasoning sufficient to displace the interpretation decided above.

24 For these materials, see the web-sites at footnote 1, supra.

Page 68 of 94

144.

145.

(6) Prior Statements of the USA and Canada

As to past contentions of the USA, Methanex relies on an interpretation of “relating to” advanced
before the WTO Appellate Body in United States Standards for Reformulated and
Conventional Gasoline, to the effect that “relating to” signifies “any connection or association

225

existing between two things In the Tribunal’s view, this is again of only marginal assistance to

Methanex.

The USA’s interpretation was there made in a “normal context”; whereas in the context of the

specific provision (Article XX(g) of the General Agreement), its position was as follows:

The phrase “relating to conservation”, interpreted in its context and in light of the
purpose of the General Agreement, means that the measure being examined has a
connection to conservation that is not incidental or tangential, but that does not have

to be “necessary” or “essential” ...” (paragraph 31).

The “normal context” interpretation does not appear materially different from the dictionary
definitions; and the interpretation actually relied on by the USA is evidently specific to the particular
context. This demonstrates the importance attributed by the USA to interpreting a term in its
particular context and in the light of an instrument’s object and purpose, an approach consistent with
the USA’s submissions in the present case. In the event, the WTO Appellate Body decided that
Article XX(g) of the General Agreement required that a measure had to be “primarily related to

7926

conservation’”””°. That its interpretation in this respect was quite different from the interpretation in

*5Submissions of the US (Appellant) 1996 WL 112677 (WTO), paras. 32-33.
26 1996 WL 227476, 11 WTO, at paragraph 12.

Page 69 of 94

146.

147.

the Pope & Talbot case again confirms the need to interpret a term in accordance with the

particular context, object and purpose.

Canada: Methanex also relies on Canada’s Statement of Implementation of NATFA, where it

summarised Article 1101 as follows:

“Article 1101 states that section A covers measures by a Party (i.e., any level of
government in Canada), that affect’: investors of another Party ...; investments of

investors of another Party ...; and... for purposes of the provisions on performance

 

requirements and environmental measures, all investments ...”.

This English text supports Methanex’s interpretation, although the French text is, at best, neutral.
Overall, the status of this succinct, unreasoned commentary by another NAFTA Party carries the
argument little further; and it provides no sufficient reason to change the interpretation decided

above.

Conclusion: We decide that the phrase “relating to “ in Article 1101(1) NAFTA signifies
something more than the mere effect of a measure on an investor or an investment and that it
requires a legally significant connection between them, as the USA contends. Pursuant to the rules
of interpretation contained in Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention, we base that decision upon
the ordinary meaning of this phrase within its particular context and in the light of the particular

object and purpose in NAFTA’s Chapter 11. As indicated above, it is not necessary for us to

27 In the French text of this document, the word “affect” appears as “agissant” suggesting something

active which produces a direct impact on something else - in its full context: “Aux termes de l'article 1101, la

section A vise toute mesure prise par une Partie (c’est-

 

dire, pour le Canada, tout palier gouvernemental) et

agissant sur: les investisseurs d’une autre Partie ... les investissements effectués par les investisseurs d'une autre
Partie ... et pour les fins des dispositions concernant les prescriptions de résultats et les mesures environmentales,
tous les investissements ...”

Page 70 of 94

address other submissions advanced by the USA in support of its interpretation based on Article

31(3) of the Vienna Convention (supported by Canada and Mexico).

Page 71 of 94

148.

149.

150.

CHAPTER K -
ARTICLE 1101(1) NAFTA:
APPLICATION TO THE ASSUMED FACTS

(1) Introduction

Pursuant to Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Methanex was required to submit a
statement of claim including a precise statement of (inter alia) the facts supporting its claim. For
present purposes, the Tribunal has decided to take into account the further facts alleged in
Methanex’s Amended Statement of Claim, as also developed in its written and oral submissions.
We have attempted to summarise the relevant factual allegations in Chapter E above; and it is

against these assumed facts that we now apply our interpretation of Article 1101(1) NAFTA.
Two explanations are necessary. First, subject to an important reservation to which we return
below, we accept that the factual allegations pleaded by Methanex’s legal representatives are not

incredible, frivolous or vexatious. Second, we accept that it is open to Methanex to rely on

reasonable inferences; and it may rely generally on circumstantial materials.

(2) Methanex’s Original Statement of Claim

It must follow from our interpretation of Article 1101(1) that Methanex’s claim, as originally

pleaded in its Original Statement of Claim, does not meet the essential requirements of alleging facts

Page 72 of 94

151.

152.

establishing a legally significant connection between the US measures, Methanex and its investments.
As there pleaded, the measures do not relate to methanol or Methanex; and accordingly, this
Tribunal decides that it would have no jurisdiction to hear that claim, as pleaded in the Original

Statement of Claim.

(3) Methanex’s Amended Statement of Claim

As to Methanex’s Amended Statement of Claim, the answer is potentially different. As regards its
allegations surrounding the meeting with ADM on 4" August 1998, Methanex contends, as
characterised in its Reply Submission of 27" July 2001 (page 9), “that Gov. Davis intended to
benefit the US ethanol industry and to penalise foreign producers of methanol and MTBE”.
Methanex contends that the “relating to” requirement under Article 1101(1) NAFTA is satisfied

where harmful intent is alleged by the claimant against the source of the disputed measure.

On this point, subject to an important qualification, there was apparently a measure of common
ground between the Disputing Parties. At the jurisdictional hearing of July 2001, the USA accepted
with regard to Article 1101 that: “7f the purpose of the measure is an intent to harm foreign-
owned investors or investments on the basis of nationality, then the measure relates to the
foreign-owned investor or investment” (Transcript, Day 3, p. 531). That qualification relates to
the credibility of Methanex’s allegations concerning the intent underlying the US measures, to which
we turn below. (Ata later stage of these proceedings, it may become necessary to consider more

precisely the scope of this apparent common ground between the Disputing Parties).

(4) The Assumed Facts and Intent

Page 73 of 94

153.

154.

The relevant assumed facts, summarised in Chapter E above, can be recalled briefly: ADM drives
the US ethanol industry’s political and lobbying machine, ADM has launched a systematic attack
on MTBE; ADM has characterised MTBE as a “foreign” product; ADM had a secret meeting with
Governor Davis during his election campaign; this meeting concerned ethanol; ADM made
substantial campaign contributions to Governor Davis; and after being elected, Governor Davis
made the California Executive Order (leading to the California Regulations) banning MTBE,
notwithstanding that MTBE is a safe product and other rational solutions exist for addressing
California’s drinking water problems. From these alleged facts, Methanex also invites the Tribunal

to make a series of inferences:

@i) That, at the secret meeting, ADM stated that MTBE was a “foreign” product and that

banning MTBE would be a patriotic step to reduce US dependence on fuels;

(i) That in bringing about the US measures Governor Davis acted on what he was told by

ADM;

ii) That in bringing about the measures Governor Davis acted to favour ADM and the US

ethanol industry; and

(iv) That Governor Davis also acted to disadvantage, relative to ADM and the US ethanol

industry, the “foreign” producers of MTBE.

On the sole basis of these assumed facts and inferences, it is doubtful that the essential requirement
of Article 1101(1) is met. It could be said with force that the intent behind the measures would be,
at its highest, to harm foreign MTBE producers with no specific intent to harm suppliers of goods
and services to such MTBE producers. If so, the measures would not relate to methanol suppliers

such as Methanex; and accordingly, even with such intent as alleged by Methanex, we would have

Page 74 of 94

155.

156.

no jurisdiction to decide Methanex’s amended claim. However, Methanex’s case does not stop
here. It is further alleged that Governor Davis had a broader objective: to favour ADM and the US
ethanol industry, to penalise “foreign” MTBE producers and “foreign” methanol producers, such

as Methanex.

The USA responds that this cannot be a credible allegation, for several reasons. First, on the
assumed facts, there is no reason why ADM should be concerned with disadvantaging methanol
suppliers because ADM’s commercial objective is already achieved by the ban on MTBE. Second,
on the assumed facts, Governor Davis fulfils his own objectives by penalising MTBE producers; and
there is no reason why he should also be concerned with the suppliers to these producers or their
products, such as methanol and Methanex. Third, the USA contends that there are strong grounds
for inferring that Governor Davis could not have intended to penalise “foreign” methanol producers

because there is a substantial US methanol industry equally subject to such intentional harm.

In addition, the USA contends that there is no sufficient reason for attributing ADM’s motives to
Governor Davis; it cannot be inferred that the meeting had any significant influence on Governor
Davis when it is not alleged that ADM representatives said anything beyond ADM’s usual public
statements; it is significant that no bribery or corruption is alleged by Methanex; the California Bill
significantly pre-dates the meeting; and as provided by the California Bill, a study was carried out
by the University of California on the human health and environmental risks and benefits associated
with the use of MTBE; this study was subjected to public scrutiny in February-March 1999 and
only thereafter was the California Executive Order made; and on the face of this Order, Governor
Davis acted on the basis that there was a significant risk to the environment and public health from.
using MTBE in gasoline in California, as reported by the University of California, public testimony

and regulatory agencies.

Page 75 of 94

157.

158.

159.

These are powerful points; and if it were possible for us safely to conclude at this stage that there
was nothing more to Methanex’s case, we would be minded to decide that the requirements of
Article 1101(1) were still not met with a sufficiently credible allegation of intent. However,
Methanex also alleges that it supplies the majority of methanol in California; that California had no
methanol industry of its own; and that as regards MTBE in California, it is essentially Methanex’s
methanol which provides the relevant “foreign” characteristic which allowed ADM to promote
ethanol to Governor Davis to the disadvantage of MTBE. Whatever the position elsewhere in the
USA, methanol and Methanex were “foreign” in California; and this, it is suggested, explains why
anti-foreigner action could be taken against methanol in California which on its face would appear
to hurt US producers of methanol. In short, it is contended, as regards Governor Davis, that his
constituency was the State of California; a “foreign” product was a product foreign to California,
which to him, as influenced by ADM, signified methanol produced by Methanex, a “foreign”

product produced by “foreigners”; and his intent was to harm Methanex.

In these circumstances, we do not consider the case clear enough to determine whether or not
Methanex’s allegations based on “intent” are sufficiently credible. Accordingly, it is not possible for
us to decide, at this stage, that any measure does or does not relate to Methanex or its investments.
In particular, decrees and regulations may be the product of compromises and the balancing of
competing interests by a variety of political actors. As a result, it may be difficult to identify a single
or predominant purpose underlying a particular measure. Where a single governmental actor is
motivated by an improper purpose, it does not necessarily follow that the motive can be attributed
to the entire government. Much if not all will depend on the evidential materials adduced in the

particular case.

Accordingly, given the procedural solution on which we have decided below, it would be

inappropriate here to develop any further analysis of Methanex’s factual case. As we have said

Page 76 of 94

160.

161.

already, we do not wish to pre-judge the evidence on disputed issues or indeed further submissions

on that evidence; and so far we have heard neither.

(5) Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules requires the arbitration tribunal, in general, to
tule on a jurisdictional plea as a preliminary question; and indeed this is the procedure which has so
far been followed in these arbitration proceedings. If the Tribunal had no jurisdiction, a decision to
that effect could save the Disputing Parties much time and cost. However, as Article 21(4) also
provides, the tribunal “may proceed with the arbitration and rule on such a plea in their final
award””’, The discretion whether to choose the general or the exceptional procedure lies with the
arbitration tribunal; and the exercise of that discretion is not confined to economic factors: e.g.
where jurisdictional issues are intertwined with the merits, it may be impossible or impractical to
decide the former without also hearing argument and evidence on the latter. In these proceedings,

two factors have influenced us in selecting the exceptional procedure.

Fresh Pleading: First, the effect of the Tribunal’s decision on Article 1101(1) NAFTA in this
Award will require Methanex to re-plead its case in a fresh Statement of Claim. Its Original
Statement of Claim fails the jurisdictional test under Article 1101; and potentially only a part of its
Amended Statement of Claim can survive that test. It is inappropriate for Methanex to re-amend
its Amended Statement of Claim. In our view, a fresh pleading is required both for the Tribunal and
as a matter of procedural fairness to the USA, which is entitled to know precisely the case

advanced against it.

Baa . oo
8 article 21(4): “In general, the arbitral tribunal should rule on a plea concerning its jurisdiction as a

preliminary question. However, the arbitral tribunal may proceed with the arbitration and rule on such a plea in
their final award.”

Page 77 of 94

162.

163.

164.

Methanex’s fresh pleading must take a form different from and more limited than its Amended
Statement of Claim. Several material allegations made by Methanex as it developed its oral and
written submissions do not appear in the Amended Statement of Claim (nor, of course in the
Original Statement of Claim); and it will be for Methanex’s careful consideration whether, to what
extent and in what form these allegations will be formally pleaded. The fresh pleading must not
exceed the limits of Methanex’s existing case (pleaded and unpleaded); and we do not intend
Methanex to make any new claim in its fresh pleading. It must comply with our decisions in this
Award and Articles 18 and 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. As regards the statement of
the facts supporting its claim under Article 18(2)(b), Methanex’s fresh pleading must set out its

specific factual allegations, including all specific inferences to be drawn from those facts.

At this stage of the proceedings, we also decide that more is required of Methanex than a fresh
pleading. As regards the USA’s alleged liability, Methanex must file with that pleading copies of
all evidential documents on which it relies (unless identified as documents previously filed with the
Tribunal), together with factual witness statements and expert witness reports of any person
intended by Methanex to provide testimony at an oral hearing on the merits. For the time being, we

exclude evidential materials relating to the alleged quantum of the USA’s liability.

In regard to a factual witness, the factual witness statement must be in writing, signed and dated by
that witness, setting out: (i) the full name and address of the witness, that witness’s present and past
relationship with Methanex (if any); and a description of the witness’s background, qualifications,
training and relevant experience; (ii) a full and detailed account, capable of standing as that witness’
examination-in-chief (direct examination) at an oral hearing, of all the facts to which that witness
will testify, expressed in that witness’s own words, and identifying the specific source of the

witness’s information, whether it be from that witness’s own knowledge or derived from another

Page 78 of 94

165.

166.

167.

person or document; and (iii) that witness’s undertaking to attend and give evidence at an oral

hearing, unless ordered otherwise by the Tribunal.

Inregard to an expert witness, the expert report shall be in writing, signed and dated by that witness
setting out: (i) the same matters specified in paragraph 164(i) above; (ii) a statement of the facts on
which the expert witness has based his or her expert opinions and conclusions, including (if relevant)
a description of the method, materials and other information used in arriving at those opinions and
conclusions; (iii) a statement of those expert opinions and conclusions; (iv) an acknowledgment by
the expert witness of his or her independent duty to assist the Tribunal, including attendance at an
oral hearing unless otherwise ordered by the Tribunal; and that this duty overrides any obligation to
Methanex as the person engaging or paying that expert witness; and (v) a statement by the expert

witness of the truth of those opinions and conclusions.

At this stage, it is not possible for the Tribunal to envisage the terms of Methanex’s fresh pleading
and the content of these evidential materials. It is also self-evident that we cannot now decide,
conclusively, that a future re-pleading of Methanex’s case will or will not meet the requirements of
Article 1101(1) NAFTA. It would be possible, perhaps, to resume the jurisdictional stage of these
proceedings once Methanex has submitted its fresh pleading; but this would add to the time and cost
already taken on jurisdictional issues; and it is not for that reason an attractive option for the

Tribunal.

Evidence: The second reason is, in our view, conclusive. The necessary analysis relating to the
credibility of Methanex’s allegations remains incomplete without receiving at least some evidence
from the Disputing Parties on the assumed, but disputed, facts and factual inferences. This part of
the USA’s jurisdictional challenge depends critically on issues which are intimately linked to the
factual merits of Methanex’s case. In our view, it is not appropriate to decide these issues without

hearing evidence from Methanex and the USA. In short, the Tribunal cannot continue what has

Page 79 of 94

168.

169.

become an impossible forensic exercise, composing a jigsaw of assumed facts and inferences with
too many missing and incomplete pieces. These difficulties could be resolved with relative ease at

an evidential hearing.

We are not, however, yet ready to decide upon the precise form of that evidential hearing. We need
first to see the scope and nature of Methanex’s evidential case; hence our decision above that
Methanex must file more than a fresh pleading. After we have considered Methanex’s fresh pleading
and accompanying evidential materials, subject to consultation with the Disputing Parties, it is our
present intention to decide then how to proceed further. It may be that we can identify one or more
threshold or other determinative issues on which limited testimony would be adduced at an early oral
hearing. It is not our present intention that the case should then proceed necessarily to a full hearing
of all factual and expert witnesses. In either event, it will of course be necessary for the USA to
plead a response to all or part of Methanex’s fresh case (including the filing of its own documentary
evidence, witness statements and expert reports); and it could be helpful to make further procedural

orders. All that, however, lies in the future.

(6) Conclusion

As regards the USA’s jurisdictional challenge under Article 1101(1) NAFTA, the Tribunal decides
that certain allegations advanced in Methanex’s Amended Statement of Claim, supplemented by its
written and oral submissions, relating to the “intent” behind the US measures can potentially meet
the requirements of that provision. At this stage of the proceedings, however, it is impossible for the
Tribunal to make a definitive ruling on jurisdiction without a fresh pleading and accompanying

evidential materials from Methanex; and accordingly that ruling will be postponed by the Tribunal

Page 80 of 94

until one or more further awards pursuant to Articles 21(4) and 32(1) of the UNCITRAL

Arbitration Rules.

Page 81 of 94

170.

171.

CHAPTER L -
LEGAL AND ARBITRATION COSTS

Under Articles 38-40 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the arbitration tribunal is required to
fix the costs of arbitration in its award, including the costs of the arbitration and the reasonable costs
of the successful party for legal representation and assistance, subject to possible apportionment to

reflect the relative success and failure on different parts of the case.

‘We make no order for costs in this Award, nonetheless reserving our power to do so in a later
award, after hearing further submissions from the Disputing Parties. Having regard to the successive
re-pleadings of Methanex’s case and the relative failure and success of the USA’s challenges on
jurisdiction and admissibility, we shall invite submissions on whether and to what extent a reasonable

apportionment should be made, whatever the eventual result of this case on the merits.

Page 82 of 94

172.

CHAPTER M -
OPERATIVE PART

For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal makes the following rulings and decisions:

(1) Admissibility: The Tribunal dismisses the USA’s several challenges based on the

“admissibility” of Methanex’s claims;

(2) Jurisdiction - Original Statement of Claim: As regards the USA’s jurisdictional
challenge under Article 1101(1) NAFTA, the Tribunal decides that Methanex’s Original
Statement of Claim fails to meet the requirements of that provision; and, as there pleaded,

the Tribunal would have no jurisdiction to hear Methanex’s claims;

(3) Jurisdiction - Amended Statement of Claim: Subject to paragraph 4 below, as regards
the USA’s jurisdictional challenge under Article 1101(1) NAFTA, the Tribunal decides that
Methanex’s Amended Statement of Claim, as a whole, likewise fails to meet the
requirements of that provision; and as there pleaded, the Tribunal would have no

jurisdiction to hear Methanex’s Amended Statement of Claim as a whole;
(4) As regards part of Methanex’s Amended Statement of Claim (as subsequently

supplemented by its written and oral submissions), the Tribunal decides that certain

allegations relating to the “intent” underlying the US measures could potentially meet the

Page 83 of 94

requirements of Article 1101(1) NAFTA, thereby allowing part of Methanex’s case to fall

within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

It is impossible for the Tribunal now to make a ruling on jurisdiction in regard to this part
of Methanex’s case without a fresh pleading from Methanex accompanied by evidential
materials, to be followed (subject to ion with the Disputing Parties) by a pleadi

and evidential materials from the USA and an evidential hearing which may be limited to

one or more threshold or determinative issues arising from Methanex’s fresh pleading.

Accordingly, that jurisdictional ruling will be postponed by the Tribunal until one or more
further awards pursuant to Articles 21(4) and 32(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules;

(5) New Pleading: Within a period not more than ninety days from the date of this Award,
Methanex shall submit a fresh pleading, complying with Articles 18 and 20 of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and conforming to the decisions contained in this Award;

and that pleading shall be accompanied by the evidential materials described in this Award;

(6) Amendment: Subject to Paragraphs 4 and 5 above, the Tribunal does not allow

Methanex’s application to amend its claim in the form of the Amended Statement of Claim;

(7) Other Jurisdictional Challenges: The Tribunal does not accept the USA’s other

jurisdictional challenges;
(8) Documentary Disclosure: The Tribunal makes no ruling for the time being on
Mett ’s Application for D 'y Discl e, it being allowed to re-submit this

application after serving its fresh pleading (if relevant); and

Page 84 of 94

Page 85 of 94

(9) Costs: The Tribunal makes no order for costs in this Award, reserving its power to do

so in a later award.

Made by the Tribunal on 2002, as at the International Centre for Settlement
of Investment Disputes, the World Bank, Washington DC, USA.

William Rowley Van Vechten Veeder Warren Christopher

Page 86 of 94

ANNEX TO PARTIAL AWARD

Relevant Provisions of

NAFTA Chapter 11 and the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

A - THE ARBITRATION AGREEMENT
(1) Article 1122 NAFTA
Article 1122: Consent to Arbitration

1. Each Party consents to the submission of a claim to arbitration in accordance with the
procedures set out in this Agreement.

2. The consent given by paragraph I and the submission by a disputing investor of a claim
to arbitration shall satisfy the requirement of: ... (b) Article II of the New York Convention
for an agreement in writing ...

(2) UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
Article 18

J. Unless the statement of claim was contained in the notice of arbitration, within a period
of time to be determined by the arbitral tribunal, the claimant shall communicate his
statement of claim in writing to the respondent and to each of the arbitrators. A copy of the
contract, and of the arbitration agreement if not contained in the contract, shall be annexed
thereto.

2. The statement of claim shall include a precise statement of the following particulars:

(a) The names and addresses of the parties;

(b) A statement of the facts supporting the claim;
(c) The points at issue;

(d) The relief or remedy sought.

Page 87 of 94

The claimant may annex to his statement of claim all documents he deems relevant or may
add a reference to the documents or other evidence he will submit.

Page 88 of 94

Article 20

During the course of the arbitral proceedings either party may amend or supplement his claim
or defence unless the arbitral tribunal considers it inappropriate to allow such amendment
having regard to the delay in making it or prejudice to the other party or any other
circumstances. However, a claim may not be amended in such a manner that the amended
claim falls outside the scope of the arbitration clause or separate arbitration agreement.

Article 21
1. The arbitral tribunal shall have the power to rule on objections that it has no jurisdiction,

including any objections with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration clause or
of the separate arbitration agreement.

3.A plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall be raised not later than

in the statement of defence or, with respect to a counter-claim, in the reply to the counter-
claim.

4. In general, the arbitral tribunal should rule on a plea concerning its jurisdiction as a

preliminary question. However, the arbitral tribunal may proceed with the arbitration and
rule on such a plea in their final award.

B - APPLICABLE LAW

() Article 1131 NAFTA

1. A Tribunal established under this Section shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance
with this Agreement and applicable rules of international law.

2. An interpretation by the Commission of a provision of this Agreement shall be binding on
a Tribunal established under this Section.

(2) UNCITRAL Article 33

1. The arbitral tribunal shall apply the law designated by the parties as applicable to the
substance of the dispute. ...

Page 89 of 94

3. Inall cases, the arbitral tribunal shall decide in accordance with the terms of the contract

and shall take into account the usages of the trade applicable to the transaction.

C - NAFTA ARTICLES: CHAPTER 11, SECTION A - INVESTMENT

Article 1101
Article 1101: Scope and Coverage
1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:

(a) investors of another Party;

(b) investments of investors of another Party in the territory of the Party; and
(c) with respect Articles 1106 and 1114, all investments in the territory of the
Party.

Article 1102
Article 1102: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party treatment no less favorable than
that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors with respect to the establishment,
acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of
investments.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party treatment no less
favorable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments of its own investors with
respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and
sale or other disposition of investments.

3. The treatment accorded by a Party under paragraphs I and 2 means, with respect to a
state or province, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment accorded,

in like circumstances, by that state or province to investors, and to investments of investors,
of the Party of which it forms a part.

Article 1105

Page 90 of 94

Article 1105: Minimum Standard of Treatment
1. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party treatment in
accordance with international law, including fair and equitable treatment and full protection
and security. ...
Article 1110
Article 1110: Expropriation and Compensation
1. No Party may directly or indirectly nationalize or expropriate an investment of an
investor of another Party in its territory or take a measure tantamount to nationalization or
expropriation of such an investment (“expropriation”), except:

(a) for a public purpose;

(b) on a non-discriminatory basis;

(c) in accordance with due process of law and Article 1105(1); and
(d) on payment of compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2 through 6.

D- NAFTA ARTICLES: CHAPTER 11, SECTION B - SETTLEMENT OF
DISPUTES

Article 1116

Article 1116: Claim by an Investor of a Party on Its Own Behalf

J. An investor of a Party may submit to arbitration under this Section a claim that another
Party has breached an obligation under:

(a) Section A ...
and that the investor has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach.
2. An investor may not make a claim if more than three years have elapsed from the date

on which the investor first acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged
breach and knowledge that the investor has incurred loss or damage.

Page 91 of 94

Article 1117
Article 1117: Claim by an Investor of a Party on Behalf of an Enterprise

J. An investor of a Party, on behalf of an enterprise of another Party that is a juridical
person that the investor owns or controls directly or indirectly, may submit to arbitration
under this Section a claim that the other Party has breached an obligation under:

(a) Section A...
and that the enterprise has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that
breach.

2. An investor may not make a claim on behalf of an enterprise described in paragraph 1
if more than three years have elapsed from the date on which the investor first acquired, or
should have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that the
enterprise has incurred loss or damage.

Article 1121
Article 1121: Conditions Precedent to Submission of a Claim to Arbitration
1. A disputing investor may submit a claim under Article 1116 to arbitration only if: ...

(b) the investor and, where the claim is for loss or damage to an interest in an enterprise of
another Party that is a juridical person that the investor owns or controls directly or
indirectly, the enterprise, waive their right to initiate or continue before any administrative
tribunal or court under the law of any Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any
proceedings with respect to the measure of the disputing Party that is alleged to be a breach
referred to in Article 1116, except for proceedings for injunctive, declaratory or other
extraordinary relief, not involving the payment of damages, before an administrative
tribunal or court under the law of the disputing Party.

2. A disputing investor may submit a claim under Article 1117 to arbitration only if both the
investor and the enterprise: ...

(b) waive their right to initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court under
the law of any Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any proceedings with respect
to the measure of the disputing Party that is alleged to be a breach referred to in Article
1117, except for proceedings for injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary relief, not
involving the payment of damages, before an administrative tribunal or court under the law
of the disputing Party.

 

 

Page 92 of 94

3. A consent and waiver required by this Article shall be in writing, shall be delivered to the
disputing Party and shall be included in the submission of a claim to arbitration ...

Page 93 of 94

Article 1128
Article 1128: Participation by a Party:

On written notice to the disputing parties, a Party may make submissions to a Tribunal on
a question of interpretation of this Agreement.

Page 94 of 94

