V.V. Veeder, QC

Essex Court Chambers

24 Lincoln's Inn Fields
London WC2A 3ED England

Warren Christopher, Esq.
O'Melveny & Myers, LLP

1999 Avenue of the Stars

Los Angeles, California 90067-6035

J. William Rowley, QC
McMillan Binch

Royal Bank Plaza

Suite 3800, South Tower
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2J7 Canada

(202) 879-3432

August 28, 2002

Re:  Methanex Corporation v. United States of America

Gentlemen:

Methanex has received and carefully reviewed the Tribunal’s Award of August 7, 2002,

which provided Methanex an opportunity to restate its claim. As we begin the task of preparing

the “fresh Statement of Claim” called for by the Award, it has become apparent that our efforts

would be significantly assisted, and the future burden on the Tribunal and the United States

potentially reduced, if certain aspects of that decision are clarified. Accordingly, pursuant to

Article 35 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, and with no intention of relitigating any issue

V.V. Veeder, QC

Warren Christopher, Esq.

J. William Rowley, QC

August 28, 2002

Page 2

the Tribunal has already decided, Methanex respectfully requests interpretation and clarification
concerning the matters specified below.

IL. REQUEST FOR INTERPRETATION

1. Definition of “Legally Significant Connection”

The Tribunal has accepted the United States’ argument that the term “relating to” in
NAFTA Article 1101 “requires a legally significant connection between” a measure and an
investor or investment. (Aug. 7, 2002 Award § 147.) Although the Award makes clear that a
challenged measure need not “be primarily directed at the [relevant investor or] investment” (id.
{ 142), it also indicates a need for “restricting the consequences for which [government] conduct
is to be held accountable.” (Jd. § 138.) The Award then suggests that the line dividing those
consequences for which a NAFTA respondent will and will not be held accountable is to be
drawn from principles developed in tort, contract and other traditional legal contexts. (Jd.)
Thus, the Award suggests that a NAFTA Party in breach of its Chapter 11 obligations will be
liable only for those types of consequences that are actionable in analogous legal circumstances,
such as, for example, where there is foreseeable, direct, or intended injury, or competitive harm,
etc. Methanex respectfully requests that the Tribunal confirm this reading of its August 7, 2002
Award, or, if necessary, further clarify the meaning of a “legally significant connection.”
Methanex further submits that, without such confirmation or clarification, it will be placed in the
difficult and unfair position of marshalling evidence and arguments to meet an undefined

standard.

V.V. Veeder, QC
Warren Christopher, Esq.
J. William Rowley, QC
August 28, 2002

Page 3

2. Contents and Scope of the “Fresh Pleading”

The Tribunal has directed Methanex to “submit a fresh pleading, complying with Articles
18 and 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and conforming to the decisions contained in”
the August 7, 2002 Award. (/d. § 172(5).) The Tribunal has further indicated that “Methanex’s
fresh pleading must take a form different from and more limited than its Amended Statement of
Claim.” (Jd. § 162.) Methanex understands that this new pleading is to incorporate certain facts
and allegations contained in Methanex’s written and oral submissions, but not found in its
Original or Amended Statement of Claim. Methanex further understands that the contents of its
fresh pleading “must not exceed the limits of Methanex’s existing case.” (/d. (emphasis added).)
But the Award gives no indication of how the “fresh pleading” (a term not found in the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules) is to be in a “a form different from” and “more limited than” the
Amended Statement of Claim. (/d.) Accordingly, Methanex respectfully requests that the
Tribunal provide additional guidance concerning the expected scope and content of its “fresh
pleading,” particularly which aspects of the Original and Amended Statement of Claim the
Tribunal considers irrelevant.

Additionally, those portions of the Award concerned with the proper role and
interpretation of Article 1101 indicate that the provision’s function is that of a “gateway” — i.e,
it establishes the threshold requirements that a claimant must satisfy before a NAFTA Tribunal
may take jurisdiction over its claims. (Jd. J] 106, 137.) As such, Article 1101 does not go to the

merits of a claimant’s individual Chapter 11 claims. Accordingly, Methanex respectfully asks

V.V. Veeder, QC

Warren Christopher, Esq.

J. William Rowley, QC

August 28, 2002

Page 4

the Tribunal to confirm that, once it is established Methanex has satisfied Article 1101’s
threshold requirements, it will then be able to proceed on each of its separate claims under
Articles 1102, 1105 and 1110.

3. Evidence

Methanex’s need to fully understand the Tribunal’s expectations concerning the scope
and content of its “fresh pleading” is heightened by the Tribunal’s further direction that
Methanex file with that pleading “copies of all evidential documents on which it relies,” as well
as fact-witness statements and expert reports. (/d. J 163-65.) As the Tribunal has
acknowledged, the tendering of evidence and witnesses is normally reserved for the merits phase
of an arbitral proceeding. (See id. § 110 (noting that because this arbitration “has only reached
the jurisdictional phase[, t]he Disputing Parties have not adduced any factual evidence on
disputed issues (nor have they been entitled to do so)”).) The unusual procedure outlined in the
Award of requiring the submission of factual evidence and expert reports before jurisdiction has
been decided raises several important questions.

As a threshold matter, Methanex is uncertain whether the Tribunal is merely requiring it
to provide sufficient evidence to demonstrate a factual basis for its allegations, to prove its case
on the merits, or something in between. For instance, while Article 18 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, which governs the contents of a statement of claim, permits a pleading to
annex evidentiary documents the claimant deems relevant, or refer to documents or other

evidence he will submit, it does not require the claimant to do so. But because the Tribunal now

V.V. Veeder, QC

Warren Christopher, Esq.

J. William Rowley, QC

August 28, 2002

Page 5

requires Methanex to file specific “evidential documents” with its next submission, it is unclear
whether the Award requires Methanex to submit only an initial pleading (as that term is
commonly used and as UNCITRAL Article 18 generally reflects), or what, in fact, would
essentially be a memorial on the merits of its case, or something in between.

Whether Methanex’s filing is to be more like a pleading or more like a memorial, the
scope of the evidence required to be filed with Methanex’s next submission is also unclear. At
times, the Award suggests that the Tribunal is looking only for “some evidence from the
Disputing Parties.” (/d. § 167 (emphasis added).) At others, the Award directs Methanex to
annex “copies of a// evidential documents on which it relies (unless identified as documents
previously filed with the Tribunal), together with factual witness statements and expert witness
reports of any person intended by Methanex to provide testimony at an oral hearing on the
merits.” (Jd. § 163 (emphasis added).) Accordingly, Methanex asks the Tribunal to confirm that
it is not being required to produce — at this still-preliminary phase of the proceedings — all
evidence on which the presentation of its case on the merits will and may rely, thereby
foreclosing the development and presentation of additional evidence at a later stage.

If the Tribunal is requiring that Methanex submit all its evidence at this stage, Methanex
respectfully observes that ninety days would be an extraordinarily short period in which to
develop and present a case on the merits of a central issue in any case. The Tribunal’s Award
appears to suggest that Methanex’s fresh pleading must be accompanied by factual evidence

proving the intent of the government and private actors responsible for the measures at issue.

V.V. Veeder, QC

Warren Christopher, Esq.

J. William Rowley, QC

August 28, 2002

Page 6

Full proof on the merits of this issue (see, e.g., id. § 158) will likely involve the marshalling of
evidence from third parties, which will in turn require substantial time and energy. In addition,
that marshalling of evidence may require additional orders from this Tribunal, and possibly from
U.S. courts, which have authority to assist international tribunals in this regard. See 28 U.S.C.
§ 1782. Indeed, even if only “some” such evidence is required, gathering and assimilating any
such evidence may require more than the ninety days currently provided.

Methanex also respectfully requests clarification concerning the requirement in the
Award regarding “expert witness reports.” While identifying, retaining, and briefing potential
experts within the ninety days allotted might be achievable, the Award appears to require more
—i.e., that Methanex not only designate but also obtain essentially final reports from all its
experts within that very limited period of time. (See id. § 165.) Doing so, however, would be
very difficult if not impossible in the time provided.

It thus bears noting that Article 15 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules requires that,
however the Tribunal decides to conduct the arbitration, “at any stage of the proceedings each
party” must be “given a full opportunity of presenting his case.” Methanex will be substantially
prejudiced if it is required to present its case without the opportunity for marshalling evidence.
Naturally, the degree to which such procedures are required will depend on the character of the
proceeding for which the resulting evidence is being produced. The scope of the evidence
identified in the Award could be read as indicating an intention to proceed directly to a hearing

on the merits of Methanex’s claims. The Tribunal has made clear, however, that it envisions the

V.V. Veeder, QC

Warren Christopher, Esq.

J. William Rowley, QC

August 28, 2002

Page 7

next phase of this arbitration to have a more limited form, potentially restricted to “one or more
threshold or other determinative issues.” (Jd. J 168.) Accordingly, Methanex asks the Tribunal
to confirm that it is not planning to proceed directly to a hearing on the merits, and requests an
interpretation providing further guidance concerning the quantity and quality of the evidence

Methanex is required to develop and provide in conjunction with its “fresh pleading.”

4. Future Proceedings

In its Award, the Tribunal indicated that it has not yet decided “how to proceed further.”
(Id. § 168.) Although it has already been more than two-and-a-half years since Methanex filed
its original claim, Methanex also recognizes that the necessity of subsequently amending that
claim, coupled with other intervening events such as the Free Trade Commission’s July 31, 2001
Interpretation, have complicated these proceedings to an unforeseen extent. Nevertheless,
Methanex is concerned that without a more concrete plan for the number, form and content of
future pleadings and/or proceedings, this arbitration could become unnecessarily extended.
Accordingly, Methanex respectfully requests that the Tribunal clarify the nature and timetable
for future proceedings.

Il. FURTHER MATTERS

1. The Relevant Negotiating History of NAFTA

In its August 7, 2002 Award, the Tribunal declined to rule on Methanex’s Application for
Documentary Disclosure, preserving Methanex’s right to re-submit its “application after serving

its fresh pleading (if relevant).” (/d. § 172(8).) Methanex respectfully submits that its prior

V.V. Veeder, QC

Warren Christopher, Esq.

J. William Rowley, QC

August 28, 2002

Page 8

application for discovery remains highly relevant at this stage of the proceedings. Despite the
United States’ failure to produce any documents relating to the negotiating history of NAFTA,
and despite the absence of the term “legally significant connection” in NAFTA itself, the
Tribunal has accepted the United States’ claim that Chapter 11 requires that relationship between
the challenged measure and the investor or investment. Again, however, the Tribunal has left the
term “legally significant connection” open for further consideration and clarification.
Consequently, NAFTA’s legislative history is very likely to be highly relevant to what exactly
Article 1101 requires.

In fact, given the Parties’ detailed documentation of their negotiations, it is hard to
believe that none of those documents are at all relevant to the intended scope of Article 1101. As
the Pope & Talbot Tribunal recently learned — after much delay and denial — the NAFTA
Parties have been less than forthcoming where NAFTA’s negotiating history is concerned. See
Pope & Talbot, Inc. v. Canada, Award in Respect of Damages (May 31, 2002), §§ 25-42. There,
as here, “having the documents” Methanex seeks would make the Tribunal’s efforts “less
difficult and more focused on the issues before it.” Id. § 39. Indeed, it would be fundamentally
unfair to accept the United States’ argument that Article 1101 requires a “legally significant
connection” while simultaneously allowing it to withhold evidence that very likely would shed
important light on the proper meaning of that term. Accordingly, Methanex respectfully renews
its request for an order compelling the United States to produce any potentially relevant

segments of NAFTA’s negotiating history.

V.V. Veeder, QC
Warren Christopher, Esq.
J. William Rowley, QC
August 28, 2002

Page 9

2. Expedited Telephonic Conference
Article 35 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules states that the Tribunal should issue the

guidance Methanex requests within forty-five days of receiving this request. By that point, of
course, more than half the time currently allotted for Methanex to develop and present its “fresh
pleading” and further “evidential materials” will have elapsed. Accordingly, Methanex
respectfully requests an expedited telephonic conference to address the issues set forth in this
letter and, depending on the ultimate resolution of those foregoing issues, to address whether
ninety days provides a realistic opportunity for Methanex to present its case.

3. Tolling

Finally, Methanex notes that whatever further clarification the Tribunal ultimately
provides, the process of requesting and obtaining it will have consumed a considerable amount
of time. Accordingly, Methanex respectfully requests that the time allotted for the preparation of
its “fresh pleading” and additional “evidential materials” be tolled until such interpretations and
clarifications are obtained. Stated more precisely, Methanex requests that whatever time is

ultimately allotted for preparation of its fresh pleading and accompanying evidence — whether

ninety days or something more — that time not begin to run until the formal interpretations
contemplated by Article 35 of the UNCITRAL rules are provided by the Tribunal.

Respectfully submitted,

Christopher F. Dugan

James A. Wilderotter

ce: Mr. Mark Clodfelter, Esq.

Barton Legum, Esq.
Margrete Stevens, Esq.

WAI-1502556v8

