iS-JHN-<641 1s tus FRUM MR VY V VEEDEK GC TO 4612627768389 P.@3/26

IN MA’ R TI

TRADE A: EMENT

BETWEEN:
METHANEX CORPORATION
laimant/Investo:

and

UNTTED STATES OF AMERICA

 

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON
PETITIONS FROM THIRD PERSONS
TO INTERVENE AS “AMICI CURIAE”

 

THE TRIBUNAL:

William Rowley QC;
Warren Christopher Esq;
V.V. Veeder OC (Chairman).

1S-JAN-2881

~

15:84 FROM MR V VU VEEDER GC TO

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction
The Petitioners’ Requests

@ The Institute
(i) Communities/Bluewater/Centre

” Submissions of Mexico and Canada
@ = Mexico
(~ Canada
Submissions of the Disputing Parties

@ The Claimant
(li) ‘The Respondent

The Tribunal’s Reasons and Decision

@ Article 15 of the UNCITRAL Rules
(ii) Safeguarding Equal Treatment

(iti) Relevant Provisions of Chapter 11
() Other UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
@ The Tribunal's Conclusion

The Tribunal’s Order

6612827769389

02

04

os
06

06
06

07

AS-JHN-24d1 0 15'u4 FROM MR VY YEEDER QC TO 6412627768389 P.a5726

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON PETITIONS FROM
THIRD PERSONS TO INTERVENE AS “AMICI CURIAE”

I- INTRODUCTION

lL On 25" August 2000, a petition was submitted to the Tribunal by the International
* * Institute for Sustainable Development requesting permission to submit an amicus curiae
brief to the Tribunal (the “Institute Petition”). On 6 September 2000, a joint Pctition
was submitted to the Tribunal by (i) Communities for a Better Environment and (ii) the
Earth Island Institute for permission to appear as amici curiae (the “Communities/Earth

Island Pctition”),

2. On 7* September 2000, the requests contained in these petitions were addressed by the
Claimant and the Respondent at the Second Procedural Hearing, which was also attended
by the legal representative from Mexico. At this point, only the Claimant had filed
written submissions on the issue of intervention (on 31% August 2000), and these were
directed to the Institute Petition only. The Tribunal decided not to rule upon the Petitions
at the Hearing. Under Item 3 of the Minutes of Order of that Hearing, as modified on 10%
October 2000, the Tribunal laid down a timetable for written submissions on the issue of
intervention by third persons as amicus curiae, to be decided by the Tribunal as a general
Printiple.

3 The Tribunal’s timetable provided as follows:

ql) 16® October 2000: Further written submissions of Petitioners for amicus curiae

status.

(2) 27™ October 2000: Written submissions from the Claimant and the Respondent
in respect of (1).

15-JAN-26¢1

18:34 FROM MR V V VEEDER GC TO 9812627768389 P6726

(3) 10“ November 2000: Written submissions from Canada and Mexico as Non-
Disputing State Parties as provided for by Article 1128 of NAFTA.

(4) 22™ November 2000: Written submissions from the Claimant and the Respondent
in respect of (3).

An “Amended Petition” was duly submitted on 13" October 2000 by (i) Communities
for a Better Environment, (ii) the Bluewater Network of Earth Island Institute and Gii) the
Center for i it Law (the “C ities/Bl (Center
Petition”); on 16" Octaber 2000, “Final Submissions” were submitted by the
International Institute for Sustainable Development (the “Institute Final Petition”); on 27"
October 2000, the Claimant and the Respondent filed their written submissions; on 10"
November 2000, Canada and Mexico each filed written submissions; and on 22%
November 2000, the Claimant and the Respondent filed their further written submissions.

 

Ta accordance with the proccdure cnvisaged at the Second Procedural Mecting and
agteed with the Disputing Parties, the Tribunal has been able to decide this issue on the
basis of these written submissions, without the need for an oral hearing. At the outset, the
Tribunal expresses its thanks to all those responsible for researching and drafting these
submissions, which touch upon important general principles directly affecting the future
conduct of these arbitration proceedings and the potential effect, direct and indirect, of
any award on the Disputing Parties’ substantive dispute.

15-JAN- 3881

15:84 FROM MR U UV VEEDER OC TO 8812627768389 P.87726

I - SUMMARY OF THE PETITIONERS’ REQUESTS

The Institute: The Institute Petition contained requests for permission (i) to file an
amicus brief (preferably after reading the parties’ written pleadings), (ii) to make oral
submissions, (iii) to have observer status at oral hearings. Permission was sought on the
basis of the immense public importance of the case and the critical impact that the
Tribunal’s decision will have on environmental and other public welfare law-making in
the NAFTA region. It was also contended that the interprotation of Chapter 11 of
NAFTA should reflect legal principles underlying the concept of sustainable
development; and that the Institute could assist the Tribunal in this respect. A further
point was made that participation of an amicus would allay public disquiet as to the
closed nature of arbitration proceedings under Chapter 11 of NAFTA. As to jurisdiction,
it was argued that the Tribunal could grant the Petition under its general procedural
powers contained in Article 15 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, and that there was
nothing in Chapter 11 to prevent the granting of the permission requested by the Institute.
References was also made to the practice of the WTO Appellate Body and courts in
Canada and the United States.

These submissions were expanded in the Institute Final Petition. It was argucd that there
was an increased urgency in the need for amicus participation in the light of the award
dated 30 August 2000 in Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States and an
alleged failure to consider environmental and sustainable development goals in that
NAFTA arbitration. It was contended that there was no danger of the Tribunal opening
the “floodgates” to other persons seeking to appear as amici in furure NAFTA
arbitrations; and that there was no overriding principle of confidentiality in arbitration
that should exclude amici. Further, in this respect, the Institute would be entitled
eventually to copies of the parties’ written pleadings under the US Freedom of
Information Act. The Institute would satisfy the special interest tests under both

Canadian and US law to enable it to appear as amicus in equivalent court proceedings in

1S-JAN-2861 15:84 FROM MR V Vv VEEDER GC TO 6812827768389 P,.G8/26

those jurisdictions. Finally, it was argued that the absence of any right of appeal fram the
Tribunal’s arbitration award made it all the more important that there should be no errors
resulting from the lack of a fresh and relevant perspective which the Institute could
provide to the Tribunal.

7. Ce iti ‘enter: The Ci uti Island Petition was in effect

 

superseded by the Communities/ Blucwater/Center Petition (as explained at paragraph
1 of the later submission). This petition requested permission to participate in the
proceedings as amici curiae, which participation was to include the opportunity to review
the partics’ writtcn pleadings, to attend hearings and to make written and oral
submissions. For practical purposes, the scope of this intervention is the same sought by
the Institute,

8. This petition stressed the widespread public support for the participation of amici in this
arbitration. It argued that the case raised issues of constitutional importance, concerming
the balance b: @¢ J authority to impl i 1 regulati
and (b) property rights. It contended that the outcome in this case might affect the
willingness of governments at all levels in the NAFTA States (including the State of
California) to implement measures to protect the environment and human health As with

, the Institute Petition, it asserted that intervention was consistent with Canadian and US
domestic law; and that the Tribunal had jurisdiction to allow the petition under Article
15 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. It was again contended that there was support
for a decision by the Tribunal to allow the petition in the form of various decisions of the
WTO Appellate Body. Further, the point was made that the United States had recognised
the value of amicus participation in cases before the WIO Appellate Body.

 

1S-JAN-2081 15:85 FROM MR V U VEEDER ac TO 812227768389 P.@9/726

I - SUMMARY OF SUBMISSIONS BY MEXICO AND CANADA

9 Mexico: Mexico stressed that Chapter 11 of NAFTA did not provide for the involvement
of persons other than the Disputing Parties and NAFTA Parties on questions of the
interpretation of NAFTA pursuant to Article 1128, It contended that if amicus curiae
submissions were allowed, the amici would have greater rights than the NAFTA Partics
themselves because of the limited scope of Article 1128 submissions. Such a result was
clearly never intended by the NAFTA Parties; and it could lead to the abrogation of
Article 1128 by NAFTA Parties submitting amicus bricfs where they wished to make
submissions on issues other than the interpretation of NAFTA. Mexico argued that the
Tribunal’s authority to appoint experts was limited by Article 1133 of NAFTA (ie.
subject to the disapproval of the Disputing Parties). In any event, amici were not to be

** confused with independent experts. In addition, Mexico noted that the there was no
power under Mexican law for its domestic courts to receive amicus briefs. The Chapter
11 dispute scttlement mechanism established a careful balance between the procedures
of common law states, Canada (at least in part) and the United States, on the one hand
and on the other a civil law state. Mexico. The existence of a specific procedure in onc
Party’s domestic state court procedure did not mean that it could be transported to a
transnational NAFTA arbitration.

10. Canada: Canada adopted a different approach from Mexico. In its written submissions,
Canada stated its support for greater openness in arbitration proceedings under Chapter
11 of NAFTA. Although mindful of the confidentiality obligations imposed by Article
25(4) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Canada supported public disclosure of
arbitral submissions, orders and awards to the fullest extent possible. Canada contended
that in this case, without prejudice to its position in other arbitrations under NAFTA
Chapter 11. the Tribunal should accept the written submissions of the Petitioners,
notwithstanding that only NAFTA Parties have the right to make submissions on
Questions of the interpretation of NAFTA. Canada also stated that it would be asking its

eee er vee. ee Yo eesewe (rose Peau eo

NAFTA partners to work together on the issue of amicus curiae participation as a matter
of urgency in order to provide guidance to arbitration tribunals under Chapter 11.

IV - SUMMARY OF SUBMISSIONS BY THE DISPUTING PARTIES

The Disputing Parties responded differently to the Petitioner’s Tequests for intervention,
The Respondent, as summarised later below, requested the Tribunal to accept part of the
Petitioner’s Tequests. The Claimant sought the dismissal of these petitions under three
principal headings: (i) confidentiality, (ji) jurisdiction, (iii) faimess of process.

@ The Claimant

Confidentiality: As to confidentiality, the Claimant relied on Article 25(4) of the
UNCITRAL Artitration Rulcs to the effect that hearings are to be held in camera. It
argued that this obligation carried with it the requirement that documents prepared for the
arbitration be confidential. The authority for this proposition wes to be found in the
reasoning of the English Commercial Court in Hassneh Insurance Co. of Israel v. Steuart
J. Mew [1993] 2 Lioyd’s Rep 243. Further, the Disputing Parties had come to an
agreement on confidentiality by the Consent Order regarding Disclosure and
Confidentiality (made by the Tribunal at the Second Procedural Meeting on 7* September
2000); and it was thereby agreed that transcripts, written submissions, witness statements,

reports, etc be kept confidential. The Order did not allow for disclosure of material to
non-governmental organisations or public interest groups, such as the Petitioners.

Jurisdiction: As to jurisdiction, the Claimant argued that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction
to add a party to the proceedings without the agreement of the parties. The ability to
appear in the arbitration was limited by Chapter 11 of NAFTA to the Disputing Parties
and NAFTA Parties, whereas granting the Petitioners the status of amicus curiae would
be equivalent to adding them as parties. No such jurisdiction was created by Article 15

1S-JAN-2081 15:25 FROM MR VU U VEEDER ac TO @@12927768389 P.11726

of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. That nile was concerned merely with procedural
matters and not the substantive issuc of who were the parties to the arbitration. There was
also no question of jurisdiction under Article 27 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rutes,
as that power to receive expert evidence had been specifically removed from the
Tribunal. Further, after a carefull search the Claimant stated that it had been unable to find
any precedent where a tribunal had granted amicus curiae status to non-partes in an
arbitration under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

14. Fairness: Asto faimess, the Claimant contended that the protection of the public interest
‘was cnsured by Article 1128 of NAFTA. Private interest §roups wishing to put their
views before an arbitration tribunal could convey their information to the NAFTA
Parties, who had the right to intervene where there was a question of interpretation of
NAFTA. Further, any of the Disputing Parties would be in a Position to call upon the
Petit to offer their i as evid in the f dings, whereas if the
Petitioncrs were to appear as amici curiae, the Disputing Partics would have no
opportunity to test by oross-examination (in Particular) the factual basis of their
contentions. In addition, granting to the Petitioners amici status would substantially

+. increase the costs of proceedings and require the Claimant to respond to the submissions
of others in a way nat contemplated by NAFTA. An undesirable Precedent would be set
and other groups might be encouraged to seek to appear as amici in arbitrations under
Chapter 11 of NAFTA.

 

15. Like Mexico, the Claimant also argued that reliance on the practice relating ta amici in
the domestic courts of certain jurisdictions was inappropriate to these arbitration
proceedings. Amicus briefs were not permitted in one of the NAFTA States, namely
Mexico. The court processes of one NAFTA State should not be preferred over another;
and the international rules governing foreign investment should not be made to give way
to domestic practices. The Claimant also considered that WTO practice was irrelevant
and should be disregarded by the Tribunal Further, insofar as it was aware, no WTO
panel or Appellate Body had for jon an U amicus brief.
Briefs had been filed in each case, but the WTO Panel or Appellate Body had always

 

-8-

AS-JHN-201 -15'u6 FRUM MR VY V VEEDER OC TU 4812827 e53E9 P.12726

A

determined that these briefs should not be considered, and the power under Article 13 of
the Disputc Scttlement Understanding to seek information from outside sources had not
been used in this respect. Further, in the order of 16% November 2000 in European
Communities - Measures Affecting Asbestos and Asbestos Containing Products, all
seventeen applications for amicus status were rejected by the WTO.

(i) The Respondent

16. The Respondent contended (i) that the procedural rules governing the arbitration
permitted the acceptance of amicus submissions, and (ii) that amicus submissions were
suitable when likely to assist the Tribunal and should then be allowed by the Tribunal.

17.* * Power: The Respondent argued that there was an inherent flexibility in the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, to be applied in the context of the particular dispute. The powers
under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rulcs should be oxercised in a manner commensurate
with the public international law aspects of the case and the fact that it implicated
substantial public interests. The NAFTA Parties’ view that the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules were sufficicatly flexible in such instances reflected a Presumption that arbitration
tribunals would use the discretion granted to them in a manner appropriate to the nature
of the dispute. In this respect, the current dispute was to be distinguished from a typical
commercial arbitration on the basis thet a State was the Respondent, the issues had to be
decided in accordance with a treaty and the principles of public international law and a
decision on that dispute could have a significant effect extending beyond the two
Disputing Parties.

18. The Respondent contended that pursuant to Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration
~ ‘Rules the Tribunal had the authority to conduct the proceedings as it deemed appropriate
subject to the proviso that the parties be treated with quality and given a full opportunity

Of presenting their cases. This rule was sufficiently broad to encompass the authority to
accept amicus briefs. The Respondent cited comments on the application of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules by the lran-US Claims Tribunal in Baker & Davis, The

-9-

1S-JAN-2661 15:46 FROM MR V VY VEEDER GC TO 9812827768389 P.13726

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules in Practice, 1992, pp. 76 and 98. The Respondent also
relied on the practice of the Appellate Body of the WTO in finding that it had broad
authority to adopt procedural rules that did not conflict with the express rules of the WTO
Dispute Settlement Understanding, therefore allowing amicus submissions: scc United
States - Imposition of Countervailing Duties on Certain Hot-Rolled Lead and Bismuth
Carbon Steel Products Originating in the United Kingdom, paragraph 39,
(WT/DS138/AB/R], adopted on 7 June 2000,

19, The Respondent considered that there was nothing in the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
that prohibited acceptance of amicus submissions. Article 25(4) of the Rules limited the
persons who could attend a hearing, not those who could submit written briefs. In this
respect, the Respondent relied on the Australian case of Esso Australia Resources Ltd.
v. Plowman (1995) 183 CLR 10 at paragraphs 30-32, in which Hassneh Insurance Co.
of Israei v, Steuart J. Mew was considered but not followed by the High Court of
Australia. It also relied on the recent application of the Esso case by the Swedish
Supreme Court in Bulgarian Foreign Trade Bank Lid. v. A. I. Trade Finance Inc
(27.x.2000); and a finding in that case that a party in an international commercial
arbitration in Sweden was not bound by a duty of confidentiality unless it had agreed to
that duty, and that the presence of an in camera rule in an arbitration agreement did not
amount to such an agreement. In any cvent, rules of confidentiality could have no bearing
on whether the Tribunal could receive written submissions from amici. Further, the
Tribunal’s discretion was not limited by Article 22 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
which did deal with written submissions.

20. Similarly, the Respondent contended that there was nothing in Chapter 11 of NAFTA to
prohibit the acceptance of amicus submissions, Article 1128 of NAFTA gave rights to
Non-Disputing Parties, leaving untouched the question of how the Tribunal might
exercise its discrction to permit submissions from other parties. There was th

no question of amici being granted greater rights than the NAFTA’s State Parties. In this

respect, the Respondent referred to the rejection of a similar argument in the WTO

context: Hot-Rolled Lead and Carbon Steel, paragraph 41 [WT/DS138/AB/R]. In

-10-

1S-JAN-2641 15:46 FROM MR V V VEEDER ac TO 8812627768389 P.14726

addition, it was contended that Articles 1126(10) and 1137(4) of NAFTA recognised the

>’ public interest involved in NAFTA arbitrations in demonstrating that the NAFTA Parties
expected the substance of each Chapter 11 dispute and most awards to be made publicly
available. Responding to the argument raised by Mexico that the Tribunal’s authority to
appoint cxperts was limited to Article 1133 of NAFTA, the Respondent maintained that
q@mici did not fulfil the same function as Tribunal appointed experts; and Article 1133
was therefore irrelevant.

21 Finally, under this heading, the Respondent argued that the Petitioners were not seeking
the status of parties so the Claimant’s comments in this respect were misconccived, A
burden would be added if the Tribunal accepted an amicus submission, but this would be
Justified where the Tribunal had made a determination that the amicus submission would
be helpful. The Consent Order regarding Disclosure and Confidentiality did not address
the question of amicus briefs, and specifically envisaged that important documents
generated during the course of the arbitration would be released to the public, whilst the

* ‘ remainder would be subject to release under the US Freedom of Information Act.

22. Discretion: As to the second of its principal contentions, the Respondent argued that a
third person might have knowledge or expertise of value to the Tribunal, and that on a
showing that the submission would be both relevant and helpful, it should be allowed by
the Tribunal. In this respect, the Claimant suggested procedures by which the Tribunal
could assess the value of a potential amicus submission before deciding to grant leave.
Specific reference was made to the procedures adopted in the order of 8 November 2000
adopted in European Communities - Measures Affecting Asbestos and Asbestos
Containing Products [WT/DS135/9). By contrast, failure to allow any amicus
submissions would reinforce the growing perception that Chapter 11 dispute resolution
was an exclusionary and secretive process. Moreover, there was no reason to fear a
deluge of petitions for amicus status - as was clear from what had happened both in this
case as well as experience in the WTO.

-ll-

LS-dRN-el Side FRU Mik VV VEEDER UC TO 612627768389 P.15726

23. As to the Petitioners’ requests that they be allowed to attend hearings and receive copies
of all documents filed in the arbitration, the Respondent’s position was that the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction was effectively restricted by Article 25(4) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration

Rules and the Consent Order regarding Di and C iality. It

 

was in favour of giving public access to the greatest extent possible, and therefore zave
its consent to the open and public hearing of all hearings before the Tribunal, supporting
disclosure consistent with the Consent Order.

V- THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONS AND DECISION

24. Pursuant to Articles 1120(1)(c) and 1120(2) of NAFTA and the agreement of the
Disputing Parties, this arbitration is govemmed by the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules save
insofar as such Rules are modified by Chapter 11, Section B, of NAFTA In the
Tribunal’s view, there is nothing in eithcr the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules or Chapter
11, Section B, that either expressly confers upon the Tribunal the power to accept amicus
submissions or expressly provides that the Tribunal shall have no such power.

25. It follows that the Tribunal’s powers in this respect must be inferred, if at all, from its
more general procedural powers. In the Tribunal’s view, the Petitioners’ Tequests must
be considered against Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; and it is not
possible or appropriate to look elsewhere for any broader power or jurisdiction.

26. = Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules grants to the Tribunal a broad
discretion as to the conduct of this arbitration, subject always to the requirements of
procedural equality and fairness towards the Disputing Parties. It provides, broken down
into numbered sub-paragraphs for ease of reference below, as follows:

“[1] Subject to these Rules, [2] the arbitral tribunal may conduct the arbitration
in such manner as it considers appropriate, [3] provided that the parties are

-12-

AS-JAN-2641 15'a/ FROM MR VY VY VEEDER OC TO @412827768389 P. 16726

27.

28.

treated with equality and that at any stage in the proceedings each party is given
@ full opportunity of presenting its case.

This provision constitutes one of the essential “hallmarks” of an international arbitration
under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, according to the travaux préparatoires. Article
1S has also been described as the “heart” of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: and its
terms have since been adopted in Articles 18 and 19(2)of the UNCITRAL Model Law
on International Commercial Arbitration, where these provisions were considered as the
procedural “Afagna Carta" of intemational commercial arbitration. Article 15(1) is
plainly a very important provision.

Article 15(1) is intended to provide the broadest procedural flexibility within
fundamental safeguards, to be applied by the arbitration tribunal to fit the particular needs
of the particular arbitration. As a procedural provision, however, it cannot grant the
Tribunal any power to add further disputing parties to the arbitration, nor to accord to
persons who are non-parties the substantive status, rights or privileges of a Disputing
Party. Likewise, the Tribunal can have no power to accord to any third person the
Substantive rights of NAFTA Parties under Article 1128 of NAFTA. The issue is
whether Article 15(1) grants the Tribunal any lesser procedural power in regard to non-
party third persons, such as the Petitioners here.

In addressing this issuc, there are four principal matters to be considered:

@) whether the Tribunal’s acceptance of amicus submissions falls within the general
scope of the sub-paragraph numbercd [2] of Article 15(1);

Gi) if so, whether the acceptance of amicus submissions could affect the equal treatment
of the Disputing Parties and the opportunity of each fully to present its case, under the
sub-paragraph numbered [3] of Article 15(1);

(ii) whether there are any provisions in Chapter 11, Section B, of NAFTA that modify
the application of Article 15(1) for present purposes: and

-13-

1S-JAN-2881 15:47 FRUM MR V V VEEDER GC TO 8812827768389 P.17726

(iv) whether other provisions of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules likewise modify the
application of Article 151) in regard to this particular case, given the introductory words
of the sub-paragraph numbered [1] of Article 15(1).

It is convenient to consider each matter in turn.
@ The General Scope of Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

29. The Tribunal is required to decide a substantive dispute between the Claimant and the
Respondent. The Tribunal has no mandate to decide any other substantive dispute or any
dispute determining the legal rights of third persons. The legal boundaries of the
arbitration are set by this essential legal fact. It is thus self-evident that if the Tribunal
cannot directly, without consent, add another person as a party to this dispute or treat a
third person as a party to the arbitration or NAFTA, it is equally precluded from
achieving this result indirectly by exercising a power over the conduct of the arbitration,
Accordingly, in the Tribunal’s view, the power under Article 15(1) must be confined to
procedural matters. Treating non-parties as Disputing Parties or as NAFTA Parties cannot
be matters of mere procedure; and such matters cannot fall within Article 15(1) of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

30. However, in the Tribunal’s view, its receipt of written submissions from a person other
than the Disputing Parties is not equivalent to adding that person as a party to the
arbitration. The rights of the Disputing Parties in the arbitration and the limited rights of
a Non-Disputing Party under Article 1128 of NAFTA are not thereby acquired by such
a third person. Their rights, both procedural and substantive, remain juridically exactly
the same before and after receipt of such submissions; and the third person acquires no

rights at all. The legal nature of the arbitration remains wholly unchanged.
31 The Tribunal considers that allowing a third Person to make an amicus submission could
fall within its procedural powers over the conduct of the arbitration, within the general

scope of Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, The wording of the sub-

-14-

15-JAN-2081 15:68 FROM MR V V VEEDER ac TO 8812827768389 P.18726

paragraph numbered [2] of Article 15(1) suffices, in the Tribunal’s view, to support its
conclusion: but its approach is supported by the practice of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal
and the World Trade Organisation.

32. Jran-US Claims Tribunat. Notc 5 of thc [ran-US Claims Tribunal Notes to Article 15(1),
of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules states:

. “5. The arbitral tribunal may, having satisfied itself that the statement of
one of the two Governments - or, under special circumstances, any other
person - who is not an arbitrating party in a particular case is likely tc
assist the arbitral tribunal in carrying out its task, permit such
Government or person to assist the arbitral tribunal by presenting written
and [or] oral statements.”

This provision was specifically drafted for the Iran-US Claims Tribunal as a
supplementary guide. Although (so it appears from published commentaries) it was
invoked by Iran or the US as non-arbitrating parties, it was also invoked by non-state
third persons (albeit infrequently), such ss the foreign banks submitting their own
memorial to the Tribunal in /ran v United States, Case A/I5: see the Award No 63-A/15-
FT made by the Full Tribunal (President Béckstiegel and Judges Briner, Virally.
Bahrami, Holtzmann, Mostafavi, Aldrich, Ansari and Brower) 2 Iran-US C.T.R. 40, at
p.43. For present purposes, the authoritative guide to the exercise of the Iran-US Claim
Tribunal’s discretion under Article 15(1) and this award demonstrate that the receipt of

. written submissions from a non-party third person does uot necessarily offend the
philosophy of international arbitration involving states and non-state parties.

33. WTO: The distinction between parties to an arbitration and their right to make
submissions and a third person having no such right was adopted by the WTO Appellate
Body in Hot-Rolled Lead and Carbon Steel, paragraph 41: “Individuals and
organisations, which are not Members af the WTO, have no legal ‘right’ 10 make
submissions to or to be heard by the Appellate Body. The Appellate Body has na fegal
‘duty ' to accept or consider unsoltctted amicus curiae briefs submitted by individuals or

organisations, not Members of the WTO ....”. Further. the Appellate Body there found

-15~

34.

nae ne He eetewe eouse reszeo

that it had power to accept amicus submissions under Article 17.9 of the Dispute
Settlement Understanding to draw up working procedures. That procedural power is
significantly less broad than the power accorded to this Tribunal under Article 15(1) to
conduct the arbitration in such manner as it considers appropriate. For prescnt purposes,
this WTO practice demonstrates that the scope of a procedural power can extend to the
feceipt of written submissions from non-party third persons, even ina juridical procedure
affecting the rights and obligations of state parties; and further it also demonstrates that
the receipt of such submissions confers no rights, procedural or substantive, on such

persons.

ICJ: The Tribunal notes, however, that there has been a traditional reluctance on the part
of the International Court of Justice to accept amicus submissions from non-parties,
although Article 62 of the ICJ Statutes allows an interested non-party state to request
intervention. As observed by Rosenne, 7he Law and Practice of the International Court
1920-1996 (1997), at pp. 653-654, the ICI docs not admit non-governmental
organisations (which are treated as individuals); and in regard to individual petitioners,
the author states: “The practice of the Court also does not envisage the legal
Tepresentatives of an individual appearing at the bar of the Court, holding a watching
brief, receiving copies of the pleadings, and being allowed - perhaps as anticus curiae -
to present its own case.” The IC] Registrar refused such a request in the Namibia Case,
Tl Pleadings, 636, 638. Nonetheless, more recently, it appears that written submissions
were received by the ICJ, unofficially, in Case Concerning the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros
Project, ICI Reports, 1997. In the Tribunal’s view, the IC]’s Practices provides little
assistance to this case. Its jurisdiction in contentious cases is limited solely to disputes
between States; its Statute provides for intervention by States; and it would be difficult
in these circumstances to infer from its procedural powers a power to allow a non-state
third person to intervene.

-16-

1S-JAN-2ee1 1S'ey Fro, Min Vv vy VEELER UC TO 8812627768389 P2826

35.

37.

Gi) Safeguarding Equal Treatment

The Tribunal notes the argument raised by the Claimant to the effect that a burden will
be added if amicus submissions are presented to the Tribunal and the Disputing Parties
seek to make submissions in response. That burden is indced a potential risk. It is
inherent in any adversarial procedure which admits representations by a non-party third

person.

However, at least initially, the burden in meeting the Petitioners’ written submissions
would be shared by both Disputing Parties; and moreover, that burden cannot be regarded
as incvitabl ive for either Disputing Party. As envi by the Tribunal, the

* Petitianers would make their submissions in writing, in a form and subject to limitations

decided by the Tribunal. The Petitioners could not adduce the evidence of any factual or
expert witness; and it would not therefore be necessary for either Disputing Party to
cross-examine a witness proffered by the Petitioners: there could be no such witness. As
to the contents of the Petitioners’ written submissions; it would always be for the
Tribunal to decide what weight (if any) to attribute to those submissions. Even if any part
of those submissions were arguably to constitute written “evidence”, thc Tribunal would
still rctain a complete diseretion under Article 25.6 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
to determine its admissibility, relevance, materiality and weight. Of course, if either
Disputing Party adopted a Petitioner’s written submissions, the other Disputing Party
could not then complain at that burden: it was always required to meet its opponent’s
case; and that case, however supplemented, can form no extra unfair burden or unequal
treatment.

* It would always be the Tribunal’s task, assisted by the Disputing Parties, to adopt

procedures whereby any burden in meeting written submissions from a Petitioner was
mitigated or extinguished. In theory, a difficulty could remain if.a point was advanced by
a Petitioner to which both Disputing Parties were opposed; but in practice, that risk
appears small in this arbitration. In any case, it is not a risk the size or nature of which
should swallow the general principle permitting written submissions from third persons

-17-

38.

40.

41.

Veeek ase re on Vw vecwer Ue 1b edited rrpooey recive

Accordingly, whilst there is a possible risk of unfair treatment as raised by the Claimant,
the Tribunal is aware of that risk and considers that it must be addressed as and when it
may arise. There is no immediate msk of unfair or unequal treatment for any Disputing

Party or Party.
(iii) ~~ Relevant Provisions in Chapter 11, Section B, of NAFTA

As already noted by the Tribunal, there are no provisions in Chapter 11 of NAFTA that
touch directly on the question of whether a tribunal has the power to accept amicus
submissions. Of the provisions that have been considered in the submissions reccived by
the Tribunal, neither Article 1128 nor Article 1133 of NAFTA has any bearing on that
question. The first is concerned with a right on the part of NAFTA Parties; and thc
second is concerned solely with a tribunal’s authority to appoint experts. Amici are not
experts, such third persons are advocates (in the non-pejorative sense) and not
“independent” in that they advance a particular case to a tribunal.

The Respondent referred to Articles 1126(10) and 1137(4) of NAFTA. In the Tribunal’s
view, there is nothing relevant in these provisions for present purposes. As the Tribunal
has already concluded, there is no provision in Chapter 11 that expressly prohibits the
acceptance of amicus submissions, but likewise nothing that expressly encourages them.

(%) Other UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

The Claimant’s reliance on Asticle 25(4) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules to the
effect that hearings are to be held in camera is not relevant to the Petitioners’ request to
serve written submissions to the Tribunal. In the Tribunal’s view, there are no further
Provisions under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules that modify the application of its
general power under Article 15(1) to allow the Pctitioncrs to make such submissions in
this arbitration. ,

However, the Claimant’s reliance on Article 25(4) is relevant to the Petitioners’ request

-18-

aoe etek Le mori nim YY verve, UL IU Blade fedsey P. 2226

42.

43

to attend hearings and to receive copies of all submissions and materials adduced before
the Tribunal. Article 25(4) provides that: “/Oral] Hearings shall be held in camera
unless the parties agree otherwise ...” . The phrase “in camera” is clearly intended to
exclude members of the public, i.e. non-party third persons such as the Petitioners. As
the @avaux préparatoires disclose, the UNCITRAL drafting committee deleted a
different provision in an earlier draft which could have allowed the arbitration tribunal
to admit into an oral hearing persons other than the patties. However, as discussed further
below, Article 25(4) relates to the privacy of the oral hearings of the arbitration; and it
does not in like terms address the confidentiality of the arbitration.

As to privacy, the Respondent has accepted that, as a result of Article 25(4), hearings are
to be held in camera unless both Disputing Parties consent otherwise. The Respondent
bas given such conscnt. The Claimant has given no such consent. The Tribunal must
therefore apply Article 25(4); and it has no power (ar inclination) to undermine the effect
ofits terras. It follows that the Tribunal must reject the Petitioners’ requests to attend oral
hearings of the arbitration.

As to confidentiality, the Tribunal notes the conflicting Iogal materials as to whether
Article 25(4) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules imposes upon the Disputing Parties
a further duty of confidentiality (beyond privacy) in regard to materials generated by the
parties within the arbitration, The most recent decision of the Swedish Supreme Court in
Bulgarian Foreign Trade Bank Ltd. v. A. I. Trade Finance Inc (27.x.2000) suggests that
a privacy rule in an arbitration agreement does not give rise under Swedish law to a
separate duty of confidentiality, at least as regards the award. That approach is strongly
supported by the decision of the High Court of Australia in Essa/RHP v Plowman (1993)
183 CLR 10 distinguishing between confidentiality and privacy, particularly as
subsequently applied by the New South Wales Court in Commonwealth of Australia v
Cockatoo Duckyard Pty Lid (1995) 36 NSWLR 662 involving a public corporation (per
Kirby. J: “Can it be seriously suggested that [the] parties’ private agreement can,
endorsed by a procedural direction of an arbitrator, exclude from the public domain
matters of legitimate concern ...”).

15-JAN-2081 15:29 FROM MR VY UV UEEDER Oc TO 412827768389 P.23726

44, The English legal materials generally point in the other direction, as invoked by the
Claimant, with the high watcr mark being the Court of Appeal’s decision in Ali Shipping
Corporation v Shipyard Trogir [1998] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 643. Evenin England, however, the
present position is arguably equivocal in. regard to public authorities (including a state
party), particularly given the absence of any statutory rule in the English Arbitration Act
1996 - for reasons explained at length in the official commentary contained in the
Departmental Advisory Committee’s 1996 Report on the Arbitration Bill (paragraphs 10-
17), It is perhaps significant that English law on strict confidentiality is a recent

' ‘ innovation, dating essentially from the decision in The Eastern Saga [1983] 2 Lloyd’s
Rep 373, cited by the Claimant. For cxample, as the DAC Report noted, the arbitration
tribunal in Lena Goldfields v USSR (1930) decided in the public interest to publish its
procedural orders and final award in the London Times”, without any critical comment
at the time (as to publication).

45, The Tribunal has also considered the position on confidentiality in the USA, insofar as
it may be relevant as the law of the place of the arbitration, Washington DC. The Federal
Arbitration Act is silent on the point; but like Australia and Sweden, US law maintains
a distinction between privacy and confidentiality. Indeed Professor Hans Smit’s expert
report on US law was adduced before the Australian Courts in Zsso/BP v Plowman. He
relied on the decision of United States District Court for the District of Delaware in USA
v Panhandle Eastern Corp 118 FRD 346, 10 Fed R Serv 3™ 686 @ Del 1988),

i i by a party in an ICC

arbitration. Professor Smit also stresscd the significance of a public interest, such as the

ing the n ity of

Petitioners suggest in this case: “/) ining to what extent itration is fide
Proper consideration must also be given to the pubic interest in knowing how disputes

are settled...” (see [1995] Arbitration International 297 & 299 at 300).

-20-

AS-JAN-2401 iS'uy FRUM MR VV VEEDER GC TO 8612627765.s55 P.24726

46. This is however a difficult area; and for present Purposes, the Tribunal does not have to
decide the point. Confidentiality is dctermincd by the agreement of the Disputing Parties
as recorded in the Consent Order regarding Disclosure and Confidentiality, forming part
of the Minutes of Order of the Second Procedural meeting of 7” September 2000. As
amici have no rights under Chapter 11 of NAFTA to receive any materials generated
within the arbitration (or indeed any rights at all), they are to be treated by the Tribunal
as any other members of the public. Accordingly materials may be disclosed only as
allowed in the Consent Order. Of course, pursuant to paragraph 3 of that Order, either
Party is at liberty to disclose the major pleadings, orders and awards of the Tribunal into
the public domain (subject to redaction of Trade Secret Information). That is however a
matter for the Disputing Parties and not the Tribunal.

() — The Tribunal’s Conclusion

47. Power: The Tribunal concludes that by Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules it has the power to accept amicus submissions (in writing) from each of the
Petitioners, to be copied simultaneously to the legal representatives of the Disputing
Parties, Canada and Mexico. In coming to this conclusion, the Tribunal has not relied on
the fact that amicus submissions feature in the domestic procedures of the courts in two,

_ but not three, NAFTA Parties, The Tribunal also concludes that it has no power to accept
the Petitioners’ requests to receive materials generated within the arbitration or to attend
oral hearings of the arbitration, Such materials may however be derived from the public
domain or disclosed into the public domain within the terms of the Consent Order
regarding Disclosure and Confidentiality, or otherwise lawfully; but that is a quite
separate matter outwith the scope of this decision.

48. Discretion: The next issue is whether, in the particular circumstances of this arbitration,
the Tribunal should decide that it is “appropriate” to accept amicus submissions from thc
Petitioners in the exercise of the discretion under Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, At this early stage, the Tribunal cannot decide definitively that it would

-21-

1S-JAN-2441 15:18 FROM MR VY VU VEEDER GC TO @@12827768389

49.

50.

be assisted by these submissions on the Disputing Parties’ substantive dispute. The
Petitions set out the credentials of the Petitioners, which are impressive; but for now, the
Tribunal must assume that the Disputing Parties will provide all the necessary assistance
and materials required by the Tribunal to decide their dispute. At the least, however, the
Tribunal must also assume that the Petitioners’ submissions could assist the Tribunal.

The Tribunal must look to other factors for the exercise of its discretion.

There is an undoubtedly public interest in this arbitration. The substantive issues extend
far beyond those raised by the usual transnational arbitration between commercial parties.
This is not merely because one of the Disputing Parties is a State: there are of course
disputes involving States which are of no greater general public importance than a dispute
between private persons. The public interest in this arbitration ariscs from its subject-
matter, as powerfully suggested in the Petitions. There is also a broader argument, as
suggested by the Respondent and Canada: the Chapter 11 arbitral process could benefit
from being perceived as more open or transparent; or conversely be harmed if secn as
unduly secretive. In this regard, the Tribunal’s willingness to receive amicus submissions
might support the process in general and this arbitration in particular, whereas a blanket
refusal could do positive harm.

There are other competing factors to consider: the acceptance of amicus submissions
might add significantly to the overall cost of the arbitration and, as considered above,
there is a possible risk of imposing an extra burden on one or both the Disputing Parties.
In this regard, as appears from the Petitions, any amicus submissions from thcsc
Petitioners are more likely to run counter to the Claimant’s Position and eventually to
Support the Respondent's case. This factor has weighed heavily with the Tribunal; and
it is concerned that the Claimant should receive whatever procedural protection might be
necessary.

These are all relevant circumstances under Article 1S(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration

Rules. Less important is the factor raised by the Claimant as to the danger of setting a
precedent. This Tribunal can set no legal precedent, in general or at all. It has no power

-22-

P,25726

1S-JAN-2881 15:19 FROM MR VU V VEEDER QC TO @8128277683e9 P.26726

to d ine for other arbitrati i how to interpret Article 15(1); and in a later
arbitration, there may be other circumstances leading that tribunal to exercise its
discretion differently. For each arbitration, the decision must be made by its uibunal in

the pasticular circumstances of rhat arbitration only.

52. Weighing all the relevant factors, the Tribunal considers that it could be appropriate to
allow amicus written submissions from these Petitioners. Whilst the Tribunal is at present
minded to allow the Petitioners to make such submissions at a later stage of these
arbitration proceedings, it is premature now for the Tribunal finally to decide the question
at this relatively early stage. The Tribunal intends first to consider with the Disputing
Pasties procedural limitations as to the timing, form and content of the Petitioners”
submissions. For example, the Tritunal may wish to impose a page-timit on such
submissions (including exhibits).

VI- THE TRIBUNAL’S ORDER

S3. For the reasons set out above, pursuant to Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal declares that it has the power to sccept amicus
written submissions from the Petitioners; whilst it iy at present minded to receive
such submissions subject to procedural limitations still to be determined by the
Tribunal (to be considered with the Disputing Parties), it will make a final decision
whether or not to receive them at a later stage of these arbitration proceedings; and
accordingly the Petitions are accepted by the Tribunal to this extent, but otherwise
rejected.

Made by the Tribunal on /S“January 2001, as at Washington DC, USA.

har Hee fy ashen

TOTAL P.26

