Paul Hastings

Atlanta
Beijing

Hong Kong
London

Los Angeles
New York
Orange County
San Diego

San Francisco
Shanghai
Stamford

Tokyo
Washington, D.C

Paul, Hastings, Janofsky & Walker LP
1299 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, 10th Floor, Washington, DC 20004-2400
telephone 202-508-9500 | facsimile 202-508-9700 | internet www.paulhastings.com

Match 8, 2004 37829.00002

V.V. Veeder, QC
Essex Court Chambers
24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields
London WC2A 3ED
England

J. William Rowley, QC
McMillan Binch

Royal Bank Plaza

Suite 3800, South Tower
Toronto, Ontario M5] 2J7
Canada

Professor W. Michael Reisman
Yale Law School

P.O. Box 208215

New Haven, CT 06520-8215

Re: Methanex Corporation v. United States of America
Gentlemen:

On January 28, 2004, Methanex Corporation submitted its Request for Reconsideration
of Chapters J and K of the Partial Award in this proceeding (the “Request”). In
accordance with the Tribunal’s February 20 request, this letter submission elaborates on
the “procedural grounds on which [Methanex’ Request] is advanced” and “the specific
powers which could allow the Tribunal to re-visit” the Partial Award.

As set forth below, the UNCITRAL Rules under which this proceeding is conducted
grant the Tribunal broad discretion to determine the type and number of briefs and
hearings it wishes to conduct. As discussed extensively in the Request, the question of
how Article 1101(1) should be construed and its interaction with the substantive
provisions of the Chapter raise fundamental issues that strike at the core of what Chapter
11 is intended to protect. The fact that the Partial Award was rendered by the Tribunal
in its former composition, which included one member who subsequently was compelled
to withdraw due to allegations of conflict-of-interest and favoritism toward the United
States, mandates that the Tribunal now entertain Methanex’ Request. Simply put, in
order to afford Methanex the “full opportunity” contemplated by the UNCITRAL Rules
to present its case before an unbiased and impartial arbiter, this Tribunal must exercise

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
March 8, 2004

Page 2

its discretion to revisit its past decision and revise Chapters J and K of its Partial Award
as set forth in Methanex’ Request.

I. The UNCITRAL Rules Grant The Tribunal Discretion To Entertain The
Request.

The Tribunal has the power to grant this Request. Nothing in the UNCITRAL Rules
which govern this proceeding precludes reconsideration of a Partial Award, particularly
where, as here, that award addressed only jurisdictional issues and the proceeding itself
remains in progress.

Article 15 of the Rules establishes the basic framework for these proceedings. The
Article instructs:

Subject to these Rules, the arbitral tribunal may conduct
the arbitration in such manner as it considers appropriate,
provided the parties are treated with equality and that at
any stage of the proceedings each party is given a full
opportunity of presenting his case.

Article 22 expressly authorizes the Tribunal to “decide which further written statements,
in addition to the statement of claim and the statement of defence, shall be required from
the parties or may be presented by them and shall fix the periods of time for
communicating such statements.”'

Inherent in the concept of a “full opportunity” is that the opportunity be “fair” as well.
As the United States Supreme Court has stated,

A fair trial in a fair tribunal is a basic requirement of due
process. Fairness of course requires an absence of actual
bias in the trial of cases. But our system of law has always
endeavored to prevent even the probability of unfairness.

' This is not a case where a party is asking the Tribunal to revisit an award on the merits,
or to reopen a factual question — contexts where, absent “extraordinary” circumstances,
tribunals governed by the UNCITRAL Rules have declined to act. See, ¢g., Ram Int'l
Industries v. Air Force of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iran Dec. 118-148-1 (Dec. 28, 1993) at

| 16 (nevertheless deciding that, in such circumstances, a tribunal does have the authority
to reconsider). The Partial Award was not a “final” award within the meaning of the
Rules. By its nature, a Partial Award is subject to revision or reconsideration as a
proceeding continues.

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
March 8, 2004

Page 3

In re Murchison, 349 U.S. 133, 136 (1955) (quoted in Jenkins v. Sterlacci, 849 F.2d 627, 631
(D.C. Cir. 1988), in which the court applied the principle of Murchison to disqualify a
special master who failed to disclose his representation of a client in a proceeding where
appellant’s lawyer was opposing counsel).”

A\s discussed below, the opportunity provided to Methanex by the Tribunal was neither
“full” nor “fair.”

Il. Reconsideration Of The Challenged Chapters Of The Partial Award Is
Necessary To Grant Methanex A “Full Opportunity” To Present Its Case
Before A Neutral And Fair Body.

‘The Partial Award established an unprecedented interpretation of NAFTA Article
1101(1) and its interaction with Article 1102 that will dramatically diminish the rights of
investors under Chapter 11 if applied by other, future NAFTA tribunals. That fact alone
should give the Tribunal pause and cause it to reconsider the substance of Methanex’
contentions advanced in its Request.

However, Methanex does not base its Request solely on the importance of the Tribunal’s
decision. Article 15 of the UNCITRAL Rules requires the Tribunal to grant the parties
a “full opportunity” to present their positions. That obligation cannot be met where, as
here, one of the members of the Tribunal responsible for the Partial Award harbored an
apparent conflict of interest that, shortly after the Partial Award was issued, caused him
to resign from this case. The fact that no such taint attached to the two remaining
members is immaterial. Neither party was privy to the Tribunal’s internal deliberations
so as to assess the relative roles of the three members in fashioning the Tribunal’s
decision. Moreover, Methanex respectfully suggests that no one, not even the Tribunal
members themselves, fairly may judge to what degree they may have been influenced by
Mr. Christopher. His presence on the Tribunal during its deliberations and formulation
of the Partial Award creates an inescapable appearance of unfairness that only
reconsideration can erase.

‘This conclusion is firmly grounded in caselaw and precedent. Courts repeatedly have
vacated arbitral awards made by multiple-arbitrator panels in instances where allegations
of bias attached only to one of the panels’ members. As the U.S. Supreme Court has
warned,

* US. precedent on this procedural issue is relevant here. As the parties acknowledged at
the March 31, 2003, hearing before the Tribunal, the 4x arbitri of the situs of this
proceeding (the United States) applies.

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
March 8, 2004

Page 4

[W]e should, if anything, be even more scrupulous to
safeguard the impartiality of arbitrators than judges, since
the former have completely free rein to decide the law as
well as the facts and are not subject to appellate review.
We can perceive no way in which the effectiveness of the
arbitration process will be hampered by the simple
requirement that arbitrators disclose to the parties any
dealings that might create an impression of possible bias.

Commonwealth Coatings Corp. v. Continental Casualty Co., 393 U.S. 145, 149 (1968) (vacating
an arbitral award where the designated neutral arbitrator had an ongoing relationship
with one of the parties, despite having “no reason” to suspect actual bias); see also, ¢.g.,
Schmitz v. Zilveti, 20 F.3d 1043, 1046-47 (9th Cir. 1994) (also vacating an arbitration
award, in case where one of the three arbitrators was accused of evident partiality for
failing to disclose a prior relationship between the arbitrator’s law firm and one of the
parties).

Importantly, the fact that the Partial Award may have been unanimous in its issuance
cannot cure the taint. E.g, id.

Ill. Grant Of Methanex’ Request Would Not Cause Prejudice To The United
States.

‘The UNCITRAL Rules’ mandate to provide a full and fair opportunity for the parties to
assert their positions trumps any concerns of prejudice that may be raised by the lapse of
time between issuance of the Partial Award and submission of the Request. Methanex
has not waited idly and silently between the time of the Partial Award and the
submission of the Request. After first seeking and receiving clarification of the Partial
Award from the Tribunal in September 2002, Methanex submitted its Second Amended
Statement of Claim in November. As the United States itself acknowledged in its
February 12, 2004, letter to the Tribunal, the assertions raised in the Request are not new
or unexpected — they are “closely tied to Methanex’s positions on the merits of the case”
as set forth in that Second Amended Statement of Claim. See, ¢.g., | 293 (making similar
assertions). It was the United States’ failure to respond to this issue in its response to
that Second Amended Statement that triggered the Request.

  

 

Nevertheless, even if the Tribunal were to consider possible prejudice that might be
caused to the parties should it entertain the Request, there is no such prejudice here. The
‘Tribunal instructed the parties in the Partial Award to submit an amended claim and

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
March 8, 2004

Page 5

subsequent pleadings that set forth the entire evidentiary bases for their claims.’ A
revision to the threshold requirements contained in Article 1101(1) would have no
bearing on those pleadings and would not require any further supplementation. In
addition, revisiting the Partial Award now would allow the parties ample time to
incorporate any change into their preparations for the anticipated June hearing. Indeed,
the United States already has offered to respond to the Request in its next submission.
Moreover, Methanex’ consistency and persistence in raising this issue, beginning in
August 2002 with its request for clarification of the Partial Award, and continuing with
its Second Amended Statement of Claim and its more recent Request, belies any
suggestion that the United States might be prejudiced by the timing of the Request.

CONCLUSION

‘The question of what level of “legally significant connection” is required by NAFTA
Article 1101(1) in a case alleging denial of national treatment under Article 1102 is one of
first impression in the NAFTA jurisprudence. The Tribunal’s decision in the Partial
Award will have significant ramifications for U.S., Canadian, and Mexican investors
beyond Methanex. On an issue of such importance, where one of the original Tribunal
members who tendered that decision since has resigned in the face of allegations of bias
and where there can be no credible claim of prejudice, Methanex respectfully submits
that the Tribunal must consider its Request.

Respectfully submitted,

Christopher Dugan
for PAUL, HASTINGS, JANOFSKY & WALKER LLP

cc: Barton Legum, Esq.
Margrete Stevens, Esq.

WDC/268053.1

* As the Tribunal recognized in its February 20, 2004, letter, Methanex separately has
asked that the Tribunal authorize Methanex to obtain additional evidence relating to its
case, That submission is unrelated to the issues addressed herein and will remain
necessary regardless of how the Tribunal rules on the Request.

