IN THE ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER 11
OF THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
AND UNDER THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

BETWEEN

METHANEX CORPORATION,

Claimant/Investor,

- and -

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

Respondent/Party.

 

REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION
OF CHAPTERS J AND K OF THE PARTIAL AWARD

January 28, 2004

Christopher F. Dugan

Claudia T. Callaway

Alexander W. Koff

Quisaira A. Whitney

Sabrina M. Rose-Smith

Matthew S. Dunne

PAUL, HASTINGS, JANOFSKY & WALKER LLP
Tenth Floor

1299 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.

Washington, DC 20004-2400

Counsel to Methanex Corporation

I. INTRODUCTION

1. It is well-settled under international law — which governs the resolution of
this dispute — that a violation of “national treatment” does not require a finding of intent.
In other words, a government measure may deny national treatment in violation of treaty
obligations even if the adopting party did not intend to discriminate against the foreign
enterprise or investor. The United States itself, in past proceedings under Chapter 12 of
NAFTA, has endorsed this position. (See infra.)

2. In its Partial Award on Jurisdiction (the “Partial Award”) in this
proceeding, this Tribunal, as formerly constituted, turned that precedent on its head. It
determined that Article 1101(1) of the NAFTA, which states simply that Chapter 11
applies to measures “relating to” investors or investments, actually erects an “intent”
requirement that Methanex, which alleges a denial of national treatment in violation of
Article 1102, must satisfy. Moreover, that intent, in the words of the Tribunal, must be a
“specific intent to harm suppliers of goods and services to... MTBE producers.” Partial
Award at J 154. Although Methanex is confident that it can show this specific intent, the
Tribunal, in arriving at this conclusion, did not apply accepted principles of international
law, treaty interpretation, and its own determination to consider the entire “context” of
Chapter 11 and of NAFTA in construing Article 1101. In effect, the Partial Award
creates a dramatic, new substantive requirement of proof for a national treatment claim —
a requirement without any support in the text or structure of NAFTA and without
precedent in international law.

3. Moreover, the Tribunal’s articulated purpose behind this step — to create a
“gatekeeper” that can deter unwarranted claims — is already effectively addressed through

the “in like circumstances” requirement of Article 1102, similar standards embodied in

the other substantive provisions of Chapter 11, and the causation requirement of Articles
1116 and 1117. The creation of an additional gatekeeper restriction in Article 1101 that
is narrower than the express gatekeeper restrictions that already appear in the text of
Article 1102 and the remainder of the Chapter is inconsistent with international law and
undermines NAFTA’s protective purpose.

4. Accordingly, Methanex respectfully requests that the Tribunal reconsider
and amend Chapters J and K of its Partial Award to eliminate any “intent” requirement.
IL. BASIS FOR RECONSIDERATION

5. The Tribunal has the power to grant this Request. Nothing in the
UNCITRAL Rules which govern this proceeding precludes reconsideration of a Partial
Award, particularly where, as here, that award addressed only jurisdictional issues and
the proceeding itself remains in progress. Article 15 of the Rules permits the Tribunal to
conduct this proceeding, subject to the Rules, as it deems “appropriate.” Article 22
expressly authorizes the Tribunal to permit additional written statements beyond the
statement of claim and response as it sees fit. Because nothing in the Rules precludes this
Request, the Tribunal is empowered to reconsider its prior decision. Methanex
respectfully suggests that exercise of that power is appropriate here for two principal
reasons.

A. The Tribunal’s Decision Sets It At Odds With Accepted Precedent

6. First, as noted, the Tribunal’s decision to require intent to harm in this
case, a case where central feature alleges a violation of NAFTA Article 1102, represents
a substantial departure from the accepted international understanding of national
treatment obligations. The Tribunal’s interpretation of Article 1101(1) was a matter of
first impression under NAFTA and, as such, warrants careful review. Methanex raised

2

this issue in its Second Amended Statement of Claim (see J 293, contending that, at most,
the only “intent” that may be probative under Article 1101(1) is “intent to deny NAFTA’s
substantive protections”). The United States did not respond to that characterization in its
subsequent submission, leading Methanex to submit this separate Request.

B. The Resignation Of One Member Of The Tribunal Due To An
Appearance Of Partiality Warrants Reconsideration Of The Award

7. Second, in this instance the composition of the Tribunal has changed since
the Partial Award. One of its members resigned in response to objections by Methanex
of partiality toward the United States due to his and his firm’s longstanding and close
relationship with former California governor Gray Davis, whose actions are central to
this proceeding. Since the resignation, a new arbitrator has joined the Tribunal.
Accordingly, a reexamination of the Partial Award is appropriate. See, e.g., Schmitz v.
Zilveti, 20 F.3d 1043, 1046-47 (9th Cir. 1994) (vacating an arbitration award where one
of the three arbitrators was accused of evident partiality for failing to disclose a prior
relationship between the arbitrator’s law firm and one of the parties, notwithstanding that
the other two arbitrators had joined in the award).

Til. THE PARTIAL AWARD

8. Article 1101 states that Chapter 11 “applies [inter alia] to measures
adopted or maintained by a Party relating to . . . investors of another party [and]
investments of investors of another Party in the territory of the Party...” The Tribunal,
in its Partial Award, rejected Methanex’ position that “relating to,” as used in Article
1101, means “affecting.” Instead, the Tribunal agreed with the United States that a
“legally significant connection” between the measure and the investor or investment is

required. Partial Award at J 139.

9. The Tribunal did not clearly define what a “legally significant connection”
entails, noting instead that “it is perhaps not easy to define the exact dividing line, just as
it is not easy in twilight to see the divide between night and day. Nonetheless, whilst the
exact line may remain undrawn, it should still be possible to determine on which side of
the divide a particular claim must lie.” Id.

10. The Tribunal discussed at some length its concern that Methanex’
interpretation of the article would “impose[] no practical limitation” to Chapter 11
claims, resulting in “no significant threshold to a NAFTA arbitration.” Jd. at {J 137-139.
Ultimately, the Tribunal reached its decision, “[p]ursuant to the rules of interpretation
contained in Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention,” based on “the ordinary meaning of
this phrase [“relating to”] within its particular context and in the light of the particular
object and purpose in NAFTA’s Chapter 11.” Jd. at § 147. The Tribunal emphasized that
it was not reaching the United States’ arguments based on Article 31(3) of the Vienna
Convention. Id.

A. The Tribunal Interpreted “Legally Significant Connection” To
Require Intent

11. For purposes of this proceeding, however, the Tribunal did issue a clear
and unequivocal decision — in order to establish a denial of national treatment,
expropriation and Methanex’ other claims, Methanex must establish that the measures
were intended not simply to deny the protections of the treaty but specifically “to harm
suppliers of goods and services to... MTBE producers.” Jd. at § 154.

12. In response to a request from Methanex for clarification of its decision, the
Tribunal purported to disclaim any position that intent is always required under Article 1101,

stating that intent is necessary here because, “in this case, Methanex’ claim is not concerned

with different factual circumstances (i.e., where that intent is absent).” September 24, 2002,
Letter at 7. The Tribunal did not explain precisely of what those hypothetical “different
factual circumstances” might consist.

13. Methanex has alleged, inter alia, denial of national treatment. Certainly,
Methanex also has alleged, in support of that claim, that California Governor Davis and
the California legislature intended to deny national treatment. However, as described
below, the absence of illicit intent cannot excuse a measure that, in fact, does violate
Article 1102’s proscription. The Tribunal’s September 24, 2002 explanation of its intent
requirement confuses the distinction between a helpful fact and a jurisdictional
prerequisite.

B. Methanex Seeks Review Only Of The “Intent” Requirement

14. Methanex does not seek modification of the bulk of the Partial Award, nor
even of the entirety of Chapters J and K of that award. Indeed, Methanex accepts the
Tribunal’s conclusion that Article 1101(1) requires a “legally significant connection”
between a challenged measure and an investor or investment. Instead, the difficulty with
the Tribunal’s decision is its assertion that, here, in the context of a claim alleging denial
of national treatment, Methanex can only have its claim heard if it can show a specific
intent to harm Methanex (or other foreign methanol producers). This creates a
jurisdictional requirement not found in international law or in the text of NAFTA.
Accordingly, Methanex submits that a “claimant-specific” intent standard requires

reconsideration.

IV. ARGUMENT

A. Denial Of National Treatment Under NAFTA And International Law
Does Not Require Intent

15. A central component of Methanex’ challenge to the measures at issue in
this case rests on an alleged violation of Article 1102 of the NAFTA. That Article
requires each Party, inter alia, to “accord to investors of another Party” treatment “no less
favorable than the most favorable treatment accorded, in like circumstances,” to its own
investors and their investments “with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.” This
provision, known as the “national treatment” requirement, forms a key part of Methanex’
claim in this proceeding. Nothing in the text of Article 1102 explicitly or implicitly
requires a showing of specific intent to harm a foreign investor or its investments. !

16. | No NAFTA tribunal has squarely addressed the question of whether an
investor claim under Article 1102 alleging denial of “national treatment” requires a
showing of intent to discriminate on the part of the governmental party enacting the
measure. However, the NAFTA precedent under the analogous provision in Chapter 12
demonstrates that intent is not necessary to claims of denial of national treatment under

other chapters of the NAFTA.

' As noted, Methanex is confident it can meet the Tribunal’s specific intent test. See
Methanex’ Second Amended Statement of Claim at 25-66. California’s
discriminatory intent can be inferred from: the foreseen disparate impact of the
California measures on Methanex and its investments ({J 166-173); the United States’
protection of the ethanol industry ({§ 174-190); the fact that MTBE was banned while
other dangerous chemicals were not ({§ 191-201); the role played by Archer Daniels
Midland Company in securing the ban on its competitors (J 202-238); analogous cases
in which states have disguised economic protectionism as environmental regulation

(§§ 239-259); and nationalistic bias in the United States against the “foreign”
methanol/MTBE industry ({§ 260-280).

17. In Cross-Border Trucking Services (USA-MEX-98-2008-01), Final
Report of the Panel (Feb. 6, 2001), the United States itself argued that it was not
necessary to prove intent to establish a national treatment violation. Jd. at § 191. The
Tribunal accepted that argument and, in interpreting Article 1202, concluded that “the
Panel declines to examine the motivation for the U.S. decision . . . it confines its analysis
to the consistency or inconsistency of that action with NAFTA.” Id. at §§ 214. The
operative language of both Article 1102 and Article 1202 — other than the fact that the
former deals with investors and investments and the latter with service providers — is
identical. There is no basis to infer an intent requirement as to one provision and not the
other.

18. Moreover, other sources of international law addressing the scope and
nature of obligations of national treatment are equally clear: a governmental measure can
violate that government’s national treatment obligation irrespective of whether the
measure was intended to discriminate against foreign entities.> Two examples make this
plain:

= The WTO Appellate Body has dismissed the relevance of legislative or
regulatory intent in determining whether a measure violates the
requirements of GATT’s Article III national treatment obligation. As
the Appellate Body has stated, “[t]his is not an issue of intent. It is not

necessary for a panel to sort through the many reasons legislators and

? Article 1131 requires that, in interpreting the provisions of Chapter 11, the Tribunal
look to “applicable rules of international law.” See also Opinion of Sir Robert Jennings,
Exhibit C to Second Amended Statement of Claim (“Jennings Opinion”) at 7-11 (noting
the relevance of international law and particularly “[e]xisting WTO/GATT and
competition law decisions” which “are too much directly on point to be ignored.”).

7

regulators often have for what they do and weigh the relative
significance of those reasons to establish legislative or regulatory
intent.” Japan — Taxes on Alcoholic Beverages, (WT/DS8, DS10,
DS11/AB/R) (4 Oct. 1996) (Adopted 1 Nov. 1996), pp. 27-28; see also,
e.g., Chile — Taxes on Alcoholic Beverages, (WT/DS87, DS110/AB/R)
(13 Dec. 1999) (Adopted 12 Jan. 2000) at § 62 (“The subjective
intentions inhabiting the minds of individual legislators or regulators do
not bear upon the inquiry ... [unless] they are given objective
expression in the statute itself[.]”) (emphasis original).

= Arbitral tribunals convened under the predecessor to the NAFTA, the
Canadian-United States Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA), earlier
reached the same conclusion. See, e.g., In The Matter of Canada’s
Landing Requirement for Pacific Coast Salmon and Herring, Panel
Report (Oct. 16, 1989) at {7.08 (stating that “the Panel considered that
it must examine the objective factors that go into a decision to adopt
such a measure[.]”).

B. Nothing In The Text, Structure Or Purpose Of Chapter 11 Supports
An “Intent” Requirement

19. Of course, the fact that an intent requirement is without precedent in the
context of a national treatment obligation would not have precluded the drafters of
NAFTA from imposing one. But nothing in the text, structure, or purpose of Chapter 11
supports such a finding. Indeed, as explained below, the “gatekeeping” function the

Tribunal sought to affix solely upon Article 1101 is found in other provisions of the

Chapter, making implausible the yet-to-be-realized endless parade of potential Chapter
11 claims imagined by the Tribunal.
1. The Text Of Article 1101 Is Simple And Straightforward
20. — Article 1101(1) itself — the provision on which the Tribunal based its
determination — is silent as to the question of intent. As already noted, it requires only
that a measure “relate to” an investor or investment. Moreover, other limitations
contained elsewhere in Article 1101 are set out expressly and unequivocally.
= Article 1101(2) reserves for Parties the right to “perform exclusively
the economic activities set out in Annex III and to refuse to permit the
establishment of investment in such activities.”
= Article 1101(3) excludes from the scope of Chapter 11 measures that
are covered by Chapter 14 (financial services).
= Article 1101(4) warns that nothing in Chapter 11 “shall be construed
to prevent a Party from providing a service or performing a function
. .. ina manner that is not inconsistent with this Chapter.”
In each instance, where the drafters of Chapter 11 felt a limitation to the general
statement of scope in Article 1101 to be important, they spelled it out explicitly. That the
NAFTA drafters might have intended a further limitation of the magnitude of the specific
“intent” adopted by the Tribunal, but somehow failed to mention it in the provision at
issue, is dubious.
21. That is particularly so when Article 1101 is understood in light of Article
1102, the national treatment provision. The elements of national treatment under
international law — particularly, the immateriality of the intent behind an allegedly
discriminatory measure — are well-established. Importing an intent requirement into

9

Article 1101(1) would have the effect of requiring intent as a prerequisite for a national
treatment claim. As the United States has pointed out (in another context), “if the
governments intended to depart from the general principles of international law, then the
‘agreement would naturally have found direct expression in the protocol itself and would
not have been left to doubtful interpretation.” United States April 14, 2001, Reply
Memorial on Jurisdiction (“Reply”) at 12 (quoting Sambiaggo Case, 10 R.LA.A. 499,
521 (Italy-Venez. Mixed Cl. Comm’n of 1903)). Surely, in the face of the CUSFTA and
other precedent, again in the words of the United States, “[mJore than silence . . . is
required to derogate from an established principle of international law such as this.”
Reply at 51.

2. The Tribunal Ignored The Role Of Other Provisions In

Chapter 11 In Articulating Article 1101(1)’s “Gatekeeper”
Function

22. The bulk of the Tribunal’s criticism of Methanex’ interpretation of Article
1101 and the basis upon which it created the intent requirement was a belief that the
article should serve as a “gatekeeper” for Chapter 11 claims and that, in the absence of a
“significant threshold” for applicability of the chapter, a veritable “infinity” of claims
might result. Partial Award at ¥ 137. In warning of this potential deluge of actions, the
Tribunal ignored the fact that in over a decade of practice under NAFTA, the frequency
of Chapter 11 claims more accurately is characterized as a trickle.

23. More fundamentally, the Tribunal ignored the question of how the other
provisions of Chapter 11 themselves limit prospective claims. As Sir Robert Jennings
aptly explains, “[t]hose who control passage through a gateway normally need to know

where one is intending to go or to do when through the gate.” Jennings Opinion at 3.

Without considering what lies “inside the gates,” an assessment of the adequacy of the
gateway is impossible.

24. — Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention requires no less, mandating
evaluation of the language’s “context” and the purpose of the Chapter in construing the
article’s meaning. See also S.D. Myers v. Canada (NAFTA Chapter 11 award,
concurring opinion of Arbitrator Bryan Schwartz dated Nov. 12, 2000) at § 55

(commenting that “relating to’ in Article 1101” should not be read “‘in isolation,” but
instead should be understood “in conjunction with the specific provisions of NAFTA that
protect investors. It would be rare that the clear purpose and scope of such provisions
will be frustrated by reference to Article 1101.”).

25. A review of the substantive provisions of Chapter 11 makes plain that,
even without the type of intent requirement the Tribunal has ordered, claims under
Chapter 11 will remain quite narrowly conscribed. In the case of claims of denial of
national treatment under Article 1102, for example, claimants will still need to establish
“like circumstances” in order to substantiate their assertions. This is not a limitless
standard, notwithstanding what the Partial Award may suggest. See Methanex’ Second
Amended Statement of Claim at {J 304-307 and Exhibit D thereto (expert opinion of Dr.
Claus Dieter-Ehlermann) (providing discussion of the methodology and criteria for
determining “likeness” under WTO law and NAFTA). The “in like circumstances” test
requires a claimant to establish a likeness between the investor or investment at issue and
the U.S. counterpart. As Methanex has argued in its briefing to the Tribunal, the “in like

circumstances” standard looks principally to the competitive relationship among the

investments, the investors, and the products. “Cleopatra’s nose,” in the words of the
Tribunal (Partial Award at § 137), this is not.

26. Moreover, Articles 1116 and 1117 expressly require claimants to establish
a connection between the acts of which they complain and the injuries they allegedly
have suffered — those injuries must be “by reason of, or aris[e] out of” the claimed
breach. Parties with only attenuated or remote involvement will not be able to sustain
that burden.> These provisions must be considered in evaluating any interpretation of
Article 1101. A construction that requires that a measure affect an investor and that the
claimant demonstrate that its injuries “arise out of” that measure is far from the “chaos”
scenario that the Tribunal feared. Partial Award at § 137.

3. The Tribunal’s Ruling Impermissibly Superimposes An
Additional Requirement On The Substantive Provisions Of
Chapter 11

27. The Tribunal not only discounted the express textual limitations on the
ability of investors to bring claims found in the substantive provisions of Chapter 11, it
also failed to consider the impact of its construction of Article 1101(1) on those other
provisions. The Tribunal has required that Methanex, in order to assert denial of national
treatment under Article 1102, show that California specifically intended to harm it or
other foreign methanol producers. What the NAFTA drafters failed to require in the text
of Article 1102 itself, the Tribunal now has imposed through the two simple words
“relating to” in Article 1101(1).
> To take just one example hypothesized by the Tribunal (in 4 137): the Tribunal’s
imagined supplier to a supplier “towards infinity” would have no ability to establish
causation between injury and breach under any reasonable legal formulation. The parties
may dispute the precise application of the causation requirement in Articles 1116 and
1117; that the two articles require some form of legally cognizable causation is not in
question.

12

28. This approach violates the settled maxim of treaty interpretation that a
specific provision controls a more general one as to the same subject matter. The United
States itself has trumpeted this “well-established principle of generalia specialbus non
derogant” in this proceeding. United States Amended Statement of Defense at § 364.

The “generalia” principle can have a number of
applications. It does not merely involve that general
principles do not derogate from specific ones, but also, or
perhaps as an alternative method of statement, that a matter
governed by a specific provision, dealing with it as such, is
thereby taken out of the scope of a general provision
dealing with the category of subject to which that matter

belongs, and which therefore might otherwise govern it as
part of that category.

Fitzmaurice, Sir Gerald, The Law and Procedure of the International Court of Justice
1951-4: Treaty Interpretation and Other Treaty Points, 33 Brit. Y.B. Int. 203, 236
(1957).

29. The International Court of Justice (“ICJ”) invoked this principle of treaty
interpretation as far back as 1948, in rejecting an approach quite similar to that adopted
by the Tribunal in the Partial Award. In Conditions of Admission of a State to
Membership in the United Nations, 1948 1.C.J. 57 (May 28), the ICJ considered whether
a U.N. member nation could base a decision on a state application for U.N. membership
on factors other than those set forth in Article 4 of the United Nations Charter. As
understood by the ICJ, Article 4 delineates four substantive requirements for membership
and empowers the General Assembly to admit members meeting those requirements upon
“recommendation by the Security Council.” Jd. at 64. Those arguing in favor of the
ability to reject prospective members for reasons other than as stated in Article 4 pointed

to the “recommending” (in effect, the gatekeeper) role of the Security Council and to

Article 24 of the Charter, which grants the Security Council additional powers to
maintain “international peace and security.”

30. The ICJ found no basis in either source to add to or amend the
requirements for membership explicitly set forth in Article 4. Jd. Having addressed the
specific subject matter of membership eligibility in Article 4, no other article of the
Charter could add to or derogate from those requirements.

31. In this case, only Article 1102 directly addresses the requirement of
national treatment for investors and their investments. That article expressly sets forth
the parameters of the national treatment obligation, limiting the requirement of not-less-
favorable treatment to foreign investors or investments that are “in like circumstances” to
their domestic counterparts. Article 1102’s specific focus removes the “matter” of
national treatment and what it requires from the purview of Article 1101. Put another
way, any further limitation on the national treatment obligation owed to investors that is
not specified in Article 1102 represents an impermissible additional condition on the
scope of that obligation and is “equivalent, not to interpreting the [chapter], but to
reconstructing it.” Maritime Delimitation in the Area between Greenland and Jan
Mayen, 1993 I.C.J. 38 (June 14) (internal citation omitted).

32. The wisdom of this well-established principle is readily apparent in this
case. The Tribunal’s approach, if not reconsidered, employs an unjustified inference
from the more general Article 1101 to undermine the protections specifically created for
investors and investments and expressly delineated in Article 1101 — protections that

embody a core purpose of Chapter 11 of NAFTA.

Vv. CONCLUSION

33. Article 1101 serves several important purposes. It explains that the rights
established under Chapter 11 apply to investors, sets out several express and clearly
delineated limitations to the scope of the Chapter, and notes which provisions confer
rights on investors from countries not party to the NAFTA and which confer rights only
on investors from one NAFTA Party in the territory of another. What it does not and
cannot do, however, is create additional elements to the substantive protections
enumerated in the chapter, most notably, Article 1102 and the requirement of national
treatment. Chapters J and K of the Tribunal’s Partial Award do just that. By reading
Article 1101 in isolation from the remainder of the Chapter and without regard for the
nature of Methanex’ claims, the Tribunal has created a new requirement for proof of a
national treatment violation that heretofore was unknown under NAFTA and other
international legal jurisprudence. Methanex respectfully requests that this reconstituted

Tribunal reconsider and correct that precipitous step.

Dated: January 28, 2004 Respectfully submitted,

PAUL, HASTINGS, JANOFSKY & WALKER LLP

By:
Christopher F. Dugan
Claudia T. Callaway
Alexander W. Koff
Quisaira A. Whitney
Sabrina M. Rose-Smith
Matthew S. Dunne
Tenth Floor
1299 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20004-2400
Telephone: (202) 508-9500
Facsimile: (202) 508-9700

Counsel to Methanex Corporation

WDC/262227.6

Il.

V.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page
INTRODUCTION 1
BASIS FOR RECONSIDERATION .......c.cecececeeeseeeeeeseeeeesesteesesteeeeeeseeneneaeaeaeee 2
A. The Tribunal’s Decision Sets It At Odds With Accepted Precedent......... 2
B. The Resignation Of One Member Of The Tribunal Due To An
Appearance Of Partiality Warrants Reconsideration Of The Award......... 3
THE PARTIAL AWARD 3
A. The Tribunal Interpreted “Legally Significant Connection” To
Require Intent. 4
B. Methanex Seeks Review Only Of The “Intent” Requirement............... 5
ARGUMENT 6
A. Denial Of National Treatment Under NAFTA And International
Law Does Not Require Intent «00.0... cceeceseeseeseeeteseeneeeeeseeseeeeeneeeeeeeeneees 6
B. Nothing In The Text, Structure Or Purpose Of Chapter 11 Supports
An “Intent” Requirement
1. The Text Of Article 1101 Is Simple And Straightforward ............ 9
2. The Tribunal Ignored The Role Of Other Provisions In
Chapter 11 In Articulating Article 1101(1)’s “Gatekeeper”
Function 10
3. The Tribunal’s Ruling Impermissibly Superimposes An
Additional Requirement On The Substantive Provisions Of
Chapter 11 12
CONCLUSION 15

 

