A

 

PTER 11 ORTH A E
ND THE. ARB
BETWEEN:
‘ METBANEX CORPORATION
Claima:
and

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
BezpondenyParty

THE WRITTEN REASONS FOR

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

OF 7™ SEPTEMBER 2000

ON THE PLACE OF THE ARBITRATION

 

THE TRIBUNAL:

William Rowley QC;
‘Warren Christopher Esq;
V.V. Veeder QC (Chairman)

Ii -

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction

The Disputing Parties’ Cases
The Claimant’s Submissions

The Respondent’s Submissions

The Tribunal’s Reasons

The Tribunal's Decision

02

06

09

THE TRIBUNAL'S WRITTEN REASONS
FOR ITS DECISION OF 7* SEPTEMBER 2000
ON THE PLACE OF THE ARBITRATION

I- INTRODUCTION

The Disputing Parties did not agree on the place of the arbitration. Pursuam to item $ of
the Order of the First Procedural Meeting held on 29 June 2000, each of the Disputing
Pardes was invited by the Tribunal to identify the place of the arbitration to be selected
by the Tribunal in the exercise of its discretion under Article 1130 of the North American ~
Free Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”) and Anicle 16 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
(the “UNCITRAL Rules”), the parties having sgrocd and confirmed to the Tribunal that
this arbitration is subject to those Rules,

Article 1130(b) of NAFTA provides : “Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, a
Tribunal shall hold an arbitration in the territory of & Party that is a party to the New
York Convention, selected in accordance with: ... (h) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
if the arbitration is under those Rules.” Article 16(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules provides: “Uniess the parties have agreed upon the place where the arbitration ts
to be held, such place shall be determined by the arbitral tribunal, having regard to the
circumstances af the arbitration.” This latter provision refers to the legal place or “seat”
of the arbitration as distinct from the geographical place of the arbitration’s hearing or
hearings and deliberations by the Tribunal, a distinction to which the Tribunal returns
below.

In compliance with item 12 of that same Order of 29° June 2000, the Claimant filed its
written submissions on 16" August 2000; and the Respondent filed its written
submissions on 1" September 2000. The issue was then addsessed more fulty by both
parties in oral argument during the Second Procedural Hearing, which was hcld on 7
September 2000 at the World Bank, Washington DC, USA . The geographical place of

-2-

that hearing was expressly agreed by the Disputing Parties and fixed by the Tribunal
without prejudice to the position of either party on the legal place of the arbitration.

di - THE DISPUTING PARTIES’ CASES

ree?

The Parties’ reapective cases are helpfully set out in their respective written
to which we retum below, aa supplemented by their ora! submissions, There was much
common ground as to the circumstances in this arbitration which were relevant to the
exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion in selecting tbe place of arbitration.

First, both Parties referred to factors listed in paragraph 22 of the UNCITRAL Notes on
Organizing Arbitral Proceedings (the “UNCITRAL Notes”), which provides as follows:

“22, Various factual and legal jactors influence the choice of the place of
arbitration, and their relative importance varies from case to case. Among the
more prominent factors are: (a) suitability of the law on arbitral procedure af the
place of arbitration; (6) whether there is a multilateral or bilcteral reaty on
enforcement of arbitral awards between the State where the arbitration takes
place’ aru the State or States where the award may have to be enforced; (c)
convenience of the parties and the arbitrators, including the travel distances; (d)
availability and cost of support services needed; and (e) location of the subject~
mnatier in dispute and proximity of evidence.”

The UNCITRAL. Notes are not legally binding, both specifically in this case and more
generally as paragraph 2 of the Notes makes clear. Nonetheless this list of factore
provides a helpful etarting-point to the practical exercise required under Article 16(1) of
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

Second, although “neutrality” in the place of arbitration was invoked to differing degrees
by the Disputant Parties, both Disputing Parties were agreed that the Tribunal’ choice of
place should be limited to a place within cither Canada or the USA, excluding any place
elsewhere within or without another Contracting State. By express agreement of the

Dispuuing Parties in this case, the Tribunal was therefore limited to selecting a place in
either Canada or the USA notwithstanding the Claimant's Canadian nationality and the
identity of the Respondent, the United States of America.

The Claimant’s Submissions: The Claimant primarily contended that the place of
arbitration should be Toronto, Ontario in Canada based upon the following principal —
factors taken ftom the UNCITRAL Notes:

Factors A + B: “Suitability of the Law on Arbitral Procedure/Enforcement”: The
Claimant accepted that under this factor there was not a great deal to choose between a
place of arbitration in either Canada or the United States, Nonetheless, the Claimant
contended that Toronto was to be preferred over any seat in the United States because
Ontario has adopied the UNCITRAL Model Law, which (it submitted) dovetailed with
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and the 1958 New York Arbitration Convention, to
which both Canade and the Respondent are panies. In addition, the Claimant contended
that the Model Law left little room for intervention by the Canadian Court, which could
be of particular significance where (as is the case here) third persons seek leave to
imtervene in the arbitration and where any decision by the Tribunal on such intervention
might be challenged by such persons before state courts. In these circumstances, the
Claimant submitted, it is best for the arbitration to be situated in a Jegal regime where the
possibilities in which a state court can review the Tribunal’s decisions are both codified
and restricted, as under the UNCITRAL Model Law.

Factor C “Convenience of the Parties and the Arbitrators”: The Claimant argued that
the test to be applied is a balance of the relative “inconvenicnce” of the place of
arbitration to the parties and the arbitrators. As to the letter, it noted that one of the
members of the Tribunal ie resident in Toranto, thus reducing accommodation and waved
costs. AS to the former, it contended that Toronto ia the convenient half-way point
between the Claimant's headquasters in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada and the
Respondent’s governmental seat in Washington DC, USA. The Claimant relied on the
fact that the Respondent maintained a consulate in Toronto; and it contended that the fact

o4e

that the Respondent may have many different departments involved in the case was no
different from the Claimant having many different officers and directors also involved
in the case. In addition, the Claimant argued that the Tribunal should have regard to the
fact tbat the case has attracted considerable publicity in the USA (adverse to the
Claimant); and that there would be lese possible disruption from external sources if the
place of arbitration were Toronto away from the USA, particularly California.

1 :

Factor D “Availability/Costs of Support Services”: The Claimant accepted that for this
factor there was not a great deal to choose between the different locations, althouga hotels
and meals would be slightly less expensive in Toronto than Washington DC. The
Claimant also accepted that if the place of arbitration were Toronto, Goods and Services
Tax (“GST”) would have to be charged by the Tribunal for onward payment to the
Canadian tax authorities. However, the Claimant noted that GST could only be charged
to the Claimant because the Respondent would be zero-rated; and as the Claimant alone
would have to pay the GST, it was not to be considered a relevant factor pointing away
from Toronto. Moreover, even if the.place of arbitration were to be in the USA, it was
still possible that GST would be chargeable by the Canadian member of the Tribunal. In
this event, the Claimant undertook to bear that charge by itself; and accordingly on any
view GST was not a citcumstance relevant to the Tribunal’s decision.

Factor E “Location of Subject Matter of Dispute”. The Claimant contended that little
weight should be given to the fact that the legislative measure complained of by the
Claimant was a Californian measure - these are matters of public documented record.
Similarly, the fact of the location of the Claimant's investment body in Dallas, Texas is
not of great importance pointing towards a place in the USA, The Claimant’s real loss is
being suffered at the beadquarters of the Claimant in Vancouver, British Colombia in
Canada, pointing towards Toronto rather than a place in the USA.

“Neutrality” Factor: \ addition to relying upon these factors listed in the UNCITRAL

Notes, the Claimant raised “neutrality” as a fiuther important factor in choosing a place
of arbitration in international commercial arbitrations, such as the present arbitration. In

S$.

this case, so the Claimant submitted, neutrality pointed away from the USA and towards
a city in Canada, such as Toronto, which was neutral as regards both the Claimant and
the Respondent. It was not of course the Claimant’s capital city, unlike Washington DC
for the Respondent.

13. The Claimant placed great emphasis on the need for a place of arbitration to be perceived
as newtral. This naled out any place in California (in particular Sacramento) given the
subject-matter of this arbitration, but equally Washington DC because this case was
being defended by the Reapondent. The Claimant ded that this approach was
consistent with usval practice in international arbitrations. It accepted that the NAFTA
cases decided thus far offer Jittle assistance in this respect, and that the Tribunal would
not in any event be bound to follow any previous decisions in NAFTA arbitrations.
Further, the Claimant contended that neutrality would mle out anywhere in New York
due to the Icgislation recently enacted in that State touching on the subject-mater of the
present dispute; and indeed other like places elsewhere in the USA.

 

14. ‘The Respondent's Submissions: The Respond ded that the place of arbitration
should be Washington DC, USA by reference to the following principal factors, also
taken from the UNCITRAL Notes:

15, Factors A+ B “Suitability of the Law On Arbitral Procedure/Enforcement”: The
Respondent also accepted that on this factor there was little to choose between a place of
arbitration in either Canada or the United States; and it relied on a passage to such effect
in the decision on place of arbitration in Eyl Corporation v. Government of Canada’.

‘The Respondent considered that the UNCITRAL Model Law as applied in Toronto
offered no real benefits over the United States law on arbitral procedure; and in particular
that it would be of no greater assistance ov attempted interventions from third persons

 

* Decision dated 28° November 1997 (Prof Dr Karl-Heins Béckstiegel, Messrs
Charles N. Brower & Mare Lalonde) Regarding the Place of Arbitration in the
NAFTA/UNCITRAL Case: Ethyl Corporation v. Government of Canada 38 Intemational
Legal Materials 704, The claimant had contended for New York and the respondent for
Ottawa or Toronto, with the tribunel selecting Torento.

-6-

wa

18.

istent on judicial review of the Tribunal’s decisions or awards, Indeed, the Respondent
argued that US law is even more deferential to arbitration proceedings in that it does not
allow any appeal by a party during the arbitration.

Further, the Respondent queried (without so contending in this case) whether it was
wholly correct to assume that the Canadian Courts would apply the UNCITRAL Model
Law to a NAFTA arbitration beld in Toronto. The Respondent noted that Section 2(2) of
the Ontario Intesnational Commercial Arbitration Act applies the Mode] Law only to
“international commercial arbitration agreements and awards”, and by itself Chapter 11
of NAFTA is not, of course, a commercial arbitration agreement between the investor-
claimant and the respondent-party state. [f this legal analysis were correct, which would :
be decided by the Canadian Courts and not the Tribunal, an award made in Canada could
Rot be challenged or enforced under the UNCITRAL Mode] Law.

In response, the Claimant relied on the text of the foomote to Article 1 of the
UNCITRAL Model Law widely defining relationships of a “commercial” nature to
include “investment” relationships. However, the issue may remain ss to whether there
could be any relevant “relationship” between an investor and a Party under NAFTA. In
this respect, Article 1136(7) of NAFTA provides that: “A claim that is submitted to
arbivation under this Section shail be considered to arise out of @ commercial
relationship or transaction for purposes of Article ] of the New York Convention and
Article J of the Inter-American Convention.” This express reference to the New York
Convention, omitting any like reference to the UNCITRAL Madel Law, leaves it perhaps
unclear whether that same claim should also be considered to arise out of a commercial
relationship or transaction for the purposes of the Mode! Law.

Subject to this point, the Respondent considered that, both Canada and the United States
being parties to the New York Convention, there was nothing to choose between the two
suggested locations.

20.

21.

Factor C “Convenience of the Parties and the Arbitrators”: The Respondent’s position
was that Toronto would be seriously inconvenient for the Respondent. Its consular post
there is small and inadequate for the purpose of this arbitration, lacking even a law
Ebrary. By contrast the Claimant would suffer no such inconvenience in Washington DC:
its Counsel bas substantial officea there housing over fifty lawyers. The nature of
governmental) decision-making and the necessary involvement of different governmental
departments in this case means that Washington DC is to be favoured over Toronto:
Washington DC is far more convenient to the Respondent than Toronte would be for the
Claimant. The Respondent argued that the differences in terme of convenience of travel
are de minimis. Finally, under this head, the Respondent argued that there was 0
evidence to support the contention of a greater likelihood of interference and disruption
by third persons in Washington DC.

Factor D “Availability/Costs of Support Services”: The Respondent accepted that there
is litle to choose berween the possible locations on this factor, save that the parties could
benefit in Washington DC from the facilities offeréd by the World Bank at relatively lime
cost (compared to commercial facilities in Toronto). The Respondent also raised the
possibility that, in addition to the GST issue, there might be a Provincial Services Tax
payable if the arbitration wero held in Toronto. Otherwise, the Respondent's position was
that costs of support services should not be « significant factor given the magnitude of the
coats of the arbitration generally.

Factor E “Locatio-. of Subject Matter of Dispute”: The Respondent contended that the
location of the subject-matter of the dispute is clearly within the United States of
America, where the measures complained of are in force. In this reepect, it drew the
Tribunal’s attention again ta 9 passage to auch effect in the decision in Ett! Corporation
v, Government of Canada (see above). The Respondent also argucd that it was not open
to the Claimant to contend that it has suffered a loss in Canade: ite claim is brought
under Article 1105 (“Minimum Standard of Treaument") and Article 1110
(“Expropriation and Compensation”) of NAFTA, both of which are concerned with

22.

23.

protection of the “investment”; and that investment is an enterprise located in the United

States, not Canada.

“Neutrality” Factor: The Respondent relied on the historical fact that “perception of a
place as neutral” was removed as a factor fom an earlier draft of the UNCITRAL Notes
on the grounds that it was unclear and potentially confusing’. The Respondent again
referred to a passage supporting its argument in Ethyl! Corporation v. Government of
Canada (see above). In addition, the Respondent noted that NAFTA arbitrations to date
where the respondent hea been Canada have been held in Canada. Insofar as neutrality
is to be considered, it only operated to favour Washington DC over a place in California,
Forther, the issue of neutrality could be addressed by holding the hearings in Washington
DC at the headquarters of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
{"ICSID”) in the World Bank, ICSID being an international organisetion under the
control of no single government.

If] - THE TRIBUNAL'S REASONS

Tu the absence of the parties’ agreement on the place of arbitration (save to exclude any
place outside Canada and the USA), the Tribunal is required to choose for this arbitration
a place of arbitration in either Canada or the USA in accordance with Asticle 1130(b) of
NAFTA and Article 16(1)of the UNCITRAL Rules. Both Canada and the USA have
enacted the 1958 New York Convention, satisfying the requirements of Article 1130(b);
and the issue tums on the application of Article 16(1) to the particular circumstances of
this arbitration.

 

? Report to UNCITRAL, 28° session, Vienna, Paragraph 337, XXVI UNCITRAL

Yearbook 1995.

-9-

24.

26.

Under Article 16(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the place of the arbitration is the legal
place, or “seat”, of the arbitration, and the Tribunal here makes no decision as to the
geographical piace of any, particular hearing. Any such hearing could be held at a
geographical place elsewhere than the legal place of arbitration in accordance with Asticle
16(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules, depending upon the convenience of witnesses, the parties
and their legal representatives, together with other relevant circumstances. In this
Decision, the Tribunal is not cancemed with any such matters; and both Disputing Parties ©
remain free hereafter to make an application for a particular bearing to be held in (say)
British Colombia, Texas or California, without affecting the legal place of the arbitration
or indeed the place where the Tribunal’s award or ewards are made. Accordingly, the
Tribunal is here concerned solely with the question of the legal place of the arbitration.

The parties’ submissions concentrated on the relative suitability of two places only:
Toronto and Washington DC. There was, rightly for this case, very limited consideration
given to other places within Canada and the USA, although there was some common
ground that it would not be appropriate for the Tribunal to choose Vancouver (where the
Claimant is based) or California (whose legislature passed the measure complained of).
Given that no cogent reasons were advanced for having the arbitration in any other place
in Canada or the United States, the Tribunal has similarly concentrated on the respective
suitability of Toronto and Washington DC for thie arbitration.

The Tribunal begins, as did the parties, with the factors listed in the UNCITRAL Notes.
As regards Factors A and B, the Tribunal accepts that there is little to choose between
Toronto and Washington DC in regard to suitability of the law on arbitral procedure and
enforcement. The Tribunal concludes that, for all practical purposes in regard to this

the two p ial places of arbitration may be idered equally suitable in
terme of the law on arbitral procedure and enforcement.

 

-10-

27,

28.

29,

Given that the Respondent did not eventually press ita query relating to the application
to this arbitration of the UNCITRAL Model Law as enacted in Ontario(see above), the
Tribunal does not think it right for present purposes to sccond-guess the approach of the
‘Canadian Courts. It is morcover an important and controversial issue better decided in
a case which requires an actual decision by the appropriate tribunal, which is not the
present situation in this erbitration. For these reasons, the Tribunal has placed no relience
on the query raised but apparently not invoked by the Respondent. No doubt it may be
soon resolved in another NAFTA arbitration.

As to Factor C, the Tribunal considers that the convenience of the three arbitrators is
irrelevant in this case When measured against other factors invoked by the Disputing
Parties. As regards the convenience of the parties, the Claimant is correct in describing
it here more as the balance of “inconvenience” rather than “convenience”, The Tribunal
also accepte that this balancing exercise must take into account both the parties and their
Counsel, because the laner’s extra travelling time and expenses will be borne ultimately
as costs by the parties.

As for Toronto, the Tribunal decides tbat it pot unduly inconvenient for the Claimant
because, although not being Vancouver, the city is the home office of its Counsel. As for
the Respondent, however, Toronto is materially inconvenient in contrast to Washington
DC. The Tribunal accepts that Washington DC is of considerable convenience to the
Respondent given the manifest involvement of different US governmental departments
in the conduct of this arbitration. Conversely, Washington DC is not unduly
inconvenient to the Claimant in view of the substantial and permanent office that its
Counsel maintains in this city, in addition to its home office in Toronto, The Tribunal
accepts the Respondent’s argument that its consular post in Toronto, providing at best
only limited and temporary facilities to the Respond is not ,

to the offices of a large international law firm, such as the Claimant's Counsel maintains
in Washington DC. The Tribunal notes that the same approach was taken by the
distinguished wibunal in its decision on place of arbitration in Eviyl v Canada.

-l-

 

30.

31.

32.

The Claimant also expressed concerns over the possible disruption by mischievous
outsiders to be arbitration proceedings if held in Washington DC. On the materials
currently available, these concerns are not equally shared by the Tribunal; and in any
event, the risk would appear to be the same for Toronto. The Tribunal considers
nonetheless that the Claimant’s concerns should be met if practically possible. To that
end, if held in Washington DC, the Tribunal ie minded to decide that this arbitration’s
bearings should be held at 1CSID’s facilities in the World Bank in Washington DC, so
that the World Bank’s security arrangements can limit any possibility for disruption.
There are no greater secure facilities available in Toronto. Accordingly, subject to this
qualification regarding security in Washingion DC, the Tribunal does not accept that the —

Claimant's concerns favour Toronto.

As to this factor, the result of the balancing exercise must necessarily tilt the balance in
favour of one party against the other; and the result must disappoint the lamer.
Nonetheless, the Tribunal considers that the relative inconvenience (and convenionce)
fos the Disputing Parties and their Counsel clearly favours Washington DC over Toronto.

As to Factor D relating to the availability and costs of support services, the necessary
support services would be available in both Toronto and Washington DC. The Tribunal
accepts that generally accommodation and other commercial services would be less
expensive in Toronto. However, as regards arbitration rooms and associated services, the
Tribunal does not have in mind using commercial facilities in Washington DC but rather
to accept ICSID’s offer of the conference room, administrative and support facilities at
the World Bank at rates which are apparently less than commercial rates for equivalent
facilitics in Toronto’. Provided thie arbitration makes use of ICSID’s facilities and
although accommodation will be higher in Washington DC, the Tribunal does not
consider that this factor favours Toronto

 

*The Disputing Parties confirmed during the Second Procedural Hearing that this offer

of facilities was not dependent on ICSID being chosen to administer the arbitration pursuant
to its Additional Facility Rules, as was also confirmed by ICSID.

-12-

.

33.

34.

Asto Factor E relating to the location of the subject-matter of the dispute, the Tribunal
considers that it points to a place in the USA as the place of arbitration. As appears from
the Statement of Claim, the Claimant pleads issues whether “the actions of the State of
Celifornia failed ta accord @ minimum standard of treatment required under the
provisions of Article 1103 of the NAFTA” and whether “the actions of the State of
California and its Governor directly or indirectly constitute a measure which is
tantamount to expropriation under Article 1110 of the NAFTA” (paragraphs 39-40).
Further, the Claimant’s claim for damages alleges that the Californian measure “har
negatively impacied and will end Meth US" business of selling methanol for use in
MTBE in California” (paragraph 35 of the Statement of Claim). Methanex US is a Texas
general partnership. The fact that the investor’s parent company (the Claimant) is based
in Vancouver, Canada does not displace the fact that the Claimant’s effective claim is
based on alleged actions in tho USA affecting a US enterprise. In the Tribunal’s view, the
subject-matter of the dispute is not Located in Canada; and accordingly, whilst this factor
beare only slight importance for this arbitration, the Tribunal considers that it favours
Washington DC over Toronto. .

In summary, in the Tribunal’s considerations so far, the factors cited from the
UNCITRAL Notes favour Washington DC over Toronto. The Tribunal now turns ta the
separate issue of neutrality, or perceived neutrality, which the Claimant invokes to favour
Toronto aver Washingion DC.

For the purpose of the present case, the Tribunal does not place any great weight on the
fact that neutrality as a factor was removed ftom the final version of the UNCITRAL
Notes. The Tribunal’s discretion tums on the broad concept of “circumstances” in Anicle
16(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules; and there is no linguistic or logical basis for excluding
neutrality as a factor in an appropriate case. Accordingly, the Tribunal has considered

as a possible cir in this arbi

-13-

36.

37.

38.

39.

 

However, in ing the signifi of lity or perceived lity, the Tribunal
bears in mind (i) that it was open to the NAFTA Panties to agree that in the interests of
neutrality Chapter Eleven disputes should be arbitrated in the territory of any third Party
not directly involved jn the dispute, yct they did not do so; and (ii) that in circumstances
where (as in this case) the disputing parties have further limited the choice of place of
arbitration by their arbitration tribunal to one or the other’s state , a neutral national verve
is simply not possible. In this arbitration, enber the Claimant or the Respondent,
effectively by their own choice, will have to arbitrate in the other’s home state. Strict
neutrality is perhaps a circumstance much to be desited for certain arbitrations; but it was
not so desired by the parties to this arbitration.

Further, the Tribunal does not consider that the interests of neutrality arc best served in
this asbitration by applying any general principle strictly favouring the jurisdiction of the
investor over the jurisdiction of the respondent; or indeed vice-versa. The previous
NAFTA oases to which the Tribunal was referred were not of great assistance on this
point, turning on agreement and otber factors falling far short from establishing any
general principle. In the Tribunal’s view, the matter must be approached on a case-by-
case basis, depending on the individual circumstances of the particular arbitration.

For this arbitration, the Tribunal considers that the requirements of neutrality are
sufficiently met if the place of arbitration lies outside British Colombia (as the home of
the Claimant), California (responsible for the legislative measure in issue) and Texas (as
the home of Methanex US). Once these three locations are exctuded, the question then
arises whether Washington DC should also be excluded on grounds of neutrality because
it is the Respondent's capitaf city, thereby (it might be said in sporting terms) requiring
the Claimant to. play away from home in its opponent’s home stadium.

As to actual neutrality, from the information currently before it, the Tribunal can find no

evidence of any difficulties for the Claimant. As to perceived neutraliry, the point is
answered by accepting ICSID’s offer of the World Bank's facilities, summarised above.

214+

40.

41.

Whilst Washington DC is of course the seat of federal government in the USA, it is also
the seat of the World Bank and ICSID. The World Bank is an independent international

 

organisation with juridical p lity and broad jurisdictional i and

(Anicle VO of its Articles of Agreement); and ICSID similarly has imernational legal
personality and benefits from a wide jurisdictional immunity (Articles 18-20 of the
Convention of the Sewlement of International Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States), The Tribunal considers that the requirements of perceived neutrality in this
cease will be satisfied by holding such hearings in Washington DC as the seat of the World
Bank, as distinct from the seat of the USA’s federal government.

Decision; Balancing all these factors as circumstances relevant to the exercise of its
discretion under Anicle 16(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal considers that
Washington DC, USA should be designated es the place of the arbitration This decision
‘was made and announced to the parties during the Second Procedural Meeting on 7™
September 2000, subject to the subsequent making of reasons by the Tribunal,

Claimant's Change of Counsel: As recorded above, the Tribunal made its decision on 7”
September 2000; and it prepared these reasons on the basis of the circumstances
prevailing on the date of its decision. After that decision, by Notice of Change of Legal
Counsel and Intem to File An Amended Claim dated 30° November 2000, the Claimant
gave written notice to the Tribunal and the Respondent that it bad changed its Counsel
from Mr Casey and Ms Mille of Baker & McKenzie in Toronto, Canada to Messrs
Duggan and Wilderotter of Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue in Washington DC. USA. This
change waa prompted by a conflict of interest between the Claimant and Baker &
McKenzie, a8 was separately explained by Mr Casey in his letter dated 1° December 2000
to the Tribunal and the Respondent. It did not result from the Tribunal’s decision made
on 7 September 2000 designating Washington DC as the place of the arbitration.
Notwithstanding that the Claimant’s new Counsel based in Washington DC could be a
factor reinforcing our decision, we have decided that the Claimant’s change of Counsel
{together with the ivtimated amendment to its claim) should not form the basis for our

-18-

decision or constinte pan of our reasons. Accordingly, the Tribuna! places no raliance
on these matters.

IV- THE TRIBUNAL'S DECISION

a2 For the reasons set oat above, the Tribunal repeats and confirms its decision that
Washington DC, USA shail be the place of arbitration in this srbitrrasion. That
decision was made and announced to the Disputing Parties at the conclaston of the
Second Procedural Meeting on 7* September 2000, subject to the subsequent
nadine of these reasons,

je by the Tribanal on3/ December 2600, ag at Wasbingtan DC, USA.

Hw bhai Verne Lam Yd.
(Cdsirean)

16+

