Paul, Hastings, Janofsky & Walker LP
1299 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, 10th Floor, Washington, DC 20004-2400
telephone 202-508-9500 | facsimile 202-508-9700 | internet www.paulhastings.com

Paul Hastings

Atlanta
Beijing

Hong Kong

London

Los Angeles

New York April 14, 2004 37829.00002
Orange County

San Diego

San Francisco

Shanghai

Stamford V.V. Veeder, QC

Wrehington pe Essex Court Chambers
24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields
London WC2A 3ED
England

J. William Rowley, QC
McMillan Binch

Royal Bank Plaza

Suite 3800, South Tower
Toronto, Ontario M5] 2J7
Canada

Professor W. Michael Reisman
Yale Law School

P.O. Box 208215

New Haven, CT 06520-8215

Re: Methanex Corporation v. United States of America
Dear Members of the Tribunal:

‘The central basis upon which Methanex Corporation (“Methanex”) rests its Request for
Reconsideration (“Request”) is the fact that a key legal ruling in this proceeding was
formulated with the active participation of a Tribunal member who subsequently
resigned in the face of well-founded allegations of bias and conflict of interest. Under
these circumstances, both Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules (“Rules”) and the ex
arbitri of the situs of this proceeding (the United States) demand consideration of
Methanex’ Request.

‘The United States’ March 30, 2004 letter mischaracterizes Methanex’ Request and the
circumstances leading up to its submission and misconstrues the Rules and the /ex arbitri
in an effort to convince this Tribunal to ignore that single, incontestable and dispositive
fact.

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
April 14, 2004

Page 2

I. The United States Mischaracterizes Methanex’ Request And The
Circumstances Leading Up To Its Submission.

A. Methanex Seeks Reconsideration Of A Legal Interpretation
Contained In The Partial Award, Not Of The Partial Award Itself.

Methanex has not asked the Tribunal to vacate the Partial Award. That award, as stated
in Chapter M (the “Operative Part”), among other things, dismissed most of the United
States’ challenges to the admissibility of Methanex’ claims, rejected Methanex’ original
and amended Statements of Claim based on an asserted lack of jurisdiction, and
permitted Methanex to submit a new statement of claim conforming to its ruling.

Methanex’ Request asks that the Tribunal reconsider the precise content of the
jurisdictional standard it adopted in the course of that award — “legally significant
connection” — as applied to Methanex’ remaining claims. Methanex has argued in its
Request that the Tribunal was mistaken in interpreting that standard to require not just
specific intent to deny the benefits of national treatment, but an additional specific intent
to harm Methanex or other non-U.S. methanol producers.

 

 

‘This is not tantamount to seeking reversal of the Partial Award. A “partial” award is
used “to resolve a single claim or a few claims in a case when other claims need further
development or evidence ....”" Partial awards have been used “to separate the merits of
a case from the issue of interest and costs, to dismiss claims involving multiple
respondents, and to dispose of the simpler claims in complicated cases.”” The Tribunal
did just that — it dismissed one category of claims from Methanex’ case (as set forth in
the original Statement of Claim) and required it to re-plead another (those contained in
the first amended Statement of Claim). The “award” is contained in the Operative Part
setting forth those rulings.

Methanex does not seek reconsideration of those decisions. Rather Methanex asks
simply that the Tribunal revisit its interpretation of the legal standard it plans to apply
when reconsidering the re-pleaded claims.

' Stewart A. Baker and Mark D. Davis, THE UNCITRAL ARBITRA’ S
PRACTICE: THE EXPERIENCE OF THE IRAN-UNITED STATES CLAIMS TRIBUNAL (1992) at
164.

* Id.

 

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
April 14, 2004

Page 3

Consequently, even if the UNCITRAL Rules are read as the United States (mistakenly)
contends,’ nothing precludes the Tribunal’s consideration of the substance of Methanex’
Request — namely, that the Tribunal revisit the appropriate meaning of the “legally
significant connection” standard, and, specifically, what sort of “intent” should be
required.

B. Methanex Did Not Wait 18 Months, As The United States Asserts.

Methanex did not wait nearly 18 months to seek reinterpretation of the “legally
significant connection” standard, as the United States incorrectly asserts. Rather, in its
Second Amended Statement of Claim, submitted within three months after the issuance
of the Partial Award and fewer than six weeks after the Tribunal’s interpretive letter,
Methanex again took issue with the Tribunal’s intent requirement. In particular,
Methanex stated:

[The Tribunal] concluded that Article 1101 must act as
the “gatekeeper” for Chapter 11 claims. Methanex does
not seek to relitigate that decision. However, it is equally
a matter of common sense that the “gatekeeper” function
of Article 1101 cannot reduce or narrow the substantive
protections established in Chapter 11 itself. In particular,
with respect to NAFTA violations that are intentional in
nature, such as discrimination or a denial of national
treatment, the relevant “gatekeeping” intent should be an
intent to deny NAFTA’s substantive protections. Put
differently, if a credible claim of discrimination in
violation of Article 1102 is stated, and if a particular
claimant is within the class of enterprises protected by
Article 1102, that should be sufficient to establish a
“legally significant connection” for purposes of

Article 1101.

In short, if improper intent is the limiting principle under Article 1101, then the operative
intent for purposes of Article 1102 must be intent to deny national treatment
(discriminatory intent’), not intent to otherwise harm foreign investors or their
investments.”

° Methanex addresses the United States’ interpretation of Articles 15 and 32 of the Rules
in Section II, infra.

* Second Amended Statement of Claim at § 293 (emphasis added).

> See id, (quoting language from heading section in pleading).

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
April 14, 2004

Page 4

A more straightforward objection to the Tribunal’s formulation of the “legally significant
connection” standard is difficult to imagine.’ Methanex’ recent Request merely restates
and elaborates this same position. The Request does not challenge the Tribunal’s
characterization of Article 1101 as “gatekeeper,” nor the Tribunal’s adoption of the
“legally significant connection” threshold. Instead, in its November 2002 Second
Amended Statement of Claim, and again in its Request, Methanex questions the type and
level of intent that should be required.

Unfortunately, the Tribunal did not respond to Methanex’ November 2002 objection
(just as it did not respond to Methanex’ many requests for additional evidence).’
Similarly, the United States failed to respond to this objection in its Amended Statement
of Defense. Faced with the silence of both the Tribunal and the United States, Methanex
was compelled to resubmit its objection in the form of the Request in February 2004.
Methanex raised this issue prior to its Reply. The failure of the United States to respond
to this in its Amended Statement of Defense waives any objection it now asserts to the
Tribunal’s review.

Il. The UNCITRAL Rules And Lex Arbitri Demand Reconsideration In
These Circumstances.

Even if Methanex’ Request can be construed to require reconsideration of the Partial
Award itself, and even if the United States’ silence in its Amended Statement of Defense
is overlooked, the United States’ opposition should still be ignored. The United States
cannot seriously contest that it would suffer any prejudice from reconsideration, nor can
it dispute that reconsideration would further important principles of fairness and equity
between the parties. Indeed, the United States does not even endorse or otherwise
embrace the merits of the “specific intent to harm” pronouncement."

° Methanex did not caption the relevant section of its pleading “request for
reconsideration” or words to that effect. Yet it is difficult to understand how else the
cited language could have been construed. Disregarding its inclusion based on the
caption would elevate form over substance. Cf, e.g. Ninigret Dev. Corp. v. Narragansett
Indian Wetuomuck. Housing Authority, 207 F.3d 21, 31 (1st Cir. 2000) (considering on appeal
an issue that was briefed by the parties at the trial court level, even though “neither the
parties nor the district court paid much attention to it” and issue was apparently not even
included in appellate briefs); MCI Telecomm. Corp. v. Fed. Communication Comm'n, 917 F.2d
30, 40 n.8 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (similar).

” See Letter from Methanex dated April 7, 2004 (detailing Methanex’ attempts to gain
additional evidence and noting the Tribunal’s failure and delay in ruling on such
requests).

* Methanex addresses this issue in greater detail infra.

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
April 14, 2004

Page 5

Perhaps recognizing the weakness of its position on these points, the United States
focuses on two arguments: (1) that Article 32(2) of the Rules precludes application of
Article 15(1) in this instance; and (2) that the /ex arbitri requires that the Request have
been submitted within three months of issuance of the Partial Award. Both of these
contentions are wrong.

A. Article 32 Does Not Preclude
Review In The Event Of Partiality Or Bias.

‘The United States first points to Article 32(2)’s instruction that “[t]he award shall be
made in writing and shall be final and binding on the parties” as preclusive of Methanex’
request. This provision, the United States contends, “reflect[s] the general principle” that
the award “is entitled to res judicata effect.”

First, Article 32 refers to “the” award, not “all” or “any” awards. The use of the definite
article connotes the final award in the entire proceeding, not interim or partial awards.

Second, the United States offers no basis for its res judicata argument. As the Tribunal is
well aware, “res judicata” is an established principle of U.S. and other countries’ law that
refers to an attempt by the same or different parties to relitigate an issue finally decided
in a previous litigation or other action. It has no bearing in this context, where a
proceeding is continuing with no final disposition. For example, the textbook definition
provides that:

The doctrine of res judicata is composed of two parts:
claim preclusion and issue preclusion. Claim preclusion
prohibits a party from relitigating a previously adjudicated
cause of action, and entirely bars a new lawsuit on the
same cause of action. Issue preclusion, or collateral
estoppel, applies to a subsequent suit between the
parties on a different cause of action. Collateral estoppel
prevents the parties from relitigating any issue that was
actually litigated and finally decided in the earlier
action. The issue decided in the earlier action must be
identical to the one presented in the subsequent action.
‘The most important criterion in determining whether two
suits concern the same controversy is whether they both
arose from the same transactional nucleus of facts. If so,
the judgment in the first action is deemed to adjudicate,
for purposes of the second action, every matter that was

° See Letter from the United States dated March 30, 2004 at 2.

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
April 14, 2004

Page 6

urged, and every matter that might have been urged, in
support of the cause of action or claim in litigation."”

In short, res judicata presumes the existence of two actions: the first in which the issue or
claim is raised, and the second in which the issue or claim is precluded. Here, Methanex
is not raising an issue or claim from a previous litigation or arbitration, nor raising an
issue or claim in “a new lawsuit” or “a subsequent suit.” Rather Methanex raises an issue
disputed throughout this proceeding. The United States’ characterization of the
‘Tribunal’s specific intent test as being “finally decided” is misleading and wrong. The
specific intent test will only be finally decided when this proceeding is concluded and a
final arbitration award issued. Accordingly, the United States reliance on the doctrine of
res judicata is misplaced.

The Tribunal should refer, instead, to the “law of the case” doctrine:

Unlike the more precise requirements of res judicata, law of
the case is an amorphous concept. As most commonly
defined, the doctrine posits that when a court decides
upon a rule of law, that decision should continue to
govern the same issues in subsequent stages in the same
case ... [L]aw of the case doctrine was understandably
crafted with the course of ordinary litigation in mind.
Such litigation proceeds through preliminary stages,
generally matures at trial, and produces a judgment, to
which after appeal, the binding finality of res judicata and
collateral estoppel will attach."

Importantly, the “law of the case” doctrine only “expresses common judicial practice
[and] does not limit the courts’ power” to reconsider earlier conclusions.’* Clearly the
“Jaw of the case” doctrine is applicable here — the litigation has proceeded through the
preliminary stages, but indisputably has not even reached the merits stage, let alone
produced a judgment to which the “binding finality of res judicata and collateral estoppel
will attach.”

The law of the case doctrine does not “pose an insurmountable obstacle” to the
reconsideration of earlier conclusions, such as the Tribunal’s incorrect specific intent

© 46 Am. Jur. 2d Judgments § 516 (2003) (footnotes omitted) (emphasis added).
"Ariz, v. Cal., 460 U.S. 605, 618-19 (1983) (citations omitted).

© Castro v. U.S., 124 S.Ct. 786, 793 (2003) (quotations omitted).

© Ariz, 460 U.S. at 618-19 (citations omitted).

 

 

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
April 14, 2004

Page 7

test.'! Indeed, as the Supreme Court noted: “Under law of the case doctrine, as now
most commonly understood, it is not improper for a court to depart from a prior holding
if convinced that it is clearly erroneous and would work a manifest injustice.”'> Here, it
was clearly erroneous for the Tribunal to adopt a narrow interpretation of NAFTA
Article 1101 that has no basis in law or logic. Moreover, adhering to this incorrect
decision in light of the Tribunal’s delay in ruling on Methanex’ continuous attempts to
gather additional evidence would constitute a manifest injustice.'®

The U.S. characterization of the award as “binding” as an additional basis to preclude
reconsideration similarly is unavailing. It is a commonplace that a judgment issued by a
tribunal pursuant to the Rules is intended to be “binding.” Article 32(2) here simply
means that awards may not be treated as advisory or voluntary. UNCITRAL arbitration
is not mediation; an award by a duly constituted tribunal under those Rules cannot be
ignored by the parties. That provision should not — and, when understood in light of
Article 15(1)’s mandate to ensure fairness and equity between the parties, cannot — be
read in the sweeping manner proposed by the United States, ie., to preclude all
reconsideration.

B. The United States Concedes The Importance Of The Lex
Arbitri But Misconstrues Its Import.

The United States, in its March 30 letter, acknowledges the “noteworth[iness]” of the /ex
arbitri but misconstrues what that /ex provides.'

“Castro, 124 S.Ct. at 793 (2003) (quotations omitted).

© Ariz, 460 U.S, at 618 1.8.

See Letter from Methanex dated April 7, 2004 (detailing Methanex’ attempts to gain
additional evidence and noting the Tribunal’s delay in ruling on such requests).

See Letter from the United States dated March 30, 2004 at 4. The United States’
acknowledgment of the /ex arbitri as “noteworthy” presumably is intended to recognize
that, where that 4x so provides, reconsideration would be appropriate. The United
States instead simply appears to contest whether the conditions for reconsideration have
been met. Methanex addresses those objections herein.

 

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
April 14, 2004

Page 8

1. A Showing Of “Actual Bias” Is Not Required.

‘The United States characterizes U.S. law as “empowerling] the federal courts to vacate an
award on the ground of actual bias on the part of the arbitrator.” True. But as set
forth in the Request and again in Methanex’ March 8, 2004 submission, U.S. law also
requires reconsideration in cases where an undisclosed relationship between an
arbitrator and a party exists.'” Here, Methanex demonstrated that Mr. Christopher had
an undisclosed relationship with Governor Davis.”

‘The United States’ vigorous protest that Methanex failed to provide evidence of actual
bias on the part of Mr. Christopher is wrong. The undisputed fact is that

Mr. Christopher withdrew. Mr. Christopher himself evidently viewed the questions
relating to his relationships with California to be of sufficient concern to warrant
withdrawal." And it is not hard to see why. Mr. Christopher, who received a share of
his firm’s profits, personally pitched a case to Governor Davis after this action had
already commenced, and Governor Davis personally decided, over the objections of his
Attorney-General, to award a lucrative representation of the State of California to

Mr. Christophet’s law firm.” It is difficult to imagine a clearer example of bias or
conflict of interest.

It is a basic principle of domestic and international law that an arbitrator must not, in
either fact or appearance, profit in any way from a party to an arbitration subject to his or
her review. To accept the United States’ argument here would be to decide otherwise.
A\fter Mr. Christopher solicited and then received business from Governor Davis and the

1d.
© See, eg, Schmitz v. Zilveti, 20 F.3d 1043, 1046-47 (9th Cir. 1994); Jenkins v. Sterlacci, 849
F.2d 627, 631 (D.C. Cir. 1988).

* See Methanex Notice of Challenge (Aug, 28, 2002) (“Methanex recently became aware
of a specific relationship between Mr. Christopher and his law firm, O’Melveny & Myers,
and California Governor Gray Davis, which gives rise to this challenge.”).

  

 

*! Methanex notes that it had no opportunity or occasion to engage in discovery, cross-
examination or any of the other tools by which actual bias could be conclusively
demonstrated. That is almost always the case in claims of this nature, which is why proof
of “actual bias” is unnecessary. The existence of the relationship alone is enough.

” See Notice of Challenge, at 1-4; see also, ¢,g., Nanette Asimov & Lance Williams, Gor.
Davis v. Schoolkids; High Price Legal Team Browbeats Youths about Shoddy Schools, S.F.
Chronicle, Sept. 2, 2001, at Al (“Davis’ office [] selected O’Melveny after a pitch [from]
Warren Christopher.”); Alan Bonsteel, Children Are Waiting: State Won't Admit Blame for
Schools, The Daily News of L.A., Dec. 16, 2001, at V1 (“At the direction of Gray Davis,
the state struck back by hiring $325-per hour lawyers of the Los Angeles firm of
O'Melveny & Myers...”) (emphasis added).

 

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
April 14, 2004

Page 9

State of California, he helped create the odd “specific intent to harm” standard now at
issue, a standard not endorsed by either party and which has no precedence in
international jurisprudence. To decline review of this overreaching standard would
conflict with fundamental notions of fairness and equity, and it would undermine
investor-confidence in the arbitral process.

2. The Purported “Three-Month” Time Frame Cited By The
United States Is Inapposite.

The United States also attempts to distinguish the /x arbitri by arguing that the United
States’ Federal Arbitration Act (“FAA”) requires a party to seek reconsideration within
three months of the challenged award, and that Methanex’ Request is, therefore,
unacceptably delayed. ** However, as already noted, Methanex first sought
reconsideration of the Tribunal’s interpretation of the legal standard adopted in the
Partial Award in its Second Amended Claim — which was submitted just under three
months after the Partial Award and fewer than six weeks after the Tribunal’s subsequent
elaboration of that standard.”

More significantly, the United States has misstated the /ex arbitri on this issue by focusing
narrowly on the FAA’s statutory language and ignoring the full body of U.S.
jurisprudence. The FAA’s three-month time limit on motions to “vacate, modify, or
correct” arbitral awards applies to motions made to the federal courts. It does not
purport, nor has it been interpreted, to impose a similar time limitation on arbitral
tribunals’ conduct of their own proceedings. It is long-established that a request to
reconsider or vacate an arbitration award “invokes the equitable jurisdiction of a [court]
because legal remedies are inadequate,” and requires the court to consider a variety of
circumstances in determining whether the request is untimely.’ To focus on a technical,
narrowly construed, and inapplicable provision at the expense of a broader, century-old
principle is unpersuasive and should be ignored by this Tribunal.

* Section 12 of the FAA provides, in part, that “[n]Jotice of a motion to vacate, modify,
or correct an award must be served upon the adverse party or his attorney within three
months after the award is filed or delivered.” 9 U.S.C. § 12.

* See Letter from the Tribunal dated September 25, 2002 (addressing the contours and
meaning of the “legally significant connection” standard).

> Maryland Central Collection Unit v. Gettes, 584 A.2d 689, 695 (Md. 1991).

© See, e9., Baltimore Ohio R.R. Co. v. Canton Company, 17 A. 394, 397 (Md. 1889) (looking
to “length of the delay and the nature of the acts done during the interval, which might
affect either party and cause a balance of justice or injustice in taking the one course or
the other”).

 

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
April 14, 2004

Page 10

Yet even if one were to regard Section 12 of the FAA as directly applicable here, the
United States’ interpretation of that provision would be incorrect for another reason.
‘The three-month limitation in the FAA applies only to final awards, not to interim or
partial rulings.” Moreover, courts have disregarded the three-month time limit where
required in the interests of fairness to the parties.”

Ill. Neither Party Supports The “Specific Intent to Harm” Standard.

Importantly, the United States does not embrace or even defend the “specific intent to
harm” test articulated in the Partial Award. Instead, the United States disputes only
Methanex’ ability to challenge the test at this stage of the proceedings. Its failure to
endorse the test — in either its Amended Statement of Defense or in recent
correspondence — reveals a similar uneasiness with the test’s narrowing scope. The
United States should not be entitled to hold Methanex to an inappropriately high burden
of proof here while remaining free to argue, before other NAFTA Tribunals on behalf of
its own investors, that the Tribunal here “got it wrong.” If the Tribunal finds that it has
the power to reconsider, as it should, then it should view the manifest silence of the
United States on this issue as a concession that the “specific intent to harm” test is
wrong.

IV. Conclusion.

Article 15(1) affords the Tribunal far-reaching flexibility to vindicate the principles of
fairness and “full opportunity” for both parties. The /ex arbitri— which the United States
itself refers to as “noteworthy” — reinforces that mandate. The participation of

Mr. Christopher in the formulation of the legal standard that continues to govern this
case unavoidably impinges on those important principles. The Tribunal can remedy this

 

” See, eg, Warren v. Tacher, 114 F. Supp. 2d 600, 602 (W.D. Ky. 2000) (rejecting claim
that petition was time-barred on ground that it was filed more than three months after
award that dismissed some but not all of the asserted claims) guoting Harry Hoffman
Printing v. Graphic Comms. Int’l Union, Local 261, 912 F.2d 608, 614 (2d Cir. 1990). See also
New York Typographical Union v. Volk & Huxley, 1982 WL 2068 (S.D.N.Y. 1982) (applying
New York state arbitration statute, which is interpreted identically to FAA, and refusing
to confirm or vacate an interim arbitral award, instead sending the parties back to
arbitration for completion of the proceedings).

* See, e.g, American Guaranty Co. v. Caldwell, 72 F.2d 209, 212 (9" Cir. 1934) (affirming
district court decision vacating award based on contention that appointment of one
arbitrator on a panel “was irregular and illegal and that the award of said arbitrator was
evidently partial, but not corrupt or fraudulent . . .” although outside of three-month
time limit).

Paul Hastings

V.V. Veeder, QC

J. William Rowley, QC
Professor W. Michael Reisman
April 14, 2004

Page 11

inequity only by reconsidering the “specific intent to harm” test developed when Mr.
Christopher was a member of the Tribunal.

Respectfully submitted,

Christopher Dugan
for PAUL, HASTINGS, JANOFSKY & WALKER LLP

cc: Barton Legum, Esq.
Margrete Stevens, Esq.

WDC/271169.11

