Christopher F. Dugan Esq

James A. Wilderotter Esq

Jones, Day, Reaves & Pogue

51 Louisiana Avenue, NW.
Washington DC 2001-21113, USA
By Fax: 00 1 202 626 1700

Barton Legum Esq

Mark A. Clodfelter Esq

Office of the Legal Adviser (L/CID)

United States Department of State

2430 E Street, N.W. Suite 203, South Building
Washington DC 20047-2800, USA

By Fax: 00 1 202 776 8388

25" September 2002

Dear Colleagues,

Re: NAFTA Arbitration
Methanex Corporation v United States of America

By letter dated 28" August 2002 from Messrs Dugan & Wilderotter to the Tribunal,
Methanex requested an Interpretation of the Tribunal’s First Partial Award of 7" August
2002 under Article 35 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; and Methanex also requested

the Tribunal’s assistance in regard to Certain Further Matters.

By the Tribunal’s letter dated 10" September 2002 to the Disputing Parties, the Tribunal

invited written comments from the USA on Methanex’s letter; these were received by the
USA’s letter dated 23 September 2002; and we have taken these comments into account
in preparing our response. We do not think it necessary to require Methanex to respond to

the USA’s comments, the reasons for the Disputing Parties’ differences being self-evident.

It is convenient to deal separately with (a) Interpretation and (b) Further Matters.

A - Interpretation

1. By its Request for Interpretation, Methanex seeks from the Tribunal an

interpretation of the Tribunal’s Partial Award in respect of four matters:

(i) The definition of “Legally Significant Connection”, cited from Paragraph

147 of the Partial Award (page 62);

(ii) The contents and scope of the “Fresh Pleading” ordered by the Tribunal,
cited from Paragraph 172(5) of the Partial Award (page 74);

(iii) The requirements of the Tribunal as to the “Evidence” to be submitted
by Methanex, cited from Paragraphs 163, 164 & 165 of the Partial Award
(pages 70-71); and

(iv) The nature and timetable of the “Future Proceedings”, cited from

Paragraph 168 of the Partial Award (page 70).

We shall consider each of these matters in turn, subject to a general preliminary

comment.

2. Methanex’s Request for Interpretation is made under Article 35 of the UNCITRAL

Arbitration Rules. It provides:

“(1) Within 30 days after the receipt of the award, either party, with notice
to the other party, may request that the arbitral tribunal give an
interpretation of the award.

(2) The interpretation shall be given in writing within 45 days after the
receipt of the request. The interpretation shall form part of the award and
the provisions of article 32, paragraphs 2 to 7, shall apply [i.e. dealing with
the form and effect of the award].”

Page 2 of 12

It is well settled that such a request is limited to an interpretation of the award in
the form of clarification; and that it cannot extend to a request to modify or annul
the award or take the form of an appeal or review of the award. Indeed, Methanex
disclaims expressly any intention of “relitigating any issue the Tribunal has already

decided”: see pages 1-2 of Methanex’s letter.

In our view, Methanex’s Request does not fall within the scope of Article 35.
Accordingly, we decline to treat it as such; and this response does not form part of
the Partial Award. Nonetheless, it can do no harm and possibly some good if we
were to address certain of the points raised by Methanex, albeit outwith Article 35

of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

(i) “Legally Significant Connection”

At paragraph 147 of the Partial Award (page 62), the Tribunal concluded that the
phrase “relating to “ in Article 1101(1) NAFTA signifies something more than the
mere effect of a measure on an investor or an investment and that it requires a
legally significant connection between them. In its Request, Methanex queries this
conclusion, addressing Paragraph 138 of the Partial Award (page 58). There the
Tribunal decided that Methanex’s interpretation of the phrase “relating to” as
“affected” would produce a surprising, if not absurd, result given that the possible
consequences of human conduct are infinite; and by analogy the Tribunal noted that
in a traditional legal context, both in the USA and Canada under the laws of
contract and civil wrong, a limit is imposed restricting the consequence for which
conduct is to be held accountable. This paragraph forms only part of the Tribunal’s
reasons which, on this point, are set out in Chapter J of the Partial Award (pages

53 to 62).

Methanex seeks confirmation of its understanding that the Partial Award suggests
that a NAFTA Party in breach of its Chapter 11 obligations will be liable only for
those types of consequences that are actionable in analogous legal circumstances,

such as where there is foreseeable, direct or intended injury, or competitive harm.

Page 3 of 12

Alternatively Methanex seeks an interpretation of the phrase “legally significant
connection”. It is said that without such an interpretation, Methanex is placed in
the difficult and unfair position of marshalling evidence and arguments to meet an

undefined standard. For two reasons, Methanex’s several requests are unfounded.

First, at Paragraphs 172(2) and (3) of the Partial Award (page 73), the Tribunal
decided that Methanex’s Original Statement of Claim and its Amended Statement
of Claim (as a whole) failed to meet the jurisdictional requirements of Article
1101(1) NAFTA. At paragraph 172(4), however, with respect to part of
Methanex’s Amended Statement of Claim (as subsequently supplemented by its
written and oral submissions), the Tribunal decided that certain allegations relating
to the “intent” underlying the US measures could potentially meet the requirements

of Article 1101(1) NAFTA.

As appears from Chapter K of the Partial Award (pages 63 to 71), the Tribunal
postponed its ruling on jurisdiction in respect of that part of Methanex’s case and
ordered a fresh pleading from Methanex because the Tribunal found it impossible
to make such a ruling without such a fresh pleading, accompanied by evidential
materials. It follows that the difficulties raised by Methanex are illusory. The
Tribunal has already decided that insofar as it may have jurisdiction in respect of
Methanex’s claim, such jurisdiction can exist only in respect of that part of the
claim alleging an “intent” underlying the US measures to benefit the US ethanol
industry and to penalise foreign methanol producers, such as Methanex.
Accordingly, in this case, Methanex’s claim is not concerned with different factual

circumstances (i.e. where that intent is absent).

Second, albeit related to this first reason, the interpretation of Article 1101(1)
NAFTA in the Partial Award is to be read as a whole, as applied to this particular
case. It serves no purpose for Methanex to isolate one particular paragraph in order
to construct an ambiguity which does not in fact exist, or if it did, is irrelevant to
the circumstances of this case. In our view, the legal requirements of Article
1101(1) are clear for this case, even though one Disputing Party might disagree

with our interpretation and although there may be difficulties in defining for all

Page 4 of 12

cases the exact dividing line between a legally significant and insignificant
connection: see Paragraph 139 of the Partial Award (page 59). Nonetheless, such
difficulties do not exist in this case for the remaining part of Methanex’s claim,

based on “intent”.

(ii) “Fresh Pleading”

At Paragraph 172(5) of the Partial Award (page 74), the Tribunal ordered
Methanex to submit within ninety days a fresh pleading, complying with Articles
18 and 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and conforming to the decisions
contained in the Award. At paragraph 162 of the Partial Award (page 68), the

Tribunal had earlier explained:

“Methanex’s fresh pleading must take a form different from and more
limited than its Amended Statement of Claim. Several material allegations
made by Methanex as it developed its oral and written submissions do not
appear in the Amended Statement of Claim (nor, of course in the Original
Statement of Claim); and it will be for Methanex’s careful consideration
whether, to what extent and in what form these allegations will be formally
pleaded. The fresh pleading must not exceed the limits of Methanex’s
existing case (pleaded and unpleaded); and we do not intend Methanex to
make any new claim in its fresh pleading. It must comply with our
decisions in this Award and Articles 18 and 20 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules. As regards the statement of the facts supporting its claim
under Article 18(2)(b), Methanex’s fresh pleading must set out its specific
factual allegations, including all specific inferences to be drawn from those
facts.”

In its Request for Interpretation, Methanex now seeks clarification of the scope
and content of this fresh pleading, particularly as to what aspects of the Original
and Amended Statement of Claim the Tribunal considers irrelevant. Methanex also
seeks confirmation that once it has satisfied Article 1101's “threshold”

requirements, it may then proceed to each of its separate claims under Articles

1102, 1105 and 1110 NAFTA.

The Tribunal considers that the directions contained in the Partial Award are clear

and unambiguous, as to both the form and content of the fresh pleading to be

Page 5 of 12

served by Methanex.

As to form, the meaning of the term “fresh pleading” is self-evident. The phrase is
indeed absent from the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (as Methanex rightly
comments); but that can scarcely be the cause of any practical difficulty in this
case. As explained in the Partial Award, it will be a pleading “more limited” than
the Amended Statement of Claim because that pleading asserts claims for which (as
we decided in the Partial Award) the Tribunal has no jurisdiction; and it will be
“different” because, as to the intent underlying the US measures, we anticipate that
it will include allegations made by Methanex orally and in written submissions
subsequent to (and therefore not included in) the Amended Statement of Claim.
Accordingly, it will be a new pleading of part of an existing case, partly pleaded
and partly unpleaded; and the term “fresh pleading” is a convenient description for
that pleading, consistent with Articles 18, 20 and 22 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules. If the position were otherwise, the Tribunal might have had no alternative

but to reject Methanex’s Amended Statement of Claim in toto.

As to content, subject to the outward boundaries permitted by the Tribunal in the
Partial Award, it cannot be for this Tribunal to instruct Methanex what should and
should not be pleaded in its fresh pleading, as explained in Paragraph 166 of the
Partial Award (page 76). Nonetheless, the Tribunal is prepared to reiterate the

following guidelines, taken from the Partial Award.

As appears from Paragraphs 46-70 of the Partial Award (pages 18 to 24),
Methanex’s factual case on “intent” is only comprehensible from certain parts of
the Amended Statement of Claim, Methanex’s Rejoinder of 25" May 2001, the
transcript of the Jurisdictional Hearing of July 2001 and Methanex’s Reply
Submission of 27" July 2001. It is therefore essential for Methanex to reduce its
case into one coherent, formal document, i.e. a fresh pleading to stand as its

statement of claim in these arbitration proceedings.

The pleading requirements of that statement of claim are set out in Article 18(2) of

the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. These do not call for extended argument,

Page 6 of 12

whether factual or legal. Moreover, as to legal argument, only brief cross-
references need be made to Methanex’s existing legal materials. It is Methanex’s
factual case which needs to be pleaded, however succinctly. Inevitably, it will be
an important pleading; possibly it may be difficult to draft; but given that it will
plead a case Methanex has already advanced in these proceedings, the task should
be relatively uncomplicated and achievable within a relatively short time. (It may
be noted that the period of ninety days exceeds the maximum period of 45 days

usually allowable under Article 23 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules).

As to the “threshold matter” raised by Methanex, there seems to be a curious
misunderstanding. As already noted above, the Tribunal decided in the Partial
Award that one part of Methanex’s Amended Statement of Claim (as subsequently
supplemented), relating to the alleged “intent” underlying the US measures, could
potentially meet the requirements of Article 1101(1) NAFTA. The Tribunal
decided that it has no jurisdiction in respect of Methanex’s other claims. It follows
that, insofar as the fresh pleading is concerned, the Tribunal can have no
jurisdiction to consider any allegation originally found in Methanex’s Original or
Amended Statement of Claim advancing any claim other than the claim based on

“intent”.

Accordingly, these jurisdictional limits apply to the breaches of the substantive
provisions of Chapter 11 NAFTA, as alleged by Methanex (i.e. Articles 1102,
1105 and 1110). It cannot be open to a claimant to establish jurisdiction by
reference to a specific claim under Article 1101 and then allege breaches of the
substantive provisions of Chapter 11 unrelated to that claim and in respect of which
the Tribunal would not otherwise have any jurisdiction. In other words, Methanex
may now only allege breaches of Articles 1102, 1105 and 1110 NAFTA (as it
chooses) insofar as these alleged breaches are related to the alleged “intent”
underlying the US measures to favour the US ethanol industry and to penalise

foreign methanol producers, such as Methanex.

Page 7 of 12

20.

21.

(iii) “Evidence”

At paragraph 172(5) of the Partial Award (page 74), the Tribunal decided that
Methanex’s fresh pleading should be accompanied by the evidential materials

described in the Award, particularly in Paragraphs 163-165 (page 69).

At paragraph 163, the Partial Award stated:

“As regards the USA’s alleged liability, Methanex must file with that
pleading copies of all evidential documents on which it relies (unless
identified as documents previously filed with the Tribunal), together with
factual witness statements and expert witness reports of any person intended
by Methanex to provide testimony at an oral hearing on the merits. For the
time being, we exclude evidential materials relating to the alleged quantum
of the USA’s liability.”

At paragraphs 164 and 165, the Partial Award set out further requirements for such

factual witness statements and expert reports.

In its Request for Interpretation, Methanex seeks confirmation that it is not now
required to produce all evidence on which the presentation of its case on the merits
will rely, thereby foreclosing the development and presentation of additional
evidence at a later stage. Methanex also seeks clarification as to whether it is
required to produce “essentially final reports from all its experts” within the ninety
day time limit imposed by the Tribunal; and it seeks confirmation now that the

Tribunal is not planning to proceed directly to a hearing on the merits.

It is difficult for the Tribunal to follow Methanex’s apparent difficulties. As the
Partial Award states in Paragraph 163 (page 69), Methanex must file with its fresh
pleading copies of all evidential documents on which it relies. This direction is
clear both as to the ambit of the evidence required (‘as regards the USA’s alleged
liability”; but “we exclude evidential materials relating to the alleged quantum’)
and the extent (“all evidential documents”). Similarly, there is no ambiguity with
respect to the Tribunal’s direction on the submission of expert reports, and there is

no suggestion that these should be draft reports or reports that are otherwise

Page 8 of 12

22.

23.

24.

25.

incomplete: see Paragraphs 163 and 165 of the Partial Award (pages 69 & 70).

Nonetheless, insofar as Methanex may find insuperable difficulty in complying with
the ninety day limit imposed by the Partial Award, it remains open to Methanex to
seek an extension of that deadline from the Tribunal. Moreover, if for good cause
shown, Methanex is unable timeously to complete its filing of all relevant
evidential materials, it remains equally open to Methanex to seek dispensation from
the Tribunal in regard to missing materials; e.g. an outstanding application against a
third person under 28 U.S.C.§1782 28 (if applicable), as raised at page 6 of

Methanex’s letter.

It is the Tribunal’s intention, both in the Partial Award and now, that Methanex and
its legal advisers should have the best opportunity to advance Methanex’s best case.
It is not the Tribunal’s intention to deprive either Disputing Party of its procedural
rights under Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, or otherwise.
However, as regards Methanex’s present exercise, given the long history of this
arbitration (on which Methanex rightly comments at page 7 of its letter), that can
only be a reasonable opportunity. There must therefore be a reasonable deadline. In
all the circumstances, from the Tribunal’s current perspective, ninety days is a
reasonable period of time. It could be extended by the Tribunal if necessary; but an
extension should be sought by means of a reasoned application to the Tribunal and

not by a request for interpretation of the Partial Award.

There is no suggestion in the Partial Award that if, at a later stage Methanex
sought to submit further relevant evidence, it would be debarred automatically from
doing so - nor could there be. This would be a matter for consideration by the
Tribunal in the future, if and when that issue arose and after hearing both Disputing

Parties.

As to Methanex’s request for confirmation that the Tribunal is not planning to
proceed directly to a hearing on the merits, the answer is obvious from the Partial
Award. At Paragraph 168 (page 70), the Tribunal stated that after considering

Methanex’s fresh pleading and accompanying evidential materials, and subject to

Page 9 of 12

26.

27.

28.

29.

consultation with the Disputing Parties, its present intention is to decide then how
to proceed further. It follows that the Tribunal has so far made no decision as to
the future procedure for the arbitration and is awaiting Methanex’s pleading and
evidential materials; and that the Tribunal does not intend to make any decision on
future procedure without also hearing both Disputing Parties. It may be that
Methanex and the USA will then wish to argue that the claim should (or should

not) proceed directly to a hearing on the merits; but all that lies in the future.

(iv) “Future Proceedings”

In its Request for Interpretation, Methanex expresses its concern that without a
more concrete plan for the number, form and content of future pleadings and/or
proceedings, the arbitration could become unnecessarily extended. It requests that

the Tribunal clarify the nature and timetable for future proceedings.

This is not a request for interpretation of the Partial Award but a request that the
Tribunal now make an order that it has not yet made - for good reason. As stated
in the Partial Award and as here re-stated above, the future procedure in this
arbitration cannot be decided by the Tribunal before Methanex’s fresh pleading and
evidential materials and a procedural hearing with the Disputing Parties. That too

lies in the future.

B - Certain Further Matters

NAFTA Documentation: In the Partial Award, we made no order regarding
Methanex’s application for documentary production of NAFTA negotiations
relating to Article 1105 NAFTA: see Chapter G (page 31). Methanex now makes
an application for similar documentation relating to Article 1101 NAFTA. We

invite Methanex to clarify two matters.

First, is it correct for Methanex to describe its current application as the re-
submission of its earlier application, given that these requests are apparently

different? Second, after the Tribunal’s decisions in the Partial Award on the

Page 10 of 12

30.

31.

32.

meaning of Article 1101, what is the relevance of these documents to any

outstanding issue in these arbitration proceedings?

The Tribunal, at present, is not minded to decide this application before a
procedural hearing with the Disputing Parties. Accordingly, it should not delay
Methanex’s compliance with the deadline for its fresh pleading and accompanying

materials.

Expedited Telephone Conference: If necessary, the Tribunal will hold an expedited
hearing with the Disputing Parties. Its necessity and usefulness may depend,

however, on the deadline to be met by Methanex, a point to which we return below

Tolling: In the Tribunal’s view, there should be no tolling. The solution is much
more simple: Methanex should make, as soon as practicable, a reasoned application
for an extension of time beyond the ninety day deadline. Subject of course to
hearing the USA, the Tribunal would receive such an application from Methanex’s

legal representatives with measured sympathy.

In conclusion, it follows that for the time being the deadline of ninety days imposed on

Methanex under the Partial Award stands, expiring on 5'* November 2002. If Methanex

requires any extension of that deadline for any part of its fresh pleading and accompanying

materials, the Tribunal invites it to make a reasoned application in writing as soon as

possible. The USA will then be asked to comment in writing on Methanex’s application;

and thereafter the Tribunal will decide whether it can rule on Methanex’s application on

paper or with a procedural hearing, whether by telephone conference-call or a meeting in

Washington D.C.

Page 11 of 12

This decision was made by the two members of the Tribunal signing this letter. Mr
Christopher resigned as arbitrator on 20" September 2002; he played no part in making

this decision; and he is not a party to it.

Yours Sincerely,

V.V.Veeder William Rowley

cc Ms Margrete Stevens: by fax 00 1 202 522 2615.

cc Canada and Mexico.

Page 12 of 12

