INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

MetLife, Inc., MetLife Servicios S.A. and MetLife Seguros de Retiro S.A. y. Argentine
Republic

(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/17).

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER No. 2

Members of the Tribunal
The Honorable Ian Binnie C:€., Q.C., President of the Tribunal
Mr. Klaus-Reichert S.C., Arbitrator
Professor Campbell McLachlan Q.C., Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco

21 December 2018

MetLife, Inc., MetLife Servicios S.A. and MetLife Seguros de Retiro S.A. v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/17)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

Introduction

On 5 October 2018, the Respondent filed its Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request
for Bifurcation. On 13 November 2018, the Claimants filed their Observations on

Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation.

On 7 December 2018, the Respondent submitted comments on the Claimants’ Observations.
On the same date, the Respondent requested “that the Tribunal not review/Argentina’s
submission and inform the Parties that the submission is rejected.” On 15‘December 2018,

the Tribunal stated as follows:

The Tribunal is deliberating regarding the bifurcation issue.Procedural Order
No I, in the provisions to which both parties agreed, there is no contemplation
of a Respondent's rejoinder to the Claimant's observations on the
Respondent's submissions in that regard. The Tribunal is to render a decision
on bifurcation by next Friday December 21, 2018. Were a rejoinder to be filed
there would undoubtedly be a Claimant's request to reply to the Respondent's
rejoinder and resulting delay. In the circumstances, the Tribunal considers
that it already has ample submissions on.the bifurcation issue and will decline
to receive further submissions or observations.

On 14 December 2018, the Claimants submitted a statement on their costs “incurred in
reviewing Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation and
preparing Claimants’ Observations.” On 18 December 2018, the Respondent submitted a
communication objecting to the Claimants’ costs statement and requesting that both Parties
be given an opportunity to submit their statements of costs and present their arguments before

the Tribunal,makes any costs decisions.

Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal refers to the application by the Respondent to bifurcate the hearing of its five
jurisdictional objections from the merits with a view to bringing this dispute to an efficient
and expeditious conclusion. Bifurcation is opposed by the Claimants on the basis that it would
add nothing except delay and costs. In addition, the Claimants argue that “most of these
objections would not dispose of all or a substantial part of the case even if they were

meritorious, (which they are not).”

MetLife, Inc., MetLife Servicios S.A. and MetLife Seguros de Retiro S.A. v. Argentine Republic

(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/17)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

The Claimants raise the threshold objection of the timing of the application, which the
Claimants say ought to have been brought “as soon as possible” after the Respondent had been
put on formal notice of the claim on receipt of the Notice of Dispute on October 5, 2016.
(There is some irony in this position having regard to the fact the Claimants waited almost
eight and a half years after passage of the Nationalization Act in 2008 before bringing the
present claim based on the failure of that Act to pay compensation). In any event; while Rule
41(1) requires the objection to be made as “soon as possible” it then adds “and'in any event
no later than expiration of the time limit fixed for the filing of the Counter Memorial.” The
Respondent set out its objections to jurisdiction in the Memorial on ‘Preliminary Objections
and Request for Bifurcation. Some tension is apparent between these two limbs of Rule 41,
however the Tribunal does not regard the words “as soon as possible” as abridging the explicit
time limit “no later than the expiration of the time limit-fixed for the filing of the Counter
Memorial.” The Respondent complied with this time limit. The timeliness objection is

therefore dismissed.

Article 41 of the ICSID Convention establishes no presumption on the question whether
jurisdictional objections ought to be decided as a preliminary question or whether they should
be joined to the merits. It simply\provides that the Tribunal ‘‘shall determine whether to deal

with [such a question] as a-preliminary question or join it to the merits of the dispute.”

The Claimants and Respondent are agreed that the fundamental reason to bifurcate or not to
bifurcate is procedural efficiency. Their disagreement is as to the application of this principle
on the current*facts. Reference is made to ICSID’s Commentary on its Arbitration Rules,
which considers relevant considerations to include (1) the merits of the objection; (2) whether
bifurcation would materially reduce time and costs; and (3) whether jurisdiction and merits
are so intertwined as to make bifurcation impractical. These considerations are not
exhaustive. The Tribunal ought also to assess whether bifurcation is likely to materially
increase time and costs as well as the possibility of reducing them. Moreover, caution must
be exercised in assessing “the merits of the objection” so as not to conflate the merits of the
objections with the prior question of the merits of bifurcation. The fact is that some cases

lend themselves to bifurcation and others do not. It is a case specific inquiry. In the end, a

MetLife, Inc., MetLife Servicios S.A. and MetLife Seguros de Retiro S.A. v. Argentine Republic

(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/17)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

Tribunal will generally have to weigh the cost and likely prejudice to one party if bifurcation

is granted against the likely cost and prejudice to the other party if bifurcation is refused.
The Respondent raises five preliminary objections:

(a) That the claim must be dismissed because of undue delay;

(b) That the Claimants have not established that they are investors with an investment in
the Respondent state;

(c) That the claim exceeds the scope of the BIT because:
(i) Claimants have not proved that the facts amount to a violation of the BIT;

(ii) Any claim based on Law 26,425 had to be submitted to the Argentine courts.

The Respondent adds that in any event certain issues “will have to be excluded in a potential

merits stage.” (para. [150]).

For reasons that will be apparent, the Respondent places its primary emphasis on the ground
of delay. It invokes general principles ofsextinctive prescription, acquiescence, good faith and

abuse of rights.

The Claimants point out that-there is no explicit limitation period on claims in either the BIT
or the ICSID Convention, and that many ICSID Tribunals have proceeded with claims after
delays lasting decades: Nevertheless, a delay of eight and a half years is significant and the

cause for some concern. Some cogent explanation is required.

The reason for the delay offered by Mr. Oscar Schmidt, witness for the Claimants (at paras.
[64]-[65] of his statement) is that as long as the Kirchner government remained in power, any
claim against Argentina would have risked retaliation against the Claimants’ other business
interests in that country. The new government of President Macri took office in December

2015. The Claimants say they moved promptly once there was a change of government.

At this stage the only issue before the Tribunal is the desirability of bifurcation. Whether or
not the Claimants’ explanation is ultimately accepted as a defence to acquiescence or laches,

and in any event the assessment of legal impact one way or the other, will be explored at a

MetLife, Inc., MetLife Servicios S.A. and MetLife Seguros de Retiro S.A. v. Argentine Republic

(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/17)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

hearing. Mr. Schmidt will be a key witness at any hearing on the merits. Efficiency suggests

that he be called in one hearing to give his entire evidence.

An important question that would arise at a bifurcated hearing respecting delay is not just
whether material delay has occurred, and whether it is imputable to the Claimant, but also
whether the delay has occasioned significant prejudice to the Respondent (See Claimants’
Observations at [61]-[77]: Bin Cheng, General Principles of Law as applied by International
Court and Tribunals (1987) AL RA 15, pp.379-83; James Crawford, State Responsibility: The
General Part (2013) at p 563, CL-128). In some cases an important witness may have died,

or a cache of key documents inadvertently destroyed.

On this point the Claimants say the Respondent was put on-notice of a likely claim by letter
dated June 2010 and could thus have taken appropriaté-steps to preserve relevant evidence
that was not already in the public record. In cases‘of real prejudice, where a respondent's
defence might be hampered by a claimant’s delay, consideration might be given to dismissal

of the claim.

The Respondent has not produced compelling evidence of efficiency savings that would result
from bifurcation. Moreover, -ifVbifurcation is granted and the objections are ultimately
rejected, it seems likely there-will be overlap on some of the issues to be discussed during the

jurisdictional phase andthe merits phase including timing, delay and fear of retaliation.

The Respondentzalso alleges that the timing of the claim violates the requirement of good faith
and amounts)to an abuse of process. In this respect, the Respondent relies on the definition

of abuse of process in Transglobal v. Panama as follows:

To determine whether an abuse of rights has occurred, tribunals have
considered all the circumstances of the case, including, for instance, the
timing of the purported investment, the timing of the claim, the substance of
the transaction, the true nature of the operation, and the degree of
foreseeability of the governmental action at the time of restructuring.
(emphasis added)

The Respondent’s argument appears to assume the point in issue, i.e. whether the reason for

the delay given by the Claimants’ witness Mr. Schmidt is or is not a sham. If the Tribunal

MetLife, Inc., MetLife Servicios S.A. and MetLife Seguros de Retiro S.A. v. Argentine Republic

(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/17)

 

20.

21.

22.

Procedural Order No. 2

accepts Mr. Schmidt’s evidence there may be no factual foundation for a claim of abuse of

process.

Whether or not the Claimants ought first to have litigated their claims in the courts of
Argentina despite the absence of an exhaustion of local remedies clause in the treaty or ICSID

Convention is a matter that can easily be resolved at a hearing on the merits.

In terms of proof of jurisdictional facts under ICSID and the BIT, the Respondent calls into
question whether (1) all of the Claimants are protected investors; and (2), whether all of the
investments in respect of which claims are made are protected investments under the BIT and
ICSID. These are among the standard issues that arise in almostall investor—state disputes.
Tf the raising of such issues warranted bifurcation, bifurcation would invariably be granted,
which is not the case. The Respondent has not identified’a case-dispositive fact or specific
sub-issue which calls out for early resolution. The allegations will require a close examination
of the Claimants’ corporate structure and operations. If the hearing of the jurisdictional
objections were to be bifurcated, and such objection did not succeed, much of the same ground
would have to be covered at the hearingon the merits into the corporate structure, who owned
what, what investments were taken\and (if any were taken) how are they to be valued. Once
again the Claimants’ case and’the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections are sufficiently

intertwined to make bifurcation an inefficient way to proceed.

Moreover, the Respondent has reserved the right to subsequently raise additional “objections”
at any potential merits stage. (See Respondent’s Preliminary Objections para. 10, note 18.)
That being the case, efficiency would best be served by hearing all preliminary objections at

once.instead of permitting the Respondent to split its case on objections.

As stated earlier, the Respondent has identified a number of issues which, if the case proceeds
to a hearing on the merits, the Respondent will ask to be excluded from the Tribunal's
consideration. [Memorial on Preliminary Objections, para. 150.] This is not a bifurcation

issue but it is duly noted and will be dealt with at the appropriate stage of the proceedings.

The Claimants have asserted facts which, if established, would amount to a violation of the

Treaty notwithstanding that the Respondent seeks to justify its conduct. The Tribunal has

MetLife, Inc., MetLife Servicios S.A. and MetLife Seguros de Retiro S.A. v. Argentine Republic

(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/17)

 

23.

24.

25.

Procedural Order No. 2

formed no opinion on the correctness or otherwise of those claims nor on any defence that the
Respondent may wish to allege. The dispute should be brought to a hearing and disposition

as quickly as circumstances permit. Bifurcation would do a disservice to that objective.

In summary, the Respondent has failed to establish that bifurcation would serve the interest
of an efficient arbitration. On the contrary, it would lead to significant delay: The
Respondent’s preliminary objections will be more appropriately dealt with and with less
duplication of effort — at a single hearing for jurisdictional and substantiveissues. A hearing
without bifurcation will result in the Tribunal being able to consider on @ complete record the
full factual context of the issues raised by way of preliminary objections. If the Respondent
is ultimately successful in its jurisdictional objections, the tribunal has power to compensate
it for any prejudice in terms of costs. If the jurisdictional’ objections do not succeed, the
Tribunal will be in a position to proceed immediately-to-a consideration of the merits in light

of a complete factual and legal record.

Tribunal’s Order

In the circumstances the application for bifurcation is dismissed. In accordance with scenario
2.1 of Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1, the Respondent shall file its Counter-Memorial on
the Merits on 22 April 2019>,The Tribunal further confirms the hearing dates as 14 through
18 and 21 through 25 September 2020 pursuant to scenario 2.1 of said order, and releases all

other hearing dates in scenarios 1 and 2.2.

The Tribunal reserves its decision on costs.

For andson behalf of the Tribunal,

 

he Honorable Ian Binnie C.C., Q.C.

President of the Tribunal
Date: 21 December 2018

