IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION PROCEEDING UNDER THE AGREEMENT ON
RECIPROCAL PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS BETWEEN THE CARIBBEAN
COMMUNITY AND THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC AND THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

(1976)

In the arbitration proceeding between
MICHAEL ANTHONY LEE-CHIN

Claimant

and

THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Respondent

ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/3

 

PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Diego P. Fernandez Arroyo, President
Mr. Christian Leathley
Prof. Marcelo Kohen

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Marisa Planells-Valero

Place of Arbitration: Washington D.C.
Date of dispatch to the Parties: July 15, 2020

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Michael Anthony Lee-Chim:

Mr. Richard C. Lorenzo
Ms. Maria Eugenia Ramirez
Mr. Mark Cheskin

Ms. Juliana De Valdenebro
Hogan Lovells US LLP
600 Brickell Avenue

Suite 2700

Miami, Florida 33131
United States of America

Representing the Dominican Republic:

Ms. Yahaira Sosa, Viceministra de Comercio
Exterior

Mr. Marcelo A. Salazar, Director de la
DICOEX

Ms. Leidylin Contreras, Subdirectora de la
DICOEX

Ms. Raquel De La Rosa, Analista de la
DICOEX

Ms. Marty Estefany Diaz, Analista de la
DICOEX

Ministerio de Industria, Comercio y Mipymes
(MICM)

Viceministerio de Comercio Exterior
Direccién de Administraci6n de Acuerdos y
Tratados Comerciales Internacionales

Av.27 de Febrero Num. 306, Bella Vista,
Santo Domingo, Republica Dominicana

Ms. Patricia Abreu, Viceministra de
Cooperacién Internacional

Ms. Rosa Otero, Directora de Relaciones
Internacionales del Viceministerio de
Cooperacién Internacional

Ms. Johanna Montero, Encargada
Departamento Comercio y Ambiente, Direccién
de Relaciones Internacionales del Viceministerio
de Cooperacién Internacional

Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y Recursos
Naturales

Av. Cayetano Germosén esq. Av. Gregorio
Luperén, Ensanche El Pedregal,

Santo Domingo, Republica Dominicana

Mr. Flavio Dario Espinal, Consultor Juridico del
Poder Ejecutivo

Ms. Jimena Conde, Sub-consultora Juridica del
Poder Ejecutivo

Ms. Nathalie Hernandez, Encargada del Dpto.
de Politica Comercial, Arbitraje, Inversion y
Negociaciones, Consultoria Juridica del Poder
Ejecutivo

Ms. Sara Patnella, Abogado II del Dpto. de
Politica Comercial, Arbitraje, Inversién y
Negociaciones, Consultoria Juridica del Poder
Ejecutivo

Consultoria Juridica del Poder Ejecutivo

Ave. México esq. Dr. Delgado, Palacio de la
Presidencia de la Republica,
Santo Domingo, Republica Dominicana
Ms. Lourdes Pérez, Asesora Legal del Despacho
del Alcalde del Ayuntamiento de Santo Domingo
Norte
Ms. Ramona Lara, Abogada del Ayuntamiento de
Santo Domingo Norte
Ayuntamiento de Santo Domingo Norte
Av. Hermanas Mirabal Esq. General Modesto
Diaz, Villa Mella Santo Domingo Norte,
Republica Dominicana

and
Mr. George Kahale III
Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson
Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila
Mr. Fernando Tupa
Ms. Elisa Botero
Ms. Natalia Linares
Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
1717 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. Suite 1300
Washington, D.C. 20006
United States of America

 

‘TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 1
1. The Partie: 1
2. Overview of the Dispute 1
3. The Parties’ Requests 6
Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 6
1. The Initial Phase 6
2. The Written Phase on Jurisdiction 9
3. The Hearing on Jurisdiction 10
4. The Post-Hearing-on-Jurisdiction Phase...
Ill. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS REGARDING JURISDICTION ..
1. The Dominican Republic’s Position...
A) The Treaty does not contain an Offer of Consent to UNCITRAL Arbitration 14
B) The Treaty does not Protects Indirect Investments or Indirect Investors.......... 15
C) Respondent’s Claim 16
2. Michael Anthony Lee-Chin’s Position.

IV. THE BASIC ELEMENTS FOR THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS...

 

 

A) The Dominican Republic Consented to Arbitrate this Dispute

 

B) The Treaty Protects Indirect Investments and Investots .....

 

C) Claimant’s Claim: 17

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. The Text to Be Interpreted 18

2. The Sources of the criteria for the interpretation of the Treaty...
3. The Preparatory Work 21
4. The Circumstances of the Conclusion of the Treaty and Other Supplementary Means
of Interpretation 21
Invocation of judicial precedents 2
V. FIRST JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION — CONSENT TO ARBITRATE ......sssecssssssteeessees 23
1. Consent to International Arbitration 23
A) The Obligation Undertaken by the Contracting Parties to the Treaty... 23
B) On the Requirement for the Specific Choice of a “FOrum”? .....ccsssssssesssssseessesnsnee 37

2. The Submission of a Dispute to International Arbitration......

 

A) The Issue Covered in Paragraph 2 of Article XII

 
 

B) The Scope of the Parties’ Potential Agreement...

iii

C) The Application of the UNCITRAL Rules...

 

3. Reliance on the Most-Favored Nation Clause

 

4. The Supplementary Means under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention of 1986 ......54
VI. SECOND JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION - THE ISSUE OF INDIRECT INVESTMENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AND INDIRECT INVESTORS 55
1. Mr. Lee-Chin’s Investments in the Dominican Republic 55

2. The Investments Protected by the Treaty... 55

A) Respondent’s Position 55

B) Claimant’s Position 56

C) The Tribunal’s Analysi 57

VII. COSTS 61
VIIL DECISION ON JURISDICTION 61

TABLE OF DEFINED TERMS

 

Article XTII of Annex III (Agreement on Reciprocal

 

 

Article XTII Promotion and Protection of Investments) of the
Treaty

CH] Claimant’s Factual Exhibit

CL-[#] Claimant’s Legal Authority

 

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction dated
July 3, 2019

 

First Legal Expert Report of Prof.
Pauwelyn

Legal Expert Report of Professor Joost H.B.
Pauwelyn dated December 22, 2018 (C-21)

 

Hearing

Hearing on Jurisdiction, held from February 27 to
February 28, 2020

 

ICSID Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States (1965)

 

ICSID or the Centre

International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes

 

Memorial on Jurisdiction

Respondent’s Memorial on
Objections to Jurisdiction dated May 6, 2019

 

Notice of Arbitration

Notice of Arbitration dated April 6, 2018

 

Opposition to Bifurcation

Opposition to Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation
dated February 19, 2019

 

R[F

Respondent’s Factual Exhibit

 

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction dated
December 12, 2019

 

Reply on Jurisdiction

Respondent’s Reply on Objections to Jurisdiction
dated October 21, 2019

 

Request for Bifurcation

Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation dated February
4, 2019

 

 

RL-[#]

 

Respondent’s Legal Authority

 

 

 

Second Legal Expert Report of Prof.
Pauwelyn

Rebuttal Legal Expert Report of Professor Joost H.B.
Pauwelyn dated June 18, 2019 (C-131)

 

Statement of Claim

Claimant’s Statement of Claim dated January 18, 2019

 

Tr. Day [#] [language] [page:line]

Hearing Transcript

 

Agreement Establishing the Free Trade Area Between
the Caribbean Community and the Dominican

 

Treaty Republic, signed on August 22, 1998 and which
entered into force on February 5, 2002
Tribunal Arbitral Tribunal constituted on August 7, 2018

 

UNCITRAL Rules

1976 Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law

 

 

Vienna Convention of 1986

 

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties between
States and International Organizations (1986)

 

vi

 

INTRODUCTION

1. This case concerns a dispute submitted on the basis of the Agreement on Reciprocal
Promotion and Protection of Investments contained in Annex II of the Agreement
Establishing the Free Trade Area between the Caribbean Community (“CARICOM”) and the
Dominican Republic, signed on August 22, 1998 and which entered into force on February 5,
2002 (the “Treaty”), and the 1976 Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on

International Trade Law (the “UNCITRAL Rules”).

1. The Parties
2. The Claimant is Mr. Michael Anthony Lee-Chin (“Claimant”), a national of Jamaica.
3. The Respondent is the Dominican Republic (the “Republic” or “Respondent’).

4. Claimant and Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The Patties’

representatives and their addresses are listed on page (i).
2. Overview of the Dispute

5. The Tribunal provides the following overview of the dispute and Claimant’s claims in order
to contextualize the Parties’ jurisdictional arguments. Nothing stated in this section reflects

any finding of fact or conclusion of law relating to the merits of the case.

6. This dispute has its origin in the Concession Agreement entered into on March 1, 2007
between the Dominican company Lajun Corporation, S.R.L. (“Lajun”) and the Municipality
of Santo Domingo Norte (“ASDN”, by its acronym in Spanish) for the administration and
operation of the Duquesa Landfill, in which final disposal of urban solid waste was carried out

in the area of the Gran Santo Domingo in the Dominican Republic.' According to Claimant,

Notice of Arbitration, § 23; Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 9; Exhibit C-1, Concession Agreement dated March 1, 2007. The
Concession Agreement was amended in four occasions, two of them before Claimant made his alleged investments in
the Republic in mid-2013 (Addenda 1 and 2) and the remaining two after that date (Addenda 2A and 3). See Exhibits
C-2 and C-3 (amendments before June 26, 2013) and Exhibits R-8 and C-6 (amendments after June 26, 2013).

the Concession Agreement also provided for Lajun’s right, and not only the eventuality, to

build a waste to energy plant (““WTE Plant’, by its acronym in English).”

7. On June 26, 2013, Mr. José Antonio Lopez Diaz and Ms. Darleny Indhira Lopez Polanco,
owners of Lajun aggregate share capital, sold 50% of that share capital to the Panamanian
entity Nagelo Enterprises, S.A. (“Nagelo”) and the remaining 50% to the Dominican entity
Wilkison Company, S.R.L. (“Wilkison”). On that same date, Mr. Lopez Diaz sold Nagelo and
Wilkison 875,373.12 m* on which the Duquesa Landfill was located (the “Land”). Claimant
alleges that on that same date he became the indirect owner of 90% of Lajun and the Land
through two Panamanian companies: Lution Investments, S.A. (“Lution”), owner of 100%
of Nagelo share capital, and Kigman Del Sur, S.A. (“Kigman”), owner of 80% of Wilkinson

share capital,’ as follows:

[PRRnKenn ten ee
S.R.L.

(Dominican Republic)

Nagelo Enterprises, S.A. Beatie amie

(Panama) an Republic)

Lution Investments, S.A. het E BPO R eee
(Panama) (Panama)
=)
100%
Michael Li thy Michael Lee Chin

(Jamaica) (OF 2)

 

See, inter alia, Statement of Claim, §§ 58, 61, 64, 82.

Statement of Claim, §§ 27, 82. Claimant explains that the remaining 10% minority interest is owned by Dr. José Luis
Asilis, a Dominican entrepreneur, See also, Memorial on Jurisdiction §§ 16-17.

8. On the basis of the foregoing, Claimant alleges that his investment in the Dominican Republic
includes (i) the acquisition of the interests in Lajun, (ii) the acquisition of the Land, (iii) the
right to develop a recycling facility and the WTE plant, and (iv) the Concession Agreement

granted by the ASDN.*

9. Claimant explains that thereafter he made substantial investments in the Duquesa Landfill and
fully complied with his contractual obligations, as acknowledged by the ASDN in many
occasions,’ and continued to render services despite Respondent’s contractual breaches and

political interferences focused on depriving Claimant of his property.’

10.

AAs consideration for the performance of services under the Concession Agreement, Lajun was
authorized to charge the Municipalities of the Gran Santo Domingo area a fee of at least USD
2 per ton of waste (the “Tipping Fee”).’ Claimant explains that the Tipping Fee did not
suffice to cover the operating costs of the Duquesa Landfill and to make the investments
required by the Concession Agreement," and that Respondent also acknowledged that the Fee
was inadequate both in the amendments to the Concession Agreement and in the settlement
agreements executed thereafter.’ Claimant recognizes that the Duquesa Landfill situation
increasingly deteriorated over the years, but alleges that this was due to the lack of adequate

compensation by the Dominican authorities for the services rendered by Lajun."”

11. According to Claimant, on July 9, 2013, under the pretext of a failure to comply with certain

environmental regulations, the ASDN notified Lajun of its decision to rescind the Concession

     

Notice of Arbitration, § 81; Statement of Claim, § 1.

See, inter alia, Statement of Claim, §§ 92-96, 114, 132, 153; Exhibit C-52, Verification of Compliance with Obligations
dated July 1, 2013; Exhibit C-16, Certification of Compliance dated July 9, 2014.

See, inter alia, Statement of Claim, §§ 24, 95, 158, 163, 173.

Notice of Arbitration, § 24; Statement of Claim, § 5'
and 4. See also, Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 11.
See, inter alia, Statement of Claim, §§ 8, 120, 129-130, 144, 152.
Statement of Claim, §§ 107-110, 115-116. Infra §§ 12 and 15.
Statement of Claim, §§ 107, 159.

 

xhibit C-1, Concession Agreement dated March 1, 2007, Clauses 3

Agreement," taking possession of the Landfill and ejecting Lajun and their employees from

the property.'*

12. Claimant invokes that in February 2014 the ASDN and Lajun concluded a settlement
agreement whereby the ASDN returned the possession of the land and authorized Lajun to
continue with the operation and administration of the Landfill (the “First Settlement
Agreement”).'’ Claimant alleges that it continued to invest substantially in the upgrading of
the machinery and technology used at the Duquesa Landfill and for construction of the WIE
Plant on the basis of the commitments made by Respondent in the First Settlement Agreement

and in the subsequent amendments to the Concession Agreement.'*

13. By Resolution No

 

/2014 of July 25, 2014, the General Directorate of Public Procurement
determined that the Concession Agreement had been executed in breach of certain provisions

of Law No. 340-06 of Public Procurement.'>

14. In 2016 and 2017 the Ministry of Environment imposed sanctions to Lajun for violations of

the environmental permit and Law No. 64-00 of Environment."

15. Claimant invokes that in May 2017, following an alleged new interference by Respondent in

the Duquesa Landfill operation,” the ASDN and Lajun executed a second settlement

agreement pursuant to which Claimant regained control of his property (the “Second

Settlement Agreement’)."*

“Statement of Claim, §§ 88-89; Exhibit C-37, Act No. 817-2013, Notice of Termination of the Agreement of the
Municipality of Santo Domingo Norte dated July 9, 2013.

Statement of Claim, § 97; Exhibit C-29, Notice of Taking of Possession of the Landfill Site of the Duquesa Landfill and
Verbal Process of Asset Inventory No. 470/2013 dated July 17, 2013.

Statement of Claim, § 100;
dated February 10, 2014.

Statement of Claim, §§ 102-108, 122.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 19; Exhibit R-17, Resolution No. 53/2014 of the General Directorate of Public Procurement
dated July 25, 2014.

Statement of Claim, §§ 123-125; Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 22 and 26.

Statement of Claim, §§ 157-158.

Statement of Claim, § 169;
dated May 24, 2017.

 

hibit C-5, First Settlement Agreement between the ASDN and Lajun Corporation, S.R.L.

 

xhibit C-8, Second Settlement Agreement between the ASDN and Lajun Corporation, S.R.L.

8

16. On July 19, 2017, the ASDN decided to exercise its unilateral termination right provided for
under the Concession Agreement, notifying Lajun of alleged breaches of its obligations under

the Concession Agreement and giving Lajun thirty days to cure them."

17. Claimant explains that on August 10, 2017, before the expiration of the cure period, the ASDN
initiated an administrative proceeding before the Superior Administrative Court of the
Dominican Republic seeking the nullification of the Concession Agreement (the “Nullification
Action”) and, concurrently, a request for interim measures seeking judicial administration of

the Duquesa Landfill until the conclusion of the Nullification Action.”!

18. On September 27, 2017, the Superior Administrative Court issued an interim measure whereby
it ordered the provisional intervention and administration of the Duquesa Landfill by a
commission composed of the Minister of Environment and Natural Resources, the Minister
of Public Health, and the Mayor of the ASDN.” The following day, this commission took
control of the Duquesa Landfill. According to Claimant, this act constituted a forced

expropriation with no compensation whatsoever.”

19. On December 19, 2017, Claimant sent Respondent a Notice of Controversy, inviting the latter

to resolve the dispute amicably.”

20.

On April 6, 2018, Claimant sent Respondent a Notice of Arbitration in compliance with

Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Rules.

Statement of Claim, § 174; Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 27; Exhibit C-9, Complaint for Breach of the Agreement, Act No.
179/2017, submitted by the ASDN against Lajun Corporation $.R.L. dated July 19, 2017.

Statement of Claim, § 177; Exhibit C-11, Administrative Proceeding aimed at Nullifying the Agreement for
Administration and Operation of the Duquesa Landfill and its amending addenda dated August 10, 2017, p. 5,
explaining that when the ASDN’s Mayor, René Polanco, took office in July 2016 Resolution No. 53/2014 was not on
the ASDN’s records. See also, Exhibit R-38, Act No. 1535/2017 dated August 1, 2017 whereby the ASDN was given
notice of Resolution No. 53/2014 of the General Directorate of Public Procurement.

Statement of Claim, § 179; Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 29.

Statement of Claim, § 184; Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 30; Exhibit C-13, Superior Administrative Court Judgment No. 0030-
2017-SSMC-00082 dated September 27, 2017, pp. 34-35.
Statement of Claim, § 185; Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 30; Exhibit R-41, Minutes No. 0001/2017 of the Commission for the
Provisional Administration of the Duquesa Landfill dated September 28, 2017.

Statement of Claim, § 185.

Exhibit C-15, Notice of Controversy dated December 19, 2017.

 

21.

On October 25, 2018, the Superior Administrative Court ruled on the Nullification Action
filed by the ASDN, declaring the sullification of the Concession Agreement on the basis of

26

violations of Law No. No. 340-06 of Public Procurement.” According to Claimant, this

judgment was not served until January 10, 2019.7”
3. The Parties’ Requests

22. On the basis of the facts summarily described above and the Dominican Republic authorities’
acts, Claimant requests that the Tribunal declare that Respondent has breached its obligations
under the Treaty regarding expropriation, fair and equitable treatment and full protection and
security, discriminatory and arbitrary measures, umbrella clause, and treatment no less

favorable and, on the basis thereof, order Respondent to pay the following:

@) damages in an amount ranging between USD 583.6 million and USD 596.1 million,
i) moral damages in the amount of USD 5 million, and
(iii) all costs relating to the present arbitration proceedings, including all of Claimant’s

attorneys’ fees and expenses, as well as the interest accrued thereon.”

23.

a

Other than by making some references to Claimant’s allegations, Respondent has not
elaborated its defense on the merits of the case. So far, Respondent’s positions and claims are
limited to the jurisdictional aspects of the dispute.”

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. The Initial Phase

24. On the basis of Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Notice of Arbitration sent by Claimant

on April 6, 2018 commenced this arbitration.

nN
on

. On July 19, 2018, the Parties notified the Secretary-General of ICSID of their agreement to

appoint ICSID as Administering Authority of the arbitral proceedings. In addition, the Parties

Exhibit C-130, Superior Administrative Court Judgment No. 0030-02-2018-SSEN-00357 dated October 25, 2018.
Statement of Claim, § 188.
Statement of Claim, pages (vi) and (vii).
Infra, §§ 63-65.

26.

27.

28.

29.

notified that, in accordance with Article 7 of the UNCITRAL Rules, Claimant had appointed
Mr. Christian Leathley, a national of the United Kingdom, as arbitrator and Respondent had
appointed Prof. Marcelo Kohen, a national of the Argentine Republic, as arbitrator. The
Parties also informed that the co-arbitrators were in the process of appointing the President

of the Tribunal.

On July 20, 2018, the Secretary-General of ICSID accepted the appointment as Administering
Authority and informed the Parties that Ms. Marisa Planells-Valero, Legal Counsel at ICSID,

would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On August 3, 2018, the co-arbitrators appointed Prof. Diego P. Fernandez Arroyo, a national

of the Argentine Republic and the Kingdom of Spain, as President of the Tribunal.

On August 7, 2018, the Centre informed the Parties that Prof. Fernandez Arroyo had accepted
his appointment as Presiding Arbitrator. The Centre also informed the Parties that the
reference number for the proceeding would be UNCT/18/3 and invited them to submit
copies of the communications they had exchanged before the appointment of ICSID as

Administering Authority and which were to be transmitted to the Tribunal.

On September 25, 2018, the Tribunal and the Parties held the preliminary procedural
consultation by telephone conference. The following persons were in attendance:
Members of the Tribunal:

Prof. Diego P. Fernandez Arroyo, President of the Tribunal
Mr. Christian Leathley, Arbitrator

Prof. Marcelo Kohen, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat:

Ms. Marisa Planells-Valero, Secretary of the Tribunal

For Claimant:

Mr. Richard C. Lorenzo, Hogan Lovells US LLP
Ms. Maria Eugenia Ramirez, Hogan Lovells US LLP
Ms. Juliana de Valdenebro Garrido, Hogan Lovells US LLP

7

30.

31.

32.

For Respondent:

Mr. Marcelo A. Salazar, Director, Directorate of International Trade Agreements and Treaties
Administration “CDICOEX”, by its acronym in Spanish)

Ms. Leidylin Contreras, Deputy Director, DICOEX

Ms. Maria Amalia Lorenzo, Analyst, DICOEX

Ms. Patricia Abreu, Vice Minister of Cooperation and International Affairs, Ministry of
Environment and Natural Resources

Ms. Rosa Otero, Director, Vice Ministry of Cooperation and International Affairs, Ministry of
Environment and Natural Resources

Ms. Johanna Montero, Counsel of the Office of Cooperation, Trade and Environment,
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources

Mr. Enmanuel Rosario, Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources

Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Elisa Botero, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

During the preliminary procedural consultation, the Parties confirmed that the Tribunal had
been duly constituted and that the Parties had no objection whatsoever regarding the
appointment of the members of the Tribunal. It was agreed, infer alia, that the proceedings
should be conducted pursuant to the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules. In addition, the Parties agreed
that the procedural languages of the arbitration would be English and Spanish; that the place
of arbitration would be Washington, D.C., although the Tribunal could hold hearings at any
other place it considered appropriate if the Parties so agreed, and that the award shall be

deemed to have been made at the place of arbitration.

Following the preliminary procedural consultation and after several additional exchanges, on
October 23, 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, recording the Parties’
agreement on certain procedural matters and the decision of the Tribunal on disputed issues.

Procedural Order No. 1 also set forth the timetable for the various procedural phases.

On November 5, 2018, following exchanges between the Parties, the Tribunal issued a revised

Procedural Calendar.

o

34.

36.

37.

38.

2. The Written Phase on Jurisdiction

On January 18, 2019, Claimant submitted his Statement of Claim, jointly with Witness
Statements by Mr. Michael Anthony Lee-Chin and Mr. Adrian Christopher Lee-Chin, Expert
Reports by Prof. Joost H.B. Pauwelyn (with Exhibits 1 to 57), Mr. Brent C. Kaczmarek (AV
Advisors) (with Exhibits IAV-1 to IAV-216), Mr. Thomas Tullo and by Mr. Francois Screve
(Deltaway), Factual Exhibits C-1 to C-130, and Legal Authorities CL-1 to CL-42 (the
“Statement of Claim”). In compliance with Section 10.2. of Procedural Order No. 1,

Claimant submitted the Statement of Claim in English.

On February 4, 2019, Respondent submitted a request for bifurcation, jointly with Factual
Exhibit R-1 and Legal Authorities RL-1 to RL-21 (the “Request for Bifurcation”) of two
jurisdictional objections. In compliance with Section 10.2. of Procedural Order No. 1,

Respondent submitted the Request for Bifurcation in Spanish.

. On February 19, 2019, Claimant submitted his Opposition to Respondent’s Request for

Bifurcation, jointly with Legal Authorities CL-43 to CL-57 (the “Opposition to
Bifurcation”). In compliance with Section 10.2. of Procedural Order No. 1, Claimant

submitted his Opposition to Bifurcation in English.

On March 6, 2019, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 informing the Parties of its
decision to grant Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation. The Tribunal further determined
continuity of the arbitral proceedings according to Option II of the revised procedural

calendar.

On May 6, 2019, Respondent submitted its Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, jointly
with Factual Exhibits R-2 to R-48 and Legal Authorities RL-22 to RL-190 (the “Memorial

on Jurisdiction”).

On July 3, 2019, Claimant submitted his Counter-Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction,
jointly with the Second Expert Report by Prof. Joost H.B. Pauwelyn (with Exhibits 58 to 70),
Witness Statements by Ambassador Frederic Emam Zade and Ambassador George Anthony
Hylton, Factual Exhibits C-131 to C-138, and Legal Authorities CL-58 to CL-61 (the

“Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction’).

39.

6

40.

41.

42.

43.

B

44.

46.

47.

On July 16, 2019, Claimant submitted a request to the Tribunal to amend the procedural
calendar. Attached to the request, Claimant submitted a communication by Respondent

rejecting Claimant’s proposal to amend the procedural calendar.

On July 17, 2019, in view of the disagreement between the Parties, the Tribunal rejected

Claimant’s request.

On August 5, 2019, following exchanges between the Parties and in compliance with
Procedural Order No. 1, the Centre transmitted the Parties’ respective requests for production

of documents to the Tribunal.

On August 19, 2019, the Tribunal issued its decision on the Parties’ requests for production

of documents.

On October 21, 2019, Respondent submitted its Reply Memorial on Objections to
Jurisdiction, jointly with Factual Exhibits R-49 to R-73 and Legal Authorities RL-191 to RL-
269 (the “Reply on Jurisdiction”).

On November 15, 2019, Claimant requested an extension for the submission of his Rejoinder
on Objections to Jurisdiction. On that same date, Respondent confirmed its agreement with

Claimant’s request.

. On November 18, 2019, in view of the Parties’ agreement, the Tribunal granted Claimant’s

request.

On December 12, 2019, Claimant submitted his Rejoinder on Objections to Jurisdiction,
jointly with the Second Witness Statements of Mr. Michael Anthony Lee-Chin and
Ambassador George Anthony Hylton, Factual Exhibits C-139 to C-145, and Legal Authorities

CL-62 to CL-75 (the “Rejoinder on Jurisdiction’).
3. The Hearing on Jurisdiction

On January 13, 2020, the Centre transmitted to the Parties a draft agenda for the pre-hearing

organizational meeting, inviting the Parties’ comments.

48.

49.

g

vy

On January 28, 2020, the Tribunal held a pre-hearing organizational meeting with the Parties

by telephone conference.

On January 31, 2020, Respondent requested the Tribunal’s leave to incorporate two new
exhibits and a new legal authority into the case record. On February 6, 2020, Claimant
indicated that he did not oppose Respondent’s request provided that he was granted the
opportunity to comment on Respondent’s additional documents during the Hearing and that
he was granted leave to incorporate a new legal authority. On February 11, 2020, Respondent
informed that it did not oppose Claimant’s request. On February 12, 2020, the Tribunal
authorized the incorporation into the case record of both Parties’ additional documents.
Accordingly, on February 13, 2020, Claimant incorporated a new legal authority under the
reference CL-76, and Respondent incorporated two new exhibits under the references R-74

and R-75 and a new legal authority under the reference RL-270.

50. On February 11, 2020, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 on the organization of the

hearing.

. On February 14, 2020, Claimant informed of Ambassador Frederic Emam Zade’s decision

not to appear to testify at the Hearing and provided a letter from him explaining that his
decision resulted from the potential political implications of his testimony in the face of the
upcoming presidential elections in the Dominican Republic. On February 18, 2020,
Respondent requested that, in view of the foregoing, Ambassador Zade’s witness statement
be stricken from the case record. On February 21, 2020, Claimant submitted additional
comments. On February 24, 2020, in compliance with Section 17.4 of Procedural Order No.
1, the Tribunal decided to strike from the case record Ambassador Zade’s witness statement,
and any reference thereto in the Parties’ pleadings, as it considered that the Claimant had failed
to prove the existence of exceptional circumstances preventing Ambassador Zade from

participating at the Hearing.

. The Hearing on Jurisdiction was held in Washington D.C. on February 27 and 28, 2020. The

following persons were present at the Hearing:

Tribunal.

Prof. Diego P. Fernandez Arroyo
Mr. Christian Leathley
Prof. Marcelo Kohen

ICSID Secretariat:

Ms. Marisa Planells-Valero

For Claimant:

Mr. Richard C. Lorenzo

. Mark R. Cheskin

s. Maria E, Ramirez

s. Juliana De Valdenebro

s. Marta M. Urra

s. Wilzette Louis

Mr. Michael Anthony Lee-Chin
Mr. Adrian Lee-Chin

s. Lorraine Sullivan

For Respondent:

Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson
s. Gabriela Alvarez Avila

. Fernando Tupa

s. Natalia Linares

s. Belén Ibafiez

Ms. Jaclyn Messemer

s. Stephania Ocampo

Mr. Marcelo A. Salazar

z

s. Leidylin Contreras

z

s. Raquel De La Rosa

z

s. Patricia Abreu Fernandez
s. Rosa Otero Nieves
Mr. Enmanuel Rosario Estévez

Ms. Johanna Montero De Los Santos

Presiding Arbitrator
Arbitrator
Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal

Hogan Lovells US LLP
Hogan Lovells US LLP
Hogan Lovells US LLP
Hogan Lovells US LLP
Hogan Lovells US LLP
Hogan Lovells US LLP
Claimant

Affiliated to Claimant
Affiliated to Claimant

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Directorate of International Trade
Agreements and Treaties Administration
Directorate of International Trade
Agreements and Treaties Administration
Directorate of International Trade
Agreements and Treaties Administration
Ministry of Environment and Natural
Resources

Ministry of Environment and Natural
Resources

Ministry of Environment and Natural
Resources

Ministry of Environment and Natural
Resources

wn
o

wn
or

y
a

wo
a

Court Reporters:

Mr. David Kasdan B&B Reporters

Ms. Marjorie Peters B&B Reporters

Mr. Dionisio Rinaldi D-R Esteno

Ms. Carla Pagura D-R Esteno
Interpreters:

Ms. Judith Letendre
Ms. Estela Zaffaroni
Mr. Luis Eduardo Arango

. During the Hearing, the following persons were examined:

Presented by Claimant:

Ambassador George Anthony Hylton Jamaica
(as witness)

Prof. Joost H.B. Pauwelyn Graduate Institute of International and
(as expert) Development Studies, Geneva
(Switzerland)

At the end of the Hearing, the Tribunal and the Parties agreed that no post-hearing briefs

would be submitted.

4, The Post-Hearing-on-Jurisdiction Phase

. On April 2, 2020, the Parties submitted the corrected versions of the Hearing transcripts. Due

to certain mismatches observed in the translations, the Parties requested the Tribunal to only
take into account the versions the transcripts in the original language. On April 3, 2020, the

Tribunal confirmed that it would act as requested by the Parties.

56. On April 7, 2020, the Secretary of the Tribunal sent to the Parties and the Tribunal the final

versions of the Hearing transcripts prepared on the basis of the corrections to the transcripts

sent by the Parties on April 2, 2020.

. On April 10, 2020, the Tribunal invited the Parties to submit their Statements of Costs.

60.

iil.

. On April 20, 2020, Claimant submitted his Statement of Costs and Respondent requested an

extension until May 15, 2020 for the submission of its Statement of Costs due to the difficulties

caused by the COVID-19 crisis.

. On that same date, Claimant informed that he had no objection to Respondent’s request

ptovided that both Respondent and the Tribunal agreed that the Tribunal could issue its
decision on jurisdiction as soon as possible, and that any such decision could be followed by

a decision on costs after receipt of the Respondent’s Statement of Costs.

On April 21, 2020, in view of the exceptional circumstances caused by the COVID-19 crisis,
the Tribunal extended the deadline for submission or amendment, if any, of the Parties’

Statements of Costs until May 15, 2020.

. On May 15, 2020, Respondent submitted its Statement of Costs. On May 17, 2020, the

Secretary of the Tribunal sent Claimant’s Statement of Costs dated April 20, 2020 and

Respondent’s Statement of Costs dated May 15, 2020 to the other Party and to the Tribunal.

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS REGARDING JURISDICTION

. In this section, the Parties’ main arguments are presented succinctly. The Tribunal shall refer

to some of them in more detail during the course of its analysis, when deemed necessary.
1. The Dominican Republic’s Position

A) The Treaty does not contain an Offer of Consent to UNCITRAL Arbitration

. In its written and oral submissions, the Republic challenges the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on

the basis of the following arguments:

(paragraph 1 of Article XIII cannot be construed as an open offer of consent to

international arbitration under the UNCITRAL Rules;””

3 Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 38 and 88. Reply on Jurisdiction, §§ 6-24.

14

31

(i)

ii)

ro)

paragraph 2 of Article XIII requires the Republic to grant its ex post consent to the
existence of a dispute for it to be referred to international arbitration under the
UNCITRAL Rules;*!

Claimant bears the burden to prove in a clear and unambiguous manner the consent
to UNCITRAL arbitration by the Republic and he has failed to meet any such
burden;”

the most-favored nation clause cannot be invoked to ground the Republic’s

consent” neither can it be used to “confirm” the interpretation of Article XIII.“

B) The Treaty does not Protects Inditect Investments or Indirect Investors

64. Respondent is also of the view that the Treaty protects neither indirect investments nor

indirect investors, on the following grounds:

@

(i)

ii)

the lack of protection to indirect investments and indirect investors is consistent
with the essential international law principle under which shareholders of a
company cannot claim for damages suffered by the company in which they hold
shares;*°

there are multiple textual references in several Treaty provisions that show the
intention thereof was to protect only direct investments and direct investors;
excluding indirect investments and indirect investors from protection is warranted
by public policy reasons, such as avoiding the exponential risk of parallel
proceedings. Accordingly, it is reasonable to assume that if the Contracting Parties
did not expressly provide for that protection, it was because they wanted to exclude

it”

Rephy on Jurisdiction, §§ 24-45.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 84, footnote 73. Reply on Jurisdiction, §§ 108-113.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§, 88-146. Reply on Jurisdiction, §§ 124-150.

Rephy on Jurisdiction, §§ 118-123.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 173-176. Reply on Jurisdiction, § 162.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 177. Reply on Jurisdiction, § 164.

Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 165.

©) Respondent’s Claims
65. On the basis of the foregoing, Respondent requests that the Tribunal:

(declare its lack of jurisdiction to resolve this dispute;
(i) reject all claims contained in the Statement of Claim for lack of jurisdiction; and
(iii) order Claimant to pay all costs of these proceedings, including Respondent’s legal

fees and expenses, as well as the interest accrued thereon.*
2. Michael Anthony Lee-Chin’s Position
A) The Dominican Republic Consented to Arbitrate this Dispute

66. Mr. Lee-Chin, both in his memorials and at the Hearing on Jurisdiction, submits that the

Republic consented to this arbitration on the basis of the following arguments:

(i) paragraph 1 of Article XIII represents a unilateral offer of consent to international
arbitration by the Republic;”

(ii) paragraph 2 of Article XIII assumes, in the first sentence, that a dispute has already
been submitted to international arbitration;

(iii) the wording of paragraph 2 of Article XIII simply allows the Parties to agree on
whether arbitration should be referred to a sole arbitrator or to an arbitral tribunal,
which shall be appointed by a special agreement or, in the absence of such
agreement (that is, by default), established under the UNCITRAL Rules;

(iv) the most-favored nation clause, contained in Article III of Annex III of the Treaty,

confirms Respondent’s consent to international arbitration.”

Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 181. Reply on Jurisdiction, § 170.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 19-42. Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, §§ 8-21.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§, 24. Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, §§ 43-45.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 25. Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 23.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 40-41, 81-105. Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, §§ 70-7.

16

4B

“4

45

B) The Treaty Protects Indirect Investments and Investors

67. Additionally, Mr. Lee-Chin states that the Treaty protects both indirect investments and

indirect investors, relying on the following arguments:

@

di)

the terms “investor” and “investment” defined in the Treaty are unquestionably
broad and unrestricted;

the Treaty does not limit its protection to “direct” investors or “direct” investments;
indeed, the term “direct” is nowhere to be found under the definitions section of

the Treaty.

©) Claimant’s Claims

68. On the basis of the foregoing, Claimant requests an award from the Tribunal containing the

following relief:

@

(i)

ii)
oo)

A declaration that the dispute is within the jurisdiction and competence of the
Tribunal;

A declaration summarily dismissing the Republic’s jurisdictional challenge
contained in its Jurisdictional Memorials;

A declaration that the dispute will immediately be proceeding to the merits phase;
An order directing the Republic to pay all of Claimant’s costs, with interest, relating
to the present bifurcation and arbitration proceedings, including all of his attorneys’
fees and expenses; and

An order granting any further relief the Tribunal deems just and proper under the

circumstances.”

5 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 106-111. Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, §§ 78-87.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 112-114. Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 81.
Counter Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 119. Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 89.

17

Iv. THE BASIC ELEMENTS FOR THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS
1. The Text to Be Interpreted

69. The Parties’ discussion at this jurisdictional phase focuses on the interpretation of the
provision contained in Article XIII of Annex III to the Treaty dealing with the reciprocal
ptomotion and protection of investments, and on whether the Treaty provides for the

protection of indirect investments and indirect investors.

70.

As to the first point, Article XII, entitled “Settlement of Disputes Between an Investor and

a Contracting Party”,"° provides as follows:

1, Disputes between an investor of one Party and the other Party concerning an obligation
of the latter under this Agreement in relation to an investment of the former which have
not been amicably settled shall, after a period of three months from written notification
of a claim, be submitted to the courts of that Party or to national or international

arbitration.

2. Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration, the investor and the Party
concerned in the dispute may agree to refer the dispute to an international arbitrator or

ad hoc arbitration tribunal to be inted by a special or d under

 

the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.

3. Neither Party shall give diplomatic protection or bring an international claim, in respect
of a dispute which one of its investors has consented to submit to arbitration, unless the
other Party which is party to the dispute shall have failed to abide by and comply with
the award rendered in such dispute by the arbitral tribunal. Diplomatic protection, for
the purposes of this paragraph, shall not include informal diplomatic exchanges for the
sole purpose of facilitating a settlement of the dispute by the arbitral tribunal.

4. The awards of the arbitrator shall be definitive, compulsory and without appeal for the

Contracting Party and the investor.

“© In order to avoid any confusion with the Patties to the proceedings, any reference to the “Contracting Parties to the
Treaty” shall mean the Parties to the Treaty.

18

2. The Sources of the criteria for the interpretation of the Treaty

71. Both Parties agree to widely rely on the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties between
States and International Organizations of 1986 (“Vienna Convention of 1986”), particularly
the articles included in Section 3 on treaty interpretation. Said Convention is not in force,
although such articles, which are identical to those of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties of 1969, may be deemed to reflect the status of the applicable customary international

law.
72. Given the many references in this regard, the relevant articles shall be transcribed below:

Article 31
General rule of interpretation
1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to
be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and
purpose.
2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in addition
to the text, including its preamble and annexes:

a) Any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the parties in
connexion with the conclusion of the treaty;

b) Any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connexion with the
conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the other parties as an instrament related
to the treaty.

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

a) Any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of the
treaty or the application of its provisions;

b) Any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the
agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

c) Any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the

parties.

 

xhibit RL-34, Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties between States and International Organizations or between
International Organizations, signed on March 21, 1986. The Parties refer to this Convention as the “VCLT II”.
Nevertheless, on account of the existence of several “Vienna” conventions and for the avoidance of confusion, the
Tribunal shall rather refer to it as the “Vienna Convention of 1986”.

19

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so intended.

Article 32
Supplementary means of interpretation
Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including the
preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to confirm
the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to determine the meaning
when the interpretation according to article 31:
a) Leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or

b) Leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

Article 33
Interpretation of treaties authenticated in to or more languages

1, When a treaty has been authenticated in two or more languages, the text is equally
authoritative in each language, unless the treaty provides or the parties agree that, in
case of divergence, a particular text shall prevail.

2. A version of the treaty in a language other than one of those in which the text was
authenticated shall be considered an authentic text only if the treaty so provides or the
parties so agree.

3. The terms of the treaty are presumed to have the same meaning in each authentic text.

4. Except where a particular text prevails in accordance with paragraph 1, when a
comparison of the authentic texts discloses a difference of meaning which the application
of articles 31 and 32 does not remove, the meaning which best reconciles the texts, having

regard to the object and purpose of the treaty, shall be adopted.

73. As it shall be highlighted in due course, according to the Parties, the interpretation that they
respectively propose is the only one in line with the principles of interpretation under the
Vienna Convention of 1986. The Tribunal is aware that, in some particular cases, there could
be more than one reading consistent with this Convention. In any event, the duty of this
Tribunal is to unravel the meaning of the relevant rules of the Treaty, by adopting the

interpretation that it considers as the most appropriate.

20

g

74.

76.

77.

3. The Preparatory Work

Unlike references to other treaties not applicable to this case, the preparatory work of the
Treaty the provisions of which are being interpreted (expressly mentioned as “supplementary
means of interpretation” in Article 32 of the Vienna Convention of 1986) may, in some
instances and under specific circumstances, help find the intent of the Contracting Parties to

the Treaty in adopting such provisions.

In this case, both Parties agree to rely on them, though stressing different aspects. The Parties
have also discussed the difficulties encountered in obtaining a complete version of the

preparatory work and the consequences of taking this preparatory work into consideration.”

4, The Circumstances of the Conclusion of the Treaty and Other Supplementary

Means of Interpretation

The Parties have resorted to other supplementary means of interpretation in their attempt to
convince the Tribunal that their respective positions are well-founded. In particular, and as for
the interpretation of Article XIII of the Treaty, Claimant has devoted considerable effort so
that the Tribunal take into consideration the opinions of two negotiators of the Treaty.’ Only
one of those opinions can be taken into account, namely, the opinion of Ambassador George
Anthony Hylton,” introduced by Claimant as the leader of the Jamaican delegation during the

negotiation of the Treaty, as well as other similar instruments.”

Respondent denies that this sort of testimony has any relevance and submits a series of
arguments to such effect. In particular, Respondent underscores that, based on the clear
interpretation it proposes, Article 32 of the Vienna Convention of 1986 prevents from

resorting to “supplementary means of interpretation” to assert precisely otherwise. For

Rephy on Jurisdiction, §§ 59 et seq.; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, §§ 39 et seq.
Tr. Day 1, Spanish, p. 18, 1. 1-p. 21, 1. 5 (Respondent); Tr. Day 1, English, p. 197, l. 8-p. 199, 1. 14 (Claimant).

Rejainder on Jurisdiction, §§ 48 et seq.; Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§, 33 et seg.

Exhibit C-138, Declaration of Ambassador George Anthony Hylton dated June 26, 2019.
As regards the exclusion of Ambassador Frederic Emam Zade as a witness, see supra § 51.
Reply on Jurisdiction, §§ 67 et seq.

Reply on Jurisdiction, §, 68.

21

Respondent, those means of interpretation may be relevant only to confirm the result of the

application of Article 31 of the Vienna Convention of 1986.

78. However, the Tribunal considers that the testimony provided by the leader of a negotiating

some relevance to

 

delegation may have, with all the limitations inherent in a fact witness,
confirm the arguments of the party that calls the witness or to undermine the arguments of
the opposing party. Indeed, the Tribunal considers that the declarations of Ambassador
Hylton at the Hearing on Jurisdiction offered interesting perspectives. Nevertheless, the
Tribunal noted the contrast between Ambassador Hylton’s inability to recall basic logistic
elements as well as the negotiation of other aspects of the Treaty, on the one hand, and his
very specific and detailed recollection of the terms of Article XIII discussed in this arbitration,
on the other hand. In the Tribunal’s view, it is not appropriate to draw conclusions about the

truthfulness of Ambassador Hylton’s testimony, but such testimony lacks the necessary

 

consistency to be included in the Tribunal’s analy:
5. Invocation of judicial precedents

79. As it is usually the case in investment disputes, both the Parties’ pleadings and their oral

submissions are full of references to judicial precedents. In fact, numerous international

   

decisions, particularly but not exclusively arbitral deci:

 

ions, have been cited by the Parties to
support their respective positions and persuade the Tribunal of the prevailing interpretation
of the notions raised before it. Some arbitral decisions have been analyzed in great detail,
offering the Tribunal a comprehensive analysis of the conflicting views of the Parties about

them.

80.

In this regard, the Tribunal cannot but recall that there is no stare decisis doctrine in international
law. Tribunals are independent from each other and there is no hierarchic organization
among them which could make them subject, under certain circumstances, to the decisions of
others. However, the Tribunal believes it desirable, in general, to foster the development of a

Jurisprudence constante based on previous decisions, not only as a means of providing certain

5 [bid.

5G, Guillaume, “Le précédent dans la justice et arbitrage international” (Lalive Lecture, June 2, 2010), Jounal de droit
international, 2010-3, pp. 685-703.

22

81.

82.

83.

ptedictability to the parties but also as a response to an ongoing demand for mote consistency
within the international investment system, a demand rooted in the need to enhance its
legitimacy. In fact, typically, the Parties’ citations to judicial precedents are aimed at stating
what a good faith interpretation should be according to the ordinary meaning of the terms

under discussion, which is the basic rule of interpretation.

The foregoing is by no means contradictory with the Tribunal’s primary duty which is,
undoubtedly, to render a decision regarding the dispute, on the basis of all the specific factual
and legal elements before it. In this regard, maybe it is pointless to mention that the search for
consistency based on a detailed analysis of previous decisions is, in many cases, unsuccessful.
Logically, special care should always be exercised to determine the similarities or differences
between the present case and those cases in which such previous decisions were adopted. The
very fact that the Parties cite the same cases to propose opposing interpretations evidences
the limits of the desire to have a consistent case-law within an absolutely decentralized system

and reminds us to what extent the Tribunal should be careful about using case law.
FIRST JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION —- CONSENT TO ARBITRATE
1. Consent to International Arbitration
A) The Obligation Undertaken by the Contracting Parties to the Treaty
a. Respondent's Position

According to Respondent, the purpose of paragraph 1 of Article XIII is to merely identify
potential alternatives for the resolution of disputes and to set the preconditions for submitting

a dispute to any of these alternatives.”

For Respondent, the word “shall” that precedes those alternatives may have several meanings

and is used here “to denote something that will eventually occur in the future, not an

9958

obligation.” [Tribunal’s Translation]. According to Respondent, interpreting “shall” as an

Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 9; Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 45.

Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 14.

23

59

a

of

obligation in this provision “would lead to the absurd conclusion that a dispute should be
simultaneously submitted to three methods of dispute resolution, since the alleged obligation

would be applicable to the three methods, which makes no sense.” [Tribunal’s Translation].
b. Claimant's Position

Claimant, on the other hand, states that paragraph 1 of Article XII undoubtedly contains the
Republic’s “complete” consent to international arbitration and that, as a result, foreign
investors — such as Claimant in this case — are provided with “an immediate right of access to
international arbitration”, with no need for the State to agree or consent a second time once

the dispute arises.”

According to Claimant, “the use of the word ‘shall’ in paragraph one confirms the binding

296

nature of the State’s consent.”" In Claimant’s words, for this interpretation to lead to the
absurd conclusion — as erroneously suggested by Respondent — that a dispute should be
simultaneously submitted to the three alternatives indicated in paragraph 1,° we would have

to ignore the word “or” used to separate the different alternatives.”
The Tribunal's Analysis

As noted above and as it could hardly be otherwise,“ both Parties have naturally and
repeatedly stated that the Treaty and, in particular, Article XIII should be interpreted following
the criteria provided by the Vienna Convention of 1986. Therefore, the application of the
international law in force, which the Tribunal would have applied anyway is, in the present
case, underpinned by the Parties’ strong conviction. The problem, as usual, is that the
apptoaches to apply those interpretation criteria as well as the specific results obtained differ

dramatically.

Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 15.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 9.

Ibid Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 45.
See supra, § 83.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 16.

Supra, §§ 71 et seg.

24

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

However, before discussing the crucial point of disagreement between the Parties, it should
be noted that there is no discrepancy about the generality of the terms of paragraph 1 of

Article XIII.

Thus, the Parties do not seem to find it difficult to accept that the disputes referred to in
Article XHI should arise between an investor of a Contracting Party to the Treaty and the

other Contracting Party thereto.

Also, the Parties agree that the disputes mentioned in paragraph 1 are those “concerning an
obligation” in relation to an investment under Annex III to the Treaty, which must be

complied with by the Contracting Party to the Treaty that is the host State.

The Parties further agree that the disputes concerned must not have “been amicably settled

2965

L...] after a period of three months from written notification of a claim,

It follows from the above that recourse to one of the dispute resolution methods becomes
available upon failure to settle this type of dispute in accordance with the described timeframe
and manner. Neither the existence of a dispute as defined in paragraph 1 of Article XIII, nor
the fact that it has not been settled as required in said paragraph are under discussion in this

case.

Thus, without having to depart from the first hypothesis of the “general rule of interpretation”
included in Article 31 of the Vienna Convention of 1986, the Parties have been able to agree

on virtually the entire paragraph 1 of Article XIII.

However, the Parties disagree on the last phrase of such paragraph 1. What Claimant considers
as a clear expression of consent by the Contracting Parties to the Treaty is, in Respondent’s
view, nothing but a mere indication of situations that might occur in the future. Thus, the
discrepancy between the Parties focuses on the crucial issue of the mandatory submission to

one of the dispute resolution mechanisms provided.

For the Tribunal, the use of the expression “shall [...] be submitted” in the English version is

unambiguous. It expresses a duty. The analysis of both the text of paragraph 1 of Article XIII

6 Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 46; Reply on Jurisdiction, § 20; Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 22.

25

96.

97.

98.

and the context in which it is embedded support this interpretation. On this basis, the Tribunal
finds no difficulty in asserting unanimously that paragraph 1 of Article XIII clearly contains
an obligation undertaken by the Contracting Parties to the Treaty. This obligation consists in
submitting the disputes defined therein between an investor and a Contracting Party to the
Treaty to one of the fora indicated at the end of the paragraph, namely: the courts of the

Contracting Party, national arbitration, or international arbitration.

It is true that, in Spanish, the future tense of the indicative mood of a verb may be used for
different purposes and the meaning may vary according to the formula used and the syntax of
the complete sentence in which the verb appears. That applies to the verb “serdn’”, the future
indicative of the verb to be. The same happens in English with the auxiliary verb “shall”
However, in this case, taking into account the wording of the expression, the complete
sentence in which it appears and, mainly, its inclusion in a legislative text, no other meaning

may be found.

Indeed, the use of such expression in relation to disputes arising from the violation of the
obligations under the Treaty can only be read as a commitment undertaken by the holders of
those obligations. In the context of the interpretation of the expression “shall be submitted”,
it is important to take into account the very title of Article XIII, which leads to think that all
its provisions must have been drafted in order to enable the “settlement of disputes between

an Investor and a Contracting Party.”

AAs a consequence of the foregoing, given that the investors have granted no agreement to
arbitrate, the advance offer to arbitrate can only emanate from the State. For this apparent
reason, it follows that the only party which is able to institute an investor-State arbitration
under Article XIII is the investor (whose rights would have been violated). Therefore, it is the
investor (and only the investor) who is entitled by Article XIII to choose international

arbitration among the three options offered.

The Respondent’s suggestion that the expression “shall be submitted” be construed in this
context as an event that might occur in the future is not acceptable. This argument raised by
Respondent is based, first, on one of the meanings of the word “sha/?’ included in two

dictionaries and, second, on a passage contained in the Decision on Jurisdiction in the case

26

66

Planet Mining v. Indonesia. For the Tribunal, those reasons do not support the interpretation

sought by Respondent.

99. As regards the word “shall”, Respondent asserts that it has several meanings, and that the one
that “refers to something that will occur in the future” is as valid as the one that “connotes an
obligation”. [Tribunal’s Translation]. In this respect, Respondent recalls one of the definitions
mentioned, respectively, in Lexico Dictionary” and in Black’s Law Dictionary. However, those
definitions do not fit the context in which the verb “shall” is used in paragraph 1 of

Article XIII.

100. In effect, Lexico Dictionary includes four meanings. The first and the fourth should be excluded,
as the first meaning refers to the use in the first person and the fourth meaning relates to
interrogations, two situations not falling within the scope of the provision under review. The
two other meanings are: (2) “[e]xpressing a strong assertion or intention;” and (3) “[e]xpressing
an instruction, command, or obligation.” The only one of the four meanings that includes a
legal standard as an example is (3): “every employer shall take all practicable steps to ensure

the safety of employees.”

101. In turn, the Black’s Law Dictionary, which is knowingly a legal dictionary widely used to look up
legal definitions in English, includes five meanings of the term “shall.” Respondent cites three
of them, which refer to a possibility (“should’, “may’”) and something that will occur in the
future (“w///’). However, Respondent fails to emphasize the first meaning and, most
importantly, the two special notes included in the definition. The first meaning reads: “[h]as a
duty to; more broadly, is required to.” The first special note — accompanying the first meaning
— reads: “[t]his is the mandatory sense that drafters typically intend and that courts typically
uphold.” The last special note is even mote conclusive, at the end of the definition, following

the five meanings: “[o]nly sense 1 is acceptable under strict standards of drafting.”

102. The only meaning in Collins Concise English Dictionary (another widely used dictionary) which

might refer specifically to the context under review, that is, the one that mentions its current

6 Planet Mining Pty Ltd v. Republic of Indonesia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/12/14 and 12/40 (“Planet Mining v. Indonesia”).
:xhibit RL-191, Lexico Dictionary, Definition of “shall”
6 Exhibit RL-192, Black’s Law Dictionary (Thomson Reuters, 2014), Definition of “shall”

 

27

o

103.

104.

105.

106.

use especially in official documents, reads that “sha//’ is “used as an auxiliary to indicate

compulsion.”

Thus, it clearly follows from all the lexicographic entries mentioned above that the only
definition applicable to the wording and context of paragraph 1 of Article XIII is the one that

takes the term “shall” as an obligation.

Relying on a paragraph of the Decision on Jurisdiction in Planet Mining v. Indonesia does not
really support the interpretation suggested by Respondent either. It is true that the arbitral
tribunal in such case (which actually consists of two consolidated cases”), refrains at one point
from adopting one of the meanings of the term “sha//” in reference to a text that has little to
do with the one under discussion in these arbitration proceedings.” However, as timely
pointed out by Claimant,” in the same Decision, the tribunal pristinely states: “the use of the
word ‘shall’ without a stated exception leaves no doubt that Indonesia was obliged to grant its
consent.” This information must surely be known by Respondent’s representatives who also

acted on behalf of Indonesia in Planet Mining.

Apart from that, Respondent explains that, “in this case, the term ‘shal? is followed by three
possible alternatives,” which means, according to Respondent, that said term “is being used
to denote something that will potentially occur in the future, rather than a duty.”” [Tribunal’s
Translation] Despite such insistence, it is worth mentioning that the term “shall” does not
actually precede the three dispute resolution mechanisms provided in paragraph 1 of

Article XHI, but the expression “shall [...] be submitted to.”

This clarification also renders untenable Respondent’s statement pursuant to which
understanding the expression “shall [...] be submitted to” as an obligation would lead to the

absurd result of having to submit the dispute to all three options specified at the end of

Exhibit RL-193, Planet Mining v. Indonesia, Decision on Jurisdiction dated February 24, 2014, and Exhibit RL-194,

Churchill Mining v. Republic of Indonesia, \CSYD Case No. ARB/12/14 and 12/40 (“Churchill Mining v. Indonesia’),
Decision on Jurisdiction dated February 24, 2014.

Planet Mining v. Indonesia, Decision on Jurisdiction dated February 24, 2014, § 163. In the same vein, Churchill Mining v.
Republic of Indonesia (same reference and date), § 162.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 15.

Planet Mining v. Indonesia, Decision on Jurisdiction dated February 24, 2014, § 201.

Rephy

on Jurisdiction, § 14.

28

paragraph 1. According to Respondent, since the obligation would apply to each option,
such understanding would force a claimant to initiate court proceedings, national arbitration

and international arbitration.

107. Under no circumstance could this reasoning be accepted. Paragraph 1 of Article XIII is
particularly clear in this respect; the duty must be fulfilled with regard to one of the options,
which are precisely that, options, as recognized by Respondent itself.” No interpretative effort
is needed to conclude that this is what follows from the use of the disjunctive conjunction
“or” to separate each of the possibilities offered to Claimant: “shall [...] be submitted to the

276

courts of that Party or to national or international arbitration.

108. Claimant, on the other hand, stresses the importance of the Legal Expert Report of Professor Joost
H.B. Pamvelyn, who in turn cites a paragraph from the academic material on ICSID arbitration
ptepared by professor Christoph Schreuer for UNCTAD, which expressly reads that “Some
BITs do not specifically mention consent. But formulations to the effect that a dispute ‘shall
be submitted’ to the Centre or that the parties have the right to initiate proceedings leave no

doubt as to the binding character of these clauses.”

109. The Tribunal agrees on the main point, in the sense that the expression “shall be submitted”
indicates a binding nature. Nevertheless, Respondent objects to the relevance of said citation
of the UNCTAD document, alleging that it refers to rules in which “there is a submission /o a
single method of dispute resolution and a forum is specified (ICSID).””* [Tribunal’s Translation].
The Tribunal considers that the obligation assumed by the State is not undermined by the fact
that there are one or more available options, as they refer to the way of implementing the

obligation and not to the existence of the obligation itself.

74 Supra § 83.
7 Reply on Jurisdiction, §§ 18, 28.

On the Tribunal’s discussion with Respondent in this regard, see Tr. Day 1, English, from p. 53, 1. 20.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 9 (emphasis added by Claimant), referring to UNCTAD, Course on Dispute Settlement, ICSID =
Module 2.3: Consent to Arbitration (ENCTAD/EDM/Misc.232/Ad.2), March 11, 2003 ‘UNCTAD, Consent to
Arbitration”), p. 17, provided as Annex 55 to the First Legal Expert Report of Prof Pamvelyn, § 36.

 

78 Reply on Jurisdiction, § 16 (emphasis added by Respondent), Although Respondent expressly cites Article 8 of the Treaty
between the United Kingdom and Sti Lanka, that is not the specific reference used in the UNCTAD document to
illustrate the statement concerned, but Article 11 of the German Model Agreement. While this Article expressly
mentions the ICSID Convention, it empowers the parties to reach a different agreement. UNCTAD, Consent to
Arbitration, pp. 17-18.

29

€

83

110. The choice of one of the three options cannot deny the existence thereof. In other words: the
fact that the Contracting Parties to the Treaty have consented to three options cannot mean
that they have not consented to any of them. Otherwise, the sentence — and its mandatory

nature (“shall be”) — would be meaningless. This is, indeed, what leads to the assertion that

 

each of these options is valid and that the Contracting Parties to the Treaty have consented to

all of them.

1

-In support of his position, Claimant also relies on the Decision on the Objection to
Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent in Garanti Koza LLP v. Turkmenistan,” which includes the
interpretation of a provision whose first paragraph is considerably similar to that in the present
case and contains the same expression under discussion. The relevant provision — Article 8(1)
of the United Kingdom-Turkmenistan BIT — provides: “Disputes between a national or company of
one Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under this
Agreement in relation to an investment of the former which have not been amicably settled shall, after a period

/

of four [months] from written i of a claim, be submitted to if the national

or company concerned so wishes.”® The tribunal in Garanti Koza decided by a majority that “[t]he

use of the auxiliary verb ‘shall’ makes that statement mandatory.”*!

112. Respondent challenges the citation of this decision, stating, on the one hand, that the provision
interpreted in Garanti Koza only refers to international arbitration, rather than to the three
options as paragraph 1 of Article XII in this case, and, on the other hand, said provision is
followed by a second paragraph which expressly sets forth the UNCITRAL Rules as the
option by default, something that — according to Respondent — paragraph 2 of Article XIII

does not.”

113. The Tribunal agrees with the reasoning of the tribunal in Garanti Koza as regards the

interpretation of the expression “shall be submitted.” As stated supra,” the fact that

Exhibits RL-160/CL-58, Garanti Koza LLP v. Turkmenistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/20, Decision on the Objection

to Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent dated July 3, 2013 (“Garanti Koza v. Turkmenistan”).
Ibid. § 17.
Ibid. § 28.

Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 16. Respondent also criticizes the decision cited arguing that it is a decision by a majority and
qualifying the reasoning as “erroneous”.

Supra §§ 94, 109.

 

30

international arbitration appears alone or together with two other options does not change at

all the compulsory nature of the expression but, in any case, how it is implemented.“

1

zB

. First, the Contracting Parties to the Treaty made an election when deciding they would offer

    

three options and that one of them could be chosen to settle a given dispute. This, in itself,
was a significant act and not an empty or senseless gesture made by the States in the context
of the Treaty dispute settlement provisions. Secondly, the text does not name (identifying
“State” or “investor”) who elects which of the three options is adopted because it is not

necessary; it is self-evident: the investor. This is so because, as already stated, only the investor

  

may legally elect to arbitrate, and only the investor needs to do so on the basis of the standing
offer of consent granted by the State. The investor’s election is not the imposition of an option,
but the acceptance of the standing consent offered by the State. There can be no imposition
whatsoever because the State has given its consent. This does not undermine the equality of

elf.

 

the parties, but rather recognizes and confirms the sequence set forth in the Treaty

 

115. The unanimity of the Tribunal’s interpretation of Article XIII comprises both the compulsory
nature of the submission to one of the dispute resolution mechanisms mentioned in its

paragraph 1 and the definition of a dispute thereunder.

116. Such unanimity is especially important, particularly taking into account the number of pages
and the time devoted by the Parties to discuss the issue, facing an obligation with a mere

indication of options that could exist in the future.

117. However, said unanimity does not extend to the implementation of the obligation clearly
undertaken by the Contracting Parties to the Treaty. Indeed, for the majority of the Tribunal,
the obligation undertaken by the States to settle disputes by international arbitration (among
other options) undoubtedly constitutes the State’s consent, and its implementation requires
interpreting paragraph 1 together with its context, that is, together with the three other
paragraphs included in the same Article. In the Tribunal’s majority opinion, the consent

expressed by the Contracting Parties to the Treaty has been subsequently perfected by the

 

SA similar situation arises as regards the application of the UNCITRAL Rules, as discussed later. Infia §§ 175 ef seg.

31

Notice of Arbitration (set forth in Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Rules), served by Claimant

upon Respondent.

118. All the members of the Tribunal agree that the State’s consent is inevitably required so that
arbitration may take place. For the majority of the Tribunal, said consent is expressed in the
obligation undertaken by the Contracting Parties to the Treaty and is what gives meaning to
it. The effét utile of the provision that establishes the obligation to submit a dispute to arbitration
— unquestionably contained in paragraph 1 of Article XIII —is to serve as an offer of consent.
In this sense, the obligation to submit a dispute to arbitration and the consent to arbitrate have
the same meaning. The effectiveness of such obligation cannot depend on whether arbitration
is the only available mechanism or it is accompanied by other dispute resolution mechanisms.
For a State, consenting (and offering early consent) to more than one dispute resolution option
is perfectly conceivable. International law does not deny this possibility, as evidenced by the
vast majority of bilateral and multilateral investment treaties. Similarly, there is no express or
implied reference in the text of the Treaty that allows concluding that consent is excluded or

limited because the Contracting Parties to the Treaty have included three options.

119. The majority of the Tribunal adopts Respondent's assertion that the consent of the State (as
well as that of any obligor) must be clear and unambiguous. It is essential that the tribunal
called upon to resolve a dispute be persuaded that all the parties concerned (infer alia, a State
in our case) have agreed to submit thereto. In the view of the Tribunal, the requirement that
consent have such features should be understood in the sense that it must arise from the text,
interpreted pursuant to the criteria accepted under international law, and not from
ptesumptions or inferences based on expressions not contained therein. The proposition that
a State’s consent is not to be presumed® is as true as the proposition that a State may not

invoke its condition as such in order to escape freely assumed obligations.

120.'That consent be clear and unambiguous does not mean that the provision in which it is

contained should be subject to restrictive interpretation. One assertion does not follow the

 

other. In this regard, the Tribunal endorses the well-known opinion of Judge Rosalyn Higgin:

“Tt is clear from the jurisprudence of the Permanent Court and of the International Court

85 Exhibits RL-160/CL-58, Garanti Koza v. Turkmenistan, §§ 21-22.

32

that there is no rule that requires a restrictive interpretation of compromissory clauses [...]
‘The Court has no judicial policy of being either liberal or strict in deciding the scope of

compromissory clauses: they are judicial decisions like any other.”*

Accordingly, the Tribunal
considers that it should be neither liberal nor strict in deciding on its jurisdiction. Neither of
those approaches is directed by the Treaty and both of them would be contrary to the

principles of interpretation applicable under the Vienna Convention of 1986.

121. In contrast, the minority believes that the obligation set out in paragraph 1 of Article XIII —
the existence of which considers as undeniable — requires, to be perfected, a subsequent
agreement on the forum to settle the dispute. The minority emphasizes that there is no
indication that either party is free to make that choice.” In no way does the argument put
forward by the majority entail or assume that States concluding a treaty may not require a
separate agreement. However, in this case, it is evident that no additional agreement is

required from the parties concerned in the dispute.

122. An international arbitration is commenced upon a claimant lodging the notice of arbitration
with respondent. In the instant case, it is all that is required as a precondition to apply
paragraph 2 of Article XIII (in accordance with the UNCITRAL Rules or whichever other
agreed rules). The State has no option to institute an arbitration under Article XIII. Therefore,
there is only one way to apply paragraph 2 of Article XII: the institution of an arbitration by

the investor. There is no other option whatsoever.

123. It is true that, unlike the absence in Article XIII highlighted by the minority, Article XIV of
Annex III to the Treaty, concerning the “Settlement of Disputes between the Patties,”

expressly mentions in its second paragraph who can submit the dispute to arbitration as

Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), Preliminary Objections, Judgnent of December 12, 1996, Separate

Opinion of Judge Higgins, IC] Reports 1996 (submitted as Annex 37 to the Second Legal Expert Report of Prof, Pamvelyr),
p. 857, § 35. See also Exhibit RL-159, Garanti Koza LLP 1. Turkmenistan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/11/20, Dissenting
Opinion of Laurence Boisson de Chazournes dated July 3, 2013, § 48, cited in Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 67.

It should be noted that the provision under discussion in the Decision on Jurisdiction issued in Garanti Koza (Article
8(1) of the U.KTurkmenistan BIT) includes that specification at the end: “Disputes between a national or company
of one Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under this Agreement
in relation to an investment of the former which have not been amicably settled shall, after a period of four [months]
from written notification of a claim, be submitted to international arbitration if the national or company concerned so
wishes” (Exhibits RL-160/CL-58, Garanti Koza v. Turkmenistan, § 17).

 

33

follow:

 

“If a dispute between the Parties cannot thus be settled, it shall, upon the request of

either Party, be submitted to an arbitral tribunal.”

124. Nonetheless, the majority of the Tribunal understands that the text of Article XIV confirms
the States’ assumption that the only scenario envisaged by Article XIII is that of the

submission of a claim for arbitration by an investor.

125. In fact, within the framework of the Treaty, there is only one way to institute investor-State
arbitration. Specifically, States have offered their consent in Article XIII, and that consent
is perfected when an investor accepts the offer by instituting an arbitration proceeding. This
is widely known as anticipated consent or offer of consent to arbitrate. The opposite way is
not possible — at least, regarding arbitration — as the investor is clearly not a Contracting Party
to the Treaty.” Likewise, the anticipated consent set out in paragraph 1 of Article XIII may

only be given by State Parties to the Treaty.

126. The language used in paragraph 3 of Article XIII, which expressly addresses the exclusion of
diplomatic protection, confirms the foregoing idea when referring to “a dispute which one of
its investors has consented to submit to arbitration.” The provision takes the investor’s
consent as a unilateral act (which follows the consent given by the State) without mentioning
or suggesting that such consent is to atise from a separate agreement. Plainly speaking, the
investor’s consent can only follow the anticipated consent to arbitrate given by the State.
Consequently, the fact that paragraph 3 of Article XIII refers to the investor consenting to
arbitration necessarily assumes that the offer of consent has been accepted by means of the
investor’s unilateral act (the Notice of Arbitration). In the opinion of the majority of the

‘Tribunal, there is no other possible explanation or interpretation.

According to Claimant’s Expert, this is related to how the disputes covered by the Treaty are defined. Second Legal
Expert Report of Prof, Panwelyn, § 13: “Since Article XII of Annex III of the Treaty only covers treaty claims by investors
against their host state (‘{dlisputes between an investor of one Party and the other Party concerning an obligation of
the latter under this Agreement), it is up to the investor, and the investor alone, to select domestic courts, national
arbitration or international arbitration to resolve disputes with the host state.”

 

The majority is cognizant of the fact that, in different contexts, arguments have been developed to support that a State
can file a claim against an investor, But, within the framework of a treaty such as that at issue here, those arguments
could only be invoked through a counterclaim. In any case, this issue has not been raised before this Tribunal.

 

 

34

127. Therefore, the Tribunal cannot endorse Respondent’s reading of paragraph 3 of Article XIII
whereby diplomatic protection would be excluded only when there exists a “perfected
consent to arbitrate,” [Tribunal’s Translation] obtained via a separate agreement. “Perfected
consent” exists when the investor accepts the offer made by the State. A good faith reading
of paragraph 3 of Article XIII does not allow us to deduce that there is an additional

OL

requirement of consent.”' Nothing in the text suggests such an interpretation.

128. The Tribunal’s position on this issue is not exactly novel. There are relevant examples that

make specific reference to the issue under discussion. Thus, for instance, in Chevron Corporation

 

and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador,” when confirming its jurisdiction, the
tribunal eloquently pointed out that “The Parties’ mutual consent to arbitration derived from
Article VI of the Treaty is not, [of] course, a treaty between two States. The Parties’ consent
is contained in the separate Arbitration Agreement subject to international law between the
Claimants and the Respondent, that was formed upon the Claimants’ written acceptance (by

their Notice of Arbitration) of the Respondent’s standing, general offer to arbitrate contained

in Article VI of the Treaty.””*

129. Respondent insists that, unlike other treaties signed by the Republic, the text of paragraph 1
of Article XIII in this case fails to mention the investor’s right to choose one of the alternative
dispute resolution methods.’ The Tribunal considers that, in general, the fact that an
international instrument is drafted in terms different from those of another can hardly prove
which is the most suitable interpretation of either of them or record the intention of the
contracting parties in the terms of Article 31(4) of the Vienna Convention of 1986. This is so
because the conditions of negotiation, the objectives pursued by each of the contracting

parties and/or the relationships between them are essentially different for each treaty.

Reply on Jurisdiction, § 45.

° Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, §§, 27-28; First Legal Expert Report of Prof, Pannelyn, § 67.

°2 Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2009-23, Second
Partial Award on Track I dated August 30, 2018, § 7.85.

°3 Although the text of the treaty in question (the BIT’ between the Republic of Ecuador and the United States, concluded
in 1993 and denounced by Ecuador in 2017) is different from that of the Treaty between the Dominican Republic and
the CARICOM, the citation to the decision transcribed is of interest, in view of the fact that the BIT between Ecuador
and the United States did not include a provision requiring additional consent from the State, other than the early
consent under Article VI.

° Reply on Jurisdiction, § 18 and note 48.

35

130. Moreover, interpreting a treaty on the mere basis of the language differences with other
treaties concluded by the same State presents at least two problems: on the one hand, language
differences do not necessarily entail differences in regimes; and, on the other hand, this
position seems to assume that the drafting of all those treaties depends on such State only,
when it is evident that there is another State (or other States, like in this case) that is also
responsible for the drafting of each particular treaty. For all these reasons, the majority of the
‘Tribunal considers that relying upon the provisions of a treaty may only have an effect on the
interpretation of another treaty insofar as specific and conclusive data show that the
provisions of the former qualify as interpretative guidelines of the latter or when such specific

and conclusive data allow to identify the intention of each of the contracting patties.

131. The Tribunal does not deny the existence of similarities between the texts of the treaties, but,
in any case, they should be addressed with utmost care. It is true that the text of other treaties
is often relied upon so as to demonstrate the “ordinary meaning” of the terms used, in the
terms of Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention of 1986, but, in that case and for the reasons
stated in the foregoing paragraph, such references should be analyzed very carefully.

Automatic extrapolations should be ruled out.

132. In the instant case, no particular element has been shown to persuade the Tribunal that the
fact that other treaties — which do not apply here — make express reference to the investor’s
tight to choose the forum means that there is no such right under the Treaty. On the contrary,
the reading of Article XIII under the guidelines of Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention of

1986 confirms such right.

133.In turn, the scenario of disputes between States, envisaged in Article XIV of the Treaty, is
completely different. In this case, it is reasonable for either of the Contracting Parties who

have mutually agreed to settle their disputes this way to institute the arbitration.

134. For all the reasons stated supra, the majority of the Tribunal believes that paragraph 1 of
Article XIII contains the expression of consent of the Contracting Parties to the Treaty to
submit the disputes referred to therein to one of the three mechanisms mentioned. In other

words, the Contracting Parties to the Treaty have built three doors through which an investor

36

can pass. All these three doors can be opened, but only one of them can be opened at a time.”
All it takes is (1) an investor who meets the conditions laid down in the Treaty in order to be
authorized to pass through one of those doors (rafione personae and ratione temporis); (2) a reason.
to do it (notably, a dispute must exist) (ratione materiaé); and (3) a choice of the door to be
used. Since the only party who can pass through the doors is the investor (as the claimant
formally instituting the dispute resolution proceeding), it is the investor who must choose the

door to be used.

135. The options available to the investor are clear, and the grounds pursuant to which they can
be invoked are apparent. Any effort to discover additional requirements there would imply to

rewrite the Treaty.
B) On the Requitement for the Specitic Choice ofa “Forum”
a. Respondent's Position

136. Respondent ins

  

sts that paragraph 1 of Article XIII not only fails to include an obligation, but

purportedly has another incurable defect: a failure to identify a specific international arbitration

 

institution and/or regime. Respondent contends that this alleged lack of forum is decisive.

in its opinion, “in international law, there is no such thing as an consent to international
arbitration i abstract,” namely, a consent that is not “forum-specific.”** Such defect would
also impact the first phrase of paragraph 2 (“Where the dispute is referred to international
arbitration”), since, in Respondent’s words, “it is not possible to ‘refer’ a dispute to

international arbitration in a vacuum.” [Tribunal’s Translation].

°3 "The lack of a separate “fork in the road” provision claimed by the minority cannot affect the consent given in paragraph
1. The Treaty explicitly distinguishes the three options as alternatives by using the word “or”.
2 Reply on Jurisdiction, § 10; Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 48.

° Reply on Jurisdiction, § 23.

37

101

102

103

b.  Claimant’s Position

137. For Claimant, the fora mentioned by Respondent are the three options set out in paragraph

 

1.°8 Specifically, according to Claimant, the Treaty “does contain a reference to an arbitral

forum” and “provides for the default application of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.”
c. The Tribunal’s Analysis

138. For the Tribunal, Respondent’s assertion that “there is no consent without a forum”
[Tribunal’s Translation] may be shared or not, depending on what it refers to. As emphasized
in the Parties’ written and oral submissions, the formulae contained in the Treaties for the
valid expression of consent to one or more dispute settlement mechanisms are varied." In

other words, there is clearly not one single ritualistic drafting in order to assume this

01

obligation.'*' What must exist as a conditio sine qua non is the conviction that a party has

102.

expressed its intent to resolve certain disputes in a given way." And in order to figure out

 

whether there has been such an expression of intent in the present case, the Tribunal follows
— as requested by the Parties — the rules of interpretation established in the Vienna

Convention of 1986. As stated supra, such rules advocate for neither a restrictive nor a liberal

approach towards consent provisions."

139. A potential scenario in which a State’s intent — clearly expressed — to submit to a given dispute
settlement mechanism is frustrated by the inability to put it in practice should not be ruled
out. Such inability may be based, for example, on the failure to meet one or several of the
particular conditions or definitions included in the body of rules containing consent. There

could also be incurable drafting defects. Now, for drafting defects to be deemed incurable, it

Tr. Day 2, English, p. 478, Il. 1-8 (Claimant).

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 12.

The Tribunal specifically refers to the consent expressed by means of international treaties — whether concerning
investments or not — given that, when the expression of consent is channeled through other means — state laws or
contracts — interpretation guidelines are, at least partially, different.

The fact that other tribunals have concluded that a specific provision of a treaty does not reflect the respondent State’s
consent to a particular type of arbitration with regard to the very dispute for which such provision is relied upon is not
at all shocking, Let alone can those particular responses tise to the category of principles of international law.

This is a long-standing principle in international law. See Advisory Opinion of the Permanent Court of International

Justice in Status of Eastern Carelia dated July 23, 1923. PCI] Series B, No. 5, p. 27

Supra § 120.

38

04

105

106

107

108

is necessary to exhaust all logical interpretative possibilities offered by the Treaty provision
containing the State’s consent — and the Treaty in general — in light of the principles of

interpretation offered by international law that apply to the relevant case.

140. It may be conceived that, if the content of Article XIII were limited to the provisions of

141.

paragraph 1, a scenario such as that presented by Respondent could exist. Yet, that is not the
situation faced by this Tribunal. In the case at issue, it is not necessary to go too far. The very
Article in which the Contracting Parties to the Treaty have regulated the “Settlement of

Disputes between an Investor and a Contracting Party” provides all the answers.

Indeed, on the basis of a good faith interpretation, the Contracting Parties to the Treaty have

clearly undertaken, in paragraph 1 of Article XIII, to submit (é/er alia) to international

104

arbitration in order to settle the disputes mentioned therein."’ And it is also evident that the

other three paragraphs of such Article regulate different aspects of the settlement of those

disputes by means of international arbitration."

142. Respondent contends that the interpretation made by Claimant and his expert is not a good-

faith interpretation, as “the principle of good faith may not be used to modify the text of

Article XIII or create obligations that do not exist.”' [Tribunal’s Translation].

143. For the Tribunal, as stated supra, the obligation undertaken by the Contracting Parties to the

‘Treaty is beyond doubt, it being unnecessary to modify a single word of paragraph 1 of Article
XII.'” The Tribunal is particularly aware of the importance of this issue. In this respect, just
as it is not allowed to modify the text and incorporate new obligations, it is not allowed to
deprive words of their ordinary meaning. In plain language, consent can be neither added

nor deleted.

144. Paragraph 2 of Article XIII, in particular, establishes what happens when a choice is made to

institute an international arbitration.'* The choice is vested upon the investor, who has the

Supra § 94.

The complete “chronological” sequence envisaged in Article XIII appeats infia in § 172.
Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 54.

Supra §§ 87-92.

Infra § 145 et seg.

39

unilateral power to invoke its right to arbitrate, provided that both the investor and the
investment on which the claim is based meet the conditions imposed by the Treaty. Along
this line of thought, in our case, no apparent obstacle, in principle, may frustrate consent. As

a matter of fact, both Parties have rightly stressed the need to read Article XIII as a whole.'”

2. The Submission of a Dispute to International Arbitration
A) The Issue Covered in Paragraph 2 of Article XIII
a. Respondent's Position

145. According to the interpretation advocated for by Respondent, the purpose of paragraph 2,
interpreted in good faith and in accordance with the ordinary meaning of the terms used
therein, is to state that, for consent to UNCITRAL arbitration to exist, the investor and the
State (a Contracting Party to the Treaty) must conclude a de novo agreement once a dispute

has arisen between them.'"”

146. As to the first phrase of paragraph 2 (“Where the dispute is referred to international
arbitration”), the Republic considers that it only intends to “introduce the conditions to be
met for a dispute to be submitted to international arbitration under the UNCITRAL Rules;
no mote, no less.”!"' This understanding does not mean for Respondent that the issues
addressed in paragraph 2 can be reduced to mere procedural questions. “It is evident that
paragraph 2 not only regulates a ‘procedural question,’ but expressly requires Respondent to
give its consent ex post the existence of the dispute, so that it can be submitted to international

arbitration under the UNCITRAL Rules.”'” [Tribunal’s Translation].

147. Respondent also contrasts the use of the plural “disputes” in paragraph 1 of Article XII with
the singular “dispute” in paragraph 2. For the Republic, this difference “shows” that
paragraph 2 requires its consent. According to this interpretation, the three dispute resolution

options set out in paragraph 1 “would be potentially available” to resolve the disputes which

© Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 30; Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 53.
"10 Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 25.
'1 Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 24.
"2. Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 26.

40

“may hypothetically arise” between an investor and a State. Instead, paragraph 2 provides
that, “for a specific dispute to be submitted to international arbitration, the parties concerned
in the dispute must consent to refer such dispute to an international arbitrator or ad hoc
arbitration tribunal, under the UNCITRAL Rules or to be appointed by a special

agreement.”!" [Tribunal’s Translation].
b. Claimant's Position

148. Claimant’s view on the purpose of paragraph 2 of Article XIII is totally different. For him,
that paragraph already assumes that a dispute has been submitted to international arbitration
and its purpose is to address the question of “how to appoint arbitrators.” Consequently, it is
a procedural question that arises once international arbitration has been initiated, not a
substantive question “capable of undermining the Dominican Republic’s unilateral binding

offer of consent to international arbitration set out in paragraph one of Article XIII.”

149. In Claimant’s view, Respondent’s interpretation does not conform to the principles of treaty
interpretation set forth in the Vienna Convention of 1986, particularly in Article 31.'%
Claimants raises, infer alia, two main points in support of this assertion. On the one hand,
Respondent fails to interpret paragraph 2 of Article XIII in context by purporting that the
phrase “may agree” conditions everything in such Article, even the consent given in
paragraph 1.''° On the other hand, Respondent’s interpretation fails to give effect to all the
terms of the Treaty, for example, regarding the introductory phrase of paragraph 2, which is

entirely ignored by Respondent.'"”
c. The Tribunal’s Analysis

150. As stated supra,'* paragraph 2 of Article XIII is the first paragraph which specifically regulates

the international arbitration regime. Perhaps, we should wonder why the regime of this

"3. Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 28.
\4 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 22; Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 25.

5 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 24.
116. Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 25.

"7 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 30.
8 Supra § 144.

4l

specific mechanism for the settlement of disputes between an investor and the host State is

specifically addressed, while the other two mechanisms set out in paragraph 1 are not.

151. The answer to that question seems evident. Only the operation of international arbitration
requires an explanation, as the other two options mentioned in paragraph 1 of Article XII
would be subject to the law of the State where the national court or arbitration mechanism is
set in motion. For international arbitration, rather, there is no uniform system, which makes
it necessary to lay down some guidelines for that option to be exercised. Paragraph 2 is, thus,

the product of this obvious conclusion by the Contracting Parties to the Treaty.

152. The terms of the sentence “Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration,”
interpreted in accordance with their ordinary meaning, indicate, in a clear, straightforward and
unambiguous manner, that the entire content of paragraph 2 is circumscribed to the case in
which the claimant selects that option. The context is the evident link between that phrase
and the final phrase of paragraph 1, which presents international arbitration as one of the
dispute settlement options. The settlement of disputes arising between an investor and a
Contracting Party to the Treaty is actually the object and purpose of Article XIII These
considerations do not imply that the majority of the Tribunal deems the drafting of Article
XIII to be perfect. However, no good faith interpretation of the phrase under analysis, of
paragraph 2, and of Article XIII in general can ignore the fact that those texts have been

drafted so as to allow, not prevent, the settlement of disputes.

153. Nevertheless, as stated supra, Respondent believes that “the first sentence of Paragraph 2 of

Article XIII only intends to introduce the conditions to be met for a dispute to be submitted

 

to international arbitration under the UNCITRAL Rules.”'”” [Tribunal’s Translation]. This
assertion is unsupported by the very terms of the relevant sentence and, hence, cannot be
shared by the Tribunal. It is worth pointing out that there is nothing there imposing any such
condition as that proposed by Respondent. Notably, paragraph 2 does not start by saying
“For a dispute to be submitted” or anything to that effect, but by “Where the dispute is
referred.” Therefore, the language used in the introductory sentence is plain and

unconditional.

"19 Supra § 146.

42

154. Likewise, Article XII contains no term requiring that any given conditions “have to be met.”
On the contrary, it merely provides that the parties concerned in the dispute may (indeed,
hypothetically) agree on certain issues regarding international arbitration, as explained infra.
‘The mechanism to set international arbitration in motion set out in paragraph 2 of Article
XII is that frequently used, namely, the notice of arbitration. For the majority of the Tribunal,
the absence of any express reference to how arbitration should be initiated can only be

interpreted as a clear confirmation that no additional condition is required.

155. Furthermore, it is worth highlighting that, if Respondent’s interpretation was deemed correct,
to the effect that paragraph 1 of Article XIII contains no consent whatsoever, the Contracting
Parties to the Treaty would have consented to none of the options set out in the final phrase

of paragraph 1. Such understanding would imply that national arbitration, in particular, is

 

actually excluded as an option, since the Treaty does not provide for the possibility of an ex
post agreement for this arbitration method. On this point, it could be said that the conclusion
of an agreement between the State and the investor in order to submit to national arbitration
would always be possible, even if the Treaty does not provide for it. Yet, as the Parties’ power
to agree to submit to a dispute settlement mechanism exists in any case, that assertion would
turn redundant the requirement to enter into an agreement once the dispute has arisen for
purposes of international arbitration. In other words, the Tribunal cannot adopt Respondent’s
interpretation to the extent that it is difficult to understand why the alleged requirement to
conclude such ex post agreement is explicitly envisaged for international arbitration, but not

for national arbitration. Respondent furnishes no convincing explanation in this regard.

156. For the reasons stated supra, an interpretation in good faith and in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to its terms in their context leads to the conclusion that paragraph 2 of

Article XII refers to the scenario in which the international arbitration option is chosen.
B) The Scope of the Parties’ Potential Agreement
a. Respondent's Position

157. For Respondent, paragraph 2 of Article XIII, and especially the expression “may agree”

contained therein, is essential. According to the Republic, this phrase clearly indicates that the

43

120

21

22

23

24

160.

161.

execution of an agreement between the investor and the host State after the dispute has arisen

is crucial for resorting to an UNCITRAL arbitration.

.In fact, Respondent understands that “a good faith interpretation, in accordance with the

ordinary meaning to be given to the terms used in Paragraph 2” leads to reading the paragraph
at issue as follows: “the investor and the Party concerned may agree to refer their dispute to

an UN

 

CITRAL arbitration.”'” And further infra, in the same pleading, Respondent insists:
“the ordinary meaning of the terms in Paragraph 2 of Article XIII, is clear regarding the fact
that a separate agreement between the investor and the host State is necessary to refer a certain

12

dispute to international arbitration.” [Tribunal’s Translation].

. Respondent also asserts that the phrase “may agree” refers not only to the body adjudicating

the arbitration (an international arbitrator or ad hoc arbitration tribunal), but also to the rules

applicable to the arbitration proceedings, which may be those defined by the parties by a

 

special agreement or the UNCITRAL Rules.'” According to Respondent, to define any of

those points it is imperative that the parties execute an agreement. Respondent sees no

99123

contradiction or redundancy whatsoever between “may agree” and “special agreement.

Under Respondent’s interpretation, the potential agreement referred to in paragraph 2 of

Article XII

 

, thus, the unavoidable pathway for the State to consent to arbitration. It is on
this basis that Respondent asserts that “[i]t is evident that Paragraph 2 does not merely regulate

999124

a ‘procedural issue”’'™ as Claimant purports. [Tribunal’s Translation].

b. Claimant's Position

Claimant, in turn, understands that the scope of the aforementioned agreement is much more
limited. According to Claimant, any such agreement is not an unavoidable condition to access
arbitration but just an option open to the patties to opt for a sole arbitrator or an arbitration

tribunal. For Claimant, the interpretation proposed by Respondent, which renders

Reply on Jurisdiction, § 25.
Reply on Jurisdiction, § 54.
Reply on Jurisdiction, §§ 29-30.
Reply on Jurisdiction, § 31.
Reply on Jurisdiction, §, 26.

44

125

126

127

128

162.

163.

164.

unavoidable the execution of an ex post agreement in order to resort to arbitration, would make
all references to international arbitration contained in Article XIII superfluous because, even
without those references, the State and the investor may always agree ex past to submit a dispute

that has arisen between them to arbitration.’

Furthermore, for Claimant it is decisive that, in contrast to the use of the mandatory verb
“shall” in paragraph one, paragraph two only uses the permissive verb “may”, “thus
distinguishing the binding character of paragraph one from the permissive character of
paragraph two.”'” From this contrast, Claimant deduces that Respondent’s interpretation

violates Article 31 of the Vienna Convention of 1986.'7”

 

Claimant also asserts that the inclusion of the expre:

 

ion “special agreement” would not make
much sense and would be redundant if the whole paragraph is deemed subject to the demand
of an ex post agreement, since one would be saying that “the parties ‘may agree’ to a ‘special

agreement’.”!7*

c. The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Parties deeply disagree about the scope that shall be granted to the agreement they are
authorized to in the terms of paragraph 2 of Article XIII. Respondent understands that such
agreement is the only possible pathway for it to express its consent to international arbitration.

Consequently, since no ex post agreement has been concluded in the case at issue, the Tribunal

 

Jacks jurisdiction to hear the dispute. Claimant, in turn, limits the scope of any such agreement
to the specific context of the sentence in which the expression “may agree” is included.
Therefore, the agreement between the investor and the host State may only refer to the specific

configuration of the body that shall adjudicate the dispute.

5 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 31; Second Legal Expert Report of Prof, Panwelyn, § 21.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 25.

Thid.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 31.

45

165. The Tribunal has analyzed all of the Parties’ arguments, focusing on what is the interpretation
which, made in good faith, is more in line with the ordinary meaning of the terms included in

the sentence at issue in their context, always in the light of its object and purpose.

166. First of all, it is essential to recall the wording that has been broadly discussed in these arbitral
ptoceedings. It is the expression “may agree.” Both Parties agree that the wording used implies

that the agreement between the litigating parties is a possibility, ie, a fact of uncertain

 

realization. Claimant asserts it with considerable emphasis.” Respondent, as well, although
giving the agreement a different meaning.'* Specifically, for Respondent, the agreement to
which the expression “may agree” refers is the only pathway for Respondent to express its
consent to international arbitration, a pathway Respondent may choose not to go through,

thus denying consent, which is what, in its view, has happened in this case.

167. The foregoing plainly indicates that, although their positions are different, both Parties admit
that the expression “may agree” alludes to a possibility. In other words, the Parties dismiss the

idea that it may be something that shall unavoidably occur.

168. The substantial positions differ in that, for Claimant, the expression refers to the possible
configuration of the arbitral body called to settle the dispute, whereas, for Respondent, the
possibility is that of consenting to international arbitration. Therefore, the lack of agreement
leads, for Claimant, to the application of the rules by default and, for Respondent, to the lack

of jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

169. Facing this dissociation in the respective positions, it is necessary to determine what the
provision at issue says verbatim. Well, the express text sets forth that the parties to the dispute
“may agree to refer the dispute to an international arbitrator or ad hoc arbitration tribunal to
be appointed by a special agreement or established under the Arbitration Rules of the United

Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).”

 

2 Counter Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 7: “the language included in paragraph 2 of Article XIII merely allows the Parties to
agree to a sole arbitrator or to an arbitral tribunal, to be ‘established’ under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (by
default, without the need for ex post agreement) or under other rules, this time explicitly made subject to ‘special
agreement’.”)

30. Rephy on Jurisdiction, §§ 25-26.

46

170.

171.

172.

There is no doubt whatsoever that the text does not say that the purpose of the agreement
may be that of submitting the dispute “to international arbitration under the UNCITRAL
Rules” [Tribunal’s Translation], as Respondent purports, but that of referring the dispute to

an arbitrator or a tribunal, which shall be constituted in one of the ways provided for.

The contextual analysis confirms and gives meaning to the terms used. In fact, the question
envisaged in paragraph 2 of Article XIII is, undoubtedly — given the clarity of the terms used
in the first sentence of the Article —, that of a dispute submitted to international arbitration."
Consequently, it is not acceptable to interpret (or rather, rewrite) the paragraph at issue as
reading in the way Respondent purports, which is the following: “the investor and the Party
involved in the dispute may refer their dispute to an UNCITRAL arbitration.”'” Much less
can it be purported that any such reading expresses “a good faith interpretation, in accordance
with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms used in Paragraph 2”, or that it “puts
beyond doubt” the requirement of an ex post agreement to submit a dispute to arbitration. It
suffices to observe what happens when adding the first sentence of paragraph 2, which
Respondent has left out in its redrafting, to confirm that from both an argumentative as well
as a syntactic point of view, the outcome is not satisfactory: “When the dispute is referred to
international arbitration, the investor and the Party concerned may refer their dispute to an
UNCITRAL arbitration.” [Tribunal’s Translation.] On the relevance of this interpretation, it
may be of interest to point out that Respondent itself paraphrases the International Court of
Justice to assert that “it is the duty of the Court to interpret the Treaties, not to revise them.”'*

The Tribunal openly agrees with this wise assessment. '*

In the Tribunal’s view, recapitulating the analysis conducted, Article XII shall be understood
as a chronological explanation of how the dispute resolution system designed by the Treaty
works. Thus, paragraph 1 contains the offer of consent made by the Contracting Parties of

the Treaty; paragraph 2 sets forth the different configurations international arbitration may

Supra § 156.
Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 25.

Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 152, with respect to the International Court of Justice Advisory Opinion Concerning the Interpretation
of Peace Treaties with Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania; Second Phase, issued on July 18, 1950 (IG] Reports 1950, p. 221), which
reads as follows: “It is the duty of the Court to interpret the Treaties, not to revise them”). For more quotes in the
same sense, Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 149.

Likewise, the Expert presented by Claimant “obviously” agrees with this assertion. Second Legal Expert Report of Prof.
Pamvebn, § 93.

47

adopt when this is the mechanism chosen by the investor; paragraph 3 clarifies the standard
question in investment arbitration, pursuant to which diplomatic protection is restricted when
the investor has instituted an arbitration proceeding against the host State; and paragraph 4,

finally, enshrines the compulsory, definitive and unappealable nature of arbitral decisions.

173. Within that scheme, and for all the reasons stated supra, the Tribunal is of the view that, a good
faith interpretation of paragraph 2 of Article XIII, without adding or removing anything from
the text thereof, allows the Tribunal to assert that, after setting the framework in which such
paragraph develops — that of international arbitration, which is the one chosen in this case —,
the paragraph itself offers the disputing Parties two options: (i) arbitration before a sole
arbitrator, or (ii) arbitration before an ad hoc arbitration tribunal constituted according to any
of the methods provided for (by a special agreement or pursuant to the provisions set forth in

the UNCITRAL Rules).

174. In the case at hand, it is apparent that the Parties have opted for a three-member tribunal for
the constitution of which they have followed the precepts of the UNCITRAL Rules, even if
considering that Respondent has done so for procedural reasons and reserving its objections

to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. '*
© The Application of the UNCITRAL Rules
a. Respondent's Position

175. Respondent asserts, as already stated,'” that the application of the UNCITRAL Rules is
possible only if the parties conclude an agreement to such effect. Accordingly, in Respondent’s
words, the phrase “they may agree” “also refers to the selection of applicable rules: either
specific rules defined by the disputing parties (special agreement) or the UNCITRAL Rules.”'”
This statement is based, according to Respondent, on the use of “or” to separate both options,

as the existence of both alternatives requires “a manner to determine if one or the other

55 Procedural Order No. 1, §§ 2(1) and 2(2).
156 Supra § 159.
57 Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 30.

48

99138

applies.”'** [Tribunal’s Translation]. This would be accomplished by the conclusion of an

agreement.

176. The Republic draws attention to Article 1(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, which requires that
the Parties conclude a written agreement to apply the Rules.’ For Respondent, Article XIII

does not contain any such agreement which, in its words, must be “clear and unambiguous.”

177. Respondent also denies that the UNCITRAL Rules are applicable “by default.” In this regard,
it explains that, on the one hand, the last phrase of paragraph 2 of Article XIII places the
“special agreement” and the UNCITRAL Rules at the same level, “without favoring one
option over the other” [Tribunal’s Translation], and, on the other hand, the Treaty does not
expressly provide that UNCITRAL arbitration is the default option, unlike other treaties
signed by the Republic.'*! Respondent adds that the initial wording of the provision on the
settlement of disputes between an investor and a Contracting Party to the Treaty proposed by
CARICOM did not mention a default option either, and it also included the option of ICSID

arbitration.”

178. Respondent rejects the fact that the comma that separates the second from the third phrase,
in the Spanish version of the paragraph in question, has any effect on the interpretation
ptoposed by Respondent. For Respondent, such comma, not found in the English version,
“merely indicates that what comes before the comma applies to what comes after.”

[Tribunal’s Translation].

179. Finally, Respondent denies having consented to UNCITRAL arbitration by the fact of being

involved in the arbitral proceedings and the constitution of the Tribunal. It states that such

138 Thi.

‘59 Rephy on Jurisdiction, §§ 10, 101 and note 205.
'40 Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 84-87.

41 Rephy on Jurisdiction, §§ 36, 38 and note 73.

'2- Rephy on Jurisdiction, §§ 37, 64. Exhibits R-50/C-143, CARICOM’s Comments on Agreement on Reciprocal Promotion
and Protection of Investments dated March 8, 1998.

5 Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 41.

49

44

45

146

“s

48

149

involvement was necessary precisely “in order to object to the Tribunal’ jurisdiction.”"*

[Tribunal’s Translation].

b. Claimant's Position

180. Claimant does not dispute the importance of the conjunction “or” included in the last phrase

18

of paragraph 2 of Article XIII. For Claimant, “or” indicates that the Treaty affords the parties
an opportunity to reach a special agreement on the appointment of the arbitrators “or” apply,

“by default”, the UNCITRAL Rules in the absence of such a special agreement.

- Claimant finds such application “by default” of the UNCITRAL Rules evident, as a special

agreement, which may exist only if the parties negotiate and reach an agreement, cannot be a
default option. By contrast, Claimant adds, the UNCITRAL Rules are expressly mentioned in
the Treaty, and these arbitration rules exist independently of any “special agreement” between
the parties; consequently, the parties can always “fallback” on the option of applying the pre-

existing UNCITRAL Rules.“

182. In Claimant’s view, the emphasis as regards Article 1(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules should be

put on the requirement that the parties have “agreed in writing” that the dispute shall be
referred to arbitration under the UNCITRAL Rules, discarding any additional requirement not

found in such provision, such as that the agreement be “clear and unambiguous.””"”

183. Claimant attaches importance to the comma before the last phrase of paragraph 2 of

Article XIII." According to Claimant, that comma (in the Spanish version) would underline
that the permissive words “may agree” (“podrin acordar’) only apply to the phrase that includes
them, that is, the phrase before the comma (sole arbitrator or ad hoc tribunal), and does not

apply to or condition the last phrase of paragraph 2.'”

Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 34.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 29.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 34.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§, 71-72.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, §§ 23, 32.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 27.

50

184. Finally, Claimant refers to the correspondence exchanged between the Parties and their
counsel at the beginning of this arbitration, stating that it evidences that the Republic not only
agreed to use and apply the UNCITRAL Rules, but was also the one that suggested that the

Parties apply the 1976 original version rather than the 2010 initially suggested by Claimant.’

c. The Tribunal’s Analysis

185. The final part of paragraph 2 of Article XIII indicates that the ad hoc arbitral tribunal may be
“appointed by a special agreement or established under the Arbitration Rules of the United

Nations Commission on International Trade Law.”

186. In an effort to contest Claimant’s interpretation that the UNCITRAL Rules are the default
option, Respondent asserts that the two options offered are at the same level, without
privileging either one.'' The Tribunal has attempted to verify the effectiveness of such

statement. The conclusion is that, assuming that Article XII] offers two options to constitute

the tribunal and that both options are equally valid, the fact that the parties do not reach any
special agreement to appoint the arbitral tribunal necessarily leads to the other option,
specified in this provision after the disjunctive conjunction “or”, that is, the establishment of
the tribunal under the UNCITRAL Rules. Similarly, the use of a special mechanism to establish

the tribunal would mean that the parties discard the UNCITRAL Rules for such purpose.

187. However, the options provided in the last phrase of paragraph 2 of Article XIII are not
ptesented on an identical basis. The distinction between the verbs “appointed” and
“established” respectively used for each of them is important. The fact that the tribunal may

be established under the UNCITRAL Rules clearly indicates that such rules are applicable.

188, Respondent itself expressly recognizes that UNCITRAL arbitration is included in Article XIII
as one of the dispute resolution options.'” Thus, the fact that the two other options (national

courts or national arbitration) have not been chosen opens the door to international arbitration

50 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 32.

151 Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 36.

52 Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 101: “the Republic only expressed its willingness to consider UNCITRAL arbitration as one of
the options for dispute resolution and to make a decision ‘on a case-by-case basis only’.” [Tribunal’s Translation]

51

under the UNCITRAL Rules, which has been selected by the investor upon filing the Notice

of Arbitration.

189.In addition, the Parties could have agreed to appoint a sole arbitrator (an “international
arbitrator”) or provided for a special mechanism to appoint arbitrators. They did neither,

relying on the provisions of the UNCITRAL Rules.

190. The effect of the use of a comma to separate the second and third phrases in the Spanish
version of paragraph 2 of Article XIII has been exaggerated by Claimant. The Tribunal
considers, as the Respondent, that a punctuation mark which only exists in one of the official
versions of the Treaty should not be that relevant. With his emphasis, Claimant attempts to
ptove that the phrase “may agree” of paragraph 2 only refers to the option between a sole
arbitrator and an arbitral tribunal. Respondent, on the other hand, minimizes the importance
of the comma in its attempt at persuading the Tribunal that the disputing parties “may agree”
on both the constitution of the tribunal and the applicable rules. More importantly, for
Respondent, in the absence of such agreement, there could be no tribunal, no rules and,

logically, no arbitration.

191. Actually, this comma does not significantly change the meaning of the provision under review.
With or without a comma, the crucial fact is that the parties have the possibility, not the duty,

to adapt the organization of the arbitral proceeding to their preferences.

192. Strictly speaking, the Parties did not question the applicability of the UNCITRAL Rules to the
constitution of the Tribunal or to any of the actions taken so far. They only argued about the
applicable version, with the 1976 original version prevailing. Even accepting Respondent’s
allegation that it accepted the application of these rules in order to object to the jurisdiction,
since, according to Respondent, the Republic had never consented to international arbitration,
the truth is that it did so on the basis of the UNCITRAL Rules without proposing the
application of any other arbitral instrument. Thus, the express inclusion of the UNCITRAL
Rules in Article XIII does not seem unremarkable. In that regard, said inclusion meets the
written agreement requirement under Article 1(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, as the submission
to arbitration “under the Arbitration Rules of [UNCITRAL]” is one of the options consented

to by the Contracting Parties to the Treaty and is precisely the option selected in this case.

52

Taking the arguments to an extreme, we might also say that the cited provision does not
mention treaties as a form of expressing consent but just contracts. However, to our

knowledge, no tribunal has adopted this interpretative approach.

193.The issue of the correspondence exchanged between the Parties for the purpose of
constituting the Tribunal does not affect this reasoning, as the Parties’ consent to arbitration
is unambiguous, as already explained. Nevertheless, it should be mentioned, given the
importance that the Parties have placed on it. Claimant argues that this correspondence shows
that the Republic not only agreed to use and apply the UNCITRAL Rules, but also proposed
using the 1976 version of these Rules (although Claimant had initially proposed applying the
2010 version).'** The Tribunal cannot read a consent to arbitrate in Respondent's suggestion.
In the Tribunal’s view, Respondent is correct to state — consistently with the expert proposed
by Claimant — that the involvement of a party in the constitution of an arbitral tribunal cannot
be interpreted as a consent to the jurisdiction of such tribunal.' In other words, the consent
to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction should not be sought in the correspondence between the Parties.
Instead, such correspondence evidences the Parties’ agreement to constitute a three-member
tribunal under the UNCITRAL Rules and to appoint ICSID as Administrative Authority.'®
There is no special agreement in this correspondence to appoint the members of the tribunal

in a specific manner and/or pursuant to a different set of rules.

194. Therefore, in view of the above, the Tribunal finds that the UNCITRAL Rules are applicable

to these proceedings.
3. Reliance on the Most-Favored Nation Clause

195. The Parties have discussed about the appropriateness of establishing consent on the basis of
the most-favored nation clause contained in Article III of Annex II] to the Treaty. Specifically,
Claimant relies on such clause to “confirm” its interpretation of the consent granted by the

Republic, while the Respondent denies that the clause may be relied upon for such purpose

53. Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 32.
54 Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 33; Second Legal Expert Report of Prof. Panwebyn, § 42.
55 Supra § 25.

53

and, in broader terms, that the clause may be relied upon to import the Republic’s consent in

other treaties.'°

196, Nevertheless, since the majority of the Tribunal considers that it follows from the analysis of
Article XII of the Treaty that the Republic has, clearly and unambiguously, granted consent
to international arbitration, it is unnecessary to address the argument on the most-favored

nation clause.
4. The Supplementary Means under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention of 1986

197. The Parties have also developed various positions regarding the use of the supplementary
means of interpretation set out in Article 32 of the Vienna Convention of 1986,'” In particular,
they have paid attention to the preparatory work of the Treaty, despite the difficulties

encountered in locating the evidence of such preparatory work.'*

198.In this regard, the Tribunal has examined all the arguments put forward by the Parties.
However, the meaning of Article XIII of the Treaty having been clearly determined by
application of Article 31 of the Vienna Convention of 1986, the majority of the Tribunal does
not consider that it should make use of the possibility offered by Article 32 thereof. In fact,
analyzing the supplementary means of interpretation in order to confirm the interpretation
made is unnecessary (especially in view of the limitations mentioned in the foregoing
paragraph). For the majority of the Tribunal, the other condition for the application of Article
32 of the Vienna Convention of 1986 does not apply in this case, since the interpretation
according to Article 31 does not leave the meaning of the provision subject to interpretation
ambiguous or obscure, let alone leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.
This makes it even mote difficult to give to the supplementary means of interpretation the

weight attached by the minority.

156 Supra §§ 63(iv) and 66(iv).
‘57. Supra §§ 74-78.
158 Supra § 75.

54

VI. SECOND JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION - THE ISSUE OF INDIRECT
INVESTMENTS AND INDIRECT INVESTORS

1. Mr. Lee-Chin’s Investments in the Dominican Republic

199. The Parties’ submissions contain the same description of the structure of Mr. Lee-Chin’s
investments in the Dominican Republic.” By means of that structure, Claimant allegedly
owns 90% of Lajun and the Land, whereas the remaining 10% is purportedly owned by

Dominican entrepreneur, Mr. Luis José Asilis Elmudesi.'®

200. Apart from the acquisition of Lajun and the Land, Claimant alleges that his investments in the
Dominican Republic also include the right to develop a recycling facility and the WTE plant,

and the Concession Agreement granted by the ASDN.'*'
2. The Investments Protected by the Treaty
A) Respondent’s Position

201. Respondent contends that the Treaty protects neither indirect investments nor indirect
investors. For Respondent, the broad definition of investments relates to the kind of rights or
assets protected by the Treaty, not to the way in which they are held.'® In its own words, such

99163

definition “has nothing to do with the issue of protection of indirect investments.

[Tribunal’s Translation].

202. According to Respondent, the absence of an express reference to indirect investments and
indirect investors leads to the inescapable conclusion that the Treaty only applies to investors

who have made a direct investment. In support thereof, Respondent relies upon various

‘9 Supra § 7.

© Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 108; Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 17.

61 Supra § 8.

'2 Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 155, and Exhibit RL-144, Exropean American Investment Bank AG v. Slovak Republic, PCA Case No.
2010-17, Award on Jurisdiction dated October 22, 2012.

63. Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§, 155-156.

55

treaties including such express reference, as well as on scholarly articles and some arbitral

decisions supporting its position.

203. Moreover, Respondent highlights that its position “is consistent with the fundamental

ptinciple of international law whereby a company’s shareholders may not seek to recover

99164

 

damages suffered by the company in which they hold shares,”' and that “it was Claimant

himself who set up an entire corporate structure precisely because he did not want to hold the

29165

investment directly.”'® [Tribunal’s Translation].

204. Lastly, Respondent submits that it can be reasonably assumed that the Contracting Parties to
the Treaty did not expressly provide for the protection of indirect investments and indirect
investors so as to avoid the exponential increase of the risk of parallel proceedings that such

protection would entail.'°°
B) Claimant’s Position

205. Claimant emphasizes the “extremely broad terms” used by the Treaty in order to define both

hin’

29167

  

“investment” and “investor,”'®’ which causes Mr. Lee- investments to be protected by

99168 O)

 

the “clear and unambiguous text of the Treaty. imant cites a series of arbitral decisions

to this effect in support of his interpretation.’

206. Claimant notes that it is true that the Treaty makes no express reference to the protection of
indirect investments and indirect investors, however it is also true that there is no mention to
the protection of direct investments and direct investors.'” In this context, Claimant rejects

Respondent’s contention that the fact that other treaties expressly refer to “indirect”

g

Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 173-176. Reply on Jurisdiction, § 162.
65 Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 166.
166 Reply on Jurisdiction, § 165.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 79.
168 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 80.
6) Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 115-117. Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, §§ 82-83.
"0. Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 81.

56

investments and investors confirms that the Treaty is intended to protect only direct

investments.'7!

207. Claimant submits that Respondent misrepresents the nature of Mr. Lee-Chin’s claim when

stating that a company’s shareholders may not seek to recover damages suffered by the

  

company on which they hold interests." In this regard, Claimant explains that he is not
seeking damages on behalf of Lajun, but rather damages associated with the loss in value of
his investment in the Dominican Republic. He further stresses that the Treaty itself expressly
recognizes the right of shareholders to initiate investment arbitrations against the State by

defining protected investments to include “shares . . . of companies.”"”

©) The Tribunal’s Analysis

208. The Parties agree that Mr. Lee-Chin’s investments in the Dominican Republic are indirect and
that Mr. Lee-Chin is, thus, an indirect investor.’ These considerations are not modified by
the fact that Respondent repeatedly qualifies such investments as “alleged” or Claimant as an
“alleged investor,” as the purpose of these qualifiers is to state its opinion that neither the
former nor the latter are protected by the Treaty. Claimant’s Jamaican nationality has not been
disputed so far, in spite of certain expressions used by Respondent which might have

suggested otherwise.'”

209. Nor is there any dispute about the broadness of the definition “arising from the text of the

[T]reaty,” as expressly recognized by Respondent." [Tribunal’s Translation].

"1 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 84.

"2. Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 86.

"3 Tbid.

"4 Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 154; Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 153.

5 In the Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 179, Respondent asserts that, “in his exchanges with state bodies and entities and in his
immigration entries into the territory of the Republic, Mr. Michael Lee-Chin always identified himself as a national of
Canada, not a Jamaican citizen.” [Tribunal’s Translation]. Rigorously speaking, the foregoing does not deny Claimant's

 

 

nationality but attributes him a certain conduct, which is not the same, despite Claimant’s reading of that assertion.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 110.

"6 Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 155 and note 335.

s7

210. Specifically, Article I(1) of the Treaty defines the term “investments” as “every kind of asset

and in particular, though not exclusively, includes: [...] (b) shares, stocks and debentures of

 

companies or interests in the property of such companies [..

 

211. The text cited in the foregoing paragraph shows the Treaty drafters’ intention to adopt an
open definition of the investments covered thereby. In general, it is worth pointing out that
the drafters were free to reduce the scope of protected investments. The Tribunal finds no
sign of a restrictive legislative policy option to such effect in this text. On the contrary, in light

of the language of the provision under analysis, the Tribunal cannot but conclude that the

 

intention of the Contracting Parties to the Treaty was the exact opposite. The Tribunal is
aware of the general maxim of interpretation whereby where the text makes no distinction,
the interpreter should make no distinction as well. The Tribunal could adopt similar maxims
such as expressio unius est exclusio alterins as bases, although with some differences, to reach the

same conclusion.

2

Nv

. In other words, the text makes no specific reference to direct or indirect investments, rather
using the formula “though not exclusively, includes,” which is much mote expressive. Based
on these arguments, the tribunal in Cemex v. Venezuela similarly concluded that indirect
investments were not excluded because they were not specifically mentioned.'” In view of the
broad formula chosen by the Treaty drafters, the analysis could end at this point. Nevertheless,
since the Parties have discussed the issue in some detail, the Tribunal deems it necessary to

elaborate thereupon in the following paragraphs.

2

oO

. Respondent devotes a significant portion of the second part of its submissions on
jurisdiction’ to transcribing an entire series of investment treaties concluded by the Republic

which include an express reference to indirect investments.

2

zB

. The fact that other treaties expressly include indirect investors and indirect investments under

the protection offered thereby is not enough by itself to prove that the Treaty does not include

17 Exhibits RL-75/CL-53, CEMEX Caracas Investments B.V. and CEMEX Caracas II Investments B.V. v Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/15, Decision on Jurisdiction dated December 30, 2010, §§ 151-158.

"8 ‘This part is called “Item II” in both submissions and takes up approximately 13°% of each of them.

58

them.'” Absent any specific evidence in this regard, the Tribunal cannot share the general
validity of the phrase cited by Respondent from the award rendered in Berschader v. The Russian
Federation, whereby “it would seem likely that if the Contracting Parties had so intended,
they would have expressly provided protection for such indirect investments in the terms of
the Treaty, as in the case of the other relevant BITs concluded by Belgium and

Luxembourg.”"*!

215. In this sense, the Tribunal echoes the words of the tribunal in Anglo American PLC 0. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, which contends: “A literal interpretation of Article 1(a) of the Treaty
handed down by the Arbitral Tribunal, in addition to being in accordance with the rules of
interpretation of the Vienna Convention, is not affected by the mere fact that, in other treaties,
the Contracting States have chosen to specify that indirect investments were protected. No

interpretative conclusion can be inferred from this circumstance for purposes of this case.”"*

216. The Tribunal is cognizant of the existence of a debate in international investment law on the
protection of indirect investors and indirect investments. Yet, it should be noted that an
important part of this debate has revolved around the claims filed by minority shareholders."
In such cases, a paradox may arise in which a State amicably settles a dispute with the
management of a company and that settlement is somehow disrupted by a relatively small
group of shareholders. It is especially in cases of significant share dispersion that the risk of

parallel proceedings invoked by Respondent can be identified."

Supra § 212.
» Exhibit RL-134, Vladimir Berschader and Moise Berschader v. The Russian Federation, SCC Case No. 080/2004, Award dated
April 21, 2006 (also including the Separate Opinion of Prof. T. Weiler).

=

Ibid. § 147, expressly highlighted by Respondent in Reply on Jurisdiction, § 159.
Exhibit CL-51, Anglo American PLC v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/14/1, Award dated
January 18, 2019, § 197. See also Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 84.

8S See, for example, D. Paez-Salgado, “Settlements in InvestorState Arbitration: Are Minority Shareholders Precluded
from Having its Treaty Claims Adjudicated”, JIDS, vol. 8-1, 2017, pp. 101-124. The Tribunal is aware that this
academic debate has revived under the current efforts to reform the investor-State dispute resolution mechanism.
Nonetheless, it is evident that the Tribunal is to decide the specific dispute submitted to it under the pertinent
applicable law.

Rephy on Jurisdiction, § 165, citing Exhibit RL-260, K. Yannaca-Small, “Parallel Proceedings”, Oxford Handbook of
International Investment Law, 2008, pp. 1011-1012.

&

g

59

217. In the instant case, Mr. Lee-Chin owns virtually the entire investment, and, regardless of what

2

might be thought about how that investment was conceived and managed — an issue which
has raised contrary opinions from the Parties but is yet to be discussed in this arbitration -, it
can hardly be doubted that the investment is closely linked to his person. Besides, as stated
supra, the only minority shareholder, which allegedly holds 10% of the shares of Lajun, is
85

described as a national of the Dominican Republic,"* which would exclude him from any

claim against Respondent under the Treaty.

. With respect to the doctrine whereby shareholders may not seek to recover the damages

suffered by the companies in which they hold interests,'*°

it is worth pointing out that that is
not the situation existing in this arbitration. Claimant in this case is Mr. Lee-Chin, who claims
on his own behalf for the loss in value of his investments in the Republic purportedly arising
from the alleged violation by the Republic of several obligations set out in the Treaty. '’ The
Tribunal observes that the point of contention in the cases before the International Court of
Justice cited by Respondent is diplomatic protection, and the Court itself has noted the
differences between this issue and that regarding claims by shareholders.' The point of
contention in our case is not diplomatic protection. Respondent fails to put the Court’s
arguments, which, in any case, are limited to customary international law, in the proper
context. Respondent merely asserts that the Treaty does not derogate from such customary
ptinciples but furnishes no evidence in support thereof. In this regard, the Tribunal agrees

with other tribunals on the importance of distinguishing between cases concerning diplomatic

Supra § 199.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 176.

Statement of Claim, § 353.

'88 Thus, in the case (relied upon by Respondent) submitted as Exhibit RL-176, Abmadon Sadio Diallo (Republic of Guinea v.

Democratic Republic of the Congo), International Court of Justice, Decision on Preliminary Objections dated May 24, 2007,
IC] Reports 2007, p. 582, § 88, which reads: “The Court is bound to note that, in contemporary international law, the
protection of the rights of companies and the rights of their shareholders, and the settlement of the associated disputes,
are essentially governed by bilateral or multilateral agreements for the protection of foreign investments, such as the
treaties for the promotion and protection of foreign investments, and the Washington Convention of 18 March 1965
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, which created an International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), and also by contracts between States and foreign investors. In
that context, the role of diplomatic protection somewhat faded, as in practice recourse is only made to it in
tare cases where treaty regimes do not exist or have proved inoperative” (emphasis added.) See also K. Yannaca-
Small, “Who is entitled to Claim: The Definition of Nationality in Investment Arbitration”, in K. Yannaca-Small (ed.),

Arbitration under international investment agreements: A Guide to the Key Issues, OUP, 2018, § 10.28.

60

protection under customary international law and cases concerning the scope of investment

protection under a treaty governing investment protection (such as the case at issue here.)'*”

219. On the basis of the foregoing arguments, the Tribunal considers that the Treaty applies to
Claimant’s investments in the Dominican Republic as well as to Mr. Lee-Chin as an investor

from one of the States bound by the Treaty (Jamaica).

VII. COSTS

220. Both Parties requested a decision on costs and submitted their respective statements.
Claimant’s Statement of Costs was submitted on April 20, 2020, and Respondent’s Statement

of Costs was submitted on May 15, 2020.

221. The Tribunal reserves all matters concerning costs for a subsequent stage of the proceedings.

VIII. DECISION ON JURISDICTION
222. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal decides:

(i) To declare that this dispute is within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal;

(ii) To reject the jurisdictional objections filed by Respondent;

(iii) To continue the arbitral proceeding as per the calendar to be fixed in consultation
with the Parties in accordance with Option I of the Procedural Timetable (Revised
Annex A’ to Procedural Order No. 1);

(iv) To defer the adoption of the decision on costs.

89 Exhibit CL-S1, Anglo American PLC v, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/14/1, Award dated
January 18, 2019, § 203; Exhibits CL-52/RL-158, Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/08,
Decision on Jurisdiction dated August 3, 2004, § 141.

19 As of November 5, 2018.

61

[ Signed ] [ Signed ]

 

Mr. Christian Leathley Prof. Marcelo Kohen
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Subject to the attached Dissenting Opinion

Date: July 9, 2020 Date: July 10, 2020

[ Signed]
Prof. Diego P. Fernandez Arroyo

President of the Tribunal

Date: July 9, 2020

62

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION PROCEEDING UNDER THE AGREEMENT ON
RECIPROCAL PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS BETWEEN THE CARIBBEAN
COMMUNITY AND THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC AND THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

(1976)

In the arbitration proceeding between
MICHAEL ANTHONY LEE-CHIN

Claimant

and

THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Respondent

ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/3

 

Dissenting Opinion of Professor Marcelo Kohen

 

Table of Contents

I. INTRODUCTION 3

Il. ARTICLE XII OF THE TREATY DOES NOT ALLOW THE INVESTOR TO
CHOOSE ONE OF THE THREE DISPUTE SETTLEMENT OPTIONS

A. Article XTI 4

 

 

(1) Ordinary Meaning of the Terms in their Context........0-c000
a. Paragraph 1 of Article XIII
b. Paragraph 2 of Article XIII
c. Paragraph 3 of Article XIII
d. Paragraph 4 of Article XIII
(2) The Broader Context 14

 

a. The Title of Article XIII

 

 

b. Comparison between the Provisions of Articles XIII and XIV

 

(3) The Object and Purpose of the Treaty
(4) Good Faith 18

 

(5) Supplementary Means of Interpretation

c. The Preparatory Work 20

 

d. The Circumstances of the Conclusion of the Treaty
i, Other BITs and FTAs Concluded by the Dominican Republic
ii, Other FTAs Concluded by CARICOM

 

 

 

iii, BITs Concluded by Jamaica.

e. Conclusion on Preparatory Work as Well as Other BIT's and FTAs
Concluded by the Partie: 27

£. Model Potentially Followed by Article XII

 

 

g. Conclusion on Supplementary Means of Interpretation

B. Conclusion: Article XHI Does Not Grant the Investor a Right to Unilaterally Decide
to Submit the Dispute to Arbitration ...

Ill. THE MOST-FAVOURED NATION CLAUSE PROVIDES NO BASIS FOR
JURISDICTION 36

IV. THE PROTECTION OF THE SO CALLED “INDIRECT” INVESTMENTS...
V. CONCLUSION 41

 

 

INTRODUCTION

I regret not being able to concur with the vote of the majority of the Tribunal which
gives tise to the Partial Award on Jurisdiction (“Partial Award”). The question at stake is
of utmost importance in the field of international arbitration. It is the need of consent to
be able to resort thereto. This Tribunal had the task to interpret for the first time the
State-investor dispute settlement clause (“Article XIII”) of the Agreement on Reciprocal
Promotion and Protection of Investments contained in Annex III of the Free Trade
Agreement between the Caribbean Community and the Dominican Republic
(CARICOM) (“the Treaty”). To my knowledge, it is also the first time an
UNCITRAL/ICSID tribunal shall interpret a clause drafted in the way Article XIII is.

Claimant invokes the clause in Article XIII as basis of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and, as
an argument in the alternative, the most-favored nation clause contained in Article III for
the UNCITRAL arbitration. Respondent invoked two jurisdictional objections: that
Article XIII does not allow the investor to trigger international arbitration directly and
that, in any event, Claimant is not a direct investor and, therefore, his action falls outside
the scope of the Treaty. The majority of the Tribunal analyzed and rejected both
objections. In this dissenting opinion I explain my disagreement. Additionally, I shall
consider Claimant’s alternative argument and explain why the most-favored nation clause

contained in the Treaty cannot establish this Tribunal’s jurisdiction either.

ARTICLE XIII OF THE TREATY DOES NOT ALLOW THE INVESTOR TO
CHOOSE ONE OF THE THREE DISPUTE SETTLEMENT OPTIONS

For the sake of facilitating the understanding of my analysis, I repeat here the State-
investor dispute settlement clause of Article XIII, the interpretation of which is subject to
fundamental discrepancies between the Parties and in the heart of the Tribunal itself:
1, Disputes between an investor of one Party and the other Party concerning an obligation
of the latter under this Agreement in relation to an investment of the former which have
not been amicably settled shall, after a period of three months from written notification

of a claim, be submitted to the courts of that Party or to national or international
arbitration.

2. Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration, the investor and the Party
concerned in the dispute may agree to refer the dispute to an international arbitrator or

3

ad hoc arbitration tribunal to be appointed by a special agreement or established under
the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law. (UNCITRAL)

3. Neither Party shall give diplomatic protection or bring an international claim, in respect
of a dispute which one of its investors has consented to submit to arbitration, unless the
other Party which is party to the dispute shall have failed to abide by and comply with
the award rendered in such dispute by the arbitral tribunal. Diplomatic protection, for
the purposes of this paragraph, shall not include informal diplomatic excchanges for the
sole purpose of facilitating a settlement of the dispute by the arbitral tribunal.

4, The awards of the arbitrator shall be definitive, compulsory and without appeal for the
Contracting Party and the investor.
‘The majority of the Tribunal contends that “the obligation undertaken by the States to
settle disputes by international arbitration (among other options) undoubtedly constitutes
the State’s consent, and its implementation requires interpreting paragraph 1 together
with its context, that is, together with the three other paragraphs included in the same
Article. In the Tribunal’s majority opinion, the consent expressed by the Contracting
Parties to the Treaty has been subsequently perfected by the Notice of Arbitration (set
forth in Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Rules), served by Claimant upon Respondent.”*
But, at the end of the day, I have not found in the Partial Award an explanation of how
any such conclusion is reached. For my colleagues, “[t]he fact that the Contracting Parties
to the Treaty have consented to three options cannot mean that they have not consented

to any of them.”* But the problem is the State bound itself to submit disputes not to
international arbitration, but to one of three different options, which include international
arbitration, but without consenting to the investor having the power to choose which of
the three shall be used to settle the dispute. If there is no unilateral possibility of choice,
there is no unilateral consent by the State that can be perfected when the investor makes

his/her choice. An ex post agreement between the parties is necessary. This is nothing new

or exclusive to the Treaty under review, as shall be seen infra.’

ARTICLE XIII

I will now present my interpretation of Article XII following therefor the rules of

interpretation unanimously accepted, as reflected in the Vienna Convention of 1986 (the

' Partial Award, para. 117.

2 Partial Award, para. 110.
3 Infra, para. 32.

treaty at issue is a treaty concluded by a State with an international organization, although

in the name and on behalf of their then member States).

(1) Ordinary Meaning of the Terms in their Context

a. Paragraph 1 of Article XIII

6. Paragraph 1 of Article XIII establishes the subjects of the dispute, its content, and the
obligation to notify in writing the existence of a claim, a minimum period of three
months to attempt “amicable” settlement thereof (“conciliate it”) and, absent any such
settlement, the obligation to submit the dispute to the courts of the Parties, to national or
international arbitration. That is strictly the content of this paragraph, in its literal
interpretation. I agree with Claimant and my colleagues in the sense that there is an
obligation to submit the dispute to an adjudicative arrangement after three months have
elapsed without the parties having been able to settle the dispute “amicably.” I have
nothing to add to the interpretation of the Partial Award as regards the scope of the
expression “shall be submitted” (“seran sometidas”). Nevertheless, I disagree with my
colleagues on the scope of the obligation established therein. It is undeniable that the text
fails to state who shall proceed to the election of one of the three adjudicative dispute
settlement means mentioned therein or how this is to be done. It does not follow from
the text that the investor may opt for one of the options and impose it upon the other
party. There is no offer by the State to one of the three options at the investor’s choice,
as held by the majority of the Tribunal. There is here no consent to any of the three
possibilities: there is just an obligation for the parties to settle the dispute by any of the
three options. The situation would be different if the Treaty imposed a single dispute
settlement manner, as set forth in the examples of compromissory clauses quoted in the
Partial Award to maintain that the expression “shall be submitted” imposes an
obligation.’ If there is only one manner to solve the dispute, that is the one to be
followed.’ If there are several means and it is set forth that the election of the forum lays

on the investor or on any of the parties, that shall be the situation. If there are several

 

+ For example, the United Kingdom-Soviet Union BIT: “Any such disputes which have not been amicably settled
shall, after a period of three months from written notification of a claim, be submitted to international arbitration if
cither party to the dispute so whishes” (CL-62); United Kingdom-Turkmenistan BIT: “Disputes between a national
or company of one Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under
this Agreement in relation to an inv‘
of four [months] from written notification of a claim, be submitted to international atbitration if the national or
company concerned so wishes” (CL-58).

 

stment of the former which have not been amicably settled shall, after a period

5 Obviously, within the framework of the parties’ free will, the parties can always reach an agreement to follow other
means.

means and the modality of putting them into practice has not been established, and
neither has the fact that one or any of the parties may choose it unilaterally, the standard
situation is that one party cannot choose a means at its own convenience. The difference
is considerable with bilateral and multilateral investment treaties that provide for different
options and which set forth that the election may be of the investor or any of the parties to the dispute.
Article XIII does not contain any such possibility. It is fundamental that, in this
circumstance, neither party may impose a choice upon the other party. The contrary
would additionally imply a potential conflict of jurisdictions impossible to overcome if
the parties chose different means. The limit of the Parties to the Treaty’s consent is set
forth there: they bound themselves to negotiate with the investors which of the three
settlement means shall be finally chosen when a dispute arises and it is not possible to
settle it “amicably” within the term provided. There is nothing extraordinary in that. At
the international level, there are several treaties containing dispute settlement clauses of

this nature.”

7. Both the Expert appointed by Claimant as well as the majority of the Tribunal hold the
opposite. My colleagues hold that “For the majority of the Tribunal, the absence of any
express reference to how arbitration should be initiated can only be interpreted as a clear
confirmation that no additional condition is required.”* For the Expert appointed by
Claimant, quoted in the Partial Award, only the investor could institute a court or
arbitration proceedings since disputes that may be submitted to any such proceedings are
those concerning an obligation of one of the Parties to the Treaty in relation to an
investment.’ That is to say, if a dispute arises, it is because an investor considers a State

breached its obligation, or in other words, the State failed to respect an investor’s right

6 See below the examples of the other treaties concluded by the Dominican Republic and CARICOM, as well as
other treaties, infra, paras. 52-73.

7 See infra, pata. 32. To quote an example of a dispute resolution clause between a State and a non-State stakeholder:
“Resolution of Disputes. 1.Disputes arising out of the application or interpretation of this Declaration of Principles.
or any subsequent agreements pertaining to the interim period, shall be resolved by negotiations through the Joint
Liaison Committee to be established pursuant to Article X above. 2.Disputes which cannot be settled by negotiations
may be resolved by a mechanism of conciliation to be agreed upon by the parties. 3.The parties may agree to submit
to abitration disputes relating to the interim period, which cannot be settled through conciliation. To this end, upon
the agreement of both parties, the parties will establish an Arbitration Committee”. (Art. XV, Israel/Palestine
Liberation Organization, Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements, September 13, 1993,
available at: https://mfa.gov.il/mfa/foreignpolicy/peace / guide/pages/declaration”200%20principles
8 Partial Award, para. 154,

? Partial Award, para. 121 and its note 88 quoting the Second Legal Expert Report of Prof. Paunelyn, § 13: “Since Article
XIII of Annex III of the Treaty only covers treaty claims by investors against their host state (‘{dJisputes between an investor of one Party
and the other Party concerning an obligation of the latter under this Agreement’), it is up to the i investor, and the investor alone, to select
domestic courts, national arbitration or international arbitration to resolve disputes with the host state.”

     

 

 

3

6

10.

‘© For instance, MINE

acknowledged in the Treaty. They conflate the content of the obligation giving rise to the

dispute with the determination of the jurisdiction to solve the dispute.

‘The Expert, and the majority of the Tribunal with him, seem to conclude that what
happens in the commonality of the cases suffices to interpret a rule in the sense that what
“usually” happens is the only thing that can happen according to the rule. But so//en and
sein ate not conflated. It is absolutely true that, in most cases, disputes between a State
and a foreign investor reach international arbitration by the action of the latter on the
basis of a compromissory clause contained in a treaty or contract, when the clause at issue so
allows. But any such disputes can also reach international arbitration, and they have,
although being a minority, by means of a commitment or bilateral agreement once their
existence is established." The same is true for inter-State disputes, for instance, before
the International Court of Justice or the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.
For the most part, the cases have been brought via unilateral claims. Those which have

been brought via special agreement (compromis) are also a minority in those instances.

For the majority of the Tribunal, the three dispute settlement options are “three doors”
and any of them may be opened just by the investor and at his/her choice. As per the
view of the majority, the most this first paragraph contains by way of limitation is that
“only one of them can be opened at once.”'' However, the Treaty does not contain the
so called “fork in the road’ clause. The Expert appointed by Claimant also evinced the lack
of any such clause in the Treaty.’? This absence is consistent with the interpretation
followed here: if the parties to the dispute still have to agree on which of the three means
of dispute resolution shall be followed, any such clause is not necessary. Only by
agreement of the parties to the dispute can one pathway be used. To follow another one,
an agreement would also be necessary. The “fork in the road’ clause could only be
considered if just one of the parties could choose one of the indicated pathways. This is

not the case here.

The majority of the Tribunal interprets the Treaty in a way that seriously affects the
principle of equality of the parties in dispute settlement. Dispute settlement mechanisms

shall be deemed open to both parties alike unless the treaty imposes the opposite. That

». Guinea, 4 ICSID Reports 67, 80; Swiss Aluminium Ltd. and Icelandic Aluminium Co. Ltd. v.

 

Teeland, YCSID Case No. ARB/83/1; Compantia del Desarrallo de Santa Elena S.A. v. Casta Rica, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/96/1.
" Partial Award, para. 134.

'2 First Legal Expert Report of Prof. Pauwelyn, paras. 33 and 115.

7

applies to both foreign investment treaties as well as State-investor contracts in which the
dispute settlement mechanism set forth is arbitration. In fact, when arbitration is the
dispute settlement means agreed upon, the State waives its right to pursue the domestic
administrative and judicial channels and, therefore, it must have a manner to solve its
disputes with the foreign investor. As pointed out by the Institut de Droit internacional in its
Hague Resolution of 2019, clauses regarding State/investor dispute settlement shall be

interpreted taking into account the principle of equality of the parties.'*

 

It is significant that the Expert for Claimant confirmed the possibility that the State may

nevertheless, he estimated that this

 

be the one initiating the arbitration route in this case;

 

would be illogical, because what is at issue is the State’s breach of an obligation under the
‘Treaty and therefore, according to the Expert, the State is not going to be the one
initiating the dispute.'* The Expert is right regarding the first issue: the State may institute
the arbitral proceedings, but I would like to add that to that end, the State shall propose
to do so and come to an agreement with the investor. His second assertion begs the
question. Should a dispute arise, and the existence thereof be determined, both parties
may be interested in its settlement. In the context of foreign investments, as far as the
State is concerned, that has to do not only with the wish to settle the particular dispute
itself, but also with the impact that pending disputes with foreign investors may have on
potential future foreign investors’ decision making. If it were not so, there could be no
explanation for the reason why States that are subject to claims against them would
accept to take their disputes to arbitration or before the international courts through
special agreements. Neither could there be an explanation for the reason why many
investment treaties leave the possibility to resort to international arbitration open to both

States and investors.

I shall elaborate on the majority of the Tribunal’s main argument, which is consistent

 

with the opinion of the Expert appointed by Claimant. Having been asked why the
investor would be the only party that could decide which of the three options contained
in paragraph 1 should be used to settle the dispute, the Expert appointed by Claimant

asserted: “the reason for that is because the Clause is worded very restrictively, unlike the

'5 Resolution “Equality of Parties before International Investment Tribunals”, “Art. 2 (1): Both the State and the

investor are equally entitled to submit a claim in relation to an investment to a tribunal, subject to the terms of the

instrument of consent, interpreted in accordance with the principle of the equality of the parties. (2) No State is

obliged to submit its claim against an investor to a tribunal, unless it gives its consent and elects to do so. Otherwise,

a State remains entitled to use the rights and remedies provided by its own national legal system in order to pursue
uploads 09

such a claim before its own courts.” Available at: https: Jidi-il.
“Tr. Day 2, English Original, p. 400, 7-21. [For consistency with further relerences to the Heating Transcript]

  

8

Cuba-CARICOM FTA that I had up a moment ago where it covers any dispute
concerning an investment. The jurisdictional clause here is limited to disputes between an
Investor and the State concerning an obligation of the State under this Agreement.”'®
When I asked the Expert about the reason why the State, after having received a claim
and having determined there is a dispute with an investor which is governed by an
international treaty and which concerns its own obligations, could not submit any such
dispute to adjudication, his answer was as follows: “No. I think if —I think it’s a
hypothetical — it’s theoretically possible, but I cannot imagine a State initiating a case
against itself or saying ‘Please, Tribunal, look at whether I have breached the Treaty’.
There has to be a Claimant, and the Claimant would be an Investor. That’s also what the

216

first paragraph says.

The Partial Award follows the same line of reasoning: “given that the investors have
granted no agreement to arbitrate, the advance offer to arbitrate can only emanate from
the State. For this apparent reason, it follows that the only party which is able to institute
an investor-State arbitration under Article XIII is the investor (whose rights would have
been violated). Therefore, it is the investor (and only the investor) who is entitled by

Article XIII to choose international arbitration among the three options offered.”"”

I agree with my co-arbitrators that “the investors” have granted no agreement to
arbitrate. It is evident that in a bilateral treaty the investors cannot give their consent to
anything. Those that determine the investors’ rights that are to be protected and the way
to settle disputes between the Parties and the investors are exclusively the States (and
whete appropriate, the regional organizations Parties to the treaties). The Parties can thus
define the jurisdictional adjudicative scope of action of the investor and the Parties
themselves. They may impose international arbitration as the single means for one or the
other party to the dispute, in which case, neither the investor nor the State has any choice
whatsoever. The only choice they would have would be to decide whether or not to
resort to the only available means of dispute settlement. If the investor decides to resort
to arbitration, more than “consenting” thereto, he/she is exercising the right to use the
only dispute settlement means that States (or competent regional organizations) have

established. In the instant case, however, what the Parties established is different. The

'5 Tr. Day 2, English Original, p. 395, 7-13.

© Tr. Day 2, English Original, p. 400, 15-21.
" Partial Award, para. 97. See also paras. 114 and 134,

16.

question here lies in determining the scope of the dispute settlement framework the

Parties to the Treaties have set.

Paragraph 1 does not state that there must be a claimant and even less so that the
claimant must be the investor. What paragraph 1 asserts is that the dispute concerns an
obligation of one Party to the Treaty in relation to an investment and that a claim to this
effect shall be made in writing. Afterwards a three-month period opens within which the
parties may amicably settle the dispute. Obviously, that includes the possibility of
establishing the manner in which the parties are going to solve it. The Expert mentioned
that during the three-month period to settle the dispute the parties may agree to take the

case before an international arbitral tribunal, but that for him this was not essential."*

In the field of international arbitration, whatever the nature of the parties might be, what
is not essential is that the dispute be unilaterally submitted and that there always be a
claimant and a respondent. There shall be a party that will advance a claim against the
other party and, for this reason, there is a dispute. Then, there shall be a “petitioner”
(“reclamante”) and a “respondent” (“reclamado”) (and sometimes this can be mutual) but
there are cases in which there is not a “claimant” and a “respondent” because the case
came through a special agreement (compromis)."° It may be possible that one of the parties
to the dispute be the one who proposes the arbitration. That does not automatically mean
any such party has the right to institute it without further ado. One of the most
resounding and emblematic cases in the history of international investment arbitration,
Auinoil/ Kuwait, was submitted to an international tribunal through a special agreement.”
For the reasons stated supra, the inference according to which when the dispute concerns
an obligation of the State, only the investor can institute the proceedings fails. Apart from
that, it cannot be seen where at paragraph 1 one can read an “unconditional offer” by the
State party to the Treaty for the investor to be who decides which of the three means

shall be followed to solve the dispute.

'8 Tr, Day 2, English Original, p. 395, 14-22.

'8 Ie is interesting to highlight the way in which the International Court of Justice refers in English to the parties to
the dispute when this reaches the Court through an Application : it is “Applicant” (not “Claimant”) and
“Respondent.” Also, the way in which the titles of the cases in which there are an Applicant and a Respondent (“A
v. B”) and the cases in which there are not (“A/B”) differs.

20 V. the Arbitration Convention of June 23, 1979: Arbitration Tribunal: Award in the Matter of an Arbitration
between Kuwait and the American Independent Oil Company (Aminoil), 24 March 1982, International Legal
Materials, 21 (5), pp. 979-981.

10

b. Paragraph 2 of Article XIII

17. Paragraph 2 of Article XIII establishes what happens or may happen “where the dispute
is referred to international arbitration” (“cuando la controversia es referida ante arbitraje
internacional”). For the majority of the Tribunal, “[pJaragraph 2 of Article XIII, in
particular, establishes what happens when a choice is made to institute an international

arbitration.”

According to the majority, “The terms of the sentence ‘Where the dispute
is referred to international arbitration,’ interpreted in accordance with their ordinary
meaning, indicate, in a clear, straightforward and unambiguous manner, that the entire
content of paragraph 2 is circumscribed to the case in which the claimant selects that
9922

option.” The Expert for Claimant was more cautious. According to him, “the language

in Article XIII, paragraph 2, may not be a model of absolute clarity and the text could

9923

have been drafted in a simpler fashion.

18. In fact, what this paragraph does “concretely” and “clearly” is simply examining the
situation where, out of the three existing options, international arbitration is the one
followed. It fails to establish how the dispute is referred to international arbitration, it only
regulates the scenarios where this happens. Nowhere in the text is it established the way to
implement it, it only regulates the situation created if what is implemented is the
international arbitration proceeding. Much less does it arise from the text that one of the

parties may unilaterally refer the dispute to international arbitration.

19. To explain the scope of paragraph 2, it is worth wondering why this paragraph
specifically regulates international arbitration and not the other options described at
paragraph 1. The reason is simple and clear to understand, and it is so asserted in the
Partial Award:™ if the dispute settlement proceeding followed is that of the national
courts or that of national arbitration, the national legislation is the one that regulates
either which is the competent court or the way in which the arbitral tribunal shall be
constituted, as well as the procedural rules to be followed or established. Within the
framework of Article XII, it is only necessary to determine the way in which the
international arbitral tribunal shall be appointed and the procedural rules to be applied

when the third option for dispute settlement is followed.

2! Partial Award, para. 144.
» Partial Award, para. 152.

2 First Legal Expert Report of Prof. Pauwelyn, para. 23.

4 Partial Award, para. 151.

20.

21.

22.

After mentioning “where the dispute is referred to international arbitration” the text
continues to point out that “the investor and the Party concerned in the dispute may
agree.”” It is significant that right after the temporary reference of the moment in which
the dispute is referred to international arbitration the text mentions the parties’ agreement.

The verb is used in the present tense: “where the dispute 7s referred to international
arbitration.” It is at that time that “the investor and the Party concerned in the dispute
may agree.” To justify his point of view, according to which the investor chose before and
imposed international arbitration, the Expert interprets paragraph 2 changing the verb
tense: “Indeed, paragraph 2 of Article XIII is delinked from paragraph 1 and by its very
terms assumes that the dispute has a/rady been referred to international arbitration (“[w]here
the dispute is referred to international arbitration.”)” Indeed, the text uses the verb in

Spanish in the future (“podran”, “may” in English) when referring to “agree”, which
means there may or may not be agreement between the parties. But that agreement or
disagreement refers to the option between the appointment of a (sole) arbitrator or an ad
oc arbitral tribunal when what is being decided is international arbitration as the means of

dispute settlement.

T agree with Claimant and my colleagues’ interpretation of the meaning of the remaining

part of this paragraph (“to be appointed by a special agreement or established under the

 

Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commi

 

ion on International Trade Law”’):
absent an agreement between the parties with respect to the election of a sole arbitrator
or a tribunal, then the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules shall apply. This shows as well that
the Parties to the Treaty know how to draft an option by default when they want to
include it. They failed to do so in paragraph 1. Nothing is said with respect to a procedure
to be followed absent an agreement regarding the choice of one of the three dispute

settlement mechanisms established.

From the text of paragraph 2, it does not arise that it is the investor who has the ability to
choose international arbitration. Neither does the text state that the agreement to submit
the dispute to international arbitration would be perfected with the investor’s unilateral
choice. The fact that “the investor and the Party concerned in the dispute may agree” on

a sole arbitrator or a tribunal “where the dispute is referred to international arbitration”

2 ‘The English version of the Treaty uses “where” to mean the Spanish “cuando” (when) (“Where the dispute is

referred to international arbitration.

») That does not alter the meaning of the paragraph. Here, the term “where”

 

does not specify the place but the time.

26 First Legal Expert Report of Prof. Pauwelyn, para. 40.

12

23,

24,

denotes that, at the time of referring the dispute to international arbitration, the action is
collective (the parties) rather than individual. Nothing in paragraph 2 denotes that it is the
investor who has the ability to choose the international arbitration means. The conclusion
that follows is consistent with that of paragraph 1: therein, there was no immediate offer
to resort to international arbitration, nor is there in paragraph 2 a possibility for the

investor to accept a non-existent international arbitration offer.

c. Paragraph 3 of Article XIII

Paragraph 3 governs diplomatic protection. It provides that neither Party shall give
diplomatic protection “in respect of a dispute which one of its investors has consented to
submit to arbitration.” The paragraph does not distinguish between the two arbitration
options available: national or international. The paragraph excludes the giving of
diplomatic protection, that is, it refers to a situation where the investor requires
protection from the State of which it is a national and the State does not give such
protection. It follows from this paragraph that diplomatic protection may be given when

the dispute settlement procedure is through national courts.

The difference of treatment between national or international arbitration and national
courts can be easily explained: national courts are State organs, whereas arbitral tribunals,
either national or international, are not. Paragraph 3 establishes both the rule of no
diplomatic protection if a dispute is submitted to arbitration and the exception: if the
Party to the Treaty fails to abide by and comply with the award rendered in such dispute
by the arbitral tribunal or if the Parties to the Treaty perform informal diplomatic
exchanges for the sole purpose of facilitating a settlement of the dispute by the arbitral

tribunal.

Besides the issue of diplomatic protection, it only follows from this paragraph as regards
arbitration options that the investor’s consent is necessary, without it there can be no
arbitration. However, the majority understands that paragraph 3 of Article XIII “takes
the investor’s consent as a unilateral act (which follows the consent given by the State)
without mentioning or suggesting that such consent is to arise from a separate

9927

agreement.”*’ I wonder why this paragraph should mention or suggest it when it merely

deals with diplomatic protection and its appropriateness or inappropriateness.

7 Partial Award, para. 126.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

Let us, nevertheless, examine the argument. For the majority, the investor’s “unilateral

act” is

 

's Notice of Arbitration, which would be in response to the alleged prior consent

by the State. Again, what could be a pos

 

ibility and in practice occurs where the treaty or
contract so allows, is here considered an applicable axiom. It is necessary to carefully

examine the content of paragraph 3.

‘This paragraph refers to the possible diplomatic protection of the investor and excludes it
in the event that the investor has consented to submit the dispute to arbitration. Nothing
is said about how such consent was granted. In a way, every consent, as an expression of

a person’s will, is a “unilateral act.” Nevertheless, the consent may be expressed both by

 

means of a unilateral act (an instrument of ratification, a note to the co-contractor) or as a
single act (the signature of all the parties to a treaty or contract). It does not follow from
paragraph 3 that an investor’s consent is necessarily expressed by means of a unilateral act
and may not be expressed in a single act, that is, an act expressing the agreement of both
parties to the dispute. Moreover, paragraph 3 does not allow to figure out the investor’s

tight to unilaterally choose international arbitration and thus impose it on the State.

Indeed, the text of paragraph 3 only refers to the investor’s consent, without specifying or
suggesting at all whether such consent is expressed unilaterally or by means of an
agreement. There is no logical need to do it. Again, the majority makes statements
without demonstrating that it is the investor who has the power to choose which of the

three means to settle the dispute with the State will be used.

d. Paragraph 4 of Article XIII

Paragraph 4 of Article XIII refers to the binding and final nature of arbitral decisions.
Unlike national courts where the binding nature of the decision and the manner it
becomes final are subject to the relevant domestic law, it was necessary to establish in the
‘Treaty the binding nature of arbitral decisions. As such, this paragraph is not helpful in
determining whether the State has given its prior consent and whether the investor may

unilaterally decide to submit a dispute to international arbitration.

(2) The Broader Context

I discussed supra the terms of Article XIII in their immediate context, that is, taking
phrases and paragraphs as a whole, rather than isolated words. I did not find that this

Article contains the State’s consent to the investor deciding which of the three dispute

14

settlement means should be followed. I will now examine a broader context, including the
title of the Article, the Article immediately following this provision, which provides for
the settlement of disputes between the Parties to the Treaty and, more generally, the
CARICOM-Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement and its Annex on investment

protection, which contains the aforementioned article.

a. The Title of Article XIII

31. The title of Article XIII is “Settlement of Disputes between an Investor and a
Contracting Party.” According to the Partial Award, the very title of Article XIII “leads to
think that all its provisions must have been drafted in order to enable the ‘settlement of
disputes between an Investor and a Contracting Party.” However, “enable” does not
mean that such purpose has been achieved or may be achieved or that the parties have
ultimately taken all reasonable steps towards such end. It all depends on the effectiveness

of the selected means and their compulsory or non-compulsory nature.

32. Numerous treaties refer to the “settlement of disputes” but contain mechanisms that do
not ultimately allow settling them if the disputing parties subsequently fail to decide
which means they will use to do so. It would be pointless to list all bilateral or multilateral
treaties under which judicial or arbitral means of dispute settlement may be used only if
the disputing parties so decide afterwards.” Those are the treaties that contain dispute
settlement clauses referring to arbitration or judicial means with optin or opt-out

mechanisms. That is, the clause is not sufficient to use arbitration or judicial settlement.

?8 Partial Award, para. 96.

2 | shall simply cite the clause of an agreement widely discussed during this pandemic: The International Health
Regulations:

“Article 56. Settlement of disputes

1. In the event of a dispute between two or more States Parties concerning the interpretation or application of these
Regulations, the States Parties concerned shall seek in the first instance to settle the dispute through negotiation or
any other peaceful means of their own choice, including good offices, mediation or conciliation. Failure to reach
agreement shall not absolve the patties to the dispute from the responsibility of continuing to seck to resolve it.

2. In the event that the dispute is not settled by the means described under paragraph | of this Article, the States
Parties concerned may agree to refer the dispute to the Director-General, who shall make every effort to settle it.

A State Party may at any time declare in writing to the Director-General that it accepts arbitration as compulsory
the i or i of these Regul: to which it is a party or
with veeard to a specific dispute in relation to any other State Party accepting the same obligation, ‘The arbitration
shall be conducted in accordance with the Permanent Court of Arbitration Optional Rules for Arbitrating Disputes
between Two States applicable at the time a request for arbitration is made. ‘The States Parties that have agreed to
accept arbitration as compulsory shall accept the arbitral award as binding and final. The Director-General shall
inform the Health Assembly regarding such action as appropriate.

4. Nothing in these Regulations shall impair the rights of States Parties under any international agreement to which
they may be parties to resort to the dispute settl anisms of other inter zl ations or
established under any international agreement.

5. In the event of a dispute between WHO and one or more States Parties concerning the interpretation or
application of these Regulations, the matter shall be submitted to the Health Assembly.”

  

 

 

15

Another step must be taken (act or omission) so that the State accepts or refuses to resort
to a court of arbitral tribunal.” Or those treaties that do not even consider the possibility
of using compulsory means leading to binding decisions. A detailed study could evidence
that both types of treaties are the majority. Obviously, there are also treaties that contain
compulsory arbitral or judicial dispute settlement means. The ensuing conclusion is
simple: the title alone gives no indication whatsoever in order to determine the scope of
consent of the Parties to the Treaty or to determine who may choose one of the three

dispute settlement mechanisms available under Article XIII.

b. Comparison between the Provisions of Articles XIII and XIV

33. It is useful to compare the two dispute settlement clauses of the Treaty, namely, the one
about disputes between a State and the investors of another State (Article XIII), and the
one about disputes between the State Parties (the Dominican Republic and the Member
States of CARICOM) (Article XIV). The latter provides that “[i]f a dispute between the
Parties cannot thus be settled, it shall, “pon the request of either Party, be submitted to an

arbitral tribunal.”

34, There is a net distinction between how arbitration is reached in each case. For the
majority, Article XIV confirms “the States’ assumption that the only scenario envisaged
by Article XIII is that of the submission of a claim for arbitration by an investor.””

According to my colleagues, in inter-state arbitration, any party may initiate the

proceedings, whereas, in State-investor arbitration, only the investor. As noted in the

Partial Award, in disputes between States, “it is reasonable for either of the Contracting

Parties who have mutually agreed to settle their disputes this way to institute the

arbitration.”* It is therefore unclear why what “is reasonable” in a case which only

provides for one settlement mechanism with no options seeds an express reference (‘shall be
submitted, wpon the request of either Party, to an arbitral tribunal”), whereas, in the other case,
in which there are also three different dispute settlement options, it would not be

“reasonable” to specify who may exercise such options.

3 See, for example, A. Kedgley Laidlaw and $. Kang, The Dispute Settlement Mechanisms in Major Multilateral
Treaties, National University of Singapore, Centre for International Law Working Paper 18/02 (2018) (available at:
hitps://cil:nus.cdu.sg/w ‘uploads/2018/10/NUS-CIL-Working-Paper-1802-The-Di r
Mechanisms-in-Major-Multilateral-Treaties.pdf) , paras. 100-113.

31 Emphasis added.

% Partial Award, para. 124.

3 Partial Award, para. 133.

16

36.

37.

38.

M Partial Award, para, 1

The explanation furnished in the Partial Award is unconvincing. In Article XIV,
arbitration is the only option available. It provides that the dispute shall be submitted by
either Party to the arbitral tribunal. If the majority interpretation of Article XII is applied
to Article XIV, the phrase “upon the request of either Party”, would be superfluous in
the latter. Indeed, it would suffice to state “[i]f a dispute between the Parties cannot thus
be settled, i shall be submitted to an arbitral tribunal’ so that there is consent to arbitration

and either party to the dispute may initiate it.

‘The formula “upon the request of either Party” clearly indicates the situation and leaves
no shadow of a doubt that nothing else is required so that either Party may initiate
arbitral proceedings. The Parties to the Treaty knew how to draft a dispute settlement
clause which stated that only one of the parties could submit a dispute to arbitration.
Contrary to the majority view, the noticeable difference between the texts of Articles XIII
and XIV confirms that the former requires the consent of both parties to choose any of

the three dispute settlement options mentioned.

(3) The Object and Purpose of the Treaty

The Partial Award refers to the object and purpose of Article XIII, that is, the settlement

of disputes between investors and State Parties.

As I have already explained, that fact
alone does not determine that it is one of the parties to a dispute that may decide how

such dispute should be settled.

The Treaty is an “agreement on reciprocal promotion and protection of investments.”
There is no preamble. Article II defines such object and purpose and provides that
“feJach Party shall in its territory promote, as fat as possible, the investment made in its
territory by investors of the other Party and shall admit these investments in accordance
with its laws.” Article VIII provides that “[e]ach Party shall provide appropriate means
and procedures for asserting claims and enforcing rights regarding investments and
investment agreements.” For Claimant’s Expert, this article
“is hard to square with a reading that under Article XIII a host state could

block or nullify its consent to international arbitration in paragraph 1 by
exercising an alleged right to disagree with UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

 

. “The settlement of disputes arising between an investor and a Contracting Party to the

Treaty is actually the object and purpose of Article XIII. These considerations do not imply that the majority of the
Tribunal deems the drafting of Article XIII to be perfect. However, no good faith interpretation of the phrase under
analysis, of paragraph 2, and of Article XIII in general can ignore the fact that those texts have been drafted so as to
allow, not prevent, the settlement of disputes.”

17

39.

40.

41.

42.

43,

under paragraph 2. All 11 BITs in force today for the Dominican Republic
provide for ex ante consent to international arbitration — including, each time,
arbitration under UNCITRAL Atbitration Rules — without such right to
block appointment procedures. Not doing the same for a closer integration
treaty such as the present FTA would be inapposite and, one would expect,
have warranted much clearer treaty text.”

‘This interpretation faces two fundamental problems. First, it presupposes the existence of
direct consent to international arbitration in paragraph 1 of Article XIII, which needs to
be proved. Second, it formulates a judgment of meta-legal value in comparing the
Dominican Republic/CARICOM Agreement to the other BITs that provide for ex ante
consent to international arbitration. If the other BIT's contain unambiguous formula of
early acceptance of international arbitration and the Agreement concerned in this case
contains a different formula, this is quite the contrary to what Claimant’s Expert suggests.
‘There must be some reason for this exception. Respondent’s decision to have a different
regime for its immediate neighbors is a political decision and it is not for this Tribunal to

examine.

In view of the above, it does not follow from the object and purpose of the Treaty that
Article XIII should be interpreted as granting a right to the investor to decide which of

the three dispute settlement mechanisms under Article XIII shall be used.

(4) — Good Faith

The provisions of Article 31 of the Vienna Convention of 1986 and the general rule of
interpretation under general international law require interpreting treaties in good faith. It
is the first aspect that is mentioned. Indeed, it is a basic idea not just for the interpretation

of treaties but also for social relationships in general.

The Partial Award refers repeatedly to the interpretation in good faith of different

* Tt is unclear whether

paragraphs of Article XIII in support of the arguments presented.
good faith adds something to the reasoning followed or it is mentioned to suggest that

any other interpretation would not be in good faith.

T agree with the Partial Award when it states that “just as it is not allowed to modify the

text and incorporate new obligations, it is not allowed to deprive words of their ordinary

55 First Legal Expert Report of Prof. Pauwelyn, para. 70.
%6 Partial Award, paras. 127, 141, 152, 156, 165, and 173.

18

44,

46.

meaning. In plain language, consent can be neither added nor deleted.” The problem is
that the majority does not indicate which words would be deprived of their ordinary
meaning ot would be deleted if a different interpretation were made. Eventually, it is the

Partial Award that adds a new obligation not arising from the Treaty.

In my opinion, the mere reference to good faith does not contribute to clarifying the
content of Article XIII. In 1985, in the Guinea/Guinea Bissau Maritime Boundary case, after
recalling that both parties recognized without restriction the rule of interpretation of
Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, the arbitral tribunal stated in
its award that:
“Cependant les interpretations qweles ont donnees dans leurs memoires et debattues dans
leurs plaidoiries, avec suffisamment de motifs pour que rien wautorise un tribunal

international ay voir autre chose qu'une manifestation de leur entiere bonne foi, ont abouti
a des conclusions finales divergentes.

9938

A good faith interpretation must be reasonable. The principle of equality of the parties,
abidance by the rule that there is no jurisdiction without consent, and the fact that the
three different dispute settlement options were considered by the Parties to the Treaty,
without any of them prevailing over the others or without explicitly establishing who has

the right to select one of those options, support the interpretation proposed herein.

(5) Supplementary Means of Interpretation

The Parties to the dispute and the Tribunal recognize that recourse may be had to
supplementary means of interpretation, such as the preparatory work and the
circumstances of the conclusion of the Treaty, pursuant to Article 32 of the Vienna
Convention of 1986, in order to confirm the interpretation resulting from the general rule
of interpretation set out in Article 31 of such Convention, or to determine the meaning
of the interpretation, when the interpretation according to such rule leaves the meaning
ambiguous or obscure, or leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.
Regrettably, the majority decided not to resort to such supplementary means, as it
believes that its interpretation based on paragraph 1 of Article 31 suffices.” I disagree,

especially when my colleagues considered it necessary to explain that their considerations

*7 Partial Award, para. 143.

38 Affaire de la delimitation de la frontiere maritime entre la Guince et la Guinee-Bissan, Award, February 14, 1985, Reports of
International Arbitral Awards, vol. XIX169, para. 46.

*» Partial Award, para. 198.

47.

48.

49,

“do not imply that the majority of the Tribunal deems the drafting of Article XIII to be

perfect.”*”

The best practice on the matter is that of the International Court of Justice. In cases
whete it considered that its interpretation based on Article 31 of the Vienna Convention
of 1969 sufficed, nevertheless, it did not hesitate to resort to supplementary means so as
to confirm its interpretation.“' Unlike the Partial Award, the following paragraphs use

such supplementary means.

c. The Preparatory Work

The Partial Award fails to examine the preparatory work available on the issue. I agree
with my colleagues in that the testimony provided by Ambassador Hylton, a member of
the Jamaican delegation in the negotiation of the Treaty and other like instruments, did
not contribute anything relevant,” although I do not think that such witness evidence can

be deemed part of the preparatory work.

‘The preparatory work available reveals that the Dominican Republic did not propose an
investor-State dispute settlement clause, but it was CARICOM that did so later.’ Its

proposal was the following:

“Settlement of Disputes Between an Investor and a Contracting Party

(1) Disputes between a national or company of one Contracting Party and
the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under
this Agreement in relation to an investment of the former which have
not been amicably settled shall, after a period of three months from
written notification of a claim, be submitted to the courts of that
Contracting Party or to international arbitration.

4 Partial Award, para. 152.

4! “The Court considers that it is not necessary to refer to the /rananx préparatoires to elucidate the content of the 1955
Treaty; but, as in previous cases, it finds it possible by reference to the /ravaux to confirm its reading of the text”
(Territorial Dispute (Libyan Arab Jamabiriyal Chad), Judgment, LLC]. Reports 1994, p. 27, para. 55); “In view of the
foregoing, the Court does not consider it necessary to resort to supplementary means of interpretation, such as the
travaux proparatoires of the 1891 Convention and the circumstances of its conclusion, to determine the meaning of
that Convention; however, as in other cases, it considers that it can have recourse to such supplementary means in
order to seek a possible confirmation of its interpretation of the text of the Convention” (Sorereignty over Puan Ligitan
and Pulau Sipadan (Indonesia/ Malaysia), Judgment, ILCJ. Reports 2002, p. 653, para. 53); see also Maritime Delimitation and
Territorial Questions between Qatar and Babrain, Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Judgment, LCJ. Reports 1995, p. 21, para. 40;
and Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Advisory Opinion, 1G]. Reports 2004,
p. 175, para. 95.

# Partial Award, para. 78.

+ Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 62-63; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 41.

20

(2) Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration, the national or
company and the Contracting Party concerned in the dispute may agree
to refer the dispute either to:

(a) International Convention for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(LCS.LD,)

(b) an international arbitrator or ad hoc arbitration tribunal to be
appointed by a special agreement or established under the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law.”

50. The text is similar to the provision of Article XIII eventually adopted. The possibility of
national arbitration was added, and the ICSID option when the dispute is referred to
international arbitration was deleted. It may be assumed that both modifications were
proposed by the Dominican Republic, despite not being of vital importance for the
interpretation of the article under analysis. What does matter for this purpose is that a
party did not wish to include an investor-State dispute settlement clause and the other
did. Even though the preparatory work does not allow expanding the interpretation
criteria arising from the application of the general rule, it may be of interest if examined

together with the circumstances of the conclusion of the Treaty.
d. The Citcumstances of the Conclusion of the Treaty

51. I agree with Claimant’s Expert in that other bilateral investment treaties (“BITs”)
concluded by the Parties to the Treaty, as well as the probable origin of the clause
contained in Article XIII, may be taken into consideration as circumstances of its

conclusion.*°

i. Other BITs and FTAs Concluded by the Dominican Republic

52. Claimant’s Expert identified 11 BITs and three free-trade agreements (“FTAs”)
concluded by the Dominican Republic which include an investor-State dispute settlement

clause.“

I consider those concluded immediately before and after the CARICOM
Agreement of August 22, 1998, to be particularly important. They are the BIT concluded
with Spain in 1995, and the BITs concluded with France and the Chinese province of

‘Taiwan in 1999,

4 CARICOM’s Comments on Treaty Draft, dated March 8, 1998, Comments to Article 11 (R-50).
4 First Legal Expert Report of Prof. Pauwelyn, paras. 71-76.
46 First Legal Expert Report of Prof. Pauwelyn, Annex 3.

21

53. ‘The Spain BIT of March 16, 1995 contains the following clause in relevant part:

“1. Any investment-related dispute which may arise between a Contracting
Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party with respect to issues
regulated by this Agreement shall be notified in writing by the investor,
together with a detailed report, to the host Contracting Party of the
investment. The parties to the dispute shall, as far as possible and without
prejudice to the legal procedures of the host Contracting Party of the
investment, endeavour to settle such differences amicably.

2. If the dispute cannot be thus settled within six months from the date of
the written notification mentioned in paragraph 1, it shall be submitted for
arbitration at the request of either of the parties to the dispute to an ad hoc
arbitral tribunal established under the Arbitration Rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law.”

54. The text explicitly states that the dispute may be submitted for arbitration “at the request
of either of the parties to the dispute” and designates a single method of establishment of
the tribunal (UNCITRAL). In spite of including the Dominican Republic/Spain BIT on
the list prepared to such effect, the Expert failed to examine this article. As it can be
recalled, his main argument is that, while other treaties indicating that arbitration may be
triggered “at the request of one of the parties” cover disputes concerning investments, which
allows both the State and the investor to file claims, the Treaty in the instant case only
refers to obligations undertaken by the Parties thereto in relation to an investment, which is why
only the investor could file claims, and, thus, it is the investor who would have the right

to choose which of the three procedures available is to be followed.*

55. Nevertheless, the clause of the BIT with Spain shows that, even though the text makes
reference to “any investment-related dispute,” it considers that claimant will be the
investor. In fact, the text provides that the dispute “shall be notified in writing by the
investor, together with a detailed report, to the host Contracting Party of the
investment.” Paragraph 2 establishes that, if the dispute cannot be settled amicably
within six months from the date of the notification, “it shall be submitted for arbitration
at the request of either of the parties to the dispute.” This demonstrates two issues
relevant to our analysis: (1) that, although the claim is filed by the investor, both the
investor and the State may submit the dispute to arbitration. This undermines not only

the Expert’s main argument, but also that adopted by the majority in the Partial Award;

 

Article 11, Agreement between the Kingdom of Spain and the Dominican Republic on the Reciprocal Protection
and Promotion of Investments, March 16, 1995, Spain, State Official Gazette No. 282, 11/22/1996, pp. 35303-
35305, available at: https://www.boe.es/diario_boe/txtphp2id=BOE-A-1996-25931

48 Tr. Day 2, English Original, 395:7-13, 398:7-12.

22

and (2) that the clause explicitly admits that the investor may unilaterally submit the
dispute to arbitration, which does not occur in Article XIII of the Treaty, which is the

subject-matter of the Partial Award.

56. The BIT concluded by the Dominican Republic immediately after the CARICOM
Agreement was the Treaty concluded with France on January 14, 1999, the text of which
in relevant part reads:

“1, Any investment dispute between one of the contracting Parties and a

national or company of the other contracting Party shall be settled amicably
between both parties concerned.

2. If the dispute cannot be settled within six months from the date on which
it was raised by either Party to the dispute, it shall be submitted at the request
of either Party to an “ad-hoc” tribunal established under the Arbitration
Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL), or to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID), established by the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, signed in
Washington on March 18, 1965, provided that both Parties are members
thereof.” [Translation]

57. This text makes reference to disputes which may be raised by either party to the dispute and
explicitly states that it may be submitted to arbitration by either party thereto. This text
differs significantly from the text of Article XIII in several aspects. In particular, it
provides that the dispute may concern investments, which makes it possible to go beyond
the obligations set out in the BIT; that both parties may file a claim; and explicitly

indicates that both parties may unilaterally submit the dispute to arbitration.

58. The other BIT concluded by the Dominican Republic in 1999 was that involving the
“Republic of China” (the Chinese province of Taiwan). Once again, the Expert includes
this BIT on his list, but fails to analyze the relevant article, which reads as follows:

“Disputes arising within the framework of this Agreement between one of

the Contracting Parties and an Investor in the territory of the former shall be
settled, as far as possible, by means of amicable consultations.

If a solution cannot be reached by means of such consultations within six
months from the date of the request for settlement, the investor may refer
the dispute:

# Agreement between the Government of the Dominican Republic and the Government of the French Republic on.
the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments, Article 7 (RL-157).

23

a) To the competent courts of the Contracting Party in whose territory the
investment was made,

b) To National arbitration of the Party in whose territory the investment was
made, or

c) To International arbitration:

i) To arbitration under the rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) if one of the Parties is not an ICSID
member.

ii) To the Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce
(ICC).”* [Translation]

59. Unlike the France BIT, this clause limits the scope of the disputes between the Party to
the BIT and investors of the other Party to those “arising within the framework of the
Agreement.” This BIT on/y contains obligations for the Parties, not for the investors.
Consequently, disputes arising “within the framework of the Agreement” concern
obligations of the State parties. It the dispute cannot be settled amicably within six
months, the BIT explicitly provides that she investor may refer the dispute to the courts of the
Party, to national arbitration, or to international arbitration. Here is a similarity with
Article XII: there are three dispute settlement options. But, unlike Article XIII, it és the

investor who may unilaterally decide which of those three to choose.

60. It would be tedious to cite and analyze all the investor/State dispute settlement clauses
included in the other BITs or FTAs concluded by the Dominican Republic. Suffice it to
say that, in all cases, but for a noteworthy exception, the investor is explicitly given the
unilateral decision to choose to resort to arbitration.*! The exception is, naturally, Article

XIII of the Agreement with CARICOM, which is the subject-matter of our analysis.

5° Agreement between the Government of the Dominican Republic and the Government of the Republic of China
on the Reciprocal Protection and Promotion of Inv vestments, Article 11. Available at:

 

https: licy.unctad.org/ii y-files/1049/ download
31 See Article XI of the Chile BIT (RL 41), Article 9 of the Finland BIT (RL- 168), and Article 8 of the Morocco BIT
(https: licy.unctad.or; treaty-files/1044/d load), Article IX

 

 

of the Panama BIT (RL-44), Article 9.2 of the Switzerland BIT (RL-45), Article X of the Argentina BIT (RL-197),
Article 9 of the Netherlands. BIT (RL-42),_ Article. | XI_— ofthe Italy BIT
(https: licy.unctad.or Li treaty-files/3194/download), Article 8 of
the BIT with the Republic of Korea (RL-43), Article 9.20 of the FTA with Central America (RL-226), and Article
10.16 of the FTA with Central America and the United States of America (RL-46).

24

61.

62.

It is unacceptable to presume that, since the Dominican Republic explicitly admitted in
the other cases the possibility that the investor unilaterally resort to arbitration,” this
acceptance should be found to be implied when the Dominican Republic actually decided
not to include it. Rather, the fact that Respondent decided in the Agreement with
CARICOM not to vest such right upon the investor when it did in all other cases
confirms the interpretation whereby Article XIII does not offer the possibility of a

unilateral choice.

ii, Other FTAs Concluded by CARICOM

The FTAs concluded between the regional organization CARICOM and States
immediately before or after the 1998 Treaty with the Dominican Republic are the

Colombia FTA of July 24, 1994 and the Cuba FTA of July 5, 2000. The Colombia FTA

 

merely encourages the possibility of concluding future BITs, and, thus, fails to provide
for the settlement of disputes between one Party and investors of the other Party.** The
Cuba FTA, in contrast, contains an annex on investments, which includes an
investor/State dispute settlement clause:
“1, Any dispute between one Party and an Investor of the other Party
concerning an Investment of the latter, in the territory of the former, shall, if
possible, be settled amicably. If such a dispute has not been settled amicably
within a period of three months from the date of written notification of the

claim, either Party may submit the dispute to the courts of that Party or to
national or international arbitration

2. Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration, the investor and
the Party concerned in the dispute may agree to refer the dispute to an
international arbitrator or ad hoc arbitration tribunal to be appointed by a
special agreement or established under the Arbitration Rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law.”™

Paragraph 1 of this article differs from paragraph 1 of Article XIII in establishing that the
relevant disputes concern the investment made by the investor of the other Party, not the
obligations undertaken by one of the Parties to the Agreement. Both articles coincide on

the three dispute settlement options: courts of the Party to the Agreement, or national or

%2 Claimant invokes this explicit acceptance in 11 BITs in support of his argument that, by application of the MEN

clause in Article III of the Treaty, Claimant could resort to UNCITRAL international arbitration (Statement of
Claim, para. 225).

53 Agreement on Trade, Economic and Technical Cooperation between the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and
the Government of the Republic of Colombia, July 4, 2004 (RL-91).

34 Agreement on Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments, Article XII (RL-48).

25

international arbitration. The second difference is that the Cuba Agreement explicitly

provides that either party to the dispute may submit it to any of the three options.

64. In regard to the other FTAs concluded by CARICOM, the only one that contains a
dispute settlement clause is that concluded with Costa Rica on March 9, 2004. The clause

in its relevant part reads as follows:

“1, Any investment dispute which may arise between one Patty and an
investor of the other Party with respect to matters regulated by this Chapter,
shall be notified in writing by the investor to the host Party. Such
notification shall include in detail all relevant information. To the extent
possible, the dispute shall be settled amicably between the patties.

2. Ifa dispute has not been settled amicably within a period of six (6) months
from the date of the notification referred in paragraph 1 above, it may be
submitted, at the choice of the investor concerned, either to the competent
Courts ot Administrative Tribunals of the Party in whose territory the
investment was made, or to international arbitration. Where the dispute is
referred to international arbitration, the investor may submit the dispute to
either:

(a) the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID), established by the "Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States" opened for signature
at Washington D.C. on 18 March 1965, provided both Parties are signatories
of the ICSID Convention; or

 

(b) the Additional Facility Rules of ICSID, provided that one of the Parties,
but not both, is a party to the ICSID Convention; or

(©) an ad hoc arbitral tribunal established under the Arbitration Rules of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL),
where none of the Parties is a signatory of the ICSID Convention.”

65. The subject-matter of the dispute under this article is framed in the section of the
Agreement concerning investment protection. It is narrower than the FTA with Cuba
and resembles Article XIII of the Treaty with the Dominican Republic, as the latter refers
to the obligations of the Parties in relation to investments, whereas the relevant section of
the FTA with Costa Rica only mentions obligations of the Parties, not the investors. Unlike
Article XII, the CARICOM/Costa Rica FTA explicitly offers, tvice, the choice of the means of

settlement (national courts or international arbitration) to the investor.

55 Agreement between the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the Government of the Republic of Costa Rica,
Article X.11. 2. (RL-47).

26

iii, BITs Concluded by Jamaica

66. The witness submitted by Claimant, Jamaica’s Ambassador George Anthony Hylton,
referred to the fact that Jamaica was the country mainly in charge of preparing the
56

negotiations of the Treaty with the Dominican Republic.” It is of interest to examine the

BITs concluded by Jamaica around that time.

67. The BIT concluded between Jamaica and the United States of America in 1997 uses the

following formula: “the national or the Company concerned may choose to submit the dispute...”
‘The Egypt/Jamaica BIT concluded in 1999 provides in relation to the dispute that “it may
be submitted upon request of either party... .’* In turn, the Indonesia/Jamaica BIT also
concluded in 1999 establishes that “when: a dispute has been raised by the investor and
the parties disagree as to the choice of (i) or (ii) she opinion of the investor shall prevail?” In
sum, all BIT’s whereby the investor has the possibility of unilaterally deciding to resort to
arbitration make express provision for such choice. It is worth highlighting that Article

XIII fails to provide so.

e. Conclusion on Preparatory Work as Well as Other BITs and FTAs
Concluded by the Parties
68. On the basis of the foregoing, it arises that both Parties to the Treaty have been very
careful in the inclusion of inyestor/State dispute settlement clauses. The Dominican
Republic preferred not to include such clause in its Treaty with CARICOM, which latter
made a proposal that was different from all others. In the face of its counterparty’s initial
position, it proposed a more tenuous formula than those in which the investor is
explicitly given the possibility of unilaterally choosing international arbitration. The
Dominican Republic has adopted a cautious attitude towards its close neighbors, which
contrasts with the BITs or FTAs concluded with other States. It has no BIT in force
with Haiti or Cuba and has the Treaty with its CARICOM neighbors which contains a
formula that is totally different from that accepted in the other BITs or FTAs: it does not

grant the investor the unilateral right to impose international arbitration thereon.

 

Second Declaration of Ambassador George Anthony Hylton, Paragraph 7 (C-139).

 

5 Treaty between the United States of America and Jamaica concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and
Protection of Investment, Article VI (2) (RL-96).

58 Agreement for the Promotion and Protection of Investments between the Arab Republic of Egypt and the
Government of Jamaica, Article VI 2 (RL-99).

59 Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Indonesia and the Government of Jamaica concerning
the Promotion and Protection of Investments, Article IX 3 (RL-100).

27

69.

70.

71.

72.

£ Model Potentially Followed by Article XIII

If one wishes to compare clauses from other BITs concluded by different parties, the
greatest interest lies in the treaties which may have served as a model for the conclusion
of the Treaty. The founding members of CARICOM are all former British colonies that
follow the Common Law tradition. Haiti and Suriname, the two CARICOM member

States that were not British colonies, joined later. Haiti did so in 2002.

Tagree with the Expert for Claimant in that the probable origin of the text of Article XIII
may be deemed a circumstance of the conclusion of the Treaty. According to the Expert,
“ijt is no secret that treaty language often derives from existing templates or models.
Parts of Article XIII seem to be derived from Article 8 [Alternative] of the Model UK
BIT of 1991. Article 8, paragraph 1 of this Model UK BIT is very similar to Article XIII
paragraph 1 of the present Treaty (concluded in 1998):
“Disputes between a national or company of one Contracting Party and the
other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under this
Agreement in relation to an investment of the former which have not been
amicably settled shall, after a period of three months from written

notification of a claim, be submitted to international arbitration if the
national or company concerned so wishes.”

In this model, I highlight: “if the national or company concerned so wishes.”

The Parties and the Tribunal also considered Article 8(1) of the BIT between the United
Kingdom and Turkmenistan of 1991 extensively, but did so mostly in order to determine
whether such article contains an obligation, which, in my view, is undisputable.
Nonetheless, this is not the main interest of this BIT for the case at issue. This BIT
closely follows the British BIT model to which the Expert for Claimant made reference.
The point of contention here is whether the investor may unilaterally impose
international arbitration. The chief purpose is to find differences from and similarities
with Article XIII so as to reach conclusions. Like the British BIT model, Article 8 (1) of
the Turkmenistan/United Kingdom BIT provides:

“Disputes between a national or company of one Contracting Party and the

other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under this

Agreement in relation to an investment of the former which have not been
amicably settled shall, after a period of four [months] from written

0 First Legal Expert Report of Prof. Pauwelyn, para. 73.

28

73.

74,

76.

notification of a claim, be submitted to international arbitration if the
national or company concerned so wishes.”

Indeed, the text is virtually identical to that of paragraph 1 of Article XIII of the Treaty,
but for three differences. Both of them contain the exact same definition of the subject-
matter of the dispute: limited to an obligation of a Contracting Party under the
Agreement in relation to an investment. Once again, this is the fundamental reason why
both the Expert for Claimant and the majority of the Tribunal believe that only the
investor may institute arbitration proceedings and that there is an offer from the State to
submit to international arbitration, which would be perfected when the investor gave its

consent by instituting the proceedings.

Apart from the one-month difference between the periods set for the parties to the
dispute to endeavor to settle it amicably, the other two differences are significant: (1) only
international arbitration appears as a dispute settlement means; and (2) it is specifically
added that the dispute will be submitted to arbitration proceedings if the investor concerned so
wishes, Were the interpretation made by both the Expert and the majority of the Tribunal
to be followed, this last reference would be not only meaningless, but also superfluous or
redundant. This final phrase of the paragraph could be assigned no practical effect
whatsoever: in view of the subject-matter of the dispute, only the investor could impose

international arbitration by instituting the proceedings.

S; ke

g. Conclusion on Supt ty Means of I1

In sum, the other BITs and FTAs concluded by the Dominican Republic or by
CARICOM, as well as the highly probable model followed for the drafting of Article
XII, expressly provide that the investor or either party may institute international
arbitration. It would be absurd to believe that, since the other treaties authorize the
investor to unilaterally resort to arbitration, then Article XIII should also be interpreted
that way, although it says nothing to that effect. The logical conclusion is actually the
opposite: the fact that this possibility has not been included for the investor means that,

in this case, the investor has no such possibility.

The majority purports Article XIII to include a unilateral and unconditional offer of
arbitration by the State which the investor accepts by instituting it, thus forming the

consent agreement. What it does in support of its position is to explain this situation. But

6! Cited in Partial Award, para. 111.

29

this is not about explaining how this possibility, included in other treaties, works, but
about demonstrating that it exists in Article XIII. It is symptomatic that, in order to
explain the operation of consent by means of a standing offer by the State and a

subsequent acceptance by the investor, the majority systematically resorts to examples of

  

treaties that do contain such possibility. Thus, it cites the decision issued in Chevron

Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v. The Republic of Ecuador. The BIT between

 

Ecuador and the United States which was applied in that case contains the following

formula in its investor/State dispute settlement clause:

“2. (...) If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national or company
concerned may choose to submit the dispute, under one of the following alternatives, for
resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party that is a party to the
dispute; or

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute-settlement
procedures; or

(©) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

4. Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment dispute for
settlement by binding arbitration in accordance with the choice specified in the written
consent of the national or company under paragraph 3. Such consent, together with the
written consent of the national or company when given under paragraph 3 shall
satisfy the requirement for:

(a) written consent of the parties to the dispute for purposes of Chapter II of
the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and for purposes of the
Additional Facility Rules; and

(b) an “agreement in writing” for purposes of Article II of the United
Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards, done at New York, June 10, 1958 (“New York
Convention”).”

77. It is all about interpreting an investor/State dispute settlement clause. It is then useful to
examine the different types of existing clauses, and a comparison is not futile. A study of

clauses in BITs including the possibility of arbitration showed the following:

“44% of the sample treaties that provide access to international arbitration for the
settlement of investment disputes make only one single forum available. Among
the other treaties, an overwhelming majority gives the investor a wnilateral choice
between listed fora.

© Partial Award, para. 124.

© Emphasis added. Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic of Ecuador concerning the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment, Article VI.
https: Li i ional-inv: y-files/1066/ download.

unctad.or;

30

78.

79,

80.

81.

Some other treaties require an agreement between the parties to access specified fora; if
the patties fail to find an agreement, the treaty may designate a tribunal by default
or give the prerogative to the investor.

Yet other treaties are silent on who has the right to choose the forum.”

In the instant case, we are faced with the last of the possibilities mentioned: the treaty is
silent on who has the right to choose the forum. The conclusion that follows is that
which governs all international legal relationships on the matter: if there is no consent to

the existence of a right to a third party that would not otherwise exist, such right does not

 

It can, therefore, be concluded that supplementary means of interpretation of treaties not
only fail to confirm the hypothesis adopted by the majority of the Tribunal or allow to
advance it, but support the interpretation whereby the possibility that the investor choose

which of the three dispute settlement methods available to adopt was excluded.

CONCLUSION: ARTICLE XIII DoEs NOT GRANT THE INVESTOR A RIGHT TO
UNILATERALLY DECIDE TO SUBMIT THE DISPUTE TO ARBITRATION

A good faith interpretation of Article XIII according to the meaning of its terms within
their context and taking into account the object and purpose of the Treaty, shows that
there are three dispute settlement options between a State and an investor, that none is
preferred, and that the Parties did not consent to either one of the disputing parties or
only the investor deciding which of the three dispute settlement means shall apply. The
supplementary means of interpretation, both the preparatory work and the other
agreements concluded by the Parties, either BITs or FTAs, or the model likely used when
drafting Article XII, confirm this interpretation or, in the alternative, make it possible
considering that the main means of interpretation would not have allowed achieving a

clear result because the text of Article XII is ambiguous and obscure.

Indeed, interpreting, like the majority, that paragraph 1 contains an unconditional offer
by the State to submit the dispute to international arbitration, perfected upon the
investor’s notice of arbitration under paragraph 2, is untenable. An “unconditional offer”
requires consent by the State so that the investor chooses one of the three options, and

there is no such consent.

6 J, Pohl, K. Mashigo, A. Nohen, Dispute Settlement Provisions in International Investment Agreements: A Large
Sample Survey, OECD International Investment 2012/02, pp. 21-22 (available at:
h d 5k

 
 

| =9369CB799 ADBE83B01D2E33B8681C9A0).

82.

83.

84.

The determination of the subject that can initiate international adjudicative proceedings is
a key question in assessing consent to such proceedings. This is the case both in general
dispute settlement treaties and in dispute settlement clauses of treaties on special matters,
whether multilateral or bilateral. The lack of determination of the subject leaves the
situation as is: a State cannot be forced to accept a dispute settlement means to which it
did not consent. This is particularly true even in a situation in which there are multiple

dispute settlement means with no predefined priority or preference.

Certainly, consent may also be implied but must arise from some manifestation by the

 

State though an act or omi

 

ion. This is not the case here. From the beginning,
Respondent expressed its reservations about the existence of a State-investor dispute
settlement clause in the Treaty and therefore submitting the dispute to international
arbitration. CARICOM, the other Party to the Treaty, did not include in its draft article

the possibility that the choice rest with the investor.

One could assume that the absence of a reference to how and by whom any of the three
dispute settlement options may be chosen is a real or alleged deficiency of the Treaty. In
that case, the deficiency cannot be replaced with the purported interpretation thereof.
This is even more important when it comes to the decision on the jurisdiction of the

‘Tribunal itself.

The manner in which the International Court of Justice addressed the issue of
conventional deficiencies of compromissory clauses in the case of Interpretation of Peace
Treaties (second phase) is enlightening. The peace treaties with Bulgaria, Hungary and
Romania after World War II provided for an obligation to submit disputes to a

commi:

 

ion composed of three arbitrators: one appointed by each party, and a third

 

member chosen by common agreement between the two parties, failing which the third
member would be appointed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The
treaties did not indicate what should be done if one of the parties failed to appoint an
arbitrator, as the three aforementioned States effectively did. The Court rejected that it be
appointed by the Secretary-General, or that the tribunal conducts the proceedings with
two appointed arbitrators. In its advisory opinion, the Court performed the following
analysis:
“The failure of machinery for settling disputes by reason of the practical

impossibility of creating the Commission provided for in the Treaties is one
thing; international responsibility is another. The breach of a treaty obligation

  

32

cannot be remedied by creating a Commission which is not the kind of
issi ies. It is the duty of the Court to

 

 

86. As regards the effér utile rule of interpretation, the Court stated in this cas

“The principle of interpretation expressed in the maxim: Uf res magis valeat
quam pereat, often referred to as the rule of effectiveness, cannot justify the
Court in attributing to the provisions for the settlement of disputes in the
Peace Treaties a meaning which, as stated above, would be contrary to their
letter and spirit.”

 

87. ‘The Court added, as regards the fact that the Parties had not envisaged the likely failure
by any of them to appoint an arbitrator, that it “does not justify the Court in exceeding its

judicial function on the pretext of remedying a default for the occurrence of which the

2967

‘Treaties have made no provision.

88. States’ consent to international arbitration is a matter of utmost importance. As

explained by Professor Georges Abi-Saab,

“In international law, all tribunals - not only arbitral, but even judicial - are
tribunals of attributed, hence limited jurisdiction (...) all international
adjudicatory bodies are empowered from below, being based on the consent
and agreement of the subjects (...) This is the reason why, the fundamental
principle and basic rule in international adjudication, is that of the consensual
basis of jurisdiction. It also explains the prominent place of questions of
jurisdiction both in the jurisprudence and in the writings on international
adjudication. It explains as well the widely shared perception that the first
task of an international tribunal is to ascertain its jurisdiction; and the great
care international tribunals take in establishing from the outset, the existence
and limits of the consent of the parties before them, on which their
jurisdiction is founded.”

89. The International Court of Justice set the standard for determining the existence of
consent to international jurisdiction in a case where a claimant submitted a dispute,
absent the respondent’s prior consent, which it gave afterwards. In doing so, it cited its
Jurisprudence constante, which includes that of its predecessor:

“The consent allowing for the Court to assume jurisdiction must be certain.
‘That is so, no more and no less, for jurisdiction based on forum prorogatum. As

© Interpretation of Peace Treaties (second phase), Advisory Opinion: I.C.]. Reports 1950, p. 229
66 Thid.
© Id., pp. 229-230.

6% Abaclat and Others v. Argentine Repnblic, CSID Case No. ARB/07/5, Dissenting Opinion of Georges Abi-Saab to
the Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 4, 2011, paras. 7-8 (First Legal Expert Report of Prof.
Pauwelyn, Annex 15).

33

the Court has recently explained, whatever the basis of consent, the attitude
of the respondent State must “be capable of being regarded as ‘an
unequivocal indication’ of the desire of that State to accept the Court’s
jurisdiction in a ‘voluntary and indisputable’ manner” (Armed Activities on the
Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002) (Democratic Republic of the Congo v.
Rwanda), Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Judgment, 1.C.]. Reports 2006, p. 18; see
also Corfit Channel (United Kingdom y. Albania), Preliminary Objection, Judgment,
1948, LCJ. Reports 1947-1948, p. 27; Application of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina v.
Yugoslavia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1996 (I), pp. 620-621,
para. 40; and Rights of Minorities in Upper Silesia (Minority Schools), Judynent No.
12, 1928, P.CLJ., Series A, No. 15, p. 24)”

 

90. An arbitral tribunal has properly summarized the situation which this Tribunal is also
facing:

“Given that States are subject to binding third party dispute settlement
procedures only if they so consent and, given the weight of authority referred
to earlier, particularly as found in decisions of the International Court of
Justice and in the particular ICSID context, the Tribunal considers that its
approach should be cautious. In the words of the International Court of
Justice in considering the very first challenge made to its jurisdiction, the
consent must be “voluntary and indisputable”, and in the words of both
ICSID tribunals “clear and unambiguous”. The necessary consent is not to
be presumed. It must be clearly demonstrated.”

91. In the end, the reasoning followed by the majority is the result of a series of inferences
made from each of the three first paragraphs of Article XIII. Its postulates repeatedly
presented upon reviewing those paragraphs are always the same: every adjudicative
procedure involves a claimant and a respondent, there is a unique manner to initiate
arbitral proceedings, and the only party that may initiate them is the investor. This is not
stipulated in or inferred from the Treaty, unlike all other dispute settlement clauses under
the BITs or FTAs concluded by both Parties, which explicitly provide so. The Partial
Award does not address this material difference. Those postulates are clearly refuted by
the numerous investment treaties that provide for the possibility to institute arbitral
proceedings by one or both parties to the dispute, which unquestionably means that the
State may also initiate arbitral proceedings against investors, and that the latter are not the

only ones that may institute them.

© Certain Questions of Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (Djibouti. France), Judgnent, LLCJ. Reports 2008, p. 204, para.
62.

° ConocoPhillips Petroxmata B.V., ConocoPhillips Hamaca B.V. and ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision on Jurisdiction and the Merits, September 3, 2013 (RL-74), para.
254.

34

92.

93.

94,

96.

My co-arbitrators focused the questions they posed to the Claimant appointed Expert on
what the standard of “clear and unequivocal” consent would mean for the interpretation
of Article XIII.” Both my co-arbitrators and the Expert claim that the interpretation of
the State-investor dispute settlement clause should not be restrictive or extensive (or
“iberal”). In support, the Expert for Claimant cited a study by the UNCTAD: “Neither a
principle of restrictive interpretation nor a doctrine of ‘effet utile’ will do justice to a

consent clause.”””

In view of the above, the conclusion is simple: the Parties to the Treaty agreed to settle
disputes with investors through one of the three dispute settlement means but did not
leave the decision to investors. Thus, the only obligation under Article XIII is to settle the
dispute by any of the three dispute settlement methods indicated. In the absence of a
provision on the selection method, the general rule, which may well be deemed a general
principle of law, shall apply. This obligation requires the disputing parties to negotiate in

good faith the selection of the means that will be used to settle the dispute.

In Article XIII, negotiation between a State and an investor forms part of the dispute
settlement process. In fact, the first part of paragraph 1 provides so. If they cannot settle
the dispute “amicably” (that is, by negotiation), they shall use all efforts to do it by any of
the three possible jurisdictional means indicated. The selection cannot be unilateral.
Therefore, submitting the dispute to an international arbitral tribunal requires the
common agreement between the parties. In the event that there is no such agreement and
the investor intends to settle the dispute by any other means, there is always the residual
solution in these cases: resorting to national courts and requesting diplomatic protection

from its State.

Moreover, if the investor’s State considers that the host State failed to comply in good
faith with its obligation to negotiate the selection of the adjudicative means indicated in
paragraph 1 of Article XIII, it may rely on Article XIV of the Treaty and submit the

dispute to arbitration without the need for its investor to exhaust all domestic remedies.

These residual options may or may not be convenient to the members of the Tribunal;

however, it is not their task to evaluate the dispute settlement mechanisms agreed upon

7! Tr, Day 2, English Original, 386:11-393:20.
7 UNCTAD, Dispute Settlement, International Centre for Investment Disputes, 2.3 Consent to Arbitration, New York and
Geneva, 2003, pp. 33-34, First Legal Expert Report of Prof. Pauwelyn, para. 16.

35

97.

98.

99.

by the Parties, but to strictly apply the Treaty, rather than forcing the Treaty to state what

it fails to state.

In the case at hand, it is evident that the agreement of the Parties to submit the dispute to
international arbitration is absent. Claimant did not attempt to agree on the mechanism
to settle the dispute. In its Notice of Dispute dated December 19, 2017, it took for

granted his purported right to pursue international arbitration following the three-month

 

period after the submission of such notice.” Respondent objected to this claim.

Therefore, this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear the case.

THE MOST-FAVOURED NATION CLAUSE PROVIDES NO BASIS FOR
JURISDICTION

Since the majority considered that in Article XIII Respondent allowed the investor to
choose international arbitration as a dispute settlement mechanism, it was not necessary
to address in the Partial Award the subsidiary argument of reliance on the Most-Favored
Nation clause of Article III of the Treaty. Since I have found quite the opposite, I believe

it is necessary to briefly discuss this argument submitted by Claimant.

‘The text of Article III, entitled “General Principles Governing Treatment”, reads:

“Each Party shall admit and treat investments in a manner not less
favourable than the treatment granted in similar situations to investments of
its investors except for investments in areas to be identified in the Appendix
to this Annex.”

 

Each Party shall admit and treat investments in a manner not less favourable
than the treatment granted in similar situations to areas related to Most-
Favoured-Nation treatment [...]

The obligation to grant treatment no less favourable than is granted to third
States does not apply to:

(a) any treatment or advantage resulting from any existing or future customs
union or free trade area or common market or monetary union or similar
agreement to which a Party is a party; or

(b) any international agreement or arrangement relating wholly or mainly to
taxation.”

® Notice of Controversy to the Dominican Republic Pursuant to Annex III of the CARICOM Free Trade
Agreement, paras. 7 and 52 (C-15).

74 Agreement Establishing Free Trade Area Between the Caribbean Community and the Dominican Republic, Annex
IIH, Article I (CL-5).

36

100. Claimant summarizes his position in the following terms:

“More specifically, by operation of Article II] (MFN) of Annex III of the
‘Treaty, Claimant’s investments have a right to “treatment no less favourable”
than that accorded by the Dominican Republic under all the bilateral
investment treaties currently in force for the Dominican Republic. To date,
the State has at least eleven bilateral investment treaties in force. In all of
these bilateral investment treaties, the State has consented to arbitration
under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules so they may be “unilaterally”
invoked by the investor without the need for any ex post, “special agreement”
between the Parties.””

101. Without delving into the disputed issue of the possibility to generally apply the MFN
clause to dispute settlement means and, where appropriate, the scope of any such
applicability, it may be asserted in general terms that “the MFN clause cannot serve the

purpose of importing consent to arbitration when none exists under the BIT.”

102. There are three reasons why it is not possible to base an alleged offer to UNCITRAL
international arbitration by Respondent subject to the investor’s unilateral decision on the
basis of Article IIL. The first reason is the following: Claimant invokes the clause to hold
that, if paragraph 1 includes an unconditional offer to international arbitration by the
State, the MFN clause may be invoked for paragraph 2, and thus determine that the
UNCITRAL arbitration may be followed. Having reached the conclusion according to
which there is no immediate consent to international arbitration in paragraph 1, it is not
necessary to examine whether the UNCITRAL arbitration would be available through
application of the MFN clause. Even if there were any such consent, there would be two
additional reasons why the MFN clause cannot operate in the instant case, which I

proceed to analyze.

103. Article IIT of the Treaty applies the MFN treatment only to investments, unlike MFN
clauses that include treatment to both investments and investors. This is the case dealt

with in Venezuela US v. Venezuela, in which the Tribunal unanimously concluded that:

“The Tribunal observes that Article 3(1) deals with treatment of
“investments”, while Article 3(2) deals with treatment of “nationals or
companies of the other Contracting Party” (¢, investors). The right to
submit a dispute to arbitration is a right accorded by Article 8 of the BIT,
under the conditions specified therein, to an “investor”. Article 8(2) uses the
expression “the investor shall have the right to submit the dispute to

*5 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 41.
7 Venezuela US, S.R.L. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, PCA Case No. 2013-34, Interim Award, July 26, 2016, para.
105 (RL-162), para. 105.

37

104.

105.

106.

arbitration.” It follows that MFN treatment can extend to dispute settlement
provisions only through the operation of Article 3(2) of the Treaty.
‘Investment’ as such has no procedural rights, therefore Article 3(1) is
without relevance for the purpose of the Tribunal’s inquiry into its

jurisdiction.”

Finally, it shall be highlighted that Article II of the Treaty refers to its application or not
to “areas.” The Expert appointed by Claimant is of the view that the dispute settlement
clause of Article III is an “area” covered by Article III. The Appendix to which the

English text refers to, and which should have identified the areas to which the national

treatment would not apply, was produced by neither Party to this dispute.”

The use of the term “areas” in the Treaty shows that it refers to the spheres of productive

80

and commercial activities or services.*’ The dispute settlement clause is not an “area.”

Moreover, that can be corroborated by the Guidelines defined by CARICOM for use in

the negotiation of BITs:

“CARICOM countries should, as part of their development plans and
strategies, determine the terms on which foreign investment may enter their
economies; the areas of their economies from which foreign investment would be
prohibited or in which it would be permitted only under special conditions
and the circumstances and criteria which will occasion restriction of foreign
investment from any sector or activity.

Where no determination of such areas, circumstances or criteria has been
made in advance of the negotiations, the BIT should incorporate an
elaboration of the policy and/or criteria governing foreign investment.”*'

In view of the foregoing, Claimant’s invocation of Article III of the Treaty does not allow
justifying the existence of an unconditional offer by Respondent for an investor to be

able to unilaterally resort to UNCITRAL arbitration.

7 Ibid., para. 104.
% Second Legal Expert Report of Prof. Pauwelyn, paras. 77-78.

% T asked the witness for Claimant, Ambassador Hylton, in this regard, and he stated not recalling to which areas
Article III referred to or if the Appendix had been negotiated (Ir. Day 1, 279:14-22, 280: 1-16)

80 See Articles II (vi) and IX of the CARICOM-Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement and Article XII (3) of
the Agreement on Trade in Goods (Annex I) (R-1 in Spanish and CL-5 in English).

81, CARICOM Guidelines for nse in the Negotiation of Bilateral Treaties, Caribbean Community Secretariat (1984)
(Emphasis added), available at: hetps://i licy.unctad.org/i ional-i treaty:

files/2879/ download

38

IV. THE PROTECTION OF THE SO CALLED “INDIRECT” INVESTMENTS

107. | Having considered that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear the present case, it would
not be necessary to examine the second jurisdictional objection. Nevertheless, as my co-
arbitrators rejected the first jurisdictional objection, I shall express my opinion on the

question, which I will also do succinctly.

108. The parties and the Tribunal devoted considerable time and space to the question of

knowing whether “indirect” investments are covered by the Treaty. The parties agree that

Mr. Lee Chin’s investments in the Dominican Republic can be qualified as “indirect.”
‘There is unanimous agreement to consider the Treaty does not expressly include indirect
investments in its definition of investments. The Treaty makes no reference to corporate
control either. We would be here before a fourth-degree indirect investment. The Partial
‘Award contains the scheme presented by Claimant which shows his interests in a number
of Panamanian and Dominican companies ending up in Lajun Corporation S.R.L., the
Dominican company subject of the measures contested by Claimant." It is through four

companies and at different levels that Claimant holds interests in Lajun.

is in order to determine whether indirect

 

109. The Partial Award conducts a detailed analysi
investments ate covered by the Treaty, although it makes no explicit reference thereto as
other BITs or FTAs do and concludes that they indeed are covered. I do not need to
opine on the general issue of indirect investments. My duty is merely to address the scope
of the protection afforded by the Treaty to the investments and the investors of the other

Party.

110. The Treaty considers “investments” the “shares, stocks and debentures of companies or
interests in the property of such companies.”*> Claimant is the sole owner of shares,
stocks and interests, but in two Panamanian companies (Lution Investment SA and
Kigman Del Sur SA), which, in turn, hold shares, stocks and interests in a Panamanian
company (Nagelo Enterprises SA) and in a Dominican company (Wilkison Company
SRL), which, in turn, hold shares, stocks and interests in Lajun Corporation SRL. Thus,
the holder of the rights granted to investors under the Treaty, as defined in Article II (2),
is not Claimant, but the Panamanian company Nagelo Enterprises SA and the Dominican

® Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 154; Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 153.

85 Partial Award, para. 7.

84 Partial Award, paras. 212-219.
8 Article I (1) (i

 

39

111.

112.

113.

114.

86

company Wilkison Company SRL. If any measure adopted by Respondent were to affect
the rights of Wilkison Company SRL, the holder of the rights granted to investors under

such article would be the Panamanian company Kigman del Sur SA.

However, the CARICOM/Dominican Republic Treaty applies neither to Panamanian
companies nor to Dominican companies having investments in the Dominican Republic.
The issue of the investments mentioned herein might include the shares, stocks and
interests of the two Panamanian companies in the Dominican companies Wilkison and
Lajun. I note in passing that there is a BIT between the Dominican Republic and Panama

which contains an investor-State dispute settlement clause.*®

Accordingly, the Tribunal lacks ratione personae and ratione materiae jurisdiction, as Claimant
and his interests do not qualify as “investor” and “investments”, respectively, under the

terms of the Treaty.

Given that the majority decided otherwise, I go on to address the scope of the ratione
materiae jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the merits of the case. The jurisdiction of the
Tribunal will require determining whether the State’s behavior somehow violates the
rights arising from the ownership of the shares, stocks or interests in the property of

Lajun Corporation SRL.

In the instant case, attention was drawn to the court or administrative proceedings
initiated against Lajun in the Dominican Republic.” The Claimant appointed Expert
tightly stated that there is no ratione personae, ratione materiae and causa petendi identity
between the proceedings before Dominican courts or tribunals and the case at issue
here.** The State could only sue Lajun Corporation SRL if it considered that there is a
dispute with it, unless in the event of joint and several liability of shareholders, which

obviously exceeds the scope of this analysis.

‘The present case does not concern Respondent’s actions towards Mr. Michael Lee-Chin,
but against Lajun Corporation SRL, approximately 80% of the capital of which is held by

the former, which was revealed after piercing the veil of four other companies at four

Agreement between the Dominican Republic and the Republic of Panama on the Promotion and Protection of

Investments (RL-44).

8? Notice of Arbitration, para. 65

88 First Legal Expert Report of Prof. Pauwelyn, paras. 31-32.

40

116.

117.

118.

different levels. The fact that Mr. Lee-Chin has decided to act through three Panamanian
companies is a matter of choice that is not to be examined by the Tribunal.
CONCLUSION

The Partial Award rightly asserts that the consent of the State must be “clear and

unambiguous.” It adds

 

“Tt is essential that the tribunal called upon to resolve a dispute be persuaded
that all the parties concerned (énter alia, a State in our case) have agreed to
submit thereto. In the view of the Tribunal, the requirement that consent
have such features should be understood in the sense that it must arise from
the text, interpreted pursuant to the criteria accepted under international law,
and not from presumptions or inferences based on expressions not
contained therein.”

It takes a lot of imagination to believe that the Parties to the Treaty have “clearly and
unambiguously” consented to the possibility that the investor alone decide to choose to
refer the dispute to international arbitration. The Partial Award is systematically based on
inferences, both for the analysis of each of the paragraphs of Article XIII and the
determination that the so-called “indirect” investments fall within the scope of protection

of the Treaty.

International courts and tribunals must be extremely cautious in analyzing the existence
of their jurisdiction. The exercise of jurisdiction over a dispute in which a State has not
given its consent entails a serious disregard for the sovereignty of the State(s) concerned.
The determination of jurisdiction by an ad hoc tribunal must be conclusively established.
The continuance of the work of its members depends on their own decision on the
matter. For all the reasons stated in this dissenting opinion, I consider that the Tribunal

lacks jurisdiction to hear the dispute submitted thereto.

[ Signed ]

Professor Marcelo G. Kohen
Date: July 10, 2020

® Partial Award, para. 119.

41

