Date of dispatch to the parties: March 15, 2002

AWARD

RENDERED BY ICSID ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

IN THE CASE OF

MIHALY INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

(ICSID CASE NO. ARB/00/2)

THE TRIBUNAL COMPOSED OF

Sompong SUCHARITKUL President
Hon. Andrew ROGERS Member
and David SURATGAR Member

Alejandro A. ESCOBAR Secretary

142

CASES, 143

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
A. REQUEST FOR ARBITRATION

1. On 29 July 1999, the Centre received a request for arbitration
dated 22 July 1999 (the request) from Mihaly International Corporation
(Mihaly USA or the Claimant), a company established under the laws of the
United States of America, against the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka (Sri Lanka or the Respondent). The request invoked the provisions
of the 20 September 1991 Treaty between the United States of America and
Sri Lanka concerning Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Invest-
ment (the US - Sri Lanka BIT). The request was submitted under the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States (the ICSID Convention). Both Sri Lanka and the
United States of America are Contracting States to the ICSID Convention.

2. On 21 December 1999, further information having been
requested by the Centre, Mihaly USA submitted a supplemental informa-
tion concerning its request.

B. REGISTRATION OF REQUEST

3. On 11 January 2000, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered
the request and notified the Parties of the registration in accordance with
Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention.

C. APPOINTMENT OF ARBITRATORS

4. Following exchanges of proposals between the Parties, on 6 April
2000 the Respondent chose the formula set forth in Article 37(2)(b) of the
Convention regarding the number of arbitrators and the method of their
appointment. Accordingly, on 7 April 2000, the Centre notified the Parties
that the Tribunal was to consist of three arbitrators, one appointed by each
party and the third arbitrator, who was to be President of the Tribunal, to
be appointed by agreement of the Parties. The Claimant appointed Mr.
David SURATGAR, a British national, as an arbitrator. The Respondent
appointed the Hon. Andrew J. ROGERS, Q.C., an Australian national,
as an arbitrator. The Parties, by agreement, appointed Professor
Sompong SUCHARITKUL, a national of Thailand, as the arbitrator to
serve as President of the Tribunal. By letter of 5 June 2000, the Acting

144 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

Secretary-General of ICSID notified the Parties that all the arbitrators had
accepted their appointment and that the Arbitral Tribunal was therefore
deemed to have been constituted, and the proceedings deemed to have
begun, on that date.

D. FIRST SESSION OF THE TRIBUNAL WITH THE PARTIES

5. On 19 July 2000, the Tribunal held its first session with the
Parties in London, United Kingdom. At the first session, the Respondent
confirmed that it was raising objections to jurisdiction. Following consul-
tations between the Tribunal and the Parties, it was agreed that the Respon-
dent would submit a written statement of its objections to jurisdiction.
The Claimant would then submit a memorial on jurisdiction with a state-
ment of relevant facts, to be followed by the submission by the Respondent
of a counter-memorial on jurisdiction, a reply by the Claimant and a
rejoinder by the Respondent.

E. EXCHANGE OF WRITTEN PLEADINGS ON OBJECTIONS
TO THE JURISDICTION

6. In due course, following some adjustment of the original
schedule, the Claimant's memorial on the objections to jurisdiction was
submitted on 16 November 2000; the Respondent’s counter-memorial on
jurisdiction was submitted on 16 February 2000; the Claimant’s reply was
submitted on 28 February 2001; and the Respondent’s rejoinder on juris-
diction was submitted on 28 March 2001. In addition, the Claimant
submitted without objection, on 9 March 2001, supplementary documen-
tation inadvertently omitted from its memorial on jurisdiction.

E HEARING ON JURISDICTION

7. As has been agreed at the Tribunal’s first session, the Tribunal
held a hearing on jurisdiction in Washington, D.C. on 30 April and 1 May
2001. During the hearing, both Parties submitted demonstrative exhibits
in support of their respective presentations to the Tribunal. In addition, the
Claimant submitted a memorandum on the law of the State of California,
USA, applicable to partnerships. At the hearing, the following appearances
were made on behalf of the Parties. Appearing on behalf of the Claimant
were: Mr. Brian T. BECK, Mr. David R. HAIGH, Q.C., Mr. Eugene B.

CASES, 145

MIHALY, Mr. Michael ROBINSON, Q.C. and Mr. John H. WALKER.
Appearing on behalf of the Respondent were: Mr. Paul D. FRIEDLAND,
Esq., Ms. Siranthani GOPALLAWA, Mr. Robert N. HORNICK, Esq.,
Mr. Saleem MARSOOK, Mr. Arjuna OBEYSEKERE, Mr. A. Rohan
PERERA and Mr. Timothy N. TANNER, Esq.

G. EXCHANGE OF POST-HEARING SUPPLEMENTAL
WRITTEN PLEADINGS

8. Under directions given by the Tribunal at the hearing on jurisdic-
tion, the Claimant submitted, on 8 May 2001, a supplemental memo-
randum on the California law of partnerships, the Respondent submitted,
on 18 May 2001, its observations on the memoranda on the California law
of partnerships submitted by the Claimant, and the Claimant submitted,
also on 18 May 2001, a list of references to the evidentiary record in connec-
tion with the role of Mihaly USA in the events leading up to the dispute.
Also under directions given by the Tribunal at the hearing on jurisdiction,
both Parties submitted, on 18 May 2001, their respective statements on the
costs incurred by each of them during this stage of the proceeding.

9. On21 May 2001, the Respondent submitted an objection to the
Claimant’s above-mentioned list of references to the evidentiary record. On
1 June 2001, the Claimant submitted, by fax, a post-hearing rejoinder to
the Respondent’s 18 May observations on the memoranda of law, and the
Respondent's 21 May objection to the list of references.

II. OBJECTIONS TO THE JURISDICTION

10. Sri Lanka raised two main objections to the jurisdiction of the
Centre as well as that of the Tribunal. For all practical purposes, these
objections could be characterized as follows:

A. OBJECTION TO THE JURISDICTION RATIONE PERSONAE;
and

B. OBJECTION TO THE JURISDICTION RATIONE MATERIAE.

The Tribunal will examine each of these objections in the light of the
contentions of the Parties and thereupon will also provide its own analysis
and findings on each of these objections to the jurisdiction.

146 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

A. JURISDICTION RATIONE PERSONAE
(1) NATURE OF SRI LANKAS OBJECTION RATIONE PERSONAE

11. SRI LANKA described the case before the Tribunal as “a claim by
a Canadian Company, allegedly assigned to this US Claimant but without Sri
Lanka’ consent, for reimbursement of expenditures made pursuing a possible
investment in a proposed power project in Sri Lanka that never happened”.
(Respondent's Counter Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 1)

12. In other words, SRI LANKA alleged that the true and undis-
guised nationality of the claim in this case as being Canadian. Hence the
claim must be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction since Canada is not a party
to the ICSID Convention. It follows that the Centre is without jurisdiction
to entertain a claim on behalf of a Canadian corporation although filed by
a United States corporation. The claim contains an inherent defect,
according to Sri Lanka, in that the nationality requirement under Article
25(2) of the ICSID Convention is not satisfied.

(2). CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES

13. THE CLAIMANT maintained that it is known by name as
Mihaly International Corporation organized under the laws of California
in the United States and as such is fully entitled to the protection under
Article 25(2) of the ICSID Convention, and that Mihaly International
Corporation (USA) eo nomine could initiate the proceedings in its own
name as well as on behalf of its partner, Mihaly International Corporation
organized under the laws of Ontario, Canada. The Claimant based its
contentions on two legal theories, namely, partnership and assignment.

14. (i) PARTNERSHIP: the Claimant advanced the theory that
under the laws of California where the Claimant was incorporated, the
partnership formed between the Claimant and its Canadian counterpart,
Mihaly International Corporation organized under the laws of Ontario,
Canada, Mihaly International Corporation (USA), the Claimant, was
empowered to file a claim on its own behalf as well as on behalf of its other
partner, the Canadian counterpart.

15. (ii) ASSIGNMENT: Mihaly International Corporation (USA)
further argued that it is the lawful assignee of all the rights, interests, and

CASES, 147

claims of its Canadian partner, Mihaly International Corporation
(Canada), and that under the assignment instrument, the Claimant is
authorized to bring a claim for all the rights and interests that Mihaly
International Corporation (Canada) had against the Respondent. In the
Claimant's view, this assignment, which is objectively valid and is recog-
nized in Ontario as well as in California, together with the existence of an
international partnership between the Claimant and its Canadian counter-
part, provide sufficient legal ground for the Claimant to file a claim which
is the subject-matter of the current dispute before the Tribunal.

16. (b) THE RESPONDENT rejected the linkages between the
Claimant, Mihaly International Corporation (USA) and its alleged partner,
Mihaly International Corporation (Canada), both

(i) on the theory of partnership for lack of evidence; and

(ii) on the theory of assignment on the ground that the personal

nature of the transactions and negotiations between Mihaly
(Canada) and Sri Lanka precluded any possibility of a valid
assignment of any claim of rights without the consent of Sri
Lanka to Mihaly (USA), the Claimant, which is not privy either
to the negotiations or to any agreements with Sri Lanka.

17. In other words, Sri Lanka contended that the Claimant, Mihaly
(USA), had no standing before the Tribunal, neither by reason of its part-
nership with Mihaly (Canada), nor in its capacity as an undisclosed
assignee. Sri Lanka denied any awareness of its ever dealing with Mihaly
(USA) at any given stage of the negotiations or in any part of the arrange-
ments made with Sri Lanka, let alone its consent, in writing, to submit the
dispute, if any, to ICSID Arbitration.

(3) ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS OF THE TRIBUNAL

18. Having examined the contentions of the Parties, and having
heard further precision in the oral arguments presented by the Parties at the
Hearing on Jurisdiction on 30 April and 1 May 2001, the Tribunal will
now present its own analysis and its own findings on the relevant facts and
the pertinent rules of law which will guide the Tribunal to its logical
conclusions.

19. The Tribunal maintains that the jurisdiction of the Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) and of this Tribunal is based

148 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

on the ICSID Convention and the rules of general international law. It
does not operate under any national law in particular, and certainly not
under the law of the State of California or the law of the Province of
Ontario.

20. The nationality requirement of a claim before an ICSID Tribunal
has in each case to be satisfied before an ICSID proceeding can be initiated
or even registered.

21. Regardless of the Parties’ subsequent contentions, the request for
arbitration submitted by Mihaly (USA) did not appear to contain any
information on the basis of which the Secretary-General of ICSID could
find the request to be manifestly outside the Centre's jurisdiction, hence
the registration of the case under Article 36 of the Convention and the
commencement of the proceedings.

22. It was common ground between the Parties that the suggested
partnership between Mihaly (USA) and Mihaly (Canada) which did not
have a separate juridical personality of its own distinct from its members,
neither acquired dual or joint nationality, nor was any of the partners
divested of its original US or Canadian nationality. The existence of an
international partnership, wherever and however formed, could neither
add to, nor subtract from, the capacity of the Claimant, Mihaly (USA), to
file a claim against the Respondent for whatever rights or interests it may
be able to substantiate on the merits in connection with the proposed
power project in Sri Lanka, upon fulfillment of the other requirements of
ICSID jurisdiction. The fact remains undisputed that the designated
Claimant in the case at bar is unmistakably Mihaly (USA) eo nomine and
not the Mihaly International or Binational Partnership (USA and Canada).

23. Under Articles 34, 35 and 36 of the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties 1969 (United Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. 1155, p. 331),
pacta tertiis nec nocent nec prosunt. Treaties neither harm nor benefit non-
Parties. The ICSID Convention, to which Canada is not a Party, could not
be invoked by Canada, nor by a national or company of Canada, such as
Mihaly (Canada). This principle was admitted by the Parties at the Hearing.

24. It follows that as neither Canada nor Mihaly (Canada) could
bring any claim under the ICSID Convention, whatever rights Mihaly
(Canada) had or did not have against Sri Lanka could not have been

CASES, 149

improved by the process of assignment with or without, and especially
without, the express consent of Sri Lanka, on the ground that nemo dat
quod non habet or nemo potiorem potest transfere quam ipse habet. That is,
no one could transfer a better title than what he really has. Thus, if Mihaly
(Canada) had a claim which was procedurally defective against Sri Lanka
before ICSID because of Mihaly (Canada)’s inability to invoke the ICSID
Convention, Canada not being a Party thereto, this defect could not be
perfected vis-a-vis ICSID by its assignment to Mihaly (USA). To allow such
an assignment to operate in favour of Mihaly (Canada) would defeat the
object and purpose of the ICSID Convention and the sanctity of the privity
of international agreements not intended to create rights and obligations for
non-Parties. Accordingly, a Canadian claim which was not recoverable, nor
compensable or indeed capable of being invoked before ICSID could not
have been admissible or able to be entertained under the guise of its assign-
ment to the US Claimant. A claim under the ICSID Convention with its
carefully structured system is not a readily assignable chose in action as
shares in the stock-exchange market or other types of negotiable instru-
ments, such as promissory notes or letters of credit. The rights of share-
holders or entitlements of negotiable instruments holders are given different
types of protection which are not an issue in this case before the Tribunal.
This finding is without prejudice to the right of Mihaly (Canada) to pursue
its claims, if any, before another otherwise competent forum.

25. This proposition is confirmed by ICSID long-standing practice
as is amply demonstrated by the decision in Kléckner v. Cameroon (ICSID
Case No. ARB/81/2), where all the three Kléckner Corporations
(Germany: Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH; Belgium: Kléckner Belge
S.A.; and Netherlands: Kléckner Handelsmaatschappij B.V.) were named
as co-claimants. Besides, ICSID case-law appears settled in the sense that a
US company, such as the American Manufacturing and Trading Company
in AMT vy. Zaire (ICSID Case No ARB/93/1) could not and did not
attempt to recover more than the shares represented by its US shareholders.
This does not preclude a State Party to the ICSID Convention from
expressly consenting to include under ICSID protection an investment
contract it concludes with an international consortium.

26. The Tribunal finds, nonetheless, that Mihaly International
Corporation (USA) is entitled to file a claim in its own name against Sri
Lanka in respect of the rights and interests it may be able subsequently to
establish in the proposed power project.

150 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

27. It must be noted, however, that this finding does not per se create
jurisdiction of the Tribunal. It merely necessitates further proof of the
existence of jurisdiction ratione materiae. Accordingly, the Tribunal is
required to examine the second objection to the jurisdiction ratione mate-
riae, even after the finding that the Claimant, Mihaly (USA), may have
locus standi before the Tribunal, which may find itself without jurisdiction
to entertain the subject-matter of the dispute presented to it for determi-
nation.

B. JURISDICTION RATIONE MATERIAE
(1) NATURE OF THE OBJECTION RATIONE MATERIAE

28. Throughout its written and oral pleadings, the Claimant relied
on the provisions of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention as the basis of the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal and of the International Centre for the Settle-
ment of Investment Disputes. In particular, the Claimant cited paragraph

(1) which reads:

“The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal
dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a
Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a
national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the
dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the
parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its
consent unilaterally.”

29. The phrase “between a Contracting State and a national of another
Contracting State” refers to jurisdiction ratione personae, already discussed
in the preceding paragraphs 11-27. The opening phrase which describes
the coverage and extent of the jurisdiction of the Centre explicitly refers to
any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment. This phrase contains
the constitutive elements of what may be regarded as the basis for
subject-matter jurisdiction or jurisdiction ratione materiae.

30. To succeed on the issue of jurisdiction, the Claimant must estab-
lish the existence of jurisdiction of the Centre and of the Tribunal both
ratione personae and ratione materiae.

CASES 151

(2). CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES

31. For the objection to the jurisdiction ratione materiae, the Parties
presented opposing arguments on each of the elements that establish the
legal basis for jurisdiction under Article 25(l) of the ICSID Convention,
namely,

(i) that there was a dispute;

(ii) that the dispute was a legal one;

(iii) that the dispute arises directly and not indirectly out of an invest-

ment; and

(iv) that there was an investment out of which a legal dispute has

directly arisen.

32. The most crucial and controversial contentions of the Parties
were concentrated upon the existence vel non of an “investment” for the
purpose of Article 25(1) to found the jurisdiction of ICSID Centre and the
Tribunal. A fortiorissime, without proof of an “investment” under Article
25(I), neither Party need to argue further, for without such an “invest-
ment”, there can be no dispute, legal or otherwise, arising directly or indi-
rectly out of it, which could be submitted to the jurisdiction of the Centre

and the Tribunal.

33. Neither Party asserted that the ICSID Convention contains any
precise a priori definition of “investment”. Rather the definition was left to
be worked out in the subsequent practice of States, thereby preserving its
integrity and flexibility and allowing for future progressive development of
international law on the topic of investment.

(a) Expert Opinions

34, The Parties did not cite any practice of States to indicate the
acceptance of an extended definition of “investment” to include and cover
also pre-investment expenditures. The Claimant nevertheless cited the
opinion of Mr Per Ljung as saying that “The expenditures during the devel-
opment phase typically amount to 2 to 4 percent of the total cost” and
wondered if the expenditures during the development phase should not be
considered as constituting investment in the host country. The Claimant
contended that the development phase activities are as essential for the
successful commercial operation of the BOT project as the physical
construction of a plant, and that it is standard practice accepted by host

152 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

governments, lenders and other equity investment to include the sponsors’
development expenditures in the investment cost.

35. The Respondent did not reject the possibility for accounting
purposes of including the sponsors’ development expenditures in the
investment cost, provided always that there was finally an agreement or
consent of the host government to receive or admit the investment in ques-
tion.

(6) The LOI, the LOA and the LOE

36. The Claimant contended that without a precise definition of
“investment”, it was appropriate to give the term a broad interpretation to
encourage a freer flow of capital into developing countries. It submitted
that otherwise the free flow of capital investment to developing countries
would subside. The Respondent, for its part, contended that developing
countries would find it difficult to adhere to the Convention, if, by means
of a broad interpretation, the Tribunal were to hold the expenditures in the
present case to be an “investment” in the absence of their explicit consent.
The Claimant cited three documents as evidence of agreement or authori-
zation or awareness, if not acquiescence and approval, on the part of Sri
Lanka for the Claimant to invest in the proposed project. These were: the

LOI, the LOA and the LOE.
(i) The Letter of Intent (LOI)

37. The Claimant contended that, in the particular circumstance of
this case, the date of the Letter of Intent, 15 February 1993, was the date
from which interest of the Claimant in being considered for the project was
transformed into an “investment”. It is the letters exchanged between the
Parties that determine whether or not the money, indubitably expended by
the Claimant, constitutes an investment within the meaning of the
Convention.

38. The Government of Sri Lanka determined that the supply of
electricity within the Republic should be improved by the erection of a new
power generation facility. It wished this facility to be constructed and oper-
ated by private enterprise. Accordingly, in 1992 it called for expressions of
interest on a build own transfer (BOT) basis. The Claimant was one of a
number of consortia of international investors, financiers and uti

 

CASES, 153

suppliers to develop, on an exclusive basis, a 300 MW thermal power
station on a BOT basis, with the objective of supplying power to the
Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) electrical transmission grid. The expres-
sion of interest itself was obviously the product of considerable work and
expenditure of money on the part of the Claimant.

39. Originally some 25 groups expressed interest in the project. OF
these, five were invited to enter into negotiations, and from that group of
five, the Claimant was selected as a recipient of the Letter of Intent.

40. Negotiations ensued and resulted in the issue to the Claimant
of a Letter of Intent dated 15 February 1993. In its guidelines for BOT
projects published at the same time as the Letter of Intent, the Respon-
dent described the function of such documents. Paragraph 8.2 of the
guidelines stated that a Letter of Intent confers “. . . some degree of exclu-
sivity in relation to a project for a period of time long enough to enable the
sponsor to finalize the project proposal.” The Letter of Intent determines
the period of exclusivity, spells out any changes to the original proposal
that must be made in order to remain in compliance, and defines what
technical inputs are required in order to reach project finalization and
negotiation.

41. The Letter of Intent stated that the Government accepted a
number of principles on the basis of which matters should proceed. Nego-
tiations were to proceed in an orderly fashion for the project leading to the
signing of a contract by the end of the third quarter of 1993. The estimated
cost of the project was just under US$400 million. The document pointed
out that “the project and contract details are subject to Cabinet approval.”
Most importantly it specified that “this Letter of Intent constitutes a State-
ment of Intention and does not constitute an obligation binding on any party.”
(emphasis added) It went on “however, the Government shall use its best
efforts to take, or cause to be taken, all action and to do, or cause to be done,
all things necessary or proper or advisable under applicable laws and regula-
tions to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby as promptly as
practicable.”

42. Following upon the issue of the Letter of Intent, there were
further extensive negotiations and indeed the parties had arrived at Draft
5 of the Power Purchase Agreement. Nonetheless, the exclusivity period of
six months was coming to an end.

154 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

(ii) The Letter of Agreement (LOA)

43. Thereupon, a document entitled “Letter of Agreement’, dated
22 September 1993, was executed.

44, The Letter of Agreement stated in part that “in furtherance of our
Letter of Intent to you February 15, 1993, which was issued as a result of your
proposal dated 31 December 1992 and the ongoing discussion and negotiations
that have taken place since then among your representatives, representatives of
the Secretariat for Infrastructure Development & Investment and the Ceylon
Electricity Board [CEB], we are pleased to confirm that we are satisfied with
the degree of progress that has been made in completing the requirements set
forth in the Letter of Intent and hereby issue this Letter of Agreement for the
purpose of this Letter of Agreement subject to contract, understanding has been
reached between the parties on the following matters.” One was the under-
standing on matters such as a take or pay obligation of 70 percent of the
rated capacity of the plant, at price of US$0.06 per kilo watt hour, as of 31
December 1992, with escalation up to the date of plant operations as per
the escalation formula in the contract.

45. It was apparent that considerable further sums of money and
effort were expended in planning the financial and economic modeling so
as to arrive at the basis of understanding mentioned in the Letter. It was
significant to note that the term of the operation had moved from 15 years
to 20 years, which in itself would have had great impact on the modelling
and the cost of it. The document concludes “this Letter of Agreement is

itional upon CEB agreeing on the contract with SAEC [South Asia Elec-
tricity Company, a company formed in Sri Lanka to negotiate and manage the
distribution of the supplies of electricity], and all other associated agreement to
facilitate the completion of arrangements for your financing the project with
various lenders from whom commitments/expressions of interest have been
obtained and presented to us so that a financial closing can occur on or about
February 15, 1994.” Once again the Letter specifically recognized that
there was no contractual obligations on any party.

(iii) Letter of Extension (LOE)
46. The parties entered into a Letter of Extension dated 20 July 1994

in response to a request by the Claimant for reinstatement of exclusivity on
the project in the light of the fact that financial closing on 15 February, as

CASES, 155

specified in the Letter of Agreement dated 22 September, had not eventu-
ated. The Letter of Extension confirmed “that exclusivity granted for the
negotiations with yourself is extended subject to the conditions laid down here-
under.” The Letter of Extension imposed the number of obligations on the
Claimant, one of them was that if the Claimant failed to achieve any of the
milestones by the due date, the Letter of Extension should automatically
cease to be operative. There was also provision for an extension of the
period of the exclusivity provided for by the Letter of Extension and it
again concluded “this Letter of E3 ion does not itute an obligation
binding on any party, However, the Government shall use its best efforts to take,
or cause to be taken, all action and to do, or cause to be done, all things neces-
sary or proper or advisable under applicable laws and regulations in Sri Lanka
to the transactions c hereby as aptly as practi-

cable.” (emphasis added)

 

47. Ultimately, there was never any contract entered into between
the Claimant and the Respondent for the building, ownership and opera-
tion of the power station.

48. It is in this factual setting that the Tribunal has been asked to
consider whether or not, the undoubted expenditure of money, following
upon the execution of the Letter of Intent, in pursuit of the ultimately failed
enterprise to obtain a contract, constituted “investment” for the purpose of
the Convention. The Tribunal has not been asked to and cannot consider
in a vacuum whether or not in other circumstances expenditure of moneys
might constitute an “investment”. A crucial and essential feature of what
occurred between the Claimant and the Respondent in this case was that
first, the Respondent took great care in the documentation relied upon by
the Claimant to point out that none of the documents, in conferring exclu-
sivity upon the Claimant, created a contractual obligation for the building,
ownership and operation of the power station. Second, the grant of exclu-
sivity never matured into a contract. To put it rhetorically, what else could
the Respondent have said to exclude any obligations which might otherwise
have attached to interpret the expenditure of the moneys as an admitted
investment? The operation of SAEC was contingent upon the final conclu-
sion of the contract with Sri Lanka, thus the expenditures for its creation
would not be regarded as an investment until admitted by Sri Lanka.

49. The Tribunal is not unmindful of the need to adapt the Conven-
tion to changes in the form of cooperation between investors and host

156 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

States. However, these changes have to be considered in the context of the
specific obligations which the parties respectively assume in the particular
case. The Tribunal repeats that, in other circumstances, similar expenditure
may perhaps be described as an investment.

50. Again, if the negotiations during the period of exclusivity, or for
that matter, without exclusivity, had come to fruition, it may well have
been the case that the moneys expended during the period of negotiations
might have been capitalised as part of the cost of the project and thereby
become part of the investment. By capitalising expenses incurred during
the negotiation phase, the parties in a sense may retrospectively sweep
those costs within the umbrella of an investment.

51. It is an undoubted feature of modern day commercial activity
that huge sums of money may need to be expended in the process of
preparing the stage for a final contract. However, the question whether
an expenditure constitutes an investment or not is hardly to be governed
by whether or not the expenditure is large or small. Ultimately, it is
always a matter for the parties to determine at what point in their nego-
tiations they wish to engage the provisions of the Convention by entering
into an investment. Specifically, the Parties could have agreed that the
formation of a South Asia Electricity Company was to be treated as the
starting point of the admitted investment, engaging the responsibility of
the Respondent for the Claimant's failure to complete other arrange-
ments to achieve the milestones by the due date mentioned in the Letter
of Extension. The facts of the case point to the opposite conclusion. The
Respondent clearly signalled, in the various documents which are relied
upon by the Claimant, that it was not until the execution of a contract
that it was willing to accept that contractual relations had been entered
into and that an investment had been made. It may be and the Tribunal
does not have to express an opinion on this, that during periods of
lengthy negotiations even absent any contractual relationships obliga-
tions may arise such as the obligation to conduct the negotiations in good
faith. These obligations if breached may entitle the innocent party to
damages, or some other remedy. However, these remedies do not arise
because an investment had been made, but rather because the require-
ments of proper conduct in relation to negotiation for an investment may
have been breached. That type of claim is not one to which the Conven-
tion has anything to say. They are not arbitrable as a consequence of the
Convention.

CASES, 157

(c) The BIT

52. The term “investment” is found not only in Article 25 of the
Convention as an objective requirement, but also in the BIT as part of the
consent of the disputing Parties. The Respondent contended in its Counter
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 65, that the only investment disputes
for which a priori consent can exist are those covered by the definition set
forth in the United States-Sri Lanka BIT. Sri Lanka maintained that none
of the documents hitherto considered (namely, the Letter of Intent, the
Letter of Agreement or the Letter of Extension) constituted an “investment
agreement” between a US company and Sri Lanka as envisaged in clause (a)
of Article VI (1) of the BIT, or “investment authorization granted by Sri
Lanka’s foreign investment authority” under clause (b). Therefore the
criteria of US-Sri Lanka BIT, Article VI (1)(a) and (b), have not been met,
and there is no consent on the part of Sri Lanka. Sri Lanka’s consent is not
otherwise created by the purported assignment of claim to the Claimant.

53. The Claimant argued that consent to jurisdiction can be founded
in Article VI(1)(c) of the United States—Sri Lanka BIT because there has
been an alleged breach of a right conferred or created by this Treaty with
respect to an “investment”. The alleged breach in this case, the Claimant
added, derives in particular from Article II(2) of the BIT, including the
right for “investment” to be accorded ‘fair and equitable treatment” as well
as “full protection and security” and treatment which in no case shall be “less
than required by international law.” The Claimant also asserted that
academic commentary supports a finding in favour of ICSID jurisdiction
on this basis.

54. The Claimant did not advance any argument based on the provi-
sions of Article I of the BIT in connection with the incorporation in Sri
Lanka of South Asian Electricity Corporation (Private) Limited, an office
company waiting to be activated. In the circumstances, the Tribunal
considers it inappropriate to develop that point.

(3) CONCLUSIONS OF THE TRIBUNAL

55. The Tribunal notes that the jurisdiction of the Centre, and
consequently of the Tribunal established thereunder, is based on the
consent of the Parties to the dispute that have previously agreed to submit
the dispute in question to the jurisdiction of ICSID and this Tribunal.

158 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

56. The Tribunal further observes that the question of jurisdiction
of an international instance involving consent of a sovereign State deserves
a special attention at the outset of any proceeding against a State Party to
an international convention creating the jurisdiction. As a preliminary
matter, the question of the existence of jurisdiction based on consent must
be examined proprio motu, i.e., without objection being raised by the
Party. A fortiori, since the Respondent has raised preliminary objections to
the jurisdiction, the existence of consent to the jurisdiction must be
closely examined.

57. In the case under review, the fact of the registration of this case
as ICSID Case No ARB/00/2 constituted an indication that, on the basis
of the information contained in the request for arbitration, the dispute was
not manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the Centre. Such registration is
naturally without prejudice to the further examination of arguments of
evidence presented by the Parties on issues of jurisdiction. The Tribunal is
competent to determine the limits of its own competence.

58. In the absence of a generally accepted definition of investment
for the purpose of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal must examine
the current and past practice of ICSID and the practice of States as
evidenced in multilateral and bilateral treaties and agreements binding
on States, notably the United States—Sri Lanka BIT. It is for the Tribunal
to determine the meaning or definition of “investment” for this purpose
as a question of law. Opinions of experts on the theory and practice of
multinational corporations are not to be identified with the teachings of
the most highly qualified publicists of the various nations, which as such
constitute subsidiary means for the determination of rules of law. Only
subject to Article 59 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice
are judicial decisions to be considered as such subsidiary sources of law.

59. The Tribunal concludes in regard to the three Letters of Intent,
of Agreement and of Extension successively issued by and on behalf of the
Government of Sri Lanka in the course of 1993 and 1994 that none of
these Letters contains any binding obligation either on Sri Lanka or on the
Claimant. As the Tribunal has already stated, in the circumstances of this
case, they are not to be treated in any way as signifying acceptance by the
host State, Sri Lanka, of such expenditures as constituting an investment
within the sense of the Convention. There is no evidence which could

CASES, 159

contradict the contingent and non-binding character of the three Letters of
Intent, of Agreement and of Extension.

60. The Tribunal is of the view that de lege ferenda the sources of
international law on the extended meaning or definition of investment will
have to be found in conventional law or in customary law. The Claimant
has not succeeded in furnishing any evidence of treaty interpretation or
practice of States, let alone that of developing countries or Sri Lanka for
that matter, to the effect that pre-investment and development expendi-
tures in the circumstances of the present case could automatically be
admitted as “investment” in the absence of the consent of the host State to
the implementation of the project. It should be observed that while the
US-Sri Lanka BIT contains provisions regarding the definition of invest-
ment and conditions for its admission, they recognize the Parties’ preroga-
tive in this respect.

61. The Tribunal is consequently unable to accept as a valid denom-
ination of “investment”, the unilateral or internal characterization of
certain expenditures by the Claimant in preparation for a project of invest-
ment. The only reference made by the Claimant to the BIT, in particular,
Article II(2), is not to any extended definition of investment but to existing
“investment” or investment iz esse or in being, which is to be accorded “fair
and equitable treatment”. In the case under review, the Tribunal finds that
the Claimant has not provided evidence of such an investment in being
which qualifies for “full protection and security.” Failing to provide
evidence of admission of such an investment, the Claimant’s request for
initiation of a proceeding to settle an investment dispute is, to say the least,
premature. However, in finding the request to be unfounded, the Tribunal
does not say that it is frivolous, vexatious or malicious. Nor does the
Tribunal’s determination that the subject-matter of the dispute, if any, falls
outside the jurisdiction of ICSID and beyond the competence of the
Tribunal preclude whatever recourse the Claimant may have at its disposal
to pursue its claim arising out of a commercial, financial or other types of
dispute. The Tribunal’s conclusions are declared to be without prejudice to
any rights of action which may be available before other instances, national
or international, with the consent of the Parties, if required.

160

62.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

III. DECISION

For reasons specified in the foregoing paragraphs, the Tribunal

decides with unanimity:

(a)

(b)

With regard to the preliminary objection ratione personae that,
subject to paragraph b) below, the objection must be dismissed;

With regard to the preliminary objection ratione materiae that
the objection is sustained in the absence of any proof of admis-
sion of an “investment” in being out of which a legal dispute
could possibly have arisen; and

Accordingly, that the Tribunal is without jurisdiction to enter-
tain the question submitted to it either in part or in whole.

The Tribunal further decides that

The costs of the proceedings including the fees and expenses of
the Arbitrators and the Secretariat shall be shared by the Parties
in equal portion; and that

Each Party shall bear its own costs and expenses in respect of
legal fees for counsels and their respective costs for the prepara-
tion of the written and the oral proceedings.

Sompong SUCHARITKUL
President

Hon. Andrew ROGERS David SURATGAR

Member Member

Attached to this Award is an individual opinion by Mr. David Suratgar.

