INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, DC

MILLICOM INTERNATIONAL OPERATIONS B.V. AND SENTEL GSM SA
CLAIMANTS
Vv.
THE REPUBLIC OF SENEGAL
RESPONDENT
(ICSID CASE NO. ARB/08/20)

Decision on the Application for provisional measures submitted by the
Claimants on 24 August 2009

Arbitral Tribunal

Prof. Pierre Tercier, President
Judge Ronny Abraham, Arbitrator
Prof. Kaj Hobér, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal
Ms. Aurélia Antonietti

The Arbitral Tribunal
In light of

- the Request for Arbitration submitted by the Claimants on 11 November 2008;
- the letter from the Respondent dated 5 December 2008;

- the letter from the Claimants dated 19 December 2008 and their Observations on
jurisdiction of the Centre of the same date;

- the Minutes of the first session of the Arbitral Tribunal of 7 September 2009;
- Procedural Order No. 1 of 14 September 2009;

- the Provisional Measures Application submitted by the Claimants (hereinafter referred
to as the “Application’”’) of 24 August 2009;

- The “Reply in response to the application for provisional measures” filed on 5 October
2009 by the Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the “Reply”);

- the hearing of 9 November 2009, held in Paris;

ruling on the Application for provisional measures submitted by the Claimants and
applicant Parties,

after having set out

I. In fact

In this section, the Arbitral Tribunal will confine itself to providing a brief summary of the
facts underlying the dispute, to the extent required for this decision.

A.

1.

The Parties

The first Claimant, Millicom International Operations B.V. (hereinafter referred to
as “Millicom”, or “Claimant 1”, or alternatively “MIO”), is a limited liability company
organised and existing under Dutch law.

The second Claimant, Sentel GSM S.A. (hereinafter referred to as “Sentel”, or
“Claimant 2”) is a limited company with a share capital of 60,000,000 CFAF,
organised and existing under Senegalese law. Sentel is a wholly-owned subsidiary of
Millicom (see Request for Arbitration, no. 12), and has run a mobile telephony
network in Senegal (“Tigo”) since 1999.

Both Millicom and Sentel are part of the Millicom International Cellular S.A. Group
(hereinafter referred to as “MIC”), a company under Luxembourg law established in
1990, founded by Millicom acting in joint venture with another mobile telephone
operator, Industrif6rvaltnings AB Kinnevik (Sweden). MIC is not a party to these
arbitration proceedings.

MIC is a global telecommunications company. Via its subsidiaries, it provides
telecommunication services in sixteen countries, in Asia, Latin America and Africa
(Request for Arbitration, no. 12). According to the Claimants, Millicom (Claimant 1)
is a wholly-owned subsidiary of MIC, and Sentel (Claimant 2) is a wholly-owned
subsidiary of Claimant 1 (idem).

Claimant 1 and Claimant 2 shall be jointly referred to as the “Claimants”. They are
represented by Messrs. Stephen Jagusch, Andrew Battisson, and Mark Levy of the
firm of Allen & Overy LLP, London.

The Respondent is the Republic of Senegal (hereinafter referred to as “Senegal” or
the “Respondent”). It is represented by Mr. Abdoulaye Dianko, State Judicial Officer,
Mr. Rémi Sermier, Esq., from the firm of Brandford-Griffith & Associés, Paris, Mr.
Frangois Sarr, Esq., SCP Francois Sarr & Associés, Dakar, and Professor Thomas
Clay, Versailles.

Summary of the facts

On 3 July 1998, the Republic of Senegal granted Sentel a concession for its mobile
telephony services entitled: “Convention de concession entre I’Etat du Sénégal et la
Société Sentel GSM S.A. pour l’exploitation d’un réseau public de radiotéléphonie
mobile cellulaire numérique GSM au Sénégal’ (hereinafter the “Concession”;
Claimants’ Exhibit C2).

This Concession was concluded under the Senegalese Telecommunications Code of
1996, which was in force at the time (Reply, no. 8). It granted Sentel the right to
operate a (first) mobile telephony network in Senegal. Sentel undertook to abide by
the terms and conditions of operation (Article 2) and to pay a licence fee to the
Respondent (Article 9). The term of the Concession was set at twenty years, beginning
on the publication of the Decree approving it (Article 1).

Decree no. 98-719 approving the Concession between The State of Senegal and Sentel
(Exhibit C3) was published on 2 September 1998, so the Concession was intended to
lapse on 2 September 2018.

On 17 July 2000, Sentel was given a formal warning by the Respondent for serious
breaches of the Concession (Reply, no. 13; Respondent’s Exhibit R6). The document
accused Sentel of having failed to pay the licence fee due on 1 January 2000; of being
responsible for blatant violations of its obligation to provide technical, administrative
and financial information; and of failing to respect the schedule for the radioelectric
coverage of the National Territory (Exhibit R6). Sentel was given one month to
respond to the allegations made against it.

On 29 September 2000, Mr. Bernard Sambou, Esq., bailiff, acting for the Respondent,
visited the premises of Sentel to serve notice that, in accordance with Article 7.4 of the
Concession, the Concession was being formally terminated, since Sentel had failed to
comply within the period allotted to it in the formal warning and had failed to remedy
the defects of which it was accused (Reply, nos. 14 and 15).

On 19 October 2000, Sentel informed the Judicial Officer of Senegal via Mr. Aloyse
Ndong, Esq., bailiff, that it was formally contesting the reasons set out in the notice
served on 29 September 2000 (Exhibit R8).

On 17 January 2001, the Respondent passed Decree no. 2001-23, intended to be the
final stage in the proceedings terminating the Concession (Exhibit C5). This text has
however still not been published.

On 13 March 2001, the Managing Director of Sentel filed an administrative appeal
with the President of the Republic of Senegal against Decree no. 2001-23 of 17
January 2001. In this filing he contested the reasons for termination and emphasised
that Sentel had respected all the terms and conditions of use of the Concession
(Exhibit R11). On 15 March 2001, the Managing Director of Sentel sent to the Judicial
Officer of Senegal a “preliminary application”, the contents of which were identical to
the contents of the filing submitted to the President of the Republic of Senegal
(Exhibit R12).

Neither of these letters received any response from the authorities to whom they were
addressed. According to the Respondent, who is relying on Article 729 of the
Senegalese Code of Civil Procedure, the silence kept for over four months by the
authorities is equivalent to a decision of dismissal (Exhibit R21).

Still according to the Respondent, the Claimant Sentel allegedly accepted the end of
the Concession, since it was fully aware of Decree no. 2001-23 and had failed to bring
any court proceedings in respect of that Decree. This situation is alleged to have
become definitive on 17 August 2001.

On 27 December 2001, the new Senegalese Telecommunications Code came into
force (Application, no. 14). Its transitional provisions include the following (Article
76, Exhibit R4):

"Les titulaires de concession d’établissement et d’exploitation de réseaux de
télécommunications ouverts au public et de  fourniture de services de
télécommunications en place a la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent Code,
bénéficient de plein droit de Jlexploitation des réseaux et services de
télécommunication qui leur ont été concédés.

Ils bénéficient, en outre, des droits d’utilisation des fréquences radioélectriques
relatives a l’exploitation de leurs réseaux et services visés ci-dessus. Cependant, ils
sont soumis aux nouvelles conditions relatives aux licences notamment au paiement de
contre partie financiére, de redevances et de contributions prévues dans les cahiers de
charge prévues par le présent Code. Toutefois, pour les besoins de la mise en ceuvre
du présent Code, l’'ART peut procéder a des modifications des assignations de
fréquences existantes.

Dans un délai de six mois, un cahier des charges, approuvé par décret, fixera les
nouvelles conditions dans lesquelles les services de télécommunications seront
rendus.” (article 76).

On 9 August 2002, Senegal and MIC concluded an agreement, the content of which is
as follows:

“Le Groupe Millicom International adhére a la politique de I’ Etat du Sénégal relative
a la modernisation et la régulation du secteur des télécommunications du Sénégal et

traduite récemment par la promulgation d’une nouvelle loi sur les
télécommunications, la naissance d’une_ Agence de Régulation des
Télécommunications et l’annonce de l’arrivée prochaine d’un nouvel opérateur.

Ainsi, soucieuse de se conformer a ce nouveau processus, le Groupe Millicom
International accompagné de sa filiale Sentel a informé l’Etat du Sénégal de sa
volonté de négocier de bonne foi les nouvelles conditions mutuellement acceptables
devant régir ses opérations au Sénégal.

A la suite de cet engagement, le groupe Millicom International, a travers sa filiale
Sentel continuera d’opérer en toute légalité sous le cadre juridique de la Convention
de 1998.”

This agreement, on whose scope the Parties have differing opinions, was signed by
Abdoulaye Balde for Senegal and by David Kimche for MIC (Application, no. 14;
Reply, no. 28; Exhibits C6 and R13).

Despite the documents that were served to it, Sentel has continued and is still
continuing to operate the Concession, developing its service and extending its
subscriber base. It claims that it also regularly paid Senegal the licence fee in
connection with the subscriptions it received during this period, in accordance with the
Concession of 1998.

On 24 September 2008, the Respondent wrote to MIC inviting it to submit a tender for
a second licence, informing it that a reasonable tender would be around two hundred
million USD (Exhibit C10). This amount corresponded to the amount that Sudan
Telecom Company Ltd. (Sudatel) had accepted to pay, when the latter obtained a full
licence in autumn 2007 (Decree no. 2007-1333 of 7 November 2007, Exhibit R15).
Correspondence was subsequently exchanged (Exhibits R16 and C11).

On 10 October 2008, Sentel submitted a tender stipulating the payment of twenty-one
million USD, in preparation for the improvement of the network covered by the
Concession (Exhibit C4).

The Respondent informed MIC by letter dated 22 October 2008 that it rejected this
offer. It added: "[...] le Gouvernement a décidé de mettre fin a cette situation
provisoire. Aussi je vous informe que, faute par vous de vous ressaisir et de nous
proposer un montant de contrepartie financiére tenant compte du prix plancher que
représente le versement effectué par Sudatel pour une 3éme licence, la publication du
décret n° 2001-23 du 17 janvier 2001, dont vous trouverez ci-joint une copie,
interviendra au Journal Officiel de la République du Sénégal, le vendredi 31 octobre
2008.” (Exhibit C12). Another exchange of correspondence took place following this
(Exhibit R17 and Exhibits C15 and C16).

On 3 November 2008, Decree no. 2001-23 terminating the Concession (see no. 9
above) was published in the Official Journal (Exhibit R3).

That same day, the Respondent issued a press release stating that it had brought legal
proceedings before the Dakar Regional Court to confirm the end of Sentel’s licence
(Exhibit C14).

On 11 November 2008, the Respondent brought proceedings against Sentel (Claimant
2 in these proceedings) and MIC (which is not a party to these proceedings) before the
Dakar Regional Court (Exhibit C17A). It requested the Dakar Court on the one hand
to order Sentel to cease and desist its illegal activity immediately and on the other
hand to compel Sentel and MIC to pay damages for the harm that the two companies
would have caused to the State, on the grounds that they allegedly used false promises
to ensure that Senegal allowed Sentel to continue operating under a provisional
framework since 2000 (Reply, nos. 59 and 60).

These proceedings continued as follows:

- On 28 January 2009, MIC and Sentel submitted their requests for relief to the
Dakar Regional Court (Exhibit C17B). They confined themselves to contesting
the Court’s jurisdiction, and did not submit any arguments on the merits of the
case. According to them, Article 11 of the Concession grants exclusive
jurisdiction to international arbitration institutions, such as the OHADA
Arbitration Court, ICSID or the ICC in Paris (Exhibit C17B, p. 6).

- On 10 February 2009, the Respondent submitted its response (Exhibit C17C).
With regard to jurisdiction, the Respondent replied to the Claimants’ claims by
alleging that Article 11 of the Concession did not contain an arbitration clause,
and that if it did, the clause was not valid, and that in any event it fell to the
Court before which proceedings were brought to rule on its own jurisdiction.

- On 11 March 2009, MIC and Sentel submitted their reply, in which they
confined themselves to confirming their jurisdictional objection of the Dakar
Regional Court, without making any submissions as to the merits (Exhibit
C17D).

- On 7 April 2009, the Respondent filed its summary submissions in rejoinder
(Exhibit C17E). It maintained its previous submissions with respect to the issue
of jurisdiction of the Dakar Regional Court (Exhibit C17E).

- On 13 May 2009, MIC and Sentel made their summary submissions in rejoinder
(Exhibit C17F). They once again raised the lack of jurisdiction of the Dakar
Regional Court in favour of ICSID.

- On 27 May 2009, the Respondent made additional submissions with respect to
the jurisdictional objection (Exhibit C17G). It concluded that the Dakar
Regional Court had jurisdiction.

- On 24 June 2009, MIC and Sentel indicated that they did not intend to reply to
the latest Respondent’s submissions on the grounds that it was merely a
repetition. They stated that they were upholding all of their requests, allegations
and claims as they had been set out in their previous written submissions
(Exhibit C17H).

20.

21.

- At an unspecified date, the Dakar Regional Court is, according to the statements
of the Respondent, alleged to have closed the proceedings (Transcript of the
hearing of 9 November 2009, English version, p. 134).

The Dakar Regional Court had set a hearing for 23 September 2009. Under the rules
of the Senegalese Code of Civil Procedure, the purpose of this hearing was to inform
the parties that the judgement was being deliberated, which meant that the Court could
issue its decision on a date that it would communicate to the Parties.

Following the joint interventions of the two Parties recommended by this Arbitral
Tribunal during the first session held on 7 September 2009, the Dakar Regional Court
accepted to postpone the hearing until 23 December 2009.

Notwithstanding these letters and proceedings, Sentel continues to operate the
Concession.

Summary of Arbitration Proceedings

On 11 November 2008, the date on which the Respondent brought proceedings before
the Dakar Court (see no. 17 above), the Claimants jointly submitted a “Request for
Arbitration” (hereinafter the “Request for Arbitration”) to the Secretariat of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (hereinafter referred to as
the “Secretariat”).

In that Request they made the following requests for relief:

“The Claimants request the following relief:
(i) a declaration that the Respondent has violated Articles 3, 4 and 8 of
the Treaty;
(ii) a declaration that the Respondent has violated the Licence, as well as
applicable rules of Senegalese and international law;
(iii) an order that the Respondent make full reparation to the Claimants for
the injury or loss to their investment arising out of the Respondent’s
violation of any of the Treaty, the Licence, and applicable rules of
Senegalese and international law, such full reparation being in the form of
damages or compensation paid to the Claimants in an amount to be
determined, including interest thereon;
(iv) compensation for the moral damages done to the Claimants, in an
amount to be determined by the Arbitral Tribunal;
(v) an order that the Respondent pay the costs of these arbitration
proceedings including the costs of the arbitrators and ICSID, as well as the
legal and other expenses incurred by the Claimants including but not
limited to the fees of their legal counsel, experts and consultants as well as
the Claimants’ own employees, on a full indemnity basis, plus interest
thereon at a reasonable commercial rate; and
(vi) any other relief the Arbitral Tribunal may deem appropriate in the
circumstances.”

On _ 26 November 2008, the Secretariat asked the Claimants to provide additional
information about Sentel’s incorporation in Senegal, Sentel’s representation,

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

Millicom’s ownership of Sentel, Millicom’s status as a “national” for the purposes of
the Bilateral Investment Treaty between the Netherlands and Senegal (hereinafter
(“BIT” or the “Treaty”) and the consent of Senegal to submit this dispute to the
jurisdiction of the Centre.

On 5 December 2008, the Respondent asked the Secretariat to refuse to register the
Request for Arbitration in the ICSID Arbitration Register on the grounds that the
Centre has no jurisdiction. In response, the Claimants submitted a document entitled
“Observations on the jurisdiction of the Centre” on 19 December 2008 (hereinafter
referred to as “Observations on the jurisdiction of the Centre”).

On 30 December 2008, the Secretariat received the information it had requested (see
no. 21 above) and on 31 December 2008, it registered the Request for Arbitration.

On 14 January 2009, the Claimants proposed a method for constituting the Arbitral
Tribunal. Following an exchange of correspondence dated 19 February, 23 February,
26 February and 2 March 2009, the Parties agreed to constitute a tribunal of three
arbitrators, with each Party appointing an arbitrator and the two arbitrators thereby
appointed nominating a President.

On 1 April 2009, the Claimants appointed Professor Kaj Hobér as an arbitrator, who
accepted this appointment.

On 7 April 2009, the Respondent appointed Judge Ronny Abraham as an arbitrator,
who accepted this appointment.

On 5 June 2009, the two co-arbitrators appointed Professor Pierre Tercier as President
of the Arbitral Tribunal, who accepted this appointment.

On 12 June 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal was constituted.

On 24 August 2009, the Claimants submitted a “Provisional Measures Application”
(hereinafter referred to as the “Application”; see no. 36 below).

On 27 August 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal held a telephone conference to discuss the
Application submitted by the Claimants and the agenda for the first session of the
Tribunal that it intended to hold.

On 1 September 2009, the Respondent informed the Arbitral Tribunal by letter that the
Application submitted by the Claimants was the Claimants’ latest tactic to gain time.
However, the Respondent would not be opposed to postponing the hearing originally
scheduled to be heard before the Dakar Regional Court on 23 September 2009 (see no.
18 above).

On 7 September 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal held its first session with the Parties, in
Paris. With regard to the unresolved questions, it was agreed that the Arbitral Tribunal
would take the necessary decisions in a procedural order (see Minutes of the session,
p. 14).

33.

With respect to the provisional measures regarding the proceedings before the Dakar
Regional Court, the Arbitral Tribunal acknowledged that the Respondent was not
opposed to a joint letter being drafted with the Claimants in order to apply to have the
hearing scheduled for 23 September 2009 to be postponed. The Parties furthermore
agreed that whichever of them would subsequently win would not enforce any
decision from the Dakar Regional Court (see Minutes of the first session, p. 15).

That same day, the Respondent confirmed by letter the undertaking it had made during
the first session.

On 14 September 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 1, in
which it ruled as follows:

“
I.

In principle, hearings of the Tribunal will take place in Paris, unless the Parties

agree on another venue and inform the Arbitral Tribunal in a timely fashion.

2.
The proceeding will be conducted simultaneously in French and in English. All
documents from the Arbitral Tribunal or the Centre will be written in both languages
and all hearings will be subject to simultaneous interpretation.
Each Party is entitled to write its submissions (with annexes) and its correspondence
in the language of its choice without having to provide a translation into the other
language;
The Arbitral Tribunal will decide at a later stage and in accordance with its
assessment on the allocation of costs generated by this decision.

3.
The Parties are invited to file a first round of written submissions limited to
objections to jurisdiction;
The Respondent is invited to submit its memorial on jurisdiction by October 29,
2009, at the latest;
The Claimants are invited to file their counter-memorial within forty-five days upon
receipt of the first submission, or by December 14, 2009, at the latest;
Upon receipt of the counter-memorial, the Arbitral Tribunal will decide if it
continues to address this issue as a preliminary matter or if it intends to address the
case altogether;
In either case, the Arbitral Tribunal will fix a timetable after consultation with the
Parties.

4.
The Parties' undertakings with regard to the proceeding pending before the Court in
Dakar are noted.

The Respondent has until October 5, 2009, to respond to the request for provisional
measures;

If they so wish, the Claimants may file their comments on this response within ten
days upon receipt of the response;

34,

35.

36.

If it so wishes, the Respondent may file its observations on these comments within ten
days upon their receipt;

A hearing will take place in Paris on November 9, 2009, to hear the Parties’ oral
arguments on this issue.”

On 5 October 2009, the Respondent submitted its “Mémoire en réponse 4 la
demande de measures conservatoires” (hereinafter referred to as the “Reply”; see
no. 37 below).

On 9 November 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal held a hearing in Paris with the Parties
(see Transcript of the hearing of 9 November 2009). The representatives of the Parties
were given the opportunity to submit their arguments orally and to respond to
questions from the Arbitral Tribunal. Following this hearing, the representatives of the
two Parties stated that they did not wish to formulate any new applications with regard
to this stage of the proceedings.

During that same hearing, the Arbitral Tribunal discussed with the representatives of
the Parties the potential timetables for the subsequent stages in the proceedings,
depending on whether or not it decided to bifurcate the proceedings and address the
jurisdictional objections and the questions on the merits in two successive phases; it
should be recalled that this decision is to be taken in accordance with Procedural
Order No. 1 (see no. 33 above) after having received a response from the Claimants
regarding the jurisdictional objections that must be filed by 14 December 2009 at the
latest. In that regard, it was agreed that if the Arbitral Tribunal were to order the
“bifurcation” of the proceedings, the Respondent would submit its reply on the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction by 15 January 2010; the Claimants would submit their rejoinder
by 15 February 2010; and the hearing would take place in Paris on 31 March and/or 1
April 2010 (see Transcript of the hearing of 9 November 2009 at the end).

Il. Inlaw
The Submissions of the Parties

In their Application (no. 29 above), the Claimants made the following requests for
relief:

“(a) that the Respondent, the Republic of Senegal (Senegal), discontinues, or
causes to be discontinued, the proceedings instituted by it in the Regional
Court of Dakar, Senegal (the Regional Court) against Millicom International
Cellular S.A. (MIC) (the ultimate parent of the Claimants) and Sentel, as
described in section 2 below (the Regional Court Proceedings);

(b) _ in the alternative, that Senegal agrees to stay such proceedings, or causes them
to be stayed, for the duration that the present ICSID arbitration proceedings
under reference number ICSID Case No. ARB/08/20 (the ICSID Arbitration
Proceedings) are pending;

(c) that Senegal does not seek to enforce, or cause to be enforced, any interim or
final judgment of the Regional Court in relation to the Regional Court
Proceedings while the ICSID Arbitration Proceedings are pending;

37.

38.

(d) that the parties refrain from conduct that might aggravate or further extend the
dispute submitted to this Tribunal; and

(e) that the Tribunal recommends any further measures or relief that it deems
appropriate in the circumstances to preserve the rights identified in section 3.4
below, including the maintenance of the status quo.» (Application, n° 1).

In its Reply, the Respondent requested the following:

“On these grounds, the Republic of Senegal requests that it please the Arbitral
Tribunal to reject in its entirety the application for provisional measures submitted by
MIO and Sentel." (Reply, p. 37).

The basis for the provisional measures

The principle of provisional measures is set out in Article 47 of the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States
(hereinafter referred to as the “ICSID Convention” or the “Washington Convention”),
on the basis of which these proceedings were opened and which stipulates:

“Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that the
circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which should be
taken to preserve the respective rights of either party.”

Article 47 of the ICSID Convention is referred to, extended and developed by Rule 39
of the Arbitration Rules, which in its current version reads:

“(1) At any time after the institution of the proceeding, a party may request that
provisional measures for the preservation of its rights be recommended by the
Tribunal. The request shall specify the rights to be preserved, the measures the
recommendation of which is requested, and the circumstances that require such
measures.

(2) The Tribunal shall give priority to the consideration of a request made pursuant to
paragraph (1).

(3) The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures on its own initiative or
recommend measures other than those specified in a request. It may at any time
modify or revoke its recommendations.

(4) The Tribunal shall only recommend provisional measures, or modify or revoke its
recommendations, after giving each party an opportunity of presenting its
observations.”

It should be added that provisional measures, which are temporary in nature and by
definition, may be modified or cancelled at any time by the Arbitral Tribunal, do not
have the same authority as an issue already judged (res judicata), are valid only for as
long as the proceedings last and become automatically null and void if the Arbitral
Tribunal rules that it does not have jurisdiction to hear the dispute.

39.

40.

41.

In accordance with Rule 39(4) of the Arbitration Rules, the Arbitral Tribunal gave
“each party an opportunity of presenting its observations”, and the Parties have had
ample opportunity to express themselves both orally and in writing.

The Arbitral Tribunal is thus able to give an informed ruling on the Claimants’
Application.

Conditions
Provisional measures may be granted only on the following four conditions:

- The Arbitral Tribunal must be prima facie competent to hear the merits of the case
(see ch. 1 below);

- The measure requested must intend to preserve the rights the protection of which
has been sought (see ch. 2 below);

- The measure must be necessary (ch. 3 below); and

- The measure must be urgent (ch. 4 below).

The Arbitral Tribunal will examine each of these conditions below.
The prima facie jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal

The Parties disagree as to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on the
Application for provisional measures.

- In short, the Claimants deem that the prima facie jurisdiction of the Arbitral
Tribunal is chiefly established by the registration of the Request for Arbitration in
accordance with Article 36 of the ICSID Convention (Application, no. 35); that
the Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction over Sentel in application of Article 11 of
the Concession; and that the Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction over MIO and
Sentel in application of Article 10 of the BIT between Senegal and the Republic
of the Netherlands.

-  Inshort, the Respondent deems that the mere fact that the Request for Arbitration
was registered is not sufficient to establish a prima facie jurisdiction, that Article
11 of the Concession does not contain an arbitration clause, and that Article 10 of
the Treaty does not apply, since MIO is not an investor as defined by that
provision and Sentel is not a national from another State.

The core of the debate centers around two provisions, whose content it is worth
restating:

- Article 11 of the Concession states as follows:

“Les Parties feront tout leur possible pour régler a l’amiable tout différend
résultant de l’exécution de la Présente Convention. Elles devront, au préalable si
les lois et réglements en vigueur le permettent, recourir a tout organisme de
conciliation de réglementation et d’arbitrage compétent en matiére de
télécommunications. Il en sera de méme en cas de conflits entre opérateurs

notamment lors des accords d’interconnexion. Si le litige persiste, les parties
pourront en définitive recourir @ V'arbitrage d’organismes internationaux tels que
la cour d’arbitrage de l’OHADA, le Centre International de réglement des
différends sur les investissements (CIRDI) ou la Chambre de Commerce
Internationale de Paris (CCIP) etc...”

- Article 10 of the Treaty between Senegal and the Netherlands states as follows:

“La Partie Contractante sur le territoire de laquelle un ressortissant de |’autre
Partie Contractante effectue ou envisage d’effectuer un investissement, devra
consentir a@ toute demande de la part de ce ressortissant en vue de soumettre, pour
arbitrage ou conciliation, tout différend pouvant surgir de cet investissement au
Centre institué en vertu de la Convention de Washington du 18 mars 1965 pour le
réglement des différends relatifs aux investissements entre Etats et ressortissants
d@autres Etats.”

42. It is accepted jurisprudence for the tribunals that have issued rulings based on the
Washington Convention that the mere fact that a party contests the jurisdiction of an
arbitral tribunal to which the case is referred is insufficient to deprive that tribunal of
the jurisdiction to order provisional measures’. If the contrary were to be accepted, it
would be easy for a party to raise any jurisdictional objection in order to deprive in
practice a large part of the institution’s competence. It is also undisputed and
indisputable that provisional measures form an essential part of the operation and the
effectiveness of the ICSID arbitration system; while waiting for a decision to be given
on the merits of a case and provided that the conditions have been met, the aim is to
ensure as far as possible that no decisions can be taken that risk depriving that decision
of its main effect in fact”.

 

That said, on the other hand, it is not enough for one party to bring proceedings to
establish the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal before which an application for
provisional measures has been brought. The solution would be every bit as
indefensible.

In order to take account of these conflicting interests, it is accepted practice for the
Arbitral Tribunal to find that it holds at least prima facie jurisdiction to rule on the
merits. This implies that the Arbitral Tribunal cannot and must not examine in depth
the claims and arguments submitted on the merits of the case; it must confine itself to
an initial analysis, i.e. “at first sight”. For this, it is necessary and sufficient that the

' See for example Victor Pey Casado and Fondation President Allende v. Republic of Chili, 1CSID Case no.
ARB/98/2, Decision on provisional measures, 25 September 2001, para. 7: “Aussi la jurisprudence
internationale est-elle claire a cet égard : l'instance dont la compétence est contestée n'est nullement privée du
pouvoir de décider des mesures provisoires.” (hereinafter referred to as “Pey Casado”).

* See for example, Tokios Tokeles v. Ukraine, (CSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No. 1, 1 July 2003,
para. 2: “the parties to a dispute over which ICSID has jurisdiction must refrain from any measure capable of
having a prejudicial effect on the rendering or implementation of an eventual ICSID award or decision, and in
general refrain from any action of any kind which might aggravate or extend the dispute or render its resolution
more difficult” (hereinafter referred to as “Tokios Tokeles”). See also Pey Casado, cited above., para 26: “les
mesures conservatoires ont, notamment ou principalement, pour but de préserver ou protéger l'efficacité de la
décision @ intervenir sur le fond, donc d’éviter de “porter préjudice & l’exécution de la sentence” et/ou
d’empécher que, de facon unilatérale, une Partie par action ou omission porte atteinte aux droits éventuels de la
Partie adverse.”

43.

facts alleged by the applicant establish this jurisdiction without it being necessary or
possible at this stage to verify them and analyse them in depth.

It is in light of these principles that the Arbitral Tribunal intends to examine whether it
has prima facie jurisdiction to rule on the requests submitted to it:

a) The Claimants base their argument on the fact that the ICSID Secretariat agreed to
register the Request for Arbitration filed by the Claimants (see “In fact” above). It
is correct that the Secretariat was entitled to refuse to register such a request, in
application of Article 36(3) of the Washington Convention, which states as
follows:

“The Secretary-General shall register the request unless he finds, on the basis of
the information contained in the request, that the dispute is manifestly outside the
jurisdiction of the Centre. He shall forthwith notify the parties of registration or
refusal to register.”

For the Arbitral Tribunal, the mere fact that the Request for Arbitration has been
registered might certainly constitute a sign of prima facie jurisdiction, but under no
circumstances may it constitute a sufficient condition. The registration process is
summary in nature and is intended solely to perform an initial check in order to
dismiss immediately any requests manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the Centre.
The decision is taken solely on the basis of the Request for Arbitration and the
additional information provided by the requesting party, without waiting for or
formally requesting any comments from the other party.

Requirements are necessarily stricter at the provisional measures stage, since the
Arbitral Tribunal will have had the opportunity to receive additional information
(whether unprompted or at its own request), which therefore enables it — still on a
provisional basis, of course — to give an initial ruling on its own jurisdiction.

Registration as an argument is therefore insufficient in and of itself to establish the
Arbitral Tribunal’s prima facie jurisdiction.

b

The Claimants then deem that the prima facie jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal
is established pursuant to Article 11 of the Concession, reproduced above. This
jurisdiction may extend only to Sentel, which is a party to the Concession, but not
to MIO, which is not.

According to the Arbitral Tribunal, the clause under Article 11 of the Concession
is not without ambiguities. It seems to imply that recourse to arbitration is one
possibility open to the parties (“may”) rather than the only option; it leaves open
the issue of which institution will govern the proceedings; the list of institutions
set out (OHADA, ICSID and ICC) is itself not exhaustive (“efc.”). As asserted by
the Respondent, it is not impossible that this provision is intended as an invitation
for the parties to agree on an arbitration agreement in order to refer the dispute to
one of the institutions listed.

According to the Arbitral Tribunal, these arguments do not automatically exclude
another interpretation. The provision does not actually make any reference to local

44.

courts, and there would be good reasons for making disputes relating to
concessions of this nature subject to the jurisdiction of international arbitration,
under the auspices of the institutions mentioned. What is more, the clause contains
a clear reference to arbitration, and it is not automatically excluded that the option
given to the party refers not to the choice of proceedings but to the choice of the
institution, as the Claimants maintain.

The fact is that the Claimants also contested the jurisdiction of the Dakar Regional
Court, even going so far as to take the risk of renouncing to comment on the
submissions made by the Republic of Senegal on the merits of the case before that
Court.

In these conditions, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that it does have prima facie
jurisdiction to rule on the Request for Arbitration, to the extent that the latter is

based on the Concession.

c

The Claimants finally maintain that the Arbitral Tribunal also has jurisdiction to
rule on the issue by virtue of Article 10 of the Treaty, the text of which has been
reproduced above. This jurisdiction would primarily extend to MIO, which
maintains that it can avail itself of the Treaty, and only indirectly to Sentel, which
is a Senegalese company.

According to the Arbitral Tribunal, its jurisdiction is not given from this
perspective either, since it is incumbent on Claimant 2 to prove that it can benefit
from this protection despite the fact that the Treaty appears to confine this
protection to individuals, and it must also be established that the Claimant actually
made an investment in Senegal as defined by the Treaty.

That said, the Arbitral Tribunal admits that there is room for doubt, since the
phrasing of the Treaty is not without ambiguity, as it is possible that MIO made an
investment in Senegal, via links that will be described below, in the form of its
(direct or indirect) investment in Sentel’s share capital.

What is more, it appears to the Arbitral Tribunal that, since it has acknowledged its
prima facie jurisdiction over Sentel, it can acknowledge that same jurisdiction by
analogy over MIO, especially as the provisional measures requested mainly relate
to the continuation of the proceedings before the Dakar Regional Court, precisely
because MIO is not a party to those proceedings.

Preserving rights the protection of which has been sought

The second condition required to grant provisional measures is that those measures
must be necessary to preserve rights the protection of which is being sought in the
proceedings brought on the merits.

a) In the Claimants’ view, granting the measures is directly linked to the rights that
they are requesting be protected: the right to bring the dispute exclusively before
the jurisdiction of ICSID, in accordance with Article 26 of the ICSID Convention,
to the exclusion of any remedy under national, international, judicial or
administrative law; and the right to continue bringing their claims without the

45.

arbitration proceedings becoming meaningless owing to a judgement to the
contrary passed by the Senegalese courts (Application, no. 42).

b

In the Respondent’s view, there is no link between the provisional measures
requested and the dispute brought before the Arbitral Tribunal. In their
Application, the Claimants request that the Arbitral Tribunal suspend the effective
application of the decision in which the Republic of Senegal has decided to
terminate the authorisation to operate enjoyed by Sentel. This is apparently a
fundamental request, and examining it would require adopting a position on the
merits of the case, and thus issuing a pre-judgement (Reply, no. 97). Furthermore,
the Claimants apparently did not make a request for relief to the Arbitral Tribunal
intended to annul the decision terminating their authorisation to operate (Reply,
no. 99). With regard to the argument concerning Article 26 of the ICSID
Convention, the Respondent alleges that the two disputes are not connected
(Reply, no. 110). Allegedly, neither the parties nor the subject-matter of the
proceedings is identical, since before the Dakar Regional Court the applications
would be based exclusively on the behaviour of MIC and Sentel in the wake of the
termination of the Concession (Reply, nos. 132 and 133). Finally, the causes of
action in the two disputes are not identical (Reply, nos. 134 ef seg.) A judgement
from the Regional Court upholding the submissions of Senegal in their entirety
would not by any means harm the interests that the Claimants intend to assert as
part of these arbitration proceedings (Reply, no. 141).

According to the Arbitral Tribunal, the objections raised by the Respondent are not
decisive:

a

Although it is true that the requests for relief made by the Claimants thus far
before the Arbitral Tribunal appear to be intended merely to obtain damages,
nothing prevents the Claimants from modifying their requests during the
proceedings. Such a measure is not by any means prohibited, provided it respects
the principle of the right to be heard and the scope of the Arbitral Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. What is more, in spite of the phrasing of these requests for relief, as
set out under paragraph 20 above, the argument developed refers to the possibility
of claiming restitution (see no. 60 of the Request for Arbitration).

b

It cannot be disputed that both sets of proceedings concern the same set of facts,
i.e. the development of the status of the parties bound by the Concession for
mobile telephony. In spite of the provisional or temporary phrasing of the
requested relief, it is based or can be based on the same issue, namely the existence
and continuation of the Concession. The outcome of any pecuniary submissions
made in either circumstance depends directly on this.

c

The Respondent states that the parties are different between the two proceedings,
since MIC is a party to the State proceedings but not a party to these proceedings,
whereas MIO is a party to these proceedings but is not a party to the Senegalese
proceedings. This argument is not conclusive either, given that the status of the
parties is not necessarily defined in the same way in both sets of proceedings. In
particular, in so far as the other conditions have been met, Claimant 2 in these
proceedings (MIO) has an obvious interest in the outcome of the Senegalese

46.

47.

proceedings, if it can claim the benefit of a protected investment by virtue of its
interest in Sentel’s capital.

d) Itis worth noting that the Arbitral Tribunal will not rule on the question of whether
it would have the power to order restitution and the power to order the Republic of
Senegal to respect the Concession, if the latter were to be held valid. Regardless of
the requests for relief submitted, the essence of both proceedings concerns whether
or not the Concession is valid.

e) Finally, it is admitted that protected rights can also include procedural rights such
as the general right to status quo and the right to non-aggravation of the dispute* :

Necessity

In order for an arbitral tribunal to be able to recommend provisional measures, they
must also be necessary:

a) According to the Claimants, a judgement from the Dakar Regional Court would
cause irreparable harm, if the Concession were to be held invalid (Application, no.
59).

b) According to the Respondent, the existence of irreparable harm has not been
proven, due to the fact that if a judgement were passed that caused harm to the
Claimants, the latter would be able to request the Arbitral Tribunal for equitable
compensation measures in order to remedy the situation (Reply, no. 89).
Furthermore, Millicom would not be affected by any judgement from the Dakar
Regional Court, since it is not even party to the Senegalese proceedings.
According to the Respondent, it would be unfair if the Arbitral Tribunal were to
grant Millicom the right to cease all proceedings brought by Senegal against Sentel
and MIC, on the sole ground that Millicom availed itself of the ICSID Convention
and the Treaty between Senegal and the Netherlands despite the fact that Senegal
had no means of bringing any claim whatsoever against that company (Reply, nos.
116 and 128). With regard to the harm suffered, the Respondent alleges that if the
Dakar Regional Court were to uphold Senegal’s requests in their entirety and
sentence MIC and Sentel jointly and severally to pay all sums claimed by the
State, MIC would be able to pay the sums required without placing its existence in
jeopardy (Reply, no. 146).

According to the Arbitral Tribunal, it is correct that, strictly speaking, there is nothing
preventing both sets of proceedings from taking place more or less simultaneously, a
situation that has already occurred in other cases submitted to ICSID. This situation is
admittedly far from perfect and may cause a range of practical difficulties, depending

3 See for example, Burlington Resources Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos
del Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/O8/5, Procedural Order No. 1, 29 June 2009, para. 60: “In the Tribunal's
view, the rights to be preserved by provisional measures are not limited to those which form the subject-matter
of the dispute or substantive rights as referred to by the Respondents, but may extend to procedural rights,
including the general right to the status quo and to the non-aggravation of the dispute. These latter rights are
thus self-standing rights”, relying on other decisions. In the same sense, Tokios Tokeles, cited above. Procedural
Order No.. 3, 18 January 2005, para. 7: “Among the rights that may be protected by provisional measures is the
right guaranteed by Article 26 to have the ICSID Arbitration be the exclusive remedy for the dispute to the

exclusion of any other remedy |. . 1.

on the speed adopted by the Court or the Tribunal. For this reason, two scenarios must
be considered:

a) Itis probable that, if no specific measures are taken, the Dakar Regional Court will

b

give its judgement before the arbitration proceedings have finished. It is
admittedly possible that the party that would have lost, whether the Republic or
Sentel, would file an appeal against that decision, or even an appeal to a higher
authority after the decision of the Court of Appeal. According to the information
given at the hearing of 9 November 2009, an appeal will suspend the enforcement
of the judgement, unless the Dakar Regional Court orders provisional enforcement
at the request of one of the parties, and such a request was made during the current
proceedings.

Leaving these aspects aside temporarily, it is conceivable that the judgement of the
Dakar Regional Court might be rendered before the award of the Arbitral Tribunal.

The Tribunal is certainly not bound by the decisions taken by national courts’, It is
however true that the purpose of these arbitration proceedings is liable to change,
since the Claimants might, depending on the circumstances, wish to incorporate
the outcome of the Senegalese proceedings into their allegations, with regard to the
Concession, or even to the Treaty.

Pursuing both sets of proceedings in parallel would necessarily involve
complications, misunderstandings or even serious resistance at the stage of
enforcing the decision, if the Arbitral Tribunal were to find in favour of the
Claimants.

It is theoretically possible that the arbitration proceedings will end before all
potential legal remedies in Senegal have been exhausted. The difficulty in this
situation, if the decision is not equivalent to the rulings of the Senegalese courts,
will be to have that decision accepted and followed, since it would then have
priority over the aforementioned rulings.

Either way, pursuing both sets of proceedings in parallel will generate difficulties,
which would not necessarily be in the interests of either party, not to mention the
misunderstandings or discontent that could occur as a result. The objective of the
measure would thus be to guarantee the status quo.

In concrete terms, the response is heavily dependent on the time factor, which is why
it is important to move onto examining the issue of urgency.

* De facto, “The right to seek access to international adjudication must be respected and cannot be constrained
by an order of a national court. Nor can a State plead its internal law in defence of an act that is inconsistent
with its international obligations. Otherwise, a Contracting State could impede access to ICSID arbitration by
operation of its own law”, SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A.v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID
Case No. ARB/O1/13, Procedural Order No. 2, 16 October 2002, 18 ICSID Rev.-FIJL (2003), p. 300.

18

48.

49.

5 ee hs
See in this sense, Pass

The urgency of the decisions

It is undisputed that, in order to be admitted, the provisional measures must also be
urgent. It must be proven that if the measures are not ordered rapidly, there are serious
risks that the rights of the applicants will be jeopardized®,

In the case in question, it is likely that, subject to the reservations expressed above, the
Dakar Regional Court will rule before the Arbitral Tribunal. If the difficulties that
have just been set out are to be avoided, a measure must be taken to prevent the
arbitration proceedings from losing the essential part of their scope in practice.

Such a measure, which would be provisional in nature, must not be unduly extended,
owing to the uncertainty it will create. For this reason, it must be of a limited duration
only. This precaution is especially justified in the present case given that it seems that
the Arbitral Tribunal could rule quickly on the central issue at this stage, namely the
issue of its own jurisdiction. The fact that this decision implies suspending
proceedings before the Dakar Regional Court should not seem unacceptable to the
Respondent: according to the Respondent and if the Respondent is right, the illegal
situation has been going on for several years now, and asking it to endure that
situation for another couple of months is not going to cause it irreparable harm,
especially since if it were to emerge that it was entirely within its rights, it would
retain the right to seek additional pecuniary damages.

Consequences

Since the conditions have been met, the Arbitral Tribunal accepts on principle the
Application for provisional measures. According to the text of Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention, an arbitral tribunal is entitled to issue "recommendations". It has
nevertheless been held in certain decisions issued by tribunals formed on the basis of
that Convention that the phrasing used does not prevent an arbitral tribunal from
ordering such measures®. According to the Arbitral Tribunal, the question may remain
undecided, since the nature of the measure required in the present case is scarcely
compatible with imposing an injunction on the Parties:

a) Suspending the proceedings may not be done unilaterally by the Respondent, since
this can be done only by the Dakar Regional Court, on which this Tribunal has no
power to command. What is possible, on the other hand, is to recommend to the
Respondent that it request the Dakar Regional Court in a joint letter with the other
Party to agree to suspend proceedings, in the interests of both sets of proceedings.
This is the approach that was taken when applying for the hearing of 23 September
2009 to be postponed, and it was implemented perfectly.

age through the Great Belt (Finland v. Denmark), Provisional measures, Order of 29 July

 

1991, LC.J. Reports 1991, p. 12, para 23: “Whereas provisional measures under Article 41 of the Statute {model
of Article 47 of the ICSID Convention] are indicated "pending the final decision" of the Court on the merits of

the case, and are therefore only justified if there is urgen

in the sense that action prejudicial to the rights of

 

either party is likely to be taken before such final decision is given.”
See Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (Cambridge 2009), Article 47, paras. 15-
22 and Pey Casado, cited above, paras. 17-24.

50.

Sl.

b) The Arbitral Tribunal is confident that the Respondent, which is aware of what is
at stake, will agree to follow this new recommendation, and that it will not be
necessary to order it to do so. The understanding displayed by the Republic of
Senegal thus far foresees that it will react in the same way to this recommendation.

Even if this were not the case, the Arbitral Tribunal is aware of the fact that, if the
recommendation were not followed, any injunction it could issue — presuming that
it had the power to do so — would not in any event be suitable for forced execution.

c

For these reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal will issue a recommendation.

As has been said above, if the Application is to be partially granted, the Arbitral
Tribunal feels that the effects of its recommendation should be of a limited duration.

The crucial question in the case in question is the issue of whether the Tribunal itself
has jurisdiction to rule on the requests for relief that have been submitted to it. If it
were to decide that it had no jurisdiction, the measures would automatically lapse, and
the Respondent could pursue the proceedings before the Senegalese judicial
authorities. If, on the other hand, it were to decide that it did hold jurisdiction, it would
be appropriate to re-examine the situation and decide, on request by one of the parties
or on its own initiative, whether or not its recommendation should be extended or
modified.

For this reason, the duration of the provisional measures must be limited to the
decision that this Arbitral Tribunal will take as to its own jurisdiction.

In accordance with the decisions taken in the Order of 14 September 2009 (see ch. 3),
the Arbitral Tribunal will have to decide, once it has received the reply from the
Claimants, whether it intends to address all issues simultaneously or whether the issue
of its jurisdiction should be resolved in the first place. In light of the developments
connected with the provisional measures requested, however, the Arbitral Tribunal is
of the view that it is justified in the present case in beginning by ruling on the
objections raised to its own jurisdiction. It is important that the relationships that exist
or that may exist between the pending proceedings be clarified as quickly as possible.
The objections made by the Respondent require a decision to be taken quickly, even if
they cannot be admitted in the absence of an in-depth examination.

During the hearing of 9 November 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal considered, together
with the Parties, what the potential timetable might be if it were to decide to rule first
and foremost on the objections raised to its own jurisdiction; it seems that the pace
contemplated is rapid, which should enable the Arbitral Tribunal to decide before the
summer. In its opinion, this finding also has the potential to ensure that the
recommendation it is issuing to both parties, although chiefly to the Respondent, is
acceptable.

As a result, and without waiting for the reply from the Claimants, the Arbitral Tribunal
decides to bifurcate the proceedings, and that it will begin by ruling on the objections
raised by the Respondent with regard to its own jurisdiction, in accordance with the
timetable it had contemplated during the hearing of 9 November 2009 (Transcript of
the hearing of 9 November 2009, English version, pp. 153-157). The details of this

20

52.

Paris,

timetable will be confirmed by a procedural order that will be sent to the Parties as
soon as this decision has been notified.

The other applications

The Claimants have made other submissions in addition to those concerning the
suspension of the proceedings before the Dakar Regional Court (see no. 36 above).
The Arbitral Tribunal deems that it is not currently necessary to rule on the issue, in
view of the scope of the recommendation issued to the Parties.

On these grounds, the Tribunal recommends the following:

The Respondent is invited to send jointly with Claimant 2, an application to the
Dakar Regional Court to have the pending proceedings in Senegal suspended.

This measure shall be valid until the decision of this Arbitral Tribunal is taken
concerning its own jurisdiction.

In modification to the Order it issued on 14 September 2009, the Arbitral
Tribunal decides that it will rule in priority on the objections to jurisdiction
raised by the Respondent; the timetable for this stage of the proceedings will be
communicated to the Parties in an Order that will be sent to them once this
decision has been notified, on the basis of the timetable envisaged during the
hearing of 9 November 2009.

The other applications will, if necessary, be examined later, upon the express
request of the Claimants.

The Tribunal reserves its ruling on the costs of the proceedings.

Date: 9 December 2009

[Signed]

On behalf of the Arbitral Tribunal
Pierre Tercier, President

21

