INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

MNSS B.V. and Recupero Credito Acciaio N.V.
v.
Montenegro

(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/8)

AWARD

Andrés Rigo Sureda, President of the Tribunal
Emmanuel Gaillard, Arbitrator
Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Geraldine R. Fischer, Secretary of the Tribunal

Date of Dispatch: 4 May 2016

Vi.

Table of Contents

 

 

   

 

INTRODUCTION... .ceceeeeceeeeeteeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeesaeeeeeeeseesaeeeeeseeeaeneees 5
BACKGROUND TO THE DISPUTE .........:cccecscseeeseeceseeseeeeeeeeeeeeneteeeeeeeeee 5
PROCEDURAL HISTORY .......ccccececesseseeceteeeeeeeeeeeeeesenseeeeeeaeeesaeeeteeeeeaeeeeee 6
A. Claimants’ Applications for Approval of Access to the Additional Facility
and Request for Arbitration .
B. Tribunal
C. First Session and Written Procedure...........ccccccece es cesseeeeeeeceneeeteeeesees 8
D. Hearing on Jurisdiction and Merits
E. Post-Hearing Phase..
FACTUAL BACKGROUND .
OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION ...... ce cecceceeeeeteeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteeeeeeeeeeeeaeee 21

A. Summary of the Parties’ Arguments...
1) | Respondent’s Counter-Memorial...
2) — Claimants’ Reply..........ceeececeeeeeseeseseeseeeeeeeeseeeeeceeeeeeeseeeeetaeeeeeeeeenaeees
3) | Respondent's Rejoinder
4) — Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdictio:

B. Analysis of the Tribunal
1) Explicit Waiver of ICSID AF Arbitration... cccceceeceseeeeereeeeeneeees 48
2) Consent
3)  Ratione Personae
4) — Ratione Materiae oo... cece creer es ene see sneseeneeeeeeieee

 
 
 
  
 
 

 

 

 

ALLEGED BREACHES OF THE BIT..

A. Summary of the Parties’ Arguments...
1) Claimants’ Memorial ..0....0.0.cceceeeseeeeceseeeeeeeeeeeeeensesseeeaeseeateeeteeeeeeeaes 78
2) | Respondent’s Counter-Memorial ..........:ccccceeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeenteees 82

 

3) Claimants’ Reply

4) — Respondent’s Rejoinder
B. Analysis of the Tribunal oo... cece eee ce cece cesses sceeseeeeeneeeneeeee

5) Fair and Equitable Treatment and Obligation of Non-Impairment

6) Most Constant Protection and Security .

7) | Most-Favored Nation Treatment... cece eee cece eee

8) Breach of the Obligation to Ensure the Free Transfer of Payments .124

 

 

 

 

VI.
Vill. DECISION.

 

Representation of the Parties

Representing MNSS B.V. and
Recupero Credito Acciaio N.V.:

Mr. Toby Landau QC
Professor Dan Sarooshi
Essex Court Chambers
24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields
London WC2A 3EG
United Kingdom

and

Mr. Tim Hardy

Mr. Csaba Kovacs

Ms. Aimee Cook

CMS Cameron McKenna LLP
Cannon Place

78 Cannon Street

London EC4N 6AF

United Kingdom

and

Mr. Goran Martinovic
Harrisons Solicitors
Bulevar Mihajla Pupina 6
PC Usee

11070 Belgrade
Republic of Serbia

Representing Montenegro:

Mr. Christoph Lindinger
Mr. Slaven Moravéevié
Ms. Anne-Karin Grill

Mr. Leon Kopecky

Ms. Jelena Bezarevié Pajié
Ms. Tanja Sumar

Mr. Michael Stimakovits
Schénherr Rechtsanwalte GmbH
Schottenring 19

1010 Vienna

Republic of Austria

and

Mr. David Pawlak
David A. Pawlak LLC
ul. Jasna 26

00-054 Warsaw
Republic of Poland

|. INTRODUCTION

1. The Claimants are MNSS B. V. (“MNSS’”), a private company constituted
under the laws of the Netherlands, and Recupero Credito Acciaio N.V.
(‘RCA’) a private company constituted under the laws of Curagao
(collectively “Claimants’).

2. The Respondent is the Republic of Montenegro (“Respondent,”
“Government,” “GoM” or “Montenegro’).

3. As described by the Claimants, “MNSS is a holding company indirectly
owned and controlled by Ethemba Capital No. 5 L.P., a limited liability
partnership managed by Ethemba Capital Limited, a private equity fund
manager.”' About 98 percent of MNSS is owned by three investment
partnerships managed by Ethemba Capital. RCA is “wholly owned by the
Abarth Private Foundation, a private foundation established under the laws
of Curagao ... the beneficiaries of which are three investment partnerships
managed by Ethemba Capital.”2

4. The Claimants initiated two arbitration proceedings under the Additional
Facility for breaches of the Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments Between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, dated 29 January 2002 (“BIT”), and for
breaches of the Montenegrin Foreign Investment Law 2000, as amended in
2007 and 2010 (“MFI Law 2000”) and the Montenegrin Foreign Investment
Law 2011 (“MFI Law 2011”) (collectively “2000 and 2011 MFI Laws”). The
Parties agreed to consolidate the two proceedings and their agreement was
adopted by the Tribunal and reflected in Procedural Order No. 1 at paragraph
19.2.

Il. BACKGROUND TO THE DISPUTE

5. MNSS made investments in Zeljezara Niksic AD Niksic (“ZN”) in the form of
equity and loans starting on 28 February 2008, and RCA alleges to have

1 Memorial, para. 20.
2 Id., para. 30.

made investments in the form of loans to ZN, a matter disputed by the
Respondent. According to the Claimants, the Respondent subjected their
investments to discriminatory, unreasonable, unlawful and irregular acts and
omissions that directly or cumulatively had the effect of unlawfully
expropriating them and violating other standards of protection to which they
consider to be entitled.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

A. Claimants’ Applications for Approval of Access to the Additional

Facility and Request for Arbitration

On 7 November 2011, the Claimants requested approval of access to the
Additional Facility of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“Additional Facility’ or “AF”) pursuant to Article 9(2)(b) of the
Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
Between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (“BIT”)? and Articles 2(a) and 4(2) of the Additional Facility Rules.
On 5 December 2011, the Secretary-General of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) notified the Parties that,
pursuant to Article 4(5) and in accordance with Article 4(2) of the Additional
Facility Rules (“AF Rules”), she had approved access to the Additional
Facility and recorded the approval in the Secretariat's Register.

On 12 June 2012, the Claimants submitted a second application for approval
of access to the ICSID Additional Facility based on Article 30(2) of the MFI
Law 2011. On 29 June 2012, the ICSID Secretariat received a letter from
Montenegro regarding the Claimants’ second application to which the
Claimants responded on 9 July 2012. On 27 July 2012, the Secretary-
General of ICSID notified the Parties that, pursuant to Article 4(5) and in
accordance with Article 4(2) of the Additional Facility Rules, she had
approved access to the Additional Facility and recorded the approval in the

Secretariat's Register.

3 BIT (Legal Authority CLA-504).

On 9 November 2012, the Claimants filed a Request for Arbitration together
with Exhibits C-001 to C-020 (“RFA” or “Request”).

On 6 December 2012, the Secretary-General of ICSID notified the Parties
that, pursuant to Article 4 of the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules,
she had registered the Request. In the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-
General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as
soon as possible in accordance with Article 5(e) of the ICSID Arbitration
(Additional Facility) Rules. The Secretary-General also reminded the Parties
that the registration of the Request was without prejudice to the powers and
functions of the Tribunal with regard to competence and merits.

B. Tribunal

By letters of 28 January 2013, the Parties notified the Secretariat of their
agreement that the Arbitral Tribunal would comprise one arbitrator
nominated by each Party and the President would be appointed by the co-
arbitrators through a list process.

On 1 February 2013, the Secretariat notified the Parties that Professor
Christoph Schreuer, an Austrian national, accepted his appointment by the
Respondent as arbitrator.

On 5 February 2013, the Secretariat informed the Parties that Professor
Emmanuel Gaillard, a French national, accepted his appointment by the
Claimants as arbitrator.

On 27 March 2013, the Party-appointed arbitrators appointed Dr. Andrés
Rigo Sureda as President of the Tribunal.

On 29 March 2013, the Secretary-General notified the Parties that Dr.
Andrés Rigo Sureda, Professor Emmanuel Gaillard and Professor Christoph
Schreuer had accepted their appointments and, pursuant to Article 13(1) of
the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules, the Tribunal was deemed to
have been constituted on that date. Ms. Geraldine R. Fischer, ICSID Legal
Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 23 February 2015, Professor Christoph Schreuer resigned as arbitrator

in this proceeding. The next day, the Parties were sent Professor Schreuer’s

resignation, and they were notified that Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda and
Professor Emmanuel Gaillard had considered the reasons for his resignation
and consented to it. The Parties were also informed that the proceeding
would remain suspended until the vacancy was filled.

On 3 April 2015, the Respondent appointed Professor Brigitte Stern, a
French national, as arbitrator.

On 7 April 2015, the Secretary of the Tribunal informed the Parties that
Professor Stern had accepted her appointment by the Respondent as
arbitrator in accordance with Article 17(1) of the ICSID Arbitration (Additional
Facility) Rules. Consequently, pursuant to Article 18 of the ICSID Arbitration
(Additional Facility) Rules, the proceeding resumed as of that day.

C. First Session and Written Procedure

The Tribunal held a first session with the Parties by telephone conference
on 17 May 2013. The Parties confirmed that the Members of the Tribunal
had been validly appointed. It was agreed, inter alia, that: the applicable
Arbitration Rules would be the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules in
force as of April 2006, the procedural language would be English and the
place of arbitration would be Paris, France. The Parties also agreed to
consolidate the two proceedings relating to the claims arising under the BIT
and the 2011 MFI Lawinto a single arbitration. The Parties’ agreements were
embodied in the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1, which was issued on 23
May 2013.
On 20 September 2013, the Claimants filed their Memorial (“Memorial”),
accompanied by the following documents:

e Witness Statement of Mr. Mark Jacobson dated 18 September 2013;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Alan Jacobson dated 18 September 2013;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Leslaw Kwasik dated 18 September 2013;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Daniel Brol dated 19 September 2013;

e Volumes 1-7 that contained chronologically ordered

contemporaneous correspondence and documents;

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

e Volumes 8 and 9 that contained reference materials;

e Volumes 10-12 that contained legal authorities; and

e Volumes 1A and 1B that contained additional correspondence,

documents, reference materials and legal authorities.4

On 31 October 2013, the Claimants submitted a corrected Memorial,
corrected Witness Statements of Mr. Mark Jacobson, Mr. Alan Jacobson,
Mr. Daniel Brol and Mr. Leslaw Kwasik and a corrected consolidated index
to the exhibits.
On 5 December 2013, following exchanges between the Parties, the
Claimants submitted the Parties’ joint document production table pursuant
to Procedural Order No. 1.
On 11 December 2013, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 ordering
the production of certain documents.
On 20 January 2014, the Respondent filed a Counter-Memorial, which
included a Request for Bifurcation (“Counter-Memorial”), accompanied by
the following documents:

e Witness Statement of Ms. Mira Todorovic Symeonides dated 20

January 2014;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Branko Vujovic dated 20 January 2014;

e Exhibits R-002 to R-057; and

e Legal Authorities RLA-001 to RLA-140.5
On 4 February 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 ordering
the Respondent to produce certain documents.
On 20 February 2014, the Claimants filed a submission objecting to the
bifurcation of the proceedings that was accompanied by exhibits in Volume
13.
On 27 February 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 rejecting
the Respondent's request for bifurcation.

4 Memorial, paras. 14-17. The exhibits accompanying the Claimants’ Memorial also included the
exhibits to the Claimants’ RFA.
5 Counter-Memorial, para. 3.

27.

28.

29.

30.

By letter of 10 June 2014, the Respondent stated that it refused to pay the
Centre’s request for additional funds and expressed its willingness to pay the
monies if the Claimants were to provide security for any future claim that the
Respondent may have for reimbursement.
On 20 June 2014, the Claimants filed a Reply on the Merits, together with a
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and a Memorial on quantum (“Reply”),
accompanied by the following documents:
e¢ Second Witness Statement of Mr. Mark Jacobson dated 20 June
2014;
e¢ Second Witness Statement of Mr. Leslaw Kwasik dated 20 June
2014;
e Second Witness Statement of Mr. Daniel Brol dated 20 June 2014;
e Montenegrin Law Expert Report of Professor Vladimir Pavic and Dr.
Milos Zivkovic dated 16 June 2014;
e Brattle Group Expert Report entitled “Damages to MNSS B.V. and
Recupero Credito Acciaio N.V.” dated 20 June 2014;
e Volumes 14-17 that contained chronologically ordered
contemporaneous correspondence and documents;
e Volumes 18 and 19 that contained legal authorities;
e Volumes 20-22 that contained the legal authorities referenced by the
Montenegrin Legal Expert Report; and
e Volume 2A that contained additional correspondence, documents,
reference materials and legal authorities.
By letter of 24 June 2014, the Claimants asked the Tribunal “to issue an
order that the Respondent pay its share of the advance costs, without
prejudice to the Tribunal’s decision on the allocation of the costs of the
arbitration,” and rejected the Respondent's proposal that the Claimants
provide security.
On 18 July 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5 noting that
Claimants had contributed both their share of the requested advances and
the Respondent's share of the first advance. The Tribunal then “recall[ed]

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

that it has the power to order security for costs, but finds that, under the
circumstances, there are no compelling reasons for such security.” The
Tribunal further reminded the Respondent of its obligation to pay its portion
of the finances for the case in accordance with Regulation 14(3)(d) of the
ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations.

On 15 September 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6
amending the schedule for the proceedings.

On 27 September 2014, the Respondent filed a request for the Tribunal to
order the production of documents.

On 13 October 2014, the Claimants filed their observations on the
Respondent's document production request.

On 20 October 2014, the Respondent filed its observations on the Claimants’
objections to the Respondent’s document production request.

On 23 October 2014, pursuant to Section 14 of Procedural Order No. 1, the
Tribunal issued its decisions on the Respondent's Request for the
Production of Documents of 27 September 2014.

On 20 November 2014, the Respondent filed a Rejoinder on the Merits,
together with a Reply on Jurisdiction (“Rejoinder”), accompanied by the
following documents:

e Second Witness Statement of Mr. Branko Vujovic dated 20
November 2014;

e Montenegrin Law Expert Report of Professor Dragan Radonji¢é and
Assistant Professor Vladimir Savkovié dated 20 November 2014 with
Exhibits LEX-0001 to LEX-0051;

e Expert Report of Mr. Brent C. Kaczmarek dated 20 November 2014
with Appendices A-H and Exhibits NAV-001 to NAV-135;

e Exhibits R-058 to R-126; and

e Legal Authorities RLA-141 to RLA-232.

On 20 February 2015, the Claimants filed their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction
(‘Rejoinder on Jurisdiction”), accompanied by the following documents:

38.

39.

40.

e Third Witness Statement of Mr. Mark Jacobson dated 18 February
2015;

e Second Montenegrin Law Expert Report of Professor Viadimir Pavié
and Dr. Milos Zivkovié dated 20 February 2014;

e Volume 23 that contained chronologically ordered contemporaneous
correspondence and documents;

e Volume 24 that contained legal authorities; and

e Volume 25 that contained the legal authorities referenced by the

Second Montenegrin Legal Expert Report.
D. Hearing on Jurisdiction and Merits

On 6 May 2015, the Tribunal held a pre-hearing organizational meeting with
the Parties by telephone conference.

On 9 May 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 7 concerning
directions for the upcoming Hearing on Jurisdiction and Merits (“Hearing”).
In this Procedural Order, the Tribunal noted that it had no objection to the
Claimants’ request that a Dutch Embassy official attend the Hearing
provided that the Respondent agreed to the official’s participation.

The Hearing took place in Paris, France, from 1 to 10 June 2015. In addition
to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary of the Tribunal, present at

the Hearing were:

For the Claimants:

Mr. Toby Landau QC Essex Court Chambers
Professor Dan Sarooshi Essex Court Chambers

Mr. Tim Hardy CMS Cameron McKenna LLP
Mr. Csaba Kovacs CMS Cameron McKenna LLP
Ms. Aimee Cook CMS Cameron McKenna LLP
Ms. Jennifer Stoddart CMS Cameron McKenna LLP
Mr. Duncan Weston CMS Cameron McKenna LLP
Ms. Jessica Foley CMS Cameron McKenna LLP
Mr. Goran Martinovic Harrisons Solicitors

41.

Mr. Mark Jacobson (also a witness)

Mr. Daniel Brol (also a witness)

For the Respondent:

Dr. Christoph Lindinger
Ms. Anne-Karin Grill
Mr. Leon Kopecky

Mr. Michael Stimakovits
Mr. Florian Stefan

Mr. David Pawlak

Mr. Slaven Moravéevié

Ms. Jelena Bezarevié Pajié
Ms. Tanja Sumar

Mr. Igor Luksié

Mr. Vladimir Kavarié

Mr. Dragan Kujovié

Mr. Goran Nikoli¢

Ms. Svetlana Stijepovic

The following persons were examined:

Authorized representative of
MNSS B.V. and Recupero
Credito Acciaio, former
Chairman and Director of
Zeljezara Niksic a.d.
Authorized representative of
MNSS B.V. and Recupero
Credito Acciaio, former
executive officer and Director
of Zeljezara Niksic a.d.

Schénherr

Schénherr

Schénherr

Schénherr

Schénherr

David A. Pawlak LLC
Moravéevié Vojnovié &
Partners

Moravéevié Vojnovié &
Partners

Moravéevié Vojnovié &
Partners

Minister of Foreign
Affairs and European
Integration of
Montenegro

Minister of Economy of
Montenegro

Acting Director,
Directorate for Industry
and Entrepreneurship at
the Ministry of Economy
of Montenegro

Officer, Directorate for
Industry and
Entrepreneurship at the
Ministry of Economy of
Montenegro

Translator, Ministry of
Economy of Montenegro

On behalf of the Claimants:

Witnesses: Authorized representative

Mr. Mark Jacobson of MNSS B.V. and
Recupero Credito
Acciaio, former Chairman
and Director of Zeljezara
Niksic a.d.

Mr. Daniel Brol Authorized representative
of MNSS B.V. and
Recupero Credito
Acciaio, former executive
officer and Director of
Zeljezara Niksic a.d.

Mr. Alan Jacobson Former interim executive
officer and Director of
Zeljezara Niksic a.d.

Mr. Leslaw Kwasik Former Chief Executive
Officer of Zeljezara Niksic
a.d.

Experts:

Mr. Carlos Lapuerta The Brattle Group

Mr. Richard Caldwell The Brattle Group

Dr. Milo& Zivkovié University of Belgrade

Professor Vladimir Pavié University of Belgrade

On behalf of the Respondent:

Witness:

Mr. Branko Vujovic Director of the
Insurance Supervision
Agency of Montenegro

Experts:

Professor Dragan Radonji¢ University of
Montenegro

Assistant Professor Vladimir Savkovié University of
Montenegro

Mr. Brent C. Kaczmarek Navigant Consulting,
Inc.

42. On 10 June 2015, Mr. Casper Holl, the Economic Counsellor at the Embassy
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands in Paris, attended the Hearing as agreed
by the Parties.

43.

44,

45.

46.

E. Post-Hearing Phase

On 16 June 2015, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal issue an order
to exclude certain documents, and the Claimants responded to the
Respondent's request on 23 June 2015. The Tribunal issued its decision
on this matter on 26 June 2015.

On 9 July 2015, the Parties filed simultaneous Post-Hearing Briefs. On 31
July 2015, the Claimants submitted a Corrected Post-Hearing Brief.

The proceeding was closed on 28 March 2016.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

ZN is an electric arc furnace steel mill, the only one in Montenegro. ZN is
one of the largest manufacturing companies in Montenegro. It started as a
State-owned entity, and there were thereafter several successive
privatizations of ZN. For purposes of the dispute before the Tribunal, the first
relevant privatization occurred in 2006. MN Specialty Steel Ltd. (“MN”) was
the successful bidder for 66.7008 percent of the share capital of ZN. On 8
November 2006, MN signed the Agreement for the Sale and Purchase of
66.7008 percent of the shares in ZN (“Privatization Agreement’ or “PA”)®
with the Government of Montenegro, the Republic of Montenegro, the Fund
for Development of the Republic of Montenegro, the Republic Fund for
Pension and Disability Insurance and the Bureau for Employment
(collectively, “Sellers”). Pursuant to this Agreement, MN undertook a series
of investment obligations: it agreed, in particular, that “during a 5-year period
from the closing of the Privatization Agreement it would invest in ZN’s capital
investment programme an aggregate amount of not less than €114 million,
with the following minimum annual spending: €14 million in 2007 (“First
Investment Period”); €20 million in 2008 (“Second Investment Period”);
€40 million in 2009 (“Third Investment Period”); €20 million in 2010

6 Privatization Agreement (Exhibit C-002).

47.

48.

49.

(‘Fourth Investment Period”); and €20 million in 2011(“Fifth Investment

Period’).”

As explained by the Claimants,
“[flollowing the 2006 privatisation, ZN’s ability to
improve on current production levels and to introduce
operating improvements was constrained by a
deficiency in working capital funding, this deficiency
being exacerbated as production volumes were
increased. In late 2007 these challenges had led to a
position where ZN was struggling to meet some of its
liabilities as they fell due ... MN was left with little option
but to agree to a sale of its interest in ZN to one of the
Claimants (MNSS) ....”8

On 8 February 2008, MNSS bought MN’s shares in ZN under a Share
Purchase Agreement (“SPA”) for an aggregate consideration of
“€16,651,799 of which €2,023,597 was attributed to the ZN shares, and
€14,628,202 to the assigned MN assets ....”? The SPA consideration was
satisfied, inter alia, “through a cash payment of €7,050,000 from MNSS to
MN, the assumption by MNSS of MN’s long-term loan obligation to Prva
Banka in an amount of ca. €1.9 million, and the issuance of a 19%
shareholding of MNSS by MN.”?°

A few days earlier, the Government had passed a resolution approving the
amendment of the Privatization Agreement in relation to the timing and
amounts of required Capital Expenditure (“CAPEX”) to be invested and
providing for future changes in certain circumstances. MN assigned its rights
under the Privatization Agreement to MNSS on 28 February 2008 by way of
an Assignment Agreement (“Assignment Agreement’) between the Sellers
and MNSS. The Sellers, including the Government, consented to the

assignment.

7 Memorial, para. 147. Emphasis in the original.
® Memorial, para. 164

° Id., para. 179.

10 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 50.

50.

51.

52.

53.

In addition to the equity investment, MNSS made five loans to ZN during the
period from 26 September 2008 to 26 January 2011. The first loan of €50
million was granted by MNSS to ZN and documented in a loan agreement
dated 26 September 2008 (‘First Loan”). This loan was made for working
capital and CAPEX purposes and carried no interest on the amounts drawn
for CAPEX purposes.

The second loan was part of the undertakings of MNSS to the Government
under the Refinancing Protocol of 9 July 2009 (“Refinancing Protocol’). It
was in the amount of €10 million, to be used for general corporate purposes
of ZN, and was interest-bearing and repayable on 31 December 2013. The
loan agreement was dated 22 July 2009 (“Second Loan”). On the same date
and as part of this refinancing, BlueBay Multi-Strategy Investments
(‘BlueBay”) made a €3.5 million short-term loan to ZN with a maturity date
of 31 October 2009 guaranteed by the Government (“BlueBay Loan”). By
the maturity date, ZN could pay only €2 million and BlueBay agreed to extend
the maturity date to 30 November 2009.

On 25 November 2009, the Government and MNSS signed the “Protocol on
Mutual Obligations in Relation to Regulating Regular Payments of Salaries
and Financing Arrangements for Zeljezara Niksic a.d” (“Salaries and
Financing Protocol”). The parties agreed that if, within ten days, MNSS
could not pay the Government for the guarantee of the BlueBay Loan, MNSS
would transfer to the Government 25 percent of its shareholding in ZN.
Eventually, BlueBay called on the Government guarantee and the
Government paid the remainder of the BlueBay Loan on 16 December 2009.
On 11 January 2010, by way of an Agreement to Transfer Shares, MNSS
transferred shares in ZN to the Government representing about 16 percent
of the issued share capital in consideration for the Government's repayment
of the BlueBay Loan.

The third loan was made by MNSS on 22 December 2009 to a Dutch
subsidiary of ZN wholly owned by ZN and guaranteed by ZN to pay for

working capital of ZN. The loan was in the amount of €3 million bearing

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

interest of 5 percent per annum and repayable on 31 December 2012 (“Third
Loan’).

The fourth loan in the amount of €200,000 was made on 26 January 2011
by MNSS to ZN to pay for the electricity bills. In fact, MNSS claims that
€257,198.15 was disbursed but not formally documented in an amendment
to the loan agreement. The loan carried interest of 5 percent per annum and
was to be repaid in three tranches (the “Fourth Loan’).

The fifth loan in the amount of €550,000 was made by MNSS to Novi Celik
D.O.O., a wholly-owned subsidiary of ZN, on 26 January 2011. It was also
guaranteed by ZN and carried interest of 5 percent per annum to be repaid
in three tranches (“Fifth Loan”). The purpose of this loan was to pay salaries
since ZN’s Montenegrin bank accounts had been blocked by court order. ZN
withdrew a total of €415,000.

On 30 October 2009, MNSS assigned to RCA its outstanding loan claims
against ZN under the First Loan. The loan assignment was concluded
between MNSS and RCA (“RCA Assignment’) and on the same day, MNSS
informed ZN. The maturity date of the First Loan was extended twice. First,
from 31 December 2012 to 31 December 2014 pursuant to an agreement
between RCA and ZN dated 19 March 2010 as part of a refinancing plan of
ZN approved by the Government. Second, from 31 December 2014 to 30
June 2015, as part of the conditions of a loan from Crédit Suisse to ZN as
part of the restructuring plan described further below (“Crédit Suisse
Loan’). The agreement for the First Loan was amended for this purpose on
28 June 2010.

MN and ZN had used Prva Banka prior to the Assignment Agreement. MNSS
continued to bank with this institution for fulfillment of its obligations under
the Privatization Agreement and for other purposes as detailed elsewhere in
the Award."

Prva Banka suffered a liquidity crisis starting in 2007, which grew more
serious as the financial crisis of 2008 unfolded.

11 See, e.g. infra paras. 290 et seq.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

Prva Banka delayed honoring MNSS payment orders from July 2008 to
October 2009 notwithstanding attempts to remedy the situation in November
2008 and June 2009.

On 19 June 2009, Prva Banka, MNSS and ZN signed a Prva Banka
Refinancing Protocol (“Prva Banka Refinancing Protocol”) whereby “Prva
Banka would pay €2.5 million to ZN’s creditor (CVS) from MNSS’ CAPEX
account by 23 June 2009, but that in return Prva Banka was entitled to apply
the balance of the funds in ZN’s account (following the transfer of those funds
from MNSS’ investment account to ZN’s account) towards the full repayment
of ZN’s loans with Prva Banka.”!?

On 6 July 2009, the Respondent and MNSS signed the Refinancing Protocol
(‘Refinancing Protocol”) and an amendment to the Privatization
Agreement. The Respondent agreed to provide a guarantee for a €25 million
loan to ZN by a commercial bank, including the guarantee of a €3.5 million
short-term loan, and to reduce MNSS’ investment obligations for 2009 and
2010. MNSS agreed to grant a loan facility of €10 million to ZN conditional
on ZN obtaining such loan from a commercial bank.

On 22 July 2009, ZN concluded a short-term loan of €3.5 million with
BlueBay Multi-Strategy Investments (“BlueBay Loan”) guaranteed by the
Respondent. On 9 December 2009, ZN defaulted on the BlueBay Loan and
on that date the Respondent paid the €1.6 million outstanding.

MNSS had agreed under the Salaries and Financing Protocol with the
Respondent to reimburse the Respondent if BlueBay would call the
guarantee or transfer 25 percent of its ZN shares.

On 11 January 2010, MNSS transferred 25 percent of its shares to the
Respondent.

On 4 March 2010, the Respondent approved a restructuring plan of ZN
(‘Restructuring Plan’).

12 Memorial, para. 471.

66.

67.

68.

69.
70.

71.

72.
73.

On 14 May 2010 and as part of the Restructuring Plan, the Respondent
guaranteed the Crédit Suisse Loan to ZN in an amount of €26.3 million’? that
was deposited in Erste Bank. Contemporaneously, the Respondent entered
into the Protocol on Oversight with ZN that required representatives of ZN,
MNSS and the Respondent to sign payment instructions.

From 27 September to 4 October 2010, workers of ZN occupied ZN’s
management building. Workers again occupied ZN’s management building
on 13 December 2010 and physically assaulted the Chief Executive.

In the course of December 2010, MNSS made several proposals and
presentations to the Respondent related to the capital requirements of ZN
and to amendments to the Privation Agreement. On 16 December 2010, the
Respondent informed MNSS that it was prepared to accept a reduction of
the labor force to 700 employees provided that MNSS would make the
agreed minimum investments of €20 million in 2011. MNSS was prepared to
invest only €2 million in CAPEX.

On 20 December 2010, the Respondent made a loan to the Union."*

On 21 December 2010, the Respondent informed MNNS that it was in
breach of the Privatization Agreement because it failed to provide the
performance bond for the fifth investment period and to pay the workers’
salaries for several months.

In February 2011, MNSS proposed to raise new finance by issuing
convertible loans to new investors. The Respondent did not approve this
proposal.

On 1 March 2011, ZN’s workers went on strike.

On 15 March 2011, the Union filed a bankruptcy petition of ZN with the
Podgorica Commercial Court.

13 The additional €1.3 million was for the payment by ZN of redundancies in Livnica, a company
unrelated to ZN. This was part of the conditions of the Respondent to agree to an extension of the
deadline for the installation of new equipment requested by MNSS. See Memorial, paras. 506-507.
14 The term “Union” refers collectively to both unions involved with the workers of ZN, as this term
is used in the pleadings of the Claimants.

20

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

On 17 and 31 March 2011, the Respondent provided financial aid to the
Union.

On 15 April 2011, the Podgorica Commercial Court placed ZN into
bankruptcy.

On 30 April 2012, the assets of ZN were sold to Toscelik.

OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION
A. Summary of the Parties’ Arguments
1) Respondent’s Counter-Memorial

In its Counter-Memorial, the Respondent raises six objections to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal. First, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction because of
the express waiver of jurisdiction contained in Clause 11 of the Privatization
Agreement (“ratione voluntatis objection”). Second, the Tribunal has no
jurisdiction because the Respondent has not consented to the Additional
Facility Arbitration in the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws (“ratione voluntatis
objection”). Third, the Claimants’ Dutch nationality has been fabricated
when the present dispute had already arisen (“ratione personae
objection”). Fourth, MNSS’ shares of ZN, MNSS’ loans to ZN and RCA’s
assigned loan from MNSS do not qualify as investments (“ratione materiae
objection’). Fifth, the alleged investments were not in accordance with host
State law (“ratione materiae objection”). Sixth, Claimants failed to exhaust
local remedies (“non-exhaustion of local remedies objection’).

a. Explicit Waiver of ICSID AF Arbitration
The Respondent argues that, under Clause 11 of the Privatization
Agreement (See the text of Clause 11 in paragraph 149, below), the investor
has waived its right to access Additional Facility Arbitration with respect to
all claims which have been brought before this Tribunal, and that the investor
undertook not to assert claims whether based on contract or on treaty in any
other forum but the contractually agreed forum. The Respondent explains

that the purpose of Clause 11 was to avoid parallel proceedings and “claim

21

79.

80.

splitting.” According to the Respondent, even if the Tribunal should conclude
that Clause 11 covers only contract claims, the Claimants’ claims are
essentially based on contract. According to the Respondent, the effect of
Clause 11 is to waive the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal under the BIT and
the substantive protection of the BIT itself.

The Respondent explains that, under Clause 11.1, the “asserted claims” may
have their basis in treaty and contract. The Respondent contends that this
clause refers to substantive obligations of the State under international law,
and that it foresees that “compliance with the PA could not result in a
violation of obligations under international law and hence in international
liability.”"5 Clause 11.1 does not differentiate between the substantive bases
of claims. According to the Respondent, Clause 11.1 shows that the parties
fully understood and considered:

“a. that the present was to be an investment contract

concluded between a foreign investor and various state
actors ...;

b. that their relation could as such give rise to claims
under international law;

c. and, in particular, that the foreign investor might at
some point bring claims on the basis of the applicable
BIT or else under international law against
Montenegro.”"®

The Respondent explains further:

“were Clause 11.1 to refer only to contract claims which
could be brought against the GoM in its capacity as a
Seller under the PA — i.e. to claims having their
substantive basis in the PA itself — there would be no
reason to single out the GoM as a defendant. Rather,
this formulation again underlines that the covered
claims also include treaty claims against the host State
Montenegro and were not limited to contractual claims
arising out of the PA.”

18 Counter-Memorial, para. 71.
16 Id., para. 72.
17 Id., para. 78.

22

81.

82.

83.

84.

The Respondent finds that the waiver of the right to access other fora is
explicit, direct, in favor of the Respondent as party to the Privatization
Agreement and an inherent precondition for the approval of the investment
by the Respondent. The Respondent argues that Clause 11.1 and Clause
11.2.1 — the forum selection clause — must be read as a whole in order to
determine their scope: “Just as the waiver clause clearly also encompasses
claims brought under the BIT, any such claims would equally be covered by
the dispute resolution clause.”1® The Respondent further argues that the
right to allegedly assert claims under the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws would
also be covered by the waiver of Clause 11 given the intention of the parties
to concentrate all proceedings in the contractual forum.

The Respondent emphasizes that Clause 11 was freely negotiated and
agreed between the parties, and that in the Assignment Agreement MNSS
agreed that the terms of the Privatization Agreement would, unless modified,
continue in full force and effect, including the arbitration clause. No effort was
made by MNSS to modify Clause 11 at the time it was negotiated and the
Refinancing Protocol of 6 July 2009 confirmed the terms of the Privatization
Agreement. The Respondent draws the attention of the Tribunal to the fact
that Clause 11 is part of a commercial agreement where the Respondent
agreed to take on the debts of ZN and redundancy costs; the waiver should
be considered as part of the overall deal.

The Respondent also discusses the relationship of Clause 11 with the BIT.
First, the Respondent recalls that the BIT was signed on 29 January 2002
and entered into force on 1 March 2004, before the parties entered into the
Privatization Agreement. Thus, the Respondent argues that Clause 11 is the
lex posterior and operates as the /ex specialis as compared to the generic
offer in the BIT.

Second, according to the Respondent, Clause 11 does not operate as a
waiver but as a joint advance selection of the single international arbitration
forum that should have jurisdiction over investment disputes between the

18 /d., para. 95. Emphasis in the original.

23

85.

86.

87.

parties. The Respondent submits that, since the investor may choose one of
the fora beforehand, it can agree with the host State on a different but
equivalent arbitration clause.

Third, the Respondent observes that the BIT does not prohibit a waiver of
jurisdiction agreed in a subsequent contract and there is no public interest
against a concentration of proceedings. In fact, Clause 11 fulfills the same
function as the dispute resolution provision in the BIT: it provides an
international neutral venue for final resolution of disputes between the
parties related to the investment.

The Respondent also argues that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction in respect
of contract claims “even if and to the extent that such claims should be held
to also amount to treaty claims, either because they would have been thus
elevated by Article 3(4) of the BIT‘ or because the facts which are
essentially a breach of contract would also amount to a violation of
substantive BIT standards ....’2° Furthermore, according to the Respondent,
“if the Tribunal should find that some of the purported acts and omissions of
Respondent did not have their essential basis in contract, any claims
inferable from such acts could not be self-standing. Rather, there would be
a significant overlap between the Claimants’ causes of action based on
contract and those, if any, exclusively based on treaty or investment law.”21

b. No Consent to Arbitration

The Respondent denies that the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws contain a
unilateral offer to arbitrate. First, the Respondent points out that the
Claimants submit an inaccurate English translation of Article 39(2) of MFI
Law 2000 and of Article 30(2) of MFI Law 2011 (See the texts of the Articles,
with the different translations in paragraphs 166-167, below). The

Respondent contends that the purely grammatical interpretation of these

19 BIT Article 3(4) reads: “Each Contracting Party shall observe any legal obligation it may have

entered into with regard to investments of investors of the other Contracting Party.” BIT (Legal
Authority CLA-504).

20 Counter-Memorial, para. 181. Emphasis in the original.

21 Id., para. 184.

24

88.

articles by the Claimants renders the first paragraph redundant and leads to
absurd results in respect of the third paragraph. This paragraph is identical
to paragraph 2, except that it refers to investment contracts between private
parties. If paragraph 2 contains an offer to arbitrate as argued by the
Claimants in the case of investment contracts with the Government, then so
does paragraph 3, but this result cannot be correct, as no unilateral consent
of a private party could be established by virtue of national legislation such
as the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws.

The Respondent argues that the interpretation proffered by the Claimants
results in a non-constitutional situation, given that in 2000 an offer to arbitrate
by Montenegro would have violated the Federal Yugoslav Constitution
against the clear and declared intention of the historical legislator. The
Respondent points out the contrast of the alleged consent under the 2000
and 2011 MFI Laws with the clear and unequivocal consent of Montenegro
expressed in Article 9 of the BIT.2? In addition, the Respondent observes

22 BIT Article 9 reads:

“4. Any dispute which may arise between an investor of one
Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party in connection
with an investment in the territory of that other Contracting Party
shall, if possible, be settled amicably.

2. If the dispute referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article cannot be
settled within three months from the date on which either party to
the dispute requested in writing an amicable settlement, the
investor shall be entitled to submit the dispute, at his choice, for
settlement to:

a) the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes, for settlement by arbitration or conciliation
under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States,
opened for signature at Washington on 18 March 1965;

b) the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes under the Rules Governing the Additional
Facility for the Administration of Conciliation, Arbitration
and Fact-Finding Proceedings (Additional Facility Rules),
if one of the Contracting Parties is not a Contracting State
to the Convention as mentioned in paragraph a) of this
Article;

25

that neither of these articles contains the contingent consent to ICSID
arbitration required under Article 4(2) of the Additional Facility.2°

89. As regards the RCA claim, the Respondent submits that even in the
Claimants’ own case, Article 39(2) and Article 30(2) do not provide a
jurisdictional basis for this Tribunal, because RCA is not a contracting party
to the Privatization Agreement and the Government is not a party to any of

the loan agreements that the Claimants allege to be part of their investment.
c. Lack of Jurisdiction Ratione Personae

90. The Respondent asserts that the Claimants are shell companies without any
genuine business activity and are ultimately UK-held. The Respondent
observes that there is no BIT in place between the UK and Montenegro. The
Respondent alleges that the Dutch nationality has been fabricated after the
present dispute had already arisen. The Respondent explains: “MNSS B.V.’s
entry in ZN in February 2008 came at a time when the present controversy
had already arisen (or was at least foreseeable). By interposing the Dutch
shell company, the effectively British investors attempted to obtain the

c) a sole arbitrator or an international ad hoc arbitral
tribunal under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL);

d) the Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of
Commerce (ICC).

3. Each Contracting Party hereby gives its unconditional consent
to the submission of a dispute to international conciliation or
arbitration in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

BIT, Article 9 (Legal Authority CLA-504).

23 BIT Article 4(2) reads:

“In the case of an application based on Article 2(a), the Secretary-
General shall give his approval only if (a) he is satisfied that the
requirements of that provision are fulfilled at the time, and (b) both
parties give their consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre under
Article 25 of the Convention (in lieu of the Additional Facility) in
the event that the jurisdictional requirements ratione personae of
that Article shall have been met at the time when proceedings are
instituted.”

BIT, Article 4(2) (Legal Authority CLA-504).

26

91.

92.

93.

protection of a BIT for a previously unprotected investment. This was
effected in an instant of inacceptable fabrication of nationality ....” 74
Referring to this transaction, the Respondent claims that it was presented as
a mere restructuring of the corporate set-up at the occasion of raising new
funds and that it was reassured that “the new corporate seat (in Amsterdam)
was for internal business reasons only and that nothing would change in the
relationship with the Respondent.”2°

The Respondent observes that the Claimants do not mention that “MNSS
(the English SPV) actually received shares in MNSS B.V. (the interposed
Dutch SPV) in partial consideration for the direct shareholding in ZN (the
Consideration Shares). In economical terms, however, there was no transfer
of the investment, but merely one more British investor joining in.”2°

The Respondent asserts that, before 28 February 2008, there was a situation
in which the two sides held opposing views on whether the investor had
performed its obligations under the Privatization Agreement, as evidenced
by the Respondent's confirmation in the Assignment Agreement that it has
no dispute with MN or MNSS. This implies that there was a dispute extant
that made it necessary to formulate a settlement. MN had not been able to
make a success of the company, MN already had a relationship with Prva
Banka and had concerns about it, but MNSS continued the relationship. ZN
management had been faced with “a considerable mass of employment
disputes.”2”

The Respondent claims that, “[w]hen MNSS B.V. took over the immediate
shareholding of ZN, it at the same time ‘took over’ and continued MNSS
Limited’s dispute. The subject matter of the dispute presently before this
Tribunal does not differ from the dispute as already in place at the time of

corporate restructuring.” 28 According to the Respondent, this is not an

24 Counter-Memorial, para. 329.
25 Id., para. 348.
26 Id., para. 352.
27 Id., para. 361.
28 Id., para. 362.

27

94.

95.

96.

incident of prospective nationality planning, but abusive forum shopping
when the Claimants’ investment was deteriorating and the dispute was at
least looming. The Respondent asserts that because of this abuse of rights
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is excluded both under the BIT and under the
2000 and 2011 MFI Laws.

d. Lack of Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae

The Respondent claims that none of the investments qualify as such under
the Additional Facility or under the BIT. According to the Respondent, MNSS
has not made a contribution to ZN or Montenegro when it acquired the
shares in ZN. MNSS provided MN, the former direct shareholder, with shares
in MNSS and hence indirect shareholding in ZN. Furthermore, according to
the Respondent, under the Privatization Agreement, the investor could not
fulfill its investment obligations by advancing loans.

The Respondent argues that the concept of investment under the AF is an
autonomous concept. Hence, the investments of the Claimants have to meet
the test for an investment under the AF and under the BIT. The Respondent
explains that the Claimants have obtained approval of access to the AF
under Article 2(a) of the AF Rules, which constitutes an exception ratione
personae to ICSID jurisdiction, corroborated by Article 4(2). The requirement
ratione materiae under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention continues to
apply. The Respondent subscribes to the Salini test for purposes of defining
an investment under the Convention.

As to the definition of investment under the BIT, the Respondent argues that
this term has an inherent meaning that flows from the object and purpose of
the BIT and goes beyond the words used in the definition in Article 1. The
Respondent recalls that the preamble of the BIT refers to the agreement of
the Parties that “the treatment to be accorded to such investments will
stimulate the flow of capital and technology and the economic development
of the Contracting Parties ....” Based on this statement, the Respondent

argues that a contribution or commitment of funds is a prerequisite of an

28

97.

98.

investment under the BIT. The Respondent finds support for this argument
in several articles of the BIT, in particular Article 5(1) of the BIT that refers to
“capital and additional amounts to maintain or increase investments.”
According to the Respondent, this confirms that the term investment
comprises “a contribution to the host State development, at least a
contribution to the host State economy.”29

The Respondent also refers to the definition of investment under the 2000
and 2011 MFI Laws and emphasizes the need for an investment to consist
of a contribution and for the investment to make a contribution to the
economic development of Montenegro whether through certain types of
contracts or by investing in or setting up a company. The Respondent denies
that MNSS has made an investment in Montenegro because MNSS has not
made any contribution of resources to the country. Furthermore, the
Respondent differentiates between the object of the investment — the
acquisition of the shares — and the manner of investing as such. This
distinction is significant because MNSS has not injected any fresh capital
into ZN, and the consideration for its shareholding in ZN was owed to a
British entity. According to the Respondent, the only contractual investment
obligation of MNSS in respect of the Respondent was set forth in Clause
8.1.1 of the Privatization Agreement and MNSS failed to honor it because

the loans advanced by MNSS do not qualify as protected investments.

According to the Respondent, the obligation to invest and the actual manner
of the investment as regulated in the Privatization Agreement are central to
determine its consent to arbitration. The Respondent submits that mere

loans to ZN would not fulfill MNSS’ contractual obligation and explains:

“A loan is inherently repayable (even if not necessarily
interest-bearing). This implies that the funds needed
for such loan repayment need to be generated in the
course of the business operation of the funded
company. As such, financing on the basis of loans is
financing on the basis of assets of the company (a

29 Id., para. 419.

29

capital increase or else a shareholder’s contribution,
however, would be a way of financing without using the
assets of the financed company).”°°

99. As to the assignment to RCA, the Respondent points out that it was made
without the knowledge and consent of the Government, in violation of the
Privatization Agreement and in the sole interest of the investor. According to
the Respondent, even if the initial loan qualified as an investment, RCA could
not acquire legal standing as a protected investor by way of the loan
assignment; RCA is not a party to the Privatization Agreement, it is not a
party to the Assignment Agreement and the loan assignment is not an
investment under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention or under the BIT or
the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws.

100. The Respondent argues that the loan assignment to RCA was a mere
commercial transaction and not an investment: “RCA did not ... carry out any
economic activity in the host State Montenegro. RCA did not inject any funds
into ZN or else transfer funds into Montenegro. The loan assignment and
holding of the receivable by RCA did not contribute to the flow of capital or
technology into Montenegro.”°1 Furthermore, ZN had not been paying
interest on the loan, which shows that RCA apparently did not commit
resources with a view to generate profits.

e. Investment not in Accordance with Host State Law

101. The Respondent affirms that it is a general principle of investment protection
law that investments need to be made and conducted in compliance with the
law of the host State and, if this is not the case, investments will not enjoy
investment protection under a BIT. The Respondent finds this principle
reflected in Article 2 of the BIT that provides that investment promotion and
protection shall be within the framework of the host State’s laws and
regulations, and in the Preamble where it is stated that the object of

30 Id., para. 489.
31 Id., para. 561.

30

102.

103.

104.

105.

investment protection is to stimulate the flow of capital and technology, and
economic development. According to the Respondent: “If a foreign investor
does not abide by the host State law, its investment will mostly not contribute
to the development of the host State.”32 The Respondent adds that the 2000
MFI Law, which protects only legal investments, has to be taken into account
as background for the understanding of the BIT.

The Respondent alleges that MN and MNSS acquired their stake in ZN on
the basis of deceitful representations. They had manifested to the
Government that they were willing and able to modernize ZN, while in fact
they could not or did not want to invest the contractually-agreed amounts in
ZN. The Respondent explains that MNSS’ ability and willingness to invest in
ZN and modernize the company was a decisive factor for the Government
to consent to the assignment of the shares and the Privatization Agreement
to MNSS against the background of ZN’s deteriorating financial position.

As regards the RCA Assignment, the Respondent claims that it was tainted
by illegality because it was made without the Government's consent, and in
violation of the Privatization Agreement, applicable corporate law and
general principles of proper corporate governance.

The Respondent also alleges breaches of domestic legislation in the areas
of social security, employment, investment and environment, which would
have entitled the Government to terminate the investment agreement.

f. No Exhaustion of Local Remedies

According to the Respondent, the Claimants need to show that “they have
already brought the essence of the claims presently before this Tribunal
before the competent courts or tribunals of Montenegro and pursued these
claims as far as permitted under Montenegrin law ....”22 The Respondent

alleges that the Claimants have not shown that they have made use of

32 Id., para. 596.
33 Id., para. 701.

31

available remedies. The Respondent explains that local remedies would

have included
“appeals to the bankruptcy judge against the decisions
of the bankruptcy administrator, to the higher court
instances against decisions of the bankruptcy judge,
the exhaustion of court instances in respect of the acts
and omissions of Prva Banka ... recourse to the
contractual arbitration forum for alleged breaches of
the Privatisation Agreement or other contracts by
government representatives and, respectively,
recourse to the administrative courts for ministerial or
governmental decisions taken ius imperii.”4

2) Claimants’ Reply
a. Explicit Waiver of ICSID AF Arbitration

106. In their Reply, the Claimants argue that RCA is not a party to the Assignment
Agreement and, therefore, it is not bound by the PA, and that the Assignment
Agreement does not automatically extend the limitations in the PA to RCA.
The Claimants further argue that the first sentence of the second paragraph
of Clause 11.1 is of no legal consequence since it merely states that the
Buyer acknowledges that the PA itself is consistent with the Respondent’s
obligations under international law. As to the second sentence of that
paragraph, the Claimants contend that it is not possible for a private party to
deem a breach of international law by a State as not having taken place.
According to the Claimants, “Clause 11.1 ... does not preclude the Buyer’s
right to bring a claim where the cause of action relates to alleged breaches
of the BIT or customary international law and does not concern conduct
under or pursuant to the contract.”3> The Claimants argue that to construe
Clause 11.1 as a waiver of Additional Facility Arbitration in respect of non-
contractual treaty claims would breach the promise of the Respondent under

the BIT: “it would be inappropriate for the Tribunal to refuse to uphold the

%4 Id., para. 705.
36 Reply, para. 184.

32

107.

108.

109.

Respondent's promise given to the Netherlands under the governing BIT, by
giving priority to a purported commitment made by a foreign investor in
relation to a contract.”

The Claimants find support for their position in the fact that Clause 11.1 itself
did not explicitly stipulate exclusivity. The Claimants also find support in
Montenegrin law, which is applicable to the Privatization Agreement.
According to the Claimants, Clause 11.1 cannot be an exclusive jurisdiction
clause because it relates only to claims “arising out” and not “arising out or
in connection with” the Privatization Agreement. The Claimants dispute that
the basis of their claims be essentially contractual; the mere existence of the
Privatization Agreement does not mean that all claims of MNSS are
automatically contractual claims. Similarly, the Privatization Agreement does
not preclude breaches of Montenegrin tort law under the 2000 and 2011 MFI
Laws.

The Claimants argue that MNSS cannot waive its rights under the BIT since
these are rights of the Netherlands as the BIT Contracting Party. The
Claimants also dispute the allegation of the Respondent that the offer to
arbitrate was no longer extant because of the subsequent agreement in
Clause 11.1. According to the Claimants, a later agreement between the
Respondent and a private party cannot affect the existence of the
Respondent's consent to AF arbitration in the BIT since the parties to the BIT
undertake their rights and obligations in respect of each other under public
international law. The Claimants point out that, in any case, Clause 11 is not
lex posterior because the Privatization Agreement is dated 8 November
2006 and the BIT was assumed by Montenegro on 18 January 2007; even if
it were /ex posterior, under Montenegrin law the concept of /ex posterior or
lex specialis applies only to statutes and not to contractual provisions.

The Claimants also contend that a waiver of ICSID jurisdiction must be
expressly envisaged in order to have effect. Furthermore, since the alleged
waiver in Clause 11.1 relates only to the Privatization Agreement, it follows

36 /d., para. 188.

33

that it does not include a waiver under the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws. The
Claimants explain that for a waiver to be effective under Montenegrin law, it
must meet three pre-conditions: (i) the right must exist solely in the interest
of the right-holder; (ii) the waiver must not violate public policy; and (iii) the
waiver must be interpreted strictly. According to the Claimants, these
conditions are applied more stringently when the waiver relates to future

claims and the alleged waiver does not meet them.
b. Consent under the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws

110. First of all, the Claimants dispute that there is an issue of translation. In fact,
the translation provided by the Claimants uses the same wording (“shall be
resolved”) “as the official translation available at the website of the
Montenegrin government ....”°7

111. The Claimants also dispute the interpretation given by the Respondent to
Article 39(2) of MFI Law 2000 and Article 30(2) of MFI Law 2011. According
to the Claimants, the in dubious mitis principle relied on by the Respondent
is not applicable to statute interpretation; rather, the contra proferentem
principle would be more appropriate. Furthermore, the interpretation
defended by the Respondent would deprive the second and third paragraphs

of the said provisions of any practical meaning.
c. Jurisdiction Ratione Personae

112. The Claimants address the two arguments of the Respondent questioning
their status as investors. First, the Claimants dispute that they are shell
companies and argue that they meet the requirement to be investors under
the BIT; namely, to be incorporated under the law of the Netherlands in the
case of MNSS and Curagao in the case of RCA. The Claimants criticize the
attempt of the Respondent to introduce a requirement of some form of
effective link between the Claimants and their State of incorporation. The
Claimants point out that there is no basis in the BIT for such additional

37 Id., para. 239, quotation of the Montenegrin Law Experts’ Opinion.

34

113.

114.

requirement and no basis in international law for conflating the issue of
nationality of individuals with that of the nationality of corporations.

As to the date when the dispute arose, the Claimants argue that the
Respondent cannot rely on the fact that there may have been a dispute with
MN to claim that the dispute with MNSS had arisen before MNSS had
acquired its equity stake in ZN. The Claimants explain that a dispute must
necessarily be a dispute between the Parties of this arbitration. The
Claimants assert that the test for determining the critical date when a dispute
can be said to have arisen is an objective test. The Claimants point out that,
in the instant case, all of the acts that later gave rise to the dispute occurred
after February 2008, but that does not preclude the Tribunal from reviewing
the Respondent's acts and omissions that occurred before that date. The
Claimants clarify that the controversy arises out of breaches by Respondent
of the BIT and not breaches of the Privatization Agreement, as argued by
the Respondent. The Claimants assert that the interposition of a Dutch
company between British investors and the investment in order to secure
protection under the BIT is perfectly legitimate and Montenegro has
acknowledged that it was aware of the restructuring.

d. Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae

According to the Claimants, the only concept relevant to the jurisdiction of
this Tribunal is that found in the BIT and the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws. The
Claimants dispute that Article 25 of the ICSID Convention applies and refer
to the following provision in Article 3 of the Additional Facility Rules: “[s]ince
the proceedings envisaged by Article 2 are outside the jurisdiction of the
Centre, none of the provisions of the Convention shall be applicable to
them.”*8 The Claimants contend that in any case their investment meets the
Salini test for purposes of defining a protected investment under the ICSID
Convention.

38 Id., para. 301.

35

115. According to the Claimants, the definition of “investment” in the BIT is very
broad, particularly in relation to the “claims to money.” Furthermore, in Article
5 of the BIT, the parties have agreed “to guarantee the free transfer of
payments related to an ‘investment, including the transfer of ‘interest
(Article 5(b)) and ‘funds in repayment of loans’ (Article 5(c)). The content of
this provision only serves to reinforce further the position that the definition
of ‘investment and the meaning of ‘claims to money’ under the governing
BIT include loans.”°? The Claimants add that the loans should “be viewed as
part of an ‘indivisible whole’ investment in ZN that was ‘directed at the
investment’s overall economic goal’ of revitalizing and turning the second
largest manufacturer within Montenegro into a going concern.”4°

116. The Claimants contest the argument of the Respondent that the Claimants’
investments do not constitute investments for purposes of the Privatization
Agreement. The Claimants contend that, when “the jurisdiction of an ICSID
AF Tribunal is founded on a BIT, it is not for one of the Contracting Parties
to provide a subsequent restriction of the scope of consent. Rather it is for
the ICSID AF Tribunal to determine the scope of consent by both Contracting
States as expressed in the terms of the BIT pursuant to the general rules of
treaty interpretation ....”41 Claimants also point out that, although irrelevant
to jurisdiction ratione materiae, Montenegro had agreed to MNSS’ ability to
fulfill its investment obligations pursuant to the Privatization Agreement.

117. The Claimants deny the Respondent’s allegations that some of the
investment loans were in fact not made.

118. The Claimants assert that the interpretation and application by the
Respondent of the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws is overly restrictive and
inaccurate. According to the Claimants, it is necessary to examine both MFI
Laws to determine the definition of protected investments under Montenegrin
law since the law changed during the investment period.

39 /d., para. 313. Emphasis in the original.
40 /d., para. 319. Emphasis in the original.
“1 Id, para. 322.

36

119.

120.

121.

122.

42 Id.,
43 Id.,
4 Id.,

As to whether the assignment by MNSS to RCA creates for RCA a protected
investment under the BIT, the Claimants argue, based on their Montenegrin
Law Experts’ Opinion, that the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws do not “distinguish
among those who initially invest and those who step into shoes of the other
investors pursuant to assignments and the like ....” Furthermore, according
to the Claimants and based on the same Opinion, “[t]here is nothing in the
law to suggest that a foreign ‘investment’ ceases to be an investment if it is

taken over by another foreign ‘investor’ .”42
e. Investment Made Not in Accordance with Host State Law

The Claimants point out that there is no requirement of legality under the BIT
that would affect the exercise by the Tribunal of its jurisdiction. The
Claimants further observe: “the Respondent raises its allegations of unlawful
acts and lack of good faith against the Claimants for the first time in this
arbitration, despite the investment having been made in Montenegro over a
four year period.”48

Similarly, as regards jurisdiction under the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws, the
Claimants argue, on the basis of the their Montenegrin Law Experts’ Opinion,
that “[uJnder Montenegrin law, neither of the Claimants’ investments was
illegal, in the sense that would bar them from seeking redress in this
arbitration either by lack of jurisdiction or though inadmissibility. Such
allegation of the Respondent is based upon an interpretation of the ‘legality’
requirement as contained in MFI Law which is erroneous and too broad.”44
According to the Claimants, the long-standing acceptance by the
Respondent of the Claimants’ investments precludes on grounds of estoppel

the use of the legality requirement to defeat the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

para. 344, quotation of the Montenegrin Law Experts’ Opinion.
para. 358.
para. 360, quotation of the Montenegrin Law Experts’ Opinion.

37

123.

124.

125.

f. | Exhaustion of Local Remedies

The Claimants assert, as held by abundant jurisprudence, that there is no
pre-condition for a claimant to have to exhaust local remedies before being
able to have recourse to an arbitration against a State that had previously

given its consent.
3) Respondent’s Rejoinder

The Respondent argues in its Rejoinder that the Assignment Agreement is
the basis of MNSS’ investment and Clause 7.4 is the key dispute resolution
provision (See the text of Clause 7.4 in paragraph 150, below). The
Respondent points out that the Claimants left a decisive pillar of the
Respondent's arguments uncontested; namely, that Clause 7.4 of the
Assignment Agreement, by using the phrase “arising out or in connection
with,” extends to contractual claims (i.e. disputes “arising out” of the
Assignment Agreement) and to treaty claims (i.e. disputes arising “in
connection with” the Assignment Agreement). The Respondent considers
the Privatization Agreement and the Assignment Agreement as an indivisible
whole; hence, disputes relating to the investment are disputes arising out of
or in connection with the Assignment Agreement. Furthermore, Clause 7.4
is an advance written consent to UNCITRAL arbitration within the meaning
of Article 9(4)(c) of the BIT and Clauses 11.1 and 11.2 operate as an
exclusive arbitration clause covering contract and treaty claims.

As regards RCA, the Respondent argues that the Claimants have failed to
meet the burden of proof to establish an investment of RCA qualifying for
treaty protection. According to the Respondent, RCA has not made a
contribution or incurred any risk; at most it incurred an ordinary commercial
risk assumed by any party that enters into an agreement on the assignment
of a receivable. The loan assignment is a mere tax driven transaction to the
sole benefit of Claimants and with no economic effect on any other third
party. Furthermore, the investment has not been made in the territory of the
Respondent because:

38

“[t]he loan assignment agreement was executed in
Amsterdam on the part of MNSS and in Curacao on the
part of RCA. Further, the loan assignment agreement
is governed by the laws of the Netherlands and
provides for the jurisdiction of the competent courts in
Amsterdam. Finally, the loan assignment agreement
provides that RCA shall issue a promissory note to
MNSS as consideration for the receivable acquired by
it under the agreement. Thus, there was no flow of
funds into Montenegro resulting from the loan
assignment agreement and no link whatsoever to
Respondent was created by entering into of [sic] the
loan assignment agreement.”45

126. The Respondent also disputes that RCA has made an investment because
it merely passively owned a loan receivable against ZN. On the basis of
Articles 9(5), 10 and 14(3) of the BIT, all referring to an investment “made,”
the Respondent contends that the BIT “only offers protection in case of an
active involvement in an investment activity and that such active involvement
constitutes an inherent element of the definition of the term ‘investment’
under the BIT.”46

127. According to the Respondent, MNSS’ assignment of a loan receivable to
RCA cannot transform the First Loan into an investment because no one can
transfer what it does not have. The position of the Respondent is that the
First Loan is not an investment, but, even if it were, RCA as assignee has
not acquired the requisite property rights to support its claims against the
Respondent. The Respondent does not deny that in certain circumstances
this may be the case but the circumstances here do not concur to justify an
exemption from the general principle that investor status and investor rights
cannot be assigned to a third party. According to the Respondent, “[t]he
identity of the investor in ZN was of paramount importance to Respondent,
which is underscored by the specific requirements and strict selection criteria
regarding potential investors already in the tender process and the express

45 Rejoinder, para. 101.
46 /d., para. 110.

39

128.

129.

prohibition of assignment of MNSS’ rights and obligations without prior
consent provided for in Clause 10.4.1 of the Privatisation Agreement.”4”

The Respondent alleges that the assignment of the major part of the First
Loan constitutes bad faith and forum shopping to undermine UNCITRAL
arbitration as the exclusive forum for resolution of disputes with the
Respondent. The Respondent calls the attention of the Tribunal to the fact
that RCA was incorporated only ten days before the assignment, it was
incorporated for the purpose of the loan assignment and it did not engage in
the management of ZN or in any other activity. By the time of the assignment,
the dispute with the Claimants over Prva Banka had already reached its peak
and the Government had notified MNSS that it had failed to live up to its
investment obligations under the Privatization Agreement. It is the
Respondent's contention that the real reason for the assignment of the First
Loan to RCA was not a tax reason but an “abusive attempt to create an
additional dispute resolution forum and to circumvent the exclusive
agreement to UNCITRAL arbitration by way of the loan assignment to
RCA.”48 The Respondent pleads that the Tribunal should not validate such
approach because it would result in fragmentation of an investment and of

the jurisdiction for disputes arising in connection with such investment.

The Respondent contends that UNCITRAL arbitration must be also the
exclusive forum for resolution of any disputes between RCA and the
Respondent. For the Respondent, “[t]he assignment of the majority part of
the First Loan ... constitutes a bad faith forum shopping effort to undermine
UNCITRAL arbitration ....”4? The Respondent points out that the dispute had
already arisen at the time of the loan assignment, and that, if the
discretionary fragmentation of the investment by the Claimants was
permitted, the Respondent would be faced with third party investors and

potential parallel proceedings.

47 Id., para. 119.
48 Id., para. 129.
49 Id., para. 121.

40

130. The Respondent disputes that the Claimants’ investment may be viewed as
an indivisible whole because the investment agreements do not provide for
the investment in ZN to be made in the form of loans, none of the loans were
approved by the Government and the loans were not “directed at the
investment’s overall economic goal of revitalizing and turning the second
largest manufacturer within Montenegro into a going concern;”"° they merely
overburdened the company with debt instead of actual investments. The
Respondent finds that the loans of the Claimants do not meet the criteria for
an indivisible investment as applied by international tribunals, as for example
in the case of CSOB v. Slovakia.

131. The Respondent argues that it is not enough for a claimant to characterize
a claim as a treaty claim; the State must act as a sovereign in order for an
alleged breach of contract to represent the basis for a treaty claim. This, the
Claimants have failed to show. The Respondent states that, in particular, the
claims of headcount reduction and scrapping of equipment are rooted
exclusively in the Privatization Agreement and the Assignment Agreement.

132. The Respondent points out that the Claimants and their Serbian Legal
Experts agree that Clause 11.1 of the Privatization Agreement has the effect
of preventing the elevation of contractual claims to the level of treaty claims
through the operation of the umbrella clause. The Respondent also draws
the attention of the Tribunal to the Claimants’ Request for Arbitration of 6
November 2012, where the Claimants considered that their claims were
rooted in contract:

“The ‘umbrella clause’: Article 3(4) of the BIT provides
as follows:

‘4) Each Contracting Party shall observe any legal
obligation it may have entered into with regard to

investments of investors of the other Contracting
Party.’

50 /d., para. 138.

41

133. This provision of the BIT imposes an obligation on the Respondent to respect
any obligations that it has entered into concerning any investments protected
by the treaty. In the present case, by way of example, this has the
consequence that the Respondent is under a treaty obligation to ensure that
it respects the obligations it has undertaken relating to the investments as
set out in, inter alia, the Assignment Agreement. As explained briefly above,
the Respondent has violated the terms of Clause 5.1.1, of the Assignment
Agreement, and by operation of the umbrella clause this violation also
constitutes a breach by the Respondent of its obligation set out in Article 3(4)
of the BIT.”5"

134. The Respondent observes that the Claimants continue to blur the distinction
between the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws. The Respondent recalls that all of
the alleged breaches of the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws pre-date the MFI Law
2011 and that the Claimants had been granted access to the Additional
Facility only in respect of the MFI Law 2011. According to the Respondent,
this is a sufficient reason to reject the Claimants’ attempt to rely on either of
the MFI Laws. The Respondent confirms its previous arguments that Articles
39 and 30 respectively of the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws do not constitute
unilateral consent to arbitration. The Respondent refers to decisions of other
tribunals related to consent to arbitrate in national legislation and notes their
emphasis in that the consent must be unambiguous. According to the
Respondent, “the dispute resolution provisions of the MFILs simply indicate
that arbitration may be an option if the parties agree on such dispute
resolution mechanism, which does not constitute a final consent to
arbitration.”52

4) Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction

135. In their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, the Claimants address first the argument
of the Respondent based on Clause 7.4 of the Assignment Agreement. The

51 Id., para 173, quoting para. 60 of the RFA. Emphasis added by the Respondent.
82 Id., para. 213.

42

136.

137.

Claimants argue that this clause does not purport to cover disputes arising
out of or in connection with the Privatization Agreement but its reach is
limited to disputes arising out of or in connection with the Assignment
Agreement. According to the Claimants, it is incorrect to state as Respondent
does that “[a]ny dispute arising in relation to MNSS’ investment in ZN is,
therefore, necessarily a dispute in connection with the Assignment
Agreement.”>? The Respondent conflates a cause of action based on the BIT
with contract claims that MNSS may bring against the Sellers. The Claimants
point out that the Government’s contractual undertakings can be found in
Clause 9 of the Privatization Agreement and that none of the breaches
alleged in this arbitration relates to breaches of these undertakings.

The Claimants then address the Respondent’s argument that, since what is
at a stake is the validity of Clause 11.1 of the Privatization Agreement, then
this matter should be decided by an UNCITRAL tribunal pursuant to the
exclusive jurisdiction of Clause 11.2 in conjunction with Clause 7.4 of the
Assignment Agreement. According to the Claimants, this Tribunal and no
other is competent to decide the question of its own jurisdiction: “in
determining the merits of the treaty claims before it, this Tribunal is
competent to determine whether to take into account the terms of the
Privatisation Agreement, and the extent that such terms would be

relevant.”®4

The Claimants dispute that MNSS accepted in advance an exclusive
jurisdiction clause that limits treaty and contract claims to the forum of
UNCITRAL arbitration. It is the Claimants’ contention that “[nJeither Clause
7.4 of the Assignment Agreement nor Clause 11.2 of the Privatisation

Agreement contains clear and unequivocal language specifically waiving

53 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 19, quoting para. 6 of the Rejoinder. Emphasis added by the
Claimants.
54 Id., para. 41.

43

138.

139.

140.

141.

55 Id.,
56 Id.,
57 Id.,

ICSID AF jurisdiction, and yet this is precisely what is required in order for
any purported waiver of ICSID jurisdiction to have any legal effect.”5°

The Claimants assert that there is no drafting history that would support the
Respondent’s assertions as regards Clause 7.4 of the Assignment

Agreement. This clause was simply not discussed.
The Claimants explain:

“it is entirely unsurprising that the Government is
singled out in Clause 11.1 of the Privatisation
Agreement alongside the Sellers. The Respondent's
explanation that the singling out of the Government is
meant somehow to provide support for the scope of
any purported waiver as including the Respondent’s
treaty obligations is, as explained above, wrong. As
already noted, it is the State — and not the Government
— that is the Contracting Party to the Bilateral
Investment Treaties.”5

As to RCA, the Claimants re-affirm that it made a “significant and continuing
contribution to the continued operation of ZN.”5” For the Claimants, the key
issue is whether ownership of the First Loan passed validly from MNSS to
RCA. The English High Court confirmed such validity. As to risk, the
Claimants argue that RCA incurred the same risks as MNSS and incurred
additional risks when it agreed to extend the maturity date of the First Loan
beyond that of the Crédit Suisse Loan. The Claimants contend that it is of no
relevance where the assignment was executed for purposes of determining
where the investment is located; the loan investment relates to ZN and ZN
is located in Montenegro. The Claimants also rebut the argument that the
investment needs to have a formal link with the Respondent.

The Claimants contest the forum shopping argument that would give the
Claimants the procedural advantage of not facing counter-claims from

Sellers other than the Government. According to the Claimants, this

para. 47.
para. 60.
para. 70.

44

142.

143.

argument is based on the notion that Clause 11.2 of the Privatization
Agreement contains a broad exclusive UNCITRAL arbitration clause that
covers BIT claims besides contract claims. The Claimants observe that RCA
had no contract with the other Sellers, the Government is designated as the
direct beneficiary of MNSS’ undertakings under the Privatization Agreement
and the purchase price was payable solely to the Government. Furthermore,
RCA made further loan investments after the assignment of the First Loan,
the arbitration proceedings started about 21 months after the assignment
and the Respondent guaranteed €26.3 million after it was informed of the
assignment.

The Claimants dispute the assertion of the Respondent that the claims are
essentially based on contract. The Claimants point out first that “[a]s a factual
matter, the acts and omissions by the Respondent that provide the cause of
action relating to breaches of the governing BIT may also constitute
breaches of the Privatisation Agreement or indeed the Assignment
Agreement. But this does not of course mean that the distinct causes of
action should be conflated.”5® Second, “the reason for the State’s act or
omission is irrelevant in terms of whether the act or omission constitutes a
breach by the State of its international/domestic law obligations ... The only
relevant question is whether the act or omission constitutes a breach by the
State of its obligations under international/domestic law.” 5° Third, the
Claimants agree with the Respondent that “[a]s a matter of principle, a claim
is to be considered a purely contractual claim ‘where the Host State, party to
a specific contract, breaches obligations arising by the sole virtue of
such contract’.”©°

The Claimants take note of the acceptance by the Respondent that certain
claims of the Claimants can be characterized as treaty claims, but that it still
considers outside the competence of the Tribunal the Government's

58 /d., para. 94. Emphasis in the original.
59 /d., para. 96. Emphasis in the original.
60 /d., para. 101, quoting para. 152 of the Rejoinder. Emphasis added by the Respondent.

45

144.

145.

unreasonable refusal to allow ZN: (i) to make any significant reductions in
the work force or involuntary redundancies; and (ii) to scrap certain obsolete
machinery to generate crucial cash flow for the company. In this respect, the
Claimants make a few additional points. The Claimants explain that the
impugned acts were of an unreasonable and discriminatory nature and took
place outside the context of any contract with the Claimants. The Claimants
dismiss the argument that the Government’s agreement was not decisive
because the agreement of the other Sellers was necessary and the Claimant
never sought their agreement. According to the Claimants, the Government
had the final word given that the other Sellers were under the control of the
Government. Furthermore, the Respondent influenced the reduction of the
workforce beyond its role as a contractual party and did not act as a private
party when it reached a deal with the ZN union on headcount reduction.
Similarly, the Claimants explain that the refusal to scrap obsolete machinery
was of an unreasonable and discriminatory nature that had a detrimental
effect on ZN’s ability to operate and manage its own business.

The Claimants observe in respect to the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws that the
Parties seem to concur in that from a procedural point of view the effect of
the MFI Law 2011 was immediate. Therefore, there was a unilateral offer to
arbitrate when the Claimants requested the ICSID Secretary-General’s
approval to access the Additional Facility. On the other hand, the Claimants
note that the Parties appear to diverge on the temporal application of the
substantive provisions of the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws, and according to the
Respondent, the dispute resolution provision in the MFI Law 2011 cannot be
used to arbitrate guarantees given under MFI Law 2000.

The Claimants argue that the 2011 MFI Law did not dislodge vested
substantive provisions of the MFI Law 2000. The Claimants agree with the
Respondent that the first paragraph of Article 39(2) of MFI Law 2000 and
Article 30(2) of MFI Law 2011 leaves “open the possibility of the parties
agreeing that their foreign investment disputes shall be submitted to

46

domestic or international arbitration.”*' The Claimants disagree that “the

second and third paragraphs then regulate that if such possibility is

exercised, the contracting parties must opt in their investment agreement for
ICSID Additional Facility."62 The Claimants point out that the Respondent

does not offer a plausible explanation for the legislator to limit the choice of

arbitration forum by contracting parties. In this respect, the Claimants refer

to Article 27 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties whereby “the

Respondent cannot restrict by its national legislation a choice of forum

already offered to foreign investors under its bilateral investment treaties.”°>

146. The Claimants dispute that their interpretation renders the final limb of the

first paragraph redundant. The Claimants explain:

“contracting parties are free to agree [sic] the
arbitration of foreign investment disputes with the
Respondent in any arbitral forum. Whether or not there
is such an arbitration agreement, the foreign investor
in a contractual relationship with the Government may
initiate an ICSID AF arbitration against the Respondent
without any further manifestation of consent by the
Respondent. The added value of the final limb of the
first paragraph is that if the investment agreement with
the Government provides for an arbitral forum other
than the ICSID Additional Facility, depending on the
scope of such agreement, the foreign investor has the
alternative of initiating a claim against the Government
based on that agreement.”6*

147. The Claimants contend that the approach of in dubio mitis should be rejected

on the basis of substantial jurisprudence and that, based on the principle of

effectiveness, the Tribunal should reject interpretations that would render the

text meaningless.

6 /d., para.
82 /d., para.
83 /d., para.
64 /d., para.

- 133.
. 134.
- 142.
- 143.

47

148.

149.

B. Analysis of the Tribunal
1) Explicit Waiver of ICSID AF Arbitration

The waiver objection is based on Clauses 11.1 and 11.2 of the Privatization
Agreement, and Clause 7.4 of the Assignment Agreement. The arguments
of the Parties raise the basic issue of the scope of these clauses, and the
related issue of whether, in contracting with a State, a private party may

waive any rights it may have under a BIT.

It will be useful for ease of reference to reproduce these clauses here. The
Clauses 11.1 and 11.2 of the Privatization Agreement on Governing Law and
Settlement of Disputes read as follows:

“11.1. Governing Law

The law governing the rights and obligations of the
Parties arising out of this Agreement shall be that of the
Republic of Montenegro.

The Buyer acknowledges that it has taken legal advice
in relation to the rights and obligations of the parties
under this Agreement and considers them to be fully
consistent with any obligations of the Government of
Montenegro and its agents under international law with
respect to foreign investment, including without
limitation, any applicable bilateral or multilateral
investment treaties. Any act or acts of the Sellers or the
GoM under or pursuant to this Agreement shall be
deemed to be compliant with such international treaty
obligations and the Buyer waives on behalf of itself any
right which it might otherwise have under international
law to assert claims against the Sellers or the GoM
other than pursuant to the express terms of this
Agreement.

11.2 Settlement of Disputes

11.2.1 Any dispute or difference arising out of this
Agreement, or the breach, termination or invalidity
thereof, which cannot be resolved by amicable
negotiations within fourteen (14) Calendar Days of
written notice of the dispute by one Party to another (or
such further period as the Parties may agree) shall be

48

150.

151.

152.

referred to and finally resolved by ad hoc arbitration in
accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
without recourse to the ordinary courts of law.”

Clause 7.4 of the Assignment Agreement provides:

“Any dispute arising out or in connection with this
Assignment Agreement shall be exclusively settled by
the dispute resolution provisions set forth in clause
11.2 of the SPA [the Privatization Agreement]. For the
avoidance of doubt, it is hereby expressly agreed
between the Assignee and the Sellers that the validity
of the Arbitration Clause of the SPA shall remain in full
force and effect.”

The first sentence of Clause 11.1 simply states that Montenegrin law is the
law of the contract. By the first sentence in the second paragraph of Clause
11.1, MNSS confirms that it has sought legal advice on the rights and
obligations of both parties to the Privatization Agreement and considers
them to be “fully” consistent with any obligation of the Government and its
agents under international law. The Respondent understands this stipulation
as meaning that the Privatization Agreement is “in line with international law
— notably with any obligations flowing from the applicable BIT.”®” The
Claimants judge this sentence to be uncontroversial because the validity or
enforceability of any provision of the Privatization Agreement under
international law is not in dispute here.

The disagreement between the Parties concerns the scope of the last
sentence in the second paragraph of Clause 11.1. For the Respondent, the
waiver covers any possible claims under international law or Montenegrin
law; for MNSS, the scope of the waiver is limited to disputes of a contractual
nature in respect of the Privatization Agreement itself.

65 Privatization Agreement, Clauses 11.1 and 11.2 (Exhibit C-002).

66 Assignment Agreement between (among others) MN Specialty Steels Limited, MNSS B.V. and
Government of Montenegro, Clause 7.4 (Exhibit C-014).

67 Counter-Memorial, para. 71.

49

153. The Respondent argues that Clause 11.1 covers treaty and contract claims,
and concerns substantive obligations of the State under international law.
Furthermore, when this clause refers to the obligations of the Government
of Montenegro and its agents under international law with respect to foreign
investment, it shows that “the contemplated obligations are international law
obligations, and not the contractual obligations incumbent upon the GoM as
one of the Sellers under the PA.”®8

154. On the other hand, the Claimants stress that the waiver only extends to acts
of the Sellers or GoM under or pursuant to this Agreement — the Privatization
Agreement. They also find support in the first sentence of the second
paragraph of Clause 11.1 where the Buyer acknowledges the rights and
obligations of the parties under this Agreement.

155. The Tribunal observes that the legal advice taken by MNSS is “legal advice
in relation to the rights and obligations of the parties under this Agreement.”
The acts of the Government or the Sellers are acts “under or pursuant to”
the Privatization Agreement. The acts of the Sellers or GoM to be deemed
compliant with international treaty obligations are acts “pursuant to” the
Privatization Agreement. The reference to international law by itself does not
expand the coverage of the clause to include claims not based on acts under
or pursuant to the Privatization Agreement. The text of the clause does not
support the wide interpretation proffered by the Respondent.

156. Clause 11.1 needs to be read in conjunction with Clause 11.2.1 on dispute
settlement. This Clause applies to disputes “arising out” of the Privatization
Agreement or the breach or termination thereof. It does not apply to disputes
beyond the confines of this Privatization Agreement. There is a lack of
balance between the wide interpretation given by the Respondent to Clause
11.1 and the scope of the dispute settlement clause. If the scope of Clause
11.1 would be as extensive as claimed by the Respondent, then Clause 11.2
would have been drafted to be commensurably wider than it is. The

Respondent seems to be aware of this imbalance, and it has argued in favor
68 /d., para. 73.

50

157.

158.

159.

of reading the two clauses together and interpreting Clause 11.2 to match
the Respondent's understanding of Clause 11.1. The Tribunal disagrees with
the Respondent's interpretation, because it would mean to expand the
consent to UNCITRAL arbitration beyond its scope.

The inference drawn by the Respondent from the reference to “the
Government of Montenegro and its agents” in the second sentence of Clause
11.1 and to “the Sellers or GoM” in the third sentence is not convincing
because the use of the term “agents” or “Sellers” in the context of references
to international law is not consistent.

The dispute in respect of Clause 7.4 of the Assignment Agreement concerns
the use of phrase “[a]ny dispute arising out or in connection with” as opposed
to “[a]ny dispute or difference arising out of this Agreement” in the
Privatization Agreement. The Respondent attributes a wider meaning to
“arising out or in connection with” than to “arising out” by itself. The Tribunal
observes that the plain meaning of “arising out” is “originating” or “resulting
from,” and “in connection with” means “in relation to.” The Tribunal has
difficulty in finding a meaningful difference between these terms in the
context of this clause, particularly because the object of Clause 7.4 is to
confirm the validity of Clause 11.2 of the Privatization Agreement not to
expand it or in any way change it. For this reason, the Tribunal does not find
merit in the argument that Clause 7.4 of the Assignment Agreement has a

wider meaning than Clause 11.2 of the Privatization Agreement.

To conclude, the parties to the Privatization Agreement waived the ability to
bring before other fora the same claims that they could bring before a tribunal
constituted pursuant to Clause 11.2.1 of the Privatization Agreement. The
scope of the waiver therefore encompasses all contract claims pursuant to
the Privatization and Assignment Agreements. The waiver was not intended
to, and does not, capture claims for breach of the BIT. These claims are
separate from, and different to, claims concerning a breach of the
Privatization and Assignment Agreements. In determining claims for breach

of the BIT, the Tribunal may examine as a question of fact whether the

51

Privatization Agreement was breached, by way of background to a claim that
does not have the nature of a contract or an umbrella clause claim. For
example, the Tribunal is entitled to decide, as a question of fact, whether the
Privatization Agreement was breached when deciding a claim for violation of
the fair and equitable treatment standard in the BIT. It follows that the
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over any claims concerning breach of contract or
of the umbrella clause, but has jurisdiction over claims concerning the
alleged breaches of Articles 3, 5 and 6 of the BIT. Whether the claims
advanced by the Claimants are not contractual claims and based on the BIT
is a matter of appreciation by this Tribunal as part of its consideration of the
merits of each of the claims.

160. The second issue is whether MNSS as a private party may waive rights
under the BIT. Given the conclusion reached above, the issue is limited to
the waiver of potential claims under the umbrella clause of the BIT. Article
3(4) of the BIT reads as follows: “Each Contracting Party shall observe any
legal obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments of

investors of the other Contracting Party.”

161. The jurisprudence referred to by the Parties on the waiver of treaty rights by
private parties is not entirely uniform. The Claimants have argued that private
parties cannot waive rights derived from State rights based on the holdings
of the Loewen and ADM tribunals. The Claimants also find support in SGS
v. Philippines where the tribunal found it doubtful that

“a private party can by contract waive rights or
dispense with the performance of obligations imposed
on the States parties to those treaties under
international law. Although under modern international
law, treaties may confer rights, substantive and
procedural, on individuals, they will normally do so in
order to achieve some public interest. Thus the
question is not whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction:
unless otherwise expressly provided, treaty jurisdiction
is not abrogated by contract.’®

®9 Quoted by the Claimants in their Reply, para. 204.

52

This notwithstanding, the SGS v. Philippines tribunal applied the
jurisdictional clause of the contract by finding the investor's claim
inadmissible before it would be submitted to the Philippine courts. The
Claimants have further developed the argument of the public interest served
by investor-State arbitration, in particular by reference to Professor
Schreuer’s analysis of waivers and have requested that the Tribunal adopts
that analysis.

162. Based on cases such as Aguas del Tunari, Occidental Petroleum, TSA
Spectrum, Corn Products and Duke Energy as well as doctrinal writings, the
Respondent has argued that the rights under a BIT are rights of the investor
that may be waived provided the waiver is explicit and the investor has freely
agreed to the waiver. The Respondent has further argued that the Claimants’
assertion that a right established in public interest is not capable of being
waived is unfounded. In this respect, the Respondent observes that even
core human rights may be waived if the waiver does not prejudice other
persons.

163. The Tribunal agrees that, as argued by the Respondent, investors may waive
the rights conferred to them by treaty provided waivers are explicit and freely
entered into by investors. As stated by the Corn Products tribunal:

“[...] there is no question of the investor claiming on
behalf of the State. The State of nationality of the
Claimant does not control the conduct of the case. No
compensation which is recovered will be paid to the
State. The individual may even advance a claim of

which the State disapproves or base its case upon a
proposition of law with which the State disagrees.””°

But in the view of the Tribunal, the public interest may not be ignored. The
Tribunal agrees with Professor Scheuer that “Investor-State arbitration
serves not only the investor’s interests but has an important function in the

70 Quoted in para. 404 of the Rejoinder.

53

public interest for the relations between the States concerned.””' Thus the
question is not whether the rights may or may not be waived, but to what
extent, if they have been waived, the waiver is in detriment of the public
purpose pursued by the State parties to the BIT.

164. In the case before the Tribunal, it is undisputed that the waiver in question
was freely negotiated and agreed to by MNSS by way of the Assignment
Agreement. It is significant that, as interpreted by the Tribunal, the waiver is
limited to contractual disputes and that MNSS may resolve contractual
disputes arising from the Privatization and Assignment Agreements by “ad
hoc arbitration in accordance with UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules without
recourse to the ordinary courts of law.””2 The ability of the investor and the
State to settle their contractual disputes by arbitration is evidently congruent
with the public purpose pursued by the State parties to the BIT.

165. Based on these considerations the Tribunal concludes that MNSS validly
waived its right under the BIT to pursue contractual claims based on Article
3(4).

2) Consent

166. The Tribunal will consider first issues related to the translation of Article 39
of MFI Law 2000 or Article 30 of MFI Law 2011. The Respondent has
indicated that the translation provided by the Claimants is not entirely correct
and has submitted its own version. The Claimants’ version reads as follows:

“Any dispute arising from foreign investment shall be
resolved by the competent court in Montenegro, unless
the agreement on investment i.e. decision on
establishment stipulates that such disputes are settled
before domestic or foreign arbitration, in compliance
with international conventions.

If a contracting party is the Government of the Republic
of Montenegro, then until the Convention of the

7 Christoph Schreuer, “Investment Protection and International Relations,” quoted by the
Claimants in their Reply, para. 206.

72 Clause 11.2.1 of the Privatization Agreement is confirmed by Clause 7.4 of the Assignment
Agreement.

54

International Center [sic] for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID) is signed, the disputes
arising from the foreign investments shall be resolved
before domestic or foreign arbitration in accordance
with the additional rules of the ICSID Convention for
countries that are not signatories of the ICSID
Convention.

If the contracting parties are domestic and foreign legal
entities and natural persons, then disputes arising from
foreign investments shall be resolved before domestic
or foreign arbitration in accordance with the United
National Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL) Rules.

The final award of the arbitration shall be enforced by
a competent court.””5

167. Article 30 of MFI Law 2011 is identical to the above-transcribed article except
for the last paragraph that has not been included in the more recent law and
the differences in the translation. The Respondent’s version of this article

reads as follows:

“Any dispute arising from foreign investments shall be
resolved before the competent court in Montenegro,
unless the investment agreement or the incorporation
act stipulates that such disputes shall be resolved in
domestic or foreign arbitration in accordance with
international conventions.

Where the Government is a contracting party, the
disputes arising from the foreign investments shall,
until the signature of the ICSID (International Center
[sic] for the Settlement of Investment Disputes)
Convention, be subject to domestic or foreign
arbitration in accordance with the Additional Facility
Rules of the ICSID Convention for countries which are
not signatories to the ICSID Convention.

Where the contracting parties are domestic and foreign
legal entities and natural persons, the disputes arising
from the foreign investments shall be subject to
domestic or foreign arbitration in accordance with the

73 Law on Foreign Investments, Official Gazette of Montenegro 52/2000 (Legal Authority CLA-505).

55

168.

169.

170.

UNCITRAL (United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law) Rules.””4

The Respondent attributes the significance to the difference between the two
versions in the second and third paragraphs. The Respondent's version says
that “disputes arising from the foreign investments shall be subject to
domestic or foreign arbitration,” while the Claimants’ version — incorrectly
and misleadingly according to the Respondent — states that such disputes
“shall be resolved before domestic or foreign arbitration.” The Tribunal does
not find this difference between the two versions to be significant to the
interpretation of either article. The Respondent’s version uses the
expression “to be resolved” in the first paragraph in relation to the courts and
arbitration, while the Claimants’ version says in the first paragraph “are
settled.” It seems that the drafter used “subject to,” “settled” or “be resolved”
interchangeably. This understanding of the Tribunal is confirmed by the fact
that, as pointed out by the Claimants and not denied by the Respondent, the
verb “to resolve” is also used by the Government in the English version
posted in its website.

The Parties have discussed applicable methods of statutory interpretation in
Montenegro. The Respondent has explained that the primary method is
textual and, if a provision is unclear or its meaning cannot be determined,
systematic, historical and teleological interpretation would apply. The
Claimants agree that the linguistic analysis is the starting point, but none of
the methods listed by the Respondent is formally more important than the
others — “their application is often synthetically combined in the course of the
analysis.””5

The difficulty in interpreting the text of these articles is to find meaning in
each of the paragraphs that can be integrated in the article as a whole. The
first paragraph of each article clearly provides for the courts of Montenegro

74 Respondent's Translation of the Montenegrin Law on Foreign Investments 2011 (Legal Authority
RLA-010).
75 Reply, para. 244, quotation of the Montenegrin Law Experts’ Opinion.

56

171.

172.

173.

to resolve investment disputes as the default option if the parties to an
investment agreement have not provided for arbitration in accordance with
international conventions. The second and third paragraphs distinguish
between the rules of arbitration to be applied to the dispute subject to
arbitration depending on who are the parties to the investment agreement. If
one of the parties is the Government, then the ICSID AF Rules apply; if both
parties are private parties, then the UNCITRAL Rules will apply. Does this
mean that the Government gave its consent in advance to future investors

with whom it would contract?

If the second paragraph truly meant that the Government has given its
consent without the need to have an arbitration clause in an investment
agreement, then the sentence in the first paragraph that starts “unless the
investment agreement ...” would be unnecessary. If Articles 39/30 had the
reach argued by the Claimants, it would also be unnecessary to have a
default option or a reference in the first paragraph to an investment
agreement, since the second and third paragraphs of Articles 39/30 would
suffice as an instrument of consent.

The Tribunal is further convinced of its understanding of Articles 39/30 by
the fact that the third paragraph refers to agreements between private
parties. As pointed out by the Respondent, the terms used in the second and
third paragraphs are similar, but the Government may not impose the
consent to arbitration to private parties in future investment agreements. The
second and third paragraphs are not deprived of meaning if read as not
including consent of the Government or, oddly, of private parties. These
paragraphs provide for the applicable arbitration rules depending on who are
the parties to the investment agreement should the parties choose to settle
their disputes other than before the ordinary courts of Montenegro.

In view of the preceding considerations, the Tribunal finds merit in the
objection raised by the Respondent and holds that it has no jurisdiction under
the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws.

57

3) Ratione Personae

174. The Tribunal reproduces here the relevant articles dealing with the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction ratione personae.
Article 1(b) of the BIT reads:

“Article 1

For the purposes of this Agreement:

b) the term “investors” shall comprise with regard to
either

Contracting Party:

(i) natural persons having the nationality of that
Contracting Party;

(ii) legal persons constituted under the law of that
Contracting Party;

(iii) legal persons not constituted under the law of that

Contracting Party but controlled, directly or indirectly,
by natural persons as defined in (i) or by legal persons
as defined in (ii).”76

Article 25(2)(b) of the Washington Convention reads:

(2) “National of another Contracting State” means:

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a
Contracting State other than the State party to the
dispute on the date on which the parties consented to
submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration and
any juridical person which had the nationality of the
Contracting State party to the dispute on that date and
which, because of foreign control, the parties have
agreed should be treated as a national of another
Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention.”

76 BIT, Article 1(b) (Legal Authority CLA-504).

58

175.

176.

177.

The argument of the Respondent is based on two grounds, namely, that
MNSS and RCA are shell companies without an effective link to the
Netherlands, and that the dispute precedes the change of nationality of
MNSS and RCA and, therefore, the acquisition of the Dutch nationality by
the Claimants was driven by the search of a nationality that would permit the
Claimants access to international arbitration under the BIT.

Article 1(b)(ii) of the BIT defines the term “investors” as comprising with
regard to either Contracting State to the BIT “legal persons constituted under
the law of that Contracting Party.” It is uncontroverted that MNSS is a legal
person constituted under the laws of the Netherlands. It is equally
uncontroverted that RCA is a legal person constituted under the laws of
Curagao to which the BIT was extended. The Claimants dispute as a matter
of fact the allegation that they are shell companies and argue that the BIT
has no further requirements for legal persons to be protected as investors
under the BIT. The place of constitution of the company is the determinant
factor without any other conditions to be met to qualify as an investor. The
States parties to the BIT could have introduced such conditions, as some
States have done, to avoid protecting companies with no link to the country
of incorporation other than the incorporation itself. But the State parties to
this BIT did not. It is not for the Tribunal to subject the definition of legal
persons considered as protected investors under the BIT to undetermined
conditions not contemplated in the BIT.

Notwithstanding the straightforward definition of investor, the Respondent
argues that the aim of Article 1(b)(ii) of the BIT is not to protect mere shell
companies because Montenegro’s incentive in entering into the BIT was to
procure Dutch direct investment and “not to further raise the Netherland’s
relevance as a haven for shell companies through which third country entities
would funnel their investment into Montenegro ....””” Furthermore, such

loose nationality requirements for legal persons would create an imbalance

77 Counter-Memorial, para. 318.

59

with the strict requirements for the acquisition of nationality by individuals
according to international law rules.

178. As already stated by the Tribunal, if Montenegro and the Netherlands had
wished to limit the application of the BIT to legal persons having a genuine
link with one of the Contracting States, they could have done so. In fact, the
aim of the parties to the BIT seems to have been the opposite: to afford wide
protection with only the requirement of incorporation. Allegedly, the
Netherlands may now have second thoughts about covering under its BITs
companies with no significant commercial activities in the Netherlands, but
this is of no relevance to this Tribunal. As to the alleged imbalance generated
by a literal reading of the text of the BIT in respect of the nationality of legal
persons as opposed to the nationality of individuals, it is not a matter of
interpretation of the BIT but of different international law rules applicable to
the nationality of individuals and legal entities. It is not this Tribunal’s role to
even out such differences. This has also been stated by other ICSID
tribunals; for example, the tribunal in Waste Management v. Mexico which
explained:

“Where a treaty spells out in detail and with precision
the requirements for maintaining a claim, there is no
room for implying into the treaty additional
requirements, whether based on alleged requirements

of general international law in the field of diplomatic
protection or otherwise.””®

179. The Respondent has also pointed out that the third alternative of who is an
investor in Article 1(b)(iii) refers to “control by either a foreign (Dutch) national
or a foreign (Dutch) company.” The Respondent also refers to the mention
of control in Article 9(6) in the context of Article 25(2) of the ICSID
Convention. These references then lead the Respondent to submit that since
MNSS is effectively controlled by British investors, “[t]he mere interposition

of a Dutch corporate shell cannot ... change this finding of nationality of the

78 Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, |CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Final Award,
30 April 2004, para. 85 (Legal Authority CLA-565 and RLA-090).

60

180.

181.

investor.”’° For the Tribunal, different situations are referred to in Article
1(b)(iii) on the one hand, and Article 9(6) of the BIT and Article 25(2) of the
ICSID Convention, on the other hand. Article 1(b)(iii) concerns a company
that is incorporated in neither one of the Contracting States, but it is
controlled by nationals of one of the Contracting States. Article 9(6) of the
BIT and Article 25(2) of the ICSID Convention, to the contrary, refer to a
company that is a national of one of the Contracting States, but controlled
by nationals of the other Contracting State. Contrary to what the Respondent
argues, the aim of the States parties to the BIT seems to refer to control only
in very specific circumstances. However, in this case, none of the situations
in which control plays a role exists: MNSS and RCA are neither companies
of a third State controlled by Dutch nationals nor companies of Montenegro
controlled by Dutch nationals. According to the Respondent, they are merely
Dutch companies controlled by UK nationals. The Tribunal cannot therefore
take into account such control.

The second leg of the argument for lack of jurisdiction of the Tribunal ratione
personae concerns the alleged manipulation of the nationality of MNSS for
the sole purpose of obtaining the BIT protection after the dispute broke out
between the Parties. The Respondent pleads that it had scant knowledge of
the corporate restructuring of MN and that in economic terms there was no
transfer of the investment but merely one more British investor. According to
the Respondent, the dispute arose before MN assigned the Privatization
Agreement to MNSS and it continued with MNSS: “At the heart of the present
dispute between the investor — initially MNSS Limited and subsequently
MNSS B.V. — and the Respondent lies a controversy about the content and
scope of the parties’ obligations under and in relation to the Privatisation
Agreement.”®°

The Tribunal first observes that the parties are distinct. MNSS is not MN
Specialty Steels Ltd. even if that company may have a stake in MNSS. The

79 Counter-Memorial, para. 324.
80 /d., para. 354.

61

facts alleged by the Claimants as the basis of their claims occurred after the
date of the Assignment Agreement. More importantly, the parties to the
Assignment Agreement acknowledge and confirm in Clause 4.2.1 that,

“save for the specific historic breaches [of the Assignor]

set out in Part A of the Schedule ... they do not have

any claim or action against or dispute with the Assignor

or the Assignee, whether past, present or future,

known or unknown, in relation to or in connection with

or arising from any breach, potential breach or alleged

breach of the SPA or any documents entered into or

any actions taken or not taken pursuant to or as

contemplated by the terms of the SPA on or prior to the

Effective Time [the date of the SPA] ....”81

182. According to the Respondent, the need to include this confirmation in the
Assignment Agreement shows that it was an important matter to clarify
because of blatant breaches of the Privatization Agreement. This is correct
as far as MN is concerned, but the Parties to this arbitration agreed that there
was no dispute between them when the Assignment Agreement was entered
into. As held by other tribunals, to structure an investment with the aim to
seek protection of a BIT is not per se in breach of the good faith expected of
an investor. Tribunals have found that an investor would not qualify for the
protection of the BIT concerned only if the nationality is changed after the
dispute has arisen or “when the relevant party can see an actual dispute or
can foresee a specific future dispute as a very high probability and not merely
as a possible controversy.”® Thus, the Aguas del Tunari tribunal stated: “it
is not uncommon in practice and — absent a particular limitation — not illegal
to locate one’s operations in a jurisdiction perceived to provide a beneficial
regulatory and legal environment in terms, for examples [sic], of taxation or
the substantive law of the jurisdiction, including the availability of a BIT.”83 In

51 Assignment Agreement between (among others) MN Specialty Steels Limited, MNSS B.V. and
Government of Montenegro, Clause 4.2.1 (Exhibit C-014).

82 Pac Rim Cayman LLC v. Republic of El Salvador, Decision on the Respondent's Jurisdictional
Objections, 1 June 2012, para 2.99 (Legal Authority RLA-126).

83 Aguas del Tunari, S.A. v. Republic of Bolivia, Decision on Respondent's Objections to
Jurisdiction, 21 October 2005, para. 330 (Legal Authority RLA-098).

62

183.

184.

185.

186.

the instant case, the dispute with MNSS arose after the Assignment
Agreement and the Respondent was party to the Assignment Agreement.
For all of these reasons, the Tribunal rejects the objection to its jurisdiction
based on ratione personae.

4) Ratione Materiae

a. The Relationship of the Additional Facility Rules to the ICSID
Convention

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal will consider the relationship of the
Additional Facility to the ICSID Convention for purposes of the determination
of whether an investment qualifies as such under the Additional Facility
Rules.
The Respondent has argued that the investment of the Claimants does not
qualify under the Additional Facility Rules, because it does not meet the
criteria for investment under the Convention. The Claimants have opposed
this view by pointing out that Article 3 of the AF Rules clearly states that the
Convention is not applicable to proceedings under the AF Rules.
The Claimants obtained the approval of the Secretary-General under Article
2(a) of the AF Rules. A proceeding under this article is not under the
jurisdiction of ICSID because the State party is not a member of ICSID or
the private party is not a national of a member State. The terms of Article 3
are clear and sweeping:

“Since the proceedings envisaged by Article 2 are

outside the jurisdiction of the Centre, none of the

provisions of the Convention shall be applicable to

them or to recommendations, awards, or reports which
may be rendered therein.”

Nonetheless, this provision cannot be read out of the context of other AF
Rules, in particular of AF Rule 4(2) that provides:
“In the case of an application based on Article 2(a), the

Secretary-General shall give his approval only if (a) he
is satisfied that the requirements of that provision are

63

187.

fulfilled at the time, and (b) both parties give their
consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre under Article
25 of the Convention (in lieu of the Additional Facility)
in the event that the jurisdictional requirements ratione
personae of that Article shall have been met at the time
when proceedings are instituted.”

under the ICSID Convention.

b. Did MNSS Make an Investment?

jurisdiction ratione materiae.

Article 1(a) of the BIT reads:

“Article 1
For the purposes of this Agreement:

a) the term ‘investments’ means every kind of asset
and more particularly, though not exclusively:

(i) movable and immovable property as well as any
other rights in rem, such as leases, mortgages, liens
and pledges, in respect of every kind of asset;

(ii) rights derived from shares, bonds and other kinds
of interests in companies and joint ventures;

(iii) claims to money, to other assets or to any
performance having an economic value;

(iv) rights in the field of intellectual property (such as
copyrights and related rights, patents, industrial
designs or models, trade marks), technical processes,
goodwill and know-how;

(v) rights granted under public law or under contract,
including rights to prospect, explore, extract and win
natural resources.”64

®4 BIT, Article 1(a) (Legal Authority CLA-504).

The implication of this rule is that the requirement that a “dispute arises
directly arising out of an investment” is to be fulfilled at the time of approval
by the Secretary-General and that the investment needs to be an investment

The Tribunal refers here the relevant articles dealing with the Tribunal’s

64

188.

189.

Article 25(1) of the Washington Convention reads:

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to
any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment,
between a Contracting State (or any constituent
subdivision or agency of a Contracting State
designated to the Centre by that State) and a national
of another Contracting State, which the parties to the
dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre.
When the parties have given their consent, no party
may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

It is well known that the ICSID Convention does not define what constitutes
an investment, but that case law has developed the meaning of the concept.

As to what constitutes an investment under the ICSID Convention, the
Respondent submits that the Salini test should be of application here at least
“in a flexible, non-stringent fashion,”® including the concept of economic
development. On the other hand, the Claimants consider that the Convention
is not applicable for purposes of determining the jurisdiction of this Tribunal
or the meaning of investment. The Claimants submit that, in any case, the
loans to ZN are investments under the Salini test for purposes of Article 25
of the ICSID Convention. The discrepancy of views between the Parties is
centered on whether loans are investments and the denial by the
Respondent that the loans of the Claimants to ZN or the transfer of shares
of MN to MNSS qualify as investments under the ICSID Convention or the
BIT. The Respondent also has argued that the loans of the Claimants do not
qualify as investments under the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws. Since the
Tribunal has upheld the objection to jurisdiction based on consent under the
2000 and 2011 MFI Laws, the Tribunal will not address this argument of the
Respondent.

The Tribunal considers that, for the purposes of ascertaining the meaning of
the term “investment” in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, the elements of
the Salini test need to be considered flexibly and as a whole in the context

®5 Counter-Memorial, para. 396.

65

of the specific facts of an investment operation.®° The elements of a
contribution for certain duration with the assumption of certain risk seem to
be inherent to the plain meaning of the term “investment.” To borrow the
more precise wording of the tribunal in PoStova Banka v. Greece, it can be
said that an investment is “a contribution to an economic venture of a certain
duration implying an operational risk ....”87 How much contribution or risk and
for how long will depend on the circumstances of the case. As to the element
of a contribution to economic development, in most cases it would be difficult
for a tribunal to ascertain whether such contribution has been made; in
particular when the dispute arises shortly after the investment has been
made and the effects on the development of the host State may be
imperceptible. Moreover, the Tribunal agrees with the analysis presented by
the tribunal in Phoenix v. Czech Republic, when it stated:

“It is the Tribunal’s view that the contribution of an

international investment to the development of the host

State is impossible to ascertain — the more so as there

are highly diverging views on what constitutes

‘development.’ A less ambitious approach should

therefore be adopted, centered on the contribution of

an international investment to the economy of the host

State, which is indeed normally inherent in the mere

concept of investment as shaped by the elements of

contribution/duration/risk, and should therefore in
principle be presumed.®®

190. To the same effect, the tribunal in Fakes v. Turkey was not convinced that

“a contribution to the host State’s economic development constitutes a

criterion of an investment within the framework of the ICSID Convention. ...

86 Emmanuel Gaillard and Yas Banifatemi, “The Long March towards a Jurisprudence Constante
on the Notion of Investment” in Building International Investment Law: The First 50 Years of ICSID
(Kluwer Law International, 2015), pp. 97-126.

87 Postova Banka A.S. and ISTROKAPITAL SE v. Hellenic Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/13/8,
Award, 9 April 2015, para. 371.

88 Phoenix Action Ltd. v. Czech Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009, para.
85 (Legal Authority CLA-531 and RLA-113).

66

Such development is an expected consequence, not a separate requirement
1789

191. The Tribunal will address now the three questions raised by the arguments
of the Parties: Are the acquisition of the shares of ZN by MNSS and the loans
made by MNSS to ZN investments under the ICSID Convention and the BIT?
Were loans permitted under the Privatization Agreement? Should the
various instruments through which the investment was made be considered
as a whole or each separately?

192. The argument of the Respondent as regards the shares held by MNSS in
ZN relies on the fact that allegedly MNSS did not inject fresh capital in ZN.
The consideration for its shareholding in ZN was owed and provided to MN
and not to ZN or Montenegro. The Respondent argues that none of the loans
may qualify as an investment under the Privatization Agreement, and points
out that not all of the loans were advanced by the Claimants to ZN — the
Third and Fifth loans were advanced to different entities, including a Dutch
company in the case of the Third Loan. Furthermore, the Fourth and Fifth
loans were for a very short duration. According to the Respondent, the
obligation under the Privatization Agreement was to invest capital, and this
obligation and the social obligations were the true consideration that the
investor had to pay for the majority shareholding in ZN.

193. The Claimants find that loans are included within the wide range of possible
investments under the definition of this term in Article 1(a) of the BIT and
point out that in Article 5 of the BIT the parties guarantee the free transfer of
payments related to an investment including interest and funds in repayment
of loans. This provision, argue the Claimants, “serves to reinforce further the
position that the definition of ‘investment’ and the meaning of ‘claims to
money’ under the governing BIT include loans.”®° The Claimants allege the
irrelevance of the Privatization Agreement for purposes of determining the

89 Mr. Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey, |CSID Case No. ARB/07/20, Award, 14 July 2010, para.
111 (Legal Authority CLA-532 and RLA-120).
£0 Reply, para. 313.

67

covered investments because where “the jurisdiction of an ICSID AF
Tribunal is founded on a BIT, it is not for one of the Contracting Parties to
provide a subsequent restriction of the scope of consent. Rather it is for the
ICSID AF Tribunal to determine the scope of consent by both Contracting
States as expressed in the terms of the BIT pursuant to the general rules of
treaty interpretation ....”°1 In any case, the Claimants allege that the
Government had agreed that MNSS was able to fulfill its investment
obligations through loans. In support, the Claimants refer, inter alia, to a
decision of the Montenegrin State Aid Control Commission where it is
recognized that “[u]p to this day, MNSS has invested over 45 million EUR in
Zeljezara in the form of shareholder loan [sic].”°2

194. The Government in Clause 4 of the Assignment Agreement approved the
acquisition of the shares in ZN by MNSS. MNSS by this transaction became
the majority shareholder of ZN and an investor in the capital of ZN. The fact
that allegedly no new equity funds flowed to ZN does not mean that MNSS
was not an investor by the transfer of the equity approved by the
Respondent.

195. The Privatization Agreement and the Assignment Agreement do not specify
the terms on which the investment needs to be made whether by a capital
infusion as equity or in the form of loans. The BIT defines investments in the
most generic terms. The acquisition of shares or a claim to money — a loan
— is included in the definition. Whether the loans made to ZN by MNSS result
in a company overburdened by debt is not an argument against the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal. The financial terms may affect the viability of the
investment, but, if permitted under the BIT, they would not by themselves
disqualify a loan as an investment.

196. So far as the element of contribution is concerned, it cannot be analyzed in
isolation. The reciprocal contributions made in a sale contract can, strictly

speaking, be classified as contributions; some more precision needs to be

81 Id., para. 322.
82 Id., para. 326.

68

given to the kind of contribution that qualifies as an investment for purposes
of the ICSID Convention, where the undefined term “investment” implies the
creation of value. Thus, for purposes of the Convention, a loan in itself is not
an investment. To be considered as an investment, it must contribute to an
economic venture consisting of an investment. This has been recognized in
the doctrine® and in ICSID case law.

197. For example, in the case of CSOB v. Slovak Republic, the CSOB loan was
considered to be an investment, because the tribunal judged that it was part
of an overall economic operation of restructuring and development of CSOB.
The tribunal was clear that not all loans, standing alone, would qualify as
investments:

“Loans as such are therefore not excluded from the
notion of an investment under Article 1(1) of the BIT. It
does not follow therefrom, however, that any loan and,
in particular, the loan granted by CSOB to the Slovak
Collection Company meets the requirements of an
investment under Article 25(1) of the Convention or, for
that matter, under Article 1(1) of the BIT, which speaks
of an ‘asset invested or obtained by an investor of one
Party in the territory of the other Party.’

The contractual scheme embodied in the Consolidation
Agreement shows, however, that the CSOB loan to the
Slovak Collection Company is closely related to and
cannot be disassociated from all other transactions
involving the restructuring of CSOB.

The basic feature of the Consolidation Agreement was
not the financial consolidation of CSOB as such, but
the development of the role and activities of CSOB in
both Republics.”

°3 Emmanuel Gaillard, “La jurisprudence du CIRDI (ICSID Case Law),” (Pedone, 2004), p. 479:
“Trois éléments sont donc requis: l’apport, la durée et le fait que Iinvestisseur supporte, au moins
en partie, les aléas de I’entreprise [...] Dans une telle conception, un simple prét dont la
rémunération ne dépend en rien du succés de I’entreprise ne peut étre qualifié
d’investissement.” Emphasis added.

°4 Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, A.S. v. Slovak Republic, |CSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision
of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 24 May 24 1999, paras. 77, 80 and 83 (Legal Authority
RLA-074).

69

198. The same distinction between a loan per se, and a loan participating in an

investment operation has been adopted by the Sempra v. Argentina tribunal:

“Under the broad definition of investment contained in
the Treaty, loans are generally to be considered as a
protected investment. The Tribunal has carefully
considered whether in the light of the Joy Mining case,
in which a distinction was drawn between a purely
commercial operation and an investment, there could
here be a situation in which the loans might, as argued
by the Respondent, be considered a commercial
operation not different from those normally made by
financial institutions, and which would result in the
loans not qualifying as a part of the investment. Despite
the fact that the commercial papers, notes, bonds and
negotiable instruments, as the instruments have been
variously described, are not different from any other
issuance of obligations, they were still made by a
qualifying investor as a_ substitute for financial
obligations previously undertaken in the context of the
financing of the same investment. Such loans were in
fact part of the investment’s continuing financing
arrangements, and were interposed at a moment
when only the investor was available to make them ...
To the extent that the loans were made in connection
with a legitimate business purpose, as they in fact
were, there is no reason to exclude them from the
protected investment.”

199. More recently, the tribunal in PoStova Banka v. Greece has confirmed the

need for a loan to be linked to a process of value creation:

“An investment, in the economic sense, is linked with a
process of creation of value, which distinguishes it
clearly from a sale, which is a process of exchange of
values or a subscription to sovereign bonds which is
also a process of exchange of values i.e. a process of
providing money for a given amount of money in
return.”96

°5 Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Award, 28
September 2007, paras. 214-215 (Legal Authority CLA-529). Emphasis added.

°6 Postova banka, a.s. and ISTROKAPITAL SE v. Hellenic Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/13/8,
Award, 9 April 2015, para. 361.

70

200.

201.

202.

The Parties disagree on whether the various instruments used by MNSS
should be considered as a whole or each by itself. The Claimants emphasize
that the loans should be viewed as part of an ‘indivisible whole’ investment
in ZN that “was ‘directed at the investment’s overall economic goal of
revitalizing and turning the second largest manufacturer within Montenegro
into a going concern.”*” According to the Respondent, “in order for an
instrument to be part of an indivisible whole investment such instrument must
(i) have an integral function in the investment required to implement it and
(ii) be provided in the transaction documentation forming the basis of the
relevant investment.”9°

In the view of the Tribunal, the acquisition of the shares of MN by MNSS and
the investment obligations of MNSS should be viewed as a whole. The loans
are part of the fulfillment by MNSS of its obligations under the Privatization
Agreement and the Assignment Agreement. It was an overall transaction,
parts of which would be implemented over a period of time. Arbitral tribunals
have recognized “the general unity of an investment operation” since the first
ICSID case, Holiday Inns v. Morocco.°9 The parties did not provide in the
Privatization Agreement the terms on which the investment needed to be
made, but did require that MNSS invest certain amounts and provide a bond
to the Government in the amount of the investment obligation for the first
year after the transfer of shares.

To conclude, the Tribunal has no difficulty in finding that the acquisition of
ZN’s shares, together with the loans to ZN, qualify as an investment under
the Convention and the BIT: in acquiring shares, the investor made a
financial contribution, incurred risk and expected a return, and the
investment was for a certain duration (no limit of time as a shareholder), and

the five loans were intimately linked to the operation of ZN.

87 Rejoinder, para. 319.

98 /d., para.139.

°9 Pierre Lalive, “The First ‘World Bank Arbitration’ (Holiday Inns v. Morocco) — Some Legal
Problems,” BYBIL 51 (1980), p. 159 (Legal Authority RLA-067).

71

203.

204.

205.

206.

c. The Assignment of the First Loan to RCA

The assignment of the First Loan did not change its terms in relation to ZN.
The assignment changed the creditor. The arguments of the Respondent are
based on the consideration of the assignment as a transaction in itself
irrespective of what is assigned. The First Loan did not change its condition
as an investment because of the assignment. The change of creditor
changes the investor but not the substance of the investment. RCA made at
least the contribution of extending the loan terms twice, the second time on
the occasion of the guarantee granted by the Government to the Crédit
Suisse Loan. The extension of the maturity of the First Loan is proof of the
risk taken on by RCA.
The fact that the assignment was done in Amsterdam is irrelevant for the
location of the investment. The investment continues to be in Montenegro.
The fact that RCA was not an active investor because of the activity
connotation of the expression “making an investment,” as argued by the
Respondent, does not mean that an investor, once a loan is made or equity
in a company is acquired, needs to make further investments or be
particularly active in the management of the investment.
As to the condition of RCA as an investor, RCA is a related company to
MNSS; both companies are indirectly controlled by Ethemba. The
Respondent has been aware of the assignment of the First Loan as a
shareholder in ZN, when it approved on 3 February 2010 the restructuring
and financing plan of ZN and when it guaranteed the Crédit Suisse Loan to
ZN in June 2010. On both occasions, the extension of the maturity of the
First Loan was a condition of the refinancing of ZN.
As explained by the Claimants, the assignment of the First Loan was done
for tax purposes:

“The amounts drawn down by ZN under the First Loan

Agreement for capital expenditures were interest free,

while the amounts drawn down for working capital

purposes were interest-bearing. As a result of the Prva
Banka episode (whereby €20.9 million of MNSS’

72

207.

208.

209.

CAPEX funds was redirected to settle ZN’s unsecured
liabilities to Prva Banka) ZN drew down on the interest-
bearing working capital facility under the First Loan
more than double what was intended under the First
Loan agreement. This increased the tax exposure of
MNSS."100

The Respondent has not shown that the Claimants had a different intent but
to reduce their tax burden. The fact that the dispute had arisen in respect of
the funds blocked in Prva Banka is precisely what prompted the assignment.
As already concluded by the Tribunal, the Tribunal has jurisdiction for claims
of a non-contractual nature based on the BIT. The Respondent’s argument
of forum shopping by the Claimants is linked to the interpretation given by
the Respondent to the dispute resolution clause in the Privatization
Agreement. If this clause is interpreted as understood by this Tribunal, then
the issue of avoidance of UNCITRAL arbitration, forum fragmentation and
forum shopping does not arise. Both Claimants have based their claims on
the BIT.

To conclude, the First Loan continues to be an investment after the
assignment and RCA is the investor in this respect.

d. Investment Not in Accordance with the Laws of the Host
State

The Parties disagree on whether the BIT requires that the investment be
made in accordance with the law of Montenegro. The Claimants observe that
the “legality requirement” is absent from the definition of investment and from
the entire text of the BIT. The Respondent argues that the requirement exists
as a general principle of investment law even if it is absent in the BIT, but
that the requirement can be found in Article 2 and in the Preamble of the BIT.
The Respondent points out that the legal requirement is also expressed in
the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws.

100 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 55.

73

210. Article 2 of the BIT reads as follows: “Either Contracting Party shall, within

211.

212.

213.

the framework of its laws and regulations, promote economic cooperation
through the protection in its territory of investments of investors of the other
Contracting Party. Subject to its right to exercise powers conferred by its
laws or regulations, each Contracting Party shall admit such investments.”""
The Tribunal observes that the first sentence in this article refers to the
obligation of each State party to the BIT to promote investments and it is not
addressed to the investors or the legality of the investments. Similarly, under
the second sentence, each State undertakes to admit investments subject
to the rights conferred by its laws and regulations.

The second leg of the argument of the Respondent is based on the reference
in the Preamble to the object of investment protection to stimulate the flow
of capital and technology, and the economic development of the State.
According to the Respondent, ‘“[i]f a foreign investor does not abide by the
host State law, its investment will mostly not contribute to the development
of the host State.” The Tribunal will limit itself to note that it would be far-
fetched for a Tribunal to deny its jurisdiction based on such future possibility.
The Tribunal does not find in the BIT a requirement that the investments
have to have been made in accordance to the law of Montenegro. Whilst the
Tribunal does not express any views on whether there could be an implicit
legality requirement in an investment treaty, in the instant case the
Respondent has never before this arbitration claimed that the making of the
investment of the Claimants was not in accordance with the law of
Montenegro. More importantly, the Respondent approved and was party to
the Assignment Agreement — the actual investment agreement.

The Respondent has also claimed that the Claimants willfully
misrepresented to the Respondent their willingness to invest or their capacity
to invest in ZN. This argument is based in part on the contention of the

Respondent that no investments have been made by the Claimants because

101 BIT, Article 2 (Legal Authority CLA-504).
102 Counter-Memorial, para. 596.

74

214.

215.

216.

217.

the Respondent does not consider loans to be investments. The Tribunal
recalls that it has already determined that it has jurisdiction ratione materiae,
and the Respondent has not produced any evidence of the intention of the
Claimants to mislead it at the time the Respondent entered into the
Assignment Agreement.

The Respondent has also claimed that the Claimants broke Montenegrin law
in the operation of their investment. Whether they did or did not and to the
extent that it has any relevance, this is a matter to be determined as part of
the consideration of the merits of this case should the Tribunal reject all the
objections to its jurisdiction.

To sum up, the Tribunal concludes that the objection to jurisdiction based on

the illegality in the making of the investment is without merit.
e. Failure to Exhaust Local Remedies

This objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is articulated by the
Respondent on the basis of customary international law, but ignores that the
Respondent has not made its consent to arbitration under the BIT subject to
the exhaustion of local remedies. The Respondent has advanced no
argument to justify an interpretation of the BIT by the Tribunal that would
incorporate the requirement of exhaustion of local remedies before the
investor would have access to arbitration. The text of Article 9 of the BIT, its
context or the object and purpose of the BIT do not support such addition
when the State parties to the BIT did not include it.

The Respondent also ignores the consistent jurisprudence of arbitral
tribunals in this respect. The Respondent's reliance on Generation Ukraine
and EnCana is misplaced. The statement of the Generation Ukraine tribunal
referred to by the Respondent is part of that tribunal’s consideration of a
claim of expropriation on the merits and not as a matter of jurisdiction. The
Generation Ukraine tribunal was careful to point out that there was no
requirement of exhaustion of local remedies:

“In such instances, an international tribunal may deem
that the failure to seek redress from national authorities

75

218.

disqualifies the international claim, not because there
is a requirement of exhaustion of local remedies but
because the very reality of conduct tantamount to
expropriation is doubtful in the absence of a
reasonable — not necessarily exhaustive — effort by the
investor to obtain correction.”1°?

does not as a general matter require.”10*

Respondent. The He/nan Annulment Committee stated:

“A requirement to pursue local court remedies would
have the effect of disentitling a claimant from pursuing
its direct treaty claim for failure by the Executive to
afford fair and equitable treatment, even where the
decision was taken at the highest level of government
within the host State. It would leave the investor only
with a complaint of unfair treatment based upon denial
of justice in the event that the process of judicial review
of the Ministerial decision was itself unfair. Such a
consequence would be contrary to the express
provisions of Article 26, incorporated into the parties’
compromis, since it would have the effect of
substituting another remedy for that provided under the
BIT and the ICSID Convention ... Such a requirement
would also have the effect of leading to the dismissal
of claims precisely on the ground that they should have
been submitted to a national court. It was the
unjustified imposition of such a requirement which led

The tribunal in EnCana was also careful to note that the holding in the narrow
point relied on by the Respondent in the instant case did not “amount to
reimposing a requirement of the exhaustion of local remedies which the BIT

That the argument presented by the Respondent needs to be treated with
caution is confirmed by the annulment of the holding in the He/nan award

based on the statement in the Generation Ukraine award referred to by the

103 Generation Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/9, Award, 16 September 2003,
para. 20.30 (Legal Authority RLA-086). Emphasis added.
104 EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, Award, 3 February 2006, n. 138 (Legal
Authority RLA-100).

76

219.

220.

Vi.

221.

222.

to the annulment of the first Award in Vivendi v.
Argentina, cited above.”'°5

Based on these considerations, the Tribunal has no difficulty in rejecting the
objection on grounds of failure to exhaust local remedies and does not need
to consider the extent to which the Claimants have pursued their grievances
before the local courts as they claim they have.

Having rejected each of the objections to its jurisdiction other than those
related to contract claims and claims under the umbrella clause and to
consent to AF arbitration under the 2000 and 2011 MFI Laws, the Tribunal
will now turn to the alleged breaches of the BIT.

ALLEGED BREACHES OF THE BIT

The Claimants allege breach of the following obligations: (i) not to impair the
operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal by the
Claimants of their investment (BIT Article 3(1)); (ii) to accord fair and
equitable treatment (BIT Article 3(1)); (iii) to provide most constant protection
and security (BIT Article 3(1)); (iv) to accord the most-favored-nation
treatment (BIT Article 3(2)); (v) to ensure free transfer of payments (BIT
Article 5(1)); and (vi) not to expropriate except under the conditions set forth
in the BIT (BIT Article 6(1)).

The Claimants base their allegations on the actions and omissions of the
Respondent related to: (i) Prva Bank; (ii) refusal to reduce the headcount;
(iii) Government's funding of the labor union; (iv) refusal to allow scrapping
of old equipment; (v) the bankruptcy proceedings of ZN; (vi) refusal to allow
a debt-equity swap; (vii) refusal to consent to the financing of ZN; (viii) refusal
to allow withdrawals from ZN’s special account; (ix) forced eviction of ZN’s
management; (x) the breach of the obligation to maintain a stable legal and

business environment; and (xi) discrimination between CEAC and MNSS.

105 Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/19, Decision
of the ad hoc Committee, 14 June 2010, paras. 53-54 (Legal Authority RLA-161).

77

223.

224.

225.

A. Summary of the Parties’ Arguments
1) Claimants’ Memorial

a. Breach of the Obligation Not To Impair the Operation
Management, Maintenance, Use, Enjoyment or Disposal
by the Claimants of their Investment

As part of their allegation that the Respondent breached the obligation not
to impair the operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or
disposal of the investment, the Claimants argue that Prva Banka refused to
execute payment requests by MNSS during 2008 and 2009 and that such
refusal had a crippling effect on MNSS. The Claimants contend that the
Government and the Central Bank obstructed the transfers and at the very
least refused to assist MNSS. According to the Claimants, the lack of
assistance was unreasonable and discriminatory, particularly as regards the
Central Bank which the Claimants allege had taken control of some aspects
of Prva Banka’s activities including payments.

The Claimants further allege that, given the changed market conditions
caused by the global financial crisis, the refusal of the Respondent to amend
ZN’s business plan and allow ZN to reduce its workforce was unreasonable.
The Claimants explain that there was a severe reduction in demand, prices
dropped, producers of steel received significant Government support and
employment levels were reduced. The Claimants also contend that the
refusal of the Government was discriminatory because, once ZN was placed
in bankruptcy, the number of employees was reduced to 345.

The Claimants argue that the secret meetings of the Government with the
Union and the provision of secret loans to the Union to pay worker salaries
impaired the ability of ZN’s management to operate and manage its
business. According to the Claimants, these actions were unreasonable and
they point out that “[t]his situation was exacerbated by the Government’s

secret deal with the Union, involving funding of the Union, at a critical

78

226.

227.

228.

229.

juncture in ZN-Union negotiations relating to employee levels and voluntary

redundancies.”

The Claimants further argue that the opposition of the Government to allow
ZN to scrap obsolete machinery was unreasonable because the
Government's position on this issue was unclear and certainly guided by the
Union. The Government had already agreed in the Restructuring Plan that
ZN close down the section of the plant where the machinery proposed to be
scrapped was located, the machinery had not been used for ten years and
was obsolete, and the scrapping of the machinery would have generated
important benefits to ZN such as increased cash flow, reduced ongoing
energy costs, among others. According to the Claimants, the Government
gave no reasons for its refusal, which was also discriminatory, because,
once ZN was in bankruptcy, the bankruptcy administrator decided to scrap
and melt the production lines in question and use the proceeds to pay
salaries.

The Claimants have also adduced as a breach of Article 3(1) of the BIT the
Government's refusal to consider the offer to key creditors (including the
Government) of the opportunity to convert their debt into equity as proposed
in a board resolution of ZN in October 2010. In the circumstances of ZN, the
Claimants contend that the refusal was unreasonable.

In addition, the Claimants contend that it was unreasonable for the
Government to refuse to publicly support the Restructuring Plan to which it
had agreed. According to the Claimants, this damaged the ability of ZN to
operate and manage it business “since it allowed the Union to present to its
members that the implementation of the Restructuring Plan was not the best
way forward for the business, and that they could take measures to obstruct
its implementation.”"°”

The Claimants argue that it was also unreasonable for the Government to

refuse payments by ZN from its account held in Erste Bank during the period

106 Memorial, para. 579.
107 Id, para. 627.

79

230.

231.

232.

233.

234.

22 March 2011 to 7 April 2011, the refusal to approve essential third party
funding for ZN in the amount of €20 million and the refusal to accept a further
loan from MNSS.

b. Fair and Equitable Treatment (FET)

The Claimants assert that the FET standard is an autonomous treaty
standard, which may require treatment beyond that of customary
international law, and that the threshold to find a breach is lower than under
customary international law. Based on arbitral awards, the Claimants
summarize the duties covered in the FET standard as follows: to protect
investors’ legitimate expectations, to act transparently, not to act arbitrarily,
not to subject the investor to discriminatory treatment, not to deny investor
justice and to act in good faith.

The Claimants argue that the breach of the obligation in Article 3(1)
amounted to a violation of the Claimants’ legitimate expectations as did the
failure of the Respondent to provide a secure environment and to act
consistently with all its obligations under the BIT.

The Claimants further argue that the Respondent failed in its duty to act
transparently because of its secret meetings with the Union and the secret
financing of the Union, because of the refusal of the Government and the
Central Bank to reply to requests for assistance in the so-called Prva Banka
episode, and because of the complete lack of transparency in the
Government dealing with MNSS’ attempts to finalize potential funding of €20
million.

The Claimants also contend that the Respondent failed in its duty not to act
arbitrarily or to discriminate against the investment. The Claimants refer to
discriminatory treatment already mentioned under the breach of Article 3(1)
and add that the Respondent acted unreasonably and in a discriminatory
fashion in respect of the Claimants throughout the bankruptcy process.

The Claimants argue that the Respondent did not act in good faith when
repeatedly alleging in public statements that MNSS had breached the

Privatization Agreement but without exercising its right to terminate it. And

80

235.

236.

237.

the other breaches alleged above are also breaches of the duty to act in

good faith and to maintain a stable legal and business environment.

c. Most Constant Protection and Security

The Claimants argue that the words “most constant” indicate that a
particularly high standard of treatment is required and claim that the
Government and its police did not act with vigilance or take all measures
necessary to protect the Claimants and their investments, but left

“(i) the Claimants and their investments completely

exposed to the invasion and occupation of ZN by the

Union and workers; and (ii) ZN’s CEO completely

exposed to the physical attack that he was subjected

to during his escape from the hostile crowd of Union

leaders and workers within ZN’s management building

and premises on 13 December 2010, with all the

fundamentally adverse consequences on the future

management and operation of ZN that these events
necessarily entailed.”"°8

d. Most-Favored Nation Treatment

The Claimants argue that the Respondent breached the obligation to treat
the Claimants’ investments no less favorably than it treats investments of
investors from third States in two instances. First, the Government afforded
better treatment to CEAC (a Cypriot investor)’s investment in KAP: (i) by
allowing KAP to reduce the number of employees; (ii) by assuming at least
€22 million of KAP’s liabilities; (iii) by not intervening when KAP faced work
protests by employees; and (iv) by affording KAP’s creditors a more “positive
treatment” during the bankruptcy process by allowing them to vote and
decide the number of members of the creditors’ committee.

In the second instance, the Respondent offered a prospective German
investor in ZN — the Max Aicher Group — more advantageous terms than

those offered by the Respondent to the Claimants.

108 Id, para. 742.

81

238.

239.

240.

241.

e. Obligation to Ensure the Free Transfer of Payments

The Claimants argue that the Respondent breached the free transfers
obligation because: (i) the Respondent failed to approve payments by ZN
from ZN’s own account with Erste Bank with the result that it was the reason
that initially caused ZN to face bankruptcy and resulted in the shutdown of
ZN’s electricity supply; and (ii) the Central Bank obstructed the transfers from
MNSS’ account in Prva Banka or at least persistently refused to assist
MNSS.

f. Expropriation

The Claimants argue that the Respondent’s measures adduced as the basis
of the claim of breach of the Respondent's obligation not to impair Claimants’
investments had the effect of indirectly expropriating them by depriving the
Claimants of the economic use and benefit of their investments, neutralizing
such economic use or benefit to the Claimants and causing a considerable
diminution in value of the investments.

In the alternative, the Claimants have pleaded direct expropriation of the
investment by the sale by the Respondent of ZN on 30 April 2012. According
to the Claimants, their claims represented about 50 percent of all of the
creditors’ claims but because of the Respondent's acts and omissions, the
Claimants have not recovered a single euro. For this reason, the Claimants
argue that the expropriation was unlawful and also because it was not in the
public interest, there was no due process of law and some acts of the
Respondent were discriminatory.

2) Respondent’s Counter-Memorial

a. Fair and Equitable Treatment

Concerning the refusal to reduce the workforce, the Respondent argues
in its Counter-Memorial that it acted reasonably in respect of the ever-
increasing requests to reduce the workforce. The Respondent blames

MNSS for the failure to reduce the workforce of ZN and the failure to reach

82

242.

an agreement with the Union. The Respondent recalls that it agreed to
reduce the workforce of the steel mill to 1200 in the Refinancing Protocol,
thus abandoning what had been one of the most important conditions of the
privatization. The Respondent agreed to further reductions under the
Restructuring Plan approved by the board of ZN on 3 February 2010 and by
the Montenegrin State Commission the same day. By the Restructuring
Plan, the Respondent was again willing to amend its contractual rights and
even bear a substantial part of the costs caused by the planned
redundancies. A further proposal was made by MNSS in July 2010 and a
new Systematization Plan was considered by the board of ZN and approved
in October 2010. This plan would have reduced the headcount to 662
employees. The Respondent was willing to consider the plan, but it needed
to know first whether MNSS would provide the required finance for the social
program. These funds were not forthcoming and hence the plan was
impossible to implement regardless of the consent of the parties to the
Privatization Agreement. As stated by the Respondent: “ZN did not have the
required funds to finance the redundancies under the Reorganisation
[Systematization] Plan and MNSS was unable to provide it.”1°9 A further plan
— Alternative “3B” — was presented to the Respondent, whereby Respondent
would have relinquished MNSS of its obligations under the Privatization
Agreement, the headcount would have been reduced to 600 persons and
the Government would have paid for redundancies to the extent that each
exceeded €8,000. The Respondent did not agree, “but expressed that it
might be acceptable provided that MNSS meets its obligations [...] in
particular that it could raise the required finance for ZN. MNSS never did.”1"°
The Respondent explains that the initiation of bankruptcy proceedings
constitutes a ground for termination of employment contracts, which can be
exercised by the administrator without asking the consent of the Union or the

Respondent. Thus, the bankruptcy administrator terminated all employment

109 Counter-Memorial, para. 846.
110 Id., para. 850.

83

243.

244.

245.

246.

247.

agreements and re-hired 1389 employees with the intention to determine on
an individual basis which of the employees would be required for the further
operation or winding down of ZN.

The Respondent denies that Claimants’ nationality played any role in the
bankruptcy proceedings. The Respondent justifies the funding of certain
redundancies in order to maintain social stability in the region and thus it
claims to have assumed an unfulfilled MNSS’ obligation under the
Privatization Agreement.

The Respondent denies that it engaged in secret meetings with Union
members and supported MNSS to the extent it considered reasonable. The
Respondent points out that by the time it made loans to the Union,
negotiations of MNSS with the Union had been taking place for about six
months and argues that it is difficult to believe the negotiations could be
undermined, as they were already at a dead end. In fact, the loans were
made to placate the workers who had received no salaries — to which they
were lawfully entitled — for several months. The Respondent explains that
what it did was “to re-establish the situation required under Montenegrin
labor law and the Privatisation Agreement, both of which MNSS had clearly
violated in the first place.”"""

The Respondent argues that, by providing the loans to the Union, it acted as
a commercial party to the Privatization Agreement and its acts did not include
any margin of the exercise of sovereign authority.

The Respondent claims that, for the reasons explained, the granting of the
loans was not an arbitrary act and nationality was not a consideration in
granting them.

As regards the scrapping of obsolete material, the Respondent asserts
that it approved the scrapping as provided for in the Restructuring Plan, but
that the Union prevented it. The Respondent denies that it was guided by
the Union. The Respondent recalls that, on 21 December 2010, the
Government and the other Sellers sent a notice of breach of the Privatization

111 Id., para. 903.

84

248.

249.

250.

Agreement and on 13 January 2011, the Respondent withdrew for the time
being its approval of the scrapping of material because “[i]t saw no reason
at the time to make any concessions to its unreliable contract partner and
hoped that it may by this way motivate MNSS to take its contractual
obligations more seriously.”'? As regards the bankruptcy administrator, the
Respondent explains that he was not bound by the Privatization Agreement
and did not need to ask Respondent’s permission for any of its decisions.
The Respondent claims that its withdrawal of the approval was not
unreasonable and not discriminatory; furthermore, the Respondent affirms
that it acted in good faith and that there was no change of the legal and
business environment.

The Respondent explains its objections to the debt-for-equity swap as
follows: Firstly, the transaction would have diluted Respondent's and MNSS’
share in ZN and that, in turn, would have made the implementation of the
Privatization Agreement impossible. Secondly, MNSS had provided limited
information to the Respondent in the 3 November 2010 letter. Thirdly, it was
unclear whether the conversion of the key creditors’ debt into equity would
need to be considered a privatization.

The Respondent also explains its refusal of the proposal of third party
funding presented by MNSS, because of its onerous conditions and
because, from the Respondent's perspective, it meant to waive some of its
most important rights under the Privatization Agreement while MNSS had at
the time (March 2011) failed to ensure the payment of the workers’ salaries
for four months and had failed to provide the performance bond for its
investment obligations for 2011.

The Respondent claims that the first and only time that it did not immediately
approve a withdrawal from the account in the Erste Bank was related to
payment instruction 16. Payments were to go directly to suppliers and in this
case a substantial part of the payment was to be deposited in another
account held by ZN in another bank and no explanation was given for the

12 Id., para. 934.

85

251.

252.

253.

change. The Respondent approved the payment instruction on 1 April 2011,
the day after it was corrected. Erste Bank insisted that payment instruction
be stamped on behalf of the Government. The Respondent recounts the few
days delay:

“Mr. Vujovic, the former Minister of Economy, who had

stamped the prior instructions, had recently been

replaced in this function by Mr. Kavaric. The latter,

however, had not deposited his signature with Erste

Bank and therefore could not approve the payment. On

6 April 2011, Mr. A Jacobson then notified Erste Bank

of the change in the signing authority. The latter then

signed and stamped the payment instruction on 7 April
2011.7118

The Respondent claims that this delay of a few days is wholly irrelevant. At
most, the delay in approval would be a mere breach of contract.

As to the refusal to approve two short-term loans — the Fourth and Fifth
Loans — in February 2011, the Respondent points out that by the time these
loans were considered by the board of ZN, they had already been disbursed.
The Respondent did not want to burden ZN with further debt and its
representatives were outvoted at the board meeting that approved them. The
Respondent wonders how to be out voted at a board meeting can constitute
a breach of the BIT.

Then, the Respondent addresses the alleged irregularities in the
bankruptcy proceedings. As regards the lack of standing of Mr. Vucinic —
the head of the Union — the Respondent explains that he did not individualize
each employee on whose behalf he was submitting the petition to initiate the
proceedings; but in an amended statement filed on 11 April 2011, each
individual creditor was listed and each granted a power of attorney to its
representative.

The Claimants have alleged the lack of any valid monetary claims on which

the petition was based. The Respondent explains that the court initiated the

113 Id, para. 989.

86

254.

255.

256.

bankruptcy proceedings based on the unpaid salaries, and observes that the
Claimants did not appeal the court’s decision.
The Respondent points out that, after the Claimants had proven their claims
in court proceedings, their claims in bankruptcy were accepted in full, a fact
that the Claimants failed to mention in their allegations. The Respondent
further points out, as regards the BlueBay Loan, that the Claimants do not
mention that MNSS disputed the Respondent's claim at the examination
hearing held at the beginning of the bankruptcy proceeding on 20 July 2011
and initiated litigation to prove their case. According to the Respondent,

“[tIhe Commercial Court in Podgorica expeditiously

ruled on the matter and rendered a judgment on 30

December 2011 adopting MNSS’ claims and

determining that the GoM’s claim for approximately

EUR 1.6 million was ungrounded, while in fact MNSS

is the holder of this claim. This decision was also

upheld by the Appellate Court on 4 September 2012.

The acknowledgment of MNSS’ claim of EUR 1.6

million was registered in the corrected final list of claims

in bankruptcy which served as a basis for compiling the
draft decision on division of the bankruptcy estate.”

As to the acceptance of the loan granted to the Union by the bankruptcy
administrator, the Respondent explains that the bankruptcy administrator
accepted this claim because the Respondent had made a payment for ZN
and was entitled to seek recourse by raising a claim in the same amount
against ZN. The Respondent notes that the Claimants did not object to the
recognition of this claim of the Respondent and did not dispute it at the
examination hearing.

The Respondent disputes the assertion that the administrator breached
Article 79(1) of the Bankruptcy Act by re-engaging the dismissed workforce.
The Respondent claims that the administrator had this right, exercised it and

then gradually reduced the workforce.

14 Id, para. 1010.

87

257.

258.

259.

260.

261.

MNSS challenged in court as a decision ultra vires the decision of the
administrator to sell scrap material to Neksan. The Respondent points out
that the court found against MNSS.

As part of its allegations, the Claimants have included the dismissal of the
Reorganization Plan. The Respondent points out that MNSS submitted a
Reorganization Plan on 15 August 2011 to the Commercial Court of
Podgorica. MNSS amended it twice on 30 September 2011 and 6 October
2011. The Court appointed an expert to assess the Reorganization Plan.
The expert considered this plan to be unrealistic and flawed for many
reasons. The Commercial Court rejected the Plan on 2 November 2011.
The Respondent argues that the acts of the administrator are not attributable
to the Respondent, the Claimants failed to exhaust local remedies and the
Respondent did not act negligently and did not discriminate against the
Claimants.

The Respondent disputes that it ever had any obligation to make any
statements in support of the Restructuring Plan and claims that, in fact, it

stated publicly that the Restructuring Plan would benefit ZN.

As regards the dispute with Prva Banka, the Respondent first notes that
Prva Banka is a private commercial bank, and that at the request of ZN, it
granted ZN four overdraft facilities of an aggregate €20 million for working
capital in April 2008 with a pledge over raw materials and ZN’s production.
Thus, these loans were substantially under-secured. The Respondent
acknowledges the liquidity shortage that affected Prva Bank by the summer
of 2008. The reluctance of Prva Banka to transfer funds set aside by MNSS
for CAPEX’s obligations was due to ZN’s outstanding debts for which ZN did
not provide security. The Respondent affirms that the Central Bank took all
the necessary steps to supervise Prva Banka as required by law. The
Respondent recounts how it kept MNSS informed about the Prva Banka’s
situation after MNSS approached the Central Bank and facilitated the
negotiations that led to the Financing Protocol in April 2009.

88

262.

263.

264.

The Respondent argues that it is not responsible for Prva Banka’s conduct;
a private company’s acts may be attributed to the State only if the State uses
it as a vehicle to commit acts in breach of international law. The Central Bank
never exercised control of Prva Bank that would justify the attribution of the
Prva Banka’s acts to the Respondent. The Respondent explains that, when
in December 2008, Prva Banka informed MNSS that it could not transfer
payments from the deposit securing the performance bond it had issued for
MNSS' investment obligations, Prva Banka was acting in accordance with
Clause 8.4.1(a) of the Privatization Agreement, and not responding to any
measure taken by the Respondent or the Central Bank. According to the
Respondent, the Central Bank issued general measures to improve Prva
Banka’s liquidity and never ordered Prva Banka to delay or refuse MNSS’
payment orders; the delay in payments was only a consequence of Prva
Banka’s liquidity shortage.

The Respondent observes that it is unclear what loss the Claimants incurred
as a result of the conduct of Prva Banka. The Respondent also observes
that, under Article 5 of the Financing Protocol, MNSS agreed to waive any
of its claims against Prva Banka for the alleged breaches of contract. This
notwithstanding, MNSS submitted its claims against Prva Banka to the
Commercial Court in Podgorica. The claims were rejected because MNSS
failed to substantiate its losses. MNSS successfully appealed the decisions
and the case was remanded to the court of first instance for re-trial. MNSS
did not pursue the matter, because it believed that it would be futile due to
unsubstantiated “political connections.”

The Respondent addresses the allegation of omissions by the Respondent.
The Respondent recalls that the Claimants were not a party to the
administrative proceedings against Prva Banka. The Respondent explains
that under the Montenegrin Banking Act “a third party in supervisory
proceedings does not have the right to participate or be kept informed, or to
be informed at all, about the status of these proceedings.”'"® Furthermore,

15 Id, para. 1149.

89

265.

266.

267.

the information collected by the Central Bank is confidential. The
Respondent contends that the Claimants have failed to show that under the
FET standard “a third party which is not party to the proceedings and which
is not entitled under the national law of the host State to any information on
administrative proceedings against a third party is entitled to any measure of
transparency in this regard.”116

b. Most-Favored Nation Treatment

As to the alleged breach of the most-favored nation treatment, the
Respondent argues that the Claimants have not shown that the
circumstances in which CEAC was allegedly more favorably treated were
comparable to those in the case of ZN. The Respondent considers the claim
related to the Max Aicher Group opaque and it is unclear to Respondent how
the letter of the Ministry of Economy to the Max Aicher Group would

constitute better treatment of that group than that of the Claimants.

c. Obligation to Ensure the Free Transfer of Payments

The Respondent refutes the allegation of breach of the obligation to ensure
the free transfer of payments because: (i) in the case of ZN’s account held
in Erste Bank, the Respondent withheld its approval as it was contractually
permitted to do; and (ii) in the case of payments transfers delayed by Prva
Banka, the delays were due to liquidity problems of Prva Banka and not due
to any measure taken or omitted by the Respondent.

d. Most Constant Protection and Security
The Respondent denies that it breached the obligation to provide protection
and security. As regards the claim related to the first strike on 28 September
2010, the Respondent claims to have exercised due diligence and taken
reasonable measures. According to the Respondent, “[t]hat these measures

116 Id, para. 1150.

90

268.

269.

turned out to be insufficient is not relevant for assessing whether or not a
breach took place.”'1” The Respondent asserts that the

“Respondent's police forces took all measures they

could within the few hours available to organise their

operations at the plant. Within the little time left they did

everything that was reasonably possible and sent

police to the plant who were present when the strikers

entered the management offices and able to deter any

acts of violence against Claimant’s [sic]
representatives.”118

As to the second strike on 13 December 2010, the Respondent could not
have taken any measures because Mr. Jacobson wrongly stated to Minister
Vujovic that the police had been informed of the strike when in fact the police

had not been informed.

e. Expropriation

The Respondent refutes the allegation of indirect expropriation of MNSS’
investment based on the aggregation of all the acts and omissions previously
addressed by the Respondent. The Respondent argues that since the
measures complained by the Claimants are factually unfounded, the claim
of expropriation fails; in any case, the Claimants’ claim fails because most of
the purported measures invoked by the Claimants did not involve the
exercise of the Respondent's sovereign powers. As to the omissions by the
Respondent, the Respondent argues that mere omissions or refusals of a
host State to take necessary acts do not constitute expropriation; the State
“must take actions which are directed at obtaining the control or at least the
fruits of an investment.”""9

Similarly, the Respondent disputes that the purported irregularities during
the insolvency proceedings directly expropriated the Claimants through the

eventual sale of ZN’s assets by the bankruptcy administrator. The

17 Id, para. 1181.
118 Id, para. 1184.
19 Id,, para. 1212.

91

270.

271.

Respondent relies on the ELS/ case before the ICJ to argue that “insolvency
proceedings do not amount to an expropriation unless they are collusively
used to expropriate an investor.” '2° The Respondent recalls that the
Claimants did not allege that the Respondent acted collusively as part of the
irregularities already addressed under the allegations of breach of the FET
obligation. The Respondent takes issue with the statement by the Claimants
that Mr. Perovic, the expert engaged by the Commercial Court, was affiliated
with the Government and points out that the Claimants have not

substantiated this allegation.
3) Claimants’ Reply

In their Reply, the Claimants note that the Respondent did not address in the
Counter-Memorial any of the breaches of its obligation not to impair the
operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of the
Claimants’ investment under Article 3(1) of the BIT. Then, the Claimants
dispute the Respondent's proposition that breaches of a contract by a host
State cannot give rise to a violation of its FET obligation. The Claimants

argue:

“the reason for the State’s act or omission is irrelevant
in terms of whether the act or omission constitutes a
breach by the State of its international obligation,
thereby engaging the State’s responsibility. The only
question is whether the act or omission constitutes a
breach by the State of its obligation under international
law. The fact that an act or omission may be committed
by a State pursuant to a contract is irrelevant where the
consequence of that act or omission is to place the
State in breach of pre-existing obligation under
international law.”121

 

The Claimants further argue that because the Respondent had exclusive
knowledge of Prva Banka’s irregularities since mid-2007, “the Respondent

assumed the risk of Prva Banka’s default and cannot escape liability for the

120 Id, para. 1218.
121 Reply, para. 29. Emphasis in the original.

92

272.

273.

corresponding losses suffered by the Claimants.”!22 The Claimants point out
that the Respondent admits that it exercised control through its Central Bank
over Prva Banka when the Central Bank ordered Prva Banka to take general
measures aimed at increasing its liquidity. The Claimants further note that
the Government exercised direct control of Prva Banka as part of the credit
support package of €44 million in December 2008, but the Government
provided the financing without setting up a mechanism to control the use of
the funds as the Central Bank had recommended.

4) Respondent’s Rejoinder

In its Rejoinder, the Respondent first addresses the Claimants’ allegation
that the Respondent in the Counter-Memorial ignores the alleged breach of
the obligation “not [to] impair, by unreasonable or discriminatory measures,
the operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal” of
the investments by the investors. The Respondent explains in the Rejoinder
that this obligation is subsumed in the obligation of fair and equitable
treatment and that it has fully replied to the Claimants’ allegations. The
Respondent asserts that none of the actions taken by the Respondent were
unreasonable or discriminatory and to the contrary were in accordance with
Respondent's rights as a contract partner. Furthermore, the supervision of
Prva Bank and the bankruptcy proceedings were in full compliance with the
law.

The Respondent re-affirms that it has not exercised sovereign powers in
connection with the impugned acts. The Respondent comments that,
notwithstanding the Claimants’ references to arbitral awards to show that the
respect of legitimate expectations forms part of the obligation of fair and
equitable treatment, the Claimants fail to present any specific legitimate
expectations in their Reply. The Respondent refers to the ever increasing
demands of the Claimants and argues that it had not “created any

expectations towards investors prior to, or during, the privatisation process

122 Id., para. 65.

93

274.

275.

276.

277.

that it would approve amendments to the Privatisation Agreement, or
accommodate any investor demands ....”128

The Respondent observes that the Claimants fail to mention that the time for
assessing the legitimate expectations is at the time when the investment is
made. As recognized by MNSS, Montenegro was a State in transition when
it invested in ZN. As regards the legitimate expectations of RCA, the
Respondent rhetorically asks itself, “what legitimate expectations could RCA
have had being conscious of the Prva Banka issue and the headcount
reduction issue already at the time of its ‘investment’?”'*4 The Respondent
adds: “Again, Claimants remain silent as to any explanation of their
legitimate expectations, in particular with respect to RCA.”125

According to the Respondent, the refusal to approve workforce reductions
was not unreasonable. The Claimants entered willfully into the Privatization
Agreement in the knowledge of the need of the Respondent’s consent to
reduce the headcount. The Respondent takes issue with the connection
made by the Claimants between the headcount reduction and the Prva Bank
episode. According to the Respondent, the Claimants fail to show how this
episode “obliged Respondent to approve any headcount reductions or how
it made the denial of such reduction unreasonable. There simply was no
such obligation imposed upon the Respondent by the Privatisation
Agreement.”126

The Respondent recalls that the argument of improper insolvency
proceedings has to meet the stricter standard of denial of justice rather than
the standard of fair and equitable treatment and observes that the Claimants
have failed to allege the requisite finality or futility of courts proceedings in
Montenegro for establishing a claim of denial of justice.

As regards the breach of the “most constant protection and security”
obligation, the Respondent disagrees with the Claimants that the BIT

123 Rejoinder, para. 518.
124 Id,, para. 535.

125 |bid.

126 Id, para. 540.

94

278.

279.

280.

requires a higher standard of protection because of the words “most
constant.” According to the Respondent, these words only “stress that
protection and security shall be accorded to foreign investors permanently
throughout the existence of the BIT.” 127 Furthermore, the applicable
standard of due diligence depends on the circumstances and resources of
the State in question, and the Claimants were well aware of and
acknowledge the business environment in which they decided to invest.
According to the Respondent, its police forces reacted adequately and with
sufficient due diligence to the labor strikes.

The Respondent argues that the Claimants have failed to establish that KAP
and ZN were situated in like circumstances and that the Respondent
accorded KAP more favorable treatment on account of nationality. Similarly,
the Claimants have failed to prove that the Max Aicher Group was in like
circumstances or treated more favorably. Furthermore, the Respondent
points out that the standard under Article 3(2) of the BIT applies to
investments and not to investors. According to the Respondent, the
Claimants have failed to show the specific investments in KAP that should
form the basis for a proper comparison. The Respondent affirms that, in fact,
the allegations of the Claimants are belied by the many concessions made
by the Respondent such as guarantees, waiver of breaches of contract,
reduction of MNSS’ investment obligations, etc.

The Respondent also contests the claim that it breached the obligation to
ensure free transfer of payments because the payments at issue do not
constitute transfers under the BIT; these payments were commercial
transactions between private parties not subject to the terms of Article 5 of
the BIT. The Respondent asserts that Montenegro cannot be held liable for
actions of Prva Banka and that the Claimants have suffered no loss.

As regards the claim of indirect expropriation, the Respondent argues that
the Claimants’ own actions diminished the value of the investment since they
increased the debt of ZN tremendously instead of actually investing in ZN.

127 Id., para. 575.

95

The Respondent observes that the gravity of deprivations in the cases relied
by the Claimants to support their arguments shows that the alleged acts in
the case before the Tribunal cannot constitute an indirect expropriation.
Similarly, the omissions alleged by the Claimants do not constitute
internationally wrongful acts. According to the Respondent, the Claimants
have failed to establish the obligation of the Respondent to perform the
alleged omitted acts.

281. As to the claim of direct expropriation, the Respondent argues that it must
fail because the alleged irregularities in the bankruptcy proceedings are
unfounded, the acts of the bankruptcy administrator are not attributable to
the Respondent, and insolvency proceedings amount to expropriation only if
used collusively to expropriate an investor. The Respondent observes that
the Claimants in their Reply have not addressed the absence of collusion

asserted by the Respondent in its Counter-Memorial.
B. Analysis of the Tribunal
5) Fair and Equitable Treatment and Obligation of Non-impairment

282. The Tribunal starts by referring to Article 3(1) of the BIT:
“Article 3

1. Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and
equitable treatment of the investments of investors of
the other Contracting Party and shall not impair, by
unreasonable or discriminatory measures, the
operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment
or disposal thereof by those investors. Each
Contracting Party shall accord to such investments the
most constant protection and security.”'28

283. The Claimants have presented separately their claims of breach of the
obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment and of not impairing the

operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal by the
128 BIT, Article 3(1) (Legal Authority CLA-504).

96

284.

285.

286.

Claimants of their investment. To avoid repetition, the Tribunal will consider
these two claims together. The Claimants themselves have observed in their
Post-Hearing Brief that the causes of action in relation to the non-impairment
standard apply with equal force to the fair and equitable treatment under the
BIT.'29 In addition, the Claimants have pleaded as breaches of the FET the
failure of the Respondent to prevent ZN’s management evictions, the
Respondent's facilitation of the bankruptcy of ZN and the failure of the
Respondent to provide a secure environment.

The Tribunal will consider each of the measures adduced by the Claimants.
The majority of the Tribunal, mindful of the Tribunal’s decision on the
Respondent's objections to jurisdiction, will first distinguish, as a preliminary
matter, between claims that it considers to be essentially treaty claims and
those that it considers as essentially contract claims. Then, it will consider
the FET standard against which non-contractual measures need to be
judged, and thirdly determine whether those breach the FET obligation.

a. Which of the Claims Pleaded in Breach of the FET
Obligation are Essentially Treaty Claims?
(i) Prva Banka

The Claimants have argued that the Respondent failed to warn MNSS about
Prva Banka’s irregularities; failed to ensure the release of funds held in Prva
Banka and refused the transfer to Fortis Bank of funds held in Prva Banka.

The question for the Tribunal is whether the Respondent's failure to warn
MNSS was “unreasonable or discriminatory” in the circumstances of the
case. The starting point for the majority of the Tribunal is that a respondent
has no duty to warn an investor about the condition of the financial system
or of a particular bank. Does the fact that MNSS and the Respondent were
co-shareholders of ZN, that MNSS, the Respondent and its Government
were parties to the Assignment Agreement, that the Central Bank was aware

of Prva Banka’s liquidity problems before MNSS’ deposit, or that Prva Banka

129 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 70.

97

287.

288.

289.

was largely owned by the family of the Prime Minister, make the failure to

warn MNSS unreasonable?

To answer this question, the Tribunal has considered relevant that the
Respondent or the Central Bank did not intervene in MNSS’ choice of bank,
that MNSS continued the banking relationship of MN with Prva Banka and
deposited the funds in Prva Banka after MNSS carried out its own due
diligence, that the contractual relationship was exclusively between MNSS
and Prva Banka, that witness Mr. Mark Jacobson admitted in his Second
Witness Statement that, “[i]Jn February 2008 MNSS had a choice as to where
it deposited funds intended to be invested in ZN,”°° and that MNSS itself
chose as its counsel a member of the Prime Minister’s family. More
importantly, the Tribunal has considered the concern that the Government
may have had in disclosing information privy to the Government that may
have a detrimental effect on the largest bank in Montenegro.

Based on these considerations, the majority of the Tribunal concludes that
the failure to warn MNSS about the financial condition of Prva Banka was
not unreasonable and was not in breach of Article 3(1) of the BIT.

The second element of the claim is the failure of the Central Bank and the
Government to assist MNSS and order Prva Banka to release the funds from
the collateral account to execute payment orders of MNSS, and the
attribution of responsibility to the Central Bank for the delays in the release
of such funds when Prva Banka was under the direct control of the Central
Bank. There are two aspects in this element. First, while delays in the
execution of payment orders may have been due to the scarce or lack of
liquidity of Prva Banka, they need to be considered against the background
of the overall contractual commercial relationship of MNSS and ZN with Prva
Banka, which went beyond the deposit made by MNSS to secure the capital
expenditures of ZN and the execution of payment orders. The second aspect

concerns the regulatory function of the Central Bank and bears on the issue

130 Second Witness Statement of Mr. Mark Jacobson, para. 69.

98

290.

291.

292.

293.

294.

of the alleged direct control of the Central Bank and its and the Government's
alleged refusal to honor the payment orders of MNSS.

To understand the context of the overall relationship of MNSS and ZN with
Prva Banka, it will be useful to describe their banking operations with Prva
Banka and provide a chronology of events.

ZN had been a client of Prva Banka and its predecessor since before ZN’s
privatization. The first ground for complaint occurred the day after MNSS
deposited €28 million in its account with Prva Banka. On 29 February 2008,
Prva Banka withdrew from MNSS’ account €8 million without requesting any
authorization from or informing MNSS. Eventually, Prva Banka explained
that it had used the funds so withdrawn to reduce ZN’s liabilities owed to
Prva Banka by ZN under a pre-existing overdraft facility and that it
considered MNSS and ZN as a group.

As early as April 2008 and at the request of MNSS, Prva Banka granted ZN
four overdraft loan facilities for a total amount of €20 million to cover ZN’s
working capital needs. ZN was obliged to provide a pledge to Prva Banka in
ZN’s contracts for movable property to secure the overdraft loan facilities. As
Respondent explains, “the pledges over the raw materials and the produce
of ZN were of little value, as the pledge could only be granted over the items
physically with ZN at the time of conclusion of the contract and they would
be sold on in the course of the business. Hence, the loans granted to ZN

were substantially under secured.”'31

Upon becoming a shareholder of ZN, MNSS assumed a loan made by Prva
Bank to MN in the amount of €1,955,000 on 15 February 2008. The loan
was unsecured and due one year later on 15 February 2009.

Prva Banka had issued a guarantee in favor of MNSS in relation to the
purchase by MNSS of 46.8 percent of the shares of Radvent AD Niksic
(‘Radvent’) from Montenegro in May 2008.

131 Counter-Memorial, para. 1058.

99

295.

296.

297.

On 9 December 2008, Prva Banka gave as a reason for not executing two
payment orders of MNSS their mutual business problems. To solve them,
Prva Banka had proposed to the Privatization Agency the application of the
accumulated interest on MNSS’ deposits in Prva Banka towards the
repayment of the loan and as cash collateral of the unsecured guarantee
referred to in the paragraph above. This action by Prva Banka was in
response to the order by the Central Bank after the previous inspection that
it “[appropriated] high potential credit loss provisions given that loans by
MNSS were completely unsecured.”152

Prva Banka had also made a loan to ZN to fund ZN’s initial redundancies in
the context of ZN’s privatization in 2006. In the Privatization Agreement, MN
undertook to pay as part of the purchase price the difference between ZN’s
working capital and ZN’s debt as of the closing date. The difference
amounted to €3 million. On the other hand, the Sellers undertook to fund
ZN’s initial redundancies or to indemnify ZN if ZN paid for them. ZN paid for
the redundancies and borrowed €3.5 million from Prva Banka to finance
them (“social loan”). When MNSS became a shareholder of ZN, the
Respondent allowed MNSS to pay back the social loan directly to Prva
Banka instead of paying the €3.5 million difference between ZN’s working
capital and ZN’s debt."

We turn now to the chronology of the interaction between the Central Bank,
the Government, MNSS, ZN and Prva Banka:

On 12 November 2008, MNSS wrote to the Central Bank about the non-

executed payment orders. 154

On 26 November of 2008, Prva Banka sought the financial assistance of the
Government to improve its liquidity.19®

132 Letter from Prva Banka CG to MNSS B.V. dated 12 September 2008 (Exhibit C-045).

133 Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 9.

134 Letter from MNSS B.V. to Central Bank of Montenegro, attached to email from Mr. Alan
Jacobson to Mr. Bojana Uskokovic and others dated 12 November 2008 (Exhibit C-030).

135 Letter from Prva Banka to the Ministry of Finance dated 26 November 2008 (Exhibit R-026).

100

On 1 December 2008, the Ministry of Finance wrote to the Central Bank to

enquire about the situation of Prva Banka.'°6

On 3 December 2008, the Central Bank confirmed Prva Banka’s inability to
operate because of its liquidity problems.*3”

On 3 December 2008, Mr. Vujovic, then President of the Privatization
Authority, wrote to MNSS noting that it had forwarded to Prva Banka MNSS’
request for payment of obligations under the investment program and that
Prva Banka promised to pay by 5 December 2008.18

On 4 December 2008, Mr. Alan Jacobson met with the Vice-Governor of the
Central Bank. He advised Mr. Jacobson that “Prva Banka would be put in
funds and would be able to action MNSS’ payment requests.”19

On 9 December 2008, Prva Banka settled the CVS instruction of 7 November
2008 and the payment instruction of 31 July 2008. It did not pay €363,000
from the foreign exchange account of MNSS because of mutual business
problems. 14°

On 11 December 2008, Prva Banka informed MNSS that it was suspending
execution of new payment orders because of unpaid obligations to Prva
Banka. ‘41

On 12 December 2008, the Respondent granted a loan to Prva Banka of €44
million. On the same day, the Central Bank issued a new decision ordering
Prva Banka to prepare a detailed plan for the use of those funds. The Central
Bank kept Prva Banka under comprehensive supervision thereafter as
detailed in the Counter-Memorial.'42

136 Letter from Ministry of Finance to Central Bank dated 1 December 2008 (Exhibit R-027).

137 Opinion of the Central Bank of Montenegro dated 3 December 2008 (Exhibit R-028).

138 Letter from Privatisation Authority to MNSS B.V. dated 12 March 2008 (Exhibit C-041).

139 Witness Statement of Mr. Alan Jacobson, para. 40.

140 Email from Mr. Alan Jacobson to Mr. Velimir Bogdanovic dated 9 September 2008, attaching
letter from MNSS B.V to Prva Banka CG (Exhibit C-044).

141 Letter sent from Prva Banka CG to MNSS B. V. dated 11 December 2008 (Exhibit C-049).

142 Counter-Memorial, paras. 1077-1080.

101

298.

On 18 December 2008, Prva Banka requested ZN to pay immediately its
outstanding debt of €3,549,949.30, which included 13 overdue repayment
instalments of the social loan in an aggregate amount of €1.7 million, plus
fees and interest for October-November, and a deficit of €1.8 million in the

foreign exchange account.'43

During January 2009, Prva Banka reiterated on various occasions that it
would not honor payment instructions of MNSS until the issues addressed in
the letter of 11 December 2008 were solved."

On 13 February 2009, MNSS wrote to the Central Bank alleging that the Prva
Banka had defrauded it.4°

On 16 February 2009, the Central Bank replied that it “performs the
supervision of banks on the basis of determining the risk profile of the bank,
without specific powers to perform mediation and the settlement of the

disputes between the clients and the banks.”'4°

The issues between MNSS and Prva Banka persisted until the Prva
Refinancing Protocol and even then Prva Banka failed to honor a payment
order to CVS. MNSS commenced a debt claim in the Commercial Court in
Podgorica, which rejected the claim. MNSS appealed the decision but no
progress was made, because of ZN’s bankruptcy and surrounding
circumstances. MNSS explains that, “it did not pursue the matter vigorously
due to its understanding and belief that any appeal would have been futile
given the high-level political connections behind Prva Banka and the lack of
independence of the Montenegrin judiciary.”"4”

143 Email from Mr. Daniel Brol to Mr. Mark Jacobson and others, attaching and summarizing letter
from Prva Banka CG to Zeljezara Niksic A.D., dated 19 December 2008 (Exhibit C-053).

144 See Memorial, paras. 464 et seq.

145 Letter from MNSS B.V. to Central Bank of Montenegro dated13 February 2009, attached to
email from Mr. Alan Jacobson to Mr. Rad Vukcevic (Exhibit C-064).

146 Letter from Central Bank of Montenegro to MNSS B.V., enclosing Law on the Central Bank of
Montenegro dated 16 February 2009 (Exhibit C-065).

147 Memorial, para. 474.

102

299.

300.

301.

In the view of the Tribunal, the detailed factual background described above
shows that this part of the Prva Banka claim is based on the contractual
relationships among Prva Banka, MNSS and ZN, and it does not arise from
the Privatization Agreement or the Assignment Agreement. However, Prva
Banka is a private bank whose conduct cannot, without more, be attributed
to the Respondent. As the Tribunal explains below, although Prva Banka
was under the Central Bank’s supervision, it was not under the Central
Bank’s control for the purposes of Article 8 of the ILC Articles, other than for
a short period during which Prva Banka made transfers to the Claimants. It
follows, therefore, that the Respondent is not responsible for Prva Banka’s
actions in this respect. The Tribunal turns now to the issue of the alleged

refusal of the Government and the Central Bank to assist MNSS.

According to the Claimants, “the persistent refusals by the Government and
the Central Bank to take action against Prva Banka to ensure that MNSS
was able to make payments in Montenegro was unreasonable.” 148
Furthermore, in the case of the Central Bank, “the unreasonable nature of
such refusals is exacerbated because of the broad mandatory powers
possessed by the Central Bank in relation to payment operations and
commercial operations,” 49 and their discriminatory nature because the
Central Bank had taken control over some aspects of Prva Banka’s activities
including in relation to payments.

This Claimants’ complaint is about the regulatory failure of the Respondent
and the Central Bank in relation to Prva Banka. The regulatory supervision
of Prva Banka is a governmental function, and the majority of the Tribunal
finds that, as such, it falls within the scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
Hence, the Tribunal will consider it as a possible breach of the FET standard

further below.

148 Id, para. 478.
149 Id, para. 479

103

302. The third leg of the claim is the refusal of the Government to agree to the

303.

304.

transfer of the account of MNSS in Prva Banka to Fortis Bank. According to
the Claimants, this bank had agreed to issue to the Privatization Authority
the performance bond related to ZN’s investment program. Under Clause
8.4.1(a) of the Privatization Agreement and as a guarantee of performance,
MNSS had the obligation to

“deposit in a Bank with the seat in Montenegro the

amount of 14 million Euro into a cash collateral account

(the “Cash Collateral Account”) to cover the investment

for the first Investment Period. The Bank will issue a

Performance Bond in the full amount in favour of the

GoM substantially in the form set out in Annex 8a

hereto, on such terms that as, if and when the GoM

approves that, the Investment Liabilities are reduced

the principle amount of the Performance Bond reduces
accordingly.”"5°

When Mr. Jacobson made this request in a meeting with the Minister of
Economy on 17 December 2008, the Minister stated: “if MNSS withdrew
€26.4 million it had deposited with Prva Banka, the bank would not
survive.”'51 But the Government was also concerned that, if MNSS’ CAPEX
deposit was transferred to another bank, Prva Banka may foreclose on ZN’s
movable assets pledge to Prva Banka. At the hearing, Mr. Vujovic was
asked:
“What, in your view, at the time would have happened

to ZN if Prva Banka had foreclosed on these assets
[movable property, raw materials, inventories]?

| think the production at ZN would have stopped
totally.”"52

In the circumstances, the Tribunal finds that the Government’s refusal to

agree on the transfer of MNSS’ funds from Prva Banka to Fortis Bank was

150 Privatization Agreement, Clause 8.4.1(a) (Exhibit C-002).
151 Witness Statement of Mr. Alan Jacobson, para. 44.
182 Transcript, Day Five, p. 192, lines 4-6.

104

305.

306.

neither unfair and inequitable, nor unreasonable or discriminatory: the
Government had no duty to agree to the transfer of the account to a foreign
bank. The Government's concern was not limited to the liquidity issue in Prva
Banka emphasized by the Claimants, but, reasonably, extended to the
likelihood that it may affect the operation of ZN itself because of the overdraft
facilities granted by Prva Banka to ZN.

(ii) Refusal to Reduce the Headcount

Under Clause 8.1.4 of the Privatization Agreement, the Buyer undertook “to
ensure that the number of Company’s employees shall not be reduced below
the amount of 1.500 employees ....” The majority of the Tribunal finds that
the basis of MNSS' claim is clearly contractual, including whether the refusal
to reduce the headcount was reasonable given the change of the
circumstances. As stated by the Respondent in its Counter-Memorial, “what
Claimants are complaining about is nothing but an alleged breach of the
Privatisation Agreement.”'%3 The majority of the Tribunal concludes that, in
view of the decision of the Tribunal on its jurisdiction, the Tribunal will not
consider the refusal to reduce the headcount as part of its appreciation of
whether Article 3(1) of the BIT has been breached.

(iii) Secret Meetings with and Financial Support to the
Union

The Respondent has denied that the meetings with the Union were secret.

As regards the First Loan, the Respondent has explained that,

“when granting the loan, [it] was acting in its function
as a party to the Privatisation Agreement and as
commercial party. It was seeking to facilitate the
ongoing negotiations between the union and its
contract partner MNSS. In order to do so in [sic]
adopted measures that were also available to any
private party: it concluded a loan agreement with the

183 Counter-Memorial, para. 859.

105

307.

308.

309.

union. Its acts did not include any margin of the
exercise of sovereign authority.”

The Respondent has further explained that, “[t]he reason why the loan was
not provided to ZN was that this would have only created further debt on
ZN’s balance sheets and would further have been considered state aid.
Hence Respondent opted to circumvent the problems connected with the
granting of a loan directly to ZN and chose to grant the loan to the union.”
On 17 March 2011 and on 31 March 2011, the Respondent provided further
financial support to the Union out of the budget reserve and as one-term aid
to the workers of ZN and other enterprises. According to the Government’s
decisions, these “funds shall be counted as an advance payment of the
social programme in case of the Government's participation in its
realization.”"5°

The Claimants in their Reply stated that “the fact that acts or omissions by
the Respondent were done pursuant to the Privatisation Agreement is
irrelevant .... 15” For the majority of the Tribunal, it is not irrelevant because
the Claimants have waived any claim under international law based on acts
of the Government “pursuant” to the Privatization Agreement. For the
majority of the Tribunal, therefore, the issue is whether the Respondent in
providing financial support to the Union acted as a sovereign or a contractual
party.

It is clear from the conclusions in respect of the financial support granted
twice to the Union in March 2011 that the Respondent was acting as the
sovereign in providing “one-term aid” that required the redirection of funds
from the “subventions” category of the Ministry of Economy to the “current”

154 Id, para. 909.

155 Id, para. 902

186 Government Conclusions No. 03-2597 dated 17 March 2011 (Exhibit C-555); Government
Conclusions No. (illegible) dated 31 March 2011 (Exhibit C-583).

187 Reply, para. 81.

106

310.

311.

budget reserve.'®® Furthermore, the funds were intended as an advance of
the Government's financing for the social program.

As regards the loan of December 2010, the fact that the financial support
has been characterized as a loan does not necessarily mean that, in
providing it, the Respondent did not act as a sovereign. In this respect, the
Tribunal notes that the Government had no contractual obligation to provide
financial assistance to the Union under the Privatization Agreement, and, as
explained by the Government, the financial support was instrumented as a
loan to circumvent restrictions on State aid, “a rational public interest
objective.”'°° Furthermore, the loan was not on commercial terms — it was
interest-free — and it is unknown from which Government pocket the loan
funds came from; they may have come from the same reserve as in the case
of outright aid but provided on different terms. For these reasons, the
majority of the Tribunal considers that the financial support to the Union was
provided in the exercise of the puissance publique of the Government and,
hence, the Tribunal is competent to determine whether these measures,
including the allegation of secret meetings, which is intimately linked to the
funding of the Union, were in breach of the FET standard.

(iv) Refusal to Allow ZN to Scrap Obsolete Machinery

Under Clause 8.2.1.3 of the Privatization Agreement, the Buyer needed the
consent of the Sellers to dispose of any assets of ZN. This clause provides
that the Sellers’ consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The majority of
the Tribunal concludes that the disposal of obsolete machinery is essentially
of a contractual nature related to compliance with the Privatization
Agreement and, hence, outside the competence of the Tribunal.

188 Government Conclusions No. 03-2597 dated 17 March 2011 (Exhibit C-555); Government
Conclusions No. (illegible) dated 31 March 2011 (Exhibit C-583).
189 Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 96.

107

312.

313.

(v) Refusal to Support Publicly the Restructuring Plan

The Claimants’ complaint concerns public statements of the Government
that, in the view of the Claimants, undermined the Restructuring Plan agreed
to by the Government itself. This ground adduced by the Claimants reflects
the ambivalence of the Government as contract partner and sovereign, but
the Government had no obligation to publicly support the Restructuring Plan
and it had shown its support by guaranteeing the Crédit Suisse Loan to ZN,
which was part of the Restructuring Plan. While the Tribunal understands the
desire of the Claimants for more support from the Government, it is also true
that the Government had to manage its support among different
constituencies with opposing interests. How it decided to allocate its support
and by which means where it had no obligation to provide it, it is not a matter
for the Tribunal to judge.

(vi) Acts Committed During the Bankruptcy Proceedings

The Claimants have listed eight items in support of their claim of breach of
Article 3(1) of the BIT by the Respondent. Seven relate to decisions of the
bankruptcy administrator. The preliminary question here is whether the acts
of the bankruptcy administrator can be attributed to the Respondent. Usually
a bankruptcy administrator is a representative of the debtor and not of the
State. This is indeed the position in Montenegrin law. Article 24.1 of the
Montenegrin Bankruptcy Act states: “The bankruptcy [administrator]
manages and represents the bankruptcy debtor, unless differently stipulated
by the law.”'®° The Tribunal is persuaded by the argument of the Respondent
that reference in the Montenegrin Criminal Code to the bankruptcy
administrator as an official serves the purpose of protecting the administrator
as if he were an official of the State. Furthermore, as argued by the
Respondent, if the bankruptcy administrator were an organ of the State, such
reference would be superfluous.

160 The Bankruptcy Law, Official Gazette of Montenegro No.1/2011 dated 22 December 2010
(Legal Authority CLA-519).

108

314.

315.

316.

317.

318.

This conclusion by the Tribunal is in line with the concept of the bankruptcy
administrator in most European civil law systems and supported by
investment treaty tribunals,1®' most recently in the case of Yukos.'®? The

facts of the present case do not warrant a departure from this approach.

The eighth item on the list relates to the initiation of the bankruptcy
proceedings by the Union because of the unpaid salaries to ZN’s workers.
This is not a Government act and, at that time, the Claimants did not object
to it.

None of the acts in relation to the bankruptcy proceedings complained of by
the Claimants may be attributed to the Respondent. Hence they cannot be
the basis for a finding of liability under Article 3(1) of the BIT.

(vii) Respondent's Objections to the Debt-to-Equity Swap
and the Issue of Convertible Loans

This transaction required the consent of the Government because of its
effect on the implementation of the Privatization Agreement. The
Government was concerned that, because of the resulting dilution of the
existing shareholders, the Government and MNSS would become minority
shareholders and could not ensure that the Privatization Agreement be
implemented. The majority of the Tribunal concludes that this, again, is a
contractual matter between the parties to the Privatization Agreement and,
therefore, the Tribunal will not consider these claims as part of the actions of
the Respondent allegedly in breach of Article 3(1) of the BIT.

(viii) Refusal to Approve Third Party Funding

This transaction involved the waiver of substantial obligations of the parties
to the Privatization Agreement. The Government explained on 17 March
2011 that the Government was not prepared to grant this waiver when MNSS

161 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Award, 27
August 2008, para. 253 (Legal Authority RLA-109); Jan Oostergetel and Theodora Laurentius v.
Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, Award, 23 April 2012, para. 157 (Legal Authority RLA-180).

162 See Rejoinder, paras. 464-467.

109

319.

320.

had failed to pay the workers’ salaries for four months and to provide the
performance bond for its investment obligations for 2011. The majority of the
Tribunal concludes, again, that this is a contractual issue among the parties
to the Privatization Agreement, which falls outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

(ix) Refusal to Allow ZN to Withdraw Funds from its
Account with Erste Bank

The Respondent and MNSS had agreed in the Protocol on Oversight signed
on the occasion of the Crédit Suisse Loan that a payment instruction signed
by MNSS, ZN and the Respondent was required to withdraw funds from ZN’s
account with Erste Bank where the proceeds of the loan were deposited. The
complaint relates to one of a total of seventeen payment instructions. The
approval of the Government was delayed by nine days. The Government did
not refuse the transfer but requested an explanation because the request did
not meet the Protocol conditions for transfers. The majority of the Tribunal
finds that this matter is contractual in nature, and, therefore, outside the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

(x) Refusal to Approve Short-Term Loans

The complaint relates to the Fourth and Fifth Loans. The Respondent’s
representatives on the board of ZN voted against them. By the date of the
vote, 17 February 2011, the funds had already been disbursed. As stated by
the Respondent, “[i]t remains wholly open from Claimants’ submission how
being outvoted on the decision on a loan agreement that have [sic] already
been concluded could possibly constitute a breach of the BIT.”1® This is a
matter between shareholders without involvement of the State as such, and
therefore cannot constitute a breach of the BIT.

163 Counter-Memorial, para. 996.

110

321.

322.

323.

324.

(xi) Obligation to Maintain a Stable Legal and Business

Environment

If proven, this is a cause of action that would pertain to the exercise of the
sovereign authority of the State; however, itis not clear from the submissions
exactly what change in the legal and business environment occurred. This
seems to be an item more in the list that needed to be ticked-off, but for
which no proof has been submitted by the Claimants.

To conclude, of the list of measures adduced by the Claimants in support of
the claim that the Respondent breached the FET standard, the majority of
the Tribunal retains some aspects of the Prva Banka episode and the
support of the Government to the Union. The Tribunal will now determine the
content of the FET standard against which to judge these measures and
whether they amount to a breach of the obligation in Article 3(1) of the BIT.

b. The FET Standard against which to Judge Non-Contractual
Measures

The relevant part of Article 3(1) of the BIT provides: “Each Contracting Party
shall ensure fair and equitable treatment of the investments of investors of
the other Contracting Party [...].”

The Claimants note that Article 3(1) of the BIT has no reference to
international law and contend that “the FET is an autonomous treaty
standard that encompasses, but which is nonetheless separate from, the
FET standard under customary international law; the customary standard
including, but not being limited to, the evolving concept of an ‘international
minimum standard.’””'*4 From this reading of the meaning of the FET, the
Claimants draw two consequences. First, that the BIT may require a
treatment by the Respondent additional to or beyond that of customary
international law; and second, that the threshold for the finding of breach of
this standard is lower than the applicable threshold to find a breach of

customary international law.

164 Memorial, para. 663. Emphasis in the original.

111

325.

326.

327.

The Respondent does not elaborate on this point or generally on its
understanding of the FET other than to note that the “Claimants have
selectively reviewed numerous awards to posit an overly broad interpretation
of the FET standard,”'® and to deny that this is the applicable standard. The
thrust of the Respondent's argument is that the facts of the case don’t
support a claim of breach of the FET standard even if understood in the
Claimants’ terms.
As held by the E/ Paso tribunal, this Tribunal “considers this discussion to be
somewhat futile, as the scope and content of the minimum standard of
international law is as little defined as the BITs’ FET standard, and as the
true question is to decide what substantive protection is granted to foreign
investors through the FET.”'® The futility is confirmed in this case by the
Claimants’ reliance, among others, on the understanding of the Waste
Management I/ tribunal, which places the FET in the context of the minimum
standard of treatment:

“[...] the minimum standard of treatment of fair and

equitable treatment is infringed by conduct attributable

to the State and harmful to the claimant if the conduct

is arbitrary, grossly unfair, unjust or idiosyncratic, is

discriminatory and exposes the claimant to sectional or

racial prejudice, or involves a lack of due process

leading to an outcome which offends judicial propriety

— as might be the case with a manifest failure of natural

justice in judicial proceedings or a complete lack of

transparency and candor in an administrative process.

In applying this standard it is relevant that the treatment

is in breach of representations made by the host State
which were reasonably relied on by the claimant.”"®”

The Tribunal concurs with this description of State conduct in breach of the
FET standard. Furthermore, the Tribunal notes that, in the Claimants’

165 Rejoinder, para. 501.

166 E/ Paso Energy International Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/15,
Award, 31 October 2011, para. 335 (Legal Authority CLA-793).

167 Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Final
Award, 30 April 2004, para. 98 (Legal Authority CLA-565 and RLA-090).

112

328.

329.

330.

summary of their review of arbitral awards, the Claimants list as constituent
duties of a State under the FET standard precisely those that would be
breached by the State conduct describe above.

The Parties have also argued whether or not a breach of contract may be a
breach of the FET standard. As held by the Noble Ventures tribunal and
consistently held by other tribunals, it is a “well established rule of general
international law that in normal circumstances per se a breach of a contract
by the State does not give rise to direct international responsibility on the
part of the State.”"®8 To be congruent with its decision on jurisdiction, the
majority of the Tribunal finds that the Tribunal need not further consider this
matter.

c. Did the Respondent Breach Its Duties Under the FET
Standard?

The majority of the Tribunal has retained for consideration as a possible
breach of the FET standard the refusal of the Respondent and the Central
Bank to make sure that Prva Banka would execute payment orders of MNSS,
and the support of the Union by the Respondent. The Tribunal will consider
them in turn.

(i) The Refusal of the Respondent and the Central Bank
to Ensure MNSS Could Make Payments from its Prva
Banka Bank Account

The Claimants allege that the Respondent is responsible for their losses for
the delayed execution of payment orders by Prva Banka, because “the
Government and the Central Bank refused to exercise its [sic] authority over
Prva Banka to ensure that MNSS’ funds were able to be used by MNSS for
ZN’s CAPEX payments and operations.”"®° The Respondent, for its part,

168 Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/11, Award, 12 October 2005, para.
53 (Legal Authority RLA-097).
169 Memorial, para. 475.

113

331.

332.

considers that “the Central Bank took all steps required by it under
Montenegrin law.”17°

The Central Bank started to monitor Prva Banka’s performance in 2007, long
before the financial crisis broke out. In a report to the European Commission
(‘Report to the Commission’) in reply to an enquiry about Prva Banka, the
Central Bank stated that “the acting by [Prva Banka] has been to a more
significant extent incompliant with regulations”, and that, therefore, it
“decided to demand that [Prva Banka] ... make commitments as to removing
the irregularities.”'”' In view of the irregularities, the Central Bank entered
into an agreement with Prva Banka on 6 July 2007 and reviewed Prva
Banka’s compliance in November 2007. The Central Bank found that Prva
Banka had not fully complied with the agreement and, on 13 February 2008,
ordered Prva Banka, inter alia, to maintain a liquidity ratio of 15 percent and
to provide the Central Bank with monthly reports on the steps taken for the
implementation of its decision. The Central Bank conducted an in-depth
investigation in July 2008 and issued a warning on 2 October 2008, requiring
daily reports.

Despite the Central Bank’s monitoring, Prva Banka ran into liquidity
problems and was unable to effect numerous payment instructions sent by
its customers among which MNSS and ZN. ‘72 In November 2008, the
Central Bank performed a new in-depth investigation of Prva Banka. On 21
November 2008, the Central Bank ordered Prva Banka to immediately take
measures to improve its liquidity, among others, through the collection of

outstanding debts.

170 Counter-Memorial, para. 1066.

171 Memorial, para. 94.

172 The problems of Prva Banka affected all customers. In the Decision of 21 November 2008, it is
acknowledged that: “The Bank currently has ca. 30 million of outstanding payment orders in the
domestic and foreign payments ... The balance in the clearing account of the Bank is insufficient
for settling daily liabilities ... it has been determined that, as of 10/11/2008, the Bank has 1,777
unrealized payment messages ... ”. (Decision No. 0104-32/1 of the Central Bank of Montenegro
dated 21 November 2008 (Exhibit C-674 and R-025)).

114

333.

334.

The Claimants use the Report to the Commission to assert that the Central
Bank was exercising the type of control needed under Article 8 of the ILC
Articles in order to attribute the acts of the “controlled” entity to the State.
The report reads:

“On 3 November 2008, the Central Bank started direct

control of [Prva Banka’s] operations ... aimed at

determining whether the Bank has removed the

irregularities identified by the Report on control (the

act strictly confidential 03-26/1 of 29 August 2008).

During the control, in the first two weeks already, the

Central Bank has established that the Bank’s liquidity

was critically insufficient due to the Bank’s incapacity

to meet all of its due liabilities, and that the liquidity risk

of the Bank is high due to mismatch between maturities
and cash flows of assets and liabilities.”"7°

The Decision of the Central Bank of 21 November 2008 refers to the “direct
supervision” of Prva Banka in the Respondent's translation’ and to “direct
control” in the Claimants’ translation.17° The Decision explains that, “the
Central Bank shall establish whether the Bank has eliminated the
irregularities identified by in the Report on control [/Supervisory Report].”176
It appears that whatever the wording, the type of control/supervision is part
of the monitoring function of the Central Bank and not a compulsory control
over the activities of Prva Banka in general or specifically over the delays in
payment complained by MNSS. The aim of the “control/supervision” was to
determine whether the irregularities found in the confidential report of 29
August 2008 had been removed.

173 “Questionnaire - Financial Markets” (undated), p. 13 (Exhibit C-483). Emphasis added.

174 Respondent's Exhibit R-025 reads: “...through direct supervision of the Bank’s operations, the
Central Bank shall determine whether the Bank has remedied the irregularities identified by the
Supervision Report.”

175 Claimants’ Exhibit C-674 reads: “...in the direct control of the Bank [Prva Banka] business, the
Central Bank shall establish whether the Bank has eliminated the irregularities identified by in the
Report on control.”

176 Decision No. 0104-32/1 of the Central Bank of Montenegro (Exhibit C-674 and R-025), referring
to the confidential report of the Central Bank, dated 29 August 2008. Emphasis added.

115

335.

336.

337.

In any case, even if the Central Bank had exercised “direct control,” this
would utmost concern decisions taken during a brief period, from 3
November 2008 to 12 December 2008. The Tribunal observes that during
this period Prva Banka requested a short-term loan from the Respondent,
the Respondent granted it and Prva Banka honored the payment orders of
MNSS of July and November to CVS and ABB.17”

According to the Respondent, the Central Bank could have introduced
compulsory management of Prva Banka under Montenegrin law, but as
indicated in the reply to a Questionnaire from the European Commission
(‘Questionnaire’), “the Central Bank did not assess as justified and
purposeful to introduce compulsory management to Prva banka ....”178 The
Central Bank did, however, request a change of management, as indicated
in the just mentioned Questionnaire, which in effect occurred: “Having in
mind that, due to negative effects of the global financial crisis, Prva banka
faced a liquidity crisis in the second half of 2008, the Central Bank took
measures towards Prva banka already in October 2008, aimed at
management replacement, cease in the risk profile growth, and provision of
additional liquid assets.”1”? The IMF acknowledged that “[t]he authorities
pointed to their prompt response to the financial turmoil ... the [Central Bank]
has prohibited new lending, demanded the installation of new management
and commissioned an independent external audit.”18°

The Claimants analyze the financial assistance to Prva Banka as exclusively
in favor of Prva Banka and assert that “[t]he Government was guided by its
desire to save Prva Banka.”'®" But the assistance was not just for the benefit
of Prva Banka, the Claimants also benefited from this assistance as did other
customers. The Claimants have further argued that the amount of the loan

was insufficient to bail out Prva Banka and “the Respondent took an effective

177 See detailed chronology in para. 297 above.

178 “Questionnaire - Financial Markets” (undated), p. 10 (Exhibit C-483).
179 [bid.

180 Extract from IMF Country Report No. 10/155, pp. 11-12 (Exhibit C-453).
181 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 63.

116

338.

339.

340.

decision to continue using MNSS’ funds to improve the liquidity of Prva
Banka.”'®2 No proof of such decision is in the record, but there is ample proof
of the ongoing dispute between MNSS and Prva Banka in the context of their
commercial relationship, as considered earlier in this Award.

Even if the assistance had not benefited the Claimants and other customers,
the fact that at the onset of the 2008 financial crisis the Government assisted
the largest bank in the country was reasonable in the circumstances. In the
words of the Sa/uka tribunal the standard of reasonableness requires “a
showing that the State’s conduct bears a reasonable relationship to some
rational policy ....’18° The short-term loan was provided at a time when many
other governments tried to save their banks, whether private or public.

As to the complaint that the funds deposited by MNSS served to boost the
liquidity of Prva Banka and made up for assistance that should have been
provided by the Government, the Tribunal has already considered this
aspect of the complaint. It relates to the complex relationship of MNSS with
Prva Banka. To the extent that in some instances Prva Banka followed
orders of the Central Bank to prop up liquidity of Prva Banka, these orders
did not single out MNSS or ZN but the institution as a whole. The funds

deposited by other customers may have also boosted Prva Banka’s liquidity.

In sum, the Tribunal finds that, rather than refusing to assist MNSS, the
Government and the Central Bank provided limited support to Prva Bank
from which MNSS, ZN and other customers benefited. This limited
assistance was not tailored to MNNS’ needs and may have been insufficient,
but MNSS had no right to special assistance from the Central Bank or the
Government.

182 Reply, para. 63.
183 Saluka Investments BV v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award, 17 March 2006, para 460
(Legal Authority CLA-553 and RLA-101).

117

341.

342.

343.

(ii) | Support of the Union

The Claimants have argued that the Government conspired with the Union
to bankrupt the company, and interfere with their ability to manage ZN with
the financial support provided to the Union and by meeting secretly with the
Union. The first thing to note is that the meetings took place in the context of
strikes by the workers. In the case of the loan, the strike had been going on
since September and the funding had been discussed in Parliament, hardly
a secret venue. The head of the Union, Mr. Vucinic, explained to Mr. Mark
Jacobson on 19 December 2010 that “we have stopped the general strike
and protests in the Big Hall of Zeljezara, today on 19.12.2010 at 11am, on
the basis of the accomplished agreement with Minister of Economy, Mr.
Branko Vujovic, at whose insistence we have accepted to talk to you about
the future work in Zeljezara Niksic.”"®* Whether the agreement was reached
or the discussions conducive to it were conducted without the prior
knowledge of MNSS, their objective was to stop the strike and bring
management and workers to the negotiating table, a result that the

withholding of salaries of the workers had not achieved.

The further support to the Union in March 2011 may have been arranged
without MNSS’ knowledge but again it took place in the context of a strike
and shortly before ZN went bankrupt. The support of the Government needs
to be placed in the context of the social obligations of MNSS under the
Privatization Agreement and the expectations that MNSS could have
legitimately had in relation to them.

It should be noted first that the strategy of ZN to achieve an agreement with
the Union on the reduction of the headcount by withholding salaries of
striking workers had failed whether or not the Government provided support

to the Union.

184 Email from Ms. Ivana Vavic to Mr. Mark Jacobson and others, attaching letter from Mr. Janko
Vucinic dated 19 December 2010 (Exhibit C-292).

118

344.

345.

In the Privatization Agreement, the Buyer acknowledged the significant
importance attached by the Sellers to the Buyer’s commitments in relation
to, inter alia, the social program. The Buyer also undertook not to allow
“obligations of the Company towards employees to be delayed or to remain
unpaid.”"®> Furthermore, the Sellers could “terminate this Agreement without
further formalities including acquiring [sic] arbitration award or court decision
in the following circumstances: (i) if the Buyer delays payment of salaries
and reimbursement to employees for two months or more ....”"8°
By MNSS permitting ZN to withhold the salaries of employees, it created an
event that would have permitted the Government to terminate the
Privatization Agreement. If the Privatization Agreement would have been
terminated under Clause 8.5.4, the Buyer was obliged to return “the Sale
Shares and any shares acquired through share capital increases and the
Buyer shall not be entitled to the reimbursement of any investment made.
Outstanding obligations toward the Company and employees shall be
collected by enforcement of the Performance Bond.”'®” Faced with the risk
of possible termination by the Government, whether the Government chose
to influence the Union by way of financing a post-bankruptcy social program
or terminating the Privatization Agreement, would seem immaterial in light of
MNSS’ commitments. The situation in this case resembles that considered
by the Noble Ventures tribunal where the Government initiated judicial
reorganization proceedings of the claimant:

“the situation of the Claimant, CSR and its employees

was such that the judicial proceedings seemed to be

the only solution to an otherwise insoluble situation.

Bearing in mind the interests of the approximately

4,000 employees who depended on CSR and their

prospects at that time, the initiation of the proceedings

was neither unfair nor inequitable. This conclusion is

reinforced by the consideration that the Respondent is

not to be blamed for having violated any obligations
under international law in connection with the

185 Privatization Agreement, Clause 8.2.1.7 (Exhibit C-002).
186 /d., Clause 8.5.4.
187 [bid.

119

346.

347.

348.

349.

350.

indisputably dramatic economic situation at that time.
Therefore, no violation of Art. II(2)(a) and its fair and
equitable treatment standard has occurred.”188

The Tribunal has no difficulty in reaching a similar conclusion, particularly if
the overall assistance, including the financial assistance, provided by the
Government to ZN is taken into consideration. The Government guaranteed
the BlueBay Loan and the Crédit Suisse Loan; both guarantees were called.
While in the case of the BlueBay Loan, the Government in compensation
received 25 percent of the shares of MNSS in the capital of ZN, the
Government did not receive compensation for paying back the Crédit Suisse
Loan, which with interest exceeded €31 million.

The Tribunal concludes that the Respondent did not breach the obligation to
accord the Claimants fair and equitable treatment.

6) Most Constant Protection and Security

Article 3(1) of the BIT provides in relevant part that “[eJach Contracting Party
shall accord to such investment the most constant protection and security.”
The Parties disagree on the content of this obligation. The Claimants argue
that the use of the expression “most constant” indicates a higher standard of
protection equivalent to “full protection.” They also claim that the
Respondent's obligation extends to ensuring a stable investment
environment. For the Respondent, the term “most constant” only adds a
temporal element and it does not have the effect of increasing the standard
of protection and security. The Respondent contends that the protection and
security standard is limited to the protection of the physical integrity of an
investment.

The Tribunal does not need to engage in a theoretical discussion of whether
the scope of this standard includes, as argued by the Claimants, “ensuring

188 Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania, |CSID Case No. ARB/01/11, Award, 12 October 2005, para.
53, para. 182 (Legal Authority RLA-097).

120

351.

352.

353.

a stable protection environment” because no claim has been made that the
investment environment has been changed.

As regards the meaning of “most constant,” the plain meaning of “constant”
is “unchanging,” “that remains the same.” ‘8° Thus, the level of protection
and security should not change for the duration of the investment. But the
expression “most constant” does not increase the level of protection and
security as understood under international law. This standard has been
understood not to impose on the Government a strict obligation but only an
obligation of vigilance and due diligence taking into account the
circumstances and resources of the host State. 19°

The specific claim of failure by the Respondent to protect the Claimants is
based on the events that occurred in September 2010 and December 2010.
Union members occupied the administration building of ZN for seven days
as from 28 September 2010. It is disputed between the Parties as to when
the Respondent was informed of the planned demonstration by the workers.
The Respondent claims that it was informed on 28 September and the police
had no time to organize police protection. The only protection provided
consisted of two plain cloth policemen in an unmarked car. Irrespective of
when the police was advised of the demonstration, the police took no action
to dislodge the occupiers during the seven days that the occupation lasted.
On 7 December 2010, the Respondent was advised of a forthcoming strike
on 13 December 2010. On 12 December 2010, the head of the Union
advised Minister Vujovic of the workers’ intent to occupy the administrative

building the next day. Again, this building was occupied as announced and

189 The Concise Oxford Dictionary.

199 See, for instance, American Manufacturing & Trading, Inc. v. Republic of Zaire, \CSID Case No.
ARB/93/1, Award, 21 February 1997, para. 6.05 (Legal Authority CLA-576); Asian Agricultural
Products Limited v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, |CSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Award,
27 June 1990, para. 50 (Legal Authority RLA-178); El Paso Energy International Company v.
Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Award, para. 522 (Legal Authority CLA-793);
Pantechniki S.A. Contractors & Engineers v. Republic of Albania, |CSID Case No. ARB/07/21,
Award, 30 July 2009, para. 81 (Legal Authority RLA-186).

121

354.

355.

356.

357.

the CEO was physically assaulted while escaping from the angry workers.

No police protection was provided.

Whether the police was advised in advance or not does not seem to have
made any difference in terms of preparation of the police to protect the
premises. According to ZN’s CEO, the police informed him that they would
not attend ZN in the event of labor unrest because ZN was a private business

on private property.19' The Respondent has not disputed this information.

It is surprising that the police would not ensure the physical integrity of
buildings and persons irrespective of their location or ownership. It is also
surprising that Minister Vujovic saw no reason to take steps in response to
ZN’s police protection request. This is even more so because the
Government owned a substantial portion of ZN.

To conclude, the standard of “most constant protection and security”
requires the Government to have a more pro-active attitude to ensure the
protection of persons and property in the circumstances of ZN, particularly
when it had been forewarned, as it was certainly the case in December
2010.'%2 Nonetheless, the Claimants have failed to show that they suffered
damage as a result of the Respondent’s actions. As a consequence, while
the standard in Article 3(1) of the BIT was breached, there is no basis for an
award of damages in relation to the behavior of the police during the two
strikes at the end of the year 2010.

7) Most-Favored Nation Treatment

This standard of treatment is to be found in Article 3(2) of the BIT, which

provides:

“Article 3

2. More particularly, each Contracting Party shall
accord to such investments treatment which in any

191 Second Witness Statement of Mr. Les Kwasik, para. 7.
192 See Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, |CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Award, 8
December 2000, para. 84 (Legal Authority CLA-577).

122

358.

359.

360.

361.

case shall not be less favourable than that accorded
either to investments of its own investors or to
investments of investors of any third State, whichever
is more favourable to the investor concerned.”195

The breach of this standard requires proof that investments in like
circumstances have been discriminated on the basis of their nationality. In
the case before the Tribunal, the alleged breach concerns the treatment
accorded to CEAC, owner of KAP, and to the Max Aicher Group of Cypriot
and German nationalities, respectively.

The Respondent has argued that, “the standard does not apply to investors,
but specifically to investments. Notably, Claimants’ investment is not ZN
itself, which was accorded the treatment that Claimants challenge as
discriminatory, but the equity and loan positions as regards ZN.”1%4

The Tribunal notes that the investment, and in particular the equity
investment, materialized through ZN. ZN is the vehicle through which the
investor made the investment. Thus, treatment of the equity, the loans or ZN
are included in the treatment to be accorded to investments. In general, the
submissions of the Respondent seem to agree with this observation of the
Tribunal, particularly in the case of CEAC, the Respondent does not
distinguish between KAP and the equity of CEAC in KAP.

The Parties disagree on whether ZN is in like circumstances to KAP. The
Respondent has emphasized the differences because CEAC and ZN are in
different economic sectors. The Claimants find that they are in like
circumstances because they are two companies affected by the economic
crisis and in bankruptcy. The Claimants’ complaint is that the Respondent
permitted KAP to reduce the number of employees in 2010, assumed €22
million in liabilities, did not interfere in negotiations of management and
employees, and that KAP received more favorable treatment in the
bankruptcy proceedings.

193 BIT, Article 3(2) (Legal Authority CLA-504).
194 Rejoinder, para. 624. Emphasis in the original.

123

362.

363.

364.

365.

Arguably, KAP and ZN are comparable even if they operate in different
sectors in the sense of being affected by the economic crisis, being the two
largest employers in the country and both being in bankruptcy. But there may
have been reasons for the different treatment. The labor-management
issues pervading in ZN may have been absent in KAP. There is evidence of
substantial support by the Respondent to ZN before it became bankrupt as
detailed by the Respondent.‘ As to the different treatment in the
bankruptcy proceedings, the Tribunal has already determined that the

actions of the bankruptcy administrator are not attributable to the State.

The Max Aicher Group was a new investor and this by itself places this group
in circumstances different from the investor whose company is in
bankruptcy. Moreover, the Tribunal notes that only KAP is mentioned in the
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief under the violation of the MFN clause. There

is no reference to the Max Aicher Group.
To conclude, the Tribunal dismisses the claim for breach of MFN treatment.

8) Breach of the Obligation to Ensure the Free Transfer of

Payments

This obligation is provided for in Article 5 of the BIT, which states in relevant
part:

“Article 5

1. Each Contracting Party shall guarantee to the
investors of the other Contracting Party the free
transfer of payments related to their investments. The
transfers shall be made in a freely convertible currency,
without restriction or delay. Such transfers include in
particular though not exclusively:

a) capital and additional amounts to maintain or
increase investments;

b) profits, interests, dividends and other current
income;

195 See id., para. 626.

124

366.

367.

c) funds in repayment of loans;
d) the proceeds of sale or liquidation of the investment;
e) royalties or fees;

f) unspent earnings of persons working in connection
with the investment in the territory of the Contracting
Party;

g) payments arising under Article 7.1%

The Claimants base the allegation of breach of the obligation to ensure the
free transfer of payments on the issues that have been already considered
by the Tribunal relating to payments from ZN’s account with Erste Bank and
to payments from MNSS’ account with Prva Banka. As regards the case of
payments by Erste Bank, the majority of the Tribunal has already decided
that the complaint of the Claimants is a contractual matter outside the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

As regards Prva Banka, the majority of the Tribunal has also decided that,
for the most part, the allegations of the Claimants concern contractual
matters that fall outside of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. To the extent that the
allegations relate to the regulatory function of the Central Bank, even if it is
accepted that the Central Bank was in “direct control” of Prva Banka in the
sense argued by the Claimants, this only occurred for a limited period of
time, from 3 November 2008 to 12 December 2008. It is precisely during this
period that payment orders of MNSS were honored. Hence, there is no merit
in the claim that the Respondent breached its obligation to guarantee free

transfer of payments.

196 BIT, Article 5(1) (Legal Authority CLA-504).

125

368.

369.

370.

9) Expropriation

The Tribunal refers to Article 6 of the BIT, which provides in relevant part for
the following:

“Article 6

1. Investments by investors of either Contracting Party
shall not be nationalized, expropriated or subjected to
any other measure having effect equivalent to
nationalization or expropriation (hereinafter referred to
as “expropriation”) in the territory of the other
Contracting Party except where expropriation is:

a) for a purpose which is in the public interest;
b) carried out under due process of law;
c) non-discriminatory, and

d) against prompt, adequate and effective
compensation, which shall be effected without
delay.”197

The Claimants have argued that they were indirectly or directly expropriated.
The claim of indirect expropriation is based on the cumulative effect of the
measures taken by the Respondent that the Tribunal has considered under
the preceding claims. The majority of the Tribunal has determined that these
are contractual claims and thus outside its competence. As regards the
cumulative effect of the other remaining claims, the Tribunal does not
consider that they could have had the effect of depriving the Claimants of
the economic use and benefit of their investments.

The Claimants also contend that they have been directly expropriated
through the bankruptcy proceedings. Most of the acts at the base of their
claim are acts of the bankruptcy administrator, including the sale of ZN’s
assets to Toscelik, which the Tribunal has already determined not to be
attributable to the Respondent on the facts of the present case. The other
ground for the claim is the dismissal of the Reorganization Plan by the

197 BIT, Article 6(1) (Legal Authority CLA-504).

126

Vil.

371.

372.

373.

Podgorica Commercial Court upheld by the Montenegrin Court of Appeal
and the fact that these courts “relied in part on an expert report submitted by
an expert affiliated with the Government.”'%8 A court decision cannot be
considered a direct expropriation unless a denial of justice is found. In the
instant case, denial of justice has not been pleaded. Therefore, the Tribunal

rejects the claim of expropriation of the Claimants’ assets.
COSTS

The Claimants have requested that, “the Tribunal exercise its discretion
pursuant to Article 58(1) of the ICSID AF Arbitration Rules, and apply the
general principle that costs shall follow the event.”'99

The Respondent has requested that the Tribunal grants them the fees and
expenses related to the proceeding, those of the members of the Tribunal
and the charges for the use of the facilities of ICSID.°

The fees and expenses of the Tribunal and ICSID’s administrative fees and
expenses are the following (in USD):201

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses:

Andrés Rigo Sureda $207,611.11
Emmanuel Gaillard $134,325.00
Brigitte Stern $128,165.90
Christoph Schreuer $3562.50

ICSID’s administrative fees and $223,409.13
expenses (estimated)?02

Total $697,073.64

198 Memorial, para. 821.

199 Reply, para. 522.

200 Rejoinder, para. 811.

201 The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties a detailed Financial Statement of the case account
as soon as all invoices are received and the account is final.

202 The amount includes estimated charges of $1,000 (courier, printing and copying) in respect of
the dispatch of this Award.

127

374. The Tribunal recalls that the Respondent has only in part been successful in

its objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. On the other hand, the

Claimants have failed on the merits. The Tribunal also recalls that the

Claimants have paid all advances requested by the ICSID Secretariat.

375. Taking into account the preceding considerations and all of the

circumstances of the case, the Tribunal in use of its discretion determines

that each Party shall pay for its own costs of the proceeding, and the

Claimants shall pay for the fees and expenses of the Members of the

Tribunal and for the expenses and charges of the ICSID Secretariat.

Vill. DECISION

For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal has decided:

1.

To uphold the objections to its jurisdiction in respect of contract claims
arising from the Privatization Agreement and the Assignment
Agreement.

To uphold the objection to its jurisdiction for lack of consent under the
2000 and 2011 MFI Laws.

To dismiss all other objections to its jurisdiction.

To uphold the claim that the Respondent failed to ensure the protection
of persons and property, but without granting any compensation, as
the Claimants have failed to show that they suffered damages as a
result.

Ata majority, to dismiss the claim that the Respondent's failure to warn
MNSS of the financial condition of Prva Banka breached the
Respondent's obligations of fair and equitable treatment and non-
impairment of the Claimants’ investment.

To dismiss all other claims on the merits or, at a majority, because they
fall outside its jurisdiction.

To apportion the cost of the proceedings as follows: each Party shall
pay for its own costs, and the Claimants shall pay for the fees and

128

expenses of the members of the Tribunal and for the expenses and

charges of the ICSID Secretariat.

129

 
     

mmanuel Gaillard Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: 27 April 2016 Date: 25 April 2016

 

Andrés Rigo Sureda
President of the Tribunal

Date: 4 May 2016

PLACE OF ARBITRATION: Paris, France

