Public Version

IN THE ARBITRATION

UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN OF THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

BETWEEN
MOBIL INVESTMENTS CANADA INC. & MURPHY OIL CORPORATION
(Claimants)
AND
CANADA
(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/4

 

AWARD

 

Tribunal
Professor Hans van Houtte, President
Professor Merit E. Janow
Professor Philippe Sands QC
Secretary of the Tribunal

Ms. Martina Polasek

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: February 20, 2015

Representing the Claimants:

Mr. David W. Rivkin,

Ms. Samantha J. Rowe
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
919 Third Avenue

New York, New York 10022
United States of America

Mr. Barton Legum
Dentons

5, Boulevard Malesherbes
75008 Paris

France

Ms. Sophie Lamb
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
65 Gresham Street

London EC2V 7NQ

United Kingdom

Mr. Rene J. Mouledoux.
Mr. Tomasz J. Sikora
Mr. Eugene J. Silva
Exxon Mobil Corporation

800 Bell Street-CORP-EMB- 16861

Houston, Texas 77002
United States of America

Mr. Walter Compton
Murphy Oil Corporation
P.O. Box 7000

El Dorado, AR 71730
United States of America

Public Version

Representing the Respondent:

Ms. Sylvie Tabet,

Mr. Mark Luz,

Mr. Adam Douglas,

Trade Law Bureau (JLT)

Department of Foreign Affairs and
International Trade

Lester B. Pearson Building, 125 Sussex
Drive

Ottawa, Ontario, KIA 0G2

Canada

Public Version

TABLE OF CONTENTS

IL INTRODUCTION 1
IL. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 2

Tl. THE MAJORITY’S ANALYSIS

  

 

 

 

A. INTRODUCTION 7
B. INCREMENTAL SPENDING 10
(a) Parties’ Position: 10

(b)

(c)

|
a

 

(i) “Consistent with the Needs”.......
(ii) Spending Which Pre-dates the Guidelines...
(iii) Spending Which Pre-dates 2009....

 

 

(iv) Spending in Line with the Accord Acts and Benefit Decisions........ 14

 

The Individual Expenditures and the Majority’s Findings ....
@
),
i) es
) i

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Spending Determined to be Incremental by the Majority

C. SR&ED (TAX) CREDIT: 38

(a)

Parties’ Position: 39

Public Version

(b) — Majority’s Finding
D. ROYALTY DEDUCTIONS

 

(a) _ Parties’ Position:

(b) — Majority’s Finding
E. SHORTFALL

(a) Parties’ P

 

 

 

(b) — Majority’s Finding

 

 

Iv. OTHER MATTERS 54
A. INTEREST. 54
B. Cost. 54

 

Vv. AWARD 57

Public Version

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

2004 Guidelines

Arbitration Rules
BNA

Board

C-CORE

CA

CE

Claimants

CNLOPB or the “Board”

Counter-Memorial on
Damages

CRA

Cl. Mem.

Cl. Mem. on Damages
Cl. Reply

Cl. Reply on Damages
Cl. P. Brief

Cl. Reply P. Brief
Damages Hearing
E&T

HMDC

Mobil Canada
MUN

Murphy Oil

Guidelines for Research and Development Expenditures
adopted by the Canada-Newfoundland Offshore Petroleum
Board in November 2004

Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules of 2006

Ben Nevis Avalon

Canada-Newfoundland Offshore Petroleum Board
Center for Cold Ocean Research

Claimants’ Authorities

Claimants’ Exhibits

Mobil Canada and Murphy Oil

Canada-Newfoundland and Labrador Offshore Petroleum
Board

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Damages of October
19, 2012

Canada Revenue Agency

Claimants’ Memorial of August 3, 2009

Claimants’ Memorial on Damages of July 23, 2012
Claimants’ Reply Memorial of April 8, 2010

Claimants’ Reply on Damages of November 30, 2012
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief (Redacted) of January 7,
2011

Claimants’ Reply Post-Hearing Brief of January 31, 2011
Hearing on damages of April 23, 2013

Education and Training

Hibernia Management and Development Company Ltd.
Mobil Investments Canada Inc.

Memorial University of Newfoundland

Murphy Oil Corporation

NAFTA
NL

Parties
POA
Projects
R&D

RA

RE
Rejoinder on Damages
Respondent
SR&ED

Public Version

North American Free Trade Agreement

Province of Newfoundland and Labrador

Claimants and Respondent

Production Operations Authorization

Hibernia and Terra Nova

Research and Development

Respondent’s Authorities

Respondent’s Exhibits

Respondent’s Rejoinder on Damages of January 25, 2013
Government of Canada

Scientific Research and Experimental Development

Public Version

I. INTRODUCTION

On May 22, 2012, the Tribunal issued a Decision on Liability and on Principles of
Quantum (“Decision”). By a majority, the Tribunal decided that the Guidelines for
Research and Development Expenditures adopted by the Canada-Newfoundland
Offshore Petroleum Board in November 2004 (2004 Guidelines”), as applied to the
investment projects Hibernia and Terra Nova (“Projects”), are not covered by Canada’s
reservation under Article 1108(1) of the North American Free Trade Agreement
(“NAFTA”) and therefore violate Article 1106 of the NAFTA. The majority of the
Tribunal also concluded that the Claimants are entitled to recover damages incurred as
aresult of the breach, provided that the Claimants submit evidence of any such damages
no later than 60 days of receipt of the Decision and that the Tribunal finds such evidence

persuasive.

Professor Philippe Sands Q.C. issued a Partial Dissenting Opinion (‘Dissent’)
concluding that there was no breach of Article 1106 of the NAFTA and that, therefore,
the question of damages does not arise. The Decision and Dissent are incorporated into

this Award as Annex 1.

Public Version

II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The procedural history of this case leading up to the issuance of the Decision is
contained in its paragraphs 7-33. This section provides the procedural history from the

date of the Decision until the date of this Award.

In accordance with the Tribunal’s Decision, on July 23, 2012, the Claimants filed a
Damages Submission (“Cl. Mem. on Damages”), accompanied by the Fourth Witness
Statement of Paul Phelan and exhibits CE-249 to CE-337, as well as legal authority
CA-267.

On September 7, 2012, pursuant to Article 41(2) of ICSID Arbitration (Additional
Facility) Rules (“Arbitration Rules”), the Respondent requested that the Tribunal order
the Claimants to produce certain documents. By letter of September 17, 2013, the
Claimants objected to the production. On October 3, 2012, the Tribunal decided to
grant the Respondent’s requests and ordered the Claimants to produce the relevant
documents and information within one week from receipt of the Tribunal’s decision.
As a result, the Respondent was granted an extension to file its response to the Cl.
Mem. on Damages. The Tribunal further invited the Parties to file a second round of

written pleadings on damages.

On October 10, 2012, the Claimants informed the Tribunal that they had no documents
responsive to the Respondent’s requests, as granted by the Tribunal. The Claimants
therefore proposed that the Respondent file its response on damages within one week.
On October 11, 2012, the Respondent countered that, in view of the fact that the
Claimants had produced no documents, there be no Reply and Rejoinder. On October
16, 2012, the Tribunal directed the Respondent to file its response by October 24, 2012

and confirmed its previous directions concerning a Reply and Rejoinder.

On October 19, 2012, the Respondent filed its Reply to the Claimants’ Submission on
Damages (“Counter-Memorial on Damages”). The submission was accompanied by a
Fourth Expert Report of Richard E. Walck (including Annexes 1 and 2) and exhibits
RE-65 to RE-72.

Public Version

Following a request for an extension granted by the Tribunal, the Claimants filed their
Reply on Damages on November 30, 2012 (Cl. Reply on Damages”), including a Fifth
Witness Statement of Paul Phelan, Witness Statements of Paul Durdle and Ryan
Noseworthy, exhibits CE-338 to CE-359 and legal authorities CA-268 to CA-271.

Due to the extension of time for the filing of the Reply and Rejoinder, the Tribunal
consulted the Parties and postponed the date for a potential hearing on damages

(initially scheduled to January 15 and 16, 2013) to April 23, 2013.

On January 25, 2013, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder on Damages (“Rejoinder on
Damages”), accompanied by a Fifth Expert Report of Richard E. Walck, exhibits RE-
73 to RE-96 and legal authorities RA-171 to RA-173.

On March 27, 2013, following requests by the Parties concerning the conduct of the
hearing on damages and admissibility of new documents, the Tribunal issued its
Procedural Order No. 3 addressing these matters. In addition, the Order invited the
Parties to comment on a number of questions posed by the Tribunal. The Parties

subsequently responded to the Tribunal’s queries by letters of April 9, 2013.

On April 5, 2013, in accordance with Procedural Order No. 3, the Claimants sought to
introduce ten new documents into the record. By letter of April 10, 2013, the

Respondent objected to the admissibility of eight of the new documents.

On April 12, 2013, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 on the admissibility of
the Claimants’ new documents. It admitted exhibits CE-360 and CE-361 on certain
conditions, reserved its position as to two other exhibits and declined to admit the

remaining documents.

On April 17, 2013, pursuant to the conditions in Procedural Order No. 4, the Claimants
submitted exhibits CE-362 to CE-367 and CE-370 to CE-372.

The Tribunal held the hearing on damages in Washington D.C. on April 23, 2013

(“Damages Hearing”). Pursuant to the Parties’ agreement, the hearing was not open to

Public Version

the public. In addition to the Tribunal and the Secretary, the following persons were

present:

On behalf of the Claimants:

Mr. David W. Rivkin, Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Ms. Samantha Rowe, Debevoise & Plimpton LLP

Ms. Mary Grace McEvoy, Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Mr. Tomasz J. Sikora, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. Nathan Baines, ExxonMobil Canada

Mr. Roger Landes, Murphy Oil Corporation

Mr. Paul Phelan, Witness

Mr. Paul Durdle, Witness

Mr. Ryan Noseworthy, Witness

On behalf of the Respondent:

Mr. Nick Gallus, Counsel, Trade Law Bureau

Mr. Mark Luz, Counsel, Trade Law Bureau

Mr. Adam Douglas, Counsel, Trade Law Bureau

Ms. Heather Squires, Counsel, Trade Law Bureau

Ms. Melissa Perrault, Paralegal, Trade Law Bureau

Ms. Annette Tobin, Senior Policy Advisor, Natural Resources

Mr. Matthew Tone, Senior Trade Policy Analyst, Department of Foreign
Affairs and International Trade

Mr. Jeff O’Keefe, Manager Resource Management, Chief Conservation
Officer, Canada-Newfoundland and Labrador Offshore Petroleum Board

Mr. Richard (Rory) E. Walck, Expert
The hearing was recorded and a verbatim transcript was made.

On May 14, 2013, the Tribunal requested that the Parties provide information on certain
matters that arose at the Damages Hearing. The Parties subsequently responded to the

Tribunal’s queries by letters of May 28, 2013. The Respondent requested an

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

Public Version

opportunity to respond to certain points raised in the Claimants’ letter of May 28, 2013
and this request was granted by the Tribunal on May 30, 2013. The Respondent

submitted a further response by letter of June 12, 2013.

On August 1, 2013, the Tribunal notified the Parties that it expected the Respondent to
indicate its final position on a proposal made by the Claimants in relation to an aspect

of their claim by August 16, 2013 (the “Proposal”).

The Parties each filed a statement of costs on August 14, 2013. The Claimants

subsequently objected to the format of the Respondent’s statement of costs.

On September 12, 2013, the Tribunal directed the Respondent to file a statement of
costs which was similar to that filed by the Claimants on August 14, 2013. Following
an enquiry from the Respondent, on September 17, 2013, the Tribunal clarified that it

did not wish to receive the Parties’ arguments on the allocation of costs at that stage.

On August 28, 2013, the Respondent wrote to the Claimants seeking further
information to assist them in considering the Proposal. By letter of September 12, 2013,
the Tribunal informed the Parties that it could not consider any further information that
was provided in the letter from the Respondent or that might be provided in response

to that letter.

On September 17, 2013, the Respondent indicated that it could not accept the Proposal.

On November 27, 2013 the Claimants were invited by the Tribunal to file observations
on specific aspects of the Respondent’s statement of costs filed on August 14, 2013.
The Tribunal also indicated that the Respondent would be permitted to file a response
to any submission the Claimants made. The Claimants subsequently requested, and
were granted, an extension, filing their submission on costs on December 27, 2013. The

Respondent filed a further response on January 17, 2014.
The proceeding was closed on January 21, 2014.

On January 22, 2014, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they had agreed on a

standstill of the arbitral proceedings to pursue settlement discussions. They requested

26.

Public Version

that the Award be released only in the event that the standstill were terminated. The
Parties specified that the standstill could be terminated by either Party on providing
notice to the other Parties and the Tribunal, and that the Tribunal may subsequently
issue the Award after two weeks. By letter of January 22, 2014, the Tribunal took note
of the Parties’ agreement and confirmed that it would continue drafting its Award,
which would be rendered after two weeks from the date of a notification by either Party

that the standstill was terminated.

On February 4, 2015, counsel for the Claimants notified the Tribunal of the termination
of the standstill of the proceeding and requested that the Tribunal issue its Award as
soon as possible after February 18, 2015. Accordingly, by letter of February 18, 2015,

the Tribunal confirmed that it would proceed accordingly.

27.

28.

29.

Public Version

Ill. THE MAJORITY’S ANALYSIS
A. INTRODUCTION

By a majority (the “Majority”), the Tribunal has found that the 2004 Guidelines, as
applied to the Projects, breach Article 1106 of the NAFTA and this “gives rise to a right

to claim compensation.”!

The Majority emphasized in the Decision that the Claimants must prove “that a call for
payment has been made or that damages have otherwise occurred (i.e. that they are
“actual”).”? The Decision indicated that money need not have been expended for
compensation to be due, but there must, at minimum, be a “firm obligation to make a

payment.”?

The Claimants claim losses in two distinct categories. First, claimed losses for
“incremental spending” represent amounts that the Claimants have already spent on
R&D or E&T* as a result of the Guidelines. Such spending, according to the Claimants,
would not have been undertaken in the ordinary course of business in the absence of
the Guidelines. Second, the Claimants advance “shortfall” losses, being the difference
between spending undertaken pursuant to the Guidelines and the spending required by
the Guidelines.° For the Claimants, the fact that they have been informed of the shortfall

for Hibernia through to April 2012, and for Terra Nova through to December 2011,

' Decision, { 487.
2 Decision, { 488.
3 Decision, { 440.

4 The Guidelines regime, and the regime that preceded it, require spending on research and development and
education and training (“R&D” and “E&T”). These terms are used, as appropriate, herein. The Claimants”
claim for incremental spending pertains primarily to projects which are classified by the Claimants as R&D,
with the exception of JN (see I{[ 94-96) and the (see 9] 89-93
below)). A great deal of the Claimants’ spending on E&T was accepted by the Respondent as incremental
(see {{ 128 below and the Annexes to Phelan Statement IV).

 

5 Based on the practice of the Board and the terms of the Guidelines, this shortfall can be met in several ways:
via spending (either incremental or ordinary course), via payment into an R&D fund, or via the drawing down
of a letter of credit (the drawn down monies are apparently then to be paid to a “recognized research or
education agency” according to the terms of the letters of credit (see, e.g. CE-315, EMM0004860, clause
2B)). Historically, the Claimants have also applied spending from subsequent periods to the shortfall relating
to earlier periods to neutralize the shortfall (see CE-252).

Public Version

means that compensation is required as an actual call for payment has occurred. Thus,
they should be compensated for both their incremental expenditures and the identified

shortfall.

The Respondent asserts that a significant portion of the Claimants’ incremental
spending is in fact spending which occurred in the ordinary course of business. The
Claimants dispute this. Additionally, the Respondent argues that if any incremental
spending is compensable, it should be reduced to reflect certain benefits that the
Claimants have received as a result of such spending. These alleged benefits result from
the Scientific Research & Experimental Development program (“SR&ED”), under
which the Claimants receive tax credits for eligible R&D spending, and a Provincial
program whereby R&D and E&T spending reduces the royalties payable to the

Province on Project revenue.

The Majority deals first with the Claimants’ incremental spending claim, followed by
the impact of the SR&ED and royalty deduction programs, and then turns to the claim

resulting from the shortfall.

By way of general remarks, the Majority notes that it has faced various difficulties in
assessing the Claimants’ losses. As the Claimants themselves have noted, the situation
in these proceedings is a novel one. The regulatory regime from which the Claimants’
alleged losses flow continues to operate. Thus, the situation involves a continuing or
ongoing breach as applied to these Claimants, and (to the Majority’s knowledge) has
not been litigated before a NAFTA arbitral tribunal previously.° The Decision dealt
with some of the peculiarities that arise from this with regard to future damages, but
other difficulties resulting from this fluid situation remain to complicate the Majority’s

task.’ The Tribunal has been asked in several instances to take into account events

6 “(NJ]o NAFTA tribunal has yet been faced with a continuing treaty violation or investment impairment
scenario” (Cl. P. Brief, { 55). More specifically, NAFTA tribunals have been confronted with continuing
breaches (see, e.g., Merrill & Ring Forestry L.P. v. Canada, UNCITRAL Award, March 31, 2010; and
Marvin Roy Feldman v United Mexican States, ICSID ARB (AF)/99/1, Award, December 16, 2002), but,
so far as the majority is aware, there have been no decisions by NAFTA tribunals which dealt with the
question of damages resulting from such breaches.

7 For example, Mr. Phelan said in a witness statement submitted November 30, 2012 that “Hibernia will
have spent down its current shortfall by the end of 2013” (Phelan Statement V, 43) but the Tribunal has

Public Version

which have not yet occurred, which therefore by nature require a degree of conjecture,
as a future event can never be supported completely by evidence or information.*
Conscious of this conjecture, the Majority has had to consider carefully the evidence
that relates to or indicates the likelihood of a future event, and whether that evidence

can meet the standards set forth in the Decision.°

The Majority also notes that whilst it has not influenced its decision herein, some of
the uncertainty surrounding this claim'® would not have arisen if the Claimants had
opted to pay the amount of spending required under the Guidelines into a fund
administered by the Board. Business imperatives apparently dictated otherwise.!! The
consequence, however, of not having taken that approach has required an extensive
examination of the rationale behind previous and ongoing expenditures without a clear

baseline.

The Majority’s task at this stage in the proceeding has largely been an evidence-based
one. Few purely legal matters remain between the Parties? as the Decision sought to
lay out principles which would apply to the determination of compensation and because
the Parties were invited by the Tribunal in the Decision to submit evidence, rather than

further legal argument."*

not seen any firm evidence of this and instead the Claimants maintain their claim for a shortfall amount for
the relevant period (i.e. as opposed to incremental spending). This illustrates the fluidity of the “continuing
breach” situation that the Parties and the Tribunal find themselves in.

8 A few examples may be illustrative: the Claimants argue against a reduction to their compensation for
SR&ED and royalty deductions on the basis of an audit that may take place in the future and that may deny
them these benefits; the Respondent argues for a deduction to the Claimants’ compensation on the basis of
ordinary course spending which might take place to neutralize the shortfall in spending required under the
Guidelines; and the Claimants argue against reduction of their compensation on the basis that future
proceedings will allow for any necessary reconciliation.

° Le. “reasonable certainty” (Decision, §] 439).
‘0 With respect to both incremental spending-based compensation and shortfall-based compensation.
11 CL. Reply on Damages, | 17; Phelan Statement I, {{ 29.

'? With the exception of, inter alia, certain principles alleged by the Claimants to be applicable, such as that
doubts as to quantum or evidence of damages should be resolved against the party in breach (Cl. Reply on
Damages, 7); issues relating to the burden of proof (see, e.g. Rejoinder on Damages, {| 8-16) and the
appropriate weight to be given to witness statements (Rejoinder on Damages, {| 17-28).

8 Decision, 1 490.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

Public Version

 

iCREMENTAL SPENDING

The Claimants claim “in compensation for their incremental

spending.'*

(a) Parties’ Positions

The Claimants have sought to fulfill their obligations under the Guidelines in part via

spending on R&D and E&T projects in the Province.!°

The fundamental disagreement between the Parties therefore, is whether expenditures
claimed as incremental, can be said to be solely motivated by the Guidelines, and
whether the Claimants would have abstained from such spending “but for” the

Guidelines.””

The Respondent says that in fact, a large part of the Claimants’ spending would have
taken place in the ordinary course of business in the absence of the Guidelines, or was
motivated by other imperatives, and is thus not compensable. For the Respondent, there
is therefore no causal link between the Guidelines and much of the spending for which

the Claimants seek compensation.

The Claimants accept that “ordinary course”’'’ spending is not compensable and claim

compensation only for expenditures that they submit “would not have been made in the

4 See Annex A to Phelan Statement V. Mobil Canada claims J and Murphy Oil

a
'S With claimed interest, this figure is JNM according to the Respondent’s expert Mr. Walck
(see Annex | to Walck Statement V) or| according to the Claimants’ witness Mr. Phelan

 

(see Annex A to Phelan Statement V). The difference in these two figures appears to be attributable to
rounding (see Walck Statement V, Annex 1, § 2). For the purposes of the Majority’s determination at § 129
below, the figure [J has been used as it is the slightly more conservative number and as the
breakdown of figures utilized by Mr. Walck was found to be more user-friendly.

'6 Cl, Mem. on Damages, { 18.

 

‘7 “In our view, the additional spending requirement, even taking the Respondent’s numbers as a base line,
involves expenditures of millions of dollars beyond that which would have likely been spent but for the
2004 Guidelines” (Decision, {| 401).

'8 In Procedural Order No.3, the Parties were requested to provide a definition of “ordinary course”. In the
Majority’s view, the responses from the Parties did not materially add to the submissions they had already

40.

Al.

42.

Public Version

ordinary course of business in the absence of the Guidelines.”'? Thus, the Claimants
confirm that whatever spending they considered to be in the “ordinary course” has
already been deducted from their claim.*? The Respondent holds that the Claimants
have made insufficient deductions on this basis and “ordinary course” spending

improperly remains part of the Claimants’ damages claim.2!

The following categories are the different bases on which the Respondent says the

Claimants spending is not incremental.”
(i) “Consistent with the Needs”

The Respondent argues that any spending which is “consistent with the needs” of the
Projects or directly relates to the “specific needs” of the Projects (such as, inter alia,
expenditure to increase oil production or to improve safety) should be classified as

“ordinary course” and is therefore not compensable.

The Respondent says that the fact that spending is related to the needs of the Projects
is evidenced in several ways, including: that it was “previously budgeted” in the
Claimants’ records;* that it may benefit the Projects;* that it was subject to an

economic incentive,* or that it was in line with a previously stated research aim or area

made on this matter. The Claimants indicated that they had sought the agreement of the Respondent on a
definition but no agreement was forthcoming.

© Cl. Mem. on Damages, | 6.
2 Phelan Statement IV, {| 30.

2! Inter alia, the Respondent says that the Claimants’ assessment and deduction of what spending is in the
“ordinary course” and what is properly incremental is unsound because it has been performed by Mr.
Phelan, who is an employee of Mobil Canada (and thus lacking the requisite independence) (Counter-
Memorial on Damages, {{ 10).

» Or as otherwise not attributable to the Guidelines.
2 Rejoinder on Damages, J 37.
24 Eg. through the production of more oil, see Rejoinder on Damages, | 44.

25 Rejoinder on Damages, { 33.

Public Version

of R&D.” Moreover, the Respondent submits that safety-related spending was clearly

ordinary course spending, inter alia because such spending was necessary.”’

The Claimants argue that “consistent with the needs of” the Projects is not necessarily
synonymous with “ordinary course” and that by focusing on criteria such as this, the
Respondent has “re-characterized” the relevant test.2* Claimants admit “that they have
sought, in the first instance, to comply with their Guidelines obligations by undertaking
incremental expenditures that would relate to the needs of the Projects” (emphasis
added).”’ Indeed, as their witness Mr. Phelan indicated “[s]ince the money must be
spent in any event, we are actively looking for opportunities to undertake work that
could at least be of some benefit to the project, even if it is unnecessary.”*° For the
Claimants, the relevant criterion is not whether spending is related to or benefits the

Projects, but rather whether it was motivated by the Guidelines.

The Claimants reject the Respondent’s argument that R&D and E&T directed at
enhancing oil production or the safety of the Projects is all ordinary course spending.
Relying on the evidence of Mr. Noseworthy, they posit that the “idea that Claimants
are in the business of undertaking R&D simply because it might ‘enhance oil recovery’”
goes against common sense and the evidence.*! Similarly, while safety is a key concern
for Exxon Mobil generally, there is a limit to spending on safety in the ordinary
course.” The Claimants also point to Exxon Mobil’s strong safety record in the oil

industry (which means that less R&D and E&T spending on safety is necessary). They

2 Rejoinder on Damages, | 45.

27 See, e.g., Rejoinder on Damages, {{ 70.

28 Cl. Reply on Damages, 1 5.

2° Cl. Reply on Damages, { 17.

3 Cl. Reply on Damages, { 17; Phelan Statement I, | 29.

3! Cl. Reply on Damages, { 19; Noseworthy Statement I, 4 6.

* The Claimants analogize using car safety, stating that “[i]f Canada’s argument were to be followed to its
logical conclusion, every car on the road would be equipped with all the newest safety features no matter
the cost, which is not the case” (Cl. Reply on Damages, 20).

Public Version

allege they have in fact not sought compensation for the “vast majority of their safety-

related expenditures.”**
(ii) Spending Which Pre-dates the Guidelines

The Respondent asserts that spending that was already ongoing or was conceived of

prior to the Guidelines has not, by its very nature, been motivated by the Guidelines.**

The Claimants argue that the Guidelines have precipitated a change in the character of
the relevant spending or that the expenditure was entirely different to begin with. For
the Claimants this is evidenced in several ways: that the spending was restructured, for
example where it was transferred from the Project operator to the joint account of the
Project owners (so it could be applied against the Guidelines), and/or the amount of
spending was increased; or, that, despite a similar or the same description for pre-

Guidelines versus post-Guidelines expenditures, it is in fact different in substance.
(iii) | Spending Which Pre-dates 2009

The Claimants’ witness, Mr. Phelan, stated that “neither Hibernia nor Terra Nova made
any incremental expenditures during the 2004-2008 period”** (emphasis added). The
Respondent thus concludes that R&D and E&T expenditure on projects which began

before 2009 cannot be incremental.

The Claimants argue that the expenditure that falls under this argument by the
Respondent is either a) not the same expenditure that began prior to 2009;” or b) if it

is expenditure that began prior to 2009, only a portion of the costs involved in the

% CL. Reply on Damages, {{ 22.

* Rejoinder on Damages, 89-99.

* eS Phelan Statement V, {21 and IE Phelan Statement V, § 22.
*¢ Phelan Statement IV, {f 32.

5 CL. Reply on Damages, {{ 34.

Public Version

overall expenditure (specifically costs related to transferring the expenditure to the

Province) are claimed.**

(iv) | Spending in Line with the Accord Acts and Benefit

Decisions

The Respondent argues that the Claimants were already obligated to spend on R&D
and E&T prior to the implementation of the Guidelines.** Therefore, any spending
compatible with the Accords Acts and Benefits Decisions fails the “but for” test and

must be deducted from the damages claimed.

The Claimants, however, highlight that the Accord Acts and Benefit Plans set no ceiling
or floor for spending, and argue (relying upon the language of the Decision) that the
2004 Guidelines, by contrast, require the Claimants to spend “millions of dollars
beyond that which would have likely been spent but for the 2004 Guidelines.“ The
Claimants’ spending in 2000 and 2001, ranging between Qy
HE’ Was deemed consistent with the Benefits Plans by the Board.* This spending
level has, since the introduction of the Guidelines, been far exceeded; the Claimants
say the timing of this increase indicates a causal link to the Guidelines. The Claimants
further hold that even if the Accord Acts and Benefits Plans required R&D and E&T
spending, the Respondent’s argument would still fail, as “[e]xpenditures on specific
R&D projects were never required by the Board before, or even since, the Guidelines,

and Canada has not introduced any evidence that suggests otherwise.”

38 Noseworthy Statement I, {| 46.

3° Counter-Memorial on Damages, {| 37-43; Rejoinder on Damages, ff 108-113.

4° Cl, Reply on Damages, {{ 37 (citing Decision, {| 401).

41 Cl, Reply on Damages, { 38.

#2 As the Claimants point out, POAs would not otherwise have been issued (Cl. Reply on Damages, 38).

3 Cl. Reply on Damages, | 42.

51.

52.

Public Version

(b) The Individual Expenditures and the Majority’s Findings

The Majority starts by observing that the categories outlined above by the Respondent
as the basis for construing whether spending is incremental or ordinary can be useful,
but are not entirely dispositive. For example, the mere fact that an expenditure may be
beneficial to the Claimants or Projects does not definitively answer whether it was
undertaken as a result of the Guidelines or not. It is logical that if the Claimants were
under an expenditure requirement, they would seek to make the necessary expenditures
of some utility. Any sensible investor would not choose to make an expenditure that
was wholly superfluous to the investment. If an expenditure was wholly superfluous,
or contrived, it would indicate that it is incremental. But as with benefit, this also might
not be determinative; the mere identification as superfluous would not necessarily
capture the totality of the expenditures that are properly deemed incremental. Similarly,
expenditure that predates the Guidelines may properly be seen as ordinary. However,
even if an expenditure is related to a Project that predates the Guidelines, this may not
in itself definitively answer the question of whether the continued expenditure is
ordinary course or incremental. The absence of a clear baseline of pre-Guidelines
expenditure has added considerable complexity to the Majority’s task. The Majority
finds itself thus obliged to consider the particular facts and characteristics of each of
the identified and challenged expenditures, together with the related testimony and

evidence before us, separately.

Accordingly, the Majority now turns to the individual incremental expenditures and
projects. The Majority notes at the outset that the burden of proof to show that each of
the incremental expenditures would not have been made in the ordinary course of
business in the absence of the Guidelines lies with the Claimants. The Majority has
already noted in the Decision that the relevant standard of proof is “reasonable
certainty,” not “absolute certainty,” and that damages must not be too speculative or

remote.*

+ Decision, 437-438.

54.

Public Version

The Majority faces the inherent difficulties of retrospectively applying the definition
of “ordinary course” to R&D and E&T spending which was not conceived with this
definition in mind. The Majority appreciates that the Claimants have had to conduct
their assessment as to what spending was ordinary course subsequent to its occurrence
or conception, and have sought to be conservative in doing so.** Nonetheless, there are
difficulties inherent in the kind of retro-fitting which the Claimants, and now the
Majority, have to engage in to assess what spending may have been in the ordinary
course. These difficulties however, do not relieve the Claimants of their burden of
proof.** The Majority is similarly not convinced by the Claimants’ argument that
uncertainty is to be construed against the wrongdoer.*’ The Majority does not find this
to be an applicable principle of international law as the Claimants allege. ‘* The
Majority has relied upon the evidence it found to be the clearest indicator of spending
being either ordinary course or incremental and has applied the “reasonable certainty”

standard.”
Qs

1h I wes carried out by HMDC in 2010
and 2011 at thc [i which is “highly

+5 Phelan Statement IV, 4 42.

46 The Tribunal notes the submission to this effect by the Claimants’ counsel at the Damages Hearing: “to

the extent there is any uncertainty because documents were not created at the time that says this is
incremental spending because what they were trying to do was meet the Guidelines, and until 2012, we
didn't have the standard from the Tribunal that it was going to apply, rather we were trying to look at the--
trying to do a life-of-field analysis of what would be ordinary, that can't be held against us” (Damages
Hearing Transcript, p.419). The Tribunal does not find that the Claimants’ burden is alleviated on this basis
and notes that the Claimants themselves introduced the “ordinary course” concept (see, e.g. Cl. Mem,
218; Rosen Statement I, [ 28 Cl. Mem. on Damages, {{ 6).

 

 

47 Cl. Reply on Damages, {| 7. The Tribunal notes that the situation is further complicated by the fact that
the Claimants themselves have created uncertainty by not simply paying the amount of required spending
into a fund, as is permissible under the Guidelines.

48 The references relied upon by the Claimants: Mark Kantor, Valuation for Arbitration, at 72 (Wolters
Kluwer Law 2008); Sapphire International v. National Iranian Oil Companies, Award of March 15, 1963,
at 187-188) are an insufficient basis to establish a rule of international law.

* Decision, {{ 438. The Tribunal notes that the Claimants submitted at the Damages Hearing that the
relevant standard of proof is a “preponderance of the evidence” standard (Damages Hearing Transcript,
p.419). The Tribunal finds it more useful to focus on the reasonable certainty standard, which was clearly
adopted in the Decision.

Public Version

faulted,” ° “slot constrained” and “technologically challenged.” *' The Claimants
submitted that the JJ sought to understand “possible connectivity, or

252

communication, across faults dividing reservoir blocks.

The Respondent argues that the [NN addresses the needs of Hibernia and that
the Claimants themselves recognized the need for the study in Benefit and
Development Plan Applications, which were subsequently approved by the Board with
the J included as a condition.* The Claimants say that they were required to
es Out that the My as such does

not fall within that obligation.

The Respondent also asserts that the Claimants’ own witness (Mr. Graham) has stated
that this expenditure was made in the ordinary course of business and that the
Claimants’ evidence indicates that the J was “previously budgeted” and
therefore was made in the ordinary course.*! The Claimants object that the evidence
relied upon to make these assertions has been misconstrued and taken out of context.
Specifically, they say that Mr. Graham is not referring to the J as the
Respondent alleges (he was instead referring to the broader obligation
MM) 2nd the label “previously budgeted” refers to a point in time that was part

of the post-Guidelines timeframe, rather than pre-Guidelines.*°

The Majority accepts the Claimants’ explanation of how the J inclusion in
an internal accounting document as “previously budgeted” did not necessarily refer to
a period pre-dating the Guidelines. The Majority also accepts that the Claimants’

witness, Mr. Graham, in stating that the JJ was “ordinary course,” referred

5° Noseworthy, Statement I, { 10.

5! Merits Hearing Transcript, Day 2, p. 468, testimony of Mr. Ringvee.
2 Noseworthy, Statement I, 16.

53 Counter-Memorial on Damages, {{ 20.

54 Counter-Memorial on Damages, {[ 22. Le., that the spending pre-dates the Guidelines, as evidenced by
the descriptor “previously budgeted,” and therefore could not have been motivated by the Guidelines.

55 Cl. Reply on Damages, { 32
56 Phelan Statement V, { 10.

58.

59.

Public Version

instead (0 [aS Te
Majority finds, however, that the Claimants have not proven that the J is an

incremental expenditure. Lack of clear evidence as to the differentiation between the
NE (ich the Claimants accept
was in the ordinary course of business), and the allegedly narrower ay
prevents the Majority from determining with requisite certainty that the

was not in the ordinary course of business.**

 

The costs claimed in relation to this project are for the establishment, by HMDC, of a
ES «ich «il!
carry out studies of enhanced oil recovery by aS
EE «© culminating in a pilot program referred to as the yy
es © Tbe Claimants are under an obligation to “maximize

recovery” at Hibernia pursuant to the Newfoundland Offshore Petroleum Drilling and
Production Regulations.” The J itself will not take place until 2014, and is

the second component of the project.”

The Respondent argues that J has long been an R&D focus at Hibernia

and this project is thus ordinary course spending. The Respondent also asserts, as it did

 

57 The Tribunal notes that whilst it has been able to discern that Mr. Graham was referring to the broader
EE it has not followed that Mr. Graham’s evidence has assisted in clarifying the
scope of the narrower [I (see Graham Statement I, {| 18 and the discussion below).

 

58 The Tribunal notes, for example, that Mr. Noseworthy, when he is describing the jg in his
witness statement, referred to Claimants’ Exhibit CE-212 (Noseworthy Statement I, { 16). At the Damages
Hearing however, Mr. Noseworthy indicated that parts of this exhibit do not relate to the

These two conflicting parts of CE-212 contain similar phraseology, which creates confusion as to what in
exhibit CE-212 can be relied upon as a clear description of the aa

 

 

5? Noseworthy Statement I, {[ 23.

°° Noseworthy Statement I, {{ 21.

  

1 Rejoinder on Damages, 46. The Claimants a

so concede that Hibernia is obligated 0
HEE (Noseworthy Statement I, { 22) but distinguish this from the gay

© Noseworthy Statement I, Damages Hearing Transcript, p. 262.

60.

61.

62.

Public Version

with respect to the i that thc i was “previously

budgeted” and therefore was made in the ordinary course.

The Claimants argue that Canada is conflating the qq with earlier,
unrelated work that was undertaken at Hibernia.“ They say that the evidence relied
upon to conclude that the study was “previously budgeted” has been misconstrued and
taken out of context. The Claimants’ witness Mr. Noseworthy asserted that but for the
Guidelines, x! would not have been established,
es

The Respondent also argues that the fact that some of the work relating to this project
was carried out at x indicates that it is
ordinary course expenditure, inter alia, because such expenditure cannot defray the
Claimants’ Guidelines obligations. The Respondent also points to a discrepancy in Mr.
Noseworthy’s statement regarding when [i
which was aimed at identifying whether x © Mr.
Noseworthy says that this J was post-Guidelines, the Respondent says
that it was in fact done before the Guidelines.* The Claimants concede that work
relating to this project has been carried ou MY. but say that this does not
indicate that the project is ordinary course. Rather, this can be explained by capacity
limitations in the Province and an occasional need to carry out initial R&D elsewhere

to get a project “off the ground.”

The Majority finds that the Claimants have proven that this expenditure is incremental.

As with the NN. the fact that the NE was included in an

® See J 56 above.

° Noseworthy Statement I, {{ 20.

© Noseworthy Statement |, {| 27.

© Rejoinder on Damages, 49; Noseworthy Statement I, 33

© Rejoinder on Damages, { 49.

8 Noseworthy Statement I, {| 20.

63.

Public Version

internal accounting document® as “previously budgeted” does not mean that this

expenditure pre-dated the Guidelines.”

ee
ee
ee ee
eS” is
duplication is persuasive evidence that NN tepresents an
expenditure that was motivated by the Guidelines. It is also significant that initially the
Claimants did not apply for pre-approval xs this aspect
was added later to <a
HE ich in tum was hoped would increase the likelihood that this
expenditure met the Guidelines and would be pre-approved.” These factors in
combination demonstrate that this expenditure would not have been made in the
ordinary course of business in the absence of the Guidelines. The Majority does not
consider the fact that some work related to this project may have been carried out J
HEE (© support that the project is ordinary course. Mr. Noseworthy’s explanations
of why this was so are reasonable.* Nor does the Majority find it significant (for
determining whether or not this spending was incremental) that some of the preparatory
work for this project may have been carried out in 2008.” Costs relating to this work

are not claimed by the Claimants and therefore this work and its timing and location

ae not relevant. rs

© This document was compiled in August 2010 (Phelan Statement V, § 11).

7 The Respondent and Claimants’ arguments regarding the “previously budgeted” label in the

context (see 4 56 above) apply here also as the same document where the “previously budgeted” descriptor
appears is at issue (CE-233).

7! Noseworthy Statement I, § 27.

7 At the Damages Hearing, in the course of a line of questioning by Arbitrator Sands, the Claimants’
witness Mr. Noseworthy confirmed that|

HE (Damages Hearing Transcript, p.317).

7 Noseworthy Statement I, § 25.

74 See Noseworthy Statement I, §§ 20, 33.

75 Rejoinder on Damages, 49.

64.

65.

66.

67.

Public Version

a

The Joint Industry NY project aims to “develop and test new
technologies” which might lead to [the Grand Banks region.”

The Claimants argue that the cost and risks involved are such that it is apparent that

this expenditure would not have been undertaken in the ordinary course of business.”

The Respondent argues that this project aims to enhance oil recovery and therefore
directly relates to the needs of Hibernia and Terra Nova and is thus in the ordinary

course of business.”

The fact that this expenditure was conducted jointly by
HEE Sv pports the Claimants’ assertion that the project was not specifically

needed at Hibernia, and rather, that it was Guidelines-motivated. The Claimants have
convincingly explained that this type of joint approach is unusual and was a novel
initiative that was a response to the Guidelines.” The Majority notes however that the
novel nature of this approach stems not only from the fact that it was a joint industry
initiative, (this alone might be unsound given that the evidence indicates that the
Claimants have been involved in joint projects before the Guidelines came into effect)*
but also because, inter alia, workshops were held to “devise both potential problems
and their R&D solutions”.*! The documents relating to these workshops clearly indicate

that the R&D under discussion at the workshops were being discussed in the context

76 Noseworthy Statement I, {[ 37.
7 Noseworthy Statement I, 37.

78 Rejoinder on Damages, | 55

™ Noseworthy Statement I, 17.

89 See, e.g. CE-84, EMM0001616.

8! Noseworthy Statement I, | 7.

Public Version

of Guidelines compliance.*” Thus, the discussion of a project in these documents is a
strong indicator (in combination with other factors) that it involved incremental

spending.

Further, it appears that this project was considered to be high risk and indeed has not
been pursued vigorously. These characteristics of the project support the finding that it

would not have been made in the ordinary course of business but for the Guidelines.

The Respondent, for its part, has not convincingly rebutted the Claimants’ assertion
that this project was undertaken as an incremental expenditure and did not discuss this

expenditure at the Damages Hearing.

The Majority therefore finds that the Claimants have proven that this expenditure is

incremental.

Le

The Claimants argue that they should be compensated pro-rata for a donation made by
EMD C i [a
es Por the Claimants, this is not required for basic
safety training and in the ordinary course of business HMDC would not have made this

donation.*

Spending on safety, the Respondent argues, however, is necessary for the Projects and

therefore is in the ordinary course. *° Moreover, this donation is based on a

® See, e.g., CE-202, EMM0003359; CE-203, EMM0003366.

8
a

a

* Durdle Statement I, 16; CE-283.

8S Durdle Statement I, 49f 14-21

86 Counter-Memorial on Damages, 30-31.

Public Version

I 21< vould have been made

in the absence of the Guidelines.*

The Claimants reply that i 32s not,

however, released until after the donation was made and did not recommend Hibernia’s

donation.*

The Majority finds that the Claimants have established that this expenditure was
incremental. The that was funded went above and beyond what
could be reasonably construed as “ordinary course” safety spending. Mr. Durdle’s
testimony refuted effectively that this expenditure xy
EE He pointed out that the timing of the expenditure did not
correspond With. nor did the object of the expenditure.” yy
He “hich further confirms that the
funding would not be part of the Claimants’ “ordinary course” spending on safety.”!
The Respondent has failed to show that this expenditure was necessary for safety at
Hibernia or Terra Nova and thus would have been made in the ordinary course of

business in the absence of the Guidelines.

*’ The Offshore Helicopter Safety Inquiry was conducted in response to a helicopter crash in March 2009
(see Counter-Memorial on Damages, {{ 31; RE-69; RE-80).

88 Counter-Memorial on Damages, { 31.
® Durdle Statement I, {22

°° Damages Hearing Transcript, p. 366. See also Durdle Statement I, { 22 (footnotes omitted) “The donation

was made and approved in July 20 |, ll

°! Damages Hearing Transcript, p. 362.

75.

76.

77.

78.

Public Version

[|

The See Which is a joint industry project conducted by
HE © trains “workers to respond to emergencies.”® The relevant
HE @e still under development.”

The Claimants argue that any safety procedures or measures that follow from this
project will not replace any of the current (ordinary course) training in place at
Hibernia, and that this demonstrates that this project was instead precipitated by the
Guidelines.®* The Claimants’ witness, Mr. Durdle, was convincing in his explanation
of how the more basic, “ordinary course” procedurcs qs
HE iffer from this safety measure, demonstrating that the latter goes

beyond ordinary course spending.

The Respondent’s arguments largely consist of questioning the statements of the
Claimants’ witness, rather than offering tangible evidence to refute them. The
Respondent argues that spending on safety is necessary for the Projects and therefore
would have been undertaken even in the absence of the Guidelines.°’ However, it has
failed to show that this particular expenditure was in any way specifically necessary
for safety at Hibernia and it has not offered convincing rebuttal of the Claimants’

assertion that this is incremental spending.

For the foregoing reasons, the Majority finds that the Claimants have proven that this

expenditure is incremental.

* CE-288.

°3 Durdle Statement I, {{ 23.

4 Durdle Statement I, {| 23

°5 Durdle Statement I, {{] 23-27.

°© Durdle Statement I, {{ 25.

°7 Counter-Memorial on Damages, If] 30-31.

°8 This project was not discussed at the Damages Hearing.

Public Version

) es

The SE project is a joint industry project with the ultimate
objective of develop in: ll
Lil

The Respondent repeats that spending on safety is necessary for the Projects and
therefore this spending would have been undertaken in the absence of the Guidelines.'”
For the Respondent, the fact that part of the expenditure on this project was classified

as ordinary course is indicative of the fact that the whole project was ordinary course.!°!

The Claimants admit that certain expenditures in relation to the “exploratory” part of
this project, which took place in 2009, are appropriately classified as ordinary course. '
However, as this was in line with the operator’s desire to be a “good corporate
citizen,”! it does not mean that the remainder of the spending on this project was
likewise in the ordinary course. The project in its final form, the Claimants say, is not

necessary for the Projects and would not have been conducted absent the Guidelines.'*

The Claimants’ witness, Mr. Durdle, convincingly describes how various aspects of
this project are above and beyond standard requirements. For example, part of the
project is aimed at the development of ‘°° At Hibernia, at the
same time as the development of these NNN is proceeding, the regular
HE ve being replaced with the same type of regular gg. This seems highly
suggestive of the exceptional nature of the spending on gS. Mr. Durdle
also convincingly described how the J equipment may not even

® Durdle Statement 1, {| 30.
NS CE279. 12110004420)
10 Counter-Memorial on Damages, If 30-31.

©! Counter-Memorial on Damages, 31.

102 Durdle Statement I, 4 33.

63 Durdle Statement I, 4 33.

04 Durdle Statement I, #{{ 30-35.

LL (1c Statement I, 430).

Public Version

ultimately be appropriate for use at either Hibernia or Terra Nova, which further

supports the non-ordinary course nature of this project.!°°

By contrast, the Respondent merely challenges statements by the Claimants and their
witness, rather than offering any evidential basis to refute the Claimants’ assertion.!”
The Respondent has failed to show that this project was necessary for safety and/or in

the ordinary course.

For the foregoing reasons, the Majority finds that the Claimants have proven that this

expenditure is incremental.

Ci)
The Claimants claim expenditure for a scoping study commissioned by Terra Nova,
which was intended to “investigate/evaluate existing technologies folly

HEE, Propose potential new/enhanced technologies, and develop a plan

(roadmap) for future research and development.”'

The Claimants point out that this vague project is merely a study to develop future
studies, with no specific parameters or specifications, and that such a vague project is

not something that would be undertaken in the ordinary course of business.'”

The Respondent says that spending on safety is necessary for the Projects and therefore

would have been undertaken in the absence of the Guidelines.'' The Claimants’

  

witness Mr. Durdle is unable to point to any specific features of this spending which
distinguish it from ordinary course spending, other than that it is vague, and that to
“come up with new studies without any defined parameters or specifications” is not a

common approach.''! Mr. Durdle is moreover primarily engaged with the Hibernia

106 Durdle Statement I, J 32.

107 Rejoinder on Damages, {[ 80-85.

108 CE-311, EMM0004809; Durdle Statement I, | 36-37.
109 Durdle Statement I, §[ 36-38.

110 Counter-Memorial on Damages, {fJ[ 30-31.

'! Durdle Statement I, { 38.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

Public Version

Project and he appears relatively unfamiliar with this project, which was centered on

Terra Nova. Mr. Durdle merely claims to have been “aware of its content”.!”

The Majority therefore finds that the Claimants have not proven that this is an

incremental expenditure.
Vii)

Th;
ee
It was first created in 1998 and was initially funded by Petro Canada,'"* in the amount

of MN per annum. In 2009 the funding for J was doubled and
transferred to Terra Nova’s joint account.!'°

The Respondent says that the Claimants have been funding J since 1998.1"
The Claimants dispute this, arguing that they did not fund J prior to 2009."7

The Majority finds that the Claimants have proven that this expenditure was

incremental.

The Majority is persuaded that the Claimants did not contribute to the funding of Jy
HM Until the Guidelines came into effect.''* This is significant and probative of a
causal link to the Guidelines. Whilst the funding off was occurring pre-

Guidelines, it was borne by a different entity and was of a lesser amount. This

1
SS (Durdic Statement I, 38); Durdle Statement I, J 36.
13 CE-227, EMM0003852.

'l4 The Terra Nova project is organized as an unincorporated joint venture. The largest shareholder, Petro-
Canada, which owned a 33.99% interest, managed and operated the project for a consortium of working
interest owners, including the Claimants. In 2009, Petro-Canada merged with Suncor, which is now the
operator.

45 Phelan Statement V, { 21.
‘46 Counter-Memorial on Damages, | 33.
417 Phelan Statement V, 20-21.

‘8 Phelan Statement V, J 21.

94.

95.

96.

97.

Public Version

expenditure was not spending the Claimants themselves were undertaking until the

Guidelines came into effect.
Ss

The Claimants claim compensation for their donation qq.
Dn

The Respondent says that the “Claimants” have been donating’
since 2003 and that this is therefore an expenditure that “pre-dates” the Guidelines and
should thus not be compensable.” The Claimants accept that “Petro-Canada has
provided relatively minor funding for qq since 2003”! but highlight

that the Claimants themselves never contributed to this donation program.

The Majority finds that the Claimants have proven that this expenditure was
incremental. Similar to the MMM. it is significant that this donation
was not spending that the Claimants were willing to undertake until the Guidelines

came into effect.
Qe

The Claimants request compensation for the costs of is
es |
order for this J to occur in Newfoundland, it was necessary to
CC —“C:sS:stéiaa

'!? Phelan Statement V, J 22. At the hearing, Claimants clarified that Mobil makes its own contributions to
the amount claimed in these proceedings is the Terra Nova “joint account” spend only (Damages

;
Hearing Transcript, p.252).

2 Counter-Memorial on Damages, | 33.
'2! Phelan Statement V, { 22.
2

Noseworthy Statement I, | 45.
!23 Noseworthy Statement I, { 47.

98.

99.

100.

101.

124

125

126

127

128

129

Public Version

The Claimants are only claiming the costs of relocating the [J to the Province as
incremental spending (as opposed to the cost of the itself). This part of the
spending, the Claimants argue, is clearly linked to the Guidelines. The transfer of this
HE «fo Newfoundland, they say, is “an excellent example of the distorted business

practices Claimants have been forced to adopt as a result of the Guidelines.” 25

The Respondent argues that this expenditure relates to an [ggg that “has long been
conducted outside of the Province”'”* and that this [ggg “pre-dates” the Claimants’
attempts to comply with the Guidelines via incremental spending and thus cannot now

be construed as incremental.'?’

The Majority finds that the Claimants have proven that these expenditures are
incremental. The evidence offered by the Claimants that this project was moved to
Newfoundland so that it would be Guidelines-compliant (combined with the timing of
this move) indicates a clear causal link with the Guidelines.'** The fact that the [yy
has been conducted for some time elsewhere is irrelevant in light of the fact that the

Claimants claim only the cost of transferring the expenditure to the Province.

i)

The Claimants claim compensation for costs related to improving the
HE 0 improve safety, operational efficiency and capability in existing and Arctic

frontier regions.”'”°

Noseworthy Statement I, i 45-48.
Noseworthy Statement I, | 45.

Counter-Memorial on Damages, {| 36.
Counter-Memorial on Damages, { 35.

Noseworthy Statement I, {{ 46-7. See also clause 3.1 of the Guidelines (“In order to be eligible, any R&D

expenditure must occur in the Province of Newfoundland & Labrador”).

CE-313, EMM0004838.

102.

104.

105.

Public Version

The Respondent says that the Claimants have participated in this type of project since
1999 and that this is therefore an ongoing expenditure, conceived of before the

Guidelines, and is therefore not incremental.'*°

The Claimants argue that the Respondent confuses this incremental expenditure with
pre-Guidelines work (also focused on [MM undertaken by Petro-

Canada/Suncor as an individual owner company."

The Majority finds that the Claimants have proven that this expenditure was

incremental.

The MG 2 issue in these proceedings appears to be far more extensive
than previous work focused on EE. both in terms of scope and costs.'*
Further, additional factors such as that Hibernia’s fundamental structure is not
susceptible to .’* and that this project was conceived at a joint industry
workshop,'™ lead the Majority to believe that this expenditure is properly characterized

as incremental.

3 Counter-Memorial on Damages, 33; Rejoinder on Damages, 1{f 96-99.
3! Noseworthy Statement I, 4 41-44.

'8 Historical Benefit Plan reports for both Projects put the cost of previous J work at much
lower amounts than the J total project cost estimated for thi (sce, c.g.
CE-84, EMM0001616; CE-93, EMM0001871; and CE-92, EMM0001824 for historical Benefit Plans, and
CE-313, EMM0004838 for the estimated cost of this 7 )

    

133 Noseworthy Statement I, { 43

'4 Noseworthy Statement I, { 44, see the discussion above at {J 67.

 

Public Version

<i)
—

Th I ois to develop cv iT
HEN, Specifically via the “development of 2 xs
 (: 2p lication 0f Es”

The Respondent refers to the Claimants’ witness’ testimony to argue that the project
began in 2007 and “pre-dates” the Claimants’ attempts to comply with the Guidelines
via incremental spending and should thus not be compensable.'*’ Moreover, this project

is consistent with ExxonMobil’s R&D priorities, which for the Respondent indicates

 

that it is ordinary course spending.'**

For the Claimants, the 2007 project was completed that same year and the yy
HE (hat was proposed in 2010, i.e. well after the implementation of the
Guidelines, and the commencement of their attempts to comply with them began in
earnest, is a separate expenditure. '° However, the Claimants’ evidence clearly
describes this 2010 project as “Phase II” in several instances.'*” The Claimants further
argue that ExxonMobil’s concomitant R&D priorities elsewhere in the world are
irrelevant to assessing whether this Terra Nova expenditure constitutes an incremental

expenditure.'*!

The Majority finds that the Claimants have not proven that this is an incremental
expenditure. They have not effectively refuted the Respondent’s argument that this

project is a phased project that was conceptualized prior to the introduction of the

A
a
ee

86 CE-310, EMM0004801.

57 Counter-Memorial on Damages, 35.

'38 Rejoinder on Damages, {| 102.

89 C1, Reply on Damages, 34.

49 CE-310, EMM0004801.

'41 Cl, Reply on Damages, 34.

110.

111.

112.

Public Version

Guidelines. The Claimants have not offered an adequate explanation of this descriptive
feature, which suggests that this project originated prior to the time at which the

Claimants indicate they began carrying out incremental spending.
(i)

a Ocused R&D" is aimed at advancing, inter alia,
“the state 0 ia and the
ee

The Respondent argues that the expenditures related to these projects fit within the
Claimants’ pre-Guidelines commitments and therefore cannot be incremental. '* It
further asserts that this type of R&D is directed towards the specific needs of the

Projects.'*°

The Claimants say that pre-Guidelines compatibility is irrelevant to the question of
whether or not the expenditure was incremental. The Guidelines imposed a threshold
for R&D spending.'’ This means that even if an expenditure is compliant with the pre-
Guidelines regime, it does not necessary follow that it was not motivated by the

Guidelines.

The Majority finds that the Claimants have proven that these expenditures were

incremental.

‘2 The relevant projects are joint industry projects with [aa
Le

(Noseworthy Statement I, 53).

143 CE- 291, EMM0004603. Two projects fall within this description, they are dealt with together partly as
this was the approach taken by the Claimants’ witness Mr. Noseworthy (Noseworthy Statement I, {ff 52-
54).

4 Noseworthy Statement I, 53.

'45 Counter-Memorial on Damages, 42.
146 Counter-Memorial on Damages, {[ 42.

47 Cl, Reply on Damages, ‘ff 36-40.

Public Version

The Majority notes that the R&D spending commitments under the Benefits Plans (the
pre-Guidelines regime) were nonspecific." It is difficult, and inappropriate, for the
Majority to now seek to late these specific i into pre-Guideli

spending requirements which would function as a baseline. The Respondent’s
arguments that rely on pre-Guidelines regime spending compliance are thus ineffective.

The Majority also finds several aspects of the Claimants’ evidence persuasive.
Foremost, the projects at issue were conceived of at a joint industry workshop. Such a
workshop, as the Claimants’ witness Mr. Noseworthy has explained, is not how the
Claimants would conduct and plan R&D in the ordinary course.'? Further, the serious
nature of MG in this context’ aligns with Mr. Noseworthy’s statements
that this research would have been undertaken earlier were it important, and that the
Projects already have systems to address NN These various aspects
support the Claimants’ assertion that this spending was Guidelines-motivated.

iv) ee
as

The Claimants seek compensation for NS that will operate under
the auspices of the I 2nd will conduct
ee
ee
ee

¥8 See, e.g, the examples given in the Counter-Memorial on Damages (4 37-38): “fund basic research”,
“promote further research and development in Canada to solve problems unique to the Canadian offshore
environment”, etc.

149 Noseworthy Statement I, 47.

10 See CE-291, EMM0004609: I presents a significant hazard to|

a
in environs TT such 2s for example, the
Grand Banks...”.

131 CE-286, EMM0004540.

33

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

Public Version

The Respondent submits that this project fits within the Claimants’ pre-Guidelines

commitments and therefore cannot be incremental.'*?

The Claimants posit that pre-Guidelines compatibility is irrelevant to the question of

whether or not the expenditure was incremental.'**

The Majority finds that the Claimants have proven that [ggg entails incremental

expenditure.

HE functions as ang. which, as the Claimants point out,
is accessible to all and can be used by their competitors. '* The Majority finds
particularly convincing the Claimants’ observation that this type of sharing
arrangement is not representative of the manner in which Projects normally carry out
“ordinary course” R&D spending. The finding that this expenditure is incremental is
also supported by the timing of its inception (which was in 2010),'** which is clearly in
line with the time period when the Claimants began to comply with the Guidelines in

earnest. '*°

Further, the Majority again notes that the R&D spending commitments under the
Benefits Plans (the pre-Guidelines regime) were general and unspecified. It is
inappropriate for the Majority to now seek to translate these pre-Guidelines spending
requirements into a particular baseline. The Respondent’s arguments are thus

unconvincing in this regard.

52 Counter-Memorial on Damages, 42.

153 Cl. Reply on Damages, { 36-40; Noseworthy Statement I, {i 49-51.
'54 Noseworthy Statement I, { 51.

155 See CE-212.

156 Phelan Statement IV, { 9.

Public Version

QV)
The Claimants’ spending on this gg in 2011 entails funding which will initially

provide for the JE that itis hoped will js
[Ultimately direct funding for the will be provided!”
| ly is = P

For the Respondent, this expenditure is i with pre-Guideli i 158

Indeed, the Respondent says, the Projects have funded J since 1986.1

The Claimants hold that the fact that Projects have funded [gM in the past is
irelevant. The current incremental (of i ) furthermore
far exceeds pre-Guidelines funding by Hibernia and is for a different purpose,
according to the Claimants.' Thus, even if the Claimants accepted that pre-Guidelines
compatibility rendered certain expenses non-compensable (which they do not), this
expenditure would be distinguishable.

The Majority finds that the Claimants have proven that this is an incremental
expenditure.

Regarding the Respondent’s argument that this spending is in accordance with the pre-
Guidelines regime, the Majority has already outlined its view that the mere fact that an
expenditure is consistent with the pre-Guidelines regime does not resolve whether it is

introduced as a result of the Guidelines or not.!

The Majority finds the timing of this funding to be probative of a causal link to the
Guidelines; the previous funding for JY began in 1986 and continued until
1991. This amounts to a 20 year break in funding for or related to ) The

157 Phelan Statement V, 9] 17 and 18.

138 Counter-Memorial on Damages, 42.

139 Counter-Memorial on Damages, 42.

160 Phelan Statement V, §] 17-18; Cl. Reply on Damages, 41.
161 See | 121 above.

35

Public Version

reinstitution of this type of funding is convincingly explained by the inception of the

Guidelines.

Vi)
Ce
The Respondent accepts that the Claimants have spent yy

HE “elated to EXT and R&D that are incremental.” The Majority therefore

does not need to engage in discussion as to whether these expenses are incremental.

(c) Total Spending Determined to be Incremental by the Majority

The Majority finds that the Claimants have proven that worth of
their expenditure was incremental and is compensable (subject to the adjustment

discussed below'®), as indicated above and set forth in the table below:

 

 

 

 

 

Expenditure / ‘Ordinary Tncremental Share Mobil ‘Share Murphy Oil
Project Course Expenditures! | Canada

| | |
Zz

| | | |
Zz

Lt 7 7 7
7

a a | a
|

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 See footnote 267 to the Rejoinder on Damages and Counter-Memorial on Damages, { 44; Walck
Statement V, Annex 1. The Respondent accepts these expenditures but still asserts that deductions should
be made for the tax and royalty-based benefits schemes (see discussion below at {J 130-150).

183 See 4 138 below.
164 See e.g. R. Walck, Report in Response to Claimant’s Damage Submission, dated 21 September 2012,
Annex 1, p. 2-7.

36

Public Version

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Public Version

 

Total —= | — —

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cc. SR&ED (TAX) CREDITS

The SR&ED tax program is self-assessing. The Claimants assess and identify the
portion of R&D expenditures that are eligible for credit under the program and reduce
their tax liability in their annual returns accordingly.'® The applicable deduction rate is
32% (i.e. the Claimants deduct from their tax payable 32% of the value of R&D
expenditures self-assessed to be eligible). The self-assessed amounts can be audited by
the Canadian Revenue Authority (“CRA”) for up to four years after the CRA issues a
Notice of Assessment, which is issued “with all due dispatch” after the Claimants file

their tax returns (reflecting the credits claimed).'®

Prior to the Damages Hearing, the Claimants offered to deduct from the compensation
they claim the SR&ED “credits” that they have self assessed and included in their tax
returns to date.'®’ If however, at a later date, the CRA denies any of the credits that
Claimants have deducted from their damages, Claimants will have to pay the CRA the
amount of that credit. Under the terms of the offer, the Canadian government will then
have to reimburse the Claimants the amount of that credit, which they had to pay to the

CRA.

At the Damages Hearing, the Claimants also indicated that they could (alternatively)
withdraw their claims for tax credits so that if the Majority compensated them for

incremental expenditures there would be no danger of overcompensation. '* The

165 Claimants’ letter to the Tribunal of April 9, 2013; Respondent's letter to the Tribunal of April 9, 2013;
Counter-Memorial on Damages, {| 49; Rejoinder on Damages.

'66 Claimants’ letter to the Tribunal of April 9, 2013, p.3; Respondent’s letter to the Tribunal of April 9,
2013, p. 2.

'67 Claimants’ letter to the Tribunal of April 9, 2013, p.2.

‘68 Damages Hearing Transcript, p.215.

Public Version

Claimants have since indicated that this is not a possible course of action for

He (2 necessary step in fulfilling this offer).’°

The Respondent ultimately rejected the offer made by the Claimants to settle the
question of SR&ED credits.'”

(a) Parties’ Positions

The Respondent argues that the Claimants are receiving the benefit that these credits
result in now and that if they are not deducted from the Claimants’ damages the
Claimants will enjoy a windfall. Thus, for any incremental spending the Majority

finds to be compensable, a 32% deduction should be applied.'”

For the Claimants, the SR&ED credits (nor the deductions from their tax payable) are
not “final,” or enjoyed in any “relevant sense”! because they have not yet been made
subject to an audit by the Canadian government authorities and can therefore still be

denied.

The Claimants argue that it is far from certain that the CRA will in fact confirm the
entirety of the credits that the Claimants have claimed. The Respondent disputes this.
To these ends, the Parties differ on the historic and overall acceptance rate of self-
assessed SR&ED credits by CRA, using Hibernia as an example. The Claimants put
the acceptance rate at jggggjthrough 2009,”'" whereas the Respondent points to the

‘© Claimants’ letter to the Tribunal of May 28, 2013, p.2. ees
ee
a

170 Respondent’s letter to the Tribunal of September 17, 2013

"7! Rejoinder on Damages, {f 115

'? The Respondent argues that as the Claimants have not clarified which expenditures they have claimed
credits in relation to, the Tribunal should assume they have claimed credits for all of its expenditure
(Damages Hearing Transcript, p.79).

173

Cl. Reply on Damages, 1 45.
"74 Cl, Reply on Damages, 147.

Public Version

high rate of acceptance from 2007 to 2009 (either J or )'” and argues that the

Claimants have in fact conceded that the overall acceptance rate for Hibernia is gg.’

Further, the Respondent says that the Claimants’ “offers” demonstrate that they
themselves agree there should be a deduction to their damages to reflect the SR&ED
credits they enjoy. The Claimants dispute this, explaining that whilst they have never
sought to “double dip,” this does not mean that they agree that the Majority should
make deductions from their compensation now. Rather, this simply demonstrates that
the Claimants are willing to work with the Respondent to achieve other solutions to

this issue that ensure that they are not left out of pocket.

(b) Majority’s Finding

The Majority finds that it is appropriate to deduct from the compensation granted to the
Claimants under this Award an amount that reflects the benefits that they, by their own
account, have received as a result of the SR&ED program. This will result in a 32%
deduction to the amount the Majority has determined to be incremental spending where
the expenditure appears to be eligible under the SR&ED program. So far as the
Majority is aware, the Claimants have not indicated exactly which of their incremental
expenditures they consider eligible and/or have used as a basis for claiming credits
under the SR&ED program.'” The Majority therefore is necessarily guided by the
indications of the Respondent’s expert in in this regard.'* Accordingly, applying the
32% discount to the relevant incremental expenditures leaves a compensable amount

of CONS clue to Mobil Canada and CDN$ gg due to Murphy Oil.'”

"5 Respondent’s letter to the Tribunal of April 9, 2013, p.2.
176 Rejoinder on Damages, {| 116.

"77 See Damages Hearing Transcript, p.78. See also the Respondent's letter to the Claimants of August 28,
2013. The Claimants have given only an approximate figure to indicate the total amount of their SR&ED
claim.

"8 See Walck Statement V, Annex 1.

'?° The following table represents the Majority’s calculations to this end:

 

Total with deduction for SR&ED
credit

Expenditure / | Incremental Spending
Project Amount

SR&ED eligible?
(Walek

 

 

 

Public Version

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mobil Murphy | Statement V, Mobil Murphy
Annex 1)

|__| i, os a a

Vs

=

i = a | ves _ =

Ll

iL me Le a

||

=

Lee

mm 7 Mmm ss = =

mz

i

=

/

7

) | = i ves _ =

|

Le

Zz = Mj = =

|

=

= = Mj = =

eel

mm = Mmm = =

|

Lee

a 7 Mmm ss = =

|

=

/

_

_ me, ms 7 =

|

zz

ne Oe Oe a a

|_|

|

_

eee!

= ma a” a =

|

=

| | 509.000 | some not all™ — —_

be

Total 12,701,000 | 2,856,000 10,310,605 2,273,635

 

 

 

*Only 5 entries in the “spending not et

 

hallenged” section of Annex 1 to W

 

falck V are marked as SRRED eligible (H-3,

H-4, H-16, TN-16 and H-49). The total amount of these entries is jg To arrive at the amount in the far right

4l

139.

140.

141.

Public Version

The Majority arrives at this finding by virtue of several aspects of the evidence and
arguments that were put before it. Foremost, there is a significant likelihood that the
Claimants will have the benefit they have already received confirmed. There is a clear
record of a high acceptance rate for self-assessed credits under this program, at times
reaching MJ even on the Claimants’ own evidence. '* No evidence has been
presented to indicate that the CRA would change its practice with respect to SR&ED
credit regime.

The Majority also finds it significant that the (potential) audit process for the SR&ED

program is relatively short, and does not entail any punitive claw-back provisions."*!

D. RoyaLTy DEDUCTIONS

Similar to the SR&ED program, the royalty deduction program allows the Clai

to self-assess deductions from the royalties on revenue that they pay to the Province,!”
based on their R&D expenditure.’ Royalties are paid to the Province on a monthly
basis and deductions to royalties for R&D are made monthly as well.'* The deduction
rates arq§j of the relevant expenditure for Hibernia andj of the relevant
expenditure for Terra Nova.'® The royalty deduction program is governed by
Provincial regulations and royalty agreements pertaining to each of the Projects.'*° The
deductions that the Claimants make are subject to review and audit. The audit process

columns, on respectively a and gg (pro rata off. i.e. amount eligible for deduction) the 32 % deduction
ied,

was applied.
180 CE-354,
181 In contrast to the royalties regime (see ff 130-150).

1®2 See, e.g. the Hibernia Royalty Agreement (CE-355). The Tribunal notes the distinction between this
type of royalty and royalties which might be payable in relation to know how or patents (see the letter from
the Tribunal of October 3, 2012).

183 Claimants’ letter to the Tribunal of April 9, 2013, p. 4; Respondent’s letter to the Tribunal of April 9,
2013, p. 3.

184 Claimants’ letter to the Tribunal of April 9, 2013, p. 4.
185 Rejoinder on Damages, § 120.
186 Phelan Statement V, 32.

42

142.

143.

Public Version

for each of the Projects differs, but can take from five to seven years to resolve.'*’ If the
Province ultimately determines, via the audit process, that certain deductions were
invalid, these must be repaid to the Province with interest. The applicable interest rate
for Terra Nova is prime + 2% and for Hibernia J (in both cases dating back

to the month in which the relevant R&D expenditure was made).

(a) Parties’ Positions

For the Claimants, it is “simply too speculative” to determine at this time whether or
not they will ultimately enjoy these royalty deduction benefits, such that there should
be a deduction to the compensation granted to them by this Majority.'** The Claimants
also object that this uncertainty is of the Respondent’s making, for the Respondent
could simply guarantee that the deductions will be confirmed. If the Respondent did
so, the Claimants would be happy to have a deduction applied to the compensation
awarded by this Tribunal. They point to the fact that the Province is yet to audit any
royalty payments from 2006 onwards, saying it is therefore unclear how R&D spending

under the Guidelines will be treated in the royalty deduction program.'*°

The Claimants argue that it is significant that the royalty regulations which apply to
both Projects!” provide that if a cost which is eligible (here R&D expenditure) is offset
in some way (i.e. by an award of damages in these proceedings), that cost becomes
ineligible as the basis for a royalty deduction. '*! Thus, any deductions that the
Claimants have made on the basis of R&D may ultimately be deemed ineligible for
royalty deductions if they are also compensated as incremental expenditure by this

Tribunal. At the Damages Hearing, the Respondent argued that it is not clear that the

'87 Claimants’ letter to the Tribunal of April 9, 2013; Respondent’s letter to the Tribunal of April 9, 2013.
The Claimants assert that the dispute resolution process that follows the audit process can take much longer
(Claimants’ letter to the Tribunal of April 9, 2013, p. 5).

188 Phelan Statement V, J 33.
189 C]. Reply on Damages, {ff 48-49.

19 And in the case of Hibernia, additionally the Royalty Agreement (Phelan Statement V, 32; CE-355;
CE-356).

'! Phelan Statement V, {{ 32.

 

144.

145.

Public Version

provisions of the royalty regulations and Hibernia Royalty Agreement would lead to

such a claw back.'*

As with the SR&ED credits, the Claimants have emphasized that they do not seek to
“double dip” and that if they ultimately receive confirmation of the deductions they
have made to their royalty payments, they will return any amount of overcompensation
to Canada.'** Indeed, the Claimants have expressed that they are willing to have this

Award direct them to do so.'

The Respondent argues that the Claimants are enjoying the benefits of the royalty
deduction program now (a fact which it asserts the Claimants have themselves
accepted). '° To avoid overcompensation to the Claimants, these savings should
therefore be deducted from any compensation awarded. The Respondent relies upon
the fact that the Claimants have offered to deduct these savings from their damages
under certain conditions to argue that indeed, the Claimants agree that there should be
a deduction.'° The Respondent asserts that it is impermissible for the Tribunal to rely
upon or include in this Award any kind of enforceable order or direction that the
Claimants repay any amount of overcompensation at a later date. This would be outside
the boundaries of the Tribunal’s powers pursuant to Article 1135 of NAFTA.'” The

only option for the Tribunal is to deduct the royalty-based benefits at the present time.

'®2 Damages Hearing Transcript, p.218.

193 See, e.g. Phelan Statement V, 4 34; Damages Hearing Transcript, p.56.
14 Damages Hearing Transcript, p.102.

15 Rejoinder on Damages, {[ 115. The Claimants respond that earlier comments by their Expert in this
regard (which the Respondent relies upon) are irrelevant because there is “no guarantee that [they] will
actually enjoy these benefits” (Phelan Statement V, § 25, emphasis added). The Respondent asserts, and the
Claimants appear to accept, that the amount they have deducted is in the order of CDN

(Respondent’s letter to the Tribunal of April 9, 2013, p.4; Respondent's letter to the Tribunal of June 12,
2013, p.3; Damages Hearing Transcript, pp. 204-205).

9 Respondent's letter to the Tribunal of April 9, 2013, p.3.
97 Article 1135(1) of NAFTA provides (emphasis added):

“1, Where a Tribunal makes a final award against a Party, the Tribunal may award, separately or in
combination, only:

(a) monetary damages and any applicable interest;

146.

147.

148.

149.

Public Version

Regarding the Claimants’ assertion that Respondent could rectify the uncertainty
(which is of the Respondent’s making) surrounding royalty deductions, the Respondent
says that it has “no authority to ‘guarantee’ a result” in this way (i.e. that it ensure the

royalty deductions are ultimately confirmed).'*

(b) Majority’s Finding

For several different reasons, the Majority finds that there should be no deduction to
the Claimants’ compensation to reflect deductions made under the royalty regime

applicable to the Projects.'°

First, it appears far from certain that the deductions the Claimants have applied to
royalties will ultimately be confirmed. xs
ee
I Unlike for the SR&ED tax credits
regime, the Majority was not presented with reliable historical data showing acceptance

rates for royalty deductions.

The Majority observes that the audit process, which applies to the royalty deductions,
is very lengthy”! and the interest rate that is applied to any amount the Claimants must
repay for Hibernia is very high, bordering on the punitive. Thus, were the Majority to

reduce the Claimants’ compensation as requested, the Claimants may well be left in a

(b) restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide that the disputing Party may pay monetary
damages and any applicable interest in lieu of restitution.

A tribunal may also award costs in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules.”
8 Rejoinder on Damages, { 117.

'° The Tribunal notes that in its letter of October 3, 2012, it indicated that “a proper assessment of damages
rests upon the Tribunal’s determination of any loss that has actually occurred. In this context, the possibility
that the amount of actual damages may have to take into account any tax benefits that have been received has
been recognized by the Claimants in their own pleadings.” (emphasis added). Having taken into account all
of the evidence, the Tribunal has ultimately found that there is not yet sufficient certainty regarding the
royalty deductions for any deduction to compensation to be warranted.

 

2 Damages Hearing Transcript, pp.208-209.

20! The Claimants’ witness Mr. Phelan testified that this process has been known to last up to 16 years
(Damages Hearing Transcript, p.209, see also the Claimants’ letter to the Tribunal of April 9, 2013, p. 5)

150.

151.

Public Version

situation (many years hence”) where they are not only out of pocket but, for Hibernia,

faced with a substantial penalty to pay in addition.

Secondly, it is a possibility that the royalty deductions will be clawed back. The
Province may, relying on provisions in the regulations and royalty agreement for
Hibernia,” seek repayment of the deductions related to R&D expenditures for which
the Majority granted compensation. This in turn creates a possibility that if the Majority
reduced the Claimants’ compensation to reflect royalty deductions, the Claimants may
later be left undercompensated. Whilst the Majority recognizes that this is not an
absolute certainty, the relevant provisions of the regulations and royalty agreement

indicate it is a possibility that warrants refusing the Respondent’s request for deduction.

s

SHORTFALL

The Claimants claim CDN$ J in shortfall-related losses, being the pro-rated
amounts for which Murphy Oil and Mobil Canada are responsible (CDN$
and CDN$ J for Hibernia and Terra Nova respectively).2“ The Board has
requested that a promissory note secured by a letter of credit be provided as security
for the Hibernia shortfall amount?® and letters of credit have been put in place to secure

the Terra Nova shortfall amount.?°

22 This appears to be to an extent under the Province’s control, which, for the Tribunal, is further reason to
deny the reduction requested by the Respondent.

28 See Phelan Statement V, { 32. The Hibernia Royalty Agreement for example states that [7

204 Phelan Statement IV, {| 58; Phelan Statement V, Annex A
205 Phelan Statement IV, {| 18. The operators are responsible for providing and maintaining letters of credit
for only their share of the shortfall for each Project

206 CE-324 and CE-325.

Public Version

(a) Parties’ Positions

The Claimants posit that the notifications of shortfalls that they have received constitute
a “call for payment” within the terms of the Decision.” Additionally, the fact that the
notification has been followed by a requirement that the Projects provide letters of
credit to underwrite the shortfalls, and the accompanying risk that if the letters of credit
are not provided, the Projects’ POAs may not be renewed, is further evidence of a call

for payment.

The Respondent says that it is likely that a great deal of the Claimants’ shortfall will be
met with spending on R&D that is “ordinary course” spending.” Such ordinary course
spending is not compensable and the Claimants are therefore not entitled to the full
shortfall amount. The Respondent argues that a reduction should also be made to reflect
the fact that the Claimants will likely meet some of the shortfall with spending that is

consistent with their obligations under the Accord Acts and Benefits Decisions.”

The Terra Nova shortfall, the Respondent says, is in fact already slated to be eliminated

via a large R&D project*"' which the Claimants have recently had pre-

212

approved by the Board.’ Similarly, the Respondent points to the fact that the

Claimants’ witness Mr. Phelan has made statements that indicate that their Hibernia
shortfall will be “spent down.”?"? The Respondent argues that this too, may be ordinary

course spending.

207 Cl. Mem. on Damages, { 15.
208 Cl. Mem. on Damages, { 16.

2 Based on historical spending, ggg for Terra Nova and ggg for Hibernia (Rejoinder on Damages, |
126).

20 Rejoinder on Damages, { 125.

21! This project seems to in fact be better characterized as a series or collection of projects, all targeted at
the same issue (CE-362).

212

Rejoinder on Damages, {| 128.
213 Phelan Statement IV, {[ 43.

Public Version

The Claimants allege that the Respondent accepts that they are entitled to the shortfall
as compensation “as a matter of law.” ?' For the Claimants, the Respondent’s
arguments regarding “ordinary course” spending and compatibility with the Accord
Acts and Benefits Decisions are an unwarranted attempt to chip away at the Claimants’
losses.” It is far from clear, argue the Claimants, that they will spend money on R&D
to meet their shortfall. They may instead simply allow the Board to draw down the
letters of credit that are held by the Board.?'* In the event that the Claimants do spend
on R&D to meet the shortfall, and if that spending is “ordinary course,” the Claimants
will not claim these amounts in future proceedings and this will allow for any necessary
reconciliation.”'’ The Respondent rejoins that the Claimants’ evidence demonstrates
that it is in fact likely that they will spend down the shortfall on R&D, and that it is
inappropriate for this Tribunal to rely on the possibility of future proceedings to

ameliorate the danger of overcompensation that is therefore present.?!*

(b) Majority’s Finding

The Majority finds that the shortfall is only partially compensable.

The Majority observes that the shortfall is comprised of the difference between the
spending required under the Guidelines over a particular POA period and the total
spending undertaken by the Projects over that particular POA period. The shortfalls for
both Projects over the first POA period after implementation of the 2004 Guidelines

(2004 to 2008) were “spent down” fully by the Claimants.?!? However, the shortfalls in

214 Cl, Reply on Damages, { 52.
215 Cl, Reply on Damages, 53.

216 Cl. Reply on Damages, ‘{ 56; Phelan Statement V, {| 40. The Board would then pay the drawn down
money a “recognized research or education agency” (see e.g. the terms of Hibernia’s letter of credit issued
May 19, 2010, clause 2(B) (CE-315) and Terra Nova’s letter of credit issued August 24, 2011 (CE-324)).

27 Cl. Reply on Damages, { 60; Phelan Statement V, 41.
218 Rejoinder on Damages, {ff 135-137.
219 Phelan Statement IV, 491 45 and 48.

158.

159.

160.

Public Version

the subsequent POA period, 2009 to 2011 (April 2012 for Hibernia), have, to the best

of our knowledge, not yet been eliminated.”

The Decision has indicated that in principle, shortfall amounts may be compensable, if
their quantum is ascertainable with sufficient certainty and if there has been a call for
payment. However, at this time, the Majority finds itself confronted by two key
challenges: first, whether the Claimants have in fact received a “call for payment.”
Second, the possibility that the current shortfalls will be mitigated by future ordinary

course expenditures.

Regarding the first issue, the Majority notes that the notification by the Board of the
shortfall and the attendant actions associated therewith are not a conventional call for
immediate payment. Rather, they amount to a call for the Claimants to fulfill their
obligations, with a request for a guarantee. The practice has been that the Board’s
notification and attendant actions are merely the first steps in a process whereby the
Claimants may ultimately take several different courses of action to fulfill their
obligation: via spending on R&D (either incremental or ordinary course); or via
payment into an R&D fund.””! The letters of credit that are in place are best considered
an interim measure; they may be amended and adapted to whatever course of action

the Claimants take in meeting the shortfall.???

More crucially, regarding the second issue, the Majority is concerned that
compensating the entirety of the shortfall, as the Claimants request, may result in pre-
financing of ordinary course expenditures. The Majority is not comforted in this regard
by the Claimants’ assurance that any future ordinary course expenditures financed by

this compensation will be off-set in any future claim or reconciliation proceedings.

220 Phelan Statement IV, 491 46 and 49.

221 See Article 4.2 of the 2004 Guidelines. As noted above (see footnote 5 above), the Board has also
permitted the Claimants to apply spending from subsequent periods to shortfalls from previous periods. The
Guidelines also permit the opposite of this (excess spending in one POA period to be applied against a
shortfall in a subsequent period) (Article 4.2 of the 2004 Guidelines).

 

22 See, e.g. CE-315, clause 6.

223

Damages Hearing Transcript, p.123.

161.

162.

163.

164.

Public Version

The Majority also finds parts of the Respondent’s approach to shortfall problematic. In
particular, Respondent’s argument that the Accord Acts and Benefit Decisions dictated
a quantifiable minimal obligation of spending and that some of the Claimants’
projected shortfall expenditures should be deemed to be in conformity with such
obligation f for Hibernia, and ia for Terra Nova)? has been found

unconvincing and inapplicable elsewhere herein.”

The Majority feels obligated to develop an understanding of possible spending by the
Claimants in the immediately foreseeable future that may mitigate the shortfall in the
specific POA period being examined herein. The Majority notes that the situation with
respect to shortfall differs between the Projects. As discussed below, there are
reasonably certain, large future expenditures at Terra Nova that are likely to eliminate
its existing shortfall completely. The same is not true for Hibernia, and the Projects’

shortfalls are therefore dealt with separately below where relevant.

Whereas the previous shortfall was fully met through the Claimants’ spending, the
present shortfall has not been extinguished and its final composition is thus currently
undetermined (whether it will be met by incremental or ordinary course spending, or
otherwise). As previously mentioned, the Claimants could have extinguished the
shortfall by placing the full amount into a Board-administered R&D Fund, or insisting

the Board draw down the letters of credit. The Claimants did not do so.

For Terra Nova, as noted above, the Majority finds it reasonably certain that the
shortfall will cease to exist via projected expenditures on the J which targets
Eee | is also reasonably certain that, as they have
done in the past by arrangement with the Board, the Claimants will use the expenditure
on this project to eliminate the existing shortfall for Terra Nova. The fact that the
Claimants have sought Board approval for this project is clear indication thereof. Given
this reasonable certainty that the shortfall for Terra Nova will cease to exist in the

foreseeable future, it is not appropriate, in the Majority’s view, that this Tribunal

24 Counter-Memorial on Damages, {{ 70.

25 See Y 121 above.

165.

166.

Public Version

compensate the Claimants at this time for the existing Terra Nova shortfall. The
Majority notes that as they have done so in these proceedings, the Claimants may claim

whatever portion of the Jj spending they believe is incremental, in later proceedings.

By contrast, for Hibernia, the Majority accepts that the shortfall is partially
compensable at present. Both the Claimants and Respondent agree on the initial
compensability of the shortfall at Hibernia,”® but differ as to the possible future
ordinary course spending that should be accounted for in the present compensation
assessment. Whereas the Claimants demand full compensation upfront, but offer not to
claim resulting pre-financed ordinary course spending in possible future proceedings,
Respondent suggests applying a historic ratio (based on spending in the 2009-2011

period) to differentiate the Claimants’ future ordinary from incremental spending.”

The Majority was, in the Decision, reluctant to engage in speculative predictions of the
future.” The Majority does not have the same concerns in using the historical
incremental spending ratio over this specific POA period (as against some far distant
past or future period) to estimate what proportion of the current Hibernia shortfall may
be reduced or extinguished with ordinary course spending. The Majority is acutely
aware that it cannot predict ordinary course spending well into the future — and neither
would it be appropriate for it to attempt to do so. However, it is comfortable with the
projection (based on historical data and practice) it is carrying out for a very narrow
future time period. The projection allows the Majority to make a reasonable
approximation of what portion of the shortfall may be met with incremental spending
and is therefore compensable. This current assessment necessarily leaves unprejudiced

the compensability of shortfall damages over future POA periods, or indeed the

226 See, e.g., Counter-Memorial on Damages, | 73.

227 Counter-Memorial on Damages, | 62; Rejoinder on Damages, {| 133; Walck IV, 9 38. Application of the
historic spending ratio is only one of three categories the Respondent identifies as necessary deductions to
the Claimants’ shortfall. However, the Respondent agrees that “the Tribunal can select individual categories
to be deducted if it does not accept that all deductions should be made.” (Rejoinder on Damages, {] 144).

28 Decision, | 473.

167.

168.

Public Version

compensability of spending not accounted for here, that the Claimants ultimately

believe is incremental.

The Majority therefore accepts, in principle, the application of the historic ratio
between incremental and ordinary course spending, as suggested by the Respondent.
However, whilst the Majority accepts this, it believes that the percentage of
posited by the Respondent requires adjustment. The J figure was derived from
information regarding the ratio of ordinary course versus incremental spending
provided by the Claimants. The Respondent’s expert Mr. Walck arrived at the Jy
figure by examining the 2009 to 2011 spending that was applied (by agreement with
the Board) to the 2004 to 2008 shortfall. The Majority has adjusted the calculations to
reflect our findings on historical incremental and ordinary course spending discussed
above and to include the spending which it has determined was not incremental

spending.”

The Majority has also made some other minor adjustments in calculating the historical

ratio of incremental spending. These adjustments include:

a. calculating the ratio across all spending that was undertaken in that POA
period, not just across the spending from 2009 to 2011 that was applied to the
2004 to 2008 shortfall. The Tribunal believes this provides a more accurate and

complete picture, and thus a more accurate historical ratio for present purposes;

b. calculating the ratio over the period 2009 to April 2012, rather than across
2009 and 2011, as this is the current Hibernia POA period; and

c. calculating the ratio based on Mobil and Murphy’s proportion of the Hibernia

project spend.

~° Specifically, an amount of CDN$ | representing the spending on the

has been added to the Claimants’ incremental spending to calculate the correct ratio.

169.

Public Version

In light of the foregoing, the Majority finds that the applicable historical ratio is yy

incremental spending / gg ordinary course spending. *° The Claimants are therefore
granted Mj of the claimed shortfall amount for Hibernia of respectively CDN$
HE (00 Mobil and CDNS gg for Murphy. **' Consequently, Mobil Canada
is entitled to CDN$ J and Murphy Oil is entitled to CDNS as

compensation for the relevant shortfall.?*

280 The Majority’s calculations (references to “lines” are to Phelan Statement IV, Annex A, Table 2B) were:

Total Hibernia Approved Expenditures 2009- April 2012 (line A): a
|

Pro rata total Hibernia expenditures:

Mobil (33.125%) =

Murphy (6.5%)

Total pro rata Mobil + Murphy =a
Incremental expenditures:

Mobil :-

Murphy: aa

Correction for ME to be deducted from total incremental expenditures amount

Pro rata deduction:
Mobil (33.125 %):
Murphy (6.5 %):

~. Incremental expenditures:
Mobi! :
Mu phy

- Total incremental expenditures Mobil and Murphy 2009-April 2012: Jaa

-. Percentage of incremental expenditures Mobil and Murphy of their total expenditures:

21 See e.g. Walck, Second Report in Response to Claimant’s Damage Submission, Annex 2 page 3.

232 ‘The Tribunal has noted that Messrs. Phelan and Walck, the experts of the Parties, have considered that
the shortfall should be subject to discounts and interest. In the Tribunal’s view, the shortfall remains a
nominal amount, which is carried over into the future and either will result in incremental expenditures in the
future or payment into the Fund. Until such actual expenditure or payment is made, no interest is due.

 

170.

Public Version

IV. OTHER MATTERS

A.

171.

INTEREST

The Claimants seek compound prejudgment interest on their incremental spending
compensation from the time of spending to the date of this Award.?*? The Claimants’
entitlement to prejudgment interest does not appear to be disputed by the Respondent.*¥
The Claimants have calculated their prejudgment interest at the rate of 12 month
Canadian dollar LIBOR rate +4, on a calendar year basis.**> The Majority grants interest
on this basis through to the date of this Award. Such interest is already incorporated
into the amounts discussed herein in section III.B.*°° However, this interest appears to
have been calculated and included by the Claimants (calculations that were followed
by the Respondent) only to the date of their first damages submission (July 23, 2012).?%”
Thus, interest at the rate of Canadian dollar LIBOR +4, compounded monthly, must be
added to the amount of incremental expenditure that the Majority has deemed
compensable above,”* in accordance with the methodology applied by the Claimants

up to July 23, 2012.2

Costs

The Claimants’ legal fees and expenses incurred in the arbitration amount to US$
8,204,365.40 (up until the Decision the legal fees and expenses amounted to US$
7,103,207.50 and the remaining US$ 1,101,157.80 pertained to the damages phase of

233 Cl. Mem. on Damages, {{ 23; Phelan Statement IV, 4 31.
24 Walck Statement V, {| 6; Walck Statement IV, {If 33-34.

235 Cl. Mem. on Damages, {[ 23; Phelan Statement IV, { 31 (“This calculation was performed on a calendar
year basis; in other words, I assumed that each of the expenditures made in a given calendar year was made
on December 31 of that year. In the case of Hibernia’s 2012 expenditures, I have assumed that they were all
made in April 2012”). The Majority notes that it is apparent from Mr. Phelan’s calculations (see Phelan
Statement IV, Annex A, p.7) that interest has been compounded monthly. As already noted, these calculations
do not appear to be disputed by the Respondent.

236 See also 138 above.

27 Phelan Statement IV, 31, Annex A (pp. 7-9).
238 CDNS I due to Mobil Canada and CDNS [ggg due to Murphy Cil., see {| 138 above.

23 See Phelan Statement IV, Annex A, pp. 7-9.

172.

173.

174.

Public Version

the proceeding). They have advanced US$ 525,000 on account of the fees and
expenses of the Members of the Tribunal and the ICSID administrative fees and
expenses (the “Arbitration Costs”), and a lodging fee of US$ 25,000. The Claimants

seek an award of the entirety of these costs.

The Respondent’s legal fees and expenses amount to CND$ 5,363,229.70 (CND$
4,507,481.19 of which related to the proceeding on merits and on principles of

quantum). It has advanced US$ 525,000 to ICSID.**"

The Respondent initially requested that the Claimants be ordered to pay the costs and
legal fees of Canada.” In its Statement of Costs of August 14, 2013, it requested the
Tribunal to decide that the Parties should bear their own legal costs and share equally
the Arbitration Costs. The Respondent argued that (i) ICSID and other tribunals have
refused to award costs when the claimant failed to establish all alleged treaty breaches
or recovered significantly less damages than claimed, meaning that there was no
“unsuccessful party” in those cases; (ii) tribunals have consistently not awarded costs
against parties that raised legitimate arguments, even if those arguments did not
ultimately prevail, or where the dispute raised novel issues as in this case; (iii) the
proceeding involved unnecessary costs due to unscheduled submissions filed by the

Claimants and the Damages Hearing requested by the Claimants.”

In their observations on the Respondent’s Statement of Costs, the Claimants maintained
their position that the Respondent should bear the Claimants’ legal fees and expenses
and the Arbitration Costs, arguing that the Tribunal should apply the “Costs Follow the

Event” rule.“ The Respondent counter-argued that the “Costs Follow the Event Rule”

240 Claimants’ Schedules of Costs of November 7, 2011 and August 13, 2014 and Claimants’ submission on
costs of December 27, 2013.

4! Respondent’s Summary of Costs Incurred by Canada of October 28, 2011, Respondent’s Statement of
Costs of August 14, 2013.

242 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial of December 1, 2009, {| 387.
3 Respondent’s Statement of Costs of August 14, 2013, {ff 3-6.
24 Claimants’ Observations of December 27, 2013, {Ill 1-6.

175.

176.

177.

245

246

Public Version

is not a prevailing principle in investment treaty arbitration and that both the NAFTA.

and the ICSID Additional Facility give full discretion to the Tribunal to award costs.*45

Although the Parties disagree on the allocation of costs, they agree that the Tribunal
has broad discretion to decide how and by whom the Arbitration Costs and the legal
costs and expenses incurred by the Parties in connection with the proceeding shall be

borne, pursuant to Article 58 of the Arbitration Rules and the NAFTA.

This case involved novel and complex issues concerning the interpretation of the
NAFTA and the quantification of damages. The Tribunal asked and addressed many
questions in this respect, some of which were also addressed to the other NAFTA
parties. Both Parties raised meritorious arguments, and presented their respective cases
fairly and professionally, which ultimately lead to a majority opinion and a dissent. The
need for a second phase of the arbitration on the quantification of the damages shows
in itself the difficulties faced by the Tribunal. Ultimately, while the Claimants prevailed
on the merits and were awarded damages on aspects of their claims, they were only

partially successful in regard to these claims.

Having considered all the circumstances of this arbitration, in the exercise of its
discretion, the Tribunal has concluded that it is fair and appropriate that both sides bear
the Arbitration Costs in equal share and that each side bears its own legal and other

costs. 4°

Respondent’s Response to the Claimants’ Observations of December 27, 2013, {if 2-3.

The Parties will in due course receive a statement of the account from the ICSID Secretariat. Any

remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Parties in proportion to the payments that they advanced to
ICSID.

Public Version

Vv. AWARD

178. On the basis of the foregoing, the Tribunal decides:

a.

That Canada shall pay Mobil Canada and Murphy Oil respectively CDN$
10,310,605 and CDN$ 2,273,635 as compensation for incremental expenditures.
These amounts shall bear interest at the 12-month Canadian Dollar LIBOR rate

+ 4%, compounded monthly, from July 23, 2012 to the date of this Award.

. That Canada shall pay Mobil Canada and Murphy Oil respectively CDN$

3,582,408 and CDN$ 1,127,612 as compensation for shortfall.

That the Parties shall bear their own legal and other costs in relation to this

proceeding, and shall bear the Arbitration Costs in equal share.

Public Version

[Signed]

Professor Hans van Houtte
President

Dose Hl Fehnency 2015”

[Signed] [Signed]
Professor Merit E. Janow Professor Philippe Sands

Date: O2 - [7 . (S Date: 1% febuory 2H

58

