CITATION: Attorney General of Canada v. Mobil et al., 2016 ONSC 790
COURT FILE NO.: CV-15-11079-00CL
DATE: 20160216

SUPERIOR COURT OF JUSTICE - ONTARIO

COMMERCIAL LIST
RE: Attorney General of Canada, Applicant
AND

Mobil Investments Canada Inc. and Murphy Oil Corporation, Respondents
BEFORE: Conway J.
COUNSEL: Karen Lovell and Roger Flaim, for the Applicant

John Terry and Emily Sherkey, for the Respondents

HEARD: January 29, 2016

REASONS FOR DECISION

(] Mobil Investments Canada Inc. and Murphy Oil Corporation (the “Investors”)' are
investors in the Hibernia and Terra Nova offshore petroleum extraction projects located off the
coast of Newfoundland and Labrador (the “Projects”.

[2] The Investors submitted a claim to arbitration under the North American Free Trade
Agreement (the “NAFTA”)’ against the Government of Canada (“Canada”). They alleged that
domestic measures requiring certain fixed expenditures for the Projects breached the prohibition
against “performance requirements” in Article 1106 of the NAFTA.

B] The arbitral tribunal (the “Tribunal”) found that Canada had breached Article 1106(1)(c)
of the NAFTA and ordered Canada to pay the Investors damages (including interest) of
approximately $19 million (Cdn.) (the “Award”).

' Both of the Investors are U.S. corporations, incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware.
? North American Free Trade Agreement Between the Government of Canada, the Government of Mexico and the
Government of the United States, 17 December 1992, Can. T.S. 1994 No. 2.

   

790 (Ca

2016 ONSC

- Page 2 -

[4] Canada seeks to set aside the Award on the basis that the Tribunal exceeded its
jurisdiction in making the Award. For the reasons that follow, Canada’s application is
dismissed.

Overview

[5] The NAFTA is a trade agreement among three trading parties, Canada, the United States
and Mexico (a “Trading Party”). Chapter 11 of the NAFTA provides various protections to
investors of one Trading Party that make investments in another Trading Party’s territory.

[6] One of those protections is contained in Article 1106, which prohibits a Trading Party
from imposing “performance requirements” on an investor from another Trading Party. In
particular, Article 1106(1)(c) prohibits a Trading Party from requiring an investor “to purchase,
use or accord a preference to goods produced or services provided in its territory, or to purchase
goods or services from persons in its territory.”

[7] At the time the NAFTA was negotiated, each of the Trading Parties had existing
domestic measures that conflicted with some of the protections afforded by Chapter 11. Article
1108(1)(a) therefore provided that each Trading Party could “reserve” existing non-conforming
measures from the application of specific articles of Chapter 11, by listing the measures in that
party’s Schedule to Annex I of the NAFTA.

The Accord Act, Benefits Plans and the 2004 Guidelines

[8] The “reservation” at issue in this case is the Canada-Newfoundland Atlantic Accord
Implementation Act (the “Accord Act”) That statute, together with comparable provincial
legislation,’ governs offshore petroleum projects in Newfoundland and Labrador. Canada listed
the Accord Act in its Schedule to Annex I of the NAFTA, thereby exempting the Accord Act
from the prohibition on performance requirements in Article 1106.

[9] The Accord Act, s. 45, requires all off-shore projects to have a “benefits plan”, approved
by the Canada-Newfoundland Offshore Petroleum Board (the “Board”), before the Board can
authorize activity or work to proceed on the project. Among other things, a “benefits plan” must
ensure that “expenditures shall be made for research and development [“R&D”] to be carried out

5 8.C. 1987, c. 3.

* Canada-Newfoundland and Labrador Atlantic Accord Implementation Newfoundland and Labrador Act, RS.N.L,
1990, c. C-2. These statutes implemented the Memorandum of Agreement on Offshore Oil and Gas Resource
Management and Revenue Sharing, an agreement signed in 1985 between the Government of Canada and the
Government of Newfoundland and Labrador to manage offshore oil and gas resources adjacent to Newfoundland
and Labrador.

16 ONSC 790 (CanLll)

20

- Page 3 -

in the Province and for education and training [“E&T”] to be provided in the Province” (s.
45(3)(C)).

[10] The Board approved benefits plans for the Hibernia and Terra Nova Projects in 1986
(updated in 1990) and 1997, respectively (the “Benefits Plans”). The Benefits Plans set out
general principles regarding R&D or E&T expenditures but did not require fixed expenditure
levels.

[11] In November 2004, the Board issued Guidelines under the Accord Act (the
“Guidelines”).> The Board explained that the Guidelines were a response to decreasing R&D
and E&T expenditures by offshore operators. The Guidelines established a formula, based on
industry practice in Canada, for determining fixed R&D and E&T expenditures.

[12] According to the Investors, the Guidelines had a significant financial impact on them by
imposing fixed expenditures for R&D and E&T, regardless of whether the Projects required that
level of research and development activity.

[13] The operators for the Projects (including the Investors) brought an application in the
courts of Newfoundland to challenge the Board’s authority to issue the Guidelines. They were
unsuccessful at the trial and appeal levels.

[14] In November 2007, the Investors initiated an arbitration against Canada under Chapter 11
of the NAFTA, alleging that the imposition of the Guidelines violated Articles 1105(1)° and
1106(1)(c) of the NAFTA.

The NAFTA Arbitration

[15] The arbitration Tribunal consisted of three members — Professor Hans van Houtte
(President of the panel); Professor Merit E. Janow (appointed by the Investors); and Professor
Philippe Sands Q.C. (appointed by Canada).

[16] The oral hearing took place in Washington D.C. from October 19 to 22, 2010. After the
hearing, by letter dated June 23, 2011, the Tribunal posed follow-up questions to the parties, as

> The Board had issued previous guidelines in 1986, 1987 and 1988. Those did not require fixed expenditure levels

for R&D or E&T.
® Article 1105(1) provides “Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party treatment in
accordance with international law, including fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security.”

16 ONSC 790 (CanLll)

20

- Page 4 -

explained further below. The parties responded with written submissions in the summer of
2011.7

[17] The Tribunal released its decision on liability on May 22, 2012. It unanimously decided
that Canada had not violated Article 1105(1) of the NAFTA.

[18] The Tribunal also unanimously decided that the Guidelines violated the prohibition on
performance requirements in Article 1106(1)(c). Canada does not challenge that part of the
decision.

[19] However, the Tribunal was split on the issue of whether the Guidelines fell within the
scope of Canada’s reservation from the requirements of Article 1106(1)(c) pursuant to Article
1108(1)(a). As explained below, the majority (Professors van Houtte and Janow) concluded that
the Guidelines did not fall within the scope of the reservation and therefore found that Canada
was liable for the breach of Article 1106(1)(c). Professor Sands dissented and found that the
Guidelines fell within the reservation and there was consequently no breach.

[20] The parties then proceeded through the damages phase of the arbitration. They filed
written submissions and an oral hearing was held. The Tribunal released the damages Award on
February 20, 2015.

Interpretation Issue: Whether the Guidelines fell within the scope of Canada’s Reservation

[21] The determination of whether the Guidelines fell within Canada’s reservation pursuant to
Article 1108 involved the interpretation of Annex I to the NAFTA. Annex I sets out the details
that the Trading Parties must include in their Schedules to reserve an existing non-conforming
measure from the application of Article 1106. One of those details is the “Measure” being
reserved. Paragraph 2(f) defines that term as follows:

“Measures” identifies the laws, regulations or other measures, as qualified, where
indicated, by the Description element, for which the reservation is taken. A
measure cited in the Measures element

(i) means the measure as amended, continued or renewed as of the date of entry
into force of this Agreement, and

(ii) includes any subordinate measure adopted or maintained under the authority
of and consistent with the measure.

7 The other NAFTA parties, Mexico and the United States, were present at the hearing. They were invited to state
their position with respect to the follow-up questions posed by the Tribunal in its June 23, 2011 letter but declined to
do so.

   

790 (Ca

2016 ONSC

- Page 5 -

[22] As noted above, Canada listed the Accord Act as a reserved measure in its Schedule to
Annex I.

[23] The parties (and the Tribunal) agreed that the Guidelines were not an amendment of the
Accord Act. The test for whether an amendment of a listed measure is reserved from the
application of Article 1106 is set out in Article 1108(1)(c) — the amendment is reserved “to the
extent that the amendment does not decrease the conformity of the measure, as it existed
immediately before the amendment, with Article...1106”. Canada refers to this as the “ratchet”
test.

[24] The Tribunal agreed that the Guidelines were a “subordinate measure”. The Tribunal
therefore had to analyze whether the Guidelines fell within the wording of paragraph 2(f)(ii) of
Annex I, namely whether they were a “subordinate measure adopted or maintained under the
authority of and consistent with the measure.” If so, the Guidelines would fall within the scope
of the reservation.

[25] After the oral hearing on liability, the Tribunal asked the parties for their views on the
meaning of the words “the measure” for purposes of analyzing whether the Guidelines were
“consistent” with “the measure” and fell within the scope of the reservation. In its letter dated
June 23, 2011, the Tribunal asked whether the words “the measure” were to be interpreted only
as the listed measure set out in the Schedule to Annex I (ie. only the Accord Act) or as the listed
measure and other previous subordinate measures (ie. the Accord Act and the existing Benefits
Plans). The parties made extensive submissions in response to the Tribunal’s letter.

[26] In its decision on lability, the majority analyzed the words of paragraph 2(f)(ii) in great
detail. It concluded that “the measure” against which the Guidelines were to be compared was
the Accord Act and any previous subordinate measures, including the Benefits Plans. It found
that the Guidelines, which “significantly alter the legal obligations” of the Investors compared to
the Accord Act and Benefits Plans, were not “consistent” with “the measure” and therefore did
not fall within the scope of Canada’s reservation.

[27] Professor Sands Q.C., in dissent, also conducted a detailed analysis of the words of
paragraph 2(f)(i). He found that “the measure” was to be interpreted as only the Accord Act. He
concluded that the Guidelines were consistent with that statute and therefore fell within the scope
of Canada's reservation.

® Canada, in its factum, explains that, “like a ratchet that locks to prevent the tool from going back to its original
position once it has moved forward, the [Trading Parties] agreed to prohibit each other from amending a listed
measure to make it less liberal than it was previously, while ensuring that any future liberalizing amendments would
be locked in and prevented fromrolling back.”

2016 ONSC 790 (CanLIl)

- Page 6 -

Positions of the Parties

[28] Canada acknowledges that the Tribunal had the jurisdiction to determine whether the
Guidelines constituted a breach of Article 1106(1)(c) and whether they were reserved pursuant to
Article 1108. However, Canada’s position is that the majority used the wrong criteria for
determining whether the Guidelines fell within the scope of the reservation. Canada argues that
the majority incorrectly concluded that the words “the measure” included both the Accord Act
and the Benefits Plans, thereby using the wrong comparator to determine whether the Guidelines
were consistent with “the measure”. It also argues that while the majority said it was applying
the “consistency test”, in reality it applied the “conformity” test. Canada argues that, in so doing,
the majority conflated the “ratchet” test in Article 1108(1)(c) (applicable to amendments to listed
measures) with the “consistency” test in paragraph 2(f)(ii) (applicable to subordinate measures).

[29] On this basis, Canada argues that the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction. It argues that
this is a jurisdictional issue because if a measure is reserved, the obligations in Article 1106(1)(c)
of the NAFTA do not apply, there can be no breach and there is no basis for an award of
damages. Therefore, if the majority applied the wrong criteria in determining that the Guidelines
were not within the scope of the reservation, the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction.

[30] The Investors’ position is three-fold. First, they argue that Canada failed to raise this
jurisdictional issue before the Tribunal and is precluded from raising it for the first time on this
application. Second, they argue that the interpretation of the NAFTA reservations is not a true
question of jurisdiction that would give the court the power to set aside the Award. Third, they
argue that even if this is a true jurisdiction issue, the majority made no error in its analysis that
would warrant setting aside the Award.

Setting Aside a Decision of an Arbitral_Tribunal

[31] The Tribunal designated Toronto as the place of arbitration. The parties agreed the
Ontario Superior Court of Justice is the court in which applications concerning the arbitration
would be filed.

[32] In an arbitration involving the federal Crown, the Commercial Arbitration Act applies.°
It provides that the Commercial Arbitration Code, which is attached as a Schedule to the statute,
has the force of law in Canada.

[33] Article 34 of the Code sets out the grounds on which a court may set aside an award.
Canada relies on Article 34(2)(a)(iii), which provides (my emphasis added):

° Commercial Arbitration Act, RS.C. 1985, c. 17 (24 Supp), s. 5 and Commercial Arbitration Code in Schedule 1,
Article 6.

   

790 (Ca

2016 ONSC

- Page 7 -

(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the court specified in article 6 only
if:

(a) the party making the application furnishes proof that:

(iii) the award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or
not falling within the terms of the submission to arbitration.
or contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration, provided that, if the decisions on
matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from those
not so submitted, only that part of the award which contains
decisions on matters not submitted to arbitration may be set
aside;

[34] The Ontario Court of Appeal examined the scope of Article 34(2) in United Mexican
States v. Cargill, Inc. (“Cargill”).!° Feldman J.A., for the court, observed that Article 34(2)
provides that an award may only be set aside on limited grounds and that none of those grounds
allows for a review of the merits of the tribunal’s decision.

[35] In Cargill, the arbitral tribunal had awarded Cargill damages for Mexico’s breach of the
NAFTA. Cargill was a U.S. producer of high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) and had built a
distribution centre in Mexico. In response to initiatives taken by Mexico to protect its sugar
industry, Cargill proceeded to arbitration. One of the issues was whether Cargill was entitled to
damages as a producer and exporter of HFCS in the United States (“upstream damages”) or only
those suffered as an investor in Mexico (“downstream damages”). The arbitral tribunal
determined that it had the jurisdiction to award damages “by reason of, or arising out of?
Mexico’s breaches and was not limited to awarding downstream damages. Mexico applied to set
aside the tribunal’s award. The application judge in the Superior Court of Justice declined to set
aside the award.

[36] The Court of Appeal dismissed Mexico’s appeal. The court held that the arbitral panel
was correct in its analysis of the limits on its jurisdiction to award damages and observed that
Mexico was seeking to expand the jurisdictional question into issues that go to the merits of the
case. Feldman J.A. noted that if there had been language in the NAFTA prohibiting an award of
damages in the investor's home business operation, that would have been a_ jurisdictional

'© 2011 ONCA 622. The court in Cargill interpreted Article 34(2)(a)(iii) of the UNCITRAL Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration. The wording of that article of the Model Law is the same as Article
34(2)(a)(iii) of the Code.

16 ONSC 790 (CanLll)

20

- Page 8 -

limitation precluding the arbitration panel from awarding such damages. There was no such
limiting language.''

[37] Justice Feldman, in explaining the scope of a review of a tribunal’s decision on
jurisdictional grounds under Article 34(2)(a)(ili), set out the following principles for the
reviewing court to apply:

e The standard of review on a matter of jurisdiction is correctness — the tribunal
must be correct in identifying the limits of its decision-making authority;

e However, that does not give the courts a broad scope for intervention in the
decisions of international arbitral tribunals. To the contrary, courts are expected
to intervene only in rare circumstances where there is a true question of
jurisdiction;

e Courts are obliged to take a narrow view of what constitutes a question of
jurisdiction and to resist broadening the scope of the issue to effectively decide
the merits of the case. This latter approach is magnified in the international
arbitration context;

e Courts are to be circumspect in their approach to determining whether an error
alleged under Article 34(2)(a)(iii) is a true question of jurisdiction. When they do
identify such an issue, they are to carefilly limit the issue they address to ensure
that they do not, advertently or inadvertently, stray into the merits of the question
that was decided by the tribunal;

¢ The onus is on the party that challenges the award.!”

[38] Justice Feldman provided two examples of true jurisdictional issues. One was if the
submission to arbitration made a claim for damages for the years 2007 and 2008 but the tribunal
awarded damages for 2009 and 2010. Another was if the investment made by a party was in
Brazil and the tribunal awarded damages for losses sustained in that country (even though the
NAFTA defines an investment as being located in the territory of one of the Trading Parties). 8

[39] | She summarized her approach by stating that the role of the reviewing court is to:

...identify and narrowly define any true question of jurisdiction.
Specifically, under Article 34(2)(a)(iii), did the tribunal decide an issue

"! Cargill, at para. 72.
"2 Cargill, at paras. 27-51.
' Cargill, at para. 49.

16 ONSC 790 (CanLll)

20

- Page 9 -

that was not part of the submission to arbitration, or misinterpret its
authority under the NAFTA? Another way to define the proper approach
is to ask the following three questions:

e@ What was the issue that the tribunal decided?
e Was that issue within the submission to arbitration made under Chapter 11
of the NAFTA?

e Is there anything in the NAFTA, properly interpreted, that precluded the
tribunal from making the award it made?!*

Analysis

[40] Canada’s application to set aside the Award cannot succeed as there is no “true
jurisdictional” issue in this case. In my view, Canada is seeking to challenge the merits of the
Tribunal’s decision. Given my conclusion on the Investors’ second argument, I do not propose
to address the Investors’ preliminary and alternative arguments.

[41] As noted, Canada acknowledges that the Tribunal had the jurisdiction to decide whether
the Guidelines breached the prohibition on performance requirements contained in Article
1106(1)(c).

[42] Canada also acknowledges that the Tribunal had the jurisdiction to determine whether the
Guidelines fell within the scope of Canada’s reservation pursuant to Article 1108. This is
consistent with Article 1132 of the NAFTA, which provides that a party can request a tribunal to
seek an interpretation of the NAFTA Free Trade Commission on whether a measure falls within
the scope of a reservation. If the Commission fails to submit an interpretation within 60 days,
“the Tribunal shall decide the issue” (my emphasis added).

[43] Canada’s position, however, is that the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction by using the
wrong criteria to conclude that the Guidelines were not a reserved subordinate measure.

[44] | I reject Canada’s characterization of this as a jurisdictional issue.

[45] I view the determination of the NAFTA breach and the “scope of the reservation” issues
as merits issues, for four reasons.

[46] First, these were the merits issues that the Tribunal was called upon to decide: did the

Guidelines breach Article 1106(1)(c) and, if so, did they fall within the scope of Canada’s
reservation pursuant to Article 1108? These were the merits issues that the parties argued in

'4 Cargill, at para. 52.

16 ONSC 790 (CanLll)

20

- Page 10 -

their written and oral submissions. These were the very issues that the Tribunal did decide.
These were issues clearly within the terms of the submission to the Tribunal.

[47] Second, to determine whether the Guidelines were a reserved subordinate measure (and
whether there was a breach of Article 1106(1)(c)), the Tribunal was required to interpret the
provisions of the NAFTA. In particular, the Tribunal was required to interpret the words “the
measure” in paragraph 2(f)(ii) of Annex I to determine the comparator against which to assess
the Guidelines. The fact that Canada prefers the minority’s interpretation to that of the majority
does not convert this into a matter of jurisdiction.

[48] Third, Canada acknowledges that the majority articulated the “consistency” test (in
determining whether the Guidelines were “consistent with the measure”). Canada simply takes
issue with the manner in which the majority applied that test to the facts at hand. In my view,
this is a challenge to the conclusion reached by the majority, not a matter of jurisdiction.

[49] | Fourth, a jurisdictional issue must be narrowly cast. In Cargill, Feldman J.A. looked at
whether there was any limiting language that precluded the tribunal from awarding damages
suffered by the investor in its home business operation. She held that in the absence of such
limiting language, there was no jurisdictional issue and that any determination of damages was
“a quintessential question for the expertise of the tribunal, rather than an issue of jurisdiction”.'*
[50] In this case, Canada has failed to establish that there was anything in the NAFTA that
precluded the Tribunal from making the Award it made. To be a reserved subordinate measure,
the Guidelines had to fall within the language of paragraph 2(f)(ii). However, this wording was
subject to interpretation. Casting this interpretive exercise as a jurisdictional issue goes far
beyond the “narrow view of what constitutes a question of jurisdiction”, as required by Cargill
and as demonstrated by the approach followed by Feldman J.A. in that case.!°

[51] I do not regard this as one of the “rare circumstances” where there is a true question of
jurisdiction. The majority decided that the Guidelines breached Article 1106(1)(c) and did not
fall within the scope of Canada’s reservation. Those were merits issues. In my view, Canada is
seeking to re-litigate the merits of the case.

Decision

[52] Canada’s application to set aside the Award is dismissed.

'S Cargill, at para. 72.
'© Cargill, at paras. 45-47.

16 ONSC 790 (CanLll)

20

- Page 11 -

[53] If the parties are unable to agree on costs of this application, written submissions not
exceeding 3 pages (double spaced) may be made, by the Investors within 15 days and by Canada
within 10 days thereafter.

Conway J.

Date: February 16, 2016

016 ONSC 790 (CanLll)

2

