INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

IN THE ARBITRATION
UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN OF THE NAFTA
AND THE ICSID CONVENTION

BETWEEN:
MOBIL INVESTMENTS CANADA INC.
Claimant

AND

GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
Respondent

(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/6)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 9
DECISION ON SCOPE OF DAMAGES PHASE

 

Members of the Tribunal
Sir Christopher Greenwood, GBE, CMG, QC, President
Mr J. William Rowley, QC
Dr Gavan Griffith, QC

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms Lindsay Gastrell

11 December 2018

Mobil v. Canada
Procedural Order No. 9

L PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. The present case arises out of the Claimant’s investment in the Hibernia and Terra Nova
oil field development projects located off the coast of the Canadian province of
Newfoundland and Labrador (together, the “Projects”) and the application by the
Canada-Newfoundland and Labrador Offshore Petroleum Board (the “C-NLOPB”) of
the Guidelines for Research and Development Expenditures (the “2004 Guidelines”),
to the Projects. In an earlier arbitration involving the same disputing Parties!
(“Mobil IP’), the Claimant had challenged the application of the 2004 Guidelines to the
Projects. The majority of the tribunal in Mobil I held that Canada had breached the
performance requirement prohibition in NAFTA Article 1106 and awarded the
claimants a portion of the damages they sought for expenditures incurred under the
2004 Guidelines during the period 2009 to 1 January 2012 (in respect of Terra Nova)
and 1 May 2012 (with respect to Hibernia).”

2. On 16 January 2015, the Claimant commenced fresh proceedings (“Mobil IT”) claiming
damages for the continued application by the C-NLOPB of the 2004 Guidelines after
1 January 2012 (Terra Nova) and 1 May 2012 (Hibernia). It adduced evidence in
respect of damages allegedly sustained in respect of the period from those dates to
31 December 2015. The Claimant did not adduce evidence in respect of losses

allegedly incurred after that date.

3. The Respondent maintained, inter alia, that the claims in Mobil IT were barred by
Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) of NAFTA and by the doctrine of res judicata. The
Respondent accepted that, if those arguments regarding jurisdiction and admissibility,
were rejected, then it could not contest liability in view of the Mobil I Decision but it

challenged the Claimant’s arguments regarding the quantum of damages.

' Murphy Oil Co. was also a Claimant in Mobil I (hence the references in quotations from Mobil I to “the
Claimants”) but it has not participated in the present proceedings.

? Mobil Investments Canada Inc. and Murphy Oil Corporation v. Canada, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/4:
Decision on Liability and on Principles of Quantum, 22 May 2012 (“Mobil I Decision”); Award, 20 February
2015 (“Mobil I Award”).

Mobil v. Canada

Procedural Order No. 9

4. During the hearings in July 2017, the Tribunal decided that it would rule on the time
bar and res judicata arguments and, only if those arguments were rejected, would it

then consider the issue of damages.

5. On 13 July 2018, the Tribunal dispatched to the Parties* its Decision on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility (the “Mobil II Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility”) in which
it rejected the Respondent’s jurisdiction and admissibility arguments. The Tribunal
stated that it would “proceed to post-hearing briefing on the remaining questions” and
that it would “consult the Parties regarding the schedule for such pleading”.*

6. Accordingly, the Secretary wrote to the Parties on 17 July 2018 inviting them to confer
and agree upon a schedule for briefing the damages issues. That letter envisaged that

there would be two rounds of briefing.

7. On | August 2018, the Claimant wrote to the Tribunal informing it that the Parties had
been unable to agree and asking the Tribunal to permit the Claimant to adduce further
evidence in respect of damages actually incurred by the Claimant after 31 December
2015, to “update” the evidentiary record in respect of other damages actually incurred
and to submit evidence in respect of prospective future losses which would be incurred
on the assumption that the C-NLOPB would continue to enforce the 2004 Guidelines
until the end of the life of the Projects. In addition, the Claimant sought the leave of
the Tribunal to adduce further evidence regarding the precise date on which damages
had been incurred during 2012 in the event that Canada renewed its argument that it
could only be held liable with regard to damages incurred after the C-NLOPB’s letter
to the Claimant dated 9 July 2012, in which the C-NLOPB had stated that it would
continue to enforce the 2004 Guidelines notwithstanding the Mobil I Decision
Finally, the Claimant proposed that the Tribunal set a schedule for the briefing on
damages which would allow the Claimant to file its submissions after 31 August 2018,
because on 31 July 2018 the Claimant had written to the C-NLOPB inviting it, in light

of the Mobil IT Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, to cease enforcement of the

5 The Decision had actually been completed in June but the Parties had requested thirty days notice of any
forthcoming decision or award.

+ Mobil II Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, para. 213.

> Exhibit C-176.

Mobil v. Canada
Procedural Order No. 9
2004 Guidelines with regard to the Claimant and requesting a response by the end of

August 2018.°

By a letter of the same date, the Respondent opposed the Claimant’s requests which it
described as an abuse of procedure and asked that, if the Tribunal was not going to
reject those requests out of hand, the Respondent should be given the opportunity to

make detailed submissions thereon.

On 6 August 2018, the Claimant responded to the Respondent’s letter of 1 August,

denying that its requests were an abuse of process.

On 9 August 2018, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties inviting them to file submissions

of the following matters:-

(a) does the Tribunal have the power to entertain the Claimant’s’ claims for
(i) damages for actual losses allegedly incurred after 1 January 2016;

(ii) damages for future losses that would allegedly be incurred in the
event that the Board decides to continue enforcing the 2004
Guidelines against the Claimant;

(b) if the Tribunal has such power, whether it should exercise it in respect of
either or both of the two categories of damages set out above. In particular,
the Tribunal wishes to hear what prejudice the Claimant asserts would
follow from a decision not to exercise that power and what prejudice Canada
maintains it would suffer in the event that the Tribunal decided to allow the
Claimant to pursue the claims.

The Tribunal’s letter of 9 August 2018 also stated that the Tribunal considered that it
would be better if it took its decision after it had heard the C-NLOPB’s response to the
letter from the Claimant of 31 July 2018. Accordingly, it set a deadline of 14 September
2018 for the Claimant’s submission and of 28 September 2018 for that of the

Respondent.

On 31 August 2018, the C-NLOPB replied to the Claimant’s letter of 31 July 2018.°

6 Exhibit C-405.
7 The letter inadvertently referred to “the Claimants”; this mistake has been corrected in the extract set out in this

Order.

8 Exhibit C-407.

Mobil v. Canada
Procedural Order No. 9

On 14 September 2018, the Claimant filed “Mobil’s Brief on the Tribunal’s Power to
Entertain Mobil’s Present and Future Damages and Whether the Tribunal should

Exercise that Power” (the “Claimant’s Brief’).

On 28 September 2018, the Respondent filed its “Reply to the Claimant’s September
14, 2018 Submission on Scope of Damages” (the “Respondent's Brief’).

THE CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN THE CLAIMANT AND THE CNLOPB

Before summarising the arguments of the Parties, the Tribunal considers that it is worth
setting out in full the relevant parts of the correspondence between the Claimant and

the C-NLOPB.

On 31 July 2018, Ms Carman Mullins, the President of ExxonMobil Canada Inc., wrote
to the C-NLOPB on behalf of the Claimant in the following terms:

As you may be aware, on July 13, 2018, a Tribunal constituted under the North
American Free Trade Agreement issued its Decision on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility (“Mobil II Decision”) in which it rejected Canada’s objections to
the claim of Mobil Investments Canada Inc. in connection with the Guidelines
for Research and Development Expenditures of October 2004 (“Guidelines”).
The Tribunal also spoke to Canada’s duty to perform its obligations under the
treaty in good faith, and to cease any continuing violation of the treaty. ... The
Tribunal has requested additional briefing from the parties on Mobil’s damages
in fairly short order.

In light of the Mobil II Decision, Mobil expects the C-NLOPB will cease the
enforcement of the Guidelines and related commitments and undertakings (such
as those contained in project operations authorizations) with respect to Mobil’s
participation interests in the projects. On behalf of Mobil, we seek the C-
NLOPB’s confirmation and assurance of cessation. The C-NLOPB’s assurance
in this regard would obviate the need for Mobil to request future losses in
connection with the Guidelines.

We kindly request to receive the above-mentioned confirmation and assurance
within a month of this letter, which is needed for the good order of the pending
arbitration. In the event the C-NLOPB is unable to do so, then Mobil will
regrettably assume that the C-NLOPB intends to continue to enforce the
Guidelines with respect to these projects.”

° Exhibit C-405.

17. On 31

Mobil v. Canada
Procedural Order No. 9

August 2018, Mr Ed Williams, the Acting Chair and CEO of the C-NLOPB,

replied as follows:

The C-NLOPB is not in a position to provide comment on your request within
the 30-day period you have stipulated, and this fact should not be deemed a
confirmation of the status quo approach to the Guidelines by the Board. The
Board is reviewing how to administer the benefits obligations of ExxonMobil
affiliates following the Tribunal’s decision, and to that end is undertaking
consultation with multiple stakeholders, including the federal and provincial
governments, as well as the Hibernia Development Management Company
(“HMDC”) and Suncor Energy, who operate the Hibernia and Terra Nova
projects respectively. As you are aware, the Board’s primary regulation of these
projects is through Operators via the issuance of authorizations and other
compliance activities, and not through dealings with individual interest
holders/project joint venture companies.

Moreover, in 2010 HMDC confirmed, following approval of an amendment of
the Hibernia Benefits Plan, that the Guidelines are applicable to all aspects of
the Hibernia Project, including the Hibernia Southern Extension. Your request
that the C-NLOPB “cease the enforcement of the Guidelines” against the
Hibernia and Terra Nova projects runs directly counter to the 2008 decision of
the Newfoundland and Labrador Court of Appeal in Hibernia Management and
Development Co. v. Canada-Newfoundland Offshore Petroleum Board, which
upheld the validity of the Guidelines and determined that their application was
reasonable. Any non-application of the Guidelines would have significant
implications for all projects in the Canada-Newfoundland and Labrador
Offshore Area.

The current applicability of the Guidelines to the Hibernia and Terra Nova
projects is without prejudice to any future position of the C-NLOPB once it has
had the opportunity to consult and come to a decision on a way forward.!°

Ill. THE POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

()

The Claimant

18. The Claimant submits that the Tribunal should be guided by two key considerations:

10 Exhibit C-407.

First, Canada is in conceded breach of the NAFTA and that this breach
continues unabated. Second, the principle of full reparation merits the
consideration and, if proved, the award of all of Mobil’s damages in the current
proceeding. ... this Tribunal has the power to finally resolve the parties’ entire
dispute. Justice and fairness counsel the Tribunal to exercise that power.'!

"' Claimant’s Brief, para. 8.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

2 Claimant's Brief,
5 Claimant's Brief,
4 Claimant's Brief,
'5 Claimant’s Brief, pa
'6 Claimant's Brief,

Mobil v. Canada

Procedural Order No. 9

The Claimant acknowledges that its initial claim was confined to damages actually
incurred before 31 December 2015. It maintains, nevertheless, that the Tribunal has
the power to receive evidence of losses actually incurred after that date and of losses

that it can reasonably expect to incur in the future.!”

According to the Claimant, that power follows, first, from the fact that Articles 25(1)
and 42(1) of the ICSID Convention confer upon the Tribunal a broad jurisdiction to
decide a “dispute” and contends that this jurisdiction extends to the dispute as it
evolves. The Claimant contends that its claims for damages incurred since 1 January
2016 and for future damages arise out of the same subject-matter and are part of the

same dispute as its original claim.!*

Secondly, the Claimant points to Article 46 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration
Rule 40(1) as conferring a power to determine incidental or additional claims provided

that they arise directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute.'*

Thirdly, the Claimant relies upon Article 43 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration
Rules 34(2) and 38(2) as giving the Tribunal the power to admit evidence at any stage

of the proceedings. '>

Finally, the Claimant contends that Article 44 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration
Rule 19 confer upon the Tribunal a broad power to determine the procedure to be

applied and that a tribunal also has an inherent power to that effect.'©

The Claimant then maintains that the Tribunal should exercise its powers and allow the
Claimant to advance claims for damages actually incurred since 1 January 2016 and for
future losses on the ground that the principles of justice and full reparation, together

with the need for efficient resolution of the dispute, militate in favour of doing so.”

The Claimant points out that, under international law, a State which violates its

obligations is required to make full reparation. In the present case, that would include

   
 

"” Claimant’s Brief, paras. 69-88.

26.

27.

28.

29.

'8 Claimants’ Brief,
'° Claimants’ Brief,
2 Claimants’ Brief,
2! Claimants’ Brief, pz
2 Respondent’s Brief, pa

Mobil v. Canada

Procedural Order No. 9

compensating the Claimant for its entire loss through to the end of the Projects’ lives.
According to the Claimant, the basis on which the Tribunal in its Mobil IT Decision on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility decided the time bar point leaves open the possibility
that future claims may be held to be time barred, thus denying the Claimant the

opportunity of securing the full reparation to which it is entitled.'*

In addition, it says that the Parties should not be required to incur the additional expense

1,19

and delay which the need to bring further proceedings would entail Moreover, the

procedure proposed by the Claimant would, it maintains, cause no injustice to Canada

while preventing what would be a serious injustice to the Claimant.”

Lastly, the Claimant maintains that the Tribunal should hear evidence relating to life-

of-field damage which was not previously available.”!

(2) The Respondent

The Respondent denies that the Tribunal has the power to grant the Claimant’s requests.

In the alternative, it argues that, if such a power exists, it should not be exercised.

The Respondent first contends that the doctrine of res judicata precludes the Claimant

being permitted to bring a claim for future loss.7?

According to the Respondent, the
Mobil I Tribunal held that only actual losses could be recovered. In this context, the
Respondent refers to the Mobil I Decision, para 490(5), in which that tribunal held, as
part of its conclusions, that “the Claimants are entitled to recover damages incurred as
a result of the Respondent’s breach provided that the Claimants submit evidence of any
such damages no later than 60 days of receipt of this Decision and that the Tribunal
finds such evidence persuasive” (emphasis added). This ruling is to be understood in
light of para. 488, in which the Mobil I Tribunal observed that “damages shall only be
compensated when there is sufficient evidence that a call for payment has been made
or that damages have otherwise occurred (i.e. that they are ‘actual’),” and para. 469,
where it stated that “damages are incurred and compensation is due when there is a firm

obligation to make a payment and there is a call for payment or expenditure, or when a

70-72 and 76-78.
723-75.

paras. 79-82 and 87-88.
83-86.

s. 8-16.

   

30.

31.

32.

33.

Mobil v. Canada

Procedural Order No. 9

payment or expenditure related to the implementation of the 2004 Guidelines has been
made”. The Respondent maintains that the Mobil J Tribunal then confirmed this
approach in its Award, when it said that “the Majority emphasized in the Decision that
the Claimants must prove ‘that a call for payment has been made or that damages have

otherwise occurred””.”3

The Respondent rejects the argument that the Claimant might be denied full reparation
on the ground that it has a right to compensation only in respect of actual damages , if
it has to claim some of those actual damages in subsequent proceedings, that has no

effect upon the res judicata nature of the Mobil I rulings.

In addition to its res judicata argument, the Respondent rejects the Claimant’s
arguments based upon the various provisions of the ICSID Convention and the
Arbitration Rules. None of the provisions cited by the Claimant, it maintains, give the
Tribunal the broad powers for which the Claimant contends. Moreover, the claims
which the Claimant now seeks to adduce cannot be regarded as incidental or additional

to the original claim.*4

The Respondent also argues that, even if the Tribunal has power to do so, the facts are
such that it should not exercise the power in the way proposed by the Claimant.?> The

Respondent advances several arguments to that effect.

First, it maintains that Procedural Order No. 1, paragraph 16.3 permits the introduction
of additional evidence only in “exceptional circumstances”. According to the
Respondent there are no exceptional circumstances that would justify the introduction
of fresh evidence at this stage, two years after the Claimant’s Reply.*° The Respondent
rejects the suggestion that the Mobil IT Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility
created any such exceptional circumstance. It maintains that the request to adduce new
evidence is untimely and that the information was available to the Claimant at a much
earlier stage in the proceedings. In addition, the Respondent argues that the Claimant’s

request goes wholly outside the proper scope of post-hearing briefs.

2 Mobil I Award, para. 28.

» Respondent’s Brief, pa
25 Respondent’s Brief, pa
Respondent's Brief, paras. 20-35.

26

  

34.

35.

IV.

36.

7 Respondent’s Brief, pa
28 Respondent’s Brief,

Mobil v. Canada

Procedural Order No. 9

Secondly, the Respondent contends that it would be seriously prejudiced if the
argument on future damages is allowed to proceed. To grant the Claimant’s request, it
says, would seriously delay the proceedings, requiring extensive use of expert witnesses
and running the risk that an award will be put off for years. It will also greatly add to
the costs of the proceedings. It also maintains that there would be a serious risk of over-
compensation and that the addition of a future damages claim would seriously prejudice

the already complicated task of review of the Guidelines by the C-NLOPB.””

Thirdly, the Respondent submits that allowing the Claimant to adduce new evidence
relating to damages allegedly “actually” incurred from 1 January 2016 would prejudice
both the Respondent and the arbitration process by creating an open-ended process in
which damages numbers are continually “updated” and allowing the Claimant to “delay
the proceedings as more alleged damages accrue”.”* By contrast, deciding the existing
2012-2015 claim would limit the scope of future proceedings and make them more

efficient.”

THE ANALYSIS OF THE TRIBUNAL

The Tribunal is grateful to the Parties for their very careful and detailed submissions
on the Claimant’s proposed course of action. It considers that those submissions

identify three distinct issues:-

qd) Is a claim for future damages precluded by the Decision and Award of the

Mobil I Tribunal under the doctrine of res judicata ?

(2) To the extent that the matter is not res judicata, does the Tribunal have power
to permit the Claimant to advance a claim: (a) for damages said to have been
incurred between 1 January 2016 and some later date ahead of the issue of the
Award in the present proceedings; and (b) for future losses, and to permit the

Claimant to adduce new evidence in support of such claims ?

 

2 Respondent’s Brief, paras. 40-48.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

3° Mobil II Decision on Jurisdiction and Admi:

Mobil v. Canada

Procedural Order No. 9

(3) To the extent that the Tribunal has such power, should it exercise that power to
permit the Claimant to advance such claims and to adduce new evidence in

support thereof ?

(1) Res Judicata

The test laid down in international law for determining whether or not a matter is res
judicata is set out in paragraphs 191-195 of the Mobil II Decision on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility. According to that test, the critical question is whether a matter has been
determined, either expressly or by necessary implication, by a previous decision in

proceedings between the same parties involving the same object and legal ground.*°

Canada maintains that the Mobil I Decision determined that the Claimant can advance
claims only for damages which have already accrued and not for future losses.
According to Canada, the Mobil II Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility expressly

recognized that this question had been settled by the earlier Tribunal.

The Mobil I Tribunal addressed the question of future damages in several different

passages in its Decision. First, it held that —

Article 1116(1) does not in our view, as a jurisdictional matter, preclude the
Tribunal from deciding on appropriate compensation for future damages.
However, this conclusion only determines whether a claim for damages is
admissible. It does not determine how compensation for future damages is to
be assessed or whether it is appropriate for this Tribunal to consider damages or
make an award of compensation with regard to the future damages claimed in
this particular case. These matters remain to be addressed.*!

It then went on to hold that —

The Majority of this Tribunal accepts that the Claimants do not have to prove
the quantum of damages with absolute certainty. The Majority further accepts
that no strict proof of the amount of future damages is required and that a
“sufficient degree” of certainty or probability is sufficient. However, the
amount claimed “must be probable and not merely possible”.*?

In applying that test, the Mobil J Tribunal said that “for the purposes of determining the

quantum of damages, the Majority will consider any loss which is incurred, i.e. which

 

 

ibility, para. 191.

3! Mobil I Decision, para. 429 (original emphasis).
» Mobil I Decision, para. 432

42.

43.

44.

4S.

Mobil v. Canada
Procedural Order No. 9

is actual, as of the date of the Award. In the Majority’s view, actual damages occur
when there is a firm obligation to make a payment and there is a call for payment or

expenditure, or the occurrence of payment or expenditure has transpired.”

Having thus determined that it had jurisdiction to adjudicate upon a claim for future
damages and laid down the test of probability to be applied, the Mobil J Tribunal applied

that test to the claim for future damages which was before it —

Turning to future damages, under the facts before us, we are not yet able to
properly assess the Claimants’ claim for future damages; too many critical
questions remain open. Although the Majority recognizes that the Claimants
are likely to incur a legal liability that would give rise to potentially
compensable losses, the claim for such losses is not yet ripe for determination.**

The Mobil I Tribunal referred to some of the uncertainties in the evidence before it and

commented —

Ultimately, after undertaking a critical examination of these variables, the
Majority considers that there is insufficient certainty and too many questions
still remain unanswered to allow it to assess with sufficient certainty the
amounts of damages incurred under the 2004 Guidelines for the 2010-2036
period. The Tribunal has applied the reasonable certainty standard discussed
above, which has not led to a conclusion per se, but rather to a finding that there
is too much uncertainty at this stage for the Tribunal to make a determination.*>

Having reviewed the approach taken by other tribunals to the assessment of future

damages, the Mobil J Tribunal observed that —

... in considering and distinguishing the practice of other tribunals, the fact that
the damages in this case will eventually be “actual” (thereby removing the
necessity to forecast losses which has been present in other cases) is a decisive
distinguishing factor.*°

The Mobil I Tribunal then concluded —

Although ultimately it is not strictly relevant given that we are not inclined to
compensate for expenditures not paid or levied (i.e. required to be paid), we
have also highlighted the uncertainty of the evidence pertaining to the amount
of incremental expenditures in this largely future period. In our view, there is
no basis to grant at present compensation for uncertain future damages. Given

33 Mobil I Decision, para. 440.
34 Mobil I Decision, para. 473.
35 Mobil I Decision, para. 474.
36 Mobil I Decision, para. 477

46.

47.

48.

Mobil v. Canada
Procedural Order No. 9

that the implementation of the 2004 Guidelines is a continuing breach, the

Claimants can claim compensation in new NAFTA arbitration proceedings for

losses which have accrued but are not actual in the current proceedings.*”
The present Tribunal has already held that these passages do not support the view that
the Mobil I Tribunal arrived at a definitive settlement of the claim for future losses so
as to preclude any further claim in respect of losses suffered after 1 January 2012 (in
respect of Terra Nova) and | May 2012 (with respect to Hibernia).** The question is
whether the Mobil I Tribunal conclusively determined that the Claimant could bring
further claims only in respect of damages as they became “actual” and not in respect of

future losses.

The present Tribunal accepts that some of the comments by the Mobil I Tribunal
support such a conclusion. It notes, in particular, that the Mobil J Tribunal distinguished
the approach of other tribunals on the basis that “the damages in this case will
eventually be ‘actual’””, something which it described as “a decisive distinguishing
factor,’ and that it then went on to observe that “the Claimants can claim
compensation in new NAFTA arbitration proceedings for losses which have accrued
but are not actual in the current proceedings”.*° On balance, however, the present
Tribunal does not consider that these remarks are sufficient to sustain the conclusion
that the Mobil I Tribunal’s Decision amounted to a definitive settlement that the

Claimant was not entitled to damages for losses which have not accrued.

As has been seen, the Mobil I Tribunal held that Article 1116(1) of NAFTA did not
preclude a claimant from bringing a claim for future losses which had not yet accrued
and become “actual”. On the contrary, it expressly upheld its jurisdiction over such
claims.*! It then laid down the test of reasonable certainty to be applied to such claims,
highlighted the uncertainties in the evidence before it, while observing that the matter
was “not strictly relevant”, and concluded that “there is no basis to grant at present
compensation for uncertain future damages”.*? This is not the language of decision

and, indeed, the Mobil J Tribunal said that it was “not inclined” to award compensation

37 Mobil I Decision, para. 478.

38 Mobil II Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, paras. 197-206.
8° Mobil I Decision, para. 477.

4° Mobil I Decision, para. 478.

41 Mobil I Decision, para. 429 (see para. 39, above).

® Mobil I Decision, para. 478.

49.

50.

51.

Mobil v. Canada
Procedural Order No. 9
for future losses, not that the Claimant could not recover for such losses until they had

accrued.

This Tribunal has already commented that the reasoning of the Mobil J Tribunal in this
part of its Decision “is not as clear as might be wished”.*? Clarity is important when
the effect of a ruling may be to exclude a party from receiving compensation for losses
caused by the other party’s breach of its obligations. That is especially so, given that it
is the long established principle of international law that a party is entitled to full
reparation which will, so far as possible, put it in the position it would have occupied
had the breach not occurred. It is true that the Respondent’s present contention is that
the effect of the Mobil I Decision is more limited, in that the Claimant would not be
excluded from such compensation but merely required to claim for it only as it became
“actual”. However, even if one leaves aside the possibility that the Respondent might
be able to frustrate future claims by relying on the time bar provisions (a matter
considered below), the requirements of Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) would in any
event necessitate the bringing of a fresh claim every three years, so that for the Claimant
to recover its losses for the period 2012 to 2036*° (assuming that the Guidelines
continued to be enforced) would require it to bring no fewer than eight claims for

“actual” damages.

The Mobil I Tribunal could, of course, have made such a decision and, if it had done
so, then the present Tribunal would have been bound by it. However, the consequences
of such a decision mean that the present Tribunal should be particularly careful to
ensure that the Mobil I Tribunal had in fact decided — either expressly or by necessary
implication — to exclude the possibility of a claim for anything other than damages
which had actually accrued. The language of the Mobil I Decision and of the

subsequent Award contains nothing which amounts to an express decision to that effect.

Nor is the present Tribunal persuaded that anything in the Decision or Award
necessarily imply such a restrictive decision. The statement that “the Claimants can

claim compensation in new NAFTA arbitration proceedings for losses which have

43 Mobil II Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, para. 196.

44 ILC Articles on State Responsibility, Article 35; Factory at Chorz6w, PCI Series A, No. 17, p. 48.

+5 The date mentioned by the Mobil [ Tribunal. If the lifetime of the concessions extends to 2040, as suggested in
the present proceedings, nine or ten distinct sets of proceedings would be required.

52.

53.

54.

Mobil v. Canada
Procedural Order No. 9

accrued but are not actual in the current proceedings”“® is not, in our view, sufficiently

clear that it is necessary to imply that the Claimant cannot bring a claim in respect of

any other type of losses.

‘We would add that, insofar as it is suggested that the Mobil IT Decision on Jurisdiction
and Admiss

  

bility itself precludes the Claimant from bringing a claim in respect for
future losses, that is not the case. It is true that the Mobil IT Decision on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility states that “unlike the position in Mobil I ... the present case is
concerned solely with a claim for damages which it is said have already become

‘actual’; there is no claim in respect of future losses”*”

and later that “the only difference
[between Mobil I and Mobil II] is that the claim for damages allegedly sustained during
the period 2012 to 2015 was there advanced as a claim for future losses and is here put
forward as a claim for damages already incurred”.** But both of those statements are
descriptive rather than prescriptive. The first statement was an accurate description of
the extent of the claim advanced at that point in time in the present proceedings and in
no way precludes the Claimant from amending its claim; the Tribunal will consider
below whether it has the power to permit such an amendment and, if so, whether it
should exercise that power so as to permit it. The second statement was, and remains,
an accurate description of the different bases on which the Claimant advances its claim
for damages for the period 2012 to 2015 in the present proceedings and in the Mobil I

proceedings.
The Respondent’s res judicata argument in respect of future losses is therefore rejected.

(2) The Extent of the Tribunal’s Powers

By itself, the decision that the doctrine of res judicata does not preclude the Claimant
from advancing a claim in respect of future losses does not mean that the Tribunal can,
or should, admit such a claim at this stage of the proceedings. There is no doubt that
the Claimant did not advance a claim for future losses in its Request for Arbitration or

at any stage in the present proceedings prior to the Mobil II Decision on Jurisdiction

46 Mobil I Decision, para. 478.

47 Mobil II Decision on Jurisdiction and Admi.

ibility, para. 81.

 

48 Mobil II Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, para. 176.

55.

56.

57.

58.

Mobil v. Canada
Procedural Order No. 9
and Admissibility. On the contrary, it expressly denied that it was seeking to advance

such a claim.”

When the Claimant sought, following the receipt of the Mobil IT Decision on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, to advance a claim for future losses, it was, therefore,
seeking to amend its claim in a significant manner. The same is true with regard to the
Claimant’s request to advance a claim in respect of damages actually incurred between
1 January 2016 and the date of the final award in the present case, albeit that this latter

request is less far-reaching.

The question, therefore, is whether the Tribunal has the power to allow the Claimant to
amend its case in such a fashion at this stage of the proceedings. We have concluded
that such a power does exist. The relevant provisions of NAFTA Chapter XI and of the
ICSID Convention (specifically Articles 25 and 42(1)) give the Tribunal jurisdiction
over the whole of the dispute and Article 46 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration
Rule 40(1) give the Tribunal power to determine incidental or additional claims arising
out of a dispute that is already before it. In addition, we agree with the Claimant that
an ICSID tribunal has an inherent power to regulate the conduct of the case before it so
long as it remains within the scope of the jurisdiction conferred upon it by the ICSID

Convention and, in the present case, NAFTA Chapter XI.

So far as the Respondent’s argument based upon Procedural Order No. | is concerned,
the Tribunal considers that the terms of that Order do not fetter its discretion to permit
the Claimant to amend its claim if the efficient conduct of the proceedings so requires.
Nor is that discretion limited by what had originally been seen as the scope of the post-

hearing briefs.

(3) The Exercise of the Tribunal’s Powers

The more difficult question is whether the Tribunal should exercise that power and
allow the Claimant to amend its claim in the manner requested. The Tribunal is
conscious that the Claimant is seeking to make a substantial change in its case
comparatively late in the day. In the end, however, the Tribunal has concluded that the

arguments in favour of permitting it to do so outweigh those against.

4° See, e.g., the statement by counsel for the Claimant at Transcript, 28 July 2017, p. 912.

16

59.

60.

61.

62.

Mobil v. Canada

Procedural Order No. 9

In arriving at that conclusion, the Tribunal takes as its starting point that the 2004
Guidelines are a violation of Canada’s obligations under NAFTA and were identified
as such by the Mobil I Tribunal in its Decision of May 2012. That decision is binding
on the Respondent and is accepted as such. Yet, more than six and a half years after
the Mobil I Decision was given, the 2004 Guidelines are still being applied to the
Claimant and are still occasioning it losses for which, as a matter of principle, it is

entitled to receive reparation.

In those circumstances, the Tribunal considers that there is an overwhelming case for
permitting the Claimant to amend its case so as to pursue its claim in respect of “actual”
damages incurred between 1 January 2016 and the date of the award (or an earlier date
to be determined). These damages were occasioned by events which took place after
the commencement of the existing proceedings and no such claim could have been

brought in 2015.

The Tribunal accepts that this decision will make the present proceedings more
protracted and more expensive than they would otherwise have been. However, the
delay and additional expense which allowing the Claimant to amend, so as to advance
a claim for actual damages incurred after 1 January 2016, would occasion would be
nothing as compared with the additional time and expense involved if the Claimant was
compelled to bring proceedings. Nor does the Tribunal accept the Respondent’s
submission that allowing a claim for damages incurred after 1 January 2016 would
permit the Claimant indefinitely to delay the proceedings by repeatedly adducing
evidence of fresh losses.*° The risk of which the Respondent writes can easily be
addressed by the imposition of a cut-off date. Moreover, it would not be in the interests

of the Claimant to delay the issue of an award in this way.

The Tribunal cannot see any prejudice to the Respondent in requiring it to defend this
claim in the present proceedings, rather than in a separate, future case. Indeed, the cost

to the Respondent is likely to be lower.

5 Respondent’s Brief, para. 40.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

Mobil v. Canada

Procedural Order No. 9

The Tribunal has therefore decided to permit the Claimant to pursue a claim for
damages already incurred after 1 January 2016. It will consider the cut-off date after it

has discussed the issue of the claim for future losses.

The Claimant’s request to be allowed to pursue a claim for future losses is more
difficult. This request entails a far more substantial change and has serious implications
for the evidence and expert reports which are likely to be needed. Nevertheless, the
Tribunal has concluded that the efficient and cost-effective resolution of the dispute

between the Parties militates in favour of granting the Claimant’s request.

Again, the starting point is that the application of the Guidelines to the Claimant has
been held to be a breach of Canada’s obligations under NAFTA. The suggestion that
the Respondent will be prejudiced by having to defend a case for future losses has to
be seen in the light of that fact. It is, and has been ever since 2012, open to the
Respondent to cease that violation and the Claimant has twice written to the C-NLOPB

inviting it to do so.

The C-NLOPB’s initial reaction was a flat refusal to reconsider the application of the
Guidelines, notwithstanding the binding decision of the Mobil I Tribunal.>'! Even after
the present Tribunal had reaffirmed the decision in Mobil I and made clear that the
Claimant’s new claim for damages incurred during the period 2012 to 2015 was not
barred either by the doctrine of res judicata or the provisions of NAFTA Articles
1116(2) and 1117(2), the C-NLOPB responded with a reply that was, at best, non-
committal.*? In its letter of 31 August 2018, the C-NLOPB said only that it was
reviewing the matter with its stakeholders. Three months after that letter was written,
the Tribunal has not been shown any sign of progress in that review. Whatever the
status of the C-NLOPB under the laws of Canada and Newfoundland and Labrador, for
purposes of international law it is plainly an organ of the Respondent for whose acts

the Respondent is internationally responsible.

While the Tribunal has endeavoured to give the Respondent time to digest the Mobil IT
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility and to decide on the appropriate course to

adopt for the future, it has to recognize its duty to conduct the present proceedings and

5! Letter from the C-NLOPB to Mobil, 9 July 2012, Exhibit C-176.
%2 Letter from the C-NLOPB to Mobil, 31 August 2018, Exhibit C-405, quoted in paragraph 17, above.

18

68.

69.

70.

71.

Mobil v. Canada

Procedural Order No. 9

ensure that the dispute between the Parties is resolved in as efficient and cost-effective
manner as possible. It must, therefore, take decisions about the next phase of the
proceedings on the basis that there is, as yet, no sign of any decision that the Respondent

will cease to apply the Guidelines to the Claimant.**

On that basis, the Tribunal is faced with the following options. On the one hand, it
could decline to permit the Claimant to amend its claim, proceed with determining the
quantum of damages proved already to have occurred, and leave the Claimant to pursue
further proceedings (possibly multiple further proceedings) before another tribunal (or
tribunals) in respect of its future losses. Alternatively, the Tribunal could allow the
Claimant to amend its case and hear the entirety of the dispute (apart from those matters

already decided in Mobil J) in the present proceedings.

In encouraging the Tribunal to adopt the latter course, the Claimant contends that the
basis on which the Tribunal decided in the Mobil II Decision on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility that the claim for actual damages incurred after the cut-off dates adopted
in Mobil I was not barred by NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) might not prevent
future claims from being barred by those provisions and certainly would not prevent

the Respondent from raising such an argument in future proceedings.**

The Tribunal notes that the Respondent has said little about this point. It has discussed
in its Brief how future proceedings might benefit from a ruling in the present case on
certain issues of causation,>> a stance which is hardly reconcilable with a readiness to
take the time bar point in any such proceedings. At the same time, it has not repudiated
any intention to raise such a defence in the future. Most importantly, the Respondent
has not argued that it would be prejudiced if the amendment was allowed because that

would deprive it of a time bar defence in future proceedings.

The Tribunal considers, however, that it is neither appropriate nor necessary for it to
respond to the question whether the reasoning in paragraphs 171-173 of the Mobil IT
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility would be held by another tribunal to

preclude future proceedings. That is because it has concluded that, in any event, the

59 The Respondent admits that “there is no timeline on when and how the Board will proceed”, Respondent’s
Brief, para. 39.

4 Claimant's Brief, para

20 and 71-72.

 

55 Respondent’s Brief, paras.41-44.

72.

73.

74.

75.

Mobil v. Canada
Procedural Order No. 9
efficient resolution of the dispute would be better served by hearing all of the

Claimant’s damages claims in the one set of proceedings.

As with the amendment to allow a more extensive claim in respect of actual damages,
the delay and additional expense, though significant, are outweighed by the
consideration that far greater delay and expense would be involved in requiring the
Claimant to bring separate future proceedings. The Tribunal is not persuaded that the
effect of a decision by it on the causation issues and other matters already raised in
respect of the existing damages claim would lead to such a cost saving in future
proceedings as to balance, let alone outweigh, the savings involved in dealing with the

entire dispute in one case.

Nor is the Tribunal persuaded that permitting the amendment would cause significant
prejudice to the Respondent. In the end, the expenditure of time and money would
almost certainly be less for both Parties. Nor is the Respondent being compelled to

answer a case it would not have had to answer at some stage in any event.

The Tribunal understands the Respondent’s complaint that it would suffer the prejudice
of having to respond to a claim which would necessarily involve a significant degree
of uncertainty but the answer lies in the Respondent’s own hands. If it does not wish
to have to defend a claim in respect of losses which would be incurred if the Guidelines
continued to be enforced, then it can cease the enforcement of those Guidelines. To
date it has refused to do so and the Respondent cannot take refuge in the uncertainty
which may result from the choice of the C-NLOPB, whose actions are attributable to
the Respondent in international law, to continue enforcement pending the outcome of
a review which has no “timeline”. Nor is the Tribunal persuaded that any
“complication” of that review which might arise as a result of allowing the amendment
(and it has some difficulty seeing what complication allowing the amendment would
occasion the review by the C-NLOPB) outweighs the prejudice which would be caused

the Claimant by compelling it to bring a further case or cases.

THE ORGANIZATION OF THE NEXT PHASE

The decision to allow the Claimant to amend its claims so as to add: (a) a claim for
actual damages incurred after 1 January 2016; and (b) for future losses, and to adduce

evidence in support of both claims necessitates a number of decisions regarding the

20

76.

77.

78.

79.

Mobil v. Canada

Procedural Order No. 9

conduct of the next phase of the proceedings. The Tribunal considers that the Parties
should consult regarding the timetable for the remainder of the proceedings. It wishes,
however, that, in doing so, they bear in mind both what has already been said in this

Order and the following points.

First, in giving leave to the Claimant to adduce fresh evidence in support of its new
claims, the Tribunal is not allowing it to adduce fresh evidence in respect of losses
already allegedly sustained before 31 December 2015. The Claimant has had ample
opportunity to put before the Tribunal its evidence regarding the existence, causation
and quantum of those losses. If, however, the Respondent intends to take a point about
the date from which a claim for damages can be made in 2012 (see paragraph 7, above),
then the Claimant may adduce evidence of the precise date in 2012 on which a particular

item of damage was suffered.

Secondly, the cut-off date for the new claim for losses which have allegedly become
“actual” after 1 January 2016 is bound up with the way in which the claim for alleged
future losses is to be handled. The Tribunal hopes that the Parties will be able to agree
on a cut-off date for the claim for alleged actual losses. If they cannot, it will decide
on such a date, which must be one that allows the Respondent a proper opportunity to

respond in its final written pleading.

Thirdly, the Respondent must be allowed a proper opportunity to respond to the whole
of the new case. Accordingly, it is also permitted to adduce fresh evidence in respect
of the new claims (though not in respect of the claim for damages for the period to 31
December 2015). Moreover, the pleading schedule must be such as to permit the

Respondent a proper opportunity of setting out its defence.

Lastly, and in the light of the point made in paragraph 78, above, the Tribunal considers
that each Party should be permitted to submit two rounds of written argument. The
Claimant should set out its entire case in respect of the two new claims in its first
pleading, with all the supporting evidence. The Respondent’s first pleading should
contain all of its responsive case and be accompanied by the supporting evidence. The
second round of pleadings should be confined to responsive points and new evidence

should be adduced only in response to evidence or arguments submitted by the other

21

Mobil v. Canada
Procedural Order No. 9

Party which could not reasonably have been anticipated. The Tribunal is also willing

to consider holding a hearing on quantum.

VI. DECISION

80. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides that:-

(1) The Claimant shall be permitted to amend its case to claim damages allegedly
incurred between | January 2016 and a date to be determined by agreement or,
failing agreement, after the Tribunal has heard the submissions of the Parties
regarding the schedule;

(2) The Claimant shall be permitted to amend its case to claim damages in respect
of alleged future losses likely to be incurred between the cut-off date referred to
in paragraph 80(1) and the end of life of the concessions;

(3) — Within the limits set out in paragraph 76 and 79, above, the Claimant shall be
permitted to adduce fresh evidence in support of these two new claims;

(4) Within the limits set out in paragraph 78 and 79, above, the Respondent shall be
permitted to adduce fresh evidence in opposition to the two new claims; and

(5) The Parties are invited to agree a schedule for the pleadings for the remainder
of the case and to revert to the Tribunal no later than 15 January 2019 regarding
this matter.

For the Tribunal
[signed]

Sir Christopher Greenwood, GBE, CMG, QC

President

22

