INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between

MOBIL EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT ARGENTINA INC. SUC. ARGENTINA
AND MOBIL ARGENTINA SOCIEDAD ANONIMA

Claimants

and

THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/04/16

 

Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability

 

Members of the Tribunal
Justice Gustaf Mdller, President
Professor Piero Bernardini, Arbitrator
Professor Antonio Remiro Broténs, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Natali Sequeira

Date of dispatch to the Parties: April 10, 2013

VI.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES
INTRODUCTION AND THE PARTIES ..

 

 

 

 

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

THE INVESTMENT PROTECTION TREATY ....

FACTUAL BACKGROUND 12

A. The Origins of the Dispute 12
1. Summary of the Parties’ Positions...

 

 

a. The Claimants’ position ..

 

 

 

 

 

 

b. The ’s position 31
B. The Final issi of the Parties 34
ISSUES OF JURISDICTION 35
A. General Observations 35
B. Argentina's objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre, the competence of the
Tribunal and the issi of the Claim 38
1. General Observations 38
2. First objection: The Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the Claimants First

 

and Second Ancillary Claim...

 

a. The Parties’ Positions...
i. The d 41
ii. The Claimants 42

 

b. The Tribunal's analys

 

3. Second objection to jurisdiction — Fork in the road...

 

a. The Parties’ Positions...
i. The d 45
ii. The Claimants 48

 

b. The Tribunal's analysi

4. Third objection to jurisdiction — the claim regarding the obligation to pay
royalties on gas exports without deducting the Export Withholdings has
become moot 53

 

 

a. The Parties Position:
i. The d 53
ii. The Claimants 53

b. The Tribunal’s analysis

 

5. Fourth objection to jurisdiction — the tax matters are inadmissible
pursuant to the BIT 54

 

a. The Parties Positions ..

i. The d 54

VIL.

VIII.

ii. The Claimants 57

 

b. The Tribunal's analys

6. Fifth objection to jurisdiction — Absence of Evidence of MEDA's
Alleged Investment 61

 

a. The Parties’ Positions...
i. The d 61
ii. The Claimants 64

 

b. The Tribunal’s analysis

 

 

 

7. Sixth objection to jurisdiction: — Transfer of interest from MEDA to
MASA 77
a. The Parties’ Positions
i. The d 77
ii. The Claimants 81

 

b. The Tribunal’s analysis

 

8. Seventh objection to jurisdiction: — Absence of any Evidence that
MASA should be treated as a US company..

 

 

a. The Parties’ Positions...
i. The d 89

ii. Claimants 89

 

b. The Tribunal’s analysis

 

 

 

Cc. Concl 92
APPLICABLE LAW. 92
A. The Parties’ Position: 93
B. The Tribunal’s Analysis 100

 

APPLICABLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK......

 

 

 

 

A. The Parties’ Position: 102
1. The Claimants' position ...
2. Argentina's position ....

B. The Tribunal’s Analysis 108

 

THE MEASURES CHALLENGED BY CLAIMANTS .

 

 

A. Pesification and other price interference ...

1. ducti 115

 

a. The Claimants’ position...
b.  Argentina’s position

2. Pesifi

 

 

a. The Claimants’ position ..

 

b.  Argentina’s position ..

 

c. The Tribunal’s Analys

 

3. Interference in Prices paid by Distributors and Power Generators

 

a. The Claimants’ position ..

 

b.  Argentina’s position ..

 

c. The Tribunal’s Analysis

4. Other Measures Preventing the Claimants from Marketing Their
Production at Freely-Agreed Prices...

 

 

a. The Claimants’ position ..

 

b.  Argentina’s position ..
c. The Tribunal’s analysis ...

B. Gas Export Pri

 
 
 
 
 

1. The Claimants' position ...

2. Argentina's position

3. The Tribunal’s Analysis.
C. Export Restri

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. The Claimants' position ...
2. Argentina's position
3. The Tribunal’ Analysis
D. Export Withholdi 205
1. The Claimants' position ...
2. Argentina's position 15
3. The Tribunal’s analysis 224
E. Royaltie: 26
1. The Claimants’ position 206
2. The 's position 29
3. The Tribunal’s Analysis. 233

THE ALLEGED VIOLATIONS OF THE BIT ..

A. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE DIFFERENT STANDARDS OF
PROTECTION 35,

B. ARTICLE IV: INDIRECT EXPROPRIATION ...

 

 

1. Indirect E iation in General 36

2. A mere frustration of a foreign investor's legitimate expectations, is not
an Indirect Expropriation...

 

 

3. The Parties Positions on the Existence of an Expropriation ..

4. The Tribunal’s Analysis of the Alleged Expropriation of the Claimants’
Legal and C Rights 43

C. INDIRECT EXPROPRIATION RELATING TO TAX MATTERG...

 

1. The Parties’ Positions ....

 

2. The Tribunal’s Analysis

iii

ARTICLE II (2)(b) ARBITRARY AND DISCRIMINATORY TREATMENT

 

1. Arbitrary Treatment: Have The Claimants Been Treated Arbitrarily? ......

a. The Parties’ Positions...

 

b. The Tribunal’s analysis ...

2. Discriminatory Treatment: Have the Claimants been discriminated
against? 255

 

a. The Parties’ Positions...

 

b. The Tribunal’s Analysis
FAIR AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT.
1. The Parties’ positions 262
2. The Tribunal’s Analysis of the Legal Standard ...

 

 

a. The Relation of Fair and Equitable Treatment with the
i Standard 65

 

b. The Content and Scope of Fair and Equitable Treatment...
3. The Different Conceptions used by Arbitral Tribunals.

 

 

4. The Tribunal’s understanding of fair and equitable treatment...

a. The Linkage of Fair and Equitable Treatment with Objective
Legitimate and E ions of Foreign Investors 76

b. Legitimate Expectations can be breached even in the absence of
bad faith of the State 77

c. Fair and Equitable Treatment May Protect Investors from
and Coercion 78

d. Legitimate Expectations Result from a Confrontation of the
Objective Expectations of Investors and the Right of the State to
Regulaté 79

e. Legitimate Expectations Necessarily Vary with the

 

 

5. How to define the standard of Fair and Equitable Treatment

a. Fair and Equitable Treatment Implies that there Is No
Unreasonable or Unjustified Modification of the Legal
Framew! 282

b. Fair and Equitable Treatment Implies that there is No
Modification of the Legal Framework when Contrary Specific
Commitments Have Been Made towards the Investor ..

THE TRIBUNAL’S APPLICATION OF THE FAIR AND EQUITABLE
STANDARD TO THE FACTS OF THE CASE...

 

 

1. The Parties’ Positions

 

 

2. The Tribunal’s Analysis
a. General Approach 289

b. Argentina’s Price Interference Measures and Domestic
Marketing Restriction:

 

 

c. The Export Restrictions...

XI.

XIl.

Xiil.

d. Export Withholdi 293
G. FULL PROTECTION AND SECURITY.....

 

1. The Parties’ Positions

 
 

2. The Tribunal’s analysis
H. ARTICLE II(2)(c): THE UMBRELLA CLAUSE

1. The Parties’ Positions ....

 

 

2. The Tribunal’s Analysis

ARE THE MEASURES CHALLENGED BY THE CLAIMANTS AUTHORISED BY
ARTICLE IV(3) OR ARTICLED XI OF THE BIT OR CAN THEY BE EXCUSED
ON ACCOUNT OF THE STATE OF NECESSITY? ....

 

A. Can the Violations Committed by Argentina Be Excused on the Basis of Article

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

IV (3) 303
1. The Parties’ Positions...
2. The Tribunals Analysis 305
ARE THE VIOLATIONS COMMITTED BY ARGENTINA EXCLUDED FROM
THE SCOPE OF THE BIT UNDER ARTICLE XI?.. 306
1. Whois entitled to Interpret Article XI? Is Article XI self-judging? 4.308
a. Argentina’s Positio 308
b. The Claimants’ position .. 14.309
c. The Tribunal’s Analysis wa 311

 

2. The Interpretation of Article XI: a General Approach and Admissibility
of the State’s Defence under Article XI...

 

3. The Application of Article XI: Has Argentina Contributed to the
Economic Crisis of 2001..

 

a. The Claimants’ Position ..

   

b.  Argentina’s p
c. The Tribunal’s Analysi

sition ...

 

 

 

4. Article XI of the BIT is subject to temporal limitations. ..
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON LIABILITY...

 

L REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Mobil Exploration and Representing the Argentine Republic:
Development Argentina Inc. Suc.

Argentina and Mobil Argentina

Sociedad Anénima:

Mr. R. Doak Bishop Dra. Angelina Maria Ester Abbona
Mr. Guillermo Aguilar-Alvarez Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Craig S. Miles Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ms. Silvia M. Marchili Posadas 1641

Mr. David H. Weiss CP 1112 Buenos Aires

King & Spalding Argentina

1100 Louisiana St, Suite 4000
Houston, Texas
United States of America

Mr. José A. Martinez de Hoz (Jr.)
Ms. Jimena Vega Olmos

Ms. Maria Florencia Villaggi

Mr. Alex Maculus

Pérez Alati, Grondona, Benites,
Arntsen & Martinez de Hoz (Jr.)

Mr. Eugene J. Silva II
Ms. Gwendolyn Dawson
Exxon Mobil Corporation

IL.

Ill.

INTRODUCTION AND THE PARTIES

The Claimants are Mobil Exploration and Development Argentina Inc. Suc.
Argentina (“MEDA”) and Mobil Argentina Sociedad Andnima (“MASA”)

collectively referred to as the “Claimants.”

The Respondent is the Argentine Republic and is hereinafter referred to as “GOA”,

the “Government of Argentina”, “Argentina” or the “Respondent.”

The Claimant and the Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as

the“Parties.”

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 19 December 2003, the Claimants filed a Request for Arbitration (the “Request”
or “RFA”) against the Argentine Republic with the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”). The Request was filed
pursuant to the Treaty Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of
Investment between Argentina and the United States of America (the “BIT”) and
pursuant to the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States

and Nationals of Other States, dated 14 October 1966 (“ICSID Convention”).

According to the Request, the dispute arose from the Claimant’s alleged investment in
Argentina. The Claimant alleges that Argentina has failed to comply with the rights
and guarantees granted to investors by the terms of the BIT, international law and the

local laws.

On 5 August 2004, the Secretary-General registered the Request for Arbitration. The
Claimants further filed two ancillary claims, a first ancillary claim on 14 February
2006 (“First Ancillary Claim”) and a second ancillary claim on 23 October 2007
“Second Ancillary Claim”).

On 27 July 2005, the Claimants appointed Professor. Piero Bernardini, an
Italiannational, as arbitrator. On 17 August 2005, the Argentine Republic appointed
Professor. Alain Pellet, a national of France, as arbitrator. Prof. Pellet subsequently
resigned. On 31 August 2006 the Argentine Republic appointed Prof. Antonio Remiro
Broténs, a national of Spain, as arbitrator. On 31 July 2008, in accordance with Rule 4
of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”), the
Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID appointed Justice Gustaf M@ller, a
Finnish national, as President of the Tribunal. On August 14, 2008, the
DeputySecretary-General of ICSID informed the Parties that all Members of the
Tribunal had accepted their appointments and that, in accordance with Arbitration

Rule 6(1), the Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted on that same day.

On 3 October 2008, the Tribunal held its first session by telephone conference.
During the first session the Parties confirmed that the Tribunal had been properly
constituted in accordance with the ICSID Convention and the applicable ICSID
Arbitration Rules. Additionally the Tribunal and the Parties agreed on the procedural

calendar.

The Claimants filed a Memorial on the Merits on 16 February 2009. On 14 May 2009
the Respondent filed a Memorial on Jurisdiction. The Claimants filed a Counter-
memorial on Jurisdiction on 31 July 2009. On 7 December 2009 theRespondent filed
a Counter-Memorial on the Merits. On 27 April 2010 Claimants filed a Reply on the
Merits. Respondent filed a Rejoinder on the Merits on 6 September 2010.

The hearing on jurisdiction and merits was held from | April 2011 through 13 April

2011 at the seat of the Centre in Washington D.C. Present at the hearing were:
Members of the Tribunal:

Justice Gustaf MGller, President of the Tribunal
Professor Piero Bernardini, Arbitrator
Professor Antonio Remiro Broténs, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat
Ms. Natali Sequeira

Assistant to Prof. Remiro Broténs
Professor Irene Blasquez Navarro

On behalf of the Claimants:

Ms. Kimberly Pilcher

Mr. Gene Silva

Mr. Mariano Vivas de Lorenzi
Mr. R. Doak Bishop

Mr. Craig S. Miles

Mr. Guillermo Aguilar Alvarez
Mr. José A. Martinez de Hoz

Ms. Valeria Macchia

Ms. Silvia Marchili

Mr. David Weiss King & Spalding LLP
Mr. Gustavo Topalian

Ms. Jimena Vega Olmos

Ms. Maria Florencia Villaggi

Mr. Alex Maculus

Ms. Adriana Forno

Mr. Tim Kistner King & Spalding LLP
Ms. Carol D. Tamez

Claimants’ Witnesses

Ms. Norma Valle ExxonMobil Corp.
Mr. Dub Crook III

Claimants’ Experts

Prof. Michael Reisman

Prof. José Alvarez

Prof. Sebastian Edwards, Ph.D.
Mr. Rudolf DolzerDirector
Mr. Keith McLeod

Secretary of the Tribunal

ExxonMobil Corp.
ExxonMobil Corp.
ExxonMobil Corp

King & Spalding LLP

King & Spalding LLP

King & Spalding LLP
Pérez Alati, Grondona, Benites,
Arnsten & Martinez de Hoz
(PAGBAM)

PAGBAM

King & Spalding LLP

PAGBAM
PAGBAM
PAGBAM
PAGBAM
PAGBAM

King & Spalding LLP

ExxonMobil Corp.

Yale Law School

New York University Law School
University of California, Los Angeles
German Society of Foreign Policy Berlin
Sproule

Ms. Nora T. Stewart Sproule

Phillip W. Pantella Sproule

Mr. Pablo Spiller LECG

Mr. Manuel Abdala LECG

Mr. Diego Bondorevsky LECG

Mr. Miguel Nakhle LECG

Ms. Maria Lombardi LECG

Mr. Ariel Medvedeff LECG

Mr. Alberto B. Bianchi Estudio Bianchi & Galarce
Mr. Julio César Rivera Julio César Rivera Abogados
Mr. Guillermo O. Teijeiro Negri & Teijeiro, Abogados
Mr. Carlos Manuel Bastos Independent Consultant

Mr. Hugo Martelli Martelli Abogados

On behalf of the Respondent:

Direccién Nacional de Asuntos y Controversias Internacionales
Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién

Dr. Horacio Pedro Diez Subprocurador del Tesoro de la Naci6n
Dr. Gabriel Bottini Director

Dra. Adriana Busto Subdirector

Dra. Gisela Makowski Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dr. Tomas Braceras Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dr. Rodrigo Ruiz Esquide Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la
NacionDra. Viviana Kluger Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dr. Matias Bietti Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dra. Verénica Lavista Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dr. Ignacio Torterola Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dr. Ignacio Pérez Cortés Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Lic. Nicolas Grosse Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Lic. Patricio Arnedo Barreiroq Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dr. Diego Gosis Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Nicolas Duhalde Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Julian Santiago Negro Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ms. M. Soledad Romero Caporale Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién

Secretaria de Energia de la Nacién

Dr. Carlos Bernardo Walter Kunz Asesor legal
Lic. Charles Massano Asesor

Respondent’s Witnesses:

Mr. Eduardo Ratti
Mr. Daniel Cameron
Mr. Diego Guiché6n

Respondent’s Experts:

Mr. Ismael Mata

Mr. Norberto E. Noblia
Mr. Guillermo Rodriguez Usé
Mr. Esteban Greco

Mr. Ernesto Schargrodsky
Mr. Guido Sandleris

Mr. Nicolas Gadano

Ms. Julieta Serna

Mr. Sebastian Gonzalez
Mr. Francisco Gulisano
Mr. César Garrasino

Mr. Benedict Kingsbury
Mr. Barry Eichengreen
Mr. Roberto Frenkel

Mr. Mario E. Damill

Mr. Nouriel Roubini

Ms. Liliana de Riz

Ms. Monica Pinto

As instructed by the Tribunal the last day of the hearing, the Parties submitted on
23 May 2011, corrections to the transcripts. On 13 June 2011 the Parties filed

simultaneous post-hearing briefs. On 12 July 2011 the Tribunal received the parties’

statements of costs.

On 4 May 2012, the parties were informed that the Tribunal had decided to bifurcate

the proceedings by first issuing a decision on liability and postponing the

Universidad Torcuato Di Tella
Universidad Torcuato Di Tella
Universidad Torcuato Di Tella
Universidad Torcuato Di Tella

Diamondstar S.R.L.
Diamondstar S.R.L.

quantification of damages to a separate quantum phase.

IV. THE INVEST!

 

NT PROTECTION TREATY

13. The BIT was signed on 14 November 1991 and entered into force on 13 October
1993. It is drafted in English and Spanish and contains, inter alia the following

provisions:
“ARTICLE I
1. For the purposes of this Treaty,

a) “investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of
one Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or
companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and
investment contracts; and includes without limitation:

(i) tangible and intangible property, including rights, such as
mortgages, liens and pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company
or interests in the assets thereof;

(ii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having
economic value and directly related to an investment;

(iv) intellectual property which includes, inter alia, rights
relating to: literary and artistic works, including sound
recordings, inventions in all fields of human endeavor, industrial
designs, semiconductor mask works, trade secrets, know-how,
and confidential business information, and trademarks, service
marks, and trade names; and

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and
permits pursuant to law;

b) “company” of a Party means any kind of corporation, company,
association, state enterprise, or other organization, legally constituted
under the laws and regulations of a Party or a political subdivision
thereof whether or not organized for pecuniary gain, and whether
privately or governmentally owned;

c) “national” of a Party means a natural person who is a national of a
Party under its applicable law;

d) “return” means an amount derived from or associated with an
investment, including profit; dividend; interest; capita gain; royalty
payment; management, technical assistance or other fee; or returns in
kind;

e) “associated activities” include the organization, control, operation,
maintenance and disposition of companies, branches, agencies, offices,
factories or other facilities for the conduct of business; the making,
performance and enforcement of contracts; the acquisition, use,
protection and disposition of property of all kinds including intellectual
and industrial property rights; and the borrowing of funds, the
purchase, issuance, and sale of equity shares and other securities, and
the purchase of foreign exchange for imports.

 

 

 

f) “territory” means the territory of the United States or the Argentine
Republic, including the territorial sea established in accordance with
international law as reflected in the 1982 United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea. This Treaty also applies in the seas and seabed
adjacent to the territorial sea in which the United States or the
Argentine Republic has sovereign rights or jurisdiction in accordance
with international law as reflected in the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.

3. Any alteration of the form in which assets are invested or reinvested
shall not affect their character as investment.

 

ARTICLE II

1. Each Party shall permit and treat investment, and activities
associated therewith, on a basis no less favorable than that accorded in
like situations to investment or associated activities of its own nationals
or companies, or of nationals or companies of any third country,
whichever is the more favorable, subject to the right of each Party to
make or maintain exceptions falling within one of the sectors or matters
listed in the Protocol to this Treaty.

 

2. a) Investment shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable
treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security and shall in no case
be accorded treatment less than that required by international law.

b) Neither Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory
s the management, operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment,
‘ion, expansion, or disposal of investments. For the purposes of
dispute resolution under Articles VII and VIII, a measure may be

 

    

arbitrary or discriminatory notwithstanding the opportunity to review
such measure in the courts or administrative tribunals of a Party.

c) Each Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into
with regard to investments.

6. Each Party shall provide effective means of asserting claims and
enforcing rights with respect to investments, investment agreements,
and investment authorizations.

ARTICLE IV

1. Investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized through
measures tantamount to expropriation or _ nationalization
(‘expropriation’) except for a public purpose; in a non-discriminatory
manner; upon payment of prompt, adequate and _ effective
compensation; and in accordance with due process of law and the
general principles of treatment provided for in Article II (2)
Compensation shall be equivalent to the fair market value of the
expropriated investment immediately before the expropriatory action
was taken or became known, whichever is earlier; be paid without
delay; include interest at a commercially reasonable rate from the date
of expropriation; be fully realizable; and be freely transferable at the
prevailing market rate of exchange on the date of expropriation.

2. A national or company of either Party that asserts that all or part of
its investment has been expropriated shall have a right to prompt
review by the appropriate judicial or administrative authorities of the
other Party to determine whether any such expropriation has occurred
and, if so, whether such expropriation, and any compensation therefore,
conforms to the provisions of this Treaty and the principles of
international law.

 

3. Nationals or companies of either Party whose investments suffer
losses in the territory of the other Party owing to war or other armed
conflict, revolution, state of national emergency, insurrection, civil
disturbance or other similar events shall be accorded treatment by such
other Party no less favorable than that accorded to its own nationals or
companies or to nationals or companies of any third country, whichever
is the more favorable treatment, as regards any measures it adopts in
relation to such losses

 

ARTICLE VII

1. For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute
between a Party and a national or company of the other Party arising
out of or relating to (a) an investment agreement between that Party
and such national or company; (b) an investment authorization granted
by that Party's foreign investment authority (if any such authorization
exists) to such national or company; or (¢) an alleged breach of any
right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to an investment.

 

2. In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute
should initially seek a resolution through consultation and negotiation.
If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national or company
concerned may choose to submit the dispute for resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party that is a party
to the dispute; or

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute-
settlement procedures; or

(c) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

3. (a) Provided that the national or company concerned has not
submitted the dispute for resolution under paragraph 2 (a) or (b) and
that six months have elapsed from the date on which the di
the national or company concerned may choose to consent in writing to
the submission of the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration:

 

(i) to the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“Centre”) established by the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, done
at Washington, March 18, 1965 (“ICSID Convention”), provided that
the Party is a party to such convention: or

(ii) to the Additional Facility of the Centre, if the Centre is not
available; or

(iii) in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNICTRAL): or

(iv) to any other arbitration institution, or in accordance with any other
arbitration rules, as may be mutually agreed between the parties to the
dispute.

(b) Once the national or company concerned has so consented, either
party to the dispute may initiate arbitration in accordance with the
choice so specified in the consent

4. Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment
dispute for settlement by binding arbitration in accordance with the
choice specified in the written consent of the national or company
under paragraph 3. Such consent, together with the written consent of
the national or company when given under paragraph 3 shall satisfy the
requirement for

(a) written consent of the parties to the dispute for purposes of Chapter
Il of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and for
purposes of the Additional Facility Rules; and

(b) an “agreement in writing” for purposes of Article II of the United
Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards, done at New York, June 10, 1958 (“New York
Convention”).

5. Any arbitration under paragraph 3(a) (ii), (iii) or (iv) of this Article
shall be held in a state that is a party to the New York Convention.

6. Any arbitral award rendered pursuant to this Article shall be final
and binding on the parties to the dispute. Each Party undertakes to
carry out without delay the provisions of any such award and to provide
in its territory for its enforcement

7. In any proceeding involving an investment dispute, a Party shall not
assert, as a defense, counterclaim, right of set-off or otherwise, that the
national or company concerned has received or will receive, pursuant
to an insurance or guarantee contract, indemnification or other
compensation for all or part of its alleged damage.

8. For purposes of an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this Article,
any company legally constituted under the applicable laws and
regulations of a Party or a political subdivision thereof but that,
immediately before the occurrence of the event or events giving rise to
the dispute, was an investment of nationals or companies of the other
Party, shall be treated as a national or company of such other Party in
accordance with Article 25(2) (b) of the ICSID Convention.

Vv.

ARTICLE XI

This Treaty shall not preclude the application by either Party of
measures necessary for the maintenance of public order, the fulfillment
of its obligations with respect to the maintenance or restoration of
international peace or security, or the Protection of its own essential
security interests.

ARTICLE XII

1. With respect to its tax policies, each Party should strive to accord
fairness and equity in the treatment of investment of nationals and
companies of the other Party.

2. Nevertheless, the provisions of this Treaty, and in particular Article
VII and VIII, shall apply to matters of taxation only with respect to the
following:

(a) expropriation, pursuant to Article IV;
(b) transfers, pursuant to Article V; or

(c) the observance and enforcement of terms of an investment
agreement or authorization as referred to in Article VII(1)(a) or (b),

to the extent they are not subject to the dispute settlement provisions of
a Convention for the avoidance of double taxation between the two
Parties, or have been raised under such settlement provisions and are
not resolved within a reasonable period of time.

ARTICLE XIII
This Treaty shall apply to the political subdivisions of the Parties.”
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
A. The Origins of the Dispute

The Argentine economy entering the 1990s was facing serious problems. Therefore
Argentina needed to implement a dramatic change. First, in an effort to end currency

instability that hindered Argentina’s chances of attracting foreign investment,

Argentina enacted Law 23,928 (together with its implementing Decree 529/91, (the
“Convertibility Law”) in 1991.' Pursuant to the Convertibility Law, Argentina

pegged the local currency (the “Peso”’) to US Dollar at a fixed rate of 1:1.

Second, Law 23,696 (the “State Reform Law”) provided for the unbundling and
eventual privatization of public assets.” A main purpose of the State Reform Law was
to promote foreign investment in the hydrocarbon industry, thereby stimulating oil
and gas drilling, increasing reserve, and transforming Argentina from a net importer
to a net exporter of hydrocarbons.* Revamped laws and decrees relating to investment

— especially Decree 1853/93 — constituted another pillar of economic reform.*

By the 1980s, the GOA almost completely owned, and to a substantial extent
operated, the entire energy sector. In the case of the Argentine oil and gas industry,
the public sector dominated the exploration, production, development, transportation,
refining, and distribution of hydrocarbons. The private sector played only a secondary
role, restricted to activities and service contracts with Yacimientos Petroliferos
Fiscales S.E. (“YPF’”), the former state-owned oil company, and with Gas del Estado
Sociedad del Estado (“Gas del Estado”), which owned and operated the gas
transportation and distribution system. Oil and gas exploration and development

activities were in critical decline.

During the mid-1980s, Argentina attempted to attract foreign investment to the oil and
gas industry. It launched a program named the “Houston Plan” with a view to

concluding service contracts between YPF and foreign companies. The main purpose

' Law 23,928 (Exhibit C-12), Decree 529/91 (Exhibit C-18).
* Law 23,696 (Exhibit C-10). See also Law 23,697 (Exhibit C-11).

Message sent by the Federal Executive Branch to Congress introducing the bill that later became
State Reform Law 23,696, quoted in José R. Dromi, Reforma del Estado y Privatizaciones, Ed. Astrea,
1991 (Exhibit C-165).

* Decree 1893/93 (Exhibit C-33).

20.

of this project was to increase Argentina’s oil and gas reserves and achieve energy

surpluses by increasing oil and gas exploration.°

Under this new regime, the foreign companies had to assume all risks regarding the
exploration programs even though they would not own the oil and gas eventually
produced. The Houston plan turned out to be a failure; no significant investments or

discoveries were made.

In the early 1990s, given the failure of the Houston Plan to alleviate the energy
sector’s critical condition, the GOA decided to deregulate the hydrocarbon industry
and to privatize its utilities. Moreover, the GOA enacted a new energy legal
framework for the energy sector. To induce foreign investment, the GOA then
launched road shows in which it presented its new model to foreign investors,

principally from the United States of America and Europe.

The GOA instituted a “Legal Framework” that included: (i) the Deregulation Decrees,
which deregulated the hydrocarbon sector; (ii) the Gas Law, which privatized Gas del
Estado and provided for freely-negotiated gas wellhead prices; (iii) Plan Argentina,
which set out the bidding terms and conditions for new exploration areas; (iv) the
Conversion Decree, which invited service contractors with YPF (the State-owned oil
company) to transform their contracts into exploration permits or exploitation
concessions; and (v) the signing of the Substitute Protocol for Protocol No. 2 to the
Agreement on Economic Cooperation No. 16 with Chile (the “Chile-Argentina
Energy Treaty”). The Protocol was designed to integrate the Argentine and Chilean
gas markets and which reinforced the deregulation of the natural gas industry through

international commitments to Chile.

5 Decree 1443/85, Third, Fourth and Fifth Recitals (Exhibit C-9).

21.

22.

23.

The program for privatization of YPF, the state-owned oil company, included several
stages prior to the privatization of YPF itself. YPF issued several calls for bids
inviting private companies to enter into joint venture agreements relating to large

producing fields.

Tecpetrol, MASA (formerly Ampolex Argentina S.A.), Compaiifa General de
Combustibles S.A. (“CGC”), and Petrobras Argentina S.A. (formerly Petrobras
Internacional S.A.) executed an agreement with YPF to form an Union Transitoria de
Empresas (“UTE”), which was then approved in December 1992 by Decree 2446/92
(the “Aguaragiie Contract”).° Thus MASA acquired interests in Aguaragiie. This
area is located in the Northwestern Basin in the Province of Salta, and includes

various fields.

The Aguaragiie Contract grants the joint venture participants the right to explore and
exploit the hydrocarbon reserves in the Aguaragiie field. It also contains a production
sharing arrangement that grants each of the joint venture partners a share in the
production of the Aguaragiie field. The Aguaragiie Contract was agreed for a 25-year
term, with an option to renew it for 10 years. MASA contends that it currently owns a
23% working interest in the Aguaragiie Contract and its hydrocarbon production.” As
a result of the exploration activities in the Aguaragiie Area, the UTE found gas in the
San Antonio Sur Block. Consequently, in February 1998, the GOA granted a

Concession for the exploitation of that block (the “San Antonio Sur Coneession’).*

© Decree 2446/92 (Exhibit C-96). The Unién Transitoria de Empresas or UTE is a type of statutory
joint venture agreement. In this case, the UTE was concluded with YPF S.A. — which at that time was
the state-owned energy company — and other partners and contains a production sharing agreement.

7 MASA (formerly named Ampolex Argentina S.A.) has been the holder of a 23 % working interest in
the Aguaragiie joint venture or Aguarague Contract, since the issuance of Decree 2446/92 C-97. The
change of Ampolex‘s corporate name is acknowledged in the recitals of Administrative Decision
424/99 of 10 November 1999 (Exhibit C-38).

8 Administrative Decision 81/98 (Exhibit C-99).

24.

25.

26.

27.

Since the San Antonio Sur Concession is located within the Aguaragiie Area and is
subject to the Aguaragiie Contract, all the rights and guarantees arising from Decrees
305/92 and 2446/92 are fully applicable to it. Furthermore, the San Antonio Sur
Concession reaffirmed the right to market the hydrocarbons produced freely, in
accordance with the Deregulation Decrees “the terms of which are incorporated into

the title of the Concession.”®

On 18 September 1996, MEDA and Mobil Oil Exploration and Production Southeast
Inc. executed a Sale and Purchase Agreement (the “BHP Assignment Agreement’)
with BHP Petroleum (Argentina) S.A., BHP Petroleum (Argentina) Inc., BHP
(Americas) Inc. and BHP Petroleum (GOM) Inc., through which BHP Petroleum
(Argentina) S.A. assigned MEDA 90% of its working interest (a 27.99819% interest)
in the title to the Sierra Chata Concession. Subsequently, BHP Petroleum (Argentina)
S.A. and BHP Petroleum (Argentina) Inc. assigned their remaining working interest

in the title to Sierra Chata (3.11091%) to MEDA.

As a result of reorganization by Mobil Corporation of its affiliates’ holdings, effective
on 9 December 1998, Mobil Argentina Ltd (“MAL”) (previously named
Monumentum Exploration Ltd) assigned all of its assets and liabilities, including its

working interest in the Sierra Chata Concession (19.8865%), to MEDA.

Chihuidos is located in the Neuquén Basin, in the Province of Neuquén, and includes
the Sierra Chata field. This area is located close to Chile, which does not produce gas,
and was eager to increase its gas imports for power generation, residential use, and

petrochemical purposes.

° Ibid, Art. 3 (Exhibit C-99).

28.

29.

One of the contracts that resulted from the Houston Plan under which companies
would not own the hydrocarbons produced’? was a service contract for the Chihuidos
Area in the western Province of Neuquén. Several years later in 1991, through the
Conversion Decree, the GOA provided parties to contracts, inter alia, under the
Houston Plan the possibility of converting their contracts into new exploration

permits and exploitation concessions in accordance with the Legal Framework.

The Chihuidos Area was included in the Conversion program, and in September
1993, Argentina issued Decree 1969/93, which granted an exploration permit in the
area to YPF, Petrolera Santa Fe, International Finance Corporation, SIPSA, CGC, and

BHP. Decree 1969/93 provides that these companies shall:
e own the hydrocarbons produced; '!

e have the right to freely market that gas in accordance with the

Deregulation Decrees; 1B

e receive at least the compensation set forth in the Deregulation
Decrees, in case of any restriction on their right to freely market

hydrocarbons, for as long as the restriction is in force;!*

e pay up to 12% in royalties, which can only be calculated on the
basis of the prices effectively collected, with applicable

deductions; 4

e be protected from discriminatory taxes; 6

' Decree 443/85, Art. 3 (Exhibit C-9).
"' Decree 1969/93, Art. 3 (Exhibit C-94).
Rae
Ibid.
'S Ibid, Att. 5.
4 Ibid, Att. 7.

30.

31.

32.

e freely dispose of 70% of foreign exchange sale proceeds in
accordance with the Deregulation Decrees, unless another
provision entitles them to a higher percentage or eliminates the

requirement.

Decree 1969/93 also granted those companies the right to obtain an exploitation
concession that would include the rights granted under the Deregulation Decrees and

the Conversion Decree. '°

In June 1995, the GOA granted a concession for the exploitation of the Sierra Chata
block in the Chihuidos area to Petrolera Santa Fe, Santa Fe Energy, BHP, Sociedad

International Petrolera, CGC, Monument, and Gassur.!7

In September 1996, Argentina issued Resolution 140/96 of the Secretary of Public
Works and Services, which grants a gas export permit for the Sierra Chata Concession
authorising the concession holders to export up to 2.5 million m3/day to Chile for a
maximum term of 15 years or until the depletion of the remaining certified reserves,

whichever occurs earlier.'*

 

'S Ibid, Art. 6.

'° Decree 1969/93, Arts. 2, 16 (Exhibit C-94).

"’ Decree 824/95 (Exhibit C-95). See also the Conversion Decree, Art. 5 (Exhibit C-28).

'S Resolution SPWS 140/96, Arts. 1-2 (Exhibit C-81). Resolution SPWS 140/96 of the Secretariat of
Public Works and Services was amended by Resolution 460/99, Exhibit C-82, and Resolution EMS
371/01 of the Secretary of Energy and Mining (Exhibit C-83). Resolution 460/99 incorporated Sipetrol
Argentina S.A. and its share in the production of Sierra Chata Concession into the Sierra Chata Gas
Export Permit. Resolution EMS 371/01 of the Secretary of Energy and Mining took notice of the
assignment by Sipetrol Argentina S.A. of all its rights under the Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit and
the underlying natural gas export contracts to Canadian Hunter Argentina S.A.

 

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

In granting the permit, the GOA expressly considered the provisions of the Chile-
Argentina Energy Treaty and emphasized the importance of the regional integration

of the gas market. 9

The Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit provides for firm export rights that could not be
interrupted without compensation.”” Also Excess Gas could be exported under certain

conditions.

On 6 January 2002 the “State of Public Emergency and Reform of Exchange

Regulation Law “25,561 (the “Emergency Law”) was enacted.”!

Under Law 25,561 and Decree 214/02, the GOA unilaterally changed the provisions
of private contracts between the Claimants and their domestic customers. These
measures unilaterally converted Dollar-denominated obligations and receivables owed
to the Claimants under gas supply contracts into Peso-denominated obligations at an
exchange rate of US$ 1: AR$ 1.” This was done at the same time that the GOA
abrogated the Convertibility Law and devalued the Argentine Peso through Law
25,561.7° By the end of May 2002, the exchange rate had reached US$ 1: AR$ 3.60,
and was in February 2009 approximately US$ 1: AR$ 3.50.

Moreover, the GOA effectively prevented power generators and gas distributors from

passing through any price increase to their own customers.”

'° Resolution SPWS 140/96, Fourth Recital (Exhibit C-81).

°° Thid, Art. 1 (Exhibit C-81).

*! Law 25,561 (Exhibit C-41).

* Law 25,561 (Exhibit C-41) and Decree 214/02 (Exhibit C-42). This mandatory conversion applied to
gas supply contracts existing as of 6 January 2002. See also Damage Valuation of MASA's and
MEDA’s Investments in Argentina by Manuel A. Abdala and Paolo E. Spiller of 15 February, 2009
[hereinafter, “LECG Report” {{[ 31 (a) and 34 (Exhibit C-2).

* Law 25,561 (Exhibit C-41).

*4 LECG Report, supra (n 22) {1 31(b), 35, 36 (Exhibit C-2).

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

On 2 April 2004, many gas producers (but not the Claimants), signed an agreement
with the GOA (the “First Gas Agreement’).*> Through the First Gas Agreement, the
GOA imposed on producers the duty to deliver certain volumes of gas to the different
categories of consumers. In doing so, the GOA demanded that producers accept an

obligation to supply the domestic market.

The First Gas Agreement established a “price path” for the upward adjustment of gas
prices at the wellhead for large industrial consumers and electricity generators from 1

May 2004 to 31 July 2005.

On 17 May 2004, the Secretary of Energy began ordering producers — including those
that did not sign the First Gas Agreement — to “re-route” and deliver all the volumes
to certain domestic consumers, regardless of whether the producers had contractual
relationships with those consumers.” The stated reason for this re-routing of gas
volumes was the delay in the renegotiations the GOA imposed on gas distributors,

producers, and industrial customers under the terms of the First Gas Agreement.

On 26 May 2004, the Secretary of Energy issued Resolution SE 503/04, which
authorised the Undersecretary of Fuels to re-route” the Claimants’ gas production on

a daily basis to gas distribution companies.””

Soon after issuing Resolution SE 503/04, the Secretary of Energy issued Resolution
SE 606/04, which enabled users that had purchased gas from gas distributors (or that
had contracted exclusively for transportation and distribution services) to resell all or

part of the gas to other users or distributors at freely-negotiated prices.*

* First Gas Agreement approved by Resolution MFP 208704 (Exhibit C-54).
*° Letter of the Secretary of Energy dated 17 May 2004 (Exhibit C-125).

27 Resolution 503/04 (Exhibit C-57).

°8 Resolution SE 606/04, Arts. 1, 9 (Exhibit C-59).

20

43.

44.

4S.

In April 2004, through the issuance of Resolution SE 265/04, Argentina began to
restrict the gas exports of Argentine producers and sellers, including the Claimants, as
a means of addressing the shortages in the domestic market.”

In compliance with an instruction contained in Resolution SE 265/04, the
Undersecretariat of Fuels temporarily approved a Curtailment Program for Gas
Exports and Use of Transportation Capacity (the “Curtailment Program”).”° The
Curtailment Program provided for restrictions on: (i) all gas exports to the extent
necessary to meet the domestic demand; and (ii) all gas transportation services related
to exports if required to meet domestic demand. Through the Curtailment Program,
the Secretary of Energy imposed restrictions on the Claimants’ exports to Chile. In
turn, these export restrictions prevented the Claimants from exporting gas volumes
even though they were previously committed under deliver-or-pay gas export sales

contracts.*!

According to Resolution SE 265/04, these measures would remain in effect until the
Secretary of Energy “decides that the available quantities of gas at the injection points
of the Argentine transportation system are sufficient to meet domestic demand.”
The Claimants contend that the GOA’s actions artificially depress gas prices and drive
up domestic demand, and therefore the resolution has effectively ensured that the

GOA will continue imposing export restrictions indefinitely.

*° Resolution SE 265/04 (Exhibit C-55); Decision of the Undersecretariat of Fuels 27/04 (Exhibit C-
56); and Resolution SE 659/04 (Exhibit C-61). The measures imposing restrictions on gas exports and
other gas price interferencearise from Decrees 180/04 and 181/04, which are based on the authority
granted by Law 25,561 that is the same law that authorized the creation of gas Export Withholdings.

° Decision SSC 27/04 (Exhibit C-56).

*! See notes sent by the Secretary of Energy imposing the curtailment of export volumes and the re-
routing of such volumes to the domestic market in (Exhibit C-132 and Exhibit C-133). Claimants’ gas
sales export contracts (with Metrogas and Gener) were backed by the Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit.
* Resolution SE 265/04, Art. 1 (Exhibit C-55).

21

46.

47.

48.

In June 2004, the Secretary of Energy issued Resolution SE 659/04, which amended
the Curtailment Program.* Through this Resolution, the GOA instructed the
Claimants to supply additional gas volumes to the local market, which according to

the Claimants resulted in a significant curtailment of gas exports.

Resolution SE 659/04 entitled gas producers affected by the export curtailments to
sales prices that were equivalent to the prices established for each basin in the First
Gas Agreement. The Claimants contend that as a consequence, gas producers received
a much lower price than the price to which they were entitled under their natural gas

export agreements.

Through Resolutions SE 752/05, 925/05, 1886/06, and 599/07, the GOA enacted
additional measures that, according to the Claimants, reaffirmed the GOA’s decision
to continue abrogating legal and contractual rights established in the Legal
Framework, the Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts, and the Chile-Argentina
Energy Treaty.* These resolutions set forth a new mandatory mechanism for the
purchase and sale of gas in the domestic market: they allow certain large users of gas,
power generators, and CNG (compressed natural gas) stations to place “irrevocable

offers” to purchase gas directly from gas producers at regulated prices.*°

* Resolution SE 659/04 (Exhibit C-61).

* See Witness Statement of Norma Valle (not dated) [hereinafter “Valle Witness Statement”| J 45
(Exhibit C-4). See also notes sent by the Secretary of Energy imposing the curtailment of export
volumes and the re-routing of such volumes to the domestic market pursuant to the Curtailment
Program (Exhibit C-132 and Exhibit C-133). In the case of natural gas coming from the Northwestern
Basin, exports could not exceed the exported volume during the 90 days prior to the execution of the
Temporary Gas Sales Agreement between Argentina and Bolivia signed on 21 April 2004 (Exhibit C-

* Resolution SE 752/05 (Exhibit C-64); Resolution SE 925/05 (Exhibit C-65); Resolution SE 1886/06

(Exhibit C-73); and Resolution SE 599/07 (Exhibit C-75).
* LECG Report, supra (n 22) Report i 41-42.

22

49.

50.

51.

52.

The First Gas Agreement expired in December 2006. Resolution SE 599/07 approved
the terms and conditions of the Second Gas Agreement.*” According to the Claimants,
the Secretary of Energy issued that Resolution as an instrument to “persuade” gas
producers to sign the Second Gas Agreement since the treatment granted to signing
producers (the “Signing Producers”) was more favourable than that granted to non-

signing producers (the “Non-Signing Producers”).

In the case of gas supply shortages in the domestic market, Resolution SE 599/07
provides that the GOA will “re-route” and curtail the exports and domestic sales of
Signing Producers only after curtailing and “re-routing” the exports and domestic

sales of Non-Signing Producers.**

Decree 1589/89, one of the Deregulation Decrees, provided that the export and import
of hydrocarbons and their byproducts would be exempt from any present or future
tariffs, duties, or withholdings.” In addition, the GOA granted safeguards against
discriminatory or specific taxes.“ Through Decree 1969/93, the GOA included both

of these protections in the Sierra Chata Concession.*!

In May 2004, through Decree 645/04, Argentina imposed a 20% Export Withholding
on the Claimants’ gas exports, among other gaseous hydrocarbons.” In addition, it

authorized the Ministry of Economy to modify the Export Withholding rate.“* At that

*” Resolution SE 599/07 (Exhibit C-75).

38 Resolution SE 599/07, Arts. 9 and 10 (Exhibit C-75).

* Decree 1589/89, Art. 3 (Exhibit C-15); Conversion Decree, Art. 9 (Exhibit C-28).

“° Plan Argentina Art. 8 (Exhibit C-27). See Conversion Decree, Art. 9 (Exhibit C-28).
*' Decree 1969/93, Arts. 1, 6 (Exhibit C-94).

” Decree 645/04 (Exhibit C-60).

Decree 645/04, Art. 2 (Exhibit C-60).

23

53.

54.

55.

time, the alleged purpose of Export Withholdings on gas was to align the tax

treatment of gas with crude oil and byproducts.**

In June 2006, Argentina and Bolivia entered into the Framework Agreement for the
Sale of Gas and the Execution of Projects Concerning Energy Integration (the
“Framework Agreement”).** Under that Agreement, Argentina agreed to buy gas from
Bolivia at US$ 5/MMBTU. This entailed a significant increase over the price
Argentina had paid under a previous agreement with Bolivia (i.e, US$
3.18/MMBTU) and it was much higher than US$ 1.20/MMBTU, the average

regulated price then paid to MASA and other Argentine producers.

The GOA decided to finance the import of the higher-priced Bolivian gas by further
increasing the Export Withholding rate on domestic gas. In July 2006, the GOA: (i)
increased the Export Withholding rate for gas from 20% to 45%;"° and (ii) modified
the basis for calculating Export Withholdings; instead of calculating Export
Withholdings based on the price that Argentine producers actually received (i.e.,
approximately US$ 1.65/MMBTU), Argentina began calculating the withholdings on
the price at which it agreed to import gas from Bolivia (initially, US$ 5/MMBTU).””

These measures effectively increased Export Withholdings on gas to a flat rate of US$
2.25/MMBTU (45% of US$ 5/MMBTU) and raised the effective Export Withholding
rate more than 67,5%, which exceeded the average export price that Argentine gas

exporters received from foreign customers by approximately 40%. This amounts to

* Preamble of Decree 645/04 (Exhibit C-60).

* Convenio Marco entre Bolivia y Argentina para la Venta de Ga Natural y la Realizacién de
Proyectos de Integracion Energética of 29 June 2006 (Exhibit C-122).

46 Decree 643/04 (Exhibit C-60). See also Resolution MEP 534/06, Art. 1 (Exhibit C-71).

47 Resolution MEP 534/06, Art. 1 (Exhibit C-71).

24

56.

57.

58.

113% of the export price that the Claimants received and renders exporting gas

unprofitable since all of the profit (and more) is taken by the Goa.*

Through Resolution MEP 127/08, the GOA, once again: (i) increased the applicable
Export Withholding rate on gas (from 45% to 100%); and (ii) altered the basis on
which it calculates Export Withholdings, disregarding the much lower export prices
actually received by exporters such as MASA.” Under Resolution MEP 534/06, the
GOA calculated Export Withholdings based on the price at which it imports gas from
Bolivia (currently US$ 10.30/MMBTU). Since early 2008, the GOA has calculated
Export Withholdings on the highest prevailing rate for gas imports (during the winter

of 2008, between US$ 14.5-17/MMBTU due to the import of LNG).*°

Thus, Resolution MEP 127/08 entails a further increase of approximately 650% in the
applicable Export Withholding rate. As a result, during the winter of 2008, export
withholdings on gas exports in Argentina were approximately between US$ 14.5 and
17/MMBTHU, that is between seven and eight times higher than the actual average

export price they received by Argentine producers (around US$ 1.90/MMBTU).

The Export Withholdings were initially designed to last five years.”! By virtue of Law
26,217, the GOA extended the period for imposing Export Withholdings through
2012. The GOA has now extended the period for imposing Export Withholdings to

ten years.

48 LECG Report, supra (n 22) { 62.

+ Resolution MEP 127708 (Exhibit C-77) See also LECG Report, supra (n 22) 63 (Exhibit C-2).

* Resolution MEP 127/08, Art. | (Exhibit C-777). The highest natural gas import price prevailing at
each time is to be informed regularly to the General Customs Office by the Undersecretariat of Fuels.
See also LECG Report, supra (n 22) {| 63 (Exhibit C-2).

*! Law 25,561, Art. 6 (Exhibit C-41).

* Law 26,217 (Exhibit C-69).

25

59.

60.

61.

The Legal Framework provides that the highest royalty rate that could be imposed on
gas producers is 12%.>> The Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts provide further
guarantees to the Claimants in this respect. The Sierra Chata Concession provides that
the highest royalty rate that could be imposed on the Claimants is 12%, and that it can

only be calculated on the prices effectively collected.

J. Summary of the Parties’ Positions

a. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants contend that MEDA between September 1996 and November 1997
acquired different portions of its current interest in the concession for the exploitation
of the Sierra Chata block in the Chihuidos area, which interest was transferred to
MASA effective 2005. Claimants assert that MASA owns a 50.99% working interest

in the Chihuidos area and the Sierra Chata Concession.”

The GOA’s measures to unilaterally convert Dollar-denominated obligations and
receivables owed to the Claimants by their domestic customers under gas supply
contracts into Peso-denominated obligations at an exchange rate of US $ 1:ARS$ 1 as
well as to prevent power generators and gas distributors — the Claimants’ primary
domestic customers — from passing through any price increase to their own
customers, say the Claimants, violate the GOA’s guarantees under the Legal
Framework and the contracts and licenses entered into by the GOA. Those measures

also effectively eliminated any chance of renegotiating the Claimants’ gas supply

*’ Hydrocarbons Law, Arts. 59, 62 (Exhibit C-8). See also Conversion Decree, Art. 10 (Exhibit C-28).
This protection was also incorporated into the Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts. See Decree
305/92, Art. 8 (Exhibit C-96), Decree 1969/93, Art. 7 (Exhibit C-94); Chihuidos Memorandum of
Understanding, Art. 13 (Exhibit C-93); and Decree 824/95, Art. 10 (Exhibit C-95).

* The Claimants’ interests in the Chihuidos exploration permit and the Sierra Chata Concession were
acquired from BHP Petroleum (Argentina) Inc. and BHP Petroleum (Argentina) S.A., on the one hand,
and Mobil Argentina Limited (previously named Monumentum Exploration Limited) on the other.

  

26

62.

63.

64.

contracts, and therefore, constituted an unlawful interference with their freely-agreed

terms.

Further, the Claimants assert that pursuant to Article 8 of Decree 214/02, the
Argentine Government instructed courts with jurisdiction over controversies relating
to these matters to maintain and preserve existing contracts in Peso terms. In practice,
this measure, the Claimants contend, precluded parties from terminating contracts
prior to their expiration due to the GOA’s alteration of the contract price or contract

price-fixing mechanism.

According to the Claimants the renegotiation of public service contracts between the
GOA and gas and power distribution companies, a process provided for in Law
25,561,” has been a massive failure. To renegotiate these contracts, the GOA
demands that public utility companies waive their rights—as well as those of their
foreign shareholders—to initiate or continue international arbitration proceedings

against the GOA based on the GOA’s measures.~°

In sum, the Claimants contend that a de facto price freeze on natural gas resulted from
(i) the mandatory currency conversion of the prices the Claimants’ local customers
paid to the Claimants, (ii) the price freeze imposed on gas distributors and power

generators, (iii) the obstacles the GOA imposed to prevent the Claimants and their

* Law 25,561, Art. 9 (Exhibit C-41).

°° The UNIREN (the commission in charge of the renegotiation of public utility contracts) has
provided model drafts of the agreements to be entered with public utility companies that expressly
include a waiver of bilateral investment treaty claims as a requirement to renegotiate such service
concessions and licenses. To renegotiate with the Government, companies are required to surrender
their most important protections and get virtually nothing in return. See also Draft memorandums of
understanding regarding the renegotiation of the public utility agreements with Camuzzi Gas Pampean
and Camuzzi Gas del Sur S.A. (January 12 2005); Gas Natural Ban S.A (11 April 2005);
Transportadora de Gas del Norte (7 July 2004); Transportadora de Gas del Sur (7 July 2004) and
Transcomahue S.A. (28 March 2005) (Exhibit C-123). See also “Demandas ante el CIADI traban los
aumentos en la tarifa de gas”, EL CRONISTA, 9 Septembre 2008 (Exhibit C-155).

 

 

27

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

customers from terminating their contracts, and (iv) the protracted renegotiation

process between the Claimants’ main customers and the GOA

Through the First Gas Agreement, GOA imposed on producers the duty to deliver
certain volumes of gas to different categories of consumers. In doing so the GOA
demanded that producers accept an individual obligation to supply the domestic

market, even though no such obligation existed in the Legal Framework.

While the price path established by the First Gas Agreement provided for the gradual
normalisation of gas prices for large industrial consumers, CNG stations and power
generators, the First Gas Agreement maintained frozen prices for residential

consumers, which represent approximately 22% of the demand.”

Moreover, the pesification of gas supply contracts — and particularly the GOA’s
additional measures that locked gas producers into frozen gas wellhead prices and
depressed domestic energy prices — caused an increase in the demand for gas. At the
same time, these measures, say the Claimants, discouraged investors from making the
investments needed to drill new wells, increase reserves, and meet that increased

demand.

According to the Claimants the result of these and other measures has been the lack of
new private investment in power generation and oil and gas drilling in Argentina.
Beginning in 2004, the GOA invoked the gas shortage as a justification for additional

measures targeted at the Claimants' business.

Resolution SE 606/04, which enabled users that had purchased gas from gas

distributors (or that had contracted exclusively for transportation and distribution

57 Report of Carlos Bastos of 13 February 2009 [hereinafter “Bastos Report”), | 103 (Exhibit C-1). See
also LECG Report, supra (n 22) 39 (Exhibit C-2).

28

70.

71.

72.

services) to resell all or part of the gas to other users or distributors at freely-
negotiated prices, resulted in flagrant discrimination against the Claimants because
the GOA forced them to accept a substantially lower price for their domestic gas
sales, while industrial users were allowed to obtain substantial profits by reselling at

higher prices.

By restricting the gas export of Argentine producers and sellers, including the
Claimants, the GOA disregarded Claimants' right to freely market the gas they
produce, as well as Claimants' firm export rights under the Sierra Chata Export

Permit.

The export restrictions and the orders to re-route and deliver to certain domestic
customers regardless of the producers had contractual relationships with those
customers violated the Claimants’ rights and resulted (and continue to result) in a
taking of revenues because they force the Claimants to deliver these export volumes
to domestic users at prices that are substantially lower than those agreed in their
export contracts.” Despite this taking of revenues, the GOA breached its commitment
to compensate the Claimants for export restrictions at the rate of at least 35% of the
international price of the Arabian Light crude oil of 34° API for 1,000m? of 9,300
KCal.

Those measures also required the Claimants to ignore their existing contractual
commitments, and instead, deliver their gas production to large domestic users, power

plants and CNG stations.

8 Decree 181/04 (Exhibit C-53).

* LECG Report, supra (n 22) 55, 58 and 61 (Exhibit C-2).

© Art. 6 of Decree 1589/89, Exhibit C-15. This guarantee was also specifically incorporated into the
Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts. See Art. 5 of Decree 1969/93 with respect to Sierra Chata.

29

723.

74.

75.

76.

Resolution SE 752/05, which allowed certain domestic customers to make irrevocable
offers, put the Claimants in a no-win situation. If the Claimants do not “agree” to an
irrevocable offer, then the Secretary of Energy requires them to supply gas to the
domestic market at a price that is significantly lower than the price they would have
received had they agreed to the irrevocable offer.°! But if the Claimants yield to the
GOA’s pressure and “agree” to the irrevocable offer, they would be prevented from

meeting their export commitments in their contracts with export customers.

The Claimants contend that Argentina forces Non-Signing Producers such as the
Claimants to “re-route” gas shipments from customers paying the highest prices to
consumers paying the lowest ones. These restrictions not only preclude MASA from
complying with its existing export commitments, but also obligate it to supply gas to
domestic consumers with which it has no contractual relationships at substantially

lower prices than the ones agreed under its export agreements.

Although domestic consumers pay Signing Producers in accordance with the price
formulas established in the Second Gas Agreement (which are also capped prices),
domestic consumers pay Non-Signing Producers much lower prices for the same
volumes. Consequently, the prices that MASA receives for its re-routed gas are not
only substantially lower than those agreed in the contracts with its export customers,
but they are also lower than the prices that the Signing Producers receive for their “re-

routed” volumes.

Even though MASA ultimately chose not to sign the Second Gas Agreement, the
Claimants assert that Resolution SE 599/07 presented MASA with two choices, both
of which entailed bad outcomes: (i) to sign the Second Gas Agreement and

consequently assume domestic supply commitments that it could not possibly fulfil

5! Resolution SE 752/05, Art. 20 (Exhibit C-64).

30

77.

78.

79.

without interrupting supplies under existing export contracts, or (ii) to become a Non-
Signing Producer, and therefore, be the first to suffer from export curtailments and re-

routing to domestic consumers at depressed, regulated, and discriminatory prices

By enacting Law 25,561, which authorised the Executive Branch to impose export
withholdings on hydrocarbons and authorised the Executive Branch to establish the
respective applicable rates,” the GOA completely disregarded the guarantees,
provided for by Decree 1589/89,° that export and import of hydrocarbons and their
byproducts would be exempt from any present or future tariffs, duties, or

withholdings and the safeguards against discriminatory and specific taxes.

As mentioned above, the Legal Framework provides that the highest royalty rate that
could be imposed on gas producers is 12%. Under Law 25,561, however, the GOA
prohibited the Claimants from deducting Export Withholdings payments when
calculating royalties. This prohibition forced the Claimants to pay royalties on their
gas export sales based on prices higher than they received (i.e., without deducting

Export Withholdings).

b. The Respondent's position

Argentina first raises a number of objections relating to the jurisdiction of the Centre
and of the competence of the Tribunal as well as objections relating to the
admissibility of the Claimants’ claims. On those grounds, Argentina requests the
Tribunal to declare that this dispute does not fall within the jurisdiction of the Centre
or the competence of the Tribunal as well as that the claim is inadmissible. Those

objections are dealt with below at VI.

® Law 25,561, Art. 6 (Exhibit C-41).
© Decree 1589/89 (Exhibit C-28).
Supra 59.

31

80.

81.

82.

83.

Argentina contends that there are three main reasons why this claim, in its entirety,
manifestly lacks any merit: (i) with respect to the regulatory measures for the
pesification of contracts, there are no longer any serious doubts as to the fact that this
was a necessary measure for the protection of public order and essential security
interests, expressly authorized by Article XI of the BIT and which, therefore, does not
breach the Treaty; (ii) with regard to the export duties, as they are “matters of
taxation” in the terms of Article XII of the BIT, they fall outside the jurisdiction of
this Tribunal, except where there is expropriation or an investment agreement, which
is clearly not the case here; and (iii) in relation to the requests for additional injection,
as the Claimants decided to (successfully) submit the dispute to the Argentine courts,
the Tribunal also lacks jurisdiction over that measure in pursuance of the provisions
of Article VII.3(a) of the BIT (choice of forum). According to Argentina, these three
fundamental reasons are enough for the Tribunal to reject the claim in whole.
However, there are also significant additional reasons why the Claimants’ claims

must be rejected by the Tribunal.

The measures adopted by the Argentine Government in order to deal with the most
serious crisis in its entire history, as well as to defuse the gas crisis are expressly

authorised under Article XI of the BIT.

As a result, those measures could never amount to a violation of the BIT or give rise
to the Argentine State’s international responsibility. Article XI of the BIT is a primary

tule which defines the scope of the substantial obligations under the BIT.

Argentina contends that the intention of the Contracting Parties to the BIT was that
each Contracting party has the exclusive right to judge whether the measures taken
under Article XI of the BIT were necessary to maintain public order or protect
essential security interest, subject only to the principle of good faith. This should be

taken into account by the Tribunal.

32

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

According to Argentina, Article XI applies to any situation where the State must
adopt measures in order to maintain public order or protect its own essential security

interests, since that provision contains no limitation in that respect.

The pesification of the economy was a necessary measure in order to maintain public
order, as well as, to protect essential security interests. Furthermore, the export duties
and the requests for additional injection of gas volumes were also necessary in order

to guarantee domestic supply and maintain public order.

The imposition of export duties was and still is a necessary measure. Export duties are
necessary, since they provide means for paying the costs required by the emergency

situation and for dealing with energy problems existing in the country.

The requests for additional injection were and are still necessary solutions to the
delicate situation regarding energy. The supply of the domestic market is the main
objective and priority of all hydrocarbon activities in Argentina and is confirmed by

the Hydrocarbons Law.

Since the application of Article XI means that the measures adopted in accordance
therewith are lawful and thus do not amount to a violation of the BIT, there is no

obligation to compensate for the consequences derived from such measures.

Moreover, the Argentine Republic acted in accordance with Article IV.3. of the BIT.
On the one hand, the measures taken by the Argentine Government and challenged by
the Claimants responded to a state of national emergency. The State was forced to
adopt the measures at issue to avoid the dangers deriving from such state of
emergency. On the other hand, the measures adopted in response to the state of
national emergency were of a general nature and impacted the Argentine economy as

a whole

33

90.

91.

92.

In conclusion, in cases of “state of national emergency” or “other similar events,” if
foreign investors suffer losses, the only obligation of that State under the BIT
pursuant to Article IV.3 is not to discriminate if it decides to take measures in relation
to such losses. The Argentine Republic fully complied with the special regime under
the BIT for emergency situations, and, therefore, it does not violate any of the BIT

provisions.

Pursuant to Article XII of the BIT, the tax related arbitral claims are limited to cases
of expropriation, transfers or investments agreements. The tax measures adopted by
Argentina are not expropriatory in nature and they have not breached any investment
agreement between the Claimants and Argentina. In addition, Article XII of the BIT
expressly excludes the possibility that export duties and royalties may be held to be
contrary to the standard of fair and equitable treatment, the standard of protection and

security, the provision on arbitrariness and discrimination and the umbrella clause.

B. The Final Submissions of the Parties

Paragraph 229 of the Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief reads as follows:

“For the reasons stated herein, the Claimants respectfully request an
award granting the following relief:

A decision rejecting Argentina’s objections to jurisdiction of the
Tribunal and the admissibility of the claims;

A finding and declaration that Argentina has violated various
provisions of the BIT and international law;

An order that Argentina compensate the Claimants for all damages they
have suffered;

An order that the Argentine Republic pay the costs of these
proceedings, including the Tribunal’s fees and expenses, and the costs
of the Claimants’ legal representation and other costs;

34

93.

94.

95.

An award of pre- and post-award interest on all amounts awarded,
compounded quarterly until the date of payment; and

A gross-up of any taxes that may be imposed by the Argentine tax
authorities; and

Such other relief as may be appropriate under the BIT or may otherwise
be just and proper.”

Paragraph 223 of Argentina’s post-hearing submissions states the following:

“In view of the foregoing, the Argentine Republic, respectfully requests
the Tribunal:

to declare the Centre’s absence of jurisdiction and the Tribunal’s
absence of competence over the Claimants’ claim;

alternatively, to dismiss each and all of the claims put forward by the
Claimants; and

to order the Claimants to pay for all costs and expenses arising from
these arbitration proceedings, plus any applicable interest.”

VI. ISSUES OF JURISDICTION
A. General Observations

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention lays down the general parameters for ICSID’s
activity and deals with the substantive questions of jurisdiction of the Centre. Article

Al of the Convention makes the arbitral tribunal the judges of their own competence.

Article 25 of the Convention contains requirements relating to the nature of the
dispute (ratione materiae) and to the parties (ratione personae). In addition the parties
must give their consent. The requirements relating to the nature of the dispute are that
it must arise directly from an investment and that it must be of a legal nature. Those
relating to the parties specify that one side must be a Contracting State and the other a
national of another Contracting State. All other parts of Article 25 either define or

otherwise specify these essential requirements.

35

96.

97.

98.

99.

Articles VII (4) of the BIT provides that each party to the Treaty consents to the
submission of any investment dispute for settlement by binding arbitration in
accordance with the choice specified in the written consent of the national or
company under paragraph 3 of the same article. This paragraph provides that the
national or company concerned may choose to consent in writing to the submission of
the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration inter alia to the International Centre
for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (“Centre”), provided that it has not
submitted the dispute for resolution to the courts or administrative tribunals of the
Party that is a party to the dispute or in accordance with any applicable, previously
agreed dispute-settlement procedures and that six months has elapsed from the date

on which the dispute arose.

The Claimants contend that the dispute between the Claimants and Argentina is a
legal dispute over the injuries suffered by MEDA and MASA under the BIT and
international law and that the dispute arises directly out of MEDA's and MASA's
investments, namely: (i) legal and contractual rights arising under the Legal
Framework, the Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts. and the Sierra Chata Gas
Export Permit; (ii) rights arising out of export and domestic gas contracts; (iii) US$
523 million invested by the Claimants in Argentina; and ( iv) claims to money and

performance having economic value under the Claimants' contract and legal rights.

The dispute is between Argentina, which became a Contracting State to the ICSID
Convention on 18 November 1994, and MEDA, a company incorporated in Delaware
and a national of the United States, which became a Contracting State on 14 October
1966 and MASA, an Argentine corporation, that the Claimants contend is controlled

by US corporations.

According to the Claimants, the dispute arose with the Emergency Law No. 25,561,
which was enacted and partially promulgated on 6 January 2002 and it was published

in the Argentine Official Gazette on 7 January 2002.

36

100.

101.

102.

103.

Pursuant to Article 25 (2) (b) of the ICSID Convention “National of another
Contracting State” means any juridical person which had the nationality of a
Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the
parties consented to submit such dispute to arbitration and any juridical person which
had the nationality of the Contracting State, party to the dispute on that date and
which, because of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be treated as

national of another Contracting State for the purposes of the ICSID Convention.

Article VII (8) of the BIT provides that for purposes of an arbitration held under
paragraph 3 of the same Article, any company legally constituted under the applicable
laws and regulations of a Party, or a political subdivision thereof but that,
immediately before the occurrence of the event or events giving rise to the dispute,
was an investment of nationals or companies of the other Party, shall be treated as a
national or company of such other Party in accordance with Article 25 (2) (b) of the

ICSID Convention.

The Claimants contend that MASA, despite being an Argentine corporation, should
be treated as a U.S. Company for the purposes of this arbitration proceeding, because
on the date MASA consented to submit this dispute to ICSID arbitration — 19
December 2003 — and immediately before the event or events giving rise to this
dispute — 6 January 2002 -, MASA was indirectly controlled by Exxon Mobil
Corporation, a company incorporated under the laws of the State of New Jersey in the

United States of America.

Argentina and the Claimants have consented in writing to submit the dispute to ICSID
arbitration; Argentina’s consent is contained in Article VII(4) of the BIT; MEDA and
MASA notified Argentina of their consent as required by Article VII(3)(a)(i) of the
BIT, through a letter on 19 December 2003.

37

104.

105.

B.

Argentina's objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre, the
competence of the Tribunal and the admissibility of the Claim

1. General Observations

Argentina requests the Tribunal to declare that this dispute does not fall within the

jurisdiction of the Centre or the competence of the Tribunal and that it is inadmissible.

Although the title of the document in which this request is made is entitled
“MEMORIAL OF THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC ON OBJECTIONS TO THE
JURISDICTION OF THE CENTRE, THE COMPETENCE OF THE TRIBUNAL
AND THE ADMISSIBILITY OF THE CLAIM”, all the seven objections included in

the document are under the heading “Objections to Jurisdiction”.

Of those seven objections, the following are objections to ICSID jurisdiction and to

the competence of the Tribunal:

1)

2)

3)

4)

The Claimants have not proven that MEDA had acquired the investment it
invokes before the 19 December 2003, when the Request for Arbitration was

made;

Neither MEDA - directly or indirectly — nor MASA - directly are entitled to
pursue claims in relation to the Exploration Permit, the Exploitation
Concession and the Transportation Concession in the Chihuidos Block for
measures adopted after the transfer of going concern from MEDA to

MASA;

There is no evidence that MASA, which is an Argentine corporation, on 19
December 2003 (i.e. on the date on which the Claimants consented to submit

the dispute to the jurisdiction of ICSID ) was subjected to foreign control;

ICSID has no jurisdiction and this Tribunal has no competence in the

matters of taxation raised in this case, since pursuant to Article XII of the

38

106.

107.

108.

BIT the provisions of the BIT shall apply to matters of taxation only with

respect to cases envisaged in that Article.

In addition to those four objections to ICSID jurisdiction and to the competence of
this Tribunal, Argentina raises three more objections based on the admissibility of the

Claim:

1) The two successive Ancillary Claims the Claimant submitted after filing and
registration of the Request for Arbitration are not admissible, since they do
not arise directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute raised in the
Request for Arbitration and are not closely connected with that dispute, in
the sense of Article 46 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 40 of the

Arbitration Rules.

2) The Claimant's claims in relation to restrictions on natural gas exports and
the rerouting of natural gas volumes to the domestic market are not
admissible, given that MEDA and MASA submitted those issues to

Argentine courts before submitting them to the Centre.

3) The claim regarding the obligation to pay royalties on gas exports, without

deducting Export Withholdings has become moot.

When analyzing the objections raised by Argentina, the Tribunal will follow the same
order in which they have been submitted by Argentina without any distinction
between the objections relating to jurisdiction strictu senso and objections relating to

the admissibility of the Claim.

The order in which the objections were presented is as follows: First, The Claimants’
First Ancillary and their Second Ancillary Claim, which were filed on 10 February

2006 and 15 October 2007 respectively, i.e. after the filing and registration of the

39

109.

Request for Arbitration in this case on 19 December 2003 and 5 August 2004
respectively, do not arise directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute raised in the
Request for Arbitration and thus do not satisfy the requirements of Article 46 of the
ICSID Convention and of Arbitration Rule 40. Second, the Tribunal lacks competence
with respect to the Claimants' claims in relation to the restrictions on natural gas
exports and the rerouting of natural gas volumes to the domestic market, given that
MEDA and MASA submitted those issues to the Argentine courts before submitting
them to the Centre. Third, the claim regarding the obligation to pay royalties on gas
exports without deducting the Export Withholdings has become moot. Fourth, the
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the Claimants' taxation claims under Article XII of
the BIT, since that article only allows tax claims for expropriation, failure to observe
the terms of either an investment agreement or an investment authorization or with
respect to transfer of funds. Fifth, there is no evidence of MEDA's alleged investment.
Sixth, MEDA has not proven to have validly assigned its alleged interests to MASA.
Seventh, the Claimants have not proven that MASA, despite being an Argentine
corporation, should be treated as a U.S. investor under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention and Article VI (8) of the BIT for the purposes of this arbitration, i.e. that
MASA on the date they consented to submit this dispute to the jurisdiction of ICSID —
19 December 2003 — and immediately before the occurrence of the event or events
giving rise to this dispute was indirectly controlled by Exxon Mobil Corporation, a

company under the laws of the State of New Jersey in the United States of America

At the outset, before analyzing the particular issues raised by Argentina, it is vital to
emphasize the scope and standard of review that shall be applied to each jurisdictional
objection. In international adjudication and arbitration, it is axiomatic that the
standard of review at the jurisdictional threshold is whether the factual allegations, if
true, could constitute a violation within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. If the answer to

this inquiry is in the affirmative, jurisdiction should be sustained. Thus the Claimants

40

110.

111.

112.

113.

need not establish either that the facts alleged are true or that such facts, if proved,

would necessarily violate the BIT.

2. First objection: The Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the
Claimants First and Second Ancillary Claim

a. The Parties’ Positions
i. The Respondent

Argentina contends that the Claimants' First Ancillary Claim and their Second
Ancillary Claim are not admissible on the ground that those claims do not arise

directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute in the Request for Arbitration.

Argentina asserts that those ancillary claims do not satisfy the requirement in Article
46 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 40 (1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, pursuant
to which the ancillary claim must arise directly out of the subject-matter of the
dispute. For any ancillary claim to be admissible, Argentina argues that there must be
a direct and very close connection between such claim and the subject-matter of the
primary claim, such that they cannot be separated from each other and that the main

claim cannot be settled if the ancillary claim is not adjudicated.

The subject-matter of the dispute raised in the Request for Arbitration, dated 19
December 2003, was the alleged violation by the Argentine Republic of the BIT to the
detriment of MEDA and MASA, as a result of the adoption of Law No. 25,561 and
Presidential Decree No. 214/2002, the pesification of natural gas and natural gas
liquids supply contracts, and the elimination of adjustment and indexation clauses

contained in public utility contracts, including tariffs for natural gas distribution.

However, in their First Ancillary Claim dated 10 February 2006, the Claimants

mentioned complaints completely different to those included in the Request for

4l

114.

115.

116.

117.

Arbitration. Such complaints related to the restrictions and rerouting of gas exports, as

well as to the imposition of export duties by the Argentine Republic.

On 15 October 2007, the Claimants filed a Second Ancillary Claim, where they
insisted on their ancillary claims regarding the restrictions on the rerouting of exports

indicated in their First Ancillary Claim.

In light of the above, neither the First Ancillary Claim nor the Second Ancillary
Claim arises directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute raised by the Claimants
in their Request for Arbitration. The Request for Arbitration refers to a measure of
general regulation, known as “pesification,” which regulated the currency of hundreds
of thousands of contracts of very different nature — from lease agreements between
two individuals involving insignificant amounts to public utility contracts —and to
the elimination in public utility contracts of indexation clauses based on price indexes
from other countries. Conversely, the First and Second Ancillary Claims refer to
restrictions on gas trade, which measures exclusively refer to the hydrocarbons sector,

and to the imposition of export duties on natural gas.

The Ancillary Claims challenge measures different to those challenged in the Request
for Arbitration, they involve different legal issues and different elements, and the
scope and nature of the dispute raised in the Ancillary Claims are different to those

raised in the Request for Arbitration

ii. The Claimants

In the Claimants view their ancillary claims comply with Article 46 of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 40 of the Arbitration Rules, since they arise directly out of the
subject-matter of the dispute, fall within the scope of the parties' consent to ICSID
arbitration and are otherwise within the Tribunal's jurisdiction. Even if the Tribunal
were to accept Argentina's objection on ancillary claims, that conclusion would not

dispose of any jurisdictional issues since the Claimants would maintain standing to

42

118.

119.

bring their ancillary claims in a separate ICSID proceeding. The practical
consequence of accepting Argentina’s argument would entail a risk of inconsistent
decisions under the BIT regarding Argentina’s measures toward the Claimants’
investment and would conflict with the goals of judicial economy that the drafters of

the ICSID Convention sought to achieve.

b. The Tribunal's analysis

The question to be addressed by the Tribunal is whether the First Ancillary Claim and
the Second Ancillary Claim are “incidental or additional claims arising directly out of
the subject-matter of the dispute.” As Argentina points out Note B to Arbitration Rule
40 in the explanatory note adds the following explanation:

“The test to satisfy this condition is whether the factual connection

between the original and the ancillary claim is so close as to require the

adjudication of the latter to achieve the final settlement of the dispute,

the object being to dispose of all the grounds of dispute arising out of
the same subject-matter.”

 

The quotation above from Note B (a) to Arbitration Rule 40 may seem to be a
somewhat narrower description of the standard which, of course, is to be found in the
authentic languages of Article 46 and Rule 40. But, the phrase “to require
adjudication of the latter in order to achieve the final settlement of the dispute” is
clearly not equivalent to, as Argentina suggests, to a requirement that ancillary claims
be adjudicated if, and only if, the initial claims cannot be resolved without the

ancillary claims. That is not what Article 46 and Rule 40 say.

® ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules) with explanatory notes
prepared by the ICSID Secretariat, January 1968, note to Arbitration Rule 40, 1 ICSID REPORTS
63,100 (1993)(Exhibit LA AR-1).

43

120.

121.

122.

123.

Thus the Tribunal must reach a determination on the subject-matter of the dispute and

decide whether the ancillary claims arise directly out of that subject-matter.

In their Request for Arbitration dated 19 December 2003, the Claimants submit at
page 22 under the heading “The Dispute” as follows:

“In breach of the above undertakings and the guarantees and

protections established in the BIT, international law, the Hydrocarbon

Regulatory Framework, the Hydrocarbon concessions and Contracts

and other legal and contractual rights of the Claimants, Argentina has

unilaterally taken certain measures including, but not limited to, the

enactment, issuance and/or approval of Law 25.561 AND Decree No

214/2002, as amended. Wide ranging and damaging changes have been

introduced, including the repeal of certain key provisions of the

Hydrocarbon Regulatory Framework, which directly impacted and

significantly injured Claimants’ investments in Argentina.”
In the light of this broad language and since the claim raised in the Request for
Arbitration and the ancillary claims involve the same contracts, concessions and
permits and legal framework and arise of the sovereign measures which directly
affected the Claimants' legal and contractual rights and their natural gas business, the
Tribunal is of the view that in the instant case the subject-matter of the dispute are the
alleged damages caused, it is argued, by Argentina's violation of its obligations owed
to the Claimants under the BIT. The measures giving rise to the claim raised in the
Request for Arbitration and the ancillary claims form a unified sequence of sovereign
acts. The GOA enacted the measures that form the basis of the ancillary claim in
reaction to the macroeconomic effects of the measures at the heart of the claim raised
in the Request for Arbitration. Those measures constitute an aggravation of the initial

restrictions on the Claimants’ right to freely market and price their natural gas

production.

Moreover, as the Claimants argue, consideration of the original claim in isolation
would not fully resolve the dispute over price interference, which includes measures
giving rise to the ancillary claims. Even if Argentina's objection on ancillary claims

were accepted that conclusion would, as the Claimants argue, not dispose of any

44

124.

125.

jurisdictional issues since this would not affect the Claimants standing to bring their
ancillary claims in a separate ICSID proceeding. Thus also procedural efficiency and
the interest to avoid inconsistent decisions speak against Argentina's objection.
Resolving the original and ancillary claims in the same arbitration will ensure a more
consistent and efficient outcome. Argentina will suffer no prejudice by the
consolidation of the Claimants’ original and ancillary claims, since the ancillary
claims were filed well in advance of the Tribunals constitution, and Argentina and
ICSID were aware of those claims when making their decisions of whom to appoint
and whether to accept appointments to the Tribunal. The objection is accordingly

dismissed.

3. Second objection to jurisdiction — Fork in the road

 

a. The Parties’ Positions

i. The Respondent

Second, Argentina contends that the Tribunal lacks competence with respect to the
Claimants’ claims in relation to the restrictions on natural gas exports and rerouting of
natural gas volumes to the domestic market, given that MEDA and MASA submitted
those issues to the Argentine courts approximately two years before submitting them
to the Centre. This, it is alleged, amounts to the choice of local courts under the BIT
and hence the “fork in the road” provision has been triggered and the jurisdiction of

an ICSID tribunal would thus be precluded.

Article VII of the BIT sets forth inter alia:

“2. In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute
should initially seek a resolution through consultation and negotiation.
If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national or company
concerned may choose to submit the dispute for resolution:

a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party that is a party to
the dispute; or

45

126.

127.

128.

b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute-
settlement procedures; or

c) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

3. (a) Provided that the national or company concerned has not
submitted the dispute for resolution under paragraph 2 (a) or (b) and
that six months have elapsed from the date on which the dispute arose,
the national or company concerned may choose to consent in writing to
the submission of the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration:

i) to the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes(‘Centre”) established by the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, done
at Washington, March 18, 1965 (“ICSID Convention”), provided that
the Party is a party to such Convention;...”

 

MASA and MEDA filed with the federal courts of the provinces of Salta and
Neuquén, respectively, two amparo actions asking that the measures taken by the
GOA in relation to natural gas exports and rerouting of natural gas volumes to the
domestic market be set aside on grounds of illegitimacy and manifest arbitrariness. In
such actions filed by MEDA and MASA with the Argentine federal courts, the
Claimants complained about the same resolutions, decisions and notes issued by the
Argentine authorities as the one they complained about before ICSID and this

Tribunal in their ancillary claims.

MASA filed before the local courts a claim on the grounds of the illegality and
arbitrariness of “Resolution No. 265 of the Secretariat of Energy, of Decision No.
27/04 of the Under-Secretariat of Fuels,” and of “Resolution No. 659/2004 of the
Secretariat of Energy, amending Decision No. 27/04 of the Under-Secretariat of
Fuels.” Furthermore, in its financial statements, MASA reported that it had challenged
the rules related to gas rerouting and Resolution No. 810/07 of the Secretariat of

Energy, suspending the permit to export from Aguaragiie.

MEDA also filed claims before the local courts, asking that the following regulations

be set aside on grounds of illegality and manifest arbitrariness:

46

129.

130.

131.

“(a) article 31 of Presidential Decree No. 180/04, article 1(c) of
Resolution No. 265/04 of the Secretariat of Energy and Decision No.
27104 of the Under-Secretariat of Fuels;

(b) Notes No. 1261 and 1269 of the Under-Secretariat of Fuels and
Resolution No. 503/04 of the Secretariat of Energy;

(c) Resolution No. 659/04 of the Secretariat of Energy;

(d) Notes No. 1871, 2016, 2054, 2132 and 2155 of the Under-
Secretariat of Fuels, Resolutions No. 807/04, 909/04 and 715/04 of the
Secretariat of Energy and Presidential Decree No. 741/04; Marketing
Office, and Resolution No. 752/05 of the Secretariat of Energy;

(1) Notes No. 1414 and 1451 of the Argentine Hydrocarbons Office;
and

(m) Resolutions No. 925/05 and 930/05 of the Secretariat of Energy.”

In the Respondent's view, it is clear that MEDA's and MASA's claims filed with the
Argentine courts are substantially the same as their claims subsequently filed with

ICSID.

In order for the fork-in-the-road provision to apply, it is not necessary for the claims
filed with the local courts to be exactly identical to the claims filed with international

tribunals, but it is enough for the claims to be substantially the same.

Finally, the Respondent emphasises that MEDA and MASA's claims submitted to the
Argentine courts are based on the same measures and grounds as their claims before
this Tribunal. The Claimants made their choice and decided to submit the issues
related to restrictions on natural gas exports and rerouting of natural gas volumes to
the domestic market to Argentine courts, which is why they have forfeited the
possibility of raising such issues before ICSID and this Tribunal, pursuant to Article
VII(3)(a) of the BIT. Consequently, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction with respect to

those issues.

47

132.

133.

134.

135.

ii. | The Claimants

The Claimants are of the opinion that to trigger the fork-in-the road provision the
amparo actions must have involved an investment dispute as defined in the BIT, as
well as a purpose and a cause of action identical to that before the Tribunal in this
arbitration. The disputes to which the fork-in-the road provision in the BIT applies are
“investment disputes”, as defined in Article VII (1) of the BIT, which provides:
“For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute
between a Party and a national or company of the other Party arising
out of or relating to (a) an investment agreement between that Party and
such national or company; (b) an investment authorization granted by
that Party's foreign investment authority (if any such authorization
exists) to such national or company; or (c) an alleged breach of any
right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to an investment.”

In the Claimant's view the amparo actions instituted in Argentine courts are not such
disputes. Those actions did not involve any claims that Argentina violated the BIT.
The sole purpose of the amparo actions was to declare Argentina's export restrictions
and re-routing measures as unconstitutional and void under Argentine law. The object
of this BIT arbitration is to determine whether Argentina has violated the treaty
provision of the BIT, and if so, what damages those violations yield. The decisions in

the amparo actions could not resolve these questions.

Accordingly, the Claimants’ amparo actions were aimed at the restoration of legal and
constitutional rights under Argentine laws and there was no jurisdiction other than the
Argentine courts to deal with the constitutionality of the measures in Argentina or for
the Claimants to defend their rights under Argentine law. However, damage claims

are not admissible in amparo actions.

Had the Claimants not been able to lodge the amparo actions, they would have been
forced to passively watch their investment further deteriorate and would have suffered
potential legal prejudice in their relationships with Chilean export customers who

expected the Claimants to diligently defend their right to export the gas quantities

48

136.

137.

138.

needed to perform their gas sales contracts. Moreover, had the Claimants not taken
legal action, Argentina likely would have misconstrued that decision as acquiescence,

as it has argued in several other ICSID proceedings.

The Claimants conclude that the fork-in-the -road clause in the light of the decisions
of many ICSID tribunals, only excludes disputes before international tribunals that
have been previously brought before local courts when those disputes involve the
same purpose and the same cause of action — namely an investment dispute under the
BIT. Thus the Claimants are of the view that Argentina's fork-in-the-road objection

lacks merit and request that it be rejected.

b. The Tribunal's analysis

This objection to the admissibility of the claims only concerns the claims in relation

to export restrictions and rerouting of volumes of natural gas to the domestic markets.

According to a note of MEDA and MASA of 13 July 2008 addressed to the Secretary
of Energy, MEDA and MASA relinquish their rights to claim and/or begin or follow
any action, national or international, arising out of or having their origin in the
restrictions to the export of natural gas resulting from the application of several
resolutions inter alia Resolution 810/07. Taking into account this note and the
motion filed by MASA on 21 December 2009 relinquishing the amparo action and
the supplementary amparo petitions filed with the Federal Court of Salta (concerning
the Aguaragiie exploitation), the objection is limited to the amparo action brought

before the Federal Court of Neuquén in 2004 (concerning the exploitation in the

© See Claimants’ letter to the Arbitral Tribunal dated 7 August 2009 with attachments (Exhibit L-15).

® See Motion filed on 21 December 2009 by Marfa Celeste Godoy and Héctor Cornejo D’ Andrea, in
the case captioned “Tecpetrol S.A. and Mobil Argentina S.A. v. Argentine Government on Action for
the Constitutional Rights” (Exhibit AR-315).

49

139.

140.

141.

Chihuidos area). This amparo action has been decided through the first instance
ruling by the Federal Court of Neuquén dated 30 June 2010, in which the Claimants’

claim was allowed.

As stated by the Claimants, the fork-in-the -road clause, in the light of the decisions of
many ICSID tribunals”, only excludes disputes before international tribunals that
have been previously brought before local courts when those disputes are between the

same parties and involve the same purpose as well as the same cause of action.
Article 43 of the Argentine Constitution provides:

“Any person may file an expedited and prompt amparo action, if there
is no other suitable judicial remedy, against any act or omission on the
part of public authorities or any private party that impairs, threatens to
impair, restricts or in any other way affects rights and guarantees
protected by this Constitution, a treaty or a law in an overtly arbitrary
or illegal manner In this case the judge may declare the
unconstitutional nature of the standard on which the act or omission is
founded.”

The Tribunal finds, in particular in the light of the legal opinion by Dr. Bianchi,
which it regards reliable, that under Argentine law, the sole purpose of “amparo
actions” is to guarantee the protection of constitutional rights upon violations caused
by overtly illegal or arbitrary acts on the part of public authorities or private parties.”°
The amparo is a strictly summary trial, very brief, with limited proof, where the
purpose is to obtain the statement of unconstitutionality or illegality of norms or a

regulation, and it has no other purpose. The deadline of an amparo is very brief i.e. 15

® Exhibit AR-334.

© See e.g. CMS Gas Transmission Company v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No ARB/O1/8,
Decision on Jurisdiction (17 July 2003) [hereinafter “CMS Decision on Jurisdiction” | {80, 90-92 and
Azurix Corp v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No ARB/O1/12, Decision on Jurisdiction (8 December
2003) [hereinafter “Azurix Decision on Jurisdiction” | 89-90.

™ See Supplementary Legal opinion prepared by Alberto B. Bianchi of 30 July 2009 [hereinafter,
“Bianchi First Supplementary Opinion” | | 35.

50

142.

143.

144.

working days. The deadline starts when the administrative action is notified, if this is
an administrative action, at the very moment when the law or regulation is published
in the Official Gazette, or else at the moment when the material conduct, is informed
to the person concerned, and the person concerned can say that it has had the truthful
knowledge. If these fifteen days lapse without a claim brought under the amparo, the
right for an amparo claim will be lost.”! The amparo actions are not admissible if the

disputed matters require a broader investigation and production of evidence.”

Thus, an amparo action constitutes an alternative remedy to ordinary proceedings.
This also follows from the fact that amparo actions are devised as summary actions
with very short procedural terms that do not allow for extended debate or the
production of much evidence, which is consistent with their purpose: To order that the

violation of constitutional rights and guarantees cease immediately.

Amparo actions are not a proper means to seek damages. Amparo actions are
extraordinary and their purpose is exhausted once the court orders the immediate
cessation of the overtly illegal governmental conduct. Thus amparo actions are not
available to seek damages.” This is obvious also in the light of the decisions of the

Argentine Supreme Court referred to in Dr. Bianchis’ report.”

The amparo actions that the Claimants filed with Argentine courts are not based on
violations of the US-Argentina BIT. Rather, they only invoke provisions of the

Argentine Constitution (the right to equality, property rights and the due process of

7 Hearing on Jurisdiction and the Merits, 1 through 13 April 2011 [hereinafter, “Hearing Transcript in
English” ], Day 2, Bianchi, supra (n 70) p. 282-284.

" See Bianchi First Supplemental Opinion, supra (n 70) {ff 11-15 and 35.

® See Bianchi First Supplemental Opinion, supra (n 70) fff 21-29.
™ See e.g. Sargenti c/Instituto Nacional de Obras Sociales, Fallos 322-2220 (1999) and Gémez ¢/
Direccién de Bienestar de la Armada, Fallos 327-5270 (2004), concurring vote of Justices Petracchi
and Fayt. See also Bianchi First Supplemental Opinion, supra (n 70) { 23.

51

145.

146.

law) and the Substitute Protocol No. 2 of ACE 16 executed in Buenos Aires on 7 July
1995.

The Tribunal finds it obvious that the sole purpose of the amparo actions was to
declare Argentina's export restrictions and re-routing measures as unconstitutional
and void under Argentine law. The purpose of an amparo is the restoration of the
legal and constitutional rights restricted through acts that are manifestly illegal or
arbitrary. As explained by Professor Reisman in his expert opinion, the amparo
actions were defensive actions that the Claimants were compelled to file to avoid
defaulting on their legal obligations to third parties in Chile.” An ICSID arbitral
tribunal has not the power to declare an Argentine law unconstitutional or to grant an
amparo. The Claimants instituted the amparo actions in order not to lose the rights
they contend they have and not in order to seek damages. On the other hand, the
purpose of the ICSID arbitration is to establish whether damages are owed by
Argentina for violation of the BIT standards. Amparo is not a precondition to claim
damages. Thus the amparo actions have a different cause of action and a different
purpose and object than this ICSID arbitration. This is so even if decisions rendered in
amparo proceedings become res judicata in relation to any subsequent claims for

damages in the event that a measure is held to be unlawful.

To conclude, this Tribunal has no jurisdiction to set aside any of the laws or
regulations envisaged in the amparo actions or declare them void under Argentine
law. Conversely, the local courts of Argentina, in an amparo action, had, and have, no
authority to adjudicate the legal claims brought in this investment arbitration; that is,
they have no jurisdiction to determine whether the foregoing measures, and other
measures enumerated in the Request and Ancillary Claims, violated the provisions of

the BIT.

75 See Opinion of W. Michael Reisman on Jurisdiction of 27 July 2009 45.

52

147.

148.

149.

150.

For the reasons mentioned above, the Tribunal finds the Respondent's objection that
the Tribunal lacks competence with respect to the Claimants' claims in relation to the
restrictions on natural gas export and the rerouting of natural gas volumes to the

domestic market unfounded. The objection is accordingly dismissed.

4. Third objection to jurisdiction — the claim regarding the
obligation to pay royalties on gas exports without deducting the
Export Withholdings has become moot

a. The Parties Positions
i. The Respondent

Argentina contends that the Claimants' claim regarding the obligation to pay royalties
on gas exports without deducting the Export Withholdings, which the Claimants
allege that Argentina through Law No.25.561 (the Emergency Law) had imposed,
has become moot since on 5 June 2007 (prior to the date the second ancillary claim
was filed), the Supreme Court of Justice of the Argentine Republic ordered the
Province of Neuquén to refrain from requiring MASA the payment of the difference
for royalties resulting from the application of Decrees N° 225 and 226 of 2006 of the

Provincial Executive Branch, until a final judgment was rendered.

On 29 November 2007, the Executive Branch of the Province of Neuquén repealed
these Decrees by issuing Decree N° 2200/07. On 12 August 2008, the Supreme Court
of Justice of the Argentine Republic declared terminated the judicial proceeding on
the grounds that the Province of Neuquén and MASA had claimed the court to declare

that the issue had become moot.

ii. | The Claimants

The Claimants assert that Argentina’s objection that the Claimants’ claims with

respect to the Province of Neuquén's practice of charging excess royalties on natural

53

151.

152.

153.

gas exports are moot is irrelevant. Provincial Decrees 225 and 226 of 2006 concern
royalties on domestic sales of hydrocarbons; Law 25,561 remains in effect and

continues to apply to natural gas exports.

b. The Tribunal's analysis

The Claimants’ assertion, according to which Provincial Decree 225 and 226 of 2006
concern royalties on domestic sales of hydrocarbons and that Law 25,561 remains in
effect and continues to apply to natural gas exports, has not been rebutted by
Argentina. Argentina's Counsel remarked that this claim is closely linked to the merits
and that this objection will be dealt with at the merits phase”®, but this did not finally

occur. Consequently, the objection is unfounded. The objection is accordingly

dismissed.
5. Fourth objection to jurisdiction — the tax matters are
inadmissible pursuant to the BIT
a. The Parties Positions

i. The Respondent

Fourth, Argentina emphasizes that pursuant to the treaty, tax matters can only be
submitted to investment dispute resolution mechanisms contemplated in the BIT if the
following is alleged: (a) that there has been an expropriation; (b) that transfers related
to an investment have not been permitted; or (c) that an investment agreement or

authorization has been violated.

Article XII of the BIT sets forth that:

© Transcript in English, Day | p. 207, 10-14.

54

154.

155.

156.

“1. With respect to its tax policies, each Party should strive to accord
fairness and equity in the treatment of investment of nationals and
companies of the other Party.

 

2. Nevertheless, the provisions of this Treaty and in particular Article
VII and VIII, shall apply to matters of taxation only with respect to the
following:

a) expropriation, pursuant to Article IV;
b) transfers, pursuant to Article V; or

c) the observance and enforcement of terms of an investment
agreement or authorization as referred to in Article VII (1) (a) or (b),

to the extent they are not subject to the dispute settlement provisions of
a Convention for the avoidance of double taxation between the two
Parties, or have been raised under such settlement provisions and are
not resolved within a reasonable period of time.”

Articles VII and VIII of the Treaty mentioned in Article XII establish systems for the
resolution of investor-host State disputes and of disputes between signatory member

States, respectively.

Argentina asserts that this case does not involve any of the above referred three
issues. First, the imposition of export withholdings did not cause the expropriation of
the Claimants’ legal and contractual rights, since the Claimants transferred those
export duties on to their Chilean customers. Second, there is no investment agreement
or authorisation between the Claimants and the Argentine Republic. Finally, in
connection with the question of transfers (item b), MEDA and MASA have not filed

any complaint about this issue.

Although the first paragraph of Article XII of the BIT states that “[w]ith respect to its
tax policies, [the State] should strive to accord fairness and equity in the treatment of
investment of nationals and companies of the other Party”, Argentina argues that,

despite that “lax duty of acting with fairness and equity in connection with tax

55

157.

158.

159.

160.

policies,””” Article XII provides that only the above mentioned three issues authorize

the use of the mechanisms contemplated in Articles VII and VIII of the BIT.

The Claimants cannot, says Argentina, even claim that their alleged investments were
not accorded fair and equal treatment. The text of Article XII is clear as regards two
aspects. First, that in the case of tax matters the “duty to give a fair and equal
treatment” is merely “an effort.” Second, it is also clear that “notwithstanding” that
“effort,” the BIT dispute resolution mechanisms are “only available” for a series of

issues not including the allegation of “unfair and inequitable treatment.”

Moreover, Argentina asserts that for an investment agreement to exist, it must contain
an international element. In investment agreements, the parties agree upon a special
regime for the treatment of the foreign investment with one or several elements that

“internationalise” that agreement.

On the one hand, the concessions invoked by the Claimants have no international
element. The law applicable to those concessions is Argentine law. It was established
that any dispute arising out of those concessions would be submitted to the local
courts. Therefore, they may not be considered investment agreements. On the other
hand, Claimants have not proved that, at the time they submitted their claim, there

was any agreement or instrument between Argentina and MEDA.

The Sierra Chata Concession is not an investment agreement. The Sierra Chata
Concession as well as other hydrocarbons concessions are contracts governed by the
Argentine legislation without any international element that might turn them into an

investment agreement.

™ Memorial of the Argentine Republic on Objections to the Jurisdiction of the Centre and the
Competence of the Tribunal and the Admissibility of the Claim, J 69.

56

161.

162.

163.

164.

ii. | The Claimants

The Claimants contend that their claim regarding Export Withholdings and excess
royalties involves: (i) Argentina’s expropriation of specific legal and contractual
rights and revenues; (ii) Argentina’s failure to observe and comply with investment
agreements (such as the Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts); and (iii)

Argentina’s unfair and inequitable treatment of the Claimants’ investment.

First, Argentina's decision to establish Export Withholdings, either by itself or in
conjunction with other measures, can constitute a measure “tantamount to

expropriation” under the BIT.

Second, the Claimants argue that it is not correct that the first paragraph of Article
XII of the US-Argentina BIT (“each Party should strive to accord fairness and equity
in the treatment of taxation’) eliminates the “fair and equitable treatment” standard
set forth by Article II of the BIT. Even though it may be a soft obligation, it is
nevertheless an enforceable obligation under international law like the obligation to
negotiate in good faith. Argentina failed to provide fair and equitable treatment to the
Claimants’ investment in Argentina by withholding commitments expressly
exempting the Claimants from Export Withholdings and violating commitments to

charge a maximum royalty rate of 12 % on natural exports.

Moreover, the Claimants argue that Argentina imposed the Export Withholdings and
excess royalties in an inequitable and discriminatory manner against the Claimants. In
addition to the taking of the Claimants’ legal and contractual rights by imposing the
Export Withholdings and excess royalties on exports, Argentina’s treatment of the
Claimants’ investment in relation to the Export Withholdings has been discriminatory,
because the taxes: (i) were designed to compensate the banking sector for losses
caused by other government measures; and (ii) targeted businesses of a specific

nature, which is precisely the standard that the Legal Framework and _ the

s7

165.

166.

167.

Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts used for excluding the applicability “of

discriminatory taxes.”

In the Claimants' view Article XII of the BIT does not deprive the Claimants of their
right to bring a claim under Article VII for Argentina’s violation of the standards
provided by Articles II and IV of the BIT. The provision on expropriation in Article
IV is made directly relevant by the terms of Article XII (2), which expressly refers to
Article TV. Article IV, in turn, provides that one of the conditions for a legal
expropriation is compliance with the provisions of Article II (2) which include fair
and equitable treatment. The Claimants' claim regarding the imposition of Export

Withholdings and excess royalties on export constitutes an expropriation claim.

Third, the Claimants assert that the imposition of the Export Withholdings and excess
royalties on exports resulted in the violation of commitments undertaken by Argentina
under the BIT. As Argentina itself acknowledges, ICSID jurisdiction is available, and
the provisions of the BIT apply (including those related to dispute resolutions
mechanisms) if the dispute concerns an expropriation. Claimants’ claim regarding the
imposition of Export. Withholdings and excess royalties on exports constitute an

expropriation claim.

The Claimants contend that the mere assertion of an expropriation is enough for the
Tribunal to find jurisdiction in this case. Whether an expropriation of specific legal
and contractual rights and revenues has occurred is not an issue for the Tribunal to
decide at his stage of the proceedings, but should instead be decided at the merits
phase. As for jurisdictional objections, ICSID tribunals must consider the claims as
alleged by the Claimants in their Memorial, and jurisdiction exists to consider the
dispute included in the Claimants’ Memorial since the Claimants have prima facie
shown that they have an expropriation claim. The dispute relates to an expropriation
of legal and contractual rights and revenues, and consequently, falls within the scope

of Article XII (2) (a) of the BIT.

58

168.

169.

170.

171.

Fourth, the Claimants assert that the Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts are a
relevant part of the Claimants’ dispute and constitute investment agreements under
the BIT for purposes of the tax-related claims under Article XII of the BIT. Nowhere
in the BIT is the term “investment agreement” defined. It was not used as a special
term with a special meaning or as a term of art. The purpose is simply by using the
term “investment agreement” to exclude ordinary commercial contracts that are not

related to an investment.

The Claimants were granted rights to natural resources owned by the Federal or
Provincial States. The Claimants' rights were conferred by virtue of a sovereign
power which, of course, takes them out of the realm of ordinary commercial
Concession Contracts. Thus the Claimant's Permits and concessions establish a legal

relationship between them and the Argentine State.

Contrary to Argentina’s assertion, no “international” element is required for the
Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts to qualify as an investment agreement.
There is no language in the BIT that requires any international element for an
investment agreement. Even if an international element were necessary, it is present
in this case. MEDA and MASA qualify as United States nationals under the BIT, and
thus imbue the Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts with an international
character. Moreover, other foreign companies and their subsidiaries were and are
parties to the Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts. In addition, Argentina granted
the Hydrocarbon Concession and Contracts as part of a movement to attract foreign

companies to invest in Argentine hydrocarbon fields.

Thus, and “without prejudice to the fact that jurisdiction can also be affirmed on other
grounds” as respects Article XII of the BIT, the failure to observe the commitments
undertaken by Argentina in those “investment agreements” with respect to tax issues
constitutes a prima facie violation of the standards of protection established by the

BIT, which gives this Tribunal jurisdiction under the BIT.

59

172.

173.

174.

175.

b. The Tribunal's analysis
Article XII (2) of the BIT provides as follows:

“Nevertheless, the provisions of this Treaty, and in particular Article
VII and VIII, shall apply to matters of taxation only with respect to the
following:

(a) expropriation, pursuant to Article IV,
(b) transfers, pursuant to Article V; or

(c) the observance and enforcement of terms of an investment
agreement or authorization as referred to in Article VII (1) (a) or (b),

to the extent they are not subject to the dispute settlement of a

Convention for the avoidance of double taxation between the two

parties, or have been raised under such settlement provisions and are

not resolved within a reasonable period of time.”
Thus, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction for tax matters except in the three situations
referred to in Article XII (2) (a-c). The Claimants' have not filed any complaint about

the question of transfers (item b).

The Claimants have made out a prima facie case that the GOA measures may have
resulted in an expropriation of the Claimants' investment or that there may be an
investment agreement as that notion may be generally understood — the notion in
question is not defined by the BIT. Accordingly, to establish the Tribunal's

jurisdiction, the Claimants can rely on the exceptions stated in Article XII (2).

Nevertheless, the question whether the Claimants’ claim regarding Export
Withholdings and excess royalties is an expropriation pursuant to Article IV of the
BIT is inextricably linked to the merits. In the Tribunal's view, the imposition of
Export Withholdings or excess royalties may prima facie amount to an expropriation

of specific legal and contractual rights and revenues. Whether such expropriation has

60

176.

177.

178.

occurred is not an issue for the Tribunal to decide now. The Tribunal cannot decide at

this point on its jurisdiction on these issue

At this stage, the scope of inquiry is limited to whether the Claimants' allegations, if
true, could constitute an expropriation. The Claimants need not establish at that stage
either that the facts alleged are true or that such facts, if proved, would necessarily
violate the BIT. Conversely, only in case that the Claimants’ allegations are clearly
untrue or, even if true, the Claimants’ allegation that their claims regarding Export
Withholdings and excess royalties would be manifestly unfounded, the Tribunal

would adopt a decision on its jurisdiction (see infra 1864).

Also, the question whether the Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts constitute
investment agreements under the BIT for purposes of the tax-related — claims under
Article XII of the BIT, is inextricably linked to the merits. Confronted with the
opposing views of the parties, this Tribunal points out that what matters at the
jurisdictional stage is whether the claims submitted, if they were to prove well
founded, would fit into the jurisdictional parameters of the BIT. Therefore we must

consider the merits to solve these issues of jurisdiction.

6. Fifth objection to jurisdiction — Absence of Evidence of MEDA's
Alleged Investment

a. The Parties’ Positions
i. The Respondent

Argentina contends that the relevant law to determine the acquisition of the rights
invoked as investment is the law of the host State. Thus, the exact nature of the rights
invoked by the investor is to be determined according to the law of the host State and
then it must be analyzed whether those rights are included in the definition of

investment established in the relevant investment treaty. Therefore, the applicable law

61

179.

180.

181.

to determine MEDA's acquisition of the rights it invokes as investment in Sierra

Chata is Argentine law.

Argentina submits that MEDA claims that it acquired its interests in the Exploration
Permit, the Exploitation Concession and the Transportation Concession through
assignments in 1996 and 1997 from BHP Petroleum (Argentina) S.A. and Mobil
Argentina Limited (“MAL”, previously named Monument Exploration Limited).
However, the assignment from BHP Petroleum (Argentina) S.A. to MEDA was
authorised by the Executive Branch only in 2005, and the assignment from MAL to

MEDA has not yet been authorised by the Executive Branch.

According to MEDA the BHP-MEDA Purchase and Sale Agreement is one of the
documents evidencing the acquisition of its interests in the Exploration Permit, the
Exploitation Concession and the Transportation Concession. By means of this
agreement, the parties agreed that BHP Petroleum (Argentina) S.A. would transfer
90% of its 31.1091% interests in the Exploration Permit, the Exploitation Concession

and the Transportation Concession to MEDA.

Argentina contends that in accordance with Argentine law, such permits and
concessions may only be assigned upon prior authorisation of the federal or provincial
Executive Branch. Indeed, Law No. 17,319 (hereinafter “Hydrocarbons Law’)
establishes that “[p]ermits and concessions awarded under the provisions of this law
may be assigned, with a prior authorisation of the Executive Branch, to such persons
who possess the qualifications and comply with the conditions and requirements
established for permit or concession holders, as the case may be.” [Emphasis added].
In addition, Law No. 26,197 of 3 January 2007 provides that, as from the enactment
of that law, the provinces will become counterparties to the exploration permits and

the hydrocarbon exploitation and transportation concessions.

62

182.

183.

184.

185.

However, the assignment from BHP Petroleum (Argentina) S.A. to MEDA was only
authorised by Administrative Decision No. 459/2005, which was published in the
Argentine Official Gazette on 9 August 2005. In addition, MEDA has not produced in
this arbitration the instruments which would prove that it is the holder of the
Exploration Permit, the Exploitation Concession and the Transportation Concession,
to wit: the final notarial deeds of assignment, which had to be submitted to the

enforcement authority pursuant to Administrative Decision No 459/2005.

Moreover, Argentina submits that the Claimants also invoke an assignment from
MAL to MEDA as source of the acquisition of their interests in the Exploration
Permit, the Exploitation Concession and the Transportation Concession. Argentina
also contends that this assignment is subject to authorisation of the Executive Branch,

which authorisation has not yet been granted.

Argentina concludes that the documents presented by the Claimants in response to the
request for evidence by the Argentine Republic fail to show that MEDA had acquired
its alleged interests in the Exploration Permit, the Exploitation Concession and the
Transportation Concession by the date the Request for Arbitration was filed - 19
December 2003. It is clear from the documents presented by the Claimants that the
assignments invoked by them were subject to the authorisation of the Federal
Executive Branch. One of the assignments alleged by the Claimants — the
assignment from BHP Petroleum (Argentina) S.A. to MEDA — was authorized in
2005 and the final notarial deeds of assignment have not yet been submitted. The
other assignment invoked by — the assignment from MAL to MEDA — has not yet

been authorised by the Executive Branch.

Jurisdiction must be established at the time of filing of the claim. Therefore, since the
Tribunal had no jurisdiction over MEDA's claim at the time the Request for
Arbitration was filed in 2003 — as it has not been proven that MEDA had acquired its

alleged investment by that date — the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to entertain

63

186.

187.

188.

189.

MEDA’s claims for acts or omissions of the Argentine Republic occurring prior to
MEDA’s acquisition of its alleged investment. Thus the Tribunal has no jurisdiction

over any of MEDA's claims.

ii. | The Claimants

The Claimants contend that the GOA has consistently recognised (and continues to
recognise) the Claimants as the rightful holders of a 50.9956% working interest in the
Sierra Chata Concession. For Argentina now to attempt to deny the Claimants,
ownership interests in their investments constitutes an abuse of rights (abus de droit)
and violates the principles of good faith, estoppel and venire contra factum proprium

non valet under both international and Argentine law.

MEDA acquired its working interest in the title to Sierra Chata through two
transactions. First, it acquired 31.1091% from BHP Petroleum (Argentina) S.A. in
1996 and 1997 (the “BHP Assignment”). Second, it acquired 19.8865% in 1998
from MAL as a result of a bulk transfer of assets within Mobil Corporation (the

“MAL Transfer’’).

On 18 September 1996, MEDA and Mobil Oil Exploration and Production Southeast
Inc. executed a Sale and Purchase Agreement (the “BHP Assignment Agreement”)
with BHP Petroleum (Argentina) S.A., BHP Petroleum (Argentina) Inc., BHP
(Americas) Inc. and BHP Petroleum (GOM) Inc., through which BHP Petroleum
(Argentina) S.A. assigned MEDA 90% of its working interest (a 27.99819% interest)
in the title to the Sierra Chata Concession. Subsequently, BHP Petroleum (Argentina)
S.A. and BHP Petroleum (Argentina) Inc. assigned their remaining working interest

in the title to Sierra Chata (3.11091%) to MEDA.

MEDA complied with all technical and financial conditions required by law to hold
its working interest in the title to the Sierra Chata Concession, but Argentina delayed

issuing an authorization of the assignment for more than eight years, despite

64

190.

191.

192.

acknowledging in 2000 that: (i) MEDA was duly registered in the Registry of Oil
Companies, thus meeting the technical conditions required by the applicable
regulations to hold hydrocarbon working interests; and (ii) MEDA complied with the
required business solvency parameters and had a satisfactory economic and financial
condition. A failure to meet these conditions constitutes the only valid reason for the

Argentine Government to delay or refuse to issue an authorization.

In 2005, through Administrative Decision 459/05, Argentina finally issued the formal
approval of the BHP-MEDA Transfer that MEDA had applied for in 1996 and 1997.
Administrative Decision 459/05 confirmed that MEDA met the statutory conditions
required under Article 72 of the Hydrocarbons Law to hold an interest in Sierra Chata.
It also authorized BHP Petroleum (Argentina) Inc. and BHP Petroleum (Argentina)
S.A. to assign 100% of their working interest in the Sierra Chata Concession
(31.1091%) to MEDA. Under Article 2 of that regulation, the parties had 60 business

days to submit the public deed implementing the assignment.

To execute a public deed, however, Article 74 of the Hydrocarbons Law requires the
submission of a certificate showing that no taxes in connection with the assigned
working interests remain unpaid. Although the Claimants have diligently requested
this certificate, the Province of Neuquén has arbitrarily refused to issue it due to a
dispute over the Province’s unreasonable and arbitrary calculation of royalties that

also involves most of the oil and gas companies operating in Neuquén.

Through a letter to the Secretary of Energy on 21 October 2005, MEDA informed the
Argentine Government of the Province of Neuquén’s refusal to issue the tax
certificates required to obtain a public deed showing MEDA’s title in Sierra Chata. In
that letter, MEDA also requested an extension of the 60-day term to obtain the tax
certificates from the Province of Neuquén. MEDA reiterated its request on 21
December 2005, but the Argentine Government failed to respond whatsoever to

MEDA’s requests.

65

193.

194.

195.

196.

197.

198.

The Province of Neuquén has challenged royalty payment calculations made not only
by MEDA and MASA, but also by almost all companies operating in the Province. As
a result, MEDA and MASA have been unable to register the deeds for their title in

Sierra Chata.

As a result of reorganization by Mobil Corporation of its affiliates’ holdings, effective
on 9 December 1998, MAL assigned all of its assets and liabilities, including its

working interest in the Sierra Chata Concession (19.8865%), to MEDA.

On 10 December 1998, MAL and MEDA informed the Argentine Government of this
assignment in accordance with the provisions of Article 15 of Decree 1969/93,

through which the Argentine Government granted the Chihuidos Exploration Permit.

As a result of another corporate reorganization in 2004, MEDA assigned to MASA its
assets and liabilities, including its 50.9956% interest in Sierra Chata. In accordance
with the rules set under Article 15 of Decree 1969/93, the Claimants notified the

Argentine Government of this assignment on 22 December 2004.

It is notable that inter-affiliate transfers, such as the MAL Transfer and the MEDA-
MASA Transfer, do not require authorization from the Argentine Government.
Article 15 of Decree 1969/93 provides that parties may assign portions of their
interest to company affiliates simply by notifying the competent authority, which the
parties promptly did upon completing the transfer. Because no formal authorization of
the transfer by the Argentine Government is required, Argentina’s allegations that the
Executive Branch did not authorise those transfers are not relevant to the lawfulness

of the transfers under Argentine law.

In addition to showing that assignments between affiliates do not require government
approval, Article 15 of Decree 1969/93 establishes that the Energy Secretariat merely
takes note of inter-affiliate assignments (rather than formally authorizing them) and

that the assignor remains jointly liable with its assignee affiliate for the assigned

66

199.

200.

interest in question. Thus, when making an inter-affiliate assignment, it is not
necessary to request approval from the government; but if the parties want to dispense
with joint liability, then they need to seek government approval exclusively for that

purpose.

Even if Argentina were correct that executive authorization had been required for the
validity of the transfers, and not simply to enable the parties to waive joint liability,
the Argentine Government, and with the enactment of Law 26,197. which transferred
the eminent domain of the hydrocarbon reserves to the Provinces and, as a result, all
concessions granted by the Federal Government were also transferred to the
provincial authorities, the Province of Neuquén, have delayed granting authorizations
for these transfers. They failed to authorise these transfers despite the fact that both
MEDA and MASA have been duly registered with the Argentine Registry of Oil
Companies and have complied with all technical and financial conditions required by

law to hold a working interest in the Sierra Chata Concession.

Argentina’s objection that the Claimants’ investment does not accord with the
formalities of Argentine law must fail for at least three reasons. First, for more than
ten years, the Argentine Government has repeatedly acknowledged that the Claimants
own a working interest in Sierra Chata; consequently, Argentina is estopped from
denying the lawfulness of the Claimants’ investment. Second, any failure to register
formal title of the Claimants’ interest in Sierra Chata lies entirely with the Argentine
Government. Argentina cannot now benefit from its own wrong in order to deny the
Claimants’ standing to claim for damage to their investment under the BIT. Third, the
Claimants complied with all statutory conditions to obtain the title. Thus, the
Government’s failure to grant the authorizations and tax certificates in question and
its current challenge of the Claimants’ standing in Sierra Chata on the grounds that
the Claimants have allegedly failed to comply with the requirements of the
Hydrocarbons Law, a charge that first arose in the context of this proceeding,

constitute an abuse of rights (abus de droit) under Argentine and international law.

67

201.

202.

203.

204.

The principle of estoppel bars Argentina from challenging the Claimants' standing to
claim for their interest in the Sierra Chata concession. Although the governing law of
this dispute stems from the BIT and international law, it is notable that Argentine law
also recognizes the doctrine of venire contra factum proprium, which is similar to the

principle of estoppel under international law.

The Argentine Government has consistently and publicly recognised the Claimants as
the rightful owners of a working interest in Sierra Chata. In a 2004 report to the
House of Representatives, the Chief of Cabinet stated that “MASA is a corporation
indirectly owned by Exxon Mobil Corporation. MEDA and MASA are natural gas
producers. They hold a hydrocarbon production concession in Sierra Chata,
Chihuidos, the Province of Neuquén (in accordance with the Hydrocarbons Law and
Decrees 1969/93 and 824/95)...” That the Chief of Cabinet has expressly recognised
the Claimants’ interest in Sierra Chata is significant since it was the Chief of Cabinet
who was empowered to issue hydrocarbon permits and concessions and to authorise

assignments.

Argentina has also addressed re-routing orders in the Neuquina Basin to the
Claimants. The Claimants’ only concession holding in the Neuquina Basin is their
50.9956% interest in Sierra Chata; thus, Argentina necessarily directed its re-routing
orders to the Claimants’ interest in Sierra Chata, the same interest it now purports to

deny.

Through Note SE 1114/04, the Secretary of Energy requested certain information
from the operator of the Sierra Chata Concession. The note specified that the
Secretary of Energy was sending a copy of the information request to the “other
holders” of the Sierra Chat Concession. In recognition of MEDA as one of the “other
holders” of the Sierra Chata Concession, the Secretary of Energy sent MEDA a copy
of Note SE 1114/04.

68

205.

206.

207.

The Argentine Government also recognised the Claimants’ interest in Sierra Chata
through Resolution SE 599/07, which approved the terms of the Second Gas
Agreement that Argentina sought to have producers sign. Annex I of the Second Gas
Agreement, which establishes the natural gas volumes that the Argentine Government
expected to receive per basin from each natural gas producer, included MASA as a
producer in both the Northwestern Basin and the Neuquina Basin. MASA does not
hold any interests in the Neuquina Basin aside from its interest in Sierra Chata.
Therefore, Annex I confirms that Argentina recognised MASA as a concessionaire in

Sierra Chata.

Even the Argentine Supreme Court of Justice has recently recognised MASA as
holder of the Chihuidos/Sierra Chata title. In Mobil Argentina S.A. v. Neuquén
Provincia del y otro (Estado Nacional), MASA requested injunctive measures against
the Province of Neuquén regarding the Province’s calculation of royalty payments.
On 5 June 2007, the Supreme Court admitted MASA’s motion and implemented the
requested injunctive measures against the Province of Neuquén. In that ruling, the
Supreme Court expressly recognized MASA “as co-holder of the production

concession of the Sierra Chata area located in the Province of Neuquén.”

The Province of Neuquén has also recognised the Claimants as interest holders in
Sierra Chata in the following ways: (i) since executing the assignments, MEDA and
MASA have paid royalties on their production from the Sierra Chata block and taxes
to the provincial government; (ii) in a letter that the Province of Neuquén sent to
MEDA on 24 August 2005, the Province refers to MEDA as the “Concessionaire” (iii)
the Province of Neuquén has held meetings with MASA regarding the Sierra Chata
Concession; (iv) the Neuquén Secretariat of Natural Resources issued Resolution
54/09, Article 10 of which provides for the notification of the Resolution to “all
permit and concession holders acting in the Province,” and MASA received notice of

this Resolution in March 2009. The Province has accepted those payments and not

69

208.

209.

210.

challenged the fact that they are calculated on the basis of the Claimants’ entire

interest in the Sierra Chata Concession.

These non-exhaustive examples show that the Argentine Government has consistently
acknowledged the Claimants’ status as title holders in Sierra Chata for more than a

decade.

A State may not rely on its own wrongful actions or omissions as a defence to
internationally wrongful conduct. Thus, Argentina’s own acts and omissions prevent
it from challenging the lawfulness of the Claimants’ investment in Sierra Chata. The
Claimants took every step and fulfilled every requirement necessary to obtain
authorization and formal title to their investment in Sierra Chata. Over a period of
more than ten years, however, Argentina repeatedly ignored the Claimants’ requests
to complete these and other administrative formalities, and due to its own
incompetence in processing authorization requests, failed to process the Claimants’
authorization requests in a timely manner, resulting in an undue delay that is
unfortunately far too common in the Argentine Government’s assignment
authorization process. Argentina cannot now rely on its incompetence to deny the
Claimants’ standing in this proceeding. Its attempt to do so constitutes an effort to
benefit from its own negligent behaviour in enforcing its legal and administrative

rules.

In addition, to relying on its own delay in granting assignment authorizations,
Argentina’s reliance on the Province of Neuquén’s failure to grant the Claimants a tax
certificate to contest the validity of the BHP-MEDA Transfer is particularly
egregious. After the Argentine Government issued Administrative Decision 459/05
approving the BHP-MEDA Transfer, BHP and MEDA unsuccessfully sought to
obtain a written certificate showing that there were no outstanding tax liabilities with
respect to MEDA’s assigned working interest in Sierra Chata. The Province of

Neuquén, however, arbitrarily refused to issue the required certificate based on

70

211.

212.

213.

interpretive disagreements regarding royalty calculations. Although MEDA promptly
informed the Secretary of Energy of these circumstances and requested an extension
of the deadline for executing the deed formalizing the assignment, the Secretary of

Energy failed to respond in any way.

Since 2002, the Province of Neuquén has systematically calculated royalties for all
hydrocarbon producers, including the Claimants, in excess of the 12% statutory
maximum under Argentine law. As a result, the Province is involved in several legal
proceedings with the majority of hydrocarbon producers in the Province’s territory. In
an attempt to coerce hydrocarbon producers (including the Claimants) to comply with
the Province’s unlawful royalty calculations (which in many cases involve calculating
royalties on the basis of prices that exceed the actual sale prices as required by the
Hydrocarbons Law), the Province of Neuquén refused to issue the tax certificates
necessary to formally register the assignment of working interests, concessions and

permits.

Had the Province of Neuquén issued the tax certificates, it still would have had the
right to pursue its royalty claims against producers. The tax compliance certificates
issued by the federal tax authority, the Administracién Federal de Ingresos Ptiblicos
(“AFIP”), expressly clarify that such certificates “do not affect the AFIP’s
surveillance and tax determination powers.” As a consequence, the issuance of a tax
certificate does not imply that the agency issuing the certificate waives its right to
take legal action against the certificate holder to claim for unpaid taxes. In any event,
Argentina’s decision to withhold a tax certificate due to its unreasonable royalty
calculations has become particularly arbitrary since the Supreme Court in December

2007 ruled that royalties were not taxes.

In summary, the substantial delays that affected the Claimants’ assignment
authorization proceedings are entirely attributable to the federal and provincial

governments’ bureaucracy, negligence, and misuse of authority in handling those

71

214.

215.

216.

217.

proceedings. Thus, Argentina may not challenge the Claimants’ standing in this
proceeding by arguing that the difficulties created by its own agencies and political

subdivisions are attributable to the Claimants.

Another reason to reject Argentina’s attempt to contest the Claimants’ standing to
claim for damages to their investment in Sierra Chata is that Argentina’s position
constitutes an abuse of rights (abus de droit) under Argentine and international law.
In this case, the Argentine Government has used its otherwise legitimate authority to
approve assignments as a tool to achieve goals unrelated to the legitimate purpose of

that authority.

First, the Argentine Government has abused its limited discretion by failing to grant
the Claimants the assignment authorisations they sought for over ten years, even
though the Claimants complied with the technical and financial conditions for
obtaining authorisations. Second, in order to gain leverage in its attempt to force
producers to pay unlawfully excessive royalty payments, the Province of Neuquén has
arbitrarily refused to issue the tax compliance certificate. The Claimants need to
notarize title to their investment. Third, Argentina has violated the abuse of rights
doctrine by attempting to invoke a purported failure to comply with the formalities of
its internal law to undermine the Claimants right to pursue its claims under the BIT

and the ICSID Convention.

Accordingly, Argentina’s attempt to deny treaty protections to the Claimants’
investment in Sierra Chata constitutes an abuse of Argentina’s otherwise reasonable
right to expect that investors will comply with formalities of host state laws.

b. The Tribunal's analysis

Even though the BHP-MEDA transfer was not approved until more than two years

after the request for arbitration was filed by the Claimants, Argentina performed

72

218.

219.

220.

221.

several acts that implied acknowledgement of MEDA's and MASA's concessionaire

status.

First, the fact that the Government has uninterruptedly collected taxes and royalties
arising from a certain legal relationship constitutes a clear admission on the part of the
Government of that legal relationship with the taxpayer. Accordingly, the fact that
MEDA and MASA have paid, export withholdings, income taxes and royalties since
1998 in relation to the Sierra Chata Block, without the Federal Government or the
Province of Neuquén ever objecting to their standing to do so, implies an

acknowledgment of their status as concessionaires over that block.

Second, Argentina has given numerous orders to MEDA and MASA in order to
implement its natural gas export curtailment measures and the routing of the so-
curtailed volumes to the domestic market, the so-called “re-routings”.”* Such a
decision implies an admission by Argentina of the Claimants’ status as
concessionaires; otherwise Argentina would have lacked jurisdiction and the orders

would not have reflected the actual state of affairs.

However, Argentina imparted such orders, thus reinforcing MEDA and MASA’s
good faith belief that they would be afforded a treatment consistent with their status

as concessionaires.

Third, through Note 1114/04 sent to MEDA on 21 September 2004, the Secretariat of
Energy impliedly considered MEDA as one of the “titleholders” of the Sierra Chata

Block concession.”? In fact, this note was aimed at demanding certain information.

78 See Natural Gas Re-Routing and Permanent Additional Injection Orders sent to MEDA and MASA
by the GOA (Exhibit C-132 and C-133),
™ See Note 1114/04 of the Energy Secretariat, dated 21 September 2004 (Exhibit C-390).

73

222.

223.

224.

225.

Fourth, in the numerous reports submitted to Congress between the years 2004 and
2007, the Cabinet Chief of the Federal Executive repeatedly stated that:

“MASA and MEDA are natural gas producers. They hold a

hydrocarbon exploitation concession in “Sierra Chata”, Chihuidos,

Province of Neuquén (pursuant to the Hydrocarbons Law and Decrees

Nos. 1969/93 and 824/95); and an exploitation contract in the
Aguaragiie Area Province of Salta (Decree No. 2446/92)"

This goes to confirm that the Argentine Government has recognised the Claimants’
ownership of the relevant investments over a decade and has shown, by specific
actions, that they effectively held the status of concessionaires of the exploration,
exploitation and transportation of hydrocarbons in the “Sierra Chata” Block.
Moreover, in this case, unlike other acts mentioned above, the admission of the
Concessionaires’ status was not privy to the State and the Claimants only, but was

instead effected in a public act before the Argentine Congress.

The question before this Tribunal is first, whether the acts described above constitute
a series of prior actions, which pursuant to the principle of good faith together with
the doctrine of venire contra factum proprium non valet, also recognised by Argentine
law, cannot be contradicted by a later act denying MEDA and MASA’s status as
concessionaires of the “Sierra Chata” Block. If this question is answered in the

affirmative Argentina's fifth objection must already on that ground be rejected.

The Tribunal agrees with Argentina that investments, as defined in the BIT, must be
made and carried out in accordance with the law of the host state. Ordinarily, then,

foreign investors must comply with any procedures or formalities prescribed by the

® See Report of the Chief of Cabinet to the House of Representatives, Report 62, July 2004 (Exhibit
C-387), Report of the Chief of Cabinet to the House of Representatives, Report 64, March 2005
(Exhibit C-394) and Report of the Chief of Cabinet to the House of Representatives, Report 62, July
2004 (Exhibit C-401).

74

226.

227.

228.

host state’s laws for assignments, transfers, acquisitions, and so forth. The principal
such formality on which Argentina predicates its jurisdictional objection in this
investment arbitration is the internal-law requirement that acquisitions and
assignments receive the prior authorization of the Executive Branch authorities,

provincial or federal, as the case may be.

Because the Claimants allegedly did not comply with this requirement as to the
relevant acquisitions and assignments, they cannot, according to Argentina, under the
BIT assert rights relative to concessions, contracts, export permits and other

investments they made, which form the subject-matter of this arbitration.

However, a host state may under international law not invoke its own failure or non-
feasance to defeat rights under the BIT, a fortiori if it has not acted in good faith.
According to the Claimants’ allegations, as to which sufficient evidence has been
given by them, Argentina’s federal and provincial authorities repeatedly and
negligently failed to complete, or delayed for years, certain formalities and
administrative actions required by Argentina’s own law, for example, approval by

Executive Branch authorities or instrumentation of public deeds.

The Tribunal finds that the principle of good faith and the doctrine of venire contra
factum proprium prevent Argentina from denying the validity of the Claimants’
acquisition or ownership of the above interests and others constituting its investment.
Argentina has consistently and repeatedly, for about a decade recognised and acted on
the basis of the validity of the Claimants’ title. By its own actions and those of its
provincial authorities, for which it clearly bears responsibility under international law,
it has shown that it regards the Claimants as the rightful holders of title. The conduct
of any State organ shall be considered an act of that State under international law,
whether the organ exercises legislative, executive, judicial or any other functions,

whatever position it holds in the organization of the State, and whatever its character

75

229.

230.

as an organ of the central Government or of a territorial unit of the State.*! Argentina

cannot now be heard to deny that title.

The Tribunal finds that inter-affiliate transfers, such as the MAL-MEDA Transfer and
the MEDA-MASA Transfer, do not require authorisation from the Argentine
Government, since Article 15 of Decree 1969/93 provides that parties may assign
portions of their interest to company affiliates simply by notifying the competent
authority, which the parties promptly did upon completing the transfer.*? Because no
formal authorisation of the transfer by the Argentine Government is required,
Argentina’s allegations that the Executive Branch did not authorise these transfers are
not relevant to the lawfulness of the transfers under Argentine law. In addition to
showing that assignments between affiliates do not require government approval,
Article 15 of Decree 1969/93 establishes that the Energy Secretariat merely takes note
of inter-affiliate assignments (rather than formally authorizing them) and that the
assignor remains jointly liable with its assignee affiliate for the assigned interest in
question. Thus, when making an inter-affiliate assignment, it is not necessary to
request approval from the government; but if the parties want to dispense with joint

liability, then they need to seek government approval exclusively for that purpose.

For the reasons mentioned above the Tribunal finds Argentina’s fifth objection

unfounded. The objection is accordingly dismissed.

*! See Articles on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, Art. 4, in Report of the
International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty third Session, U.N. GAOR, 56th Sess, Supp.
No. 10, at 43, U.N. Doc. A/56/10 (2001), annexed to G.A. Res. 56/83 (12 December 2001).

* Exhibit C-94.

76

231.

232.

7. Sixth objection to jurisdiction: — Transfer of interest from MEDA
to MASA
On 21 December 2004, MEDA and MASA entered into a Transfer of Going Concern
Agreement (hereinafter “MEDA-MASA Transfer Agreement”) by which MEDA
agreed to transfer to MASA all of the assets and liabilities of its Argentine Branch,
including its interests in the Exploration Permit, the Exploitation Concession and the
Transportation Concession in the Chihuidos Block. Pursuant to the MEDA-MASA
Transfer Agreement the transfer and reorganization to be carried out thereunder

became effective from 31 December 2004.**

a. The Parties’ Positions
i. The Respondent

Argentina contends that like the assignments referred to in their fifth objection; the
assignment from MEDA to MASA is subject to the prior authorisation of the
Executive Branch. In this regard, in the MEDA-MASA Transfer Agreement MEDA
undertook to request authorisation from the Executive Branch to carry out the
assignment of the Exploration Permit, the Exploitation Concession and the
Transportation Concession. Moreover, such agreement provided that if the Executive
Branch refused to grant the requested authorisation, MEDA would resume in its own
name the exercise of the rights and obligations derived from its interests in the
Exploration Permit, the Exploitation Concession and the Transportation Concession.
Furthermore, MEDA’s 2005 to 2008 financial statements informed that the

assignment was pending approval from the Secretariat of Energy. However, the

“) The MEDA-MASA Transfer Agreement (Exhibit C-179) says: “The transfer and reorganization to
be carried out hereunder shall be effective from 31 December, 2004.”

 

77

233.

234.

235.

Claimants have not produced the letter-requesting authorisation from the Executive

Branch to carry out the aforesaid assignment.

If MEDA had acquired prior to the filing of the Request for Arbitration the interests
in the Exploration Permit, the Exploitation Concession and the Transportation
Concession it alleges as investment and had then validly assigned those interests to
MASA, it would not be entitled to pursue any claim as regards those interests for
measures adopted after such interests were transferred to MASA. MEDA has not

either proven to have validly assigned its alleged interest to MASA.

The Claimants state to have excluded the ICSID claim from the transfer. However,
even if MEDA were entitled to claim for measures adopted before the transfer of its
alleged investment, it would not be entitled to claim for measures adopted after such
transfer. Indeed a tribunal has no jurisdiction over a bilateral investment treaty claim
for acts or omissions occurring after the transfer of the relevant investment. As stated
by MEDA itself, since the transfer to MASA the Argentine Branch “has not
performed any operation,” “does not have any assets, liabilities or income” and “it is
also the intention of the Head Office that the Branch do not operate in the foreseeable
future.” Therefore, MEDA is not entitled to pursue any claim for measures adopted

after the transfer of its alleged investment.

MASA is not entitled either to pursue claims in relation to the Exploration Permit, the
Exploitation Concession or the Transportation Concession in the Chihuidos Block. In
the first place, MASA may not invoke an investment other than the investment
alleged when it filed its claim. This means that MASA may not invoke as investment
its alleged interests in the Chihuidos Block because when it filed its claim it invoked
as investment its interests in the Aguaragiie Block. Secondly, MASA has not proven
to have acquired its alleged interests in the above-mentioned permit and concessions.

Finally, even if MASA had acquired such interests, this would have occurred after the

78

236.

237.

238.

filing of the Request for Arbitration, which means that the Tribunal would

nonetheless have no jurisdiction over MASA’s claims as regards those interests.

In return for the transfer of the going concern, MEDA acquired a 54.61%
shareholding in MASA. This shareholding does not entitke MEDA to pursue
derivative or indirect claims for measures adopted after the transfer in relation to the
alleged interests of MASA in the Exploration Permit, the Exploitation Concession and

the Transportation Concession in the Chihuidos Block.

Firstly, MEDA may not invoke an investment other than the investment alleged when
it filed its claim. This means that MEDA may not invoke as investment its
shareholding in MASA, because when it filed its claim it invoked as investment its
alleged interests in the Exploration Permit, the Exploitation Concession and the
Transportation Concession in the Chihuidos Block. Secondly, MEDA may not pursue
a claim for rights that its subsidiary has not proven to have acquired. In this regard,
MASA has not proven to have acquired its alleged interests in the Exploration Permit,
the Exploitation Concession and the Transportation Concession and, even if it had
acquired such interests, this would have occurred after the filing of the Request for
Arbitration. Finally, MEDA is not entitled to claim for rights, which do not belong to
it. That is to say, if the transfer of MEDA’s alleged interests in the Exploration
Permit, the Exploitation Concession and the Transportation Concession to MASA
were valid, after such transfer the invoked rights would belong to MASA and not to

MEDA.

As regards this last issue, an investment in shares is protected by the Treaty but the
shareholder has only a valid claim under the Treaty to the extent that its rights as
shareholder are affected by measures of the Government. There is no definition in

international law of the rights of a shareholder.

79

239.

240.

241.

242.

243.

Therefore, it is necessary to refer to the rules of municipal law to establish the rights
that a shareholder acquires through an investment in shares. In the Barcelona Traction

case, the International Court of Justice (“ICJ”) specifically dealt with this issue.™*

A key issue that the ICJ had to consider in that case was how to transplant the legal
concept of shareholder in a corporation from domestic law to international law. The
answer provided by the Court was that the essential characteristics of that concept
must be preserved when it forms part of an international claim. Investment treaty

tribunals must provide the exact same answer.

The usual reference to shares as a form of protected investment in the first article of
investment treaties solves the question of whether a shareholder in a local company
has standing to file a claim under an investment treaty. This reference to shares says
nothing with respect to the substantial rights related to the shares in a company. This
question may only be solved by the Jex societatis. Neither investment treaties nor

international law regulates the rights of shareholders.

In municipal legal systems, “the fiction of corporate personality” is taken rather

seriously. Indeed, it is only ignored when it is found to be an instrument of fraud.

Every legal system that recognises limited liability company structures necessarily
draws a distinction between the company and its shareholders. A shareholder cannot,
for instance, seize a physical asset of the company in return for relinquishing its share
with an equivalent value. This would amount to misappropriation or theft.
Shareholders have no rights in rem over the assets of the company. The company

holds the assets for its own account and in its own name. A company does not hold

* Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited (Belgium v. Spain), ICJ 3, 37 (5 February
1970) (Exhibit LA AR-62).

80

244.

245.

246.

247.

assets as an agent or trustee of its shareholders. If a third party seizes an asset of the

company, it is not the shareholder who is the victim of theft but the company.

As regards the derivative or indirect claim that MEDA seeks to pursue in this
arbitration proceeding, it is also worth remembering the conclusive words of the
ICSID Tribunal in the Consorzio Groupement L.E.S.I. —- DIPENTA v. Algeria case

“Tl est évident pour le Tribunal arbitral qu’il ne peut entrer en matiére

sur une réclamation si celle-ci lui est soumise par un sujet de droit qui

n'est pas lié par le contrat sur lequel elle repose. L’affirmation est si

essentielle qu’elle n’a pas besoin d’étre spécialement documentée. Peu

importent les liens économiques qui peuvent exister entre les

entreprises; ainsi, la société-mére ne pourrait réclamer des prestations

revenant contractuellement a sa société fille, méme si celle-ci dépend

totalement d’elle, 4 moins de circonstances trés particuliéres qui ne sont

pas alléguées en l’espéce. Ce sont ces parties qui ont choisi de recourir

pour des motifs qui leur appartiennent 4 des structures juridiques

différentes; elles ne peuvent ensuite demander a I’autre partie d’en faire

purement et simplement abstraction.”
To conclude, neither MEDA — directly or indirectly — nor MASA - directly are
entitled to pursue claims in relation to the Exploration Permit, the Exploitation
Concession and the Transportation Concession in the Chihuidos Block for measures
adopted after the transfer of the going concern from MEDA to MASA. The Tribunal

has no jurisdiction to entertain such claims.

ii. | The Claimants

The Claimants argue that the MEDA-MASA transfer on 31 December 2004 merely
altered the form in which the Claimants held their investment in Argentina through
changes in asset ownership and shareholding of two whole-owned subsidiaries of

Exxon Mobil Corporation.

The Claimants contend that the BIT is particularly clear in providing in Article I (3)
that “[a]ny alteration of the form in which assets are invested or reinvested shall not

affect their character as investment.” Moreover, no issue of jurisdiction under the

81

248.

249.

250.

ICSID Convention arises from a transfer between original claimants for reasons
unconnected with the claim, even if the measures forming the basis of the claim
accrue after the transfer. It follows that the alteration of the form of MEDA’s
investment from a direct ownership of the underlying assets to an indirect ownership
through its stake in MASA’s capital stock does not affect MEDA’s standing to claim
for damages to that investment. This also applies to MASA. That MASA, an original
claimant in these proceedings, received its interest in Sierra Chata, an investment
present since the commencement of these proceedings, through a bulk transfer in the
form of universal succession does not preclude MASA from pursuing its claim with

respect to the “inherited assets.”

In short, a company’s decision to restructure its assets and shareholding structure does
not generally deprive that company or its subsidiaries of their rights under the BIT.
Three consequences follow from this conclusion: (A) MEDA may claim for damage
caused by Argentina’s measures taken toward its investment before the MEDA-
MASA Transfer; (B) from December 31, 2004, forward, MASA may claim for
damage caused by Argentina’s measures toward the portion of the investment it
obtained from MEDA in 2004; and (C) MEDA, without duplication, may claim as a
shareholder of MASA for damage caused by measures that affected MASA’s
investments after the MEDA-MASA Transfer.

It follows under investment treaty law that investors may retain standing under a
bilateral investment treaty when they have transferred sold, or assigned their
investment after commencing international proceedings. It is generally recognised
that there is jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention if the Claimant was an investor
at the time of instituting ICSID proceedings. Any assignments or transfers after that

time will not affect the investor's standing to claim under the ICSID Convention.

In this case, MEDA directly owned its investment in Sierra Chata as of the date of

initiating proceedings, and MEDA continued to directly own that interest until the

82

251.

252.

253.

MEDA-MASA Transfer in 2004. When making the MEDA-MASA Transfer, MEDA
specifically reserved its BIT claims for measures preceding that transfer. The express
exclusion of MEDA’s BIT claims from the MEDA-MASA Transfer was intended to
preserve MEDA’s right to pursue the claims up to the date of the Transfer and to
demonstrate that the Claimants were not attempting to duplicate their claim for
damages. MEDA’s direct ownership interest imbues it with standing to claim damage

caused to its investment in Sierra Chata prior to 31 December 2004.

Argentina’s argument that MASA cannot claim for the interest in Sierra Chata that it
inherited from MEDA fails to reference any legal authority for support. MASA is
MEDA’s successor in interest under Argentine law, and as such, may assume
MEDA’s standing in this arbitration. The BIT expressly applies to claims for acquired
investments, and ICSID tribunals have only precluded assignees from claiming when
assignments were made to obtain ICSID jurisdiction where there was none, which is
not the case here. That the transfer in question was made after the date of registering
the original claim has no bearing on this conclusion, since it does not introduce a new
investment, a new claim, or a new claimant to this proceeding. Moreover, even if the
MEDA-MASA Transfer were not valid — as Argentina alleges—the issues
surrounding MASA’s standing would be moot since MEDA would still own its direct
interest in Sierra Chata and could continue to claim for that interest through the

present date.

Through the 2004 bulk transfer, MASA became the owner of the Sierra Chata Assets
by way of “universal succession.” Under Argentine law, a transfer of a going concern
involves a “universal succession” as opposed to a simple assignment of assets or
transfer uti singuli. The existence of “universal succession” is not affected by a partial

exclusion from the transfer of certain assets or liabilities.

It follows that, in addition to its standing to claim for all damages sustained in relation

to its investment in Aguaragiie, MASA may claim for damages to the portion of the

83

254.

255.

256.

investment received from MEDA accruing after 31 December 2004 (i.e., the effective

date of the MEDA-MASA Transfer).

While the existence and validity of the MEDA-MASA Transfer is governed by
domestic law, its consequences for the current proceeding constitute a matter of
international law. Article I (3) of the BIT is explicitly flexible with how investors
choose to structure their investments, stating that: “Any alteration of the form in
which assets are invested or reinvested shall not affect their character as investment.”
Likewise, the ICSID Convention contains no provision that would prohibit successors
in interest, such as MASA, from continuing a claim in place of their predecessor.
ICSID tribunals have consistently held that transfers and assignments of investments
from one BIT-protected investor to another, such as that in the MEDA-MASA

Transfer, are valid and do not raise issues of jurisdiction.

The corporate restructuring in this case did not involve any transfers between third
parties, but rather a restructuring of assets solely between two wholly-owned
ExxonMobil subsidiaries, MEDA and MASA, both of which have been claimants
since the commencement of the arbitration. The Claimants introduced no new parties,

investments, or claims to the proceeding as a consequence of the transfer.

In this case, MEDA had standing to claim for damage to the Sierra Chata assets, and
transferred that interest and standing through a universal succession to an affiliate,
MASA, at a time when MASA was already a Claimant in the arbitration. MEDA and
MASA are US nationals for the purposes of the BIT, and they made the Transfer as
part of a corporate restructuring within a group of affiliated companies, not to create
ICSID jurisdiction where none existed. Thus, the Transfer complies with the
nationality requirements of the ICSID Convention, and ICSID jurisdiction should be

upheld.

84

257.

258.

259.

260.

Argentina’s argument that “MASA may not invoke an investment other than the
investment alleged when it filed its claim” is, at best, procedural in nature and has no
basis in the jurisdictional requirements of either the BIT or the ICSID Convention.
Simply because ICSID jurisdiction is established at the date of registering the
arbitration does not mandate that a successor in interest to an investment forming part
of the original claim may not continue to claim in place of the original claimant,

especially when the successor in interest is already a party to the arbitration.

Because Argentina’s objection is a procedural (rather than jurisdictional) in nature,
MASA could always bring the claim in another proceeding if the Tribunal were to not
admit it in this proceeding. Such a result would create inefficiencies and risk an
adjudicated outcome inconsistent with the Tribunal’s decision about the same
measures and the same investment in this proceeding. Moreover, a decision to
exclude the portion of the claim for damage to the Claimants’ interest in Sierra Chata
after 31 December 2004 would be inconsistent with the goal of Article 46 of the
ICSID Convention and Rule 40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules to finally resolve the

dispute in one proceeding.

In summary, MASA is MEDA’s successor in interest and may continue in MEDA’s
place in this proceeding to claim for the investment in Sierra Chata. This conclusion is
supported by the fact that the MEDA-MASA Transfer has no bearing on the
Claimants’ standing under the BIT or the ICSID Convention. The dispute involves the
same claimants, the same investments and the same claims; thus, the inter-affiliate
restructuring between MEDA and MASA in no way prejudices Argentina. In
consideration of these facts and the analysis above, the Claimants ask that the
Tribunal reject Argentina’s objections on this point and affirm MASA’s standing to

claim as MEDA’s successor in interest.

Article I (3) of the BIT provides that “[a]ny alteration of the form in which assets are

invested or reinvested shall not affect their character as investment.” This provision

85

261.

262.

263.

264.

reflects the BIT’s policy to protect investment while maintaining the investor’s

autonomy to structure its investment.

The restructuring of MEDA and MASA’s investments created no jurisdiction here
because ICSID jurisdiction over their claims already existed. Until the MEDA-MASA
Transfer, MEDA undoubtedly fell within the personal jurisdiction of the BIT and the
ICSID Convention as a United States company with an investment in Argentina. That
MEDA now holds its investment indirectly does not change this fact. To deprive
MEDA of ICSID’s jurisdiction because of the restructuring of its interest in Sierra
Chata would contradict the clear policy goal in Article I (3) of the BIT to allow

investors to restructure their investment through the form they see fit.

With respect to MEDA’s continued claim for damages to its investment in Sierra
Chata as shareholder of MASA, The Claimants note that they do not seek double-
recovery. Rather, the Claimants simply wish to affirm MEDA’s continued standing to

claim despite changing the form through which it holds its investment in Sierra Chata.

Argentina’s attempt to deny the advantages of the BIT to a US shareholder in a local
company is at odds with express provisions of the BIT. The inclusion of shareholders
is confirmed by Article I (1) of the BIT, which defines “investment” as “every kind of
investment in the territory of one Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by
nationals or companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and
investment contracts; and includes without limitation: a company or shares of stock or
other interests in a company or interests in the assets thereof’ and “any right

conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and permits pursuant to law.”

Through the BITs’ definition of “investments” as including companies and shares of
stock, “the participation” in the locally incorporated company becomes the
investment. Even if the local company is unable or unwilling to pursue the claim

internationally, the foreign shareholder in the local company may pursue the claim in

86

265.

266.

267.

268.

his own name. The shareholder may then pursue claims for adverse action by the host

State against the local company that affects its value and profitability.

Thus, contrary to Argentina’s assertions, MEDA is not pursuing the rights of MASA.
MEDA’s claim is brought on its own behalf as a US investor with qualifying
investments under the BIT. MEDA’s shareholding in MASA and its indirect
ownership of investments owned by MASA, including the concessions, contracts, and
permits, is a covered investment that provides MEDA with standing under the ICSID
Convention and the BIT. Claims by shareholders are well recognised in ICSID case
law, Shareholders like MEDA have a direct right of action for such “derivative”

claims.

b. The Tribunal's analysis

Argentina argues that the Claimants have lost standing to claim for the portion of
MEDA's investment that MASA has obtained as MEDA's successor in interest
through the MEDA-MASA transfer which became effective on 31 December 2004.

Pursuant to Article 25(2) of the ICSID Convention jurisdiction is established on the
dates of consent and registration of the dispute. As a result, subsequent events do not
affect jurisdiction. Thus a disposal or transfer of assets that form the basis of an
investment claim, subsequent to the institution of the proceedings, such as the transfer
from MEDA to MASA, does not affect the standing of the original claimant. Thus,
MEDA may claim for damages caused by Argentina's measures affecting its
investments before the MEDA-MASA transfer became effective on 31 December

2004.

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that the MEDA-MASA transfer merely
altered the form in which the Claimants held their investments in Argentina through
changes in asset ownership and shareholding of two wholly-owned subsidiaries of

Exxon-Mobil Corporation.

87

269.

270.

271.

272.

273.

Article 1(3) of the BIT provides that “[a]ny alteration of the form in which assets are
invested or reinvested shall not affect their character as investment.” As the Claimants
submit, no issue of jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention arises from a transfer
between original claimants for reasons unconnected with the claim, even if the
measures forming the basis of the claim accrue after the transfer. It follows that,
although MASA, an original claimant in these proceedings, received its interest in
Sierra Chata, an investment present since the commencement of these proceedings,
through a bulk transfer in the form of universal succession, this does not preclude

MASA from pursuing its claim with respect to those assets.

MEDA-MASA transfer has no bearing on the Claimants' standing under the BIT or
the ICSID Convention, although the transfer was made after the date of registering the
Request for Arbitration. The dispute involves the same Claimants, the same
investments and the same claims; thus the inter-affiliate restructuring between MEDA

and MASA in no way prejudices Argentina.

Thus, MASA may from 31 December 2004, which is the date on which the transfer
pursuant to the transfer agreement became effective, onwards claim for possible
damage or harm suffered after that date because of Argentina's measures affecting the

investments it obtained from MEDA.

On the other hand, the Tribunal finds that the transfer from MEDA to MASA had the
effect that MEDA lost its standing to claim for possible damage or harm affecting the
investment it transferred to MASA suffered after the transfer of assets from MEDA to
MASA became effective on 31 December 2004. Being a shareholder of MASA does
not give MEDA standing to pursue a claim concerning MASA’s rights, which do not

specifically belong to MASA’s shareholders.

For the reasons mentioned above, the Tribunal finds Argentina's objection concerning

MEDA's standing, in its capacity as shareholder of MASA, to claim for possible

88

274.

275.

damage or harm suffered after the transfer of assets from MEDA to MASA became
effective on 31 December 2004 justified. In all other respects, the Tribunal finds
Argentina's sixth objection unfounded. The objection is accordingly accepted as far as
it concerns MEDA’s standing in its capacity as shareholder of MASA but in all other

respects dismissed.

8. Seventh objection to jurisdiction: — Absence of any Evidence that
MASA should be treated as a US company

a. The Parties’ Positions
i. The Respondent

Argentina contends that the Claimants have not proven that MASA should be treated
as a US company for the purposes of Article 25(2) (b) of the ICSID Convention and
Article VII (8) of the BIT. In the absence of such evidence, says Argentina, the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction to entertain MASA's claim. The only evidence produced
by the Claimants to try to prove the existence of control was a certificate issued by an
employee of Exxon Mobile Corporation, which stated that from 1 December 2001 up
to the date of issue of the certificate - 21 January 2009 — MASA had been and
continued to be “an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of Exxon Mobile Corporation.”

This is not sufficient to prove that Exxon Mobil controlled MASA.

ii. | Claimants

Claimants contend that since MASA has been incorporated in Argentina at all
relevant dates for determining jurisdiction, including on the date that the parties
consented to submit this dispute to ICSID arbitration, it is only necessary that: (i) the
parties have agreed that MASA should be treated as a national of that other
Contracting State for purposes of the ICSID Convention; and (ii) MASA is controlled

by shareholders of a Contracting State to the ICSID Convention other than Argentina.

89

276.

277.

278.

279.

Through Article VII (8) of the BIT, Argentina agreed to treat MASA as a US
company. Argentina cannot credibly deny that MASA is an investment of Exxon
Mobil Corporation, a company incorporated in New Jersey that indirectly holds 100%
of MASA’s shares, particularly when the Chief of Cabinet himself, in a report to the
House of Representatives, expressly recognised that “MASA is a corporation
indirectly owned by Exxon Mobil Corporation.” The Chief of Cabinet’s statement is
particularly relevant because he cites information provided by the Procuracién del
Tesoro de la Nacién, representing Argentina in this case, as the source of its

statement.

That Exxon Mobil Corporation has a 100% indirect shareholding interest in MASA
fortifies the reasonableness of the parties’ agreement to treat MASA as a US company

for purposes of the BIT and the ICSID Convention.

b. The Tribunal's analysis
Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention states:
“National of another Contracting State” means:

(a) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties
consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any
juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting State party
to the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign control, the
parties have agreed should be_treated as a national of another
Contracting State for the purpose of this Convention.”

MASA has been incorporated in Argentina at all relevant dates for determining
jurisdiction. Therefore, it is only necessary that: (i) the parties have agreed that
MASA should be treated as a national of the other Contracting State for purposes of
the ICSID Convention; (ii) MASA is controlled by shareholders of a Contracting

State other than Argentina.

90

280.

281.

282.

283.

Article VII (8) of the BIT states:

“For purposes of an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this Article,
any company legally constituted under the applicable laws and
regulations of a Party or a political subdivision thereof but that,
immediately before the occurrence of the event or events giving rise to
the dispute, was an investment of nationals or companies of the other
Party, shall be treated as a national or company of such other Party in
accordance with Article 25(2) (b) of the ICSID Convention.”

Thus, in case MASA is an investment of nationals or companies of the United States

of America and is under “foreign control”, Argentina has agreed to treat MASA as a

US company.

The Chief of Cabinet has in a report the House of Representatives expressly
recognised that “MASA is a corporation indirectly owned by Exxon Mobil
Corporation.”*° Therefore, and in the light of the full corporate charts with references

8° it has been established that

to supporting stock ledger submitted by Claimants,
Exxon Mobil Corporation, a company incorporated in New Jersey, indirectly holds

100 % of MASA's shares.

Having regard to this ownership the Tribunal finds it established that MASA also is
under foreign control and that Argentina and the United States have agreed in the BIT
that MASA shall be treated as a national of the United States for the purposes of the

ICSID Convention. Argentina's objection is accordingly dismissed.

® See Report of the Chief of Cabinet to the House of Representatives, Report 62, July 2004 (Exhibit C-
387), Report of the Chief of Cabinet to the House of Representatives, Report 64, March 2005 (Exhibit
C-394) and Report of the Chief of Cabinet to the House of Representatives, Report 62, July 2004
(Exhibit C-401).

86 See Stock Ledgers and other corporate documents (Exhibit C-408).

91

284.

285.

VIL

286.

&

C. Conclusions

The objections to the jurisdiction of the ICSID, the competence of the Arbitral
Tribunal and of the admissibility of the claims raised by the Argentine Republic must
be rejected. However, MEDA lacks Jocus standi in order to file a claim against the
Argentine Republic: a) for damages allegedly attributable to the Respondent
stemming from measures applied in the area of Aguaragiie; b) for damages occurring
as of 31 December 2004 allegedly attributable to the Respondent, including damages
resulting from the application of measures concerning export restrictions, re-routing,
Export Withholdings and royalties in the area of Chihuidos all of which were adopted
after the 31 December 2004, i.e. the date when the transfer from MEDA to MASA

became effective.

Thus MEDA is entitled to claim for damage which occurred before 31 December
2004 allegedly attributable to the Respondent stemming from the measures applied in
the Chihuidos area. MASA, for its part is entitled to claim for damages allegedly
attributable to the Respondent stemming from measures applied in the area of
Aguaragiie as well as for damages allegedly attributable to Respondent, which
occurred as of 31 December 2004, stemming from the measures applied in the
Chihuidos area, including damages resulting from the application of export
restrictions, re-routing, Export Withholdings and royalties referred to in the ancillary

claims.

APPLICABLE LAW

Before proceeding to examine the facts and the parties’ allegations, the Tribunal will
make the following preliminary observations concerning the law applicable to the

merits of the dispute.

92

287.

288.

289.

290.

Article 42 (1) of the ICSID Convention provides:

“1. The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of
law as may be agreed by the parties. In the absence of such agreement,
the Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the
dispute (including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of
international law as may be applicable”.

A. The Parties’ Positions

The Claimant argues that Article 42 of the ICSID Convention, in its first sentence,
directs the Tribunal to look first to the rules of law agreed by the parties, and in the
absence of any such agreement, the Tribunal should look to (1) the law of the

Contracting State, and (2) such rules of international law as may be applicable.

International law applies in this case because the BIT (which is part of Argentine law)
is itself the governing law as the lex specialis between the parties, and it expressly
requires Argentina to comply with international law. In addition, international law
applies under the second sentence of Article 42(1) regardless of the application of
Argentine law because that sentence makes international law applicable in every
ICSID arbitration in which the parties have not agreed on a choice of law to the
contrary. Thus, the decision to apply international law is not optional; the Tribunal
has a mandatory duty to apply applicable international law, regardless of the role of
domestic law. The Claimant argues that Article 42 of the ICSID Convention, in its
first sentence, directs the Tribunal to look first to the rules of law agreed by the
parties, and in the absence of any such agreement, the Tribunal should look to (1) the
law of the Contracting State, and (2) such rules of international law as may be

applicable.

In any event, Argentina has incorporated international law into its domestic law and
treaties prevail over domestic law. Thus international law applies in this case. The
BIT expressly requires Argentina to comply with international law, and the BIT and

international law have been incorporated by Argentina in its domestic law.

93

291.

292.

293.

According to the Claimant, the BIT requires “the Argentine Republic to afford U.S.
investors like MEDA and MASA treatment no less favourable than that required by
international law, both with respect to investment generally and in particular with

respect to expropriations or measures tantamount to expropriation of an investment.”
The Claimant quote, among others, Professor Weil who says:

“However complex and multifaceted, these attempts [to delineate the
respective roles of domestic and international law] are actually futile,
for no matter how domestic law and international law are combined,
under the second sentence of Article 42(1), international law always
gains the upper hand and ultimately prevails. It prevails indirectly
through the application of domestic law where the latter is deemed
consistent with international law or incorporates it. It prevails directly
where domestic law is deemed deficient or contrary to international
law. Thus, under the second sentence of Article 42(1), international law
has the last word in all circumstances: “international law is fully
applicable and to classify its role as ‘only’ ‘supplemental and
corrective’ seems a distinction without a difference.”

The Claimants also rely on the statement of the ICSID Tribunal in Santa Elena. In
that case the Tribunal concluded that Costa Rican law was “generally consistent with
the accepted principles of public international law on the same subject.” The Tribunal

noted, however. that

“[t]o the extent that there may be any inconsistency between the two
bodies of law, the rules of public international law must prevail. Were
this not so in relation to takings of property, the protection of
international law would be denied to the foreign investor and the
purpose of the ICSID Convention would, in this respect, be
frustrated.”

87 Pp. Weil, The State of the Foreign Investor and International Law: To No Longer Stormy
Relationship of a Ménage A Trois, 15(2) ICSID REV — F.LL.J.J. 401, 409 (2000) [hereinafter “P.
Weil” (Exhibit C-325).

*$ Compaiifa del Desarrollo de Santa Elena, SA v Republic of Costa Rica, ICSID Case No ARB/96/I,
Award (17 February 2000) 39 ILL.M. 1317, 1328 (2000) [hereinafter “Santa Elena Award”| (Exhibit
C-231).

94

294.

295.

296.

297.

Moreover, the Claimants rely, inter alia, on the Annulment Committee in Vivendi IT
on the law applicable to the determination of whether a breach of the BIT has
occurred. It held

“[T]he inquiry which the ICSID tribunal is required to undertake is one

governed by the ICSID Convention, by the BIT and by applicable

international law. Such an inquiry is neither in principle determined,

nor precluded, by any issue of municipal law, including any municipal

law agreement of the parties.”*”
In support of their contention that that international law also applies under the second
sentence of Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, the Claimants rely here again on
the authority of Professor Weil, who with regard to tribunal's choice of law analysis
under the second sentence of Article 42(1), holds: “These attempts [to delineate the
respective roles of domestic and international law] are actually futile, for no matter
how domestic law and international law are combined, under the second sentence of
Article 42(1) international law always gains the upper hand and _ ultimately

prevails.”””

The Claimants conclude that although the Tribunal is required to apply both the law
of the Contracting State and applicable international law under the second sentence of
Article 42(1), international law inevitably prevails when domestic and international
law conflict. Any other interpretation would allow governments to enact and interpret
laws in order to evade their international obligations, thereby frustrating the purpose

of the ICSID Convention and the protections of the BIT.

The Respondent draws a different conclusion from the fact that the parties have not

agreed on the applicable law. The Respondent submits that the second sentence of

® Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal (formerly Compagnie Générale des
Eaux) v Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment (3 July 2002)
{hereinafter “Vivendi Decision on Annulment”) { 102, (Exhibit C-454).

© P. Weil, supra (n 87) p. 409.

95

298.

299.

300.

Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention must be applied. Hence, in accordance with
Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, the law governing the present dispute consists
of the provisions of the applicable BIT and other applicable rules of international law,

as well as the Rules of Argentine law.

Moreover, the Respondent submits that in the instant dispute, the definition of rights
allegedly acquired by the Claimants is defined by Argentine law. The existence of
such rights, as well as their scope, manner of acquisition and conditions for their
transfer are determined by Argentine law. Neither the BIT nor general international
law contains any definition of these concepts. The Respondent quotes Judge Rosalyn
Higgins, who states as follows:

“So far as the concept of property itself is concerned, it is as if we

international lawyers say: property has been defined for us by

municipal legal systems; and in any event, we “know” property when

we see it. But how can we know if an individual has lost property rights

unless we really understand what property “is?”?

Therefore, in order to know whether the Argentine Republic is internationally
responsible under the BIT, the Respondent asserts it must be determined, in the first
place, which the rights allegedly acquired by Claimants under Argentine law are and

how those alleged rights evolved under Argentine law.

The Respondent refers to the case EnCana Corporation v. Ecuador, in which, the
Respondent contends, this has been upheld in the following terms: “[FJor there to

have been an expropriation of an investment or return (in a situation involving legal

°! Rosalyn Higgins, The Taking of Property by the State: Recent Developments in International Law,
RECUEIL DES COURS DE L’ACADEMIE DE DROIT INTERNATIONAL 259, 268 (1982-III)
(Exhibit LA AR-90).

96

301.

302.

303.

304.

305.

rights or claims as distinct from the seizure of physical assets) the rights affected must

exist under the law which creates them.”**

Moreover, the Respondent refers to Sacerdoti, who states “[f]oreign investments are
subject in the first place to general legislation and to any specific applicable law and

regulation of the host state.”°

Therefore, the Respondent contends, Argentine law is one of the sources of law that
must be applied in order to determine whether the Treaty standards for the protection

of investments have been complied within in this particular case.

In conclusion, the Respondent asserts that Argentine law determines the existence and
scope of the rights allegedly acquired by the Claimants and is part of the applicable
law to be used for determining whether the Treaty provisions have been complied

with.

Finally, Argentina contends that the human rights obligations of the State must be
borne in mind in interpreting and delimiting the scope of the applicable BIT
provisions, given that the emergency measures challenged by the Claimants must be
analyzed in the light of all the relevant rules, including the paramount obligation of

the State to guarantee fundamental human rights.

In their Reply, the Claimants contend that Argentine law is irrelevant to the issue of
Argentina's international responsibility; it is only relevant as a fact to add context to
Argentine Government’s measures and conduct at issue, which the Tribunal must

analyze through the lens of the BIT and international law.

* EnCana Corporation v Republic of Ecuador UNCITRAL Arbitration, Award (3 February 2006)
hereinafter “EnCana Award”| 184 (Exhibit LA AR-30).

® Giorgio Sacerdoti, Bilateral Treaties and Multilateral Investments, 269 RECUEIL DES COURS DE
L’ACADEMIE DE DROIT INTERNATIONAL 251, 369 (1997) (LA AR-91).

97

306.

307.

308.

Moreover, the Claimants contend that Argentina's interpretation of EnCana is
confused and inaccurate. In that case, the claimant argued that Ecuador wrongfully
denied rights to refunds owed to EnCana’s subsidiaries under Ecuadorian law. The
Tribunal thus looked at Ecuadorian law to determine the content of the commitment
to VAT refunds made by Ecuador. But Ecuadorian law was not employed to
determine the standard of international responsibility, as Argentina implies. Nor does
the EnCana decision imply that the Tribunal would not have looked to sources other
than Ecuadorian law for the VAT refund obligation at issue (e.g., assurances from
State officials, legal or contractual commitments, the BIT, etc.) had the claimant

alleged such additional source.

In addition, the Claimants rely on the statements by the Tribunal in the CME case and
the Tecmed case. In the CME case the Tribunal stated: “The State may not invoke its
own legislation to detract from [its BIT] obligation[s].”°* In the Tecmed case the
Tribunal held: “That the actions of the Respondent are legitimate or lawful from the
standpoint of the Respondent's domestic laws does not mean that they conform to the

Agreement or to international law.”

In its reply, the Claimants finally contends that in maintaining that its measures were
necessary to preserve fundamental human rights in the time of the crisis, Argentina
establishes no direct link between the measures at issue and its human rights
obligations. In support of that Claimants refer to the Siemens case in which the
Tribunal remarked:

“(T]he Tribunal notes the reference made by Argentina to international
human rights law ranking at the level of the Constitution after the 1994

° CME Czech Republic BV v Czech Republic [hereinafter “CME Partial Award”], UNCITRAL,
Partial Award (13 September 2001) (ff 159-60 (Exhibit C-237).

°5 Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed SA v United Mexican States, \CSID Case No ARB (AF) 00/2),
Award (29 May 2003) [hereinafter “Tecmed Award”, | 120 (citing ELSI at 73) (Exhibit C-244).

98

309.

310.

constitutional reform and implying that property rights claimed in this

arbitration, if upheld, would constitute a breach of international human

rights law. This argument has not been developed by Argentina. The

Tribunal considers that, without the benefit of further elaboration and

substantiation by the parties, it is not an argument that, prima facie,

bears any relationship to the merits of this case.”°°
Furthermore, the Claimants contend that similarly, the tribunals in Azurix and CMS
held that Argentina failed to establish the incompatibility of its human rights and

investment treaty obligations within the precise context of those cases.”

In its Rejoinder, Argentina reaffirms its considerations in the Counter-Memorial that,
the parties have not expressly agreed on the applicable law in the BIT and, therefore,
Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, second sentence, establishes the applicable
law, which includes Argentine law, the applicable BIT provisions and other
international law, for instance human rights provisions. Thus the Tribunal must apply
the BIT, Argentine law and other relevant international laws in a harmonious manner
so that there are no contradictions between them since the second sentence of Article
42(1) of the ICSID Convention sets forth the application of all those sources of law,
without giving precedence. Argentina quotes, among others, Sacerdoti who explains:

“[t]his construction of the relationship between domestic law and BIT’s

obligations indicated that the freedom of the host state to enact or

change its law and regulations in the furtherance of general or specific
policies (e.g. in the respect of in the environment labour and consumer

 

°® Siemens AG v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No ARB/02/8, Award (6 February, 2007)
{hereinafter “Siemens Award”| 79 (Exhibit C-266).

” See Azurix Corp v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No ARB/O1/12, Award (14 July 2006)
[hereinafter “Azurix Award”] (failing “to understand the incompatibility in the specifics of the instant
case”), C-261; CMS Gas Transmission Co v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No ARB/O1/8, Award
(12 May 2005) [hereinafter “CMS Award”] 121 (“there is no question of affecting fundamental
human rights when considering the issues disputed by the parties”) (Exhibit C-256).

99

311.

312.

313.

protection, technological research, industrial development) is basically

unaffected by BIT’s”.”°
Moreover, Argentina relies in support of its contention that domestic law is frequently
relevant to determine whether there was a breach of the international instrument, inter
alia, on the fact that the Ad Hoc Committee in the Decision on Annulment in the
Vivendi case held that “at most, it might be relevant—as municipal law will often be

relevant—in assessing whether there has been a breach of the treaty.””?

In its Rejoinder, Argentina emphasizes that it requests the Tribunal to take into
consideration the international law of human rights when analyzing whether the
Argentine Republic breached any provision under the Treaty. For instance, the fact
that a measure was adopted to protect certain fundamental human rights Argentina
was (and is) subject to by international laws of the highest level becomes relevant to
determine if the measure that ruled certain rights of foreign investors was fair and
equitable. Argentina holds that there is no conflict whatsoever between the rules on
investment and on human rights and reasserts that the measures that the Claimants
challenge were legitimately adopted and necessary for the protection of fundamental

human rights.

B. The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Claimants consider that the first sentence of Article 42 (1) of the ICSID
Convention applies in this case since the BIT is itself the governing law as the lex
specialis between the parties, and it expressly requires Argentina to comply with

international law.

°S Giorgio Sacerdoti, Bilateral Treaties and Multilateral Investments, 269 RECUEIL DES COURS DE
L’ACADEMIE DE DROIT INTERNATIONAL 251, {371 (Exhibit LA AR-382).
® Vivendi Decision on Annulment (n 89) 4 101 (Exhibit LA AR-82).

100

314.

315.

316.

317.

There is no express agreement between the Claimants and Argentina on the applicable
law. Neither does the BIT contain any express clause on applicable law. Thus, the
Tribunal agrees with Argentina that the second sentence of Article 42 (1) of the

ICSID Convention applies in the instant case.

The Tribunal notes that the parties agree that the BIT is the point of reference for
judging the merits of MEDA's and MASA's claim. The Tribunal further notes that,
according to the Argentine Constitution, the Constitution and treaties entered into

with other States have primacy over domestic laws.!°°

Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention has been the subject of controversy on the
respective roles of municipal law and international law. It is clear from the second
sentence of Article 42(1) that both legal orders have a role to play, which role will
depend on the nature of the dispute and may vary depending on which element of the

dispute is considered.

MEDA's and MASA's claim has been advanced under the BIT and, as stated by the

101 1! the

Annulment Committee in Vivendi and later by the Azurix Tribunal
Tribunal’s inquiry is governed by the ICSID Convention, by the BIT and by
applicable international law. While the Tribunal’s inquiry will be guided by this
statement, this does not mean that the law of Argentina should be disregarded. On the
contrary, the law of Argentina should be helpful in the carrying out of the Tribunal’s
inquiry into the alleged breaches of the concessions and permits to which Argentina’s
law applies, but it is only an element of the inquiry because of the treaty nature of the

claims under consideration.

' Section 31 and Section 75 (22). See Legal Opinion of Dr. Alberto B. Bianchi of 13 February, 2009

{hereinafter “Bianchi Report”) 54, 303 and 305 (Exhibit C-3).
'l Vivendi Decision on Annulment (n 89) { 102 (Exhibit C-454).
' Azurix Award, supra (n 97) 67 (Exhibit C- 261).

101

318.

319.

320.

321.

APPLICABLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

Argentina deregulated in 1994 natural gas wellhead prices and marketing by
producers as from 1 January 1994 by Decree 2731/93. The disagreement between the
parties concerns above all the significance of the Hydrocarbons Law (no. 17,319) of

1967.

A. The Parties’ Positions

I. The Claimants' position

The Claimants assert that “Article 6 of Hydrocarbons Law provides the Government
with the power to regulate only the prices of liquid hydrocarbons, not natural gas.”
They contend that Article 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law has not governed gas exports
since the Argentine Government modified the regime governing gas exports through
the Gas Law and its implementing regulations, the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty,

the Deregulation Decrees, and other government measures.

Even if quod non the Hydrocarbons Law did govern the regulation of gas prices, the
Deregulation Decrees enjoy legislative status, and Articles 14 and 15 of Decree
1055/89 would prevail over the Hydrocarbons Law on the specific issues of gas prices
and gas marketing. The legislative status of the Deregulation Decrees under Argentine
law is widely accepted and has been upheld by Supreme Court decisions, however,
Argentina fails to identify any ministerial resolutions that have purportedly repealed

those decrees:

Articles 14 and 15 of Decree 1055/89 provide:

“Article 14. — FREE DISPOSITION OF HYDROCARBONS.
Hydrocarbons obtained as a result of the concessions governed by the
Argentine Mining Code may be freely disposed of once 180 days have
elapsed from the effective date hereof.

102

322.

323.

Article 15. — The free disposition of hydrocarbons referred to in
Sections 5(d), 13 and 14 hereof shall be governed by these rules:

a) Hydrocarbons may be sold without restrictions in the domestic and
foreign market pursuant to the legal framework in force.

b) Companies shall have access to treatment, movement, storage and
dispatch systems or means at rates consistent with international values.

c) The payment of royalties for freely disposable hydrocarbons must be
made by the companies in accordance with the regulations fixed by the
SECRETARIAT OF ENERGY.”
Decree 2446/92 '°° which approved the Aguaragiie Contract, provides in Article 4
that the parties shall own and be free to dispose of the hydrocarbons extracted from
the Aguaragiie area (Northwestern Basin), pro rata their respective shares in the
Agreement as approved in Article 1, in accordance with provisions set forth in Article
6 of Law No. 17,319, Articles 13 and 15 of Decree No. 1055, dated October 10, 1989,
Articles 5 and 6 of Decree No. 1589, dated December 27, 1989, and Article 5 of
Decree No. 305, dated February 12, 1992.

The Sierra Chata Decree 1969/93'™ Article 3, provides that the Permit holder shall
own and be entitled to freely dispose of the hydrocarbons produced in the Area of the
Exploration Permit, in accordance with Article 6 of Law No. 17,319, Article 15 of
Decree No. 1055, dated October 10, 1989, Article 4 of Decree No. 1212, dated
November 8, 1989, Articles 5 and 6 of Decree No. 1589, dated December 27, 1989,
and Article 5 of Decree No. 2411, dated November 12, 1991, whose terms in force as
of the signing date of the Memorandum of Understanding approved in Article 1

hereof shall be incorporated to the Exploration Permit during its effective term.

103

Decree 2446/92 (Exhibit C-97).
' Decree 1969/93 (Exhibit C-94).

103

324.

325.

326.

327.

328.

Thus, Argentina assumed the commitment to give the Claimants a right to freely
dispose of their natural gas production in the domestic and external markets not only
through general legislation but through specific promises made in the Sierra Chata

Concession and the Aguaragiie Contract.

The existence of this right was acknowledged by the current Secretary of Energy

105 and during his testimony at the hearing.'

Cameron in both internal memoranda
As stated by Decree 867/2002, the “essence of the right to freely dispose of
production” is the “right of producers to dispose of the product at freely agreed
prices.” The minimum price guaranteed by Article 6 of Decree 1589/89140 was also
specifically incorporated into the Claimants’ Hydrocarbon Concessions and

Contracts.

2. Argentina's position

Argentina contends that among the rules specifically governing the exploration,
exploitation and marketing of hydrocarbons in the Argentine Republic, the
Hydrocarbons Law is the highest applicable law. Nonetheless, there are certain laws
enacted by the Congress which rank pari passu in hierarchy with the Hydrocarbons

Law and govern specific aspects of hydrocarbons, such as hydrocarbon exports.

With regard to natural gas, the Hydrocarbons Law contains the general principles and
the legal system applicable to its exploration, exploitation and industrialization,

whereas the Gas Law provides for the transportation and marketing thereof.

Agreeing domestic prices to cover operation costs and enable the obtention of

reasonable revenues is a Policy of State perfectly consistent with the power of the

‘5 Exhibit C-1058 and Exhibit C- 1031.
'6 Hearing Transcript in English, Day 4, pp. 883:13-20.

104

Executive Branch to regulate domestic prices set forth by the Hydrocarbons Law

article 6.

329. Article 6 of the Hydrocarbons law provides:

“Permit holders and concessionaires shall be the owners of any
hydrocarbons extracted by them and, as a result, they may transport,
sell and industrialize them, as well as sell their by-products, in
accordance with the regulations enacted by the Executive Branch,
based on reasonable technical and economic considerations which shall
bear in mind the best interest of the domestic market and attempt to
promote the exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons.

 

During periods in which the national production of liquid hydrocarbons
is not enough to meet domestic needs, the use in the country of all
available hydrocarbons of national origin shall be mandatory, except in
cases where it is not convenient due to sufficient technical reasons. As
a result, the new refineries or extensions shall adapt to the rational use
of national oils.

If during such a period the Executive Branch sets the prices for selling
crude oil in the domestic market, such prices shall be equal to those set
for the relevant state-owned company, but not lower than the price
levels for imported oils of similar characteristics. Where the prices of
imported oils significantly increase due to special circumstances, they
shall not be taken into consideration when fixing the sales price in the
domestic market and, in that case, they may beset on the basis of the
actual exploitation costs of the state-owned company, such
amortizations may be technically appropriate, and a reasonable interest
rate on the updated and depreciated investments made by such state-
owned company. If the executive sets the prices for by-products, they
shall be consistent with the oil prices calculated on the basis of the
above criteria.

  

 

 

 

 

The Executive Branch shall allow the export of hydrocarbons or by-
products which are not required for properly satisfying domestic needs,
provided that such exports are carried out at reasonable commercial
prices. In such case, it may establish the criteria that shall govern
transactions in the domestic market, in order to allow all of the
country’s producers to participate in it in a reasonable and equitable
manner.

The natural gas produced may be used, first, to satisfy the needs
characteristic of the exploitation of the fields from which it is extracted
and of other fields in the area, whether or not they belong to the
concessionaire and in pursuance of the provisions of section 31. Any
state owned company providing public gas distribution services shall

 

 

105

330.

331.

be given preference in the acquisition, within acceptable terms, of the
amounts remaining after the abovementioned use at agreed-upon prices
which may ensure a fair return on the relevant investment, bearing in
mind the specific characteristics and conditions of the field.

With the approval of the enforcement authority, the concessionaire may
decide on the destination and terms of use of the gas not employed in
the manner indicated above.

The sale and distribution of gaseous hydrocarbons shall be subject to

the regulations enacted by the Argentine Executive Branch.”
Argentina contends that the Hydrocarbons Law passed in 1967 remains in full force
and effect also after the GOA modified the regime governing gas exports through the
Gas Law and its implementing regulations, the Chile-Argentine Treaty, the
Deregulation Decrees, and other government measures. It is the highest-ranking
statute regulating the hydrocarbons exploration and exploitation in Argentina. The
Chihuidos Permit expressly establishes the right to freely dispose of hydrocarbons in
accordance with Section 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law, the Deregulation Decrees and
the Conversion Decree. It should be noted that Section 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law
has a higher rank than the Deregulation Decrees and the Conversion Decree, and
grants broad powers to the Argentine Executive Branch to impose restrictions, quotas,
domestic prices, etc. The Gas Law only governs procedural aspects of exports and
imports of natural gas and, as mentioned by the Secretary of Energy Cameron, “the
ruling principles were still those established by Section 6 of Law 17,319, which

remained fully effective.”!””

Section 1 of the Gas Law sets forth expressly that “[it] shall govern the transportation

and distribution of natural gas [only]” whereas “[hydrocarbons] production,

‘7 Daniel Cameron Witness Statement dated 3 September 2010, [hereinafter “Cameron Winess
Statement”] { 15.

106

332.

333.

334.

335.

collection, and treatment shall [continue] be[ing] regulated by Argentine Law No.

17,319.”

Furthermore, when defining the persons actively engaged in the natural gas industry,
Section 9 of the Gas Law established expressly that it is only “natural gas
transporters, distributors, brokers, storage operators or consumers” who are fully
bound by the rights and obligations deriving from natural gas. Instead, hydrocarbons
producers (such as MEDA and MASA), who are also considered “persons” engaged
in the natural gas industry, carry out a general interest activity and are to abide by the

Hydrocarbons Law.

In other words, the fact that the scope of Law No. 24,076 is narrowed down to the
transportation and distribution of natural gas is unequivocal. Consequently, the
activities carried out by MEDA any MASA continue being governed by the

Hydrocarbons Law as stated by their respective hydrocarbon concessions.

Moreover, it is incorrect to maintain that paragraph 2 of Section 6 of the
Hydrocarbons Law does not apply to gaseous hydrocarbons, for said Section applied

to both liquid and gaseous hydrocarbons.

Proof of the foregoing is that paragraph 1 of Section 6 sets forth:

“Permit holders and concessionaires shall be the owners of any
hydrocarbons extracted by them and, as a result, they may transport,
sell and industrialize them, as well as sell their by-products, in
accordance with the regulations enacted by the Executive Branch,
based on reasonable technical and economic considerations which shall
bear in mind the best interest of the domestic market and attempt to
promote the exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons.”

107

336.

337.

338.

B. The Tribunal’s Analysis

Article 3 of Decree 1969/93'% and Article 4 of Decree 2446/92'” make the free
disposal of hydrocarbons subject to Article 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law No. 17,3191",
Pursuant to Article 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law the holders of permits,
concessionaires, and other holders of exploitation rights may transport, commercialize
and industrialize the hydrocarbons obtained and market its by-products, subject to
such regulatory provisions issued by the Executive Power on reasonable technical and
economic bases, for the benefit of the domestic market, and stimulating the
exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons. The reference to the Hydrocarbons Law
in the Claimants’ Hydrocarbon concessions and contracts is due to the fact, that the
Hydrocarbons Law governs specifically the rights and obligations related to
exploration and production. This does not make the Hydrocarbons Law applicable to

gas marketing and gas export.

On these grounds, the Tribunal finds that the reference to the Hydrocarbons Law in
the Claimants' concessions does not exclude the application of the Gas Law since the
mining titles, i.e. permits and concessions are in any case subject to Argentinean law

and the Gas Law is part of the laws of Argentina.

The question is thus to which extent the Gas Law takes precedence over the
Hydrocarbons Law. To reply to this question an analysis has to be made of the scope

of application of the Gas Law.

'S Decree 1969/93 (Exhibit C-94).

' Decree 2446/92 (Exhibit C-97).
"07 aw 17319 (Exhibit C-8).

108

339.

340.

341.

342.

343.

344.

345.

Article 1 (1) of the Gas Law provides:

“This law governs the transportation and distribution of natural gas

which constitute a national public service, the production, gathering

and treatment thereof being regulated by law 17,319.""!
Thus, according to this provision, the Gas Law governs the transportation and the
distribution of natural gas, while the production, gathering and treatment thereof are
regulated by Law 17,319 (the Hydrocarbons Law). However, Article 1 of the Gas law

does not say which of those two laws regulates marketing of natural gas.
Article 96 of the Gas Law provides:

“In the event of a conflict with this Law and other Laws, this Law shall

prevail”
Thus in the event of any conflict between the Gas Law and other laws, the Gas Law
prevails. Consequently, the Gas Law prevails in case of conflict with the

Hydrocarbons Law.

A number of provisions of the Gas Law and its implementing regulations suggest that
to the extent to which such provisions apply the Gas Law regulates also the marketing

of natural gas.
Thus Article 13 of the Gas Law provides that:

“Without prejudice to the rights of distributors arising from their
entitlements, any consumer shall be entitled to purchase natural gas
directly from producers or marketers, freely arranging with them the
terms and conditions of the transaction.”

Article 38 (c) of the Gas Law provides for ENARGAS power to interfere with gas

prices only to ensure competitive conditions.

"7 aw 24,076 (Exhibit C-31).

109

346.

347.

348.

Article 83 of the Gas Law provides as follows:

“A period of one year as from the effective date of this law is hereby
set, which may be extended by a decree of the Executive Power for one
extra year, during which the diversification of the supply of gas shall be
defined as the goal of the energy policy. The National Executive Power
may reduce the above period if the goal is achieved before such time.

During such period, the Minister of Economy and Public Works and
Services shall fix, for the domestic market, the maximum prices of gas
at the point of entrance to the transportation system to be collected by
the producers.

At the expiration of such period, the prices of gas at the point of
entrance to the transportation system shall be deregulated and
transactions for the demand and supply of gas shall be free within the
industry's guidelines and pursuant to the Regulatory Framework.”

Decree 2731/1993, implementing Article 83 of the Gas Law, provides:

“From January 1, 1994, be the price of natural gas deregulated. All gas

supply and demand shall be freely agreed upon form such date,

pursuant to this Decree and the supplementary rules issued by the

ENERGY SECRETARIAT.”
The expert Dr. Martelli said at the oral examination before the Tribunal that, “when
the Gas Law was finally approved Hydrocarbons Law was limited to the mining
aspects in Exploration and Production by means of Exploration permits and
exploitation concessions---- Hydrocarbons Law deals with mining aspects of
production of gas and petroleum, and the Gas Law deals... two aspects of gas,
marketing and gas exports,” !!? The same opinion was also expressed by former

113

Secretary of Energy Mr. Bastos."~ Argentina’s expert witnesses did not submit

anything that would rebut this evidence.

 

110

349.

350.

351.

352.

On these grounds the Tribunal concludes that the Gas Law, and not the Hydrocarbon

Law, also regulates the marketing and the export of natural gas

According to the Claimants, the Deregulation Decrees enjoy legislative status and
prevail over the Hydrocarbons Law on the specific issues of gas prices and gas
marketing, whereas according to Argentina the Hydrocarbons Law passed in 1967 is
the highest-ranking statute regulating the hydrocarbons exploration and exploitation
in Argentina, and that it therefore remains in full force and effect also after the GOA
modified the regime governing gas exports through the Gas Law and its implementing
regulations, the Chile-Argentine Treaty, the Deregulation Decrees, and other

government measures.

The Decree 2446/92, which approved the Aguaragiie Contract, and Decree 1969/93
concerning the Sierra Chata Permit, expressly establish the right to freely dispose of
hydrocarbons in accordance with Section 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law and the

Deregulation Decrees. Decree 2446/92 refers in addition to the Conversion Decree.

According to the Legal Opinion of Dr. Alberto Bianchi dated 13 February 2009.

wld

Regulations issued by the Executive Branch are called “decrees and decrees

issued to fill gaps in the general text of a law may be either “delegated” or executive
decrees.”''> Those two types of decrees have the same purpose to fill the gaps in the

general contents of law. Ne

According to the same legal opinion Argentine law
acknowledges that the Public Administration is vested with the power to complete the
general text of a law, which may be achieved through two types of decrees, although

no clear and specific distinction may be drawn between them.''” Thus, Argentine law

"4 Bianchi Report, supra (n 100) 75.

"5 Thid, | 76.
6 Thid, | 77.
"" Thid, | 82.

111

353.

354.

allows for regulations to complete and become an integral part of laws and, if valid,
the deregulated regulation becomes an integral part of the law, thus acquiring the
same hierarchy and binding force as law. In other words, it becomes an integral part

of the law as if it were law itself.

The Tribunal finds that the Executive Branch (the “Argentine President”) regulated
the Hydrocarbons Law and Law 23,696 (the “State Reform Law”),!!8 which
provided for the unbundling and eventual privatisation of public assets, through the
Deregulation Decrees. Article 1 of Decree No. 1055/89 expressly states so and
specifies the articles of the Laws above that are regulated; Decree No. 1212/89
mentions Law No. 23,696 and Decree No. 1055/89 in its recitals; and Decree No.
1589/89, in turn, refers to the Hydrocarbons Law and the two Decrees above. Decree
No. 2411/91 not only refers to Laws Nos. 17,319 and 23,696 in its recitals, but also
explains in detail the purpose of regulating and implementing the policies set out in

Law No. 23,696.

The Hydrocarbons Law provides for a wide range of delegations to the Executive
Branch. Article 2 provides that hydrocarbon activities shall be conducted “in
accordance with the provisions hereof and such regulations as may be issued by the
Executive Branch.” Article 3 provides that the Executive Branch shall determine the
national hydrocarbon policy. Articles 4 and 6 authorise the Executive Branch to grant
permits and concessions and to regulate the activity of permit holders and
concessionaires. Article 7 provides that the Executive Branch shall establish the rules
applicable to the import of hydrocarbons and by-products, ensuring the attainment of

the goal set forth herein. As stated by Dr. Bianchi the Hydrocarbons Law “is based on

"8 T aw 23,696 (Exhibit C-10).

112

355.

356.

357.

the power delegated to the Executive Branch to regulate the application of the

law.7!!9

The privatization of state-owned companies and their business implemented in
Argentina during the 1990s was structured on the basis of the State Reform Law. To
this end, extensive powers were delegated to the Executive Branch.'”” As to
hydrocarbons, the State Reform Law authorised the Executive Branch to convert the
state-owned hydrocarbon company Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales (“Y.P.F.”) and
to award its areas in concessions or joint ventures, or execute lease contracts for the

exploration and exploitation of certain areas.

The Tribunal finds that in exercising its power based on the power delegated to the
Executive Branch to regulate the application of the Hydrocarbons Law, the Executive
Power regulated the Hydrocarbons Law through the Decrees referred to above within
the general framework of the principles of privatisation and deregulation of
hydrocarbon activities under the State Reform Law. As stated by Dr. Bianchi, within
the context of this policy, and to support and ensure the feasibility of the project, the
Executive Branch issued the Deregulation Decrees, which, among other provisions,
established the right to freely dispose of hydrocarbons, the right to freely trade
hydrocarbons in the domestic and international markets, the prohibition of
withholding taxes on present or future exports or discriminatory taxes, and the right to

export hydrocarbons freely. 21

Moreover, the Tribunal concludes that the Decrees conform to the legislative policy
established in the Hydrocarbons Law and the State Reform Law. As delegated law,

the Decrees referred to above are an integral part of the Hydrocarbons Law and the

"° Bianchi Report, supra (n 100) {| 106.
20 See in particular Arts. 8 to 20 of the State Reform Law.
"2! Bianchi Report, supra (n 100) § 110.

113

358.

359.

State Reform Law and have the same legal status as those laws. They thus prevail
over the Hydrocarbons Law of 1967 on the specific issues of gas prices and gas
marketing. As can be seen from Dr. Bianchi’s report, the Supreme Court has held that

such regulatory provisions have the same force and effects as laws. |?

Finally, as shown in the Bianchi Report, the Deregulation Decrees constitute
delegated legislation contemplated in Temporary Provision Eight of the Argentine
Constitution. Those Decrees were subsequently ratified by Laws No. 25,148, 25,645,
25,918, and 26,135. Laws No. 25,148, 25,645, 25,918, and 26,135 also ratified the

legislative status of the Deregulation Decrees. 7°

THE MEASURES CHALLENGED BY CLAIMANTS

Before the Tribunal considers the meaning of each of the standards allegedly
breached by the Argentina, and because this discussion is closely related to the
conflicting views of the parties on the facts of the dispute and their implications, the
Tribunal will now consider at length the facts and the measures challenged by the
Claimants and then each of the standards of treatment of the BIT supposedly breached
by the Respondent. The Tribunal will follow the order in which the facts have been
presented in the Claimants Memorial on the Merits taking into account the witness
statements, the documentation submitted, expert opinions and the written and oral

arguments made by the parties.

"22 Thid, Uf 120-121.
"3 Bianchi Report, supra (n 100) {ff 122-141.

114

360.

361.

362.

A.

Pesification and other price interference

J. Introduction

a. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants contend that Argentina interfered heavily with the Claimants’

contracts and prices in violation of the Legal Framework and their vested rights,

mainly by:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Pesifying domestic gas supply contracts (i.e., the mandatory conversion to
Pesos of the dollar denominated gas sales prices at an artificial rate of US$1
to AR$1);

Preventing gas distribution companies and power generators from passing
through to their gas distribution tariffs and energy variable production costs
any increase in the wellhead price of natural gas purchased from producers;
Freezing the price of natural gas for all categories of users until 2004, and in
the case of residential users and small commercial users, until December
2008; and

Preventing gas producers from freely agreeing on the price of natural gas
with their customers, as guaranteed by the Gas Law and the Claimants’

Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts, and imposing low regulated prices.

b. Argentina’s position

Argentina asserts that the Claimants, allegation that the pesification of contracts
provided for by the Emergency Law and Decree No. 214/02 violated their right to
freely agree on hydrocarbon prices in accordance with the statutory framework and

hydrocarbon concessions and contracts is flawed.

The crisis of late 2001 and 2002 was the worst economic, social and institutional

crisis that ever hit the country and affected all its inhabitants and sectors.

115

363.

364.

365.

366.

Consequently, as pointed out by Mr. Cameron, Secretary of Energy, it “also affected
the energy activity in general, as well as the hydrocarbon activity in particular.”!74 To

endeavour to isolate from the crisis, as the Claimants attempt to do, is absurd.

Argentina argues that neither MEDA nor MASA have any legal standing to claim as
far as gas distribution companies and power generators were prevented from passing
through to their gas distribution tariffs and energy variable production costs in the
well-head price of natural gas purchased from the producer. Bearing in mind the
Argentine crisis of 2001-2002, the measures taken by ENARGAS and the Secretary
of Energy in this respect were legitimate, reasonable and in accordance with the

regulatory frameworks of natural gas and electricity

Moreover, Argentina contends that there have been substantial increases in gas
wellhead prices, and as stated by expert Greco “market prices for most part of the
domestic demand are currently well above the level prior to 2002 and exceed the
maximum projected values for the long-term contracts entered into in the late

1990s.”!5

Further, Argentina argues that all the natural gas sales contracts entered into for
export purposes were excluded from the pesification. Therefore, a substantial portion
of the natural gas volume produced by the Claimants was not affected by the crisis at
all. On the contrary, the decline in the production costs allowed the Claimants to

benefit from the crisis.

Argentina contends that the Hydrocarbons Law expressly provides for the possibility

that the State may regulate natural gas pricing. '”° Likewise, the Deregulations,

'°4 Cameron Witness Statement, supra (n 107) 145
"5 Report by Esteban Greco, dated 1 December, 2009 [hereinafter Greco Report] 119.
"26 Hydrocarbons law, Sections 3 and 6 (Exhibit AR-1).

116

367.

368.

369.

370.

invoked by the Claimants, do not provide for any right to set of the price of natural
gas at will. On the contrary, the only reference made to natural gas prices sets forth
exactly the opposite; gas prices are to be fixed by the Argentine State. Indeed,
Presidential Decree No. 1212/89 established that “natural gas prices for users and
producers shall be fixed on a monthly basis by the Ministry of Public Works and
Services, through the Secretariat of Energy, until the market conditions include

multiple suppliers.” v7

Moreover, Argentina argues that the Aguaragiie and Sierra Chata concessions
specifically refer to the Hydrocarbon Law and to the Deregulation Decrees, which

provide for the regulation of natural gas by the State. 28

In sum, Argentina concludes that there is no rule that sets forth a right to set natural
gas wellhead prices at will and there is no commitment in this respect in the

hydrocarbon exploitation concessions either.

2. Pesification

a. The Claimants’ position

As mentioned above, the Claimants assert that the pesification of domestic gas supply
contracts interfered heavily with the Claimants’ contracts and prices in violation of

the Legal Framework and their vested rights.

Under Law 25,561 and Decree 214/02, the GOA unilaterally changed the provisions
of private contracts between the Claimants and their domestic customers. These

measures unilaterally converted Dollar-denominated obligations and receivables owed

27 Presidential Decree No. 1212/89 section 10 (Exhibit AR-62).
°8 Presidential Decree No. 2446/92, section 4 (Exhibit AR-72).

117

371.

372.

373.

374.

to the Claimants under gas supply contracts into Peso-denominated obligations at an

artificial exchange rate of US$ 1: AR$ 1.

This was done at the same time that the GOA abrogated the Convertibility Law and
devalued the Argentine Peso through Law 25,561. By the end of May 2002, the
exchange rate had reached US$1:AR$3.60, and currently is approximately
US$1:AR$3.50. Thus, the GOA unilaterally changed private contracts so that the
Claimants received only about 30% of the express contract price; this conduct
flagrantly violated the Claimants’ right to freely agree on the prices of hydrocarbons

and their byproducts.

b. Argentina’s position

According to Argentina, the Claimants’ allegation that the pesification of contracts
provided for by the Emergency Law and Decree No. 214/02 violated their right to
freely agree on hydrocarbon prices in accordance with the statutory framework and

hydrocarbon concessions and contracts is flawed.

On the one hand, the Emergency Law sets forth the abandonment of the fixed
exchange rate system which had been established by the Convertibility Law, yet
devaluation had already taken place. Indeed, the devaluation was not a measure
adopted by the Argentine government but the Government took certain measures to
face the devaluation which occurred in the market — which then turned into an
exchange rate overshooting. On the other hand, the whole Argentine economy was
pesified and the parties were forced to restructure their mutual obligations, sharing the

effects of the exchange rate modification in an equitable manner.

However, it is clear that not only the pesification did not violate any bilateral
investment treaty, but did not contradict any statutory framework or hydrocarbon

concessions or contracts either. On the contrary, several Argentine courts have

118

375.

376.

377.

acknowledged the constitutionality of the pesification of contracts between private

parties and the provision compelling parties to freely adapt agreed upon rules. 129

Furthermore, the reality demonstrates that contracts between private parties, which
were governed by Argentine laws and affected by the pesification, were voluntarily
adapted by the parties or, in the event of disagreement, by Argentine judges, posing
no obstacle to the development of business in the country. Like any other contract
between private parties, the contracts expressed in US Dollars to which the
Claimants’ challenges refer were affected by the Emergency Law. This was true not
only for such contracts as were executed by the Claimants as debtors but to those

executed as creditors as well.

However, natural gas purchase and sale agreements for export purposes were not
affected by the pesification. Therefore, a substantial portion of the natural gas volume

produced by the Claimants was not affected by the Emergency Law.

The pesification of the whole Argentine economy affected the contracts invoked by
the Claimants, as well as any other contract subject to Argentine jurisdiction. This
general measure in principle established a 180-day term for the parties to negotiate the
restructuring of their reciprocal liabilities, trying to share in a fair way the effects of
the modification in the exchange ratio resulting from the pesification. S°Then,
relevant to this specific case, Decree 214/2002 established the adaptation of those
contracts due to local inflation for the benefit of the creditor, the possibility of the
parties' renegotiation of the terms of the contracts if the pesification had given rise to
any unfair circumstance, and the right of the parties to resort to court to request an

equitable adjustment if renegotiation between the parties were unsuccessful

'° Report by Augusto César Belluscio; November, 2009 4110. See also Report by Ismael Mata of 1

December 2009 [hereianfter “Mata Report] | 228-230.
'0 Emergency Law, Art. 11.2 (Exhibit RA-3).

119

378.

379.

380.

381.

c. The Tribunal’s Analysis

Pesification was introduced by Law 25.651 and Decree 214/02 by which the
Convertibility Laws was amended and the US Dollar-denominated obligations and
receivables under domestic gas supply contracts were as of 6 January 2002
unilaterally converted into Peso denominated obligations at an artificial exchange rate
of US $1 = AR $1. Pesification did not affect export contracts, which continued to be

denominated in US Dollars. '*!

The Claimants do not claim damages for the Government’s pesification of the
economy as a general measure. What Argentina must defend are its measures that
interfered with natural gas prices. The Claimants assert that they had specific
commitments from the Government that they would benefit from deregulated prices and
that they could freely agree to the terms of their natural gas supply agreements at the
prices and currency of their choice. The Claimants contend, that therefore they were in a
substantially different situation than the rest of “the whole Argentine economy” and
therefore Argentina's observation that the effects of pesification reached the “whole

economy” is irrelevant to this case.

Argentina contends that there is no specific commitment to MEDA and MASA
regarding the “pesification.” The purported commitment of deregulated prices is a
sectoral matter and has nothing to do with a general, an “across the board” measure,
such as pesification. Both are independent from each other. Pesification only deals
with the currency denomination of all domestic contractual obligations. All contracts
denominated in US dollars or otherwise related to a foreign currency governed by

Argentine law were affected by pesification.

Article 3 of Decree 1969/93 concerning the Sierra Chata Permit provides:

'5! See Law 25,561 (Exhibit C-41) and Decree 214/02 (Exhibit C-42).

120

382.

383.

384.

385.

“The Permit holder shall own and be entitled to freely dispose of the
hydrocarbons produced in the Area of the Exploration permit, in
accordance with Law 17,319, Article 15 of Decree No.1055 dated
October 10, 1989, Article 4 of Decree no.1212, dated November
8,1989, Articles 5 and 6 of Decree No. 1589, dated December 27,
1989, and Article 5 of Decree No. 2411, dated November 12,1991,
whose terms are in force as of the signing date of the Memorandum of
Understanding approved in Article 1 hereof shall be incorporated to the
Exploration Permit during its effective term.”

Article 5 of Decree 1969/93 provides

“Every restriction to the free disposition referred to in Article 3 of this
Decree shall entitle the Permit holder to receive during the period such
a restriction is applied, an amount not lower than set in Article 6 of
Decree No. 1589, dated. December 27, 1989.”

Article 4 of Decree 2446/92, which approved the Aguaragiie Contract provides:

“Y.P.F. SOCIEDAD ANONIMA,TECPEETROL SOCIEDAD
AONIMA, AMPOLEX ARGENTINA S.A. AND PETROBAS
INTERNACIONAL S.A. -BRASPETRO- shall own and be free to
dispose of the Hydrocarbons extracted from the Aguaragiie area
(Northwestern Basin), pro rata their respective shares in the Agreement
as approved in Article 1, in accordance with provisions set forth in
Article 6 of Law 17,319, Articles 13 and 15 of Decree No. 1055, dated
October 10, 1989, Articles 5 and 6 of Decree No. 1589, dated
December 27, 1989 and Article 5 of Decree No. 305, dated February
12, 1992”.

 

  

Article 6 of Decree 2446/92 provides:

“Any restriction to the free availability of hydrocarbons referred to in
Article 4 above, shall entitle the parties to the Agreement to receive,
over the term of the restriction, an amount, which may not be lower
than that specified in Article 6 of Decree 1589, dated December 27,
1989, unless a higher percentage is otherwise provided for by any other
rule.”

The 1989 Deregulation Decrees established that hydrocarbon producers would enjoy
the right to freely market their production, both in the domestic market and abroad
(Decree 1055/89, Art. 15, Decree 1212/89 Art.9. Decree 1589/89). Moreover, those

Deregulation Decrees guaranteed that in the event the rights to freely market gas were

121

386.

387.

388.

restricted, producers would be entitled to a minimum price linked to international
hydrocarbon prices (Decree 1589/89, Art. 6). Thus those rights have by Decree
1969/93 and Decree 2446/92 been incorporated in the Sierra Chata Concession and in

the Aguaragiie Agreement.

As mentioned above the Claimants’ claims are not about pesification per se as a
general measure, but rather on the compounded impact of interfering with freely
negotiated contracts and prices and subsequently taking measures that impeded any
price negotiations. Since the pesification interfered with freely agreed contract prices,
the Claimants claim to have received only about 30 per cent of the agreed contract
price as a result of pesification. Therefore, the Claimants claim damages for the

effect of pesification on their private contracts for January-February 2002.

The Claimants' right to freely market gas, both in the domestic market and abroad as
well as the Claimants right to minimum price in the event of restriction have, as
mentioned above, been incorporated in both the Sierra Chata Concession and the
Aguaragiie Contract and are consequently also contractual rights. Therefore, the
Tribunal finds that pesification was in breach of the Claimants’ contractual rights as
far as it interfered with the Claimants' freely negotiated contracts for January-

February 2002.

3. Interference in Prices paid by Distributors and Power
Generators

a. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants contend that the GOA effectively prevented power generators and gas
distributors — the Claimants’ primary domestic customers — from passing through
any price increase to their own customers. Consequently, the Claimants and other

producers were unable to renegotiate price increases with their main customers, with

122

389.

390.

391.

the result that the price of gas at the wellhead remained frozen for years, because the

GOA:

e prevented the gas distribution companies from passing through any
price increase of gas at the wellhead (even in Peso terms) to their

customers, in violation of the terms of the gas distribution licenses; and

e prevented power generators from including any price of gas in excess of
the Price in Pesos allowed by ENARGAS in their declaration of variable
costs for purposes of CAMMESA's determination of the energy spot

price.

These measures violated the GOA’s guarantees under the Legal Framework and the
contracts and licenses entered into by the GOA. They also effectively eliminated any
chance of renegotiating the Claimants’ gas supply contracts, and therefore, constituted

an unlawful interference with their freely-agreed terms.

Pursuant to Article 8 of Decree 214/02, the GOA instructed courts with jurisdiction
over controversies relating to these matters to maintain and preserve existing contracts
in Peso terms. In practice, this measure precluded parties from terminating contracts
prior to their expiration due to the GOA’s alteration of the contract price or contract

price-fixing mechanism.

The renegotiation of public service contracts between the GOA and gas and power
distribution companies, a process provided for in Law 25,561 has been a massive
failure. To renegotiate these contracts, the GOA demands that public utility
companies waive their rights—as well as those of their foreign shareholders—to
initiate or continue international arbitration proceedings against the GOA based on the

GOA measures.

123

392.

393.

394.

395.

396.

Although the GOA initially declared that it would conclude these negotiations within
120 days it passed various laws, decrees, and resolutions that have delayed the tariff

renegotiations for more than seven years.

Argentina's attempts to justify the measures that ENARGAS (the natural gas
regulator) took to restrict the pass-through of price increases to natural gas
distribution tariffs constitutes another admission that the Government took measures

to manipulate gas prices.

Argentina alleges that Article 38(c) of the Gas Law and Decree 1411/94 provided
ENARGAS with the power to interfere in natural gas prices by regulating gas
distribution tariffs. However, the regulations Argentina invokes apply in a completely
different context and do not authorize ENARGAS to absolutely prohibit gas

distributors from passing through price increases to natural gas distribution tariffs.

Decree 1411/94 and the other regulations that Argentina cites were designed to
operate in the context of the semi-annual price-adjustment contemplated in the Gas
Law and the gas distribution licenses, as well as certain other limited situations. In
this context, Decree 1411/94 granted ENARGAS the authority to monitor gas prices
in order to ensure that the prices that gas distribution companies reported were
negotiated in a competitive environment and on an arm’s length basis. In other words,
the scope of ENARGAS’s authority to regulate gas distribution tariffs was limited to

protecting consumers from market collusion and price-fixing.

ENARGAS’s power to ensure market competition did not encompass the authority to
prohibit the pass-through of any increases of gas wellhead prices in order to suppress
gas prices at artificially low levels, as ENARGAS did in this case. To the contrary,
Article 38(c) of the Gas Law expressly confined ENARGAS’s ability to regulate the

pass-through of gas prices to cases in which the price agreed between the producer

124

397.

398.

399.

and the distribution company exceeds the prices agreed by other distribution

companies in similar situations.

Consistent with the Gas Law’s limitation on ENARGAS’s ability to regulate gas
distribution tariffs, Decree 1411/94 requires that ENARGAS verify whether the prices
agreed by distribution companies result from a transparent, open, and competitive
process, as well as from the distribution company’s reasonable efforts to obtain the
best available prices and conditions. If ENARGAS is unable to establish that a price
increase reported by a particular distributor fails to meet these requirements, then it

may not limit the pass-through of that price increase.

The limitations that Argentine regulations placed on ENARGAS’s ability to regulate
gas distribution tariffs reflect ENARGAS’s mission to align the prices reported by a
given distributor with market prices and to prevent market collusion and price-fixing.

As LECG explains with reference to this process:

“This is a benchmarking exercise that the ENARGAS ought to
implement in each season to verify that distributors are getting the best
prices possible in comparison to prices observed in the marketplace. If
ENARGAS considered that a distributor was contracting natural gas at
prices that were out of line with market prices contracted out by other
buyers, then ENARGAS could limit the pass-through to end-user tariffs
to benchmark contract prices, as opposed to the distributor's own
contract prices.”

 

 

In this manner, ENARGAS’s mission to ensure that market prices prevail was
completely consistent with the Claimants’ right to freely agree on prices with their

customers.

‘2 Damage Valuation of MEDA’s and MASA’s Investments in Argentina Supplemental Report by
Manuel A. Abdala and Pabolo T. Spiller of 26 April 2010 [hereinafter “LECG Updated Report”| | 21
(Exhibit C-510).

125

400.

401.

402.

It follows from this discussion that ENARGAS’s authority to regulate gas distribution
tariffs has no relationship whatsoever with the measures that the Argentine
Government imposed to regulate gas prices. Argentina’s price interference measures

went far beyond that scope of authority by:

(i) absolutely prohibiting all natural gas distribution companies from passing
through to their tariffs any price increase (even in pesos) agreed with
producers, a prohibition that effectively destroyed producers’ ability to
freely agree (or renegotiate) their agreements as guaranteed by the Legal

Framework and their Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts;

(ii) freezing and interfering with gas wellhead prices paid by other categories
of consumers (e.g., power plants and industrial clients) that were outside
the scope of Decree 1411/94 and the other regulations cited by Argentina;

and
(iii) establishing price paths for different categories of consumers since 2004.

Accordingly, Argentina’s reliance on ENARGAS’s ability to regulate gas distribution
tariffs constitutes little more than a disguised attempt to focus on issues that are

irrelevant to the resolution of this investment dispute and confuse the Tribunal.

Like ENARGAS, the Secretary of Energy exceeded the scope of its authority by
preventing power generators from factoring gas price increases into their calculation
of electricity spot prices. Under the Electricity Law 24,065, power generators were to
receive a uniform spot price based on the short-term marginal cost of the system.
When declaring their production costs in order for the grid administrator to fix
electricity spot prices, generators were required to report their variable costs of
production in dollars, a calculation that primarily included the cost of natural gas,
which is the most common fuel used in Argentina by thermal generators. By not

allowing generators to include the actual market cost of gas in their declaration of

126

403.

404.

405.

costs, the Secretary of Energy created spot prices that no longer reflected the
economic cost of the system, an act that exceeded its powers under the regime

provided by the Electricity Law 24,065.

b. Argentina’s position

As mentioned above, Argentina contends that neither MEDA nor MASA have any
legal standing to claim the pesification of public utility contracts and licences ordered
by the Emergency law (a required measure in the context of emergency prevailing in
2002). It is essential that they have no standing to claim over regulatory measures
regarding contracts to which they are not parties. If anyone could claim for the
indirect effects of a measure, the number of claims would be endless. Therefore, the
resulting discussion is ex abundante cautela. However, a fundamental aspect at issue
is: the Claimants have no legal standing to claim for regulation measures regarding

contracts to which they are not parties.

They are different companies, regulated by different rules and whose situations at the
outset of the worst-ever economic, social and institutional crisis in Argentina were
different. Furthermore, the Emergency Law established simultaneously the
renegotiation of the contracts for public utilities, inter alia, contracts for the
transportation and distribution of electric power and the licences of transportation and

distribution of natural gas to adapt the public utilities rates to the new context.

The agreements were progressive and individual to each company, and did not
involve companies in the gas and electricity sectors only, as alleged by the Claimants;
it also involved all public services (trains, road accesses, ports, water and sewage
services roads and highways, telecommunications, airports etc.) Despite the manifest
complexity of the questions, final and temporary agreements were reached with all

companies.

127

406.

407.

408.

409.

410.

Evidently, MEDA and MASA are foreign to the process of renegotiating public
services contracts and licences between the Argentine Executive Branch (as Grantor)
and the different companies and to the resulting agreements merely because, as

explained above, they are also foreign to the renegotiated contracts.

ENARGAS has always been empowered to intervene in the contracts for natural gas
supply between producers (such as MEDA and MASA) and distributors to guarantee
users the lowest cost of natural gas as possible. The interpretation of the Claimants

and their expert, Mr. Bastos,!**

is not consistent with the rules, regulations and
mechanisms used by ENARGAS (as regulatory authority) which show that the

Government has always had an active role in the natural gas market in Argentina.

Before the crisis, a few measures had been taken that were the expression of the
powers of the Executive to intervene in the natural gas market when it considered it

necessary.

Even before the privatization of Gas del Estado, one of the Deregulation Decrees
established the following on the price of natural gas:

“NATURAL GAS PRICES. After the transition period, natural gas

prices for users and producers shall be fixed on a monthly basis by the

MINISTRY OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SERVICES, through the

SECRETARIAT OF ENERGY, until the market conditions include

multiple suppliers.” '**
In other words, it was established that the Argentine Government was going to
regulate the fixation of natural gas prices until market conditions include multiple

suppliers.

‘3 Supplementary Expert Report by Carlos M. Bastos of 23 April 2010 [hereinafter “Bastos

Supplementary Report” | {ff 22, 30-35.
'4 Presidential Decree No. 1212/89 (emphasis added) (Exhibit AR-62).

128

411.

412.

413.

414,

However, experts Sandleris and Schardgrodsky point out: “The lack of competition
conditions that are indispensable for a decentralised pricing mechanism to work
properly led the gas regulator (ENARGAS) to set a limit to the prices of gas paid by

distribution companies systematically. !*°

In this regard, Guichén explains that “Since the commencement of the privatization
process, there was serious concern about the high concentration of the natural gas
supply in the Argentine Republic”."* For example, Presidential Decree No. 1020/95
established a promotion regime for gas distributors to manage natural gas purchase

efficiently. 7

In a non-competitive market and, accordingly, lacking in multiple
suppliers of natural gas, ENARGAS (as regulatory authority) has always intervened
in the price of natural gas because it was essential for consumers’ protection in the

face of potential abuse by the leading natural gas producers.

Therefore, if under normal conditions, there have always been mechanisms to
intervene in natural gas prices, it is both logical and reasonable that — amidst a serious
economic, social and institutional crisis such as the one prevailing in Argentina as
from 2002 — there are reasonable grounds for the Government to intervene further in
the natural gas market. In 2010, and after the events in the last two years that followed

the international economic crisis

 

, No person can argue against the need for the State to

have a more active intervention in the economy in a systemic crisis scenario.

Moreover, the measures relating to the price of natural gas taken after the crisis in
2002 are not so different from the measures taken by other countries going through

similar situations. As highlighted by the Secretary of Energy, Mr. Cameron:

13s

Supplementary Report by Guido Sandleris and Emesto Schargrodsky of 31 August 2010
{hereinafter “UTDT Second Report") { 76.

86 Supplementary Statement by witness Diego F. Guichén of 24 August 2010 [hereinafter “Guichon
Suplementary Witness Statement”) | 37.

‘57 Presidential Decree No. 1020795 (Exhibit AR-282).

129

Als.

416.

417.

418.

“The policy Argentina has followed is not far from that adopted by

other countries under similar circumstances. Thus, during the dramatic

increases that generated the 1973 petrol crisis, the United States of

America established that the prices in natural gas would be restructured

gradually, in a segmented way, and throughout a long period of

years.”
Indeed, in the 1970’s — in the face of serious problems in the natural gas supply — the
United States passed the Natural Gas Policy Act (“NGPA”), which determined the
prices of natural gas and, in turn, fixed caps for the sales of the different categories.
That is to say, something very similar to the agreements and understandings with gas

producers under the First and Second Natural Gas Agreement.

About the experience in the United States, in his expert report, Mr. Greco highlighted
that “in order to respond to the gas crisis, the United States introduced measures
entailing strong state intervention, with a long-term gradual deregulation schedule,

and that this led to a dramatic increase in gas supply.”!?

It is not correct, as the Claimants allege, that “the Secretary of Energy exceeded the
scope of its authority by preventing power generators from factoring gas price

increases into their calculation of electricity spot prices.”

The system of governance of the Argentine electricity market vests the Secretary of
Energy with broad powers to introduce amendments to the dispatch rules. In this
regard, in the electricity regulatory framework there are remarkable differences
between the regulated sectors (transportation and distribution) and the competitive

segment of power generation.

'8 Cameron Witness Statement, supra (n 107) | 64.
'8° Second Report by Esteban Greco of 30 August 2010 [hereinafter “Greco Second Report”| { 101.

130

419.

420.

421.

422.

423.

The initial functioning rules of the sector were laid down by SE Resolution No. 61/92.
There, the Procedures (hereinafter, “the Procedures”) for Operation, Dispatch and

Price Calculation were established.

Such set of provisions included the initial rules for the functioning of the wholesale
electricity market. By late 2001, when the crisis struck the country, the Procedures
had been modified by several resolutions issued by the Secretary of Energy on 131
occasions. That is, the variability of the dispatch rules has been a constant in the
functioning of the Argentine electricity market rather than an isolated, crisis-related

fact.

Although the variability of the dispatch rules has been a constant in the functioning of
the Argentine electricity market, some rules did not vary at all. In particular, the
substantial aspects of the procedures aimed at determining payments for energy —
spot prices— were not significantly changed after the crisis. They kept being based on
cost statements from generators —this being subject to a maximum benchmark

value— and a price based on the most expensive generator dispatched.

Cost statements from generators were always subject to a maximum limit fixed by the
Secretary of Energy. Specific mechanisms were established after the crisis to adapt
such functioning to the prevailing uncertainty. Such changes included the power of
the Secretariat of Energy to audit the costs declared, increase the frequency by which
the statement had to be filed (fortnightly instead of semi-annually), break down the
components of the variable costs into fuels, maintenance and miscellaneous, and

declare the impact of exchange rate on variable costs, etc.

The limits to the cost statements have been constant in the functioning of the
electricity market in Argentina. In other words, there was no change or amendment to
the rules of the game, only adjustments to the benchmark values provided for in the

regulations in force.

131

424.

425.

426.

427.

428.

429.

Furthermore, fixing a maximum cap for the spot price relies on the economic
justification and is a part of the ordinary functioning of the generation competitive
markets. The particular features of such functioning are to be achieved through
centralized rules, which do not arise from the free interaction of the actors in the

market.

In summary, bearing in mind the Argentine crisis of 2001-2002, the measures taken
by ENARGAS and the Secretary of Energy were legitimate, reasonable and in

accordance with the regulatory frameworks of natural gas and electricity.

It is not true that the process of renegotiation of public service contracts between the
Argentine Government and the gas and power distribution companies provided for by

the Emergency Law was a failure.

The GOA reached agreements with all the national public transportation and power
distribution services concessionaires. With respect to the natural gas industry, final
agreements were reached with most of the licensees. Although no final agreements
were reached with the gas distributor Metrogas and with the transportation companies
TGN and TGS, provisional memoranda of understanding were subscribed, by means
of which attempts were made to adjust gas licenses to the new economic, financial,

political and social context.

Argentina did not demand public utility companies and their foreign shareholders to
waive their rights to initiate or continue international arbitration proceedings to be
able to take part in the renegotiation process. The continuity of arbitration proceedings
by minority shareholders of a company after such company agreed a renegotiation and
accepted the enforceability of actions herein objected proves the falsehood of that

assertion.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is true that, when minority shareholders proceed

with their arbitration proceedings while the major shareholder is reaching an

132

430.

431.

432.

agreement with the government, serious inconveniences and delays in the
renegotiation process take place. The Argentine Republic cannot, without any
precaution, enter into agreements with public utility concessionaires and licensees that
anticipate tariff increases, and then have also to pay compensation to the minority
shareholder based on (and assessed) future revenues from the company with whom it
renegotiated the contract. Otherwise, we would be faced with the legal contradiction
of having to pay compensation with respect to a measure the same company whose
rights were regulated had accepted as legitimate. It can be also concluded that
Argentina's inhabitants pay twice for the same reason: as taxpayers when the country

has to pay the award as users of the service when they have to pay the tariff increase.

Moreover, there has even been cases in which major shareholders had the intention to
reach an agreement with the Argentine Republic, but had to face serious

inconveniences with their minority shareholders.

Without prejudice to the foregoing, the Argentine Republic just requires the
suspension of actions on the part of the concessionaire and the licensee, and not of
their shareholders, to take part in the renegotiation process, and in case a final
agreement is reached, if required, the dismissal of any other claim beyond the
executed agreement and/or an indemnity commitment by the company favoured by
the agreement in connection with their shareholders' claims related to the renegotiated

contract.

c. The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Claimants assert that the measures adopted by Argentina prevented gas
distributors and power generators from passing through to their customers any
increase to the cost of natural gas and this took away the Claimants’ vested rights to
negotiate prices freely. According to the Claimants the gas distributors and power

generators represented 78% of the Claimants’ domestic market. This has not been

133

disputed by Argentina. Moreover, the Claimants contend that their customers simply
refused to agree on any price increase that they were not able to pass through to their

own customers. This is also confirmed by the witness statement of Mrs. Valle.'*°

433. Thus, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants’ are bringing their own claim and are

asserting their own right and not relying on third party rights.
434. According to the legal opinion of Dr. Martelli:

“The Argentine Government, acting through the Executive and/or the
Energy Secretariat, is not legally authorized to interfere with the
wellhead prices of natural gas or to prevent the pass through of the
wellhead prices to the distribution tariffs, except in specific cases in
which the contractually agreed-upon price entails a violation of market
transparency and competitiveness. Nor is the Argentine Government
legally authorized to prevent the spot price of electricity paid to power
generators from being fixed pursuant to the actual cost of gas, which
was the main variable production cost for those generators. Moreover,
this guarantee for power generators also implied a guarantee to gas
producers that they would be paid the actual cost of gas sold to
generators.” !*!

435. Also former Secretary of Energy Mr. Bastos’s says in his Supplementary Report:

“Tn this context, the reference by the Argentine Republic and its experts
to Article 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law to justify the regulation of natural
gas prices is untenable. The purpose of the Government was to provide
clear rules for the operation of the sector. Relying upon a previous rule
to neutralize the price deregulation that was implemented does not
seem to be consistent with that purpose. In any event, the Gas Law —
in certain cases, jointly with the Deregulation Decrees — prevails over
the Hydrocarbons Law in all matters related to natural gas marketing
and exports because the Gas Law provides a subsequent rule that
regulates those matters specifically.” '*”

140

° Hearing Transcript in English, Day 4 p. 784-785 and 791-792.

Legal Report of Dr. Hugo Martelli of 23 April 2010 [hereinafter “Martellli Legal Opinion” p. 14
and p. 20 (Exhibit C-508). See also Hearing Transcript in English, Day 5 p. 910.
'® Bastos Supplementary Report, supra (n 133) {| 24. Hearing Transcript in English, Day 5 p. 1016.

134

436.

437.

The Tribunal finds on the basis of these statements established that ENARGAS
powers under Decree 1411/94 are constrained to monitoring the competiveness of
natural gas transactions between gas producers and distributors and that ENARGAS
is only authorized to intervene when prices passed through to tariffs exceed certain
market levels. This is also supported by Article 1 of Decree 1411/94 which refers to
these powers of ENARGAS under Article 38 (c) of the Gas Law, confirming the
application of the Gas Law regarding natural gas prices and by a Memorandum of the
Team of Natural Gas Advisors to the Undersecretary of Fuels of 16 January 2004
indicating that

“Moreover, gas production is governed by Law No. 17,319 and its

regulations both with regard to access to gas and the conditions of its

exploitation and sale. Until December 2001, prices charged for the sale

of natural gas in the points of entry to the network transportation

system were not subject to regulation; only ENARGAS, as part of its

functions, reviewed the degree of competitiveness in which the

providers of regulated gas network distribution and sale had entered

into contracts, in order to deduct, when appropriate, the cost of gas

purchased from the final tariffs paid by the users of these services.

Those functions were performed by ENARGAS pursuant to the

provisions laid down in Chapter 9 of the network gas Distribution

Licenses, the model of which was approved under Decree No.

2255/1992."
Although Argentina's expert Mr. Greco says that the fact gas prices were not
competitive was just one of the reasons because of which ENARGAS could limit the
transfer of prices which were negotiated by distributors with gas producers within the
context of the biannual review of tariffs, he was when examined at the hearing not
able to identify a single example of ENARGAS' intervention other than within its
limits to protect competition. 4 He also admitted that he thought he had not in his

report even analyzed the price freeze measures since 2002. 5 Thus Mr. Greco's

"83 SSC Gas Advisors Memo p. 408 (Exhibit C-1030).
'4 Hearing Transcript in English, Day 7 pp. 1622-1624.
'5 Hearing Transcript in English, Day 7 p. 1624.

 

135

438.

439.

report and testimony does not rebut the evidence above Thus the Tribunal finds that
ENARGAS exceeded the scope of its authority by preventing power distributors from

factoring gas price increases into their calculation of electricity spot prices.

Under Article 36 of the Electricity Law 24,065 power generators were to receive a
uniform spot price based on short-term marginal cost of the system. '“° Under the
CAMMESA Proceedings, Annex 13, Items | and 2 (2000)!47 generators were, when
declaring their production costs in order for the grid administrator to fix electricity
prices, required to report their variable costs of production in dollars, a calculation
that primarily included the cost of natural gas, which is the most common fuel used in
Argentina by thermal generators. On these grounds and taking also into account Mr.

Bastos’s witness statement, 148

the Tribunal finds that the Secretary of Energy
exceeded the scope of its authority by preventing power generators from factoring gas

price increases into their calculation of electricity spot prices.

4. Other Measures Preventing the Claimants from Marketing Their
Production at Freely-Agreed Prices

a. The Claimants’ position

A de facto price freeze on natural gas resulted not only from the mandatory currency
conversion of the prices the Claimants’ local customers paid to the Claimants, and the
price freeze imposed on gas distributors and power generators, but also from the
obstacles the GOA imposed to prevent the Claimants and their customers from
terminating their contracts, and the protracted renegotiation process between the

Claimants’ main customers and the GOA.

‘4 Martelli Legal Opinion, supra (n 141), {| 64-65, C-508. See also Bastos Report, supra (n 57) WJ 95-

100.
‘$7 Exhibit C-183.
'48 Bastos Report, supra (n 57) { 42.

136

440.

441.

442.

Argentina’s argument that, through a renegotiation process between producers and
direct industrial users, the Claimants were able to freely agree on prices with respect
to most of their contracts existing as of 2002, is misleading. As a preliminary matter,
providing the Claimants with the mere possibility of renegotiations does not detract
from the fact that the Argentine Government unlawfully interfered in their contracts
in the first place. That point aside, Argentina’s allegation that the renegotiation
process was feasible requires the following two assumptions, neither one of which is
true: (i) that most of the Claimants’ gas sales in 2002 were based on contracts entered
into with categories of users other than power generators or gas distribution

companies; and (ii) that renegotiations with industrial users would have been possible.

First, by February 2002, the Claimants had as many natural gas sales agreements with
power generators and gas distributors (three) as they did with other categories of
domestic users. In addition, the aggregate volume under the Claimants’ gas supply
agreements with power generators and gas distributors was more than twice the
aggregate volume under the gas supply agreements with other categories of domestic
users, and two of the gas supply agreements with consumers other than power
generators and gas distributors expired in April and December 2002. Thus power
generators and gas distribution companies had become the Claimants’ main customers
by 2002. By limiting the ability of power generators and gas distributors to passing
through any increase in the cost of gas at the wellhead, Argentina rendered null any

prospects of renegotiating with those customers.

Second, Argentina is incorrect that renegotiation with industrial users, the small
remainder of the Claimants’ customers by 2002, would have been possible. Under
Law 25,561 and Decree 214/02, parties to pesified natural gas sales contracts had no
obligation to reach an agreement within the 180-day renegotiation period that those
measures created. Rather, their only obligation was to “renegotiate,” which in practice

consisted of a requirement that producers wait for the expiration of the 180-day

137

443.

444,

445.

446.

447.

renegotiation period before starting mediation proceedings that constituted a

prerequisite for filing legal actions against their customers.

Real renegotiations with gas purchasers were not feasible because, along the
Argentine Government’s so-called “instruction to renegotiate,” the Government
reduced in Dollar terms the Dollar-denominated sales price in producers’ contracts
with industrial users by one-third of the original price and barred producers from
terminating those contracts. As a result, industrial users had no incentive to

renegotiate those contracts, and sellers were left with no leverage.

In addition, when asked to renegotiate, industrial customers threatened to switch their
purchases from the Claimants to natural gas distribution companies from which they
could buy natural gas at pesified and depressed regulated prices, which critically
reduced the Claimants’ bargaining power to negotiate price increases with those

customers.

With domestic gas prices frozen at artificially-depressed prices, on 2 April 2004,
many gas producers (but not the Claimants), signed an agreement with the GOA (the

“First Gas Agreement”).

Through the First Gas Agreement, the GOA imposed on producers the duty to deliver
certain volumes of gas to the different categories of consumers. In doing so, the GOA
demanded that producers accept an individual obligation to supply the domestic

market, even though no such obligation existed in the Legal Framework.

The First Gas Agreement established a “price path” for the upward adjustment of gas
prices at the wellhead for large industrial consumers and electricity generators from 1
May 2004 to 31 July 2005. While the price path provided for the gradual
normalization of gas prices for large industrial consumers, CNG stations, and power

generators, the First Gas Agreement maintained frozen prices for residential

138

448.

449.

450.

451.

consumers, which represent approximately 22% of the demand. Further, even these

“new” prices were regulated prices in violation of the Legal Framework.

Since 2004, Argentina has undermined producers’ ability to bargain for higher gas
prices through the renegotiation of existing contracts or entering into new contracts by
implementing a price-path through the First Gas Agreement and numerous other
measures. Thus, producers were unable to renegotiate new prices for those segments
of demand that continued to be regulated. With respect to industrial users and power
generators, the First Gas Agreement also limited producers’ bargaining power by
operating as a limitative price signal. Even today, Argentina cannot credibly contend
that the Claimants have been able to renegotiate their existing agreements or freely
agree to the terms of their gas supply agreements. The ability to renegotiate has

proved illusory because of the Government’s various measures undermining it.

In addition, the GOA rendered the price adjustment ineffective to a significant extent
by delaying the pass-through of the price increases to the distribution tariffs.
Similarly, Resolution SE 925/05 restricted the ability of power generators to consider
deregulated gas prices at the wellhead as variable costs of production when
determining electricity spot prices. The GOA also failed to honour the other price
adjustments established in the First Gas Agreement. For almost seven years after the
issuance of Law 25,561 and Decree 214/02, the GOA froze the gas prices and tariffs

for residential consumers and small commercial users.

Although the Claimants did not sign the First Gas Agreement, they still suffered the
consequences of the depressed prices that this arrangement caused. The Claimants did
not sign the agreement because it constituted a veiled attempt by the GOA to gas

producers to accept the disintegration of the Legal Framework.

The GOA’s measures described above violated the following legal and contractual

rights and guarantees:

139

452.

453.

454,

455.

e the rights to freely market hydrocarbons at deregulated prices at the wellhead

and

e the guarantee that gas distributors would pay market prices for their gas
purchases, since they had the right to pass their costs through to their tariffs

(calculated in Dollars and adjustable in accordance with the US PPI).

The resulting regime is in sharp contrast to the one that MEDA and MASA relied on
when investing in Argentina, a regime under which the GOA guaranteed that “the sale
of gas between producers, distributors, and large users [would] be freely agreed

between them.”

Beginning in 2004, the GOA invoked the gas shortages that its own policies had
caused as a justification for adopting additional measures targeted at the Claimants’

business.

On 17 May 2004, the Secretary of Energy began ordering producers — including those
that did not sign the First Gas Agreement — to “re-route” and deliver all the volumes
arbitrarily allocated in the First Gas Agreement to certain domestic consumers,
regardless of whether the producers had contractual relationships with those
consumers. The stated reason for this forced re-routing of gas volumes was the delay
in the renegotiations the GOA imposed on gas distributors, producers, and industrial

customers under the terms of the First Gas Agreement.

Because the Claimants did not sign the First Gas Agreement, the GOA had no legal
basis to impose its provisions on the Claimants. By applying this measure to the
Claimants, the GOA violated the Claimants’ right to freely sell their production and
interfered with the Claimants’ contractual obligations to deliver gas to domestic

customers that were not benefited by the “rerouting.”

140

456.

457.

458.

459.

In reaction to a gas shortage of its own making, the GOA forced the Claimants to
terminate deliveries under their contracts with foreign and domestic customers in
favour of deliveries to certain low-paying domestic consumers unilaterally selected by
the Government. On 26 May 2004, the Secretary of Energy issued Resolution SE
503/04, which authorized the Undersecretariat of Fuels to “re-route” the Claimants’

gas production on a daily basis to gas distribution companies.

These re-routing measures resulted in a loss of revenues for the Claimants, since the
prices they would have received under their gas sales agreements were much higher
than the prices they actually received for their volumes re-routed to third parties such

as distribution companies.

Soon after issuing Resolution SE 503/04, the Secretary of Energy issued Resolution
SE 606/04, which enabled users that had purchased gas from gas distributors (or that
had contracted exclusively for transportation and distribution services) to resell all or
part of the gas to other users or distributors at freely-negotiated prices. Resolution SE
606/04 resulted in flagrant discrimination against the Claimants because the GOA
forced them to accept a substantially lower price for their domestic gas sales, while
industrial users were allowed to obtain substantial profits by reselling the gas at

higher prices.

The Claimants argue that Argentina in an attempt to defend its natural gas pricing
policies asserts that there have been substantial increases in gas wellhead prices, but
fails to mention that it froze natural gas prices completely for all segments of natural
gas demand until the execution of the First Gas Agreement in July 2004. In addition,
Argentina acknowledges that it kept gas prices absolutely frozen for residential users
and small commercial users until the execution of the Supplementary Gas Agreement
in September 2008. Most importantly, Argentina acknowledges that it continues to
systematically manipulate gas prices, a practice that violates its commitments to the

Claimants and the rules established under the Deregulation Decrees and the Gas Law.

141

460.

461.

462.

Further, Argentina’s argument, that its alleged price increases have resulted in gas
prices that are currently above the price levels existing prior to its pesification of the
Claimants’ contracts, is highly misleading because Argentina is comparing 2010 gas
prices for some segments of users to those just prior to 2002. In any case, Argentine
gas prices remain substantially lower than the prices of alternative fuels in Argentina
and the prices of natural gas imported from Bolivia, which have increased at a much
quicker (and more natural) pace. Had Argentina not interfered with gas prices in the
first place, the Claimants could have expected substantial increases in gas prices that
aligned more closely with price increases for those alternative fuel sources, even
though the prices for alternatives to Argentine gas would have remained higher.
Notably, domestic gas prices in Argentina are the lowest in the region, in spite of the
fact that, at the time of the Claimants’ investment, the Argentine Government had

strived for a uniform regional gas price through deregulation and regional integration.

In addition, Mr. Greco, one of Argentina’s experts presents the current price levels in
a misleading way, because he fails to consider both that Argentina has forcibly
reduced the Claimants’ exports to a minimum (i.e., they have only marginally
collected export prices since 2007) and that the Claimants’ gas sales are not limited to
industrial customers and power plants, especially given the Government’s re-routing
measures. In fact, the Claimants sell a substantial portion of their gas to distributors
for residential consumption, meaning that the Claimants receive the lowest regulated
price for that portion of their sales (approximately US$ 0.60/MMBTU). Thus, the
Claimants’ weighted average sale price between 2007 and 2009 has been lower than
US$ 1.10/MMBTU, which is significantly lower than the prices stated by Argentina’s

expert.

The above analysis demonstrates that Argentina’s arguments regarding gas price
increases are misleading. When put in their proper context, Argentina’s alleged price
increases can only be seen as “increases” if measured against the frozen gas prices

that Argentina artificially created in 2002; they have been insufficient to mitigate the

142

463.

464.

465.

Claimants’ losses. The analysis below further demonstrates that Argentina’s alleged

price increases were late, partial and insufficient, or non-existent.

The Respondent's expert Greco states that Decree 689/02 provided for the
dollarization of export prices “which entailed a growth in excess of 249% in export
prices measured in local currency at the exchange rate as of December 2002.” This is
completely wrong because it implies that Argentina converted prices in one currency
(Pesos) to US dollars. But Decree 689/02 did not dollarize export prices; rather it
clarified that export contracts were excluded from the effects of pesification. As a

consequence, the prices in natural gas export agreements did not increase.

Greco derives his conclusion that export prices “grew” from the fact that, after the
devaluation of the Argentine currency, gas export prices (which were dollar
denominated) represented a larger figure in pesos. The fact, however, is that export
prices did not increase (and had no impact on the domestic prices or domestic
consumers). Notably, export prices were affected due to Argentina’s measures,
because they were linked to domestic basin prices that the Government had frozen at
pesified levels in 2002. Thus, Greco’s argument aims to mislead by manipulating the

facts.

Through another sleight of hand, Greco alleges that, through the maintenance of gas
prices (measured in pesos) that corresponded to gas prices in the winter of 2001, the
Government increased the natural gas price component of distribution tariffs in 2002.
Greco bases this conclusion on the fact that gas prices are higher in winter periods.
Thus, because the country maintained gas prices during the first part of the winter of
2002 (May-June) that corresponded to the prices charged in the winter of 2001, Greco
concludes that the price of natural gas included in tariffs increased by 10% compared

to the gas prices (in pesos) included in tariffs between October 2001-April 2002.

143

466.

467.

468.

Greco’s analysis is flawed for two reasons. First, the regulations regarding the
seasonal semi-annual distribution tariff adjustment did not affect the prices that
distributors paid to gas producers; those prices had been pesified and remained frozen.
Second, contrary to Greco’s assertion, the maintenance of the 2001 winter prices for
the first part of the winter of 2002 confirms: (i) that gas prices did not increase (even
in pesos) since the level of gas prices passed through to the distributors during the
winter of 2001 was maintained for the winter of 2002 and (ii) that the Argentine
Government froze distribution tariffs and undermined producers’ ability to renegotiate

their supply agreements with gas distributors.

The price increases included in the First Gas Agreement and the Supplementary Gas
Agreement were partial, insufficient and late, and sometimes non-existent. In many
cases, the Argentine Government either delayed the price increases to which it
committed, took action to limit the effect of those commitments, or failed to fulfil

those commitments altogether.

This occurred under the First Gas Agreement for several reasons. First, that
agreement did not provide any compensation for the price freeze that persisted until
the signing of the agreement in April 2004. Second, despite its promises in the First
Gas Agreement, the Government continued regulating prices for those categories of
consumers for which price increases were authorized. Third, the price increases
envisioned in that agreement maintained Argentine gas prices at levels significantly
below the regional gas prices and were clearly insufficient to avoid the looming
energy crisis. Fourth, the Government failed to comply with its commitment that, by
December 2006, residential consumers would pay the same level of prices applicable
to the other categories of consumers as of July 2005. Fifth, the Government delayed
the pass-through to distribution tariffs of the price increases established for industrial

consumers, power generators, and CNG stations.

144

469.

470.

471.

472.

The Claimants did not sign the First Gas Agreement for at least two reasons. First, the
Argentine Government required producers to waive their right to bring any claims
against distribution and power generators in connection with price interference
measures (a requirement that in itself constitutes an effective admission of liability for
producers’ rights to freely-agreed prices). At that time, the Claimants were in no
position to give that right up in exchange for some partial and insufficient relief from
a party that had shown no respect for its commitments or the gas market’s need for
clear and consistent regulation. Second, the Claimants did not want to take any action
that could be construed as consent to the measures that were in violation of its rights

and guarantees under the Legal Framework.

When the First Gas Agreement expired in December 2006, the GOA began pressing
gas producers like the Claimants to enter into a more drastic version of the agreement
(the “Second Gas Agreement”). Resolution SE 599/07 approved the terms and
conditions of the Second Gas Agreement. The Secretary issued that Resolution as an
instrument to “persuade” gas producers to sign the Second Gas Agreement since the
treatment granted to signing producers was more favourable than that granted to non-

signing producers.

With respect to the Supplementary Gas Agreement, Greco fails to consider several
drawbacks in that agreement that left much of the damage caused by Argentina’s

price interference measures without remedy.

First, despite this agreement, the Argentine Government continued regulating prices
for those categories of consumers for which price increases were authorized (i.e.,
residential and small commercial users and GNC users). Second, the price increases
contained in the agreement did not provide any compensation for the price freeze for
residential and small business customers that remained in effect until the agreement
was signed in late 2008; nearly seven years after the Government first froze gas

prices. Third, producers never collected any portion of the price increases authorized

145

473.

474.

475.

under this “agreement,” since the Government assigned all amounts collected due to
authorized price increases to a fiduciary fund that it created to subsidize the
consumption of liquid petroleum gas by low-income households. Thus, despite
signing the Supplementary Gas Agreement as a mitigation mechanism, the Claimants
never benefitted from the price increases to which the Government committed in that

agreement.

None of the Government’s so-called gas “agreements” arose from an arm’s length
transaction between natural gas producers and their customers. Rather, the
Government used its sovereign power to impose the terms of those agreements on
producers, a group that was legally entitled to much more than the agreements
provided. The Energy Secretariat’s role in the execution of those “agreements”
(acting as the sole counterparty) shows that the prices imposed on producers were
regulated prices that violated the Claimants’ right to freely-agreed prices, as well as
their legitimate expectation that the Government would not unilaterally interfere in

the price terms of their private contracts.

Argentina also references the creation of the Gas Plus Program, which provides that
the prices of natural gas produced in qualifying fields are not subject to the price
guidelines of the Second Gas Agreement, and as a result, are likely to increase. This
program allows producers to charge higher prices for gas produced under certain
conditions, including gas from unexploited areas, blocks with special geological
characteristics (e.g., tight gas), and blocks which have been out of production since

2004.

Argentina’s invocation of the Gas Plus Program to justify its conduct in this case is
misleading and irrelevant. The Argentine Government enacted the Gas Plus Program
in 2008, more than six years after pesifying natural gas contracts and freezing the
price of natural gas at the wellhead. Moreover, the Government did not extend the

program’s application to producers such as the Claimants who did not sign the

146

476.

477.

478.

coercive Second Gas Agreement until 2010. This means that as of January 2010 the
Claimants have the ability to start taking part in the Gas Plus program. In addition, the
prices received for sales not made under the program will continue to be regulated
prices in violation of the Legal Framework and the Claimants’ Hydrocarbon

Concessions and Contracts.

Although Argentina has taken the position in this arbitration that, the regulated prices
it established through its price interference measures are reasonable, it has publicly

recognised over the years that the natural gas prices its policies created are

 

insufficient to ensure the sustainability of the gas production sector. For example, as
explained by Guichén, one of Argentina’s witnesses, Secretary of Energy Cameron
recognised in 2003 that the frozen prices the Government created were insufficient to
sustain gas production:

“One of Cameron’s ideas, which was shared by the Under Secretary of

Fuels, Cristian Folgar, was that once the widespread uncertainty as to

the evolution of the exchange rate and domestic prices was eliminated

and a relatively stable macroeconomic context was reached, it was

necessary to start immediately to study the restructuring of energy

sector prices which would cause the sector to become sustainable.” '“”

Thus, Secretary Cameron recommended that the Government raise natural gas prices

to make the energy industry sustainable.

As a result of Secretary Cameron's recommendation the GOA requested the
preparation of a report on natural gas exploration and production costs. This report
clearly explains that, following the pesification of natural gas wellhead prices, the gas

sector was unable to carry out exploration activities

'° Witness Statement by Diego F. Guichén of 13 November 2009 [hereinafter “Guichén First Witness
Statement”) { 103.

147

479.

480.

481.

“Natural gas production showed a reasonable development. Since the

pesification of [natural gas supply] contracts it [the gas production

sector] is no longer able to: — Replace reserves (except those linked to

the exploration of crude oil). — Develop new reserves.”
This assessment, made in August 2003, comports with the conclusions of numerous
analysts that Argentina’s interference in gas prices stifled further investment in

exploration and production.

In 2004, through the recitals of Decree 181/04, the Argentine Government again
acknowledged the insufficiency of pesified and frozen prices to sustain the gas sector
and recognized the need to “provide reasonable economic signals to ensure the
normal supply of natural gas and promote investments in exploration and production.”
More recently, in January 2010, the current Secretary of Energy emphasized the need
to increase energy prices and stated that a “normal” country needs to pay “the real

value” of energy. ISI

These statements from Argentine Government officials clearly contradict Argentina’s
assertions in this case that the Government priced natural gas in a fair and sustainable
manner. In addition, the Government’s many acknowledgments that its measures kept
gas prices artificially low dispels any notion that it has honoured the right of gas
producers to freely agree on prices or that the Claimants were to blame for the
damages they suffered from price interference measures. To the contrary, these
statements show that the Government was very much aware that its price interference
measures would have the effect of depriving producers like the Claimants of their
right to freely-agreed prices, and that by doing so, those measures would disincentive

investment and lead to decreased exploration and production levels throughout the

‘80 1. Grieco, J Gonzdlez Naya, f. Kohldorfer, Estimacién del Costo del Gas en cabecera del

Gasoducto Troncal, August 2003 (Exhibit AR-169). .
'5! See Daniel Cameron, “Energfa: Gobierno insiste en que debe subir las tarifas”, Ambito Financiero
(4 January 2012) (Exhibit C-571).

148

482.

483.

484.

485.

country.” Despite this awareness, the Government maintained its course and now
attempts to blame on the Claimants for what it once openly acknowledged as a

foreseeable consequence of its price interference measures.

b. Argentina’s position

Argentina contends that there have been substantial increases in gas wellhead prices,
and as stated by expert Greco “market prices for most part of the domestic demand
are currently well above the level prior to 2002 and exceed the maximum projected

values for the long-term contracts entered into in the late 1990s.”!°

All the natural gas sales contracts entered into for export purposes were excluded
from the pesification. One of the first measures taken by Argentina during the crisis
was passing Presidential Decree No. 689/02, whereby contracts for exporting natural
gas were excluded from pesification. As a significant part of their hydrocarbons
production was earmarked for exporting, MEDA and MASA had an excellent
economic performance in 2002. Therefore, Argentina argues, a substantial portion of
the natural gas volume produced by the Claimants was not affected by the crisis at all.
On the contrary, the decline in the production costs allowed the Claimants to benefit

from the crisis.

MEDA and MASA attempt to ignore the crisis that hit Argentina in late 2001 and in
2002, its consequences and effects and the gradual and progressive increases of the

hydrocarbons producers since 2004.

It is important to distinguish between the gas wellhead price received by producers

(such as MEDA and MASA) and the final rates paid by the users of natural gas and

'S2 Greco Report, supra (n 125) { 119.

149

486.

487.

488.

489.

490.

electricity. The wellhead price received by all producers “recorded significantly

higher increases than the transportation and distribution tariffs.”'°

It is not true that natural gas producers were subjected to the artificial depression and
freeze of prices. On the contrary, natural gas prices at the wellhead are freely agreed

between producers and purchasers.

Actually, upon the enactment of the Emergency Law, prices of natural gas at the
wellhead continued to be freely agreed between the parties and, contrary to the
Claimants’ assertion, they rose significantly. As explained by expert Greco “the
wellhead price charged by the Claimants recorded significantly higher increases than

the transportation and distribution tariffs.” Ist

One of the measures adopted by Argentina during the crisis was the conduct of an
assessment of the cost of natural gas exploration and production. Afterwards, and on
the basis of this cost assessment, the First Gas Agreement was implemented, which

enabled producers to obtain very reasonable rates of return.

In connection with natural gas sales contracts between natural gas producers and
natural gas distribution companies and power generators, the Executive Branch
subscribed the Agreement for the Normalization of Natural Gas Prices, which was

signed by most of natural gas producers i.e. the First Gas Agreement.'*°

In that sense, experts Sandleris and Schargrodsky state the following: “[T]he “First
Gas Agreement” was signed by most gas producers (Repsol YPF, Total Austral,

Pluspetrol, Wintershall, Pan American Energy and Petrobras Energia), and guaranteed

'S3 Greco Report, supra (n 125) J 100.
'S Thid.

'S5 First Gas Agreement (Exhibit AR-190).

150

491.

492.

493.

494,

around 78.5 million m3/day (68.1 million m3/day for distributors) to satisfy domestic

demand. The agreement remained in effect from April 2004 until December 2006.”!%°

Apart from guaranteeing certain volumes of natural gas, the First Gas Agreement
established significant increases in natural gas wellhead prices for around 80% of
demand. As pointed out by the Secretary of Energy, Mr. Cameron, “It provided for a
gradual increase in prices, until reaching the value estimated as a reasonable
compensation for gas producers in the drafting of Presidential Decrees No. 180
and181/2004.”'"7_ However, MEDA and MASA could not benefit from such

Agreement because they refused to sign it.

This Agreement implied a process of recomposition of prices of gas at the wellhead.
Thus, there were price increases of about 120 per cent for industrial users. 188 Tn spite

of that, MEDA and MASA did not sign the agreement.

The Claimants argue that by means of the First Gas Agreement, the Argentine
Republic “demanded that producers accept an individual obligation to supply the
domestic market, even though no such obligation existed in the Legal Framework.”
That is not true for two reasons. First, because it was an agreement freely subscribed
by most gas producers, who committed to supply certain volumes of gas to the
domestic market, but in a merely jointly way, and second, because the main goal of

the regulation set forth in the legal framework was the supply of the domestic market.

On the one hand, the Claimants admit that under the First Gas Agreement, prices of

natural gas at the wellhead increased gradually for around 80% of natural gas

'86 Analysis of the Valuation of the Damages to Claimants’ Investments by Guido Sandleris and

Ernesto Scadgrodsky of 3 Decemeber 2009 [hereinafter “UTDT Report] { 100.
” Cameron Witness Statement, supra (n 107) 1 56.
‘88 UTDT Report, supra (n 156 ) | 103.

151

495.

496.

497.

498.

demand. On the other hand, they argue that these “new prices were regulated prices in

violation of the Legal Framework.”

However, agreeing domestic prices to cover operation costs and enable the obtention
of reasonable revenues is a Policy of State perfectly consistent with the power of the

Executive Branch to regulate domestic prices set forth by the Hydrocarbons Law.

In August 2007, a Second Gas Agreement was executed,! subscribed again by most
gas producers, including, but not limited to, YPF, Total Austral, Pluspetrol,
Wintershall, Pan American Energy and Petrobras Energia. As explained by expert
Greco, the Second Gas Agreement “extende[d] the supply commitments to the
domestic market until 2011 and establishe[d] price increase guidelines.”!In spite of

that, the Claimants did not sign the Second Gas Agreement either.

Regarding the prices of gas for residential consumers, in November 2008 a
Supplementary Agreement was executed with gas producers, whereby gradual
increases in prices of natural gas for higher-consumption residential users,
commercial users, CNG and thermal generators were established.'°' MASA adhered
to that agreement. MASA admits that it received a price increase at the wellhead for

residential users.

Furthermore, given the substantial decline in the amount of natural gas reserves, the
Secretary of Energy created also in 2008 a program called “Gas Plus”!, to foster
exploration and production of new gas fields, which will not be subject to the prices

guidelines under the Second Gas Agreement, estimating significant increases in the

159

‘60 Resolution SE 599/07 (Exhibit AR-232).
60

Greco Report, supra (n 125) J 118.
‘6! Resolution SE 1070/08 (Exhibit AR-240).
'© Resolution SE 24/08 (Exhibit AR-221).

152

499.

500.

501.

prices of natural gas of such fields. The “Gas Plus” program was implemented

through Resolution SE 24/08.'°

Through this program, a mechanism was created for encouraging investments
required for increasing gas production in Argentina. In this regard, companies
making new discoveries or having areas under exploitation with particular geological
characteristics (Tight Gas), or having areas that have not been producing since 2004
or areas that are producing and to which new fields are added, are not subject to the
price conditions reached by the 2007-2011 Agreement with Natural Gas Producers
and are thus able to sell gas at unregulated prices. This category includes, for
example, the companies Arpetrol Argentina S.A., Petréleos Sudamericanos S.A.,
Necon S.A. YPF S.A., Apache Energia Argentina S.R.L.; Tecpetrol S.A. — a partner of
the Claimants in the Aguaragiie area — ; Gran Tierra Energy Argentina S.A. and
Occidental Argentina Exploration and Production, Inc. Sucursal Argentina, among

others.

In short, there have been substantial increases in gas wellhead prices, and as stated by
expert Greco “market prices for most part of the domestic demand are currently well
above the level prior to 2002 and exceed the maximum projected values for the long-

term contracts entered into in the late 1990s.”'™

The Claimants disregard the results of the First Gas Agreement, which entailed a path
of restructuring of gas wellhead prices and gave rise to increases in the order of 20%

for industrial users.

6 Exhibit AR-221.
' Greco Report, supra (n 125) { 119.

153

502.

503.

504.

505.

In spite of being an extremely complex process, the Argentine Government reached
agreements with all the national public transportation and power distribution services

concessionaires.

With respect to the natural gas industry, final agreements were reached with most of
the licencees. In that connection, Gas Natural Ban, Gasnor, Litoral Gas, Distribuidora
Gas del Centro, Distribuidora de Gas Cuyana, Gas Nea, Camuzzi Gas Pampeana, and
Camuzzi Gas del Sur executed the memoranda of understanding with the GOA.
Although no final agreements were reached with the gas distributor Metrogas and
with the transportation companies TGN and TGS, provisional memoranda of
understanding were subscribed, by means of which attempts were made to adjust gas

licenses to the new economic, financial, political and social context.

Through Resolution No. 752/05'®°, the Secretariat of Energy established that large
users were required to acquire natural gas directly from hydrocarbon producers (and
not through distributors) and, therefore, prices were freely agreed upon and gradually
began to converge with export prices. That is to say, substantial increases for these

new direct users of producers began to occur.

As a result of the signature of the agreements and the programmes implemented in the
Secretariat of Energy, gas at the wellhead presents prices higher than pre-crisis levels
and in some cases even surpass the projections of long-term contracts signed in the
90's.'© Even with the State’s regulation of natural gas prices, experts Sandleris and
Schargrosky point out that the prices received by the Claimants do not differ

substantially from their projections and further explain that

‘6S Exhibit AR-205.
'6 Greco Report, supra (n 125) { 118.

154

506.

507.

508.

“According to the data provided by the Claimants, the mean price

charged between 2002 and 2009 was USD 1.08 per million BTU,

which is not very different from the price projected in their original

investment plan. Moreover, the sharp devaluation of the local currency

must have reduced their production costs in US dollars.”
In conclusion, in view of the circumstances experienced in Argentina due to the 2002
crisis, the measures adopted by Argentina aimed at restoring the natural gas price in a

gradual and progressive manner are lawful and reasonable.

c. The Tribunal’s analysis

It is uncontested that prices for all users remained frozen until 2004 and for residential
and small commercial users until December 2008. Industrial users had no incentive to
renegotiate because the GOA had reduced to 1/3 the original price in USD and barred
producers from terminating these contracts. Moreover, it is uncontested that the prices
received by the Claimants following the First and Second Gas Agreements, which the
Claimants did not sign, were regulated, a process to which the Claimants had not
agreed. At the hearing the Secretary of Energy Mr. Daniel Cameron said that those
agreements included 92 % of the production and signing producers represented 24%
of the producers operating in Argentina. ‘68 The Claimants’ witness Ms. Norma Valle
said at the hearing that the Claimants were the first to suffer the re-routing of their
export volumes to the domestic market, and their natural gas was redirected to users

who paid the lowest prices in the market. !®

4.170

The rerouting measures issued by the Secretary of Energy of 21 May 200: in

reaction to a gas shortage resulted in a loss of revenue for Claimants equal to the

‘8 UTDT Second Report, supra (n 135) | 146.

Hearing Transcript in English, Day 4 p. 888.
'® Hearing Transcript in English, Day 4, p. 736.
' Resolution SE 503/04 (Exhibit C-57).

168

155

509.

510.

S11.

difference between the price they would have received under their gas sale
agreements and the much lower prices received for volumes routed to third parties.
Since Claimants refused to sign the First and Second Gas Agreements their gas
production was re-directed to buyers, which paid the lowest price on the market. This
notwithstanding the fact that Claimants were entitled to refuse to sign both the First
and the Second Gas Agreement. The difference in price was never recovered by

Claimants and is claimed in this arbitration.

Based on the above the Tribunal finds that prices for all users remained frozen until
2004, and for residential and small commercial users until December 2008 and that
gas producers were prevented from freely agreeing on the price of natural gas with
their customers, as guaranteed by the Gas Law and the Claimants’ Hydrocarbon
Concession and Contracts and that low regulated prices were imposed by Argentina.
Moreover the Tribunal concludes that it has not been shown that there was any price

recovery for the Claimants.

B. Gas Export Prices
I. The Claimants' position

Argentina’s depression of gas wellhead prices also affected gas producers’ export
revenues, since the price formulas contained in the export contracts were in many
cases linked to reference domestic prices. The rationale of this linkage was to avoid
any discrimination between domestic and foreign customers in the context of the
regional energy integration that the Government promoted. This was the case of the
Claimants’ export contracts with Metrogas and Gener, under which the applicable
sales price would be determined in accordance with the domestic basin prices

calculated and published from time to time by the ENARGAS.

The price-adjustment formulas in those export contracts link the determination of the

minimum and maximum prices to the basin price in the Neuquina Basin published

156

512.

513.

514.

periodically by ENARGAS. Prior to the Argentine Government’s price interference
measures, the gas industry considered Argentine basin prices to constitute an adequate
reference price for gas, since it reflected the average price of long-term gas sales
agreements in the basin in question. Since no international gas price index existed and
the Southern Cone was increasingly regionalizing, it was a well-known industry
practice to use basin prices as a reasonable reflection of regional prices and thus a
reference price for gas export contracts. As the Argentine Government recognised
when it exempted export contracts from pesification:

“TI]t is necessary to consider the features of the natural gas regional

market, in which, under other economic circumstances, it was usual

practice to include in the export contracts the prices of natural gas in

the different basins of the Argentine Republic as a reference to

establish the price of the exported natural gas and/or the range within
which such prices may vary.”!7!

 

Thus, the GOA’s policy of freezing and depressing gas prices directly impacted the
prices that some of the Claimants’ foreign customers paid, with the result of reducing

the Claimants’ export revenues significantly.

By publishing basin prices on a regular basis, the Government implicitly encouraged
this practice. The Government also explicitly promoted the practice of linking gas
prices in international contracts to Argentine basin prices as part of its movement

toward regional integration of the gas industry.

Like many gas producers in the 1990s, the Claimants incorporated basin prices into
context of regional integration, but also in reliance on their legitimate expectations
about the stability of the Legal Framework and the specific guarantees of freely-
agreed prices contained in that framework and the Sierra Chata Concession. As long

as the Argentine Government kept its commitment to allow producers to freely agree

'! Decree 689/02 (Exhibit AR-142).

157

515.

516.

on gas prices, the Claimants and the industry in general understood that the basin
price published by ENARGAS would adequately reflect regional gas prices and thus
provide a reasonable benchmark for its gas export contracts. Indeed, that so many
industry companies used basin prices as references in their international contracts

underscores the depth of Argentina’s commitment to freely-agreed prices for gas.

When Argentina dismantled the Legal Framework and destroyed the market pricing
system that formed the basis of both basin prices and the specific guarantees granted
to the Claimants, it severely undermined the price foundation of the Claimants’ export
contracts with Metrogas and Gener. The Government discontinued publishing basin
prices altogether in 2002. As a result, no reference price existed to factor into the
price-adjustment formulas of the Claimants’ export contracts with Metrogas and

Gener.

To respond to this situation, the Claimants sought to rely on a clause in an addendum
to their contracts that provided that the parties would “use their reasonable
commercial efforts” to resolve any distortions in the Neuquina basin price.'” The
Claimants entered into renegotiations with their customers under a cloud of
uncertainty. Through Article 9 of Resolution SE 299/98, the Government had
provided that exporters needed a new export permit in order to change the gas prices

: : 173
in their export contracts.

Given the Government’s increasing propensity toward
abrogating its commitments to the Claimants, they could not risk losing their export
permit and thus had to renegotiate transitory prices with their export customers, which
the Claimants were finally able to achieve in late 2003. But once the Government

initiated export curtailments in 2004, the Claimants’ customers no longer considered

'? Clause 2 of Addendum No 2 to the Agreements entered into by and between certain gas producers,
including the Claimants as sellers and Metrogas and Chilenger (now AES Gener) as purchasers
(Exhibit C-100).

5 Resolution SE 299/98 (Exhibit C-36).

158

517.

518.

519.

the Claimants reliable suppliers, thus severely undermining the Claimants’ ability to
negotiate transitory prices that were at or near the prices the Claimants would have

received but for Argentina’s measures.

Despite this unfortunate sequence of events, Argentina now alleges that the
Claimants’ losses from the Government’s interference in prices are due to the
Claimants’ imprudent business decisions. Here, Argentina misapprehends the concept
of business risk as opposed to sovereign risk. In setting Argentine basin prices as the
reference price for their export contracts, the Claimants took on the business risk of
natural fluctuations in those prices, as the gas market (like any market) fluctuates
periodically. However, the Claimants did not take on the risk that the Argentine
Government would unilaterally abrogate those commitments and then force the
Claimants to submit their export permits to government review simply to have the
ability to exercise a price equilibrium clause in their private contracts. That risk was a
regulatory and sovereign risk, and it was accounted for in the Argentine
Government’s commitments under the Sierra Chata Concession, the Legal

Framework, and the BIT.

2. Argentina's position

The pesification of the whole Argentine economy had not affected the exports of
hydrocarbons, and, in particular, natural gas purchase and transportation agreements.

Among them, the contracts with the Claimants.
As pointed out by the Secretary of Energy, Mr. Cameron:

“One of the measures to be highlighted from year 2002, promoted by
my predecessors, was the issue of Presidential Decree No. 689/2002,
which established that natural gas contracts and transport i
agreements related to them were not to be affected by the pesification.

 

159

520.

521.

522.

523.

Due to this measure, exporters of natural gas enjoyed an exceptional

year in 2002, very different from the one experienced by natural gas

producers wholly devoted to the domestic market and the rest of the

population.”!”*
The Claimants fall within the natural gas producers who most benefited from
Presidential Decree No. 1689/02 as most of its natural gas purchase agreements were

intended for export to Chile.

As to the Claimants contention that the “alleged” decline in gas wellhead prices also
impacted on export revenues, since the price formulas contained in the export
contracts were linked to reference domestic prices, Argentina argues that the
Claimants themselves were the ones who agreed privately on prices in the contracts
they freely subscribed. An attempt to hold Argentina liable for business decisions

taken by the Claimants themselves is inadmissible.

The Claimants allege that “the price-adjustment formulas in [their] export contracts
with Metrogas and Gener link the determination of the minimum and maximum
prices to the basin price in the Neuquina Basin published periodically by ENARGAS”
and that the alleged “destruction” of domestic market prices “severely undermined the

price foundation of Claimants’ export contracts.”

Furthermore, Norma Valle, witness for the Claimants, points out that “relying on the
basin price to calculate the price in export contracts was a common practice before the
measures” and that “the Government supported that practice as a means to align

domestic and export prices.” 'SThese claims are incorrect for various reasons.

‘4 Cameron Witness Statement, supra (n 107) 53.
5 Supplementary Witness Statement by Norma Valle [hereinafter “Valle Second Witness Statement”
{20 (Exhibit C-512).

160

524.

525.

526.

527.

528.

To begin with, Presidential Decree No. 689/02 detached natural gas export agreement
prices from the domestic prices of each basin so that the pesification provided for in
the Emergency Law and Presidential Decree No. 214/02 did not affect the exports of
local producers like MEDA and MASA.

Indeed, Section 4 provided that “the price under natural gas purchase agreements for
export, agreed upon in US dollars, shall be invoiced and must be paid in such
currency and shall be adjusted in the manner provided for in the respective

agreements.” 176

In other words, through Presidential Decree No. 689/02, MEDA and MASA were
able to renegotiate natural gas prices under their export agreements with AES Gener
and Metrogas in more advantageous conditions, which would not have occurred if the

Decree had not been issued.

In all long-term hydrocarbon agreements, it is usually set forth that price indicators
may vary or disappear over time. As explained by Guichdén, in those cases
“mechanisms for reopening negotiations in case such source ceases to exist in the

future or needs to be replaced with another one are provided.”!””

Indeed, the Claimants provided in their export agreements with Metrogas and AES
Gener for the possibility of adjusting natural gas prices. In this regard, Guichon

pointed out

“As shown by the authorization file entitled Sierra Chata,
EXPMEYOSP No. — 750-003106/94, renamed as CUPAD
S01:0331204/2004, price renegotiation mechanisms were established
on page 108 (including the involvement of an expert), in the letter of 15
June 1994 (pages 182 to 194 —in particular, Section 3 of page 183 and
page 184) and also in the letter from Petrolera Santa Fe which includes

'%6 Presidential Decree No. 689/02 (Exhibit AR-142).
‘77 Guichén Second Witness Statement, supra (n 149) 47.

161

529.

530.

531.

532.

533.

the letter of intent for the sale of Chilgener S.A., Metrogas S.A. and the
Sierra Chata producers (Section 4 “price” on page 204). In fact, the
renegotiations of prices deriving from these records do nothing but
demonstrate the flexibility offered by the agreement.”'

Further, there were no “specific guarantees” with the Claimants that basin prices

would be used as price indicators in their export agreements.

Quite on the contrary, it was MEDA and MASA who voluntarily decided to assume
the risk of a drop in domestic prices by structuring their export agreements with prices
tied to domestic basin prices. That is, it was a risk that they could well not have

assumed

Although the Claimants recognise that they “took on the business risk” of fluctuations
in natural gas prices in the domestic market, they assert that they did not take on the

“regulatory and sovereign risk”.

However, as explained by Guichén, “the Argentine Government was under no
obligation to create a long-term basin price indicator. In addition, an export agreement
which would remain in force for about 15 years could not be exclusively based on an
indicator which was incidentally implemented in late 1995, to be updated for 15

years....”!

Finally, and concerning the preceding paragraph, the Claimant’s claim again presents
a serious problem of admissibility and legal standing. The Claimants complain that
the measures adopted by the State affected the evolution of a price that they had
decided to use as a benchmark in their agreements entered into with other private
parties. It is as if someone included in an agreement an adjustment mechanism that

follows the evolution of prices of certain real property and then sued the State because

"8 Thid, 1 54.
"° Guichén Second Witness Statement, supra (n 149) (51.

162

534.

535.

536.

it establishes certain zoning restrictions preventing those prices from evolving in the
manner expected by the parties under such private agreement. The owners of the real
property would have standing to sue on the basis of the effects of such zoning
restrictions, but someone who decides under an agreement to take such prices as a
benchmark clearly does not have such standing to sue, regardless of whether using
such benchmark constitutes usual “practice” or not in the market. Like in other claims
raised by the Claimants, the admission of this claim would lead to absurd results,
enabling the multiplication of claims by parties that would be indirectly affected by
governmental measures as a result of provisions that they freely decided to include in

their agreements with other private parties.

In conclusion, it is inadmissible to render Argentina liable for the business decision

made by MEDA and MASA.

3. The Tribunal’s Analysis

Argentina does not deny the Claimants' contention that Argentina's price interference
measures caused damage to the Claimants' export business, since the Claimants’
export contracts with Metrogas and Gener were based on Argentine basin prices. The
price-adjustment formulas in the Claimants’ export contracts with Metrogas and
Gener link the determination of the minimum and maximum prices to the basin prices
in the Neuquén Basin published periodically by ENARGAS. It is obvious that the
Claimants when they linked their prices to the basin price in the Neuquén Basin did so

in reliance on the stability of the Legal Framework and the Sierra Chata Concession.

‘When the GOA measures substantially altered the Legal Framework and the market
pricing system that formed the basis of both basin prices and the specific guarantees
granted to the Claimants, it undermined the price foundation of the Claimants' export

contracts with Metrogas and Gener.

163

537.

538.

539.

540.

In setting Argentine basin prices as the reference price for their contracts, the
Claimants of course took on the business risk of natural fluctuations in those prices,
but they were not supposed to take on the risk that the Argentine Government — which
had made specific guarantees to the Claimants to allow freely agreed prices to prevail
— would unilaterally abrogate those commitments and then force the Claimants to
submit their export permits to government review simply to have a price equilibrium
in their private contracts. As the Claimants contend, this risk was a regulatory risk,
and it was accounted for in the Argentine Government's commitments under the

Sierra Chata Concession, the Legal Framework and the BIT.

On the grounds mentioned above, Argentina has violated Claimants rights also to the

extent its price interference measures caused damage to Claimants’ export business.

C. Export Restrictions
I. The Claimants' position

The volumes authorized by the Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit are firm, and not
subject to interruption. The guarantees of the Legal Framework and the Chile-
Argentina Energy Treaty in particular — along with the reliance on those guarantees

by all energy market participants — substantiate this fact.

Relying on these firm export rights, investors including the Claimants made
significant investments to develop and produce hydrocarbon reserves in Argentina
over long time horizons to meet firm contractual commitments. In particular,
investors dedicated significant capital to construct, expand, and maintain an adequate
transportation infrastructure for gas. Exporting gas to Chile, which entailed crossing
the Andes Mountains or the Magellan Strait, required complex and costly engineering
projects. Investors would not have made these significant long-term investments if the

export permits that the GOA granted were not firm.

164

S41.

542.

543.

Like private investors, the Chilean Government also considered that the Sierra Chata
Gas Export Permit was firm. Chile would not have relied on gas exports from
Argentina if it believed that Argentina had the right to interrupt the export permits
without compensation. By 2004, Chile was absolutely dependent on gas from
Argentina. It was buying 90% of Argentina’s gas exports, and in turn, Chile generated
25% of its electricity from the imported gas As Mr. Juan A. Pardo, former General
Counsel of MEDA and MASA explains:

“Throughout more than ten years, all players in the hydrocarbon sector,

including the Government itself, construed the nature and the scope of

the commitments assumed in the applicable framework in the manner

described in the preceding paragraphs. In sum, all relevant actors

considered that the Government had guaranteed foreign investors clear

rules under a legal framework that ensured long-term stability to
hydrocarbon investments.” '*”

 

The GOA also construed the rights it granted under export permits as firm. For this
reason, it analyzed the impact that the export permits would have on the long-term
domestic supply prior to authorizing gas exports. Moreover, the GOA differentiated
the firm export volumes established in each export permit from Excess Gas exports
which were subject to interruption in the event of a domestic supply shortage. By
allowing the Claimants to export volumes of gas in excess of the firm volumes
granted under the Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit, the GOA highlighted the firm
nature of the export volumes that the permit guaranteed. To take the contrary view
would conflate the concept of firm export volumes with the concept of Excess Gas

volumes.

Neither the Claimants, their customers, Chile, nor Argentina expected that the firm
volumes in the gas export permits were conditioned on the demands of domestic

supply throughout the life of the permit. This understanding was consistent with the

'8 Witness Statement of Juan A Pardo of 16 February 2009 {{ 40 (Exhibit C-5).

165

544.

545.

546.

547.

Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty and with the enormous amounts of capital that were

invested in the gas export regime and infrastructure.

In April 2004, through the issuance of Resolution SE 265/04'*!, Argentina began to
restrict the gas exports of Argentine producers and sellers, including the Claimants, as
a means of addressing the self-induced shortages in the domestic market. By doing
so, the GOA disregarded the Claimants’ right to freely market the gas they produce,

as well as the Claimants’ firm export rights under the Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit.

In compliance with an instruction contained in Resolution SE 265/04, the
Undersecretariat of Fuels “temporarily” approved a Curtailment Program for Gas
Exports and Use of Transportation Capacity (the “Curtailment Program”). The
Curtailment Program provided for restrictions on: (i) all gas exports to the extent
necessary to meet the domestic demand; and (ii) all gas transportation services related

to exports if required to meet domestic demand.

Through the Curtailment Program, the Secretary of Energy imposed restrictions on
the Claimants’ exports to Chile. In turn, these export restrictions prevented the
Claimants from exporting gas volumes even though they were previously committed

under deliver-or-pay gas export sales contracts.

These measures violated the Claimants’ rights and resulted (and continue to result) in
a taking of revenues because they force the Claimants to deliver these export volumes
to domestic users at prices that are substantially lower than those agreed in their
export contracts. Despite this taking of revenues, the GOA breached its commitment

to compensate the Claimants for export restrictions at the rate of at least 35% of the

'S! Resolution 265/04 (Exhibit C-55).

166

548.

549.

550.

551.

international price of the Arabian Light crude oil of 34° API for 1,000m? of 9,300
KCal.

According to Resolution SE 265/04, these purportedly “temporary” measures would
remain in effect until the Secretary of Energy “decides that the available quantities of
gas at the injection points of the Argentine transportation system are sufficient to meet
domestic demand.” Since the GOA’s actions artificially depress gas prices and drive
up domestic demand, the resolution has effectively ensured that the GOA will

continue imposing export restrictions indefinitely.

In June 2004, the Secretary of Energy issued Resolution SE 659/04'?

, which
amended the Curtailment Program. Through this Resolution, the GOA instructed the
Claimants to supply additional gas volumes to the local market, thus resulting in a

significant curtailment of gas exports.

Resolution SE 659/04 entitled gas producers affected by the export curtailments to
sales prices that were equivalent to the prices established for each basin in the First
Gas Agreement. As a consequence, gas producers received a much lower price than

the price to which they were entitled under their natural gas export agreements.

Through Resolutions SE 752/05'**, 925/05'**, 1886/06'*°, and 599/07'*°, the GOA
enacted additional measures that reaffirmed the GOA’s decision to continue
abrogating legal and contractual rights established in the Legal Framework, the
Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts, and the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty.

These resolutions set forth a new mandatory mechanism for the purchase and sale of

'® Resolution SE 659/04 (Exhibit C-61).
'83 Resolution SE 752/05 (Exhibit C-64).
'S Resolution SE 925/05 (Exhibit C-65).
'85 Resolution SE 1806/06 (Exhibit C-73).
'86 Resolution SE 599/07 (Exhibit C-75).

167

552.

553.

554.

555.

gas in the domestic market: they allow certain large users of gas, power generators,
and CNG stations to place “irrevocable offers” to purchase gas directly from gas
producers at regulated prices. If the aggregate domestic demand of these users is not
satisfied, the shortfall must be supplied through additional gas requests to the local

market at below-market prices fixed by the Secretary of Energy.

These measures required the Claimants to ignore their existing contractual
commitments, and instead, deliver their gas production to large domestic users, power
plants and CNG stations. Hence, the GOA abrogated the Claimants’ vested legal and
contractual rights to freely sell its gas production, undermined the Claimants’ export

rights, and violated the international commitments that the GOA assumed.

In addition, Resolution SE 752/05,'87 which allowed certain domestic customers to
make irrevocable offers, put the Claimants in a no-win situation. If the Claimants do
not “agree” to an irrevocable offer, then the Secretary of Energy requires them to
supply gas to the domestic market at a price that is significantly lower than the price
they would have received had they agreed to the irrevocable offer. But if the
Claimants yield to the GOA’s pressure and “agree” to the irrevocable offer, they
would be prevented from meeting their export commitments in their contracts with

export customers.

Far from being a transitory measure, the GOA intends the “irrevocable offer”

mechanism to become permanent.

The GOA continued to impose export restrictions and in August 2005, the Energy

5 188

Secretariat enacted Resolution SE 939/05°°°, which provided a priority list for

injecting gas into transportation pipelines. Resolution SE 939/05 prevented exporting

'87 Resolution SE 752/05 (Exhibit C-64).
'88 Resolution 939/05 (Exhibit C-65).

168

556.

557.

558.

559.

producers such as the Claimants from exporting gas if they had not previously met all
of their government mandated or contractual commitments with their domestic

customers.

Since 2007, the Director of Hydrocarbons Economy at the Energy Secretariat and
other high-ranking officers have been informally ordering the Claimants to suspend
all exports to Chile and deliver their production exclusively to the domestic market in
accordance with a government-mandated priority for injections. These orders were

not grounded on any of the existing resolutions imposing export restrictions.

Since April 2007, a government-mandated and controlled Committee has been
determining how to reallocate gas produced in Argentina to mitigate the energy
shortages. The Committee consists of transportation and distribution companies and
officers of the Secretary of Energy and ENARGAS, the Argentine regulatory agency
for gas distribution and transmission systems. At the Committee meetings,
distribution companies report the volumes of gas they require, and based on this
information, the Secretary of Energy usually requires that distribution companies’

demands be met at the expense of export volumes.

In addition to the injection orders that the Secretary of Energy issued under
Resolutions SE 659/04 and SE 752/05, Decision SSC 27/04, and the “informal”
orders issued following each of the Committee meetings since July 2007, other senior
Argentine officials have begun issuing administrative orders and controlling
deliveries by Argentine gas producers like MASA. Through these orders (which in
many cases are just verbal), Argentine officials inform gas transportation companies
of the volumes of gas (if any) they may export. Transportation companies may not

transport volumes in excess of the amounts that the officials authorize.

As noted, the GOA began in December 2006, when the First Gas Agreement expired,

pressing gas producers like the Claimants to enter into a more drastic version of the

169

560.

561.

562.

agreement (the “Second Gas Agreement”). The declared aim of the new agreement
was to guarantee full supply to the domestic market while maintaining regulated

prices at different levels for different categories of consumers.

Resolution SE 599/07 approved the terms and conditions of the Second Gas
Agreement.'” The Secretary of Energy issued that Resolution as an instrument to
“persuade” gas producers to sign the Second Gas Agreement since the treatment
granted to signing producers (the “Signing Producers”) was more favourable than
that granted to non-signing producers (the “Non-Signing Producers”). As explained
by Ms. Valle:

“The Government forced producers to execute the Second Natural Gas

Agreement under the threat of imposing sanctions and subjecting the

producers that refused to sign the “agreement” to discriminatory

treatment.” '?
In the case of gas supply shortages in the domestic market, Resolution SE 599/07
provides that the GOA will “re-route” and curtail the exports and domestic sales of
Signing Producers only after curtailing and “re-routing” the exports and domestic
sales of Non-Signing Producers. '°! Thus, the Second Gas Agreement was in no way a

voluntary agreement; it was coerced and extortive.

The main beneficiaries of the re-routed gas are the consumers included in the so-
called “Priority Demand” (residential and small commercial users supplied by gas
distribution companies). Of all customers, these consumers pay the lowest prices.
Argentina forces Non-Signing Producers such as the Claimants to “re-route” gas
shipments from customers paying the highest prices to consumers paying the lowest

ones. These restrictions not only preclude MASA from complying with its existing

'8 Resolution 599/07 (Exhibit C-75).
' Valle Witness Statement, supra (n 34) { 60 (Exhibit C-4).
'! Resolution SE 599/07, Arts. 9 and 10 (Exhibit C-75).

170

563.

564.

565.

export commitments, but also obligate it to supply gas to domestic consumers with
which it has no contractual relationships at substantially lower prices than the ones

agreed under its export agreements.

In addition, although domestic consumers pay Signing Producers in accordance with
the price formulas established in the Second Gas Agreement (which are also capped
prices), domestic consumers pay Non-Signing Producers much lower prices for the
same volumes. Consequently, the prices that MASA receives for its re-routed gas are
not only substantially lower than those agreed in the contracts with its export
customers, but they are also lower than the prices that the Signing Producers receive

for their “re-routed” volumes.

Even though MASA ultimately chose not to sign the Second Gas Agreement,
Resolution SE 599/07 presented MASA with two choices, both of which entailed bad
outcomes: (i) to sign the Second Gas Agreement and consequently assume domestic
supply commitments that it could not possibly fulfil without interrupting supplies
under existing export contracts, or (ii) to become a Non-Signing Producer, and
therefore, be the first to suffer from export curtailments and re-routing to domestic

consumers at depressed, regulated, and discriminatory prices.

MASA refused to sign the Second Gas Agreement because it would have forced the
company to terminate deliveries under its pre-existing export contracts. In addition,
any “voluntary” agreement to the Second Gas Agreement might have precluded
MASA from invoking its force majeure rights in disputes with its export client arising
out of Argentina’s export curtailments. MASA paid a price for not relenting to the
GOA’s coercion, because the Second Gas Agreement contained an inherent retaliation
mechanism that subjected MASA and other Non-Signing Producers to additional

restrictions and discriminatory treatment.

171

566.

567.

568.

569.

Through, inter alia, Resolutions SE 265/04, 659/04, and 752/05, Argentina repudiated

the Claimants:

. right to freely dispose of and market the production of gas at deregulated
prices;
. vested rights under the Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit to export certain firm

volumes of gas; and

. right to receive as compensation (in case export or domestic restrictions are
established) a sum equivalent to 35% of the international price of Arabian

Light crude oil for the relevant energy equivalent unit of gas.

The GOA’s restrictions on gas exports also violate the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty
by: (i) not providing a legal regime permitting free exports of gas; (ii) restricting
exports that were approved based on sufficient reserves measured at the time the

export permits were granted; and (iii) curtailing gas exports on a discriminatory basis.

Argentina’s measures also adversely affected the Claimants’ business relations with
Chilean gas purchasers because the GOA’s export restrictions impaired the
Claimants’ ability to meet their contractual deliveries. In addition, the gas export
contracts contain strict delivery (“deliver-or-pay”) obligations that subject the
Claimants to liquidated damages and other penalties for not delivering, remedies that

would impact both the Claimants’ revenues and long term business prospects.

The GOA disregarded and even aggravated the negative impact that these restrictions

have on the Claimants’ business. As explained by Ms. Valle:

“The Government did not assist us politically at all in our efforts to
maintain acceptable commercial relationships with our Chilean
customers. On the contrary, the Government actively aggravated the
commercial tension its measures caused. For example, the Energy
Secretariat sent a letter to AES Gener S.A., one of Mobil’s customers,
which stated that the export restrictions and curtailments did not

172

570.

S71.

572.

constitute a force majeure event but were the result of the producers’

behavior. Despite our efforts to reach an amicable solution, AES Gener

sued Mobil and its partners in the Sierra Chata area in an arbitration

proceeding under the rules of the International Chamber of

Commerce.”
Argentina does not contest, but rather acknowledges, that it took the export
curtailment and re-routing at issue. Through those measures, the Argentine

Government:

. suspended firm export volumes under the Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit
through Decision SSC 27/04, which was ratified and supplemented by
Resolution SE 503/04; and

e imposed, on the basis of, inter alia, Resolutions SE 659/04, 752/05, 925/05,
1886/06 and 599/07, curtailments of authorized firm gas export volumes
through orders to re-route gas to the domestic market at the discretion of the
Secretary of Energy even when those deliveries conflicted with producers’

existing contractual obligations.

Those measures re-routed the Claimants’ export volumes to the domestic market at
regulated prices that were substantially lower than the prices they would have
received under their export contracts. As a consequence, the Claimants suffered
severe damage to their export business, and the Argentine Government violated the
Claimants’ firm export rights, as well as their right to market gas freely at freely-
agreed prices, under the Sierra Chata Export Permit, the Sierra Chata Concession, and

the Legal Framework (which includes the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty).

Argentina focuses on attempting to defend its measures through various ways, such as

by alleging that: (i) producers “agreed” to have their exports restricted and re-routed;

'? Valle Witness Statement, supra (n 34) 71, (Exhibit C-4).

173

573.

574.

(ii) producers had various mitigation mechanisms available; (iii) producers such as the
Claimants are responsible for the gas shortages that led to the export restriction and
re-routing measures; and (iv) the Government’s compensation obligations are null due

to rising crude oil prices.

As noted, in 2004, the GOA’s began restricting export volumes in order to serve the
domestic demand that the Government created by freezing gas prices at absurdly low
levels. Those measures had the effect of subjecting exports to the prior satisfaction of
the artificially-stimulated domestic demand that resulted from Argentina’s price
interference measures. From the outset, the Government was well-aware that the
applicable Legal Framework did not impose a domestic supply requirement on
producers or allow for the uncompensated curtailment and re-routing of export
volumes. In order to reduce its exposure for the violation of the Legal Framework and
gas export permits, the Government began to seek an agreement from gas producers

that would permit it to continue restricting exports on the basis of forced consent.

The First Gas Agreement, which the Claimants refused to sign, was the Government’s
first attempt to create the appearance of consent. The Irrevocable Standardized Offers
program, which the Government implemented shortly thereafter, and the Second Gas
Agreement, which the Claimants also refused to sign, operated in a similar fashion
and were part of the Government’s strategy to create the appearance of consent. In
implementing those measures, the Argentine Government “invited” gas producers to
commit gas volumes to the domestic market, which in most cases could only be done
at the expense of restricting deliveries to their export customers. If producers did not

accept the “invitation,” the Argentine Government imposed restrictions on their
exports and re-routed their volumes to the domestic market under conditions that were
more onerous than those applying to the producers who had accepted the

Government's “invitation”.

174

575.

576.

577.

In other words, the Government impaled producers with a “Morton’s Fork”; either (i)
yield to the Government’s pressure to supply the domestic market, and by doing so,
voluntarily fail to meet their delivery obligations to export customers and potentially
give the appearance of consent to Argentina’s wrongful measures, or (ii) as the
Claimants did, refuse to assume domestic supply obligations and suffer even more
burdensome export restriction and rerouting measures. Resolution SE 599/07, which
approved the terms of the Second Gas Agreement, is clear that, in any event, those
producers that refused to sign the agreement would be subjected to domestic supply
obligations, have their volumes restricted first (before other producers), and receive

the lowest tier of regulated prices.

Argentina further distorts the facts by alleging that the Claimants acted as “free
riders” by not signing the Second Gas Agreement, since they allegedly benefitted
from the supposed price increases provided by that agreement while not assuming the
same domestic supply requirements as signing producers. Far from benefitting from
this agreement, the Claimants suffered severe damages by refusing to sign, as
explained above. Through the application of Resolution SE 599/07, since August
2007 the Government has allocated as much as 60% of the Claimants’ production to
the distribution companies that pay the lowest price for gas. In addition, far from
establishing actual price increases, the Second Gas Agreement merely provided that
the Government would discuss the segmentation of priority demand (i.e. residential
and small commercial users) and analyze if it might at some time in the future seek an
adjustment of the prices paid by high-income consumers. This constitutes further
recognition by the Government that the prices paid by those consumers were

inadequate and did not reflect market levels.

In a farfetched attempt to justify the reasonableness of its export restrictions and re-
routings, Argentina argues that it offered gas exporters the possibility to continue
exporting if they substituted the curtailed export volumes with alternative (i.e. liquid)

fuels. By using gas substitutes to satisfy the domestic supply requirement that the

175

578.

579.

580.

Government imposed, the Claimants would allegedly be able to export the volumes
that would otherwise be curtailed to their export customers. Argentina’s actual
motivation to authorize this “option” was not to provide gas producers with a
mitigation mechanism. Rather, Argentina provided this option in an effort to avoid
incurring liability for violating its treaty obligations to Chile under the Chile-
Argentina Energy Treaty. Not surprisingly then, the viability of this “option” for

producers was merely ostensible.

In an attempt to evade responsibility and redirect the Tribunal’s attention from the
relevant points at issue in this case, Argentina alleges that the conduct of certain gas
producers, and not its own measures, caused the gas shortages that Argentina began
experiencing in 2004. In doing so, Argentina denies that its price interference
measures artificially stimulated demand and that those same measures deprived
producers of the incentives needed for further exploration and production activities,
when it is well known (and acknowledged by the Government itself) that those factors

were the primary causes of its gas shortages.

The principle of supply and demand operates in natural gas markets. All other factors
being equal, if prices are low in comparison with substitute fuels, certain segments of
consumers will consume more gas. Conversely, if the price of gas rises, consumption
may decrease. The pattern of rising demand and falling production resulted directly

from Argentina’s measures maintaining artificially low prices.

Argentina alleges that the level of demand and the maturity of basins were not
unforeseeable events based on the projections existing before the outburst of the
crisis. It also alleges that the first signs of difficulties in the supply of natural gas to
the domestic market became apparent in the first half of 2002, even though an official
report prepared by the Energy Secretariat in May 2003 projected an aggregate gas
demand (i.e., domestic plus export demand) for 2004 that was lower than the actual

volumes produced in that year.

176

581.

582.

583.

Even if Argentina’s allegations concerning projected demand were true, they would
raise the question of why, if the Government understood at such an early point in time
that gas demand was set to rise dramatically, did it engage in pricing policies that
could only contribute to that increase while simultaneously preventing the
replacement of reserves and development of new ones. Moreover, if the Government
was aware that drastic increases in domestic demand were imminent as early as 2002
(or even before the crisis), why did it continue granting export permits through 2004.
Even by the Government's own analysis of demand projections, it is evident that it

mismanaged the situation despite advance warning of potential gas shortages.

For the purpose of this arbitration, Argentina blames the country’s gas shortages on a
write-off of natural gas reserves by producers, including the Claimants. In doing so,
Argentina generally accuses gas producers in the country of overestimating their
reserves and blames those producers for the “disappearance” of reserves on a national
level. In alleging that reserves throughout the country “disappeared,” Argentina fails
to consider some elementary concepts concerning the economics and science of

estimating gas reserves.

The Claimants are, and always have been, marginal gas producers in Argentina. In
fact, the Claimants’ share of Sierra Chata’s and Aguaragiie’s reserves during this
period represented on average less than 1% and 1.5%, respectively, of Argentina’s
natural reserves. The Claimants’ share of the production during the same period in
both fields represented, on average, less than 3% of the total domestic gas production.
Thus, any decrease in the Claimants’ reserves and production levels would have had
no significant impact on the country’s overall supply of natural gas. Argentina’s own
damage experts recognize this fact when they express that “MASA and MEDA are

marginal players in the natural gas market.” In any event, Greco indicates that during

177

584.

585.

586.

the 2002- 2008 period Sierra Chata actually discovered new reserves of 1,828 MM
m3.'°? It follows that there is no substance to Argentina’s allegation that the

Claimants contributed to the countries’ gas shortages.

One of the a posteriori explanations that the Argentine Government provided for
imposing export restrictions is that producers allegedly breached their domestic
supply quotas, despite the fact that producers had never had any obligation to supply
the domestic market. In an attempt to justify its export restrictions, however, the
Government invented the concept of collective and individual domestic supply

obligations for producers in 2004.'°*

Through the invention of this requirement, the
Government tried to make producers the scapegoat for its own negligence and

mismanagement of the gas sector.

Aside from relying on Article 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law as the legal basis for its
newly-invented domestic supply quotas on producers, the Argentine Government fails
to identify a single law or regulation establishing a specific quota that producers must
meet either individually or collectively. Of course, no such requirement existed under
the Legal Framework. As Sandleris and Schargrodsky concede, under the Legal
Framework the Government placed the duty to guarantee the supply of the domestic

market on gas distribution companies, not producers. 195

Notably, even when Argentina began to impose domestic supply quotas in 2004, it
issued Decision SSC 27/04, which distinguished between producers that had met their
alleged domestic supply quotas and those that had not.'°° The Government included

the Claimants among the group of producers that were meeting their domestic supply

'®3 Greco Report, supra (n 125) J 89.

' Decision SSC 27/04, Eight Recital (Exhibit C-56).
'5 UTDT Report, supra (n 156) | 88.
'° Decision SCC 27/04 (Exhibit C-56).

178

587.

588.

589.

quotas. Thus, Argentina cannot now accuse the Claimants of failing to meet any
domestic supply quotas, even if such an obligation had existed in the first place,

which it did not.

With respect to the Sierra Chata Export Permit specifically, as Bastos notes, the
Government did not condition the granting of that permit on the maintenance of a
certain level of reserves.'°” That the Government did impose such a condition when
granting other export permits shows that it knew how to do so if it had wanted, but it
did not. Accordingly, even if the Government had wanted to invoke the reserve
declines in Sierra Chata as a reason for imposing export restrictions, it could not have
done so. To raise this argument now, in light of the lack of a reserve maintenance

requirement in the Sierra Chata Export Permit, would constitute an act of bad faith.

In any event, Argentina is precluded from alleging that producers failed to make
necessary investments in production. The expert reports and witness statements that it
submitted in this arbitration have acknowledged that, following 2002, producers
contributed to increasing total national gas production by 38%. That such an increase
took place despite the abnormally low natural gas prices that the Government
imposed raises serious doubts about Argentina's claim that producers like the

Claimants had underinvested.

2. Argentina's position

First of all, gas shortage in Argentina was not the result of an increase in gas demand

due to the (alleged) interference of the Argentine Government with energy prices.

'7 Bastos Supplemental Report, supra (n 133) {109 (Exhibit C-504).

179

590.

591.

592.

593.

594.

As expert Greco points out, “the main problem of the supply crisis was the shortage

7198 As an

of gas in the fields and not the restrictions on the transportation system
evidence of this, starting in 2004, shortage of gas in the domestic market began to
take place but, at the same time, there was available transportation capacity at the gas

pipelines.

Furthermore, in spite of the increase in the gas demand in the last years, volume of
gas delivered by producers was lower than expected in some demand forecasts
prepared before the outburst of the crisis. Thus, as explained by expert Greco “gas

supply shortage may not be attributed to an unforeseeable level of demand.”'”

In fact, the Energy Secretary Cameron states that “on the contrary, the 2001/2002
crisis only delayed the manifestation of the problem as, due to the reduction in GDP
since 1998 forward, the increase in the gas consumption in Argentina was far below

average values.”?

Additionally, over time, there was a recovery in the price of natural gas. Particularly,
Guichén mentioned that “the prices of liquefiable components, such as condensate
gas, natural petrol and liquefied petroleum gas, which derive from the production of
natural gas, remained in dollars and followed the evolution of the international price
of oil.”20'"
Secondly, the main cause of the gas supply crisis was the behaviour of some natural
gas producers (like the Claimants). Lack of exploration investments on the part of
producers gave rise to the shortage of gas, which prevented export of hydrocarbons

and, simultaneously, the appropriate supply within the domestic market. In that

198

Ws Greco Report, supra (n 125) 55.

Ibid J 131.
2 Cameron Witness Statement, supra (n 107) J 67.
2°! Guich6n First Witness Statement, supra (n 149) J 162.

180

595.

596.

597.

598.

connection, expert Greco points out that “The reduction in the exploration activity
since 1998 is noteworthy. The average of exploration wells after 1998 is lower than
half (61% lower) the average of the previous 28 years,”

On the other hand, there has been a strong decline in proved natural gas reserves

across all the country's basins for reasons other than production.

In particular, MEDA and MASA natural gas reserves decreased sharply during the
last years and in a higher percentage than the average for the country. As stated by
experts Sandleris and Schardrodsky “MASA and MEDA’s reserves dropped, between
1994 and 2008, by 65% in Aguaragiie and 63% in Chihuidos, [but] the average
decline for the country was 26%.

The Claimants never explained the reason why their export permit was suspended
from the Aguaragiie area. The explanation is very simple: through Resolution SE
810/07 the export permit was suspended from the Aguaragiie area due to an
inaccurate reserves statement made by the Consortium in which MASA participates

when requesting authorization to export natural gas to Chile.
In the recitals of Resolution SE 810/07 it is stated that:

“[T]he reserves estimation made in 1997 by the operating company of.
the fields involved in the AGUARAGUE and SAN ANTONIO SUR
Concessions, at that time TECPETROL SOCIEDAD ANONIMA, and
certified by an external audit hired to that end, GAFFNEY, CLINE &
ASSOCIATES, that said estimation would be incorrect, from a
technical point of view, showing the use of reserve evaluation practices
not recommended by the specialized literature and revealing a strong
optimistic bias in the weighting of existing reserves, as well as in the
probabilistic classification made.””

~ Ibid 71.
23 UTDT Report, supra (n 156) J 127.
° Resolution SE 810/0, Recital 30 (Exhibit AR-233)

181

599.

600.

601.

602.

The evolution of Aguaragiie and San Antonio Sur field reserves shows a strong
descending tendency in the ratio of reserves to production. In fact, there was a
significant reduction in reserves and in the ratio reserves/production of the

abovementioned fields of the Claimants.

To analyze the performance of the Claimants and assess whether they contributed to
the shortage of natural gas in the domestic market it is necessary to take into account

all their concessions, i.e. Aguaragiie and Sierra Chata.

MASA itself acknowledged that to analyze the degree of impairment of the domestic
market it is necessary to take all its reserves into consideration, i.e. all the reserves of
the North western Basin and the Neuquén Basin. In a Note addressed to the Energy
Secretary Cameron to request the lift of the suspension of the export permit of
Aguaragiie, MASA stated that”

“In this manner and as a result of the termination of MASA export

agreements for the “Sierra Chata” gas field, the volume of natural gas

net reserves incorporated by MASA amount to 5,512,00 MM m3,which
must be added to the availability of MASA natural gas reserves.

It is out of the question that such reserves, once discounted the export

volumes under other agreements, are available reserves for the

domestic market supply, which offset any decline in the North western

Basin.”?
To justify the over-estimation of reserves in Aguaragiie and their responsibility for the
disappearance of the 40,455,300,000 m3 of natural gas from their “certified” reserves,
the Claimants assert that “the concept of reserves is not only tied to physical

considerations but also to economic and regulatory elements” and therefore “existing

?°5 Note of Mariano C. Vivas de Lorenzi, MASA’s attorney-in-fact, addressed to the Energy Secretary

Daniel Cameron, dated 8 February 2008 (Exhibit AR-308).

182

603.

604.

605.

606.

607.

gas volumes which may be reported as reserves at a certain level of prices or costs

may no longer be considered reserves if the prices or costs substantially change.”

However, a decline in reserves does not always arise from the uncertainty of “future
level of prices or costs”. For instance, if the companies do not use reserve estimation
techniques properly, reserves that are not such may be declared. This is what
happened in the Aguaragiie and San Antonio Sur Areas where the “decline in reserves
would result from mining risks, such as the flooding with water of the hydrocarbon

reservoirs.”

In fact, the estimation of reserves made in 1997 by the Aguaragiie Joint Venture
(composed by MASA) at the time of requesting a natural gas export permit to Chile
was not correct from a technical viewpoint since “it did not follow recommended

practices for the assessment of reservoirs.”

Even worse, the members of the Aguaragiie Joint Venture (composed by MASA)
were aware since 1993, as a result of a report filed by the technical operator of the
Concession, of the possibility of floods at the hydrocarbon reservoir. In other words,
they knew it was likely that such event occurred during the execution of the export

permit, thus seriously affecting the production of natural gas.

The Argentine Republic did not begin retaliatory proceedings against MASA for not
agreeing to the Second Gas Agreement. The Aguaragiie Export Permit was suspended
for a significant loss in the computable volume of natural gas reserves due to causes

different from the gas production between December 1997 and December 2004.

The Aguaragiie Joint Venture (composed by MASA) contributed to the natural gas
shortage in the domestic market by submitting inaccurate reports on the gas reserves
available at the Aguaragiie and San Antonio Sur fields and making insufficient

investments in additional exploration.

183

608.

609.

610.

6ll.

The Energy Secretary Cameron stated that:

“In our country, there were many cases of understatements of reserves,
the most relevant being the reclassification of reserves made by
Petrobras in 2003 on assets recently purchased to Pérez Companc, the
reclassification by YPF in 2005 and 2006 and the sharp decline of the
most important gas production concessions in the Noroeste Basin:
Aguaragiie and Ramos.”

 

MEDA and MASA assert that they have not breached any obligation related to the
Sierra Chata Concession and, particularly, that “the investment obligations imposed
by the Hydrocarbons Law contain an economic component and do not require the
Claimants to invest in a manner that is not economically sustainable.” LECG also
states that natural gas producers “have the option to reduce the supply to the market

(leaving natural gas in the ground for better times)”.?””

Both MEDA and MASA are hydrocarbon concessionaires and their activities must
conform to the provisions of the Hydrocarbons Law. In this regard, experts Sandleris
and Schargrodsky explain that “As concessionaires, they must respect the regulatory
framework and exploit the field that the Government has entrusted them with

regularly, continuously, rationally and efficiently.”°*

However, according to the Sproule report, “in 2002, gas production from the Sierra
Chata Field was reduced by the operator due to lack of available markets with gas
prices that would sustain a return on investment.” *"It is to be noted that in 2002

natural gas export contracts were not pesified, and export restrictions and duties were

2° Cameron Witness Statement, supra (n 107) (71.

°" LECG Second Report, supra (n 132) | 45.

8 UTDT Second Report, supra (n 135) 49.

2 Expert Report of Sproule International Limited of 26 April 2010 [hereinafter “Sproule Report”] 1
109.

184

612.

613.

614.

615.

not applied to natural gas exports. As Cameron said, “2002 was an excellent year for

natural gas exporters.”7!°

Pursuant to Section 31 of the Hydrocarbons Law, concessionaires must exploit their
fields “in pursuance of the most reasonable and efficient techniques... ensuring the
maximum hydrocarbon production compatible with the proper and _ profitable
exploitation of the field, as well as compliance with the criteria guaranteeing

convenient preservation of the reserves.”

Then, both the reduction in production in 2002 and the well opening-and-closing
behaviour, performed by the Sierra Chata Consortium (composed by MEDA) are not
in line with the Hydrocarbons Law and contributed to the natural gas shortage in the

domestic market.

‘Whether MEDA and MASA have a small or large share in the total production of
Argentina is irrelevant. What is relevant is to actually determine if they affected the
domestic market supply. In that regard, Greco points out that “the fall in their
production helped prevent supply from increasing to the extent required to satisfy

demand.”?"!

To summarize, the under-estimation of reserves, the lack of additional exploration by
the Aguaragiie Joint Venture (composed by MASA), the decline in production in
2002 and the well opening-and-closing behaviour of the Sierra Chata Consortium
(composed by MEDA) contributed to the gas shortage in Argentina. Ironically, the
Claimants contributed to the situation that forced the Argentine Government to take

the measures they now complain about.

210 Cameron Witness Statement, supra (n 107) 53.
21! Greco, Second Report, supra (n 139) J 88.

185

616.

617.

618.

619.

620.

621.

Moreover, the Claimants assure they do not claim for the natural gas volumes they
export from the Aguaragiie area. However, it arises from LECG Report submitted by
the Claimants that they claim for the restrictions placed on the MASA agreement with

the power generator Termoandes.

In fact, MEDA and MASA try to deceive the Tribunal by hiding a claim for
restrictions in the Aguaragiie area under another accusation: “price interference”,
which is also inappropriate since the MASA agreement with Termoandes is not

subject to pesification.
As explained by experts Sandleris and Schargrodsky:

“MASA and MEDA disguise this situation by calculating the damages
under the line item “price interference in wholesale market”. This is
inaccurate, because the pesification of contracts did not reach the prices
of Termoandes, and therefore, there was no intervention of the
Argentine Government in prices. Contractual prices were agreed upon
in US Dollars, and bore no relation to domestic prices. This is accepted
by LECG, because in their valuation model real and counterfactual
prices of Termoandes are identical. i.e., Claimants acknowledged there
was no price interference in the case of Termoandes, but they quantify
damages under the item price interference.” 7!7

 

 

Therefore, the Claimants' claim for their agreement with Termoandes must be

dismissed by the Tribunal.

In short, reduction and overstatement of reserves on the part of some natural gas
producers and, specifically, of MEDA and MASA were crucial to understand the

causes of gas shortage in Argentina.

Natural gas export restrictions and re-routings were not unrelated to the behaviour of

some hydrocarbon producers (such as the Claimants). In fact, in face of the domestic

UTDT Report, supra (n 156) | 243.

186

622.

623.

624.

625.

626.

market shortage of gas supply caused by the behaviour of some hydrocarbon
producers and pursuant to the Hydrocarbons Law as regards giving priority to
domestic supply, the Secretary of Energy instructed producers to re-route a
percentage of their natural gas exports to satisfy domestic market needs. Apart from
the abovementioned measures which aimed at solving the serious gas shortage
problems, other longer term measures were implemented with a twofold purpose: to
achieve consensus among gas producers and to boost gas production increasing gas

prices at the wellhead.

The Claimants argue that the Secretary of Energy had no legal grounds for imposing

the re-routing on natural gas exports. This assertion is false.
In fact, paragraph 4, article 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law sets forth:

“The Executive Branch shall allow exports of hydrocarbons or by-

products not required for appropriate satisfaction of domestic demand,

provided said exports are made at reasonable commercial prices and

shall, in that situation, set the criteria. that will govern the domestic

market transactions, so as to enable a rational and fair market share

for all the country producers.” [Emphasis added]
In this context, the provisions and resolutions issued by the Secretary of Energy have
set forth throughout several periods, on the basis of rationality and fairness criteria,
participation of all the country producers in the fulfilment of the domestic market
needs. Besides, gas exports were restricted only to the extent producers could not

comply with their domestic market share.

The export permit of Sierra Chata is not firm. On the contrary, when authorizing gas
exports, the Secretary of Energy had to assess their impact on the domestic market
and, in particular, whether they would affect the gas supply needs within the country.

In other words, the entire country existing reserves were taken into account.

Subsequently, it could be proved that, in many cases, the information about reserves

furnished by hydrocarbons producers was false or inaccurate. This false information

187

627.

628.

629.

630.

631.

affected one of the prerequisites at the time of granting export permits. As was the
case with the Consortium in which MASA participates, whose export permit for the

Aguaragiie area was suspended.

In short, if at the time exports were requested the actual situation of proved reserves at
the country level could have been verified, some requests may have been denied.
Therefore, and contrary to the Claimants' assertion, there is no absolute right to export

natural gas.

The Second Gas Agreement was once again willingly subscribed by most of
hydrocarbons producers in Argentina (including, Repsol YPF, Total Austral,
Pluspetrol, Wintershall, Pan American Energy and Petrobras Energia) and it is
intended to remain effective until December 2011. It is simply absurd to believe that
Argentina has the capacity to coerce several multinational oil companies (including
one controlled by the Brazilian Government), which are among the leading companies

in the world.

It is an open, voluntary agreement, i.e., any signatory producer to the agreement may
terminate its participation, and any non-signatory producer may adhere during the
entire term of the agreement. In other words, the Claimants may adhere to the

agreement at any time during its term, if they consider it appropriate.

Moreover, in the Second Gas Agreement, producers undertook to supply the domestic
market in a merely jointly manner, i.e. limiting each gas producer to supply a certain

volume.

On the other hand, in case of a gas shortage of supply for the domestic market due to
the behaviour of some producers, the Second Gas Agreement stipulates that the
producers who would first supply their export gas volumes are the signatory ones and

subsequently, if said volumes are not enough, non-signatory producers should satisfy

188

632.

633.

634.

635.

the domestic market, pursuant to the Hydrocarbons Law. Thus, there is no

discrimination against non-signatory producers as the Claimants.

By means of the agreements entered into between the Argentine Republic and natural
gas producers, it was possible to boost production for the domestic market of most
producers and, based on a cost analysis, natural gas price increases at the wellhead

were set for all producers.

Finally, it is worth mentioning that the Claimants state they did not sign the Second
Gas Agreement because it meant “assuming domestic supply commitments that it
could not possibly fulfil without interrupting supplies under existing export
contracts.” This is clearly shown by the fact that:

“The production in the areas where MASA and MEDA operate

dropped from 8.5 million m3/day (in average) before the crisis to

around 5.2 million m3/day after the crisis. At the same time, national

production rose from approximately 100 million m3/day before the

crisis to 138.4 million m3/day after the crisis.” *'?
To sum up, it can be concluded that the Claimants (as well as other hydrocarbon
producers) are responsible for the energy shortage and in view of this situation the

measures taken by the Secretary of Energy are reasonable and legitimate.

The measures adopted by the Argentine Republic during the crisis in order to ensure
hydrocarbon domestic market satisfaction did not violate the applicable regulatory
framework, the Treaty with Chile, and did not affect the right to the free disposition of

hydrocarbons.

213 UTDT Report, supra (n 156) { 139.

189

636.

637.

638.

639.

640.

First, according to the Hydrocarbons Law (the most important rule governing the
industry) only the export of hydrocarbons or by-products not required for appropriate

satisfaction of domestic demand can be authorized.

In all the rules, either in the Gas Law, the LPG Law, or the Deregulation Decrees,
article 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law and the need to ensure domestic market
hydrocarbons supply were also expressly taken into account, and consequently, it was

possible to establish restrictions on exports

Second, all the rules mentioned by the Claimants are below the Hydrocarbons Law
and the other specified laws. Therefore, they can never modify or abrogate them. In
the same vein, Dr. Mata states that “Decrees No. 1055/89, 1212/89, 2178/91, and
2411/91 are executive regulations of the Hydrocarbons Laws, HL, and the State

Reform Law, SRL, contemplated in Article 99,2, AC!4

Even though the quoted rules do not have the scope the Claimants intend to assign
them, should it be so, it should be taken into consideration that the rules whereby
restrictions on exports were imposed are of the same or of a higher level than the ones
quoted by the Claimants, thus as they are subsequent rules, the first ones would

prevail.

Third, the Claimants are mistaken when they state that the Treaty with Chile was
violated. On the contrary, the Treaty with Chile included the provision that natural gas
export permits would be considered “to the extent domestic supply would not be
jeopardized.” Contrary to the arguments held by MEDA and MASA, the Treaty with
Chile expressly takes into consideration the main objective of domestic market

supply. The provisions of the treaty establish that export of gas will be allowed “based

214 Mata Report, supra (n 129) q 180.

190

641.

642.

643.

644.

645.

on the reserves of the respective exploitation areas and their availability” and that “the
legal framework applicable to the sale, export, import and transport of gas is provided

by the legislation of each State...7715

In other words, far from rendering domestic legislation ineffective, the Treaty with
Chile expressly ratifies its effectiveness. In addition, it also lays down the same
principles as Argentine legislation does, such as the subordination of gas exports to

the domestic market supply.

Fourth, the right to free disposition of hydrocarbons pursuant to the deregulation

decrees is subject to domestic supply.

Finally, given the Argentine Government levies a tax on exports, tax collection
increases as exports are made. Thus there is no incentive to establish unnecessary
restrictions on exports. MEDA and MASA hold that they have the right to receive a
compensation “for export restrictions at the rate of at least 35% of the international

price of the Arabian Light crude oil of 34° API for 1,000m3 of 9,300 KCal.”

According to the Claimants, article 5 of Decree 1969/937"° empowers the Holder of
Permit to receive, for the time the [restriction] lasts, a value not below the one

established in article 6 of Decree 1589 of December 27, 1989.7!”

However, article 6 of Decree 1589/89 sets forth that “in case the National Executive
Branch should establish restrictions on crude oil and/or by-product exports, the

provisions of article 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law shall apply.”

5 Protocol Substituting Protocol No. 2 to the Agreement on Economic Complementary No. 16
between the Republic of Chile and the Argentine Republic, 27 November 1995, Art. 2 and 6, (Exhibit
AR-79).

216 Decree 1969/93 (Exhibit C-94).

*!7 Decree 1589/89 (Exhibit C-15).

191

646.

647.

648.

649.

650.

Article 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law establishes:

“When crude oil international prices significantly increase due to

exceptional circumstances, they shall not be considered for domestic

market commercialization price fixing. In that case, domestic prices

shall be fixed based on the actual exploitation costs, amortizations that

technically correspond, and at a reasonable interest on the updated and

depreciated investments.” [Emphasis added]
Due to the significant increase in the international crude oil prices as a consequence
of the exceptional circumstances, the international crude oil price cannot be used to
fix domestic market prices. Therefore, the compensation amount of article 6 of

Decree 1589/89 is not applicable.

Consequently, if the international crude oil price shall not be used to fix domestic
market prices, then it cannot be used as reference to fix gas sales prices for the

domestic market either.

In such context, and pursuant to current rules, the Secretary of Energy made a cost
analysis for natural gas exploration and production in order to determine actual
exploitation costs. Based on this cost analysis carried out by the Secretary of Energy,
the First Gas Agreement was signed by most gas producers with purpose of

restructuring the natural gas price.

As Dr. Mata explains:

  

“After the 2001/2002 crisis, an agreement was entered into between the
Secretary of Energy and most of the gas producers entitled “Agreement
for the Implementation of the Normalization Model of Natural Gas
Prices at the Entry Point to the Transport System,” which was approved
by the Ministry governing the sector by means of Resolution No.
208/04 of the Ministry of Federal Planning. Said Agreement was based
on a cost study which had the purpose, in accordance with the recitals
of the Resolution mentioned above, of “ensuring reasonable supply
conditions and a resolution of the crisis by contemplating the situation
of residential consumers and the sector of industrial consumers with
less power to directly negotiate with producers.” As may be observed,
the Agreement with producers was the first step towards gradually
solving the force majeure situation created by the crisis based on the

 

 

192

651.

652.

653.

654.

principle of shared sacrifice and in accordance with the guidelines

established by Articles 6, HL, and 6 of Decree No. 1589/89.”7"
All measures taken by the Argentine Republic to fight the shortage of hydrocarbons in
the domestic market were aimed at ensuring self-supply, were legitimate and in line

with the applicable legal framework.

Section 3 of Presidential Decree 1969/93°"” whereby the Exploration Permit on the
Chihuidos Area was awarded and that led to the Exploitation Concession of Sierra
Chata granted by Presidential Decree 824/95>” establishes that

“[...] shall own and freely dispose of hydrocarbons... in accordance

with the provisions of Section 6 of Law No. 17,319, Section 15 of

Presidential Decree No. 1055/89 dated 10 October 1989, Section 4 of

Presidential Decree No. 1212/89 dated 8 November 1989, Sections 5

and 6 of Presidential Decree No. 1589/89 dated 27 December 1989 and

Section 5 of Presidential Decree No. 2411 dated 12 November

1991"!
Even if it was true (which is not) that the Gas Law only governs natural gas exports
Section 3 establishes that natural gas exports shall be authorized “to the extent

domestic supply is not adversely affected.”

Additionally, the rules that set the procedure to obtain natural gas export permits also
give priority to the domestic market supply. Resolution SE 299/98 establishes that

“export permits... shall be awarded provided that domestic supply is not adversely

 

affected. Additionally, according to Resolution SE 131/01 “Section 3 of Law 24,076

establishes that natural gas export permits are subject to the domestic market supply.”

218 Mata Report, supra (n 129) ¥ 299.

* Presidential Decree 1969/93 (Exhibit AR-75).
°° Presidential Decree 824/95 (Exhibit C-95).
*! Presidential Decree 2411/91 (Exhibit AR-75).

193

655.

656.

657.

658.

659.

660.

The principle of free availability of hydrocarbons established by the Deregulation
Decrees and the Conversion Decree is a relative principle which is contingent upon

the self-sufficiency of the domestic market.

The Claimants’ argument that pursuant to Section 6 of Presidential Decree 1589/89,
the Argentine Republic must pay compensation for imposing restrictions on natural
gas exports can be rejected in limine, since the Claimants expressly hold that they do
not base their damage calculation on that piece of legislation. In any case, the
interpretation of MEDA and MASA of the rules on which they base their claim is

wrong and aims at confusing the Tribunal.

Presidential Decree 1589/89 cannot grant rights broader than those granted by the
Hydrocarbons Law as it implements such law. Section 6 of Presidential Decree

1589/89 expressly refers to the Hydrocarbons Law.

The importance of hydrocarbons to public interest is such that the Argentine
Constitution itself prescribes that productive activities shall meet present needs
without endangering those of future generations and the Argentine authorities shall
provide for the rational use of natural resources and the preservation of the natural

heritage.

In conclusion, the measures adopted by the Argentine Republic to defend the natural
gas domestic supply are within the legal framework applicable to the MEDA and
MASA concessions and were reasonably established in line with the principles set in

that legal framework.

Resolution 140/967 whereby the natural gas export permit was awarded to the Sierra

Chata Consortium is contingent upon and subject to the domestic market supply in

2 Resolution 140/96, (Exhibit AR-81).

194

661.

662.

663.

664.

conformity with the applicable legal framework.

In fact, Section 1 of Resolution 140/96 awarded a natural gas export permit “for up to
a firm volume of two million and five hundred thousand cubic meters per day
(2,500,000m3/day) for a term no longer than fifteen (15) years or until the volume of
the remaining certified reserves was reached, calculated in accordance with Section 2

of this Resolution.”

Additionally, Section 2 of Resolution 140/96 sets forth that “to calculate the
remaining certified reserves... the total volume of natural gas certified reserves dated
December 27, 1995 filed by the exporting consortium, i.e. seventeen thousand and
thirty millions of cubic meters (17.030.000.000 m3) should be subtracted from the
natural gas volume actually delivered to the Distributor MetroGas S.A. in the
domestic market at the beginning of the exports, as well as the volume to be delivered

in the future as per the local undertakings.”

Moreover, Section 4 of Resolution 140/96 establishes that the total volume of gas
authorized to be exported “will be annually adjusted in line with the volume actually

exported and the volume actually delivered to the domestic market.”

Experts Sandleris and Schargrodsky when explaining the characteristics of the Sierra

Chata Permit state that:

“This calculation method used to establish the amount authorised for
export includes three key elements that define the permit:

a) the basis on which the scope of the permit is established; that is, the
authorised stock, is defined by the statement of reserves made by the
company itself;

b) the gas to be supplied to the domestic market (distribution company
Metrogas) must be deducted from such amount, taking the volume of
gas that had already been delivered at the commencement of exports as
well as the gas to be sold in the future;

195

665.

666.

667.

668.

669.

c) the total gas volume that the consortium may export is not fixed and

established by the Resolution; it is adjusted every year and depends on

the reserves and on the gas sold in the domestic market.””*
That is to say, the methodology used to calculate the total volume of natural gas
authorized to be exported under the Sierra Chata Permit shows that it is not fixed and

is subject to the domestic market.

To be awarded a natural gas export permit, one of the requirements that companies
shall fulfil is the filing of a certificate of the reserves and the contracts with those

requesting the exports

In that context, the Argentine Secretariat of Energy requested to the members of the
Sierra Chata Consortium, among other information, “b) the certified volumes of gas
reserves, proved, developed and to be developed in the future on the Sierra Chata

field...; c) local undertakings in force to deliver gas for the next twenty years.”

When hydrocarbon concessionaires obtain an export permit, they also agree to
perform investments pursuant to Section 31 of the Hydrocarbons Law. Therefore,
failure to make such investments could cause all or part of the reserves authorized to

be exported to be inexistent.

When in the process of obtaining the export permit, the Sierra Chata Consortium filed
an audit report of the reserves conducted by Gaffney, Cline & Associates Inc.
According to that report, at the time of requesting the export permit, the consortium
reserves included “3.3 billion m3 of undeveloped proved reserves and 3.03 billion m3

of probable reserves.”

3 UTDT Second Report, supra (n 135) { 131.

196

670.

671.

672.

673.

674.

675.

MEDA and MASA, as any other hydrocarbon producer in Argentina, knew that in the
event of shortage of hydrocarbons to satisfy the needs of both the domestic market
and exports, the legal framework applicable to the production of natural gas set forth
that the Sierra Chata Export Permit was contingent upon the domestic market supply.
This arises from Sections 3 and 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law and Section 3 of the Gas

Law.

The Sierra Chata Export Permit is not an absolute right that cannot be limited or
regulated. The opposite, which is the position of the Claimants, would mean that the
Argentine Secretariat of Energy (as enforcement authority of the Hydrocarbons Law)
would be limited even when the key requirement that led to the permit was no longer

fulfilled, ie. non-impairment of the domestic market.

The “firm and non-interruptible service” concept comes out of the Rules of
Transportation and Distribution of Natural Gas, which states that as a matter of fact,
the firm service may be interrupted in case of “emergency or Force Majeure events.”
This also proves that restrictions on natural gas exports — including “firm” export

volumes — were and are legitimate in the event of lack of gas in the domestic market.

Additionally, the preference for the domestic supply cannot be limited only to the
“time of the award” since permanent controls must be made to check that the
domestic market is not being affected and that investments by producers- exporters of

hydrocarbons (like MEDA and MASA) are being made.

The report of Sproule International Limited (hereinafter, the “Sproule Report’) filed
by the Claimants shows that the impairment analysis of supply must be made while
the Sierra Chata Export Permit is effective and not just at the time the permit is

awarded.

In fact, the Sproule Report when trying to justify the decline in reserves and

production of the Claimants states that “reserves can be adjusted up or down” and that

197

676.

677.

678.

679.

they “change from one period to another not only due to production but also to
technical and economic factors, such as technical revisions, acquisitions and

dispositions, drilling, and economic factors.”?24

Then, if hydrocarbon reserves may vary from one year to the following due to
different circumstances (involving producers or otherwise) as mentioned in the
Sproule Report, it is logical and reasonable that the Argentine Secretariat of Energy
(as enforcement authority of the Hydrocarbons Law) performs permanent and on
going controls so that exports from the Sierra Chata concession do not affect self-
sufficiency. Therefore, the argument of the Claimants that the Argentine Government
must assess the domestic market supply at the time of awarding export permits is false

and contradicts their own experts’ reports.

In conclusion, the Sierra Chata Permit is contingent upon and subject to the non-

impairment of domestic supply and compliance with certain investments.

On the basis of a cost study performed by the Argentine Secretariat of Energy that no
hydrocarbon producer objected to, the First Gas Agreement was executed on 2 April
2004 by means of which a certain volume of gas was guaranteed for the domestic
market. In other words, through the First Agreement, hydrocarbon producers
voluntarily agreed to deliver certain volume of natural gas in exchange for the

adjustment of the natural gas price.
In relation to the Second Gas Agreement, Energy Secretary Cameron explains that:

The Agreement for the 2007-2011 period was entered into by most
producers, who represent 90% of the natural gas production in
Argentina. Among the signing producers are Petrobras and Total

24 Sproule Report, supra (n 209) §{f 98-99.

198

680.

681.

682.

683.

684.

Austral, Claimant's partners in Sierra Chata. YPF, Tecpetrol, and CGC,

MASA’s partners in Aguaragiie also signed the agreement.” ~
Any non-signatory producer (like the Claimants) may adhere to the agreement at any
time and any signatory producer to the agreement may terminate its participation

during the term of the Second Gas Agreement.

As expert Greco states, “even though Distribution Companies, as regulated utilities,
are under a duty to supply users within the Licence area, this is not inconsistent with
the priority given to domestic market supply over exports, by which producers must

«yg 922
abide.”””*

Lastly, the Claimants state that “the authorization to supply the domestic market with
gas, substitutes was illusory for at least three reasons: (i) the cost of gas substitutes
was higher than the export price of gas; (ii) logistical constraints; and (iii) it was
impracticable for carrying out significant long-term export contracts.” The argument

of the Claimants is wrong for several reasons.

First, pursuant to Resolution SE 659/04,727 Disposition SSC 27/0478 and Resolution
SE752/05°” upon requests for additional injection of gas made by the Argentine
Secretariat of Energy originated by the shortage of such fuel in the domestic market,
all hydrocarbon producers can choose to substitute the amount of natural gas

requested with some equivalent energy source (mechanism called energy swap).

Second, the assertion of the Claimants and witness Valle that “to exercise the option

of sending gas substitutes to the domestic market instead of their export volumes”

5 Cameron Witness Statement, supra (n 107) { 60.

© Greco Second Report, supra (n 139) { 62.

27 Resolution 659/03, Annex I, Section 15 (Exhibit AR-196).
8 Decision SCC 27/04 (Exhibit AR-189).

229 Resolution SE 725/05 (Exhibit AR-205).

199

685.

686.

687.

688.

would have led to “greater” loss or would have broken even only “if the customers
agreed to share the incremental costs” is false (Rejoinder of the Argentine Republic

4 323).

According to the contract addenda, Chilean purchasers bore “all costs that Sellers
[Sierra Chata producers Consortium] may incur in as a result of a proposal by
Purchaser to Substitute natural gas or other equivalent sources of energy...” In other
words, at doing a swap, its cost did not lead to economic restraints (Rejoinder of the

Argentine Republic | 324).

Third, there were no logistic constraints. Apart from being able to import alternative
fuels, the Claimants produce and market hydrocarbons that are natural gas substitutes.
In fact, a company of the same economic group as MEDA and MASA, ESSO
Petrolera Argentina, has an oil refinery in the city of Campana, province of Buenos

Aires, which produces fuel-oil and diesel

Lastly, the Claimants have many times requested to the Argentine Secretariat of
Energy the swap, with equivalent sources of energy, the requests for additional
injection of natural gas for the domestic market. This was acknowledged by witness
Valle in her supplementary statement who asserted the Claimants “performed several

energy substitutions with one of [our] Chilean costumers.”*°
The Energy Secretary explains that

“These mechanisms have been widely used. As a matter of fact, MASA
has used them more than once in relation to its contract for the
provision of gas from Sierra Chata to its Chilean customers. The swaps
requested and implemented by MASA were related to two thermal
power plants: the San Nicolds Power Plant, where electric power can be

250 Valle Supplementary Statement, supra (n 175) J 29 (Exhibit C-512)

200

689.

690.

691.

generated through coal, fuel oil or natural gas, and the Puerto Power

Plant, where swaps were linked to fuel oil equipment.””"".
To summarize, considering the problem of domestic market supply, the Argentine
Secretariat of Energy summoned a meeting of hydrocarbon producers and voluntary
agreements were executed that guaranteed sufficient volumes of natural gas supply. It
is worth mentioning that the practice of executing agreements with private companies
was followed by the United States government so that the different economic sectors
could be in line with the circumstances resulting from the current international

financial crisis.

3. The Tribunal’ Analysis

The Tribunal has above under the heading “Applicable Regulatory Framework”
(VIB) held that the Deregulation Decrees enjoy legislative status and prevail over the
Hydrocarbons Law passed in 1967 on the specific issues of gas prices and gas
marketing. Moreover, the Tribunal has under the heading “Applicable Regulatory
Framework” (VII) held that the Gas Law and not the Hydrocarbons Law regulates the
marketing and the export of natural gas. Article 3 of the Gas Law, which is under the
heading “Export and Import of Natural Gas”, provides inter alia:

“Natural gas exports must be approved in each case by the National

Executive Power within a period of 90 days following the receipt of a

request, provided that the domestic supply is not affected.”
Thus, Article 3 of the Gas Law requires that export authorizations do not affect
domestic supply. Dr. Martelli said at the oral hearing: “Once this Permit was granted,
it was firm in the sense that it was an export commitment that was irrevocable and

continuous under the volumes that were contracted and not the other volumes that

25! Cameron Witness Statement, supra (n 107) 1.90.

201

692.

693.

were subject of the possibility of being interrupted.”?” The Gas Law does not subject
the continuity of a firm export permit to later events.* Dr. Bianchi said on cross
examination that the analysis whether the requested export affects domestic supply is
made “upon granting the authorization.””** Also Article 12 of Resolution SE 299/98
(Natural Gas) provides after having referred to the 5-year policy review to be carried
out by the SE: “In any case, the legal continuity of the export permits granted as of
that date will not be affected.”?*° The same principle is also adopted in Article 2 of
the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty, which confirms that any analysis on impact on
domestic supply is performed at the time the export authorization is granted.**° This
also supports the view that any analysis of impact on domestic supply is performed at

the time export authorisation is issued.

The fact that volumes of natural gas exported as excess amounts, i.e. exceeding the
daily amount pursuant to Section 6 of the Sierra Chata Permit (Resolution 140/96),
shall be counted as part of the total volume authorised to be exported hereby does not

allow any other conclusion as to the meaning of the notion “firm”.

From the Decree 1738/92 Annex I, Article 3(5), as amended by Decree 951/95, it can

be seen that “firm volumes” are those that cannot be interrupted once their export has
been approved by the export authorization and that “excess volumes” are those that
may be interrupted if there are domestic supply difficulties.”°’ Article 3(5) of the
Article provides:

“The authorization issued by the Executive power may provide for the
export of excess Gas to the extent established therein, provided that

2 Transcript in English, Day 5, p. 936.

25 See Bianchi, Transcript in English Day 6, p. 1304-1305.
°4 Transcript in English, Day 6, p. 1299.

*5 art. 12 (Exhibit C-36).

236 Art. 2 (Exhibit C-89).

37 Decree 951/95 (Exhibit C-31).

202

694.

695.

696.

697.

said exports are subject to interruption if there are domestic supply

difficulties. In this case, it is not required to obtain an approval for each

excess gas export in the authorization; exporters will only be required

to file with the Gas Regulator, for information purposes, the

corresponding contracts, the corresponding contract including the

interruptibility condition and the lack of compensation if such

interruption occurs.”
Also the Sierra Chata export authorization confirms the difference between “firm
volumes” and “excess volumes”. It authorizes in Article 1 the export of up to a
specific quantity of firm volume of natural gas for a maximum of 15 years and of
natural gas in excess of the quantity mentioned in the same Article, subject to the

latter volume being interruptible for the needs of domestic supply.?**

Argentina asserts that the term “firm” refers to a type of transportation service that
may be interrupted whenever required for emergency or force majeur reasons and
refers to the Gas Regulatory Decree, Annex I, Section 1 and Presidential Decree No.
2255/92, Annex A, Sub-Annex II, Section 2(p). It is, however established that “firm
transportation” and “firm volumes” are different concepts.” Also Argentina's expert
Mr. Nobilia said that an export permit which was granted when he acted as Chief
Legal Counsel of YPF specifically distinguishes firm export volumes from firm

transportation service as two distinct concepts.”

Moreover, Article 3 of the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty provides in Article 3:

“The parties guarantee the elimination of all legal, regulatory, and
administrative restrictions on the export and transportation of any such
natural gas that Argentine sellers agree to supply to Chile.”
The Claimants' witness Mrs. Valle said at the hearing that the Claimants received up

to three re-routing orders during the same day that included different volumes, often

** Resolution 140/96 (Exhibit C-628).
2 See Bianchi, Transcript in English, Day 6 p. 1304-1305.
*40 Transcript in English, Day 7 p.1568.

203

698.

notified informally (for instance by telephone) and without disclosing the recipient of
the re-routed volumes. The Claimants were forced to breach their existing export
contracts to deliver gas volumes to “anonymous” users with whom they had no
contractual relationship. When the re-routing orders came, the Claimants were not
told where the gas was going and was therefore for a long period of time, sometimes
five or six months, unable to invoice the purchaser. The identified user said that the
Claimants had not been the ones who had delivered gas to the user. The user failed to
recognise the price or the user was waiting for a Government agency to confirm the
price and the volume and the financial impact was substantial. Moreover, Mrs Valle
said that as a result of the export curtailment and the Export Withholdings Mobil's
export business in Argentina disappeared actually.**! This testimony of Mrs. Valle

has not been disputed by Argentina.

Mrs. Valles's witness statement also confirms that the Claimants did not sign the First
Gas Agreement (2004) because this would have put them into breach of their existing
export contracts, and because, in any event, the Claimants' supplies to the domestic

market at the time covered the volumes under the “agreement.”

Moreover, Mrs.
Valles's witness statement confirms that the Claimants refused to enter into the
Second Gas Agreement for the same reason and also because doing so would be
deemed a waiver of its vested rights to freely market its natural gas. Moreover, Mrs
Valle said at the oral hearing that the Claimants were more impacted by the Second
Gas Agreement than many other producers because the requested unreal volumes and
since the volume of the non-signers were rerouted first and to the lower price
users. 7? It is undisputed that the GOA applied both Gas Agreements to the

Claimants. Pursuant to Resolution SE 599/07 signing producers are only required to

* Transcript in Engli
*® Transcript in Eng!
Transcript in Englis|

Day 4 p.730-736.
Day 4 p. 787-788.
, Day 4 p. 736.

  

243

204

699.

700.

supply additional volumes once all the export volumes of the non-signing producers
have been rerouted. *“* The Tribunal finds it established that the Claimants’ tights to
export authorized volumes of natural gas under the Sierra Chata concession have been
severely impaired since a considerable part of firm export volumes from MASA’s

Sierra Chata Gas Production were re-routed to the domestic market.

The Tribunal finds it established that the Claimants' firm rights to export the volumes
authorized under the Sierra Chata Gas Permit were severely impaired by numerous
measures adopted since 2004. These measures prevented the Claimants from
exporting gas from the Sierra Chata block and imposed re-routing obligations to the
domestic market. The GOA did not condition the Sierra Chata Export Permit on the

maintenance of a certain level of reserves.

D. Export Withholdings
I. The Claimants' position

Decree 1589/89, one of the Deregulation Decrees, provided in Article 3 that the
export and import of hydrocarbons and their byproducts would be exempt from any
present or future tariffs, duties, or withholdings.” In addition, the GOA granted
safeguards against discriminatory or specific taxes.“ Through Decree 1969/93, the
GOA included both of these protections in the Sierra Chata Concession.”*” These
were fundamental rules of the program to deregulate the oil and gas industry and were
a major reason why the Claimants and other foreign investors had an overwhelmingly

positive response to privatization. As explained by Professor Bianchi, the protections

44 art. 9 and 10 of Resolution 599/07 (Exhibit C-75).

45 art. 3 (Exhibit C-15).

*4 Plan Argentina, Art. 8, C-27. See also Conversion Decree, Art. 9 (Exhibit C-28).
47 Decree 1969/69, Arts. 1, 6 (Exhibit C-94).

205

701.

702.

703.

against the imposition of Export Withholdings under the Sierra Chata Concession

qualify as tax stability provisions.”“*

Dr. Teijeiro, an expert in Argentine tax law, confirms that the mere imposition of
Export Withholdings violates the tax stability guarantees that the Government gave
through the Legal Framework and the Sierra Chata Concession.” Thus, when the
Argentine Government began imposing Export Withholdings on gas in 2004, it did so
in violation of its legal and contractual commitments to the Claimants. Other than a
minor discrepancy over the effective rates resulting from the Government’s
calculation of Export Withholdings, there appears to be no dispute between the parties

concerning whether, and at what rate, the Government imposed those measures.

By imposing Export Withholdings, the Argentine Government also violated its
commitment to exempt the Claimants from specific and discriminatory taxes. Export
Withholdings on natural gas were discriminatory because they vastly exceed the
effective rate of export withholdings on crude oil by-products that compete with
natural gas and the 5% export withholding rate for petrochemicals and fertilizers that
use gas as a raw material. Dr. Teijeiro identifies three additional reasons why Export
Withholdings constitute “specific” taxes and violate the prohibition on specific and

discriminatory taxes.?

Thus, even leaving aside Argentina’s specific commitment to exempt the Claimants
from present and future Export Withholdings, the specific and discriminatory manner

in which Argentina imposed those measures violated the Claimants’ rights.

*48 ‘Third Legal Opinion by Alberto B. Bianchi, dated 22 April 2010 [hereinafter “Bianchi Second

Supplemental Opinion”) { 114 (Exhibit C-505).

Tegal Opinion of Guillermo O. Teijeiro Legal Opinion dated 23 April 2010 [hereinafter “Teijeiro
Legal Opinion” {6 (Exhibit C-509).

250 Teijeiro Legal Opinion, supra (n 249) J 23 (Exhibit C-609).

206

704.

705.

706.

707.

In 2002, the GOA completely disregarded these guarantees by enacting Law 25,561,
which authorized the Executive Branch to impose export withholdings on
hydrocarbons for a five-year period and authorized the Executive Branch to establish
the respective applicable rates.”"! By virtue of Law 26,217, the GOA extended Export
Withholdings through 2012.7°?

In May 2004, through Decree 645/04, Argentina imposed a 20% Export Withholding
on the Claimants’ gas exports, among other gaseous hydrocarbons.”*> In addition, it
authorized the Ministry of Economy to modify the Export Withholding rate. At that
time, the alleged purpose of Export Withholdings on gas was to align the tax

treatment of gas with crude oil and byproducts.

In June 2006, Argentina and Bolivia entered into the Framework Agreement for the
Sale of Gas and the Execution of Projects Concerning Energy Integration (the
“Framework Agreement”). Under that Agreement, Argentina agreed to buy gas from
Bolivia at US$ 5/MMBTU. This entailed a significant increase over the price
Argentina had paid under a previous agreement with Bolivia (i.e, US$
3.18/MMBTU) and it was much higher than US$ 1.20/MMBTU, the average

regulated price then paid to MASA and other Argentine producers.

The GOA decided to finance the import of the higher-priced Bolivian gas by further
increasing the Export Withholding rate on domestic gas. Hence, in July 2006, the
GOA (i) increased the Export Withholding rate for gas from 20% to 45%,"™ and (ii)
arbitrarily modified the basis for calculating Export Withholdings; instead of

calculating Export Withholdings based on the price that Argentine producers actually

5! Art. 6, Law 25,561 (Exhibit C-41).

°° Exhibit C-69.
253, rt, 2 (Exhibit C-60).
254 Decree 645/04 (Exhibit C-60).

207

708.

709.

710.

received (i.e., approximately US$ 1.65/MMBTU), Argentina began calculating the
withholdings on the price at which it agreed to import gas from Bolivia (initially, US$

5/MMBTU).”>

These measures effectively increased Export Withholdings on gas to a flat rate of US$
2.25/MMBTU (45% of US$ 5/MMBTU) and raised the effective Export Withholding
rate more than 675%, which exceeded the average export price that Argentine gas
exporters received from foreign customers by approximately 40%.°°° This amounts to
113% of the export price that the Claimants received and renders exporting gas

unprofitable since all of the profit (and more) is taken by the GOA.”

Most recently, through Resolution MEP 127/08, the GOA once again (i) increased the
applicable Export Withholding rate on gas (from 45% to 100%), and (ii) altered the
basis on which it calculates Export Withholdings, disregarding the much lower export
prices actually received by exporters such as MASA.”** Instead of calculating Export
Withholdings on the basis of the price at which MASA exports gas, the GOA uses
artificial prices. Under Resolution MEP 534/06, the GOA calculated Export
Withholdings based on the price at which it imports gas from Bolivia (currently US$
10.30/MMBTU). Since early 2008, the GOA has calculated Export Withholdings on
the highest prevailing rate for gas imports (during the winter of 2008, between US$
14.5-17/MMBTU due to the import of LNG).””

Thus, Resolution MEP 127/08 entails a further increase of approximately 650% in the
applicable Export Withholding rate. As a result, during the winter of 2008, export

withholdings on gas exports in Argentina were approximately between US$ 14.5 and

**5 Resolution MEP 534/06, Art. | (Exhibit C-71).

256 Bastos Report, supra (n 57) 144 (Exhibit C-1).

LECG Report, supra (n 22) 62 (Exhibit C-2).

258 Resolution MEP 127/08 (Exhibit C-77). See also LECG Report { 63 (Exhibit C-2).
°9 Resolution MEP 127/08, Art. | (Exhibit C-77).

257

208

711.

712.

713.

714.

17/MMBTHU, that is between seven and eight times higher than the actual average
export price they received by Argentine producers (around US$ 1.90/MMBTU). This

equates to nearly 800% of the Claimants’ export price.

This measure further aggravates the uncertainty and unpredictability of the Claimants’
investment environment since the basis for calculating Export Withholdings has
become dependent on future and uncertain events that have nothing to do with the

Claimants’ exports (such as changes in the purchase price of LNG).

In attempting to explain why it was imposing Export Withholdings, the GOA never
settled on one rationale. The different reasons the GOA gave for Export Withholdings

over time include the following:

. the alignment of the tax treatment of crude oil and its byproducts
with gas;
. the need to consolidate the sustainability of the economic and

fiscal plan; and

. the goal of capturing the allegedly extraordinary gains of the

hydrocarbons business.

But as former Secretary Bastos notes, the motivation for these withholdings is

political.?

The Claimants were not able to pass through Export Withholdings to their Chilean
customers in the Sierra Chata field from June 2004 to July 2005, and although they

are currently able to pass through Export Withholdings, there is no certainty that they

26 Bastos Report, supra (n 57) {ff 144-145.

209

715.

716.

717.

718.

will be able to do so in the future.*°' These measures also caused damage to the
Claimants’ investments by increasing royalty rates. In addition, as Ms. Valle notes,
these developments had a negative impact on the Claimants’ relationships with their

Chilean customers.”

The Export Withholdings on gas violate the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty, which

prohibits discriminatory treatment of gas exports by Argentina.

Under Article 9 of the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty, the tax treatment for gas
exports may not exceed either the tax treatment for exports of petroleum products or

the tax treatment for products that use gas as a raw material.°°>

Even without taking
into account their calculation based on a grossly exaggerated reference price, the
Export Withholdings imposed on gas grossly exceed the 5% export withholding rate
for petrochemicals and fertilizers that use gas as a raw material. They also
significantly exceed the current 31.03% effective rate of Export Withholdings on

crude oil.

This discriminatory treatment violates the plain requirement of the Chile- Argentina
Energy Treaty and is contrary to the GOA’s own statements in the decree that

imposed the 20% Export Withholdings.

Despite the straightforward nature of the Claimants’ Export Withholdings claim,
Argentina seeks to justify those measures by arguing that Article 6 of the Sierra Chata
Concession specifically subjected the Claimants to the general tax regime. In doing
so, Argentina conveniently fails to include the full text of this provision, which

expressly excludes “provisions that levy specifically or discriminatorily the person,

261

°8! LECG Report, supra (n 22) 64 (Exhibit C-2).
2° Valle Witness Statement, supra (n 34) {] 81-82 and 84 (Exhibit C-4).
263 Art. 9 (Exhibit C-89).

210

719.

720.

721.

722.

legal status, or activity of the permit or concession holder or the assets assigned to the
respective works.” When read in context, it becomes clear that Article 6 of the Sierra
Chata Concession limits the application of general taxation legislation with respect to

specific or discriminatory taxes.

In addition, reference to the general tax legislation does not bar the exemption from
Export Withholdings established by Article 3 of Decree 1589/89, because the Sierra
Chata Concession incorporates both types of protection. As explained by Professor
Bianchi, Argentina’s denial of limitations to the applicability of the general tax
legislation entails the unacceptable proposition that there is a flagrant contradiction
between Articles 2 and 6 of Decree 1969/93, which set forth the terms of the Sierra

Chata Concession.

If taken to its logical conclusion, Argentina’s proposition that the Claimants are
subject to the general tax legislation despite receiving specific tax stability
commitments would lead to the unacceptable conclusion that the Sierra Chata
Concession included a protection that was ineffective ab initio. If the Argentine
Government had the ability, as it now contends, to disregard or revoke these
guarantees—which were granted throughout the full term of the concession—when
problems arose, that would entail the unacceptable conclusion that the guarantees and
promises made by the Argentine Government were devoid of any legal significance

and were merely illusory

The Sierra Chata Concession created vested legal and contractual rights, as well as
legitimate expectations for investments made in reliance on them. It follows that, even
under Argentine law, the Argentine Government cannot unilaterally amend those

rights, which were designed to induce investment, without paying compensation.

Argentina wrongly portrays the Claimants’ claim regarding Export Withholdings as a

challenge to its sovereign authority to amend its regulations. In support of this

211

723.

contention, Argentina relies on the Argentine Supreme Court for the proposition that
no one has a vested right to the maintenance of a certain regime. But none of the
cases that Argentina cites involved tax exemptions that the Government granted
through contracts or concessions. Rather, the claims in those cases were based on
unilateral tax or other incentive measures. In making this argument, Argentina ignores
that the Argentine Supreme Court has consistently held that, when an individual has
fulfilled all substantial acts, conditions, and formal requirements under the provisions
of a specific regulation, that individual has a vested right that the Government cannot
abrogate through new legislation without violating the protection of property

recognized by Article 17 of the National Constitution.”

Argentina also tries to justify its imposition of Export Withholdings by arguing that
the exemption from those measures contained in Article 3 of Decree 1589/89 is a
“privilege and therefore, is only temporary.” The Argentine Government argues that it
is unreasonable that such a provision could grant rights ad infinitum. Contrary to
Argentina’s position, through the exemption from Export Withholdings contained in

the Sierra Chata Concession the Government created a vested right.?°

As explained
by Professor Bianchi, even if ad arguendo the exemption established in Article 3 of
Decree 1589/89 could be categorized as a privilege granted in accordance with Article
75(18) of the Argentine Constitution, it does not follow that the Government could
simply remove that exemption without consequence. The Argentine Supreme Court
has confirmed that tax exemptions constitute vested rights.?°° Thus, the Claimants are

not claiming that Argentina cannot change its laws on Export Withholdings, but rather

24 Bianchi Legal Opinion, supra (n 100) 156.170 (Exhibit C-3).

Bianchi Legal Opinion {| 156-170 (Exhibit C-3), Teijeiro Legal Opinion, supra (n 249) ¥ 146
(Exhibit C-605).
26 Bianchi Second Supplemental Opinion, supra (n 248) {| 146 (Exhibit C-505).

265

212

724.

725.

726.

that it must respect the Claimants’ vested legal and contractual right to be exempted

from Export Withholdings or else pay compensation for failing to do so.

Argentina further argues that the Claimants could not expect to be exempt from
Export Withholdings since the Government imposed withholdings on all exports as a
general measure. Even if Argentina had treated all other exports the same as it treated
gas, which it did not, that fact would not justify its repudiation of the Claimants’
tights. First, unlike hydrocarbons, most goods had no protection against export
withholdings. Second, the Government must respect the export withholding
exemptions that it granted to specific goods even after the “general” imposition of
export withholdings.”°” It follows that Argentina’s attempt to justify export

withholdings as a general measure fails as a matter of fact, as well as law.

Argentina argues that, under the Hydrocarbons Law, the Argentine Government is
entitled to fix prices and quotas for hydrocarbon exports; thus, it concludes that the
Argentine Government can also use export withholdings to reduce local prices. This
argument fails to recognise that the Hydrocarbons Law only empowers the
Government to fix crude oil prices, not those of natural gas; the Gas Law governs
natural gas marketing and pricing. 268 Argentina also argues that the Hydrocarbons
Law authorizes the Executive to establish subsidies or withholdings on exports if

international prices increase or decrease substantially.

In addition, Argentina’s logic that the power to impose export quotas entails the
power to impose export withholdings is flawed from an economic standpoint. Export

quotas and export withholdings are not interchangeable. Export quotas, which allow

267

This is the case with forestry products, Law 25,080 (Exhibit C-524). See also Martelli Legal
Opinion, supra (n 141) Pf 209, 211-212 (Exhibit C-5080).

2° Gas Law, Art. 83 (Exhibit C-31), Decree 2731/3 (Exhibit C-34). See also Martelli Legal Opinion,
supra (n 141) | 43 (Exhibit C-508).

213

727.

728.

729.

producers to continue to collect the international prices for the gas that they do export,
do not have the same effect on a gas producer as export withholdings, which
effectively allow producers to collect only a reduced price, since they are supposed to
be taxed on the prices producers actually receive. Thus Argentina is wrong to assert
that its power under the Hydrocarbons Law to impose export quotas includes the

power to impose export withholdings.

In any event, Decree 1589/89 (given its legislative status) supplemented and
superseded Article 6 of the Hydrocarbons Law and effectively limited the scope of the
Argentine Government’s regulatory authority. That decree distinguishes between
export quotas and export duties by providing specific guarantees with respect to each:
Article 3 of Decree 1589/89 prohibits the imposition of Export Withholdings, while
Article 6 of Decree 1589/89 protects (via compensation for price differentials) against

the imposition of export restrictions and quotas.”

By providing that it could not impose export restrictions without paying
compensation, the Argentine Government effectively restricted the scope of its
regulatory authority and created legitimate expectations for investors.” Article 3 of
Decree 1589/89 expressly prohibits “present” and “future” export withholdings in
furtherance of both that law’s objectives to promote production and the policies set
forth by the Law of State Reform to deregulate the sector. Thus, neither the Executive
nor the Energy Secretariat can, through implementing regulations (which do not enjoy

legislative status) contravene the provisions of the Deregulation Decrees.

Argentina argues that the Claimants “erroneously claim that discriminatory treatment

took place because the exports of crude oil and petrochemical products and fertilizers

26 Arts, 3, 6 (Exhibit C-15).
270 Arts, 3, 6 (Exhibit C-15); Decree 1212/89, Art. 6 (Exhibit C-14).

214

730.

731.

732.

using gas as raw material are subject to a lower rate than that imposed on natural gas
exports.” By pointing out that Argentina violated the provisions of the Chile-
Argentina Energy Treaty through its discriminatory taxation measures, the Claimants
are not “trying to harmonize the tax regime of Argentine exports”. Rather, the
Claimants are simply observing that, by imposing Export Withholdings, Argentina
violated a treaty obligation that coincides with Argentina’s domestic legal and

contractual commitment to exempt the Claimants from discriminatory taxes.

Article 9 of the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty provides that the Government cannot
levy taxes on natural gas exports at a rate that is higher than the tax rate applying to
the exports of crude oil byproducts or products that use gas as a raw material. Even
without taking into account that the Argentine Government calculates Export
Withholdings on a grossly exaggerated reference price, the Export Withholdings
imposed on gas grossly exceed the 5% export withholding rate for petrochemicals and
fertilizers that use gas as a raw material. They also significantly exceed the current
52% effective rate of Export Withholdings on crude oil byproducts. This is exactly the
kind of distortion that the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty and the Claimants’ legal

and contractual rights were aimed at preventing.

2. Argentina's position

The Claimants have not suffered the damages they allege in their Claim Memorial
due to the hydrocarbon export withholding established by the Argentine Republic.
They have passed through their value to the Chilean buyers. Consequently, the claim

associated with damages as a result of export withholding must be dismissed.

In the amendments to the gas export contracts between the Producer Consortium of

Sierra Chata and their Chilean customers (Metrogas and AES Gener) it is expressly

215

733.

734.

735.

736.

established that “the prices mentioned in items 1 and 2 include the export duties for

the period from January 1, 2005 to December 31, 2006.2”!
As explained by experts Sandleris and Schargrodsky:

“Claimants passed through the export tax to their Chilean customers as
from January 2005, and not as from May 2005 as they claim. This is
evidenced by point 3.1 of the addenda: “Point 3.1. The prices
mentioned in points 1 and 2 include the export duties for the period
between 1/1/2005 and 12/31/2006 [...].” Points 1 and 2 referred to
prices of around USD 1.90 MMBTU for the period between 1/1/05 and
4/30/05, USD 1.95 MMBTU between 5/1/05 and 9/30/05, USD 1.975
between 10/1/05 and 4/30/06 and USD 2 MMBTU between 5/1/06 and
12/31/06. MASA and MEDA, instead, argue that “From June 2004
through April 2005, Claimants were unable to pass through export
taxes to their Sierra Chata Chilean customers[ The claim for export
taxes between January and April 2005 is inadmissible.”?””

 

  

 

This means that since January 2005 up to the present moment, the Claimants have
passed through the export duties to their Chilean customers and have therefore

suffered no damages.

To make it very clear: from the foregoing it arises that the only (alleged) damage
suffered by the Claimants is the application of an export duty of 20% during the six-
month period (between July and December 2004) which, besides, only implies an

actual value of 16%.

In fact, the Claimants acknowledge that during the period they could not pass through
the export duties to their Chilean customers, the export duty “meant an effective rate
of 16.67% since the amount of the Export Withholdings was deducted from the sales

price.”

21" Addendum to the Sale and Purchase of Natural Gas Agreement between AES Gener S.A., Metrogas

S.A. and the Consortium of Sierra Chata producers, 26 April 2005, item 3.1 (Exhibit RA- 204); see
also Greco Report, supra (n 125) J 106.
2? UTDT Report, supra (n 156) J 151.

216

737.

738.

739.

740.

TAL.

Therefore, the description above could never be construed as an expropriation on the

part of the Argentine Republic in violation of its obligations pursuant to the BIT.

Furthermore, new contract addenda show that Chilean purchasers have reimbursed

100% of the export duties to the present.?”°

In addition, the reimbursement of export duties was not at all a new fact; actually the

274,

Claimants had, from the beginning of the business relationship~’’with the Chilean

companies, contractual rights for these to bear any possible future taxes. This was

recognized by Chilean counterparties in all the contract addenda.””>

Moreover, Chilean purchasers reimbursed export duties even for the second half of
2004 (a period regarding which, in the Counter-Memorial, it was assumed that the
Claimants had been unable to transfer the export duties). Hence, it would seem that
the Claimants were reimbursed by absolutely all amounts paid as export duties. In
fact, only this arises from the evidence submitted in the arbitration, which means that

these claims raised by the Claimants constitute an abuse.

Finally, export duties were not applied on a differentiated or specific basis to the

Claimants, on the contrary, apart from hydrocarbons, they were applied to a large

273 Contract addendum of 26 September 2006, Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; Contract addendum of 31 January
2007, Section 2.1; Contract addendum of 1 July 2008, Section 1. In: File 750-003106/94 of the Natural
Gas Export Authorization concerning the Sierra Chata field (Exhibit AR-306).

*™ Natural Gas Export Agreement with Metrogas SA and Chilgener SA, 23 October 1996, Section
A.15: Taxes: the Purchasers shall be responsible for all taxes, levies, royalties and other charges
applicable downstream from such interconnection point at Tratayen in the Neuquina Basin and all
import duties applicable to the Natural Gas.” The interconnection point at Tratayen is located within
the Argentine Republic, in the province of Neuquén, a few miles away from the Sierra Chata field
(Exhibit C-100).

* Contract addendum of 26 September 2006, recital 3; Contract addendum of 31 January 2007,
Section 2.1. In: File 750-003106/94 of the Natural Gas Export Authorization concerning the Sierra
Chata field (Exhibit AR-306).

217

742.

743.

744.

number of commodities and manufactured products from the industrial and farming

sectors. In this sense, Ratti indicates that:

“(T]he Argentine Ministry of Economy fixed export duties for several
products, including foodstuffs, such as fish, dairy products, eggs,
honey, vegetables, edible fruits, coffee, tea, yerba mate, spices, etc.;
industrial or medicinal plants, tobacco, salt, sulphur, plants and flowers,
roots, soil and rocks, plaster, lime and cement, metalliferous minerals,
slag and ashes, fertilizers, rubber and its by-products, wool, cotton,
etc”. 7

 

Furthermore, Dr. Mata states that export duties applied to the Claimants “were the
result of the ordinary exercise of powers by the State, were general, were not
addressed to a specific operator of the activity, and there was no discrimination

among the actors of the sector that were in the same situation.”

The Argentine Republic did not execute any tax stabilization agreement for the
Claimants and the Chihuidos Concession was not included in an export withholding

tax exemption, but on the contrary, it was expressly stated that “[t]he holders of

Export Permits shall be subject to the general tax legislation that may apply.”?”*

Furthermore, the rule specific to the business of export of natural gas produced in the
Sierra Chata lot (Export Resolution 140/96) does not provide for personal

exemptions. 27° As set forth in the tax legislation, exemptions are not presumed and a

positive act granting them must exist.”°°

276 Witness Statement by Eduardo A. Ratti dated 19 November 2009 [hereinafter “Ratti Witness
Statement| | 23.

27” Mata Report, supra (n 129) ¥ 139.

278 Decree 1969/93, Art. 6 (Exhibit RA-75).

2 Resolution SO y SP 140/96 (Exhibit AR-81).

280 Law No. 23,771, Section 4 (Exhibit AR-272); Resolutions DGI 4206/96 and 4191/96 (Exhibit AR-
284).

218

745.

746.

747.

748.

749.

In this respect, Dr. Mata explains that concessions to the Claimants are subject to the
general tax legislation “and considering that the export withholdings are clearly taxes,
it may be concluded that the “withholdings” are also included in the “general
legislation” and, therefore, may be subject to such modifications as may be

determined by the lawmaker.. 778

The Argentine Government never waived the possibility of modifying rules or its
tariff policy. Exemptions granted, on which the Claimants base their (alleged) right
did not imply any waiver on the part of the Argentine Republic to exercise its tax

authority (a feature of Nation Sovereignty) and to modify such rules.

There is no impediment for a subsequent rule of the same or higher level to modify
the regulation of this issue in a reasonable manner. It is not a right vested ad infinitum
but an applicable legal regime that can (obviously) be modified, like in any other legal

system in the world.

The Claimants arguments related to exemptions show a clear oversight of the basic
principles of general law, and of the rules that govern exemptions, in particular. Their
stance implies maintaining inflexible tax clauses that would ban the legislator from
levying certain taxable situations, creating a (groundless) privilege for certain
companies, ad infinitum. The legislator is entitled to establish taxes and to modify
them, both to obtain funds for the treasury and to comply, by means of said tool, with
other purposes pursued by the Government. In this context, they are also entitled to

establish exemptions or tax reliefs.

The exemptions, in particular, are exceptions -or situations of privilege or

preference— established by the legislators for economic or social reasons that address

8! Mata Report, supra (n 129) q{ 135.

219

750.

751.

the situation that a country is going through at a certain time. On the basis of the
same reasons as those for which they are used as a temporary instrument that can be
resorted to by the legislator in a given situation, they may be modified at any time.
They are exceptions from the obligation to pay and divert from the principles of

generality and equality.

Although the Argentine Constitution empowers the legislator to grant privileges or
exemptions in view of the country’s prosperity, it expressly provides that they must
be temporary. Furthermore, it is unreasonable to consider that a rule without a specific

term should remain in force forever in the legal system.

It is a principle of Argentine law and of the law in general that nobody is entitled to
the maintenance of a particular legal regime. The Claimants are not entitled to a
crystallization of their right and they could not have any legitimate expectation that
the regulation would never be modified.” In this regard, the Argentine Supreme

Court has held that:

“[NJobody has a vested right to the maintenance of the laws or the
maintenance of the taxes created or exempted by them (Fallos:
288:279; 291:359; 299:93; 303:1835); and that the repeal of a tax
exemption reaffirms the equality principle, which is the basis of tax and
public burdens (Article 16 of the Argentine Constitution, final part) and
obviously entails the legislator’s intention that the tax be borne by the
person benefitting from the exemption.”?**

?8 Parkerings-Companiet AS v Lithuania, ICSID Case No ARB/05/08, Award (11 September 2007)
{hereinafter “Parkerings Award”] J 332 (LA AR-201); see also EDF (Services) Limited v Romania
ICSID Case No ARB/05S/13, Award (8 October 2009) [hereinafter “EDF (Services) Award”] | 218
(Exhibit LA AR-190).

*8 Argentine Supreme Court of Justice, Unola de Argentina Ltda v YPF y Banade s/ contrato de obra
publica, Fallos: 321:2683 (1998) (Exhibit LA AR-113).

220

752.

753.

754.

755.

756.

757.

The most important of the rules of the Regulatory Framework for the hydrocarbon
sector, the Hydrocarbons Law, was not repealed. This law provides for the possibility

of fixing prices and establishing hydrocarbon export quotas.”**

Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that export duties can be used to adjust
domestic prices, which at the same time gives more freedom to companies. What is
more, the Hydrocarbons Law provides that the Executive will allow exports to be
made at “reasonable prices.” If international prices happen to go up or down
substantially, the Executive could very well provide for subsidies or export

withholdings, respectively.

Lastly, neither Decree 824/957 granting a hydrocarbon exploitation concession on
the Sierra Chata lot, nor SE Resolution 140/967*° granting an authorization for export
of gas volumes produced at that lot, provide for the alleged right to stability and to the

exemption from the imposition of export duties relied upon by the Claimants.

In sum, the Argentine Republic never guaranteed tax stability to the Claimants and

the Claimants do know that.

The Claimants maintain that “the Export Withholdings on gas violate the Chile-
Argentina Energy Treaty, which prohibits discriminatory treatment of gas exports by

Argentina.”

Indeed, as acknowledged by the Claimants, the Economic Complementation
Agreement between the Argentine Republic and the Republic of Chile acknowledges
the power of the Argentine State to establish export withholdings on natural gas

exports.

“ Art. 6, 3 (Exhibit AR-1).
°5 Decree 824/95 (Exhibit AR-78)
286 SE Resolution 140/96 (Exhibit AR-81).

221

758.

759.

760.

761.

762.

763.

Hence, it cannot be maintained that the Argentine Republic supposedly waived the
right to establish hydrocarbon export duties, as the Claimants seem to allege in

contradiction.

Even though the Claimants recognise that the Argentine Republic is authorized to
establish withholdings on natural gas exports, they erroneously claim that a
discriminatory treatment took place because the exports of crude oil and
petrochemical products and fertilizers using gas as raw material are subject to a lower

rate than that imposed on natural gas exports.

It is clear that this arbitration is not the appropriate venue for questioning the export
duties imposed on crude oil exports or on the exports of petrochemical products and
fertilizers. Furthermore, it is not the appropriate venue for trying to harmonize the tax
regime of Argentine exports, especially when no losses have been sustained, insofar
as, during the period in which they alleged to have been subject to “discriminatory
treatment’, the Claimants clearly carried over the export duties to their Chilean

clients.

Nevertheless, Guichén points out that it “it should be underlined that the dispute
settlement mechanisms provided for in the 2nd Additional Protocol were never used
in connection with controversies relating to natural gas. Therefore, at no time were the

parties declared to have committed a breach.”?*’

Finally, it should be noted that the parties to Additional Protocol No. 2 are Argentina

and Chile, and not the Claimants.

As a result of Argentina’s worst ever social, economic and institutional crisis and the

repeal of the convertibility regime, a massive devaluation of the local currency took

87 Guichén Witness Statement, supra (n 149) { 122.

222

764.

765.

766.

place. In mid-2002, the Argentine peso plummeted by more than 200% as against the
US Dollar and the fiscal deficit resulting from the recession and subsequent economic
depression for more than 4 years was very serious. In that context, the Argentine
Congress enacted the Emergency Law, which, among other things, establishes a series

of export duties on broad sectors of the Argentine economy.

In addition to export duties on hydrocarbons (as set forth in Article 6 of the
Emergency Law), other export duties on a large number of primary products and
agricultural and industrial manufactures were established, with a view to generating

tax revenues and reducing the impact of the currency devaluation on domestic prices.

Export duties on hydrocarbons were fixed at that time at values between 4% and
17%? Two years later in 2004, with a view to according equal tax treatment to all
hydrocarbons (because at the time the Claimants and the other gas exporters enjoyed a

privileged situation), duties on the export of natural gas were imposed.”*?

As in the case of other sectors, the withholdings affected only a portion of the
extraordinary windfall profits made by exporters as a result of the massive
devaluation of the local currency. In addition, in the context in which they were
adopted, the export withholdings made it possible to alleviate the inflation impact that
the devaluation had on the prices of tradable goods. Along the same lines, Sandleris
and Shargrodsky point out that:

“The imposition of export taxes contributed to the two main objectives

of economic policy in the post-crisis period: (i) to collect revenues

directly from the sectors benefited by the devaluation, balancing fiscal

accounts without repeating the contractionary tax policies that had led

to the implosion of the economy in 2001; and (ii) to contain inflation
reducing the impact of the devaluation on domestic prices, and

88 Decrees 310/02 (Exhibit AR-128) and 809/02 (Exhibit AR-145); see also Guichén Witness

Statement, supra (n 149) | 72.
289 Decree 645/04, whereas clause 3 (Exhibit AR-139)

223

767.

768.

769.

770.

preserving the benefits in terms of competitiveness of a high real

exchange rate that encouraged import substitution and export

growth.”?”
In the face of the considerable increase in the price of oil worldwide, hydrocarbon
export duties were increased in what amounted to a proportional and appropriate
economic policy. In May-September 2008, the crude oil price per barrel was USD
175. In that context, which was favourable to hydrocarbon production companies, the

rate of the export duties applicable to prices above USD 45 was not increased.”*!

The increase of withholdings on natural gas exports as from 2006 was based on two
reasons: on the one hand, the attempt to bring its tax treatment into line with the new
value of withholdings on the rest of hydrocarbon products (around 45%), and, on the

other, the dramatic increase in the price of gas that Argentina imports from Bolivia.”

Argentina is facing serious shortage issues due to the behaviour of many gas
producers. In this context, there are basically two options: to find financing means in
order to import Bolivian gas that satisfies a portion of the domestic demand, and to
restrict exports. Certainly, it is unreasonable for the Claimants to expect that
Argentina will not do anything about this, that it will not import gas and that it will

allow all of the country’s reserves to be exhausted at the same time.

3. The Tribunal’s analysis
Article 3 (1) of Decree 1589/89 provides:

“Concerning the export and import of hydrocarbons: The export and
import of hydrocarbons and their byproducts is authorized and will be

°° UTDT Report, supra (n 156) J 187.

*! MEP Resolution 394/07 (Exhibit AR-235).
See MEP Resolution 534/06 (Exhibit AR-223); see also El aumento seria de 62% para la
Argentina, CLARIN, 7 January 2006 (Exhibit AR-219).

291

224

exempt from any present or future tariffs, duties, or withholdings. It is
also established that the export and import of hydrocarbons will not
benefit from any present or future repayments or reimbursements and
those existing will lapse as from the date the present Decree takes
effect.”

771. Moreover, Article 9 of Decree 2411/91 (the “Conversion Decree”) provides:

“The holders of the exploration permits or exploitation concessions
shall be subject to applicable general tax legislation, but any provisions
that may discriminatorily or specifically tax the person, legal status, or
business of the permit or concession holder or the assets assigned to the
respective tasks shall not be applicable.”

772. Moreover Article 8 of Decree 2178/91 (“Plan Argentina’) provides:

“Since article 56, subsections c), and d) of Law 17319 is not applicable
to hydrocarbon exploration permit holders and/or exploitation
concessionaries, the shall be subject to the general laws on profit tax
and shall be exempted from any provisions that may tax separately or
specifically the person, their legal status, or activities, or the assets
applied to the exploration or concession, or the tasks arising there from,
including the disposal of the hydrocarbons produced.”

773. Article 1 (1-2) and 6 (1) of Decree 1969/93 provide:

“Article 1 -That the Memorandum of Understanding signed on March
18, 1993 between YPF SOCIEDAD ANONIMA, PETROLERA
SANTA FE SOCIEDAD ANONIMA, SANTA FE ENERGY
COMPANY OF ARGENTINA, INTERNATIONAL FINANCE
CORPORATION, SOCIEDAD INTERNACIONAL PETROLERA
SOCIEDAD ANONIMA, COMPANIA GENERAL DE
COMBUSTIBLES SOCIEDAD ANONIMA, and B.H.P.
PETROLEUM (ARGENTINA) INC., is hereby approved, a certified
copy of which is made an integral part hereof as Annex I.

As a result of the agreement reached and the provisions of Law No.
23,696, be Agreement No. 25,174 for the exploration and later
exploitation of hydrocarbons in the CNQ-10 “CHIHUIDOS” Area,
Province of Neuquén, which was approved by means of Decree No.
1573 dated November 3, 1988, converted into a hydrocarbon
Exploration Permit, with the effect provided for in Law No. 17,319 and
the modalities arising from Decrees No. 1055, dated October 10, 1989,
No. 1212, dated November 8, 1989, No. 1589, dated December 27,
1989, and No. 2411, dated November 12, 1991 over the surface area
covered by Agreement No. 25,174, identified ------

225

774.

775.

776.

777.

Article 6 Permit holders shall be subject to the applicable general tax

law. The provisions specifically levying taxes on the person, legal

condition or activity of the Permit holder or the assets used to perform

relevant activities shall not be applied.”
Thus the exemption from any present or future tariffs, duties or withholdings provided
for in Decree 1589/89 and the exemption from specific and discriminatory taxes
provided for in Plan Argentina and the Conversion Decree were through Decree
1969/93 included in the Sierra Chata Concession. Therefore the Tribunal finds that
the Claimants were protected from any present or future such measures, including
inter alia export withholdings, for the full term of that concession. Thus the Sierra
Chata concession created vested contractual tights which the GOA cannot unilaterally

amend.

The question whether Argentina also violated the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty

through discriminatory taxation measures is not relevant in this case.

The question which amount of Export Withholdings was borne by MASA’s Chilean

customers will be evaluated in the context of compensation for BIT violations.

E. Royalties
I. The Claimants’ position

These withholding measures also impacted on the royalties paid by the Claimants to

their customers. The Legal Framework provides that the highest royalty rate that

293

could be imposed on gas producers is 12%.“ The Hydrocarbon Concessions and

Contracts provide further guarantees to the Claimants in this respect. The Sierra Chata

*3 Hydrocarbons Law, Arts. 59, 62 (Exhibit C-8). See also Conversion Decree, Art. 10 (Exhibit C-28).

This protection was also incorporated into the Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts. See Decree
305/92, Art. 8 (Exhibit C-96); Decree 1969/93, Art. 7 (Exhibit C-94); Chihuidos Memorandum of
Understanding, Art. 13 (Exhibit C-93); and Decree 824/95, Art. 10 A (Exhibit C-95).

  

226

TB.

779.

Concession provides that the highest royalty rate that could be imposed on the
Claimants is 12%, and that it can only be calculated on the prices effectively

collected.?”*

Under Law 25,561, however, the GOA prohibited the Claimants from deducting
Export Withholdings payments when calculating royalties. This prohibition forced the
Claimants to pay royalties on their gas export sales based on prices higher than they
received (i.e., without deducting Export Withholdings). Thus, in case the buyer
assumes the obligation to cover the Export Withholdings, the GOA calculates the
12% royalty rate on the contract sales price (e.g., US$ 1.65/MMBTU) plus the Export
Withholding amount (US$ 17/MMBTU during the winter of 2008). This calculation
yields a total sum of US$ 18.65/MMBTU. The 12% royalty in these cases is
equivalent to US$ 2.238/MMBTU, which is higher than the sales price and effectively

imposes a negative price.”°

Argentina does not contest the existence or scope of the Claimants’ right to a 12%
maximum royalty rate calculated on the price they actually receive for their gas sales.
Yet Argentina denies that the Province of Neuquén required the Claimants to pay
royalties on a price higher than the one actually collected from the Claimants’ foreign
customers. Argentina further argues that “it was the Claimants, with the aim of
transferring export duties to their Chilean clients, who negotiated and incorporated
into the calculation basis for the payment of royalties the export duties.” Both of those

arguments distort the facts of this case.

24 Decree 169/93 (Exhibit C-94).

5 Tf conversely, the buyer did not refund the Export Withholding amounts to the Argentine producer,
the 12% royalty would be calculated on the basis of a notional price of approximately US$
1.65/MMBTHU, in spite of the fact that Export Withholdings turn it into a negative price. See Valle,
Witness Statement, supra (n 34) | 79 (Exhibit C-4).

227

780.

781.

782.

First, by attempting to blame excess royalty payments on the Claimants, Argentina
fails to mention that under Law 25,561 the Argentine Government expressly
prohibited hydrocarbon producers, including the Claimants, from deducting Export
Withholding payments when calculating royalties. This prohibition effectively
violated the provisions of the Legal Framework and the Sierra Chata Concession that

state that royalties may not exceed 12% of the price actually received by the producer.

Second, although as a mitigation measure the Claimants have been able to pass
through the cost of Export Withholdings to their Chilean clients since April 2005,
Argentina is wrong to deny that the Province of Neuquén has been collecting excess
royalties from the Claimants. By adding the cost of Export Withholdings (e.g., US$
17/MMBTU during the winter of 2008) to the calculation, the Province of Neuquén
claimed royalties on the basis of a price that exceeds the contractual export price that
the Claimants receive (e.g., US$ 1.65/MMBTU). The calculation that the Province
applies results in a royalty calculation on the basis of an export price of US$
18.65/MMBTU (US$ 1.65/MMBTU (export price) plus US$ 17/MMBTU (Export
Withholdings)). The 12% royalty in these cases is equivalent to US$ 2.238/MMBTU,
which is higher than the Claimants’ export price and effectively imposes a negative

. 2
price.”

This practice violates Argentina’s commitment under the Legal Framework and the
Sierra Chata Concession to refrain from charging a royalty rate that exceeds 12%
calculated on the basis of the price that producers actually receive.”"” The Claimants

were only able to partially pass-through to their export clients the incremental costs of

2% Valle Witness Statement, supra (n 34) {79 (Exhibit C-4).

” Decree 1969/93, Art. 7 (Exhibit C-94). See also Hydrocarbons Law, Arts. 59, 62 (Exhibit C-8);
Conversion Decree, Art. 10 (Exhibit C-28). This protection was also incorporated into the
Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts; Decree 305/92, Art. 8 (Exhibit C-96); Decree 1969/93, Art.
7 (Exhibit C-94); Memorandum of Understanding for Conversion of Contract No. 25,174, Art. 13
(Exhibit C-93); Decree 824/95, Art. 10 (Exhibit C-95).

 

228

783.

784.

785.

786.

royalties as from February 2008. By alleging that the Claimants are responsible for
their excess royalty payments because they did not fully succeed in modifying their
gas export contracts to off-set the impact of Argentina’s measures, Argentina
improperly attempts to shift the consequences of the Government’s wrongful conduct

to the Claimants.

2. The Respondent's position

It is not correct, as the Claimants maintain that the province of Neuquén requires them
to pay royalties on a price higher than that actually charged for gas exports to foreign

clients.

To begin with, as reported by the province of Neuquén, “the amounts paid by Mobil
Exploration and Development Argentina Inc. Sucursal Argentina and Mobil
Argentina Sociedad Anénima on account of royalties were equivalent to 12%, as

provided for by the legislation in force — Law No. 17319.”

Indeed, the Hydrocarbons Law provides that “natural gas production shall be subject
to the payment of monthly royalties equivalent to twelve per cent (12%) of the value

of the volumes extracted and actually used ...” and that “[iJn the case of hydrocarbon
exports, the market value ... shall be fixed on every occasion on the basis of the

actual price charged by the concessionaire in the export ...”

In turn, the modifications to the gas export agreements between the Consortium of
Sierra Chata producers and their Chilean clients (Metrogas and AES Gener) expressly

provide that “the prices [of natural gas] referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 include

229

787.

788.

789.

790.

export duties for the 1/1/2005 - 31/12/2006 period.”

That is, it was the Claimants, with the aim of transferring export duties to their
Chilean clients, who negotiated and incorporated into the calculation basis for the

payment of royalties the export duties.
As explained by experts Sandleris and Schargrodsky

“In our opinion, the alleged damages for excess royalties are originated
in the same contractual deficiencies. In the addenda subsequent to
2002, Claimants could have foreseen the impact of export duties on
royalties, thus establishing such a contractual price that the net price
received is the price desired, but they failed to do so.”””

The Argentine Republic has nothing to do with the private negotiation between the
Claimants and their customers. It is a claim based on facts in which Argentina is not

involved. Therefore, Argentina requests that the claim be dismissed by the Tribunal.

The royalties and any other items that may be deducted from their payment have been
regulated since the passage of the Hydrocarbons Law. Since 1969, regulation has

been uniform on that matter, as well as on the fact that export duties are excluded

from deductible amounts.*”

8 Decree No. 1671/69 (Exhibit AR-55), Decree No. 1055/89 (Exhibit AR-61), Decree No. 1757/90
(Exhibit AR-64), Decree No. 2178/91 (Exhibit AR-67), Decree No. 2411/91 (Exhibit AR-66), SC
Resolution No. 5/91 (repealed; for exemplification purposes only) (Exhibit AR-65), SE Resolution No.
155/92 (Exhibit AR-73), Law No. 24145 (Exhibit AR-71), SE Resolution No. 188/93 (Exhibit AR-64),
SE Resolution No. 232/02 (Exhibit AR-164), SE Resolution No. 435/04 (Exhibit AR-191).

2 UTDT Report, supra (n 156) J 248.

5 Decree No. 1671/69 (Exhibit AR-55), Decree No. 1055/89 (Exhibit AR-61), Decree No. 1757/90
(Exhibit AR-64), Decree No. 2178/91 (Exhibit AR-67), Decree No. 2411/91 (Exhibit AR-66), SC
Resolution No. 5/91 (repealed; for exemplification purposes only) (Exhibit AR-65), SE Resolution No.
155/92 (Exhibit AR-73), Law No. 24145 (Exhibit AR-71), SE Resolution No. 188/93 (Exhibit AR-64),
SE Resolution No. 232/02 (Exhibit AR-164), SE Resolution No. 435/04 (Exhibit AR-191).

230

791.

792.

793.

794.

795.

796.

Consequently, the regulations that govern the Claimants’ concession in Sierra Chata
make no provision for further deductions from the payment of royalties other than the

usual ones.**!

Secondly, the difference between the versions of the facts provided by the witnesses
and the experts for the Claimants is apparent. While LECG states that the period
during which the Claimants had to bear the payment of the purportedly “excess
royalties” runs from September 2006 to September 2008, 3virs, Valle asserts that
such period does not go beyond December 2007.°°>Making a submission in that
fashion proves unserious, as it fails to contain reliable facts and which involves
significant amounts claimed from the Argentine Republic, without a severe control of
the allegations. The Argentine Republic requests that the Tribunal dismiss this claim

submitted by the Claimants.

Last, neither do the several hydrocarbons agreements including provisions on
royalties executed so far between the Argentine Executive and the companies in the

sector establish any hypothetical deduction other than the usual ones.
In summary, the Claimants’ claim for royalties is groundless.

The Argentine Republic does not attempt to “improperly shift” the consequences of
its wrongful conduct, but rather the opposite: The Claimants insist on the Argentine

Republic’s becoming the insurer of their business activity.

There are contract documents, from the beginning in 1996 of the commercial relation

between Sierra Chata and the Chilean purchasers, which defeat the claim from MEDA

*! Decree No. 1969/93, Art. 7 (Exhibit AR-75); Decree No. 824/95, Art. 10 (Exhibit AR-78);

Resolution No.140/96 (Exhibit AR 81).
5 1 ECG Report, supra (n 22) 103.
5° Valle Witness Statement, supra (n 34) J 84.

231

797.

798.

and MASA. These documents, together with the recent addenda, expressly state that
excess royalties and “any impact on such royalties resulting from their billing

shall be borne by the purchasers.

As can be seen, the dispute does not involve the percentage of royalties actually
collected; according to the information provided by the Province of Neuquén, MEDA
and MASA always paid 12%. The Claimants acknowledge that the claim involves the
alleged “impact” that export duties may have on the final sale price, which will
increase the amount subject to royalties. However, the contract provisions agreed with
purchasers show that it is not unusual and unforeseeable that taxes indirectly increase
royalties. The Claimants’ claim involves matters that are inherent to the business

itself.

The Claimants have been reimbursed by their Chilean counterparties for the “excess”
royalty amounts. However, if there still were amounts pending reimbursement (which
to date cannot be known for sure due to the lack of documentary evidence and
contradictions between witnesses’ testimonies), it would be the consequence of acts
attributable to the management of MEDA and MASA.*°° Insisting on deceitful claims
intended to confuse the issues under the analysis of the Tribunal and to remedy their
own business contingencies is inacceptable. Finally, it is to be noted the most recent

evidence disorder by the Claimants, who allege that they could only pass the royalty

* Contract addendum dated 26 September 2006, Sections. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; Contract addendum dated 31
January 2007, Section 2.2; Contract addendum dated 1 July 2008, Section 1.3 (Exhibit AR-306).
Contract for the export of natural gas with Metrogas SA and Chilgener SA, 23 October 1996, Section
A.15: “Taxes: the Purchasers shall be responsible for all taxes, levies, royalties and other charges
applicable downstream from such interconnection point at Tratayen in the Neuquina Basin and all
import duties applicable to the Natural Gas.”(Exhibit C-100) The interconnection point at Tratayen is
located within the Argentine Republic, in the province of Neuquén, a few miles away from the Sierra
Chata field.

°° UTDT Report, supra (n 156) J 248.

232

costs through “since February 2008” and, on the contrary, the addenda signed with

their export customers establish the reimbursement of royalties since 2004.76

799. Since the matter submitted to the analysis of this Tribunal is not within the scope of
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction as a result of the application of Article XII of the BIT and,
alternatively, considering the additional arguments already explained and presented in
the Counter-Memorial, the Argentine Republic respectfully requests the Tribunal to

reject this claim together with the relief sought regarding export duties

3. The Tribunal’s Analysis
800. Articles 59 and 62 (1) of the Hydrocarbons law provide:
“Article 59

The exploitation concessionaire shall pay to the Federal State a
monthly royalty of twelve percent (12%) of the production of liquid
hydrocarbons at wellhead, which percentage may be reduced by the
Federal Executive Power up to five percent (5%), taking into account
the productivity, the conditions and location of the wells.”

“Article 62

Natural Gas production shall pay a monthly royalty, calculated as a
percentage of the volumes produced and effectively employed,
accounting to twelve percent (12%), which the Executive Power may
reduce to five percent, taking into consideration the factors indicated in
article 59.”

801. Article 7 (1) of the Sierra Chata Concession provides

“ARTICLE 7.- In the event provided for in Article 2 of this Decree, the
exploitation Concessionaire shall pay directly to the Province of

*° Contract addendum dated 26 September 2006, Section 3. Also, Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. In: File 750-
003106/94 for the Authorization of Natural Gas Export concerning the Sierra Chata field (Exhibit AR-
306).

233

802.

803.

804.

805.

806.

Neuquén, in the name of the FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, the royalties

resulting from the application of Articles 59 and 62 of Law No. 17,319,

paying up to TWELVE PER CENT (12%) of the production valued on

the basis of the prices actually obtained in the trading operations of

hydrocarbons produced in the Concession Area, with the deductions set

forth in Articles 61, 62, and 63 of that law.”
The fact that the Claimants were able to pass through the cost of Export Withholdings
to their customers for some periods does not entitle the GOA or the Province of
Neuquén to include Export Withholdings in its royalty calculation, because the
Government, not the Claimants, actually collects the cost of the Export Withholdings.
Therefore, the Tribunal finds that Export Withholdings are not part of the “price
actually obtained” by the producer, which in accordance with the Hydrocarbons Law
and the Sierra Chata Concession is the only price that may serve as the basis for the

calculation of royalties.

The Tribunal finds that by adding the costs of Export Withholdings to the calculation,
the Province of Neuquén has claimed on the basis of a price that exceeds the

contractual export price that the Claimants receive.

The Tribunal finds that this practice violates Argentina's commitment under the Legal

Framework, which is incorporated in the Sierra Chata Concession.

The question whether the Claimants have been reimbursed by their Chilean customers
for any “excess royalty amount” will be evaluated in the context of compensation for

BIT violations.

THE ALLEGED VIOLATIONS OF THE BIT

Before the Tribunal begins to evaluate the facts and contentions of the Parties in this
case, in order to ascertain whether or not they show violations of the international
standards of protection of foreign investments, the Tribunal considers it appropriate to

identify the legal framework within which the factual aspects can and must be

234

807.

808.

809.

810.

examined. Once ascertained, the facts, as they result from the record, have to be
analysed taking due account of the applicable rules. It is therefore important to
identify the content and scope of the different standards benefitting foreign investors

under the BIT.

A. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE DIFFERENT STANDARDS
OF PROTECTION

The standards of protection applicable to foreign investors are stated in Article IV (1)

and Article II (a) and (b) of the BIT.

Article IV (1) of the BIT provides:

“Investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized either directly or
indirectly through measures tantamount to expropriation or
nationalization (“expropriation”) except for a public purpose; in a non-
discriminatory manner; upon payment of prompt, adequate and
effective compensation; and in accordance with due process of law and
the general principles of treatment provided for in Article II(2).”

Article II(2)(a) and (b) provide:

“(a) Investment shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable
treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security and shall in no case
be accorded treatment less than that required by international law.

(b) Neither Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory
measures the management, operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment,
acquisition, or disposal of investments. For the purposes of dispute
resolution under Articles VII and VIII, a measure may be arbitrary or
discriminatory, notwithstanding the opportunity to review such
measure in the courts or administrative tribunals of a Party.”

 

 

The Tribunal finds that that ICSID case-law generates some confusion and overlap
between these different standards of protection found in most BITs. The Tribunal will
therefore try to clarify as much as possible the scope of the different standards of
protection, because in our view they should not be used indifferently one for the

other.

235

811.

812.

813.

814.

815.

There is not always a clear distinction between indirect expropriation and violation of
legitimate expectations, between the fair and equitable treatment (“FET”) and the full
protection and security (“FPS’’) standards, and sometimes between several standards
of treatment, which are all amalgamated, and the distinction seems also difficult

between arbitrary or discriminatory treatment and violation of the FET.

The Tribunal holds that FET is designed to guarantee that, in situations where the
other more precise standards are not violated, but where there is an unreasonable
interference bringing about an unjust result regarding an investor’s expectations, that

investor can claim a violation of the FET and obtain reparation therefore.

The Tribunal will below analyse interferences with the Claimants’ investments
successively with reference to the different standards of protection in a sequential
order, proceeding from expropriation to FPS. The Tribunal will thus examine first
whether there is an indirect expropriation, second whether there is arbitrary and
discriminatory treatment, third whether there is a violation of the FET, and fourth

whether there is a breach of FPS.

B. ARTICLE IV: INDIRECT EXPROPRIATION

The Tribunal will first address the complaints concerning acts of the GOA, other than
tax measures complained of, which enter into the Tribunal’s jurisdiction if they
amount to an expropriation or relate to the observance and enforcement of terms of an
investment agreement or authorization as referred to in Article VII(1)(a) or (b) of the

BIT.

J. Indirect Expropriation in General

Expropriation is not defined in Article ITV of the BIT, which however mentions
expropriation at the same level as nationalization and measures tantamount to

expropriation or nationalization and sets out the conditions to be fulfilled if such acts

236

816.

817.

818.

are to be consistent with the BIT. These conditions are that the measures (a) are taken
for a public purpose; (b) in a non-discriminatory manner, upon payment of prompt,
adequate and effective compensation; and (c) in accordance with due process of law

and the general principles of treatment provided for in Article II (2).

As in most other BITs, expropriation under the terms of this BIT may be considered
to be an act taken by a State in the exercise of its sovereignty by which an investor is
involuntarily deprived of property. Property should in this context be given a broad
meaning and cover any material and immaterial assets having an economic value,
including concessions and contractual rights belonging to the investor. Expropriation
is to be distinguished from less far-reaching measures which regulate or restrict the

right to use property.

As held by the Tribunal in E/ Paso, “a general regulation is a lawful act rather than an
expropriation if it is non-discriminatory, made for a public purpose and taken in
conformity with due process. In other words, in principle, general non-discriminatory
regulatory measures, adopted in accordance with the rules of good faith and due

process, do not entail a duty of compensation”. 307

However, general regulations that are arbitrary, discriminatory, disproportionate or
otherwise unfair can be considered amounting to indirect expropriation if they result
in a neutralization of the foreign investor’s property rights. The proportionality when
making use of this right was recognised in Tecmed, which observed that “whether
such actions or measures are proportional to the public interest presumably protected
thereby and the protection legally granted to investments, taking into account that the

significance of such impact, has a key role upon deciding the proportionality.”*°*The

°°” El Paso Energy International v Argentine Republic, CSID Case No ARB/03/15, Award (31

October 2011) [hereinafter “El Paso Award”, | 240 [Emphasis in the original].
%°8 Tecmed Award, supra (n 95) ¥ 122.

237

need for proportionality of State measures interfering with private property has been

stressed by the Tribunal in LG&E:

“With respect to the power of the State to adopt its policies, it can
generally be said that the State has the right to adopt measures having a
social or general welfare purpose. In such a case, the measure must be
accepted without any imposition of liability, except in cases where the
State’s action is obviously disproportionate to the need being
addressed.”*”

819. As examples of possible exceptions from the principle that general regulations do not
amount to indirect expropriation, it may be mentioned, first, that of an intentionally
discriminatory regulation or an objectively discriminatory regulation. The Tribunal in
the Methanex case clearly distinguished discriminatory regulations from non-

discriminatory ones:

“In the Tribunal’s view, Methanex is correct that an intentionally
discriminatory regulation against a foreign investor fulfills a key
requirement for establishing expropriation. But as a matter of general
international law, a non-discriminatory regulation for a public purpose,
which is enacted in accordance with due process and, which affects,
inter alias, a foreign investor or investment is not deemed expropriatory
and compensable unless specific commitments had been given by the
regulating government to the then putative foreign investor
contemplating investment that the government would refrain from such
regulation.”

 

820. As another example can be mentioned a disproportionate regulation, meaning a
regulation in which the interference with the private rights of the investors is

disproportionate to the public interest. In other words, proportionality has to exist

°° LG&E Energy Corp, LG&E Capital Corp and LG&E International Inc v Argentine Republic,

Decision on Liability (3 October, 2006) [hereinafter “LG&E Decision on Liability”) { 98.
30 Methanex vy United States, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Final Award (7 August, 2005) [hereinafter
“Methanex Award”) { 7 of Part IV Chapter D.

238

821.

822.

823.

824.

between the public purpose fostered by the regulation and the interference with the

investors’ property rights, as recognised in Tecmed.*"!

Thus, discriminatory or disproportionate general regulations may be considered

expropriatory if there is a sufficient interference with the investor’s right.

The Tribunal considers that at least one of the essential components of the property
tights must have disappeared for an expropriation to have occurred. It is generally
accepted that the decisive element in an indirect expropriation is the Joss of control of
a foreign investment, in the absence of any physical taking. In this regard, the Pope &
Talbot tribunal concluded that “[w]hile it may sometimes be uncertain whether a

particular interference with business activities amounts to an expropriation, the test is

  

whether the interference is sufficiently restrictive to support a conclusion that the

property has been taken from the owner.”3!?
This approach has also been adopted in several of the Argentinian cases, resulting
from the crisis, which brought about this arbitration. In CMS, the tribunal stated:

“The essential question is therefore to establish whether the enjoyment

of the property has been effectively neutralized. The standard that a

number of tribunals have applied in recent cases where indirect

expropriation has been contended is that of substantial deprivation.”*"*
Then, applying this test to the case at hand, the tribunal considered that the measures
adopted by the State did not deprive the investor of control over its investment and

therefore concluded that there was no expropriation.

x Tecmed, supra (n 95) { 121.
2

° Pope & Talbot Inc v Government of Canada, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Interim Award (29 May,
2003) [hereinafter “Pope & Talbot Interim Award”| 199.
53 CMS Award, supra (n 97) { 262.

239

825.

826.

827.

. 3,
In Enron*"* as well as in Sempra” 8

the tribunals held that for expropriation to exist
there must be a substantial deprivation and that such a deprivation occurs when the
investor is forced to lose control over the investment. If the measures do not interfere
with the control of the property, there can be no expropriation. This has been
confirmed by the award in another Argentinian case, Continental, where an indirect

expropriation was defined as amounting to

. limitations and hampering with property, short of outright
suppression or ee interfering with one or more key features,
such as ility, which are i

as tantamount to expropriation, because of their substantial impact on
the effective right of property.”

 

2. A mere frustration of a_ foreign investor’s legitimate
expectations, is not an Indirect Expropriation

In the Tribunal’s view, a mere frustrating of a foreign investor’s legitimate
expectations with respect to sovereign assurances is not an indirect expropriation.
This was also stated, for example, by the Waste Management tribunal. The tribunal
explicitly pointed out that “the loss of benefits or expectations is not a sufficient
9317

criterion for an expropriation, even if it is a necessary one.

As Argentina argues, the Tecmed award, cited by the Claimants in support of their
allegation that interference with the investor’s expectations may amount to indirect

expropriation, was in this regard criticized by the MTD annulment committee because

54 Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets LP v Argentine Republic, ICSID case No ARB/O1/3,
Award (22 May 2007) [hereinafter “Enron Award”] { 245.

* Sempra Energy International v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Award (28
September 2007) [hereinafter “Sempra Award”) J 285.

® Continental Casualty Company v Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Award (5
September 2008) [hereinafter “Continental Award” J 276.

7 Waste Management, Inc v The United Mexican States |CSID Case No ARB(AF)/00/3), Award (30
April 2004) [hereinafter “Waste Management Award”) ¥ 159.

240

828.

829.

the Tecmed tribunal had relied on the investor’s expectations to determine that an

expropriation had taken place:

The TECMED Tribunal’s apparent reliance on the foreign investor’s
expectations as the source of the host State’s obligations (such as the
igation to for expror ) is ible. The
obligations of the host State towards foreign investors derive from the
terms of the applicable investment treaty and not from any set of
expectations, investors may have or claim to have. A tribunal which
sought to generate from such expectations a set of rights different from
those contained in or enforceable under the BIT might well exceed its
powers, and if the difference were material might do so manifestly.*'*

 

In conclusion, consistently with mainstream case law, the Tribunal finds that for an
expropriation to exist, the investor should be substantially deprived not only of the
benefits, but also of the use of the investment. A mere frustration of investor’s
expectations, even when legitimate, which is not a result of an interference with the

control or use or the investment, is not an indirect expropriation.

3. The Parties Positions on the Existence of an Expropriation

According to the Claimants, “Argentina has expropriated key legal and contractual
tights and specific associated revenues of the Claimants.” The Claimants do not
complain about direct expropriation but argue that the question whether expropriation
is direct or indirect has no bearing on the legal consequences of the act. The list of the
expropriatory acts presented by the Claimant include the following: (i) abrogation and
repudiation of key legal and contractual rights such as the Claimants’ rights to freely
dispose of and market hydrocarbon production and to freely agree on prices and
currency payment; (ii) unilaterally changing the terms of the Claimants’ private gas

supply contracts; (iii

 

introducing Export Withholdings on hydrocarbon exports

38 MTD Equity Sdn Bhd & MTD Chile SA v Republic of Chile,] 1CSID Case No ARB/O1/7, Decision
on Annulment (21 March 2007) [hereinafter “MTD Decision on Annulment” 4 67 (emphasis added).

241

830.

831.

832.

833.

contrary to prior express undertakings; (iv) taking the right to export hydrocarbons;

and (v) taking the Claimants’ right to royalty rate stability.

The Claimants contend that the GOA “through a series of increasingly onerous
measures” abrogated the Claimants’ rights under the Legal Framework, the
Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts and the Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit.
Through their abrogation, Argentina, according to the Claimants, “expropriated the
Claimants’ legal and contractual rights and specific revenues directly, indirectly, and

by measures tantamount to expropriation.”

According to Argentina, first, none of the measures interfered with the Claimants’
property rights, since the Claimants did not have a right to be excluded from
pesification, a right to the non-application of export restrictions and re-routing or a
right to be exempt from export withholdings: second, the measures challenged by the
Claimants did not deprive them of control over their alleged investments. As regards
export withholdings, Argentina argues that they did not cause a_ substantial

interference.

First, it is Argentina’s position that the measures challenged by the Claimants did not
interfere with their property rights. The Claimants did not have a right to be excluded
from pesification, or a right to the non-application of export restrictions and re-routing

or a right to be exempt from export withholdings.

Second, Argentina contends that the measures challenged by the Claimants did not
deprive them of control over their alleged investments. In this regard, the Claimants
argue that they were deprived of effective control over their natural gas export
business. Demanding compliance with the legal duty to supply the domestic market
does amount to controlling the natural gas export business. The possibility of
exporting natural gas subsists provided the duty to supply the domestic market is

complied with (a limitation that has existed all along). Moreover, it has been held in

242

834.

835.

836.

837.

other cases that the establishment of restrictions, quotas or prohibitions on exports

does not amount to expropriation.

Third, Resolution SE No. 659/04 affords the possibility of replacing volumes of
natural gas by alternative fuel to comply with the duty to supply the domestic market.
the Claimants could have opted for such possibility and exported natural gas to their

Chilean customers, since the latter offered to pay for the alternative fuel.

Finally, Argentina argues, all the measures challenged by the Claimants were bona

fide non-discriminatory regulatory measures within the police power of the State.”

4. The Tribunal’s Analysis of the Alleged Expropriation of the
Claimants’ Legal and Contractual Rights

The Claimants contend that Argentina eviscerated the Claimants’ export right
through a series of export restrictions that resulted not only in a reduction of the
Claimants’ export capacity but also in the Claimants’ inability to perform the very
export contracts which the GOA had taken into consideration when granting the
Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit. The GOA’s export restrictions began by forcing the
Claimants to supply additional gas to the local market, but soon escalated by coercing
the Claimants to accept irrevocable offers from certain domestic consumers to
purchase gas at regulated, below-market prices. The GOA also sought to coerce the
Claimants to agree to further restrain their export rights through the Second Gas
Agreement, which would have subjected the Claimants to additional domestic supply
obligations and regulated prices. The Claimants refused, and as a consequence,

effective control over their export business was taken by Argentina

According to the Claimants:

“This drastic evisceration of rights subjected Claimants to forcible re-
routing of their gas exports at below-market prices to sometimes
unknown customers with whom they had no contractual relationship.

243

838.

839.

840.

841.

842.

Under this new paradigm, Claimants lost their firm export rights and
effective control of their investments.”*”
Thus, the GOA expropriated the Claimants’ right to export firm volumes of natural

gas.

Moreover, the Claimants contend that through the interference in the Claimants’
Dollar-denominated contracts by converting them into Pesos at an artificially-low and
confiscatory exchange rate and by impeding the renegotiation of those prices between
the Claimants and their main customers, the GOA took away the Claimants’ legal and
contractual rights to freely market their gas production and agree on prices and

currency, as well as the specific revenues associated within those rights.

According to the Claimants, in addition, the GOA imposed export restrictions that
further eroded the Claimants’ right to dispose of gas production at freely-agreed
prices. These measures restricted the Claimants’ exports and forcefully re-routed gas

export volumes to third-party domestic customers at regulated, below-market prices.

The Claimants contend that in particular, these measures have taken the Claimants’
rights to freely dispose of and market gas and to enter into hydrocarbon sale contracts
freely with customers on freely agreed terms, including price and currency. The
GOA’s measures created an environment that is inconsistent with the regime under
which MEDA and MASA invested—a regime in which “the sale of gas between

producers, distributors, and large users will be freely agreed between them.”

The Claimants had a legitimate expectation that the GOA would not unilaterally
interfere with the terms of their contracts with their customers, and that they could sell

hydrocarbon production freely and at prices determined by negotiation and market

*! Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits { 333.

244

843.

844.

845.

forces, not “government mandate”. Because of the GOA’s repudiation of these basic
legal rights, which formed part of the legal and business environment in which the
Claimants invested, the Claimant contend that the GOA has indirectly expropriated

the Claimants’ legal and contractual rights and specific revenues.

Taking into account what is said above under the heading “Indirect Expropriation in
General” (IX.B.1) about indirect expropriation, the Tribunal concludes that there was
no expropriation of the Claimants’ rights. First, a mere frustration of legitimate
expectations is not an indirect expropriation. Second the measures questioned by the
Claimants did not have the consequence that the Claimants were deprived of control

of their investments.

C. INDIRECT EXPROPRIATION RELATING TO TAX MATTERS
1. The Parties’ Positions

The Claimants contend that the Export Withholdings imposed by the GOA resulted in

the expropriation of the Claimants’ legal and contract rights.

According to the Claimants, Export Withholdings conflict with undertakings and
assurances given by Argentina in good faith and are thus expropriatory. Under the
Legal Framework and the Sierra Chata Concession, the GOA guaranteed the
Claimants a stable tax regime and expressly exempted the Claimants from Export
Withholdings and any other specific or discriminatory taxes. Export Withholdings
violate express provisions of the Legal Framework, which apply to, and have been
expressly incorporated into, the Claimants’ Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts.
Furthermore, because they are asymmetric to the tax treatment of other petroleum
products and “products which use gas as a raw material”, Export Withholdings on gas

also violate the tax-treatment provision of the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty.

245

846.

847.

848.

Second, the Claimants contend, the manner in which Argentina took these rights and
associated revenues is confiscatory. In 2004, when Argentina first took the Claimants
right to be e exempt from export withholdings, it did so through an export-
withholding rate of 20%, which was calculated based on the prices the Claimants
actually received for their exports. In 2006, when the GOA raised the withholding rate
to 45%, it arbitrarily changed the basis for calculating Export Withholdings
disregarding the actual export prices received by the Claimants. Instead, the
Government calculates the Export Withholdings on a deemed price; the price of
expensive Bolivian gas that was imported by the GOA, yielding an effective
withholding rate exceeding 100%. Since March 2008, the Argentine Government has
imposed a 100% withholding rate calculated on an even higher deemed import price;
the price for importing LNG, which yields an effective rate of up to 800%, a rate that

is confiscatory by any notion of ‘the term.

According to the Claimants, each instance of Export Withholdings constitutes a
taking of legal and contractual rights and specific revenues. The cumulative effect of
the Export Withholdings has been to deprive the Claimants of the protections against
such measures, which the GOA guaranteed the Claimants through contracts and
legislation. The GOA’s Export Withholding rates constitute an expropriation of the
Claimants’ vested legal and contractual rights to be exempt from Export Withholdings

and to enjoy tax stability.

Moreover, the Claimants contend that the Export Withholding measures also violated
the GOA’s legal and contractual commitment to refrain from imposing royalties on
gas producers higher than 12%. The GOA made this guarantee under the Legal
Framework and incorporated it into the Claimants’ Hydrocarbon Concessions and
Contracts. Along with Law 25,561 — which prevents the Claimants from deducting
their Export Withholding payments when calculating royalties —, the computation of
Export Withholdings for gas exports results in an effective royalty rate that exceeds

the contract price and is far above the statutory ceiling for royalty rates. Not only do

246

849.

850.

851.

these measures expropriate the Claimants’ legal and contractual rights, but they also

interfere with the Claimants’ activities and result in a substantial loss of revenues

The Claimants admit that taxation per se is of course a lawful sovereign activity, but
asserts that Article XII expressly subjects Argentina’s taxation measures to the
scrutiny of the BIT’s expropriation provision. The question is thus under what

circumstances taxation measures may result in unlawful expropriation.

As regards export withholdings, Argentina contends that they did not cause a
substantial interference, given that the Claimants passed their duties through to their
Chilean customers, except for a six-month period during which they were subject to
an effective rate of 16.67% Furthermore no royalties in excess of the 12% rate
established in the Hydrocarbons Law have been demanded. The Claimants themselves
included the export withholdings in the basis for calculating royalties. Argentina
contends that these and all other measures were bona fide non-discriminatory

regulatory measures within the police powers of the State.

2. The Tribunal’s Analysis
Article XII of the BIT provides as follows:

“1. With respect to its tax policies, each Party should strive to accord
fairness and equity in the treatment of investment of nationals and
companies of the other Party.

 

2. Nevertheless, the provisions of this Treaty, and in particular Articles
VII and VIII, shall apply to matters of taxation only with respect to the
following:

(a) expropriation, pursuant to Article IV;

(b) transfers, pursuant to Article V; or

(c) the observance and enforcement of terms of an investment
agreement or authorization as referred to in Article VII (1) (a) or (b), to
the extent they are not subject to the dispute settlement provisions of a

247

852.

853.

854.

855.

Convention for the avoidance of double taxation between the two

Parties, or have been raised under such settlement provisions and are

not resolved within a reasonable period of time.”
It is common ground that the tax policy of a country is a matter relating to the
sovereign power of the State and its power to impose taxes on its territory. Thus the
State has a sovereign right to enact the tax measures it deems appropriate at any
particular time. There is a presumption of validity in favour of legislative measures
adopted by the State, and it is up to those who challenge such measures to
demonstrate their invalidity. This idea has also been embodied in Article XII of the

BIT, the effect of which is only to limit slightly the State’s power to levy taxes.

Having regard to both the language used in Article XII (1) - “each party should
strive” — and the fact that Article XII (2) excludes in matters of taxation, except in
specific and limited cases, any review of a possible violation of the BIT standards, the

Tribunal concludes that Article XII (1) creates only a best-effort obligation.

In as much as the Claimants’ claim relates to tax matters, i.e. export withholdings and
their impact on royalties, the issue is whether such taxes could qualify as an

expropriation (point a).

The Tribunal will first look into the Export Withholdings in order to consider whether
they can be considered an expropriation. The Emergency Law adopted on 6 January
2002 decided on the principle of such a tax, known as withholding on oil and gas and
authorized the Executive Branch to impose export withholdings on hydrocarbons for a
five-year period and to establish the respective rates:

“The Executive Branch of Government shall be entitled to establish

compensatory measures to avoid the unbalancing of financial

institutions resulting from the provisions set forth in the preceding
paragraph. These measures may include the issue of guaranteed

248

856.

857.

858.

859.

national public bonds in foreign currency. For purpose of funding such
guarantee, an export tax on hydrocarbons is hereby created for the term
of FIVE (5) years, and the Executive Branch of Government shall be
entitled to determine the corresponding tax rate.”

By virtue of Law 26,217,*! the GOA extended the Export Withholdings through
2012.

In May 2004, through Decree 645/04, Argentina imposed a 20% Export Withholding
on Claimant’s gas exports, among other gaseous hydrocarbons**: this amounts to a
16,67% export duty on crude oil exports, as in Argentina the withholding is included
in the amount used to calculate export duties and therefore a 20% export duty implies
an actual 16.67% withholding. In addition, it authorized the Ministry of Economy to

323 At that time, the alleged purpose of Export

modify the Export Withholding rate.
Withholdings on gas was to align the tax treatment of gas with crude oil and by-

products. *7*

Argentina and Bolivia had entered into the Framework Agreement for the Sale of Gas
and the Execution Projects Concerning Energy Integration (the “Framework
Agreement”) in June 2006. In July 2006, the GOA (i) increased the Export
Withholding rate for gas from 20% to 45%.*°

These measures raised the effective Export Withholding rate on gas more than 675%
which according to the Bastos report exceeded the average export price that Argentine
gas exporters received from foreign customers by approximately 40%.**°This

amounts according to the LECG Report to 113 % of the export price that the

520 Taw No. 25,561 (Emergency Law), Title IV, Chapter I, Art. 6 § 2.
*! Exhibit C-69.

* Decree 645/04, Art. 1.

* Decree 645/04, Art. 2.

* See Preamble of Decree 645/04.

*5 See Decree 645/04 and Resolution MEP 534/06, Art. 1.

*6 Bastos Report, supra (n 57) {144 (Exhibit C-1).

249

860.

861.

862.

863.

Claimants received and renders exporting gas unprofitable since all of the profit (and

more) is taken by the Goa.*””

Through Resolution MEP 127/08,*8 the GOA once again (i) increased the applicable
Export Withholding rate on gas (from 45% to 100%), and (ii) alters the basis on
which it calculates Export Withholdings, disregarding the much lower export prices
received by exporters such as MASA. Instead of calculating Export Withholdings on

the basis of the price at which MASA exports gas, the GOA uses artificial prices

Under Resolution MEP 534/06, the GOA calculated Export Withholdings based on
the price at which it imports gas from Bolivia (currently US$ 10.30/MMBTU). Since
early 2008, the GOA has calculated Export Withholdings on the highest prevailing
rate for gas imports (during the winter of 2008, between US$ 14.5-17/MMBTU due to
the import of LNG). Thus, Resolution MEP 127/08 entails a further increase of
approximately 650%n in the applicable Export Withholding rate. As a result, during
the winter of 2008, export withholdings on gas exports in Argentina were
approximately between US$ 14.5 and 17/MMBTU, that is between seven and eight
times higher than the actual average export price they received by Argentine
producers (around US$ 1.90/MMBTU). This equates to nearly 800% of the

Claimants’ export price.

Turning now to the analysis of these matters, the Tribunal considers, first, that the
creation of export duties on gas is a reasonable governmental regulation within the

context of the crisis.

Under no circumstances may a tax less than 20% on exports be characterised as

expropriation of an investment. The impact of the imposition of export withholdings

*°7 1 ECG Report, supra (n 22) | 62 (Exhibit C-2).
*°8 Resolution MEP 127/08 (Exhibit C-77), See also LECG Report, supra (n 22) { 63 (Exhibit C-2).

250

864.

865.

866.

at a rate of 16,67% and the consequence of the Export Withholdings that that royalty
rate is higher than 12% and is above the statutory ceiling for the royalty rate cannot be
deemed expropriatory. The same is true of the highest rates required subsequently
taking into account that for the most part the amount was transferred to the clients of

MASA.

In conclusion, the Tribunal, having analysed the Export Withholdings and their
impact on the royalty rate does not consider that they amount to an indirect
expropriation. Therefore, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction pursuant to Article XII
(2)(a) of the BIT as far as the Export Withholdings and their impact on royalties are

concerned.

D. ARTICLE II (2)(b) ARBITRARY AND DISCRIMINATORY
TREATMENT

Article II (2) (b) of the BIT states:

“Neither Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory
measures the management, operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment,
acquisition, expansion, or disposal of investments. For the purposes of
dispute resolution under Articles VII and VIII, a measure may be
arbitrary or discriminatory notwithstanding the opportunity to review
such measure in the courts or administrative tribunals of a Party.”

J. Arbitrary Treatment: Have The Claimants Been Treated
Arbitrarily?

a. The Parties’ Positions

According to the Claimants, the GOA’s actions were arbitrary for three primary
reasons: (1) they bear no rational relation to their stated purpose; (2) they were
coercive and retaliatory; and (3) they were taken in a wilful disregard of due process
and proper procedure. The Claimants argue that the Export Withholdings bear no
rational relation to their stated purpose, the Second Gas Agreement punished

producers who did not sign the agreement by: (i) imposing domestic supply

251

867.

868.

requirements on non-signing producers; (ii) rerouting the export gas of non-signing
producers before that of signers; and (iii) re-routing it to the lowest paying domestic
users. Resolution SE 599/07 contains a retaliatory mechanism that punishes Non-
Signing producers by subjecting them to far worse treatment than that granted to

Signing Producers.

Moreover, the Claimants contend that the GOA enacted certain measures without due
regard to proper legal process and procedure. The method by which the GOA
dismantled the Legal Framework and unwound its legal and contractual commitments
under the Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts and the Sierra Chata Gas Export
Permit was itself arbitrary. Furthermore, since 2007, the GOA has even subjected the
Claimants to informal (often verbal) orders demanding that the Claimants supply gas
to certain local companies or that the Claimants refrain from exporting gas volumes.
According to the Claimants those orders do not even attempt to comply with proper

procedures or the rule of law.

Argentina argues that the Claimants may not make a claim on tax matters alleging
arbitrariness, since Article XII of the Treaty expressly excludes such types of claims
and the distinction between the signatory and non-signatory producers did not amount
to retaliation, but consisted merely of reasonable distinctions based on the fact that
their situation was different. The purpose of the Second Gas Agreement is to
guarantee the provision of a certain volume of natural gas to the domestic market. The
orders given to the Claimants to provide gas to the domestic market were reasonable
measures and they were founded on the priority goal of supplying the domestic

market under the Hydrocarbon law.

> Resolution SE 599/07 (Exhibit C-75).

252

869.

870.

871.

872.

873.

Moreover, Argentina denies that it disregarded “proper procedure and due process” in
violating the Claimant’s rights and dismantling the Legal Framework, since
restrictions on export and demands for additional injections were legitimate measures
pursuant to the applicable legal framework which were adopted in view of the gas

shortage.

Finally, Argentina contends that the Argentine Secretary of Energy had broad powers
to introduce modifications to dispatch rules and there have always been regulatory

mechanism in place for natural gas prices in normal situations.

Argentina concludes that the measures adopted by ENARGAS (the Gas Regulator)
and the Secretary of Energy after the 2002 crisis were far from being arbitrary and

were adopted in accordance with the legal framework of natural gas and electricity.

b. The Tribunal’s analysis

Black’s Law Dictionary defines the word “arbitrary” as “[dJepending on individual
discretion; specif. determined by a judge rather than by fixed rules, procedures, or
law. In addition “arbitrary” (of a judicial decision) is defined as “founded on
prejudice or preference rather than on reason or fact.” 330
According to international law, “[ar]bitrariness is not so much something opposed to a
tule of law, as something opposed to the rule of law. It is a wilful disregard of due
process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of juridical

propriety.”>*!

°° Black’s Law Dictionary, 9th ed. (2009) p. 119.

5! Elettronica Sicula SpA (United States of America v Italy) {hereinafter “ELSI”], Judgment (20 July,
1989) ICJ Rep 1989, p. 15 J 128.

253

874. The Tribunal agrees with Argentina that the presence of arbitrariness must be
determined in light of the circumstances of the case and that insofar as all the disputed
measures were adopted within a context of social and economic crisis — and
subsequent energy crisis — the existence of which is not a fact in issue, the
governmental measures cannot be regarded arbitrary, notwithstanding any other
disagreement between the parties as to the validity of such measures. Thus, for
example, in the Noble Ventures case, the Tribunal considered that the measure

challenged was not arbitrary as it was aimed at overcoming a social crisis.>
875. As the El Paso tribunal stated:

“if one is faced with a difficult economic situation, there are always
several methods for dealing with it, depending on the circumstances,
the political constraints incumbent on governments and their economic
analyses, It is clear that neither the causes of, nor the answers to,
Argentina's economic crisis at the end of 2001 have been the object of
unanimous appraisal.”**>

876. There is no common analysis of the origin of the crisis. This was pointed out by the

tribunal in the CMS case:

“This crisis ... stemmed basically from economic conditions that made
it impossible to maintain the fixed exchange rate and which gradually
led to the greatest default on foreign debt in history and the collapse of
the Argentine financial markets. Some tend to fault foreign investors
and put the blame on excessive privatization and globalization, while
others see in it the result of not having carried out the liberalization
program in its entirety and having allowed, jinajor governmental
interferences in the functioning of the economy.”

 

 

877. As stated by the Tribunal in LG&E, the reactions to the crisis could of course have

been different:

*® Noble Ventures Inc v Romania, ICSID Case No ARB 01/11, Award (12 October 2005) [hereinafter
“Noble Ventures Award”| ¥ 171.

533 E] Paso Award, supra (n 307) { 320,

34 CMS Award, supra (n 97) 1153.

254

“... Argentina faced severe economic and social hardship from 2001
onwards and had to react to the circumstances prevailing at the time.
Even though the measures adopted by Argentina may not have been the
best, they were not taken lightly, without due consideration.”

878. In the Tribunal’s view it is likely that the GOA tried to take the best measures to cope
with the situation. As shown by the diverging views expressed on the subject by
commentators of the Argentinian crisis of 2001, it is very difficult to assess whether
those measures were the best. The only issue to be verified by the Tribunal in this
context is whether these measures were taken arbitrarily. In the Tribunal’s view,
based on the documents and the oral hearing, it seems that the measures adopted were
the result of reasoned judgment rather than simple disregard of the rule of law, which
means that they cannot be considered arbitrary. However, the Tribunal’s analysis,
characterising the measures as not arbitrary does not mean that such measures are
characterised as fair and equitable or regarded as not having affected the stability of

the legal framework under which gas producing companies in Argentina operated.

2. Discriminatory Treatment: Have the Claimants been
discriminated against?

a. The Parties’ Positions

879. According to the Claimants’ memorial, Argentina’s measures specifically targeted
foreign owners of the privatised public industries and energy companies to bear the
brunt of Argentina’s measures and the country’s economic downturn. The Claimants

further contend:

“In particular GOA’s restrictions on exports are a classic case of
discriminatory treatment. Under Resolution SE 599/07, the GOA
heavily discriminated against GAS producers, like MASA who refused
to sign the Second Gas Agreement. Resolution SE 599/07 set a new
priority order for export curtailments and “re-routing” of gas volumes
to the domestic market. In case of any shortfall in the gas supply to the
domestic market, Resolution SE 599/07 requires that the export
curtailments and re-routing measures first apply to Non-Signing
Producers. Only after curtailing and re-routing the exports and

255

domestic sales of Non-Signing Producers, do the restrictions apply, if
required, to the exports and domestic sales of Signing Producers.

Resolution SE 599/07 also establishes that Non-Signing Producers will
be remunerated for their re-routed volumes at prices substantially lower
than those paid to Signing Producers will. As a result, the prices
Claimants receive for their re-routed gas volumes are not only
substantially lower than those agreed in contracts with their export
customers, but they are also lower than the prices the Signing
Producers receive for their re-routed volumes. The GOA’s regime of
curtailing and re-routing is therefore discriminatory because it provides
“differential treatment applied to people who are in similar situations.”
Moreover, these measures are not simply discriminatory in effect; they
also explicitly intend to discriminate against producers who do not sign
the Second Gas Agreement.

 

 

 

In addition, the GOA’s decision to alter the terms of private contracts
constituted discriminatory treatment. By locking MEDA and MASA
into frozen energy prices in Pesos at pre-devaluation levels while other
sectors of the economy were not subject to price controls or similar
restrictions, the GOA shifted the cost of the Peso’s devaluation and
Argentina’s economic difficulties to energy companies. Essentially,
Argentina forced the gas producers to bear a disproportionate portion of
Argentina’s financial difficulties in order to cross-subsidize the rest of
its economy by approximately US$ 4.7 billion.***

   

   

Further, the GOA’s Export Withholdings are discriminatory. They tax
gas exports at a rate that exceeds the tax treatment for exports of
petroleum products and the tax treatment for products that use gas as a
raw material in express contradiction of the protection against this type
of discrimination established by the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty.
Through Export Withholdings, the GOA targeted gas producers with
higher taxes to pay for expensive gas imports”

880. The Claimants conclude:

“The above elements show that Argentina’s conduct toward Claimants
was discriminatory: (i) the GOA’s hostility toward foreign investors;
(ii) specific statements of high level Argentine officials targeting
foreign investors (particularly in the energy sector); (iii) measures that
had a disproportionate effect on the energy sector, and particularly, the
hydrocarbon producers; and (iv) the GOA’s overt discrimination

 

* Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits {[ 360-363.

256

881.

882.

883.

between gas producers that acquiesced to its unlawful measures and

those that did not.”**°
According to Argentina, the existence of discrimination in accordance with Article
IL.2 (b) of the BIT entails: (a) different treatment to the foreign investor on the basis
of nationality; (b) less favourable treatment than that accorded to others in like
circumstances; (c) intention to harm the foreign investor; (d) actual damage to the
foreign investor; and (e) lack of reasonable grounds to provide differential treatment.

Argentina asserts that these elements are cumulative.
Therefore Argentina concludes that for discrimination to exist

the investor must be provided with differential treatment on the
sis of nationality, which treatment must be less favorable than that
accorded to other investors in a similar situation, must be provided with
the intention to harm such investor, must cause actual damage to the
investor and must not be justified by reasonable motives.”

 

 

  

b. The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal does not agree with Argentina’s contention that the existence of
discrimination in accordance with Article II (2) of the BIT entails different treatment
to the foreign investor on the basis of nationality. As the Claimants submit Article IT
(2) expressly prohibits the impairment of investment through discrimination as an
independent standard that does not require national treatment violation. The Tribunal
finds that neither the ordinary meaning of “discrimination” in Article II (2), the
context of the BIT, which includes a separate national treatment provision, nor the
cases relied on by Argentina absent a distinctive treaty language, support requiring a
national treatment violation in order to find a State measure discriminatory. As

Professor Schreuer has observed, although most of the practice dealing with

56 Tbid, para 364.

257

884.

885.

discrimination focuses on nationality, this does not mean that the issue of

. se . : . : . . 33)
discrimination is necessarily restricted to nationality.**”

There is common ground between the parties that unequal treatment is only
discriminatory among subjects that are in like circumstances. However, the
Respondent disagrees with the Claimants’ contention that investors in different
economic sectors may be in “like circumstances” for certain measures. In the
Tribunal’s view, the standard of the BIT, according to which foreign investors are
protected against discrimination, does not entail the far-reaching consequence that a
State cannot treat differently the economic actors in different sectors of the economy,
as long as this differential treatment applies equally to national and foreign investors.
However, the Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that depending on the nature of the
measure at issue, the relevant circumstances for determining “likeness” between two
economic actors and/or their respective sectors may differ. For example in
Occidental, the Tribunal interpreted a BIT that provided for national treatment and

held:

. “in like situations” cannot be interpreted in the narrow sense as
advanced ...as the purpose of national treatment is to protect investors
as compared to local producers, and this cannot be done by addressing
exclusively the sector in which that particular activity is
undertaken.”**

Also the tribunals in Enron and Sempra held that discrimination between sectors that

was "capricious, irrational or absurd” would violate the BIT. 339

°C. Schreuer, Protection against Arbitrary or Discriminatory Measures at 12 and Rudolf Dolzer-
Christoph.Schreuer, Principles of International Investment Law (2008) p.176.

*58 Occidental Exploration and Production Company v Repuiblic of, UNCITRAL, Award (1 July 2004)
Ecuador {hereinafter “Occidental Award”) { 173.

5 Enron Award, supra (n 314) {282 and Sempra, supra (n 315) 1319.

258

886.

887.

Moreover, the Tribunal does not agree that discriminatory measures require an intent
to harm the investor in question. Such a requirement appears nowhere in the text of
the BIT, and the case law interpreting the BIT does not support such a requirements.
For instance, the Tribunal in Siemens held that “intent is not decisive or essential for a
finding of discrimination, and that the impact of the measure on the investment would
be the determining factor to ascertain whether it had resulted in non-discriminatory
treatment.”*"° The LG&E Tribunal held that “Tijn the context of investment treaties,
and the obligation there under not to discriminate against foreign investors, a measure
is considered discriminatory if the intent of the measure is to discriminate or if the
measure has discriminatory effect” [emphasis added].*"' It is thus, as found by the
Tribunal in E/ Paso, sufficient that, objectively, two similar situations are not treated

similarly. 32

As mentioned above, the standard of the BIT according to which foreign investors are
protected against discrimination does not, in the Tribunal’s view entail the far-
reaching consequence that a State cannot treat differently the economic actors in
different sectors of the economy, as long as this differential treatment applies equally
to national and foreign investors. None of the impugned measures, adopted to face the
economic crisis differentiated in legal terms between Argentinian nationals and
companies or foreign or foreign-owned companies, on the other. There is no evidence
that any foreign investor has received treatment different from that granted to its
Argentinian counterparts, and the Claimants have received the same treatment as

other investors in the same sector.

*° Siemens Award, supra (n 96) ¥ 321.

“! 1G&E Energy Corp, LG&E Capital Corp and LG&E International, Inc v Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No ARB/02/1, Award (25 July 2007) [hereinafter “LG&E Award”] { 146.
*® EI Paso Award, supra (n 307) 305.

259

888.

889.

890.

891.

The question that remains is whether the Claimants can be held to be in “like
circumstances” as some other economic sector and the impugned measures therefore

are discriminatory.

The Claimants’ contend that the GOA’s decision to lock gas producers into frozen
energy prices in Pesos at pre-devaluation levels while other sectors of the economy
were not subject to price controls was discriminatory. According to the Claimants the
GOA thereby shifted the cost of the Peso’s devaluation and Argentina’s economic
difficulties to energy companies and forced the gas producers to bear a
disproportionate portion of Argentina’s financial difficulties in order to cross-

subsidize the rest of its economy by approximately US$4.7 billion.

The Tribunal finds that the Claimants have not established that this measure was
specifically aimed at foreign companies and not of a general nature. It is not denied
that other sectors of the economy were not subject to price control and similar
restrictions as gas producers, but in the Tribunal’s view, this does mean that the gas
sector was discriminated. On the contrary, as stated by the tribunal in E/ Paso, the
overall scheme adopted by the GOA had the objective of balancing for each sector the

. - ec 343
advantages or disadvantages of the general economic situation.

Moreover, the
Presidential Decree No, 689/02 excluded natural gas purchase and sale export
contracts from pesification. As far as the Gas Sector was concerned, the exports
continued to be denominate in US dollars, whereas the gas producers’ costs were still
expressed in Argentine pesos, the gas producers seemed to be in a more favourable

position than those which did not export.

The Claimants contend that the most direct act of discrimination of GOA against the

Claimants was through the Second Gas Agreement and Resolution SE 599/07.

“3 E1 Paso Award, supra (n 307) { 310.

260

892.

893.

894.

Through those instruments, the GOA imposed an obligation on non-signing producers
to supply the domestic market, which it did not impose on producers that acquiesced
to the Government’s pressure to sign the agreement. The reality was that the
Government re-routed the gas of non-signing producers first to cover insufficiency in
the supply quotas agreed by the signing producers, and sent those volumes to the

customers that paid the lowest price for their gas.

The Tribunal is of the view that non-signatory producers are not in the same
circumstances as signatory producers, since the latter have made commitments to
supply the domestic market, while the former have not. The Second Gas Agreement
was an open agreement, which means that anyone could enter into or terminate it at
any time. As Argentina argues, producers who did not sign the agreement are required
to comply with their legal duty to supply the domestic market because, unlike the
signatory producers, they have not committed to contributing any exportable natural

gas to the domestic market.

To conclude, it is the Tribunal’s view that a differential treatment based on the
existence of a different factual and legal situation does not breach the BIT standard.
Here the Tribunal is in line with other Tribunals cited and finds itself in agreement
with the Tribunals in E/ Paso and Enron, which found no discrimination between the
different sectors of economy, although they were treated differently, as there was no
“capricious, irrational or absurd differentiation in the treatment accorded to the
Claimants as compared to other entities or sectors.” Thus, the Tribunal concludes that
the Claimants have not proven any improper differentiation with could be held as

discriminatory treatment.

E. FAIR AND EQUITABLE TREAT!

 

Article II(2)(a) of the BIT provides;

261

895.

896.

897.

898.

“Investment shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment,

shall enjoy full protection and security and shall in no case be accorded

treatment less than that required by international law.”
The BIT emphasises this treatment by including in its preamble: “agreeing that fair
and equitable treatment of investment is desirable in order to maintain a stable

framework for investment and maximum effective use of economic resources.”

As can be seen below, two main issues are raised by the application of the fair and
equitable treatment (FET) standard in an arbitration case: the first concerns the
relation of FET with general international law, whereas the second is the

determination of its content and scope.

I. The Parties’ positions

The Claimants aver that neither a proper interpretation of Article II(2)(a) of the BIT
nor the case law and commentary support the view that the fair and equitable
treatment standard in the BIT is equivalent to the minimum standard under customary
international law. The Claimants refer to the wording “and shall in no case be
accorded treatment less than that required by international law” and assert that the
BITs use of the connector “and” indicates that the fair and equitable treatment
standard is in addition to the treatment required by customary international law. Thus
fair and equitable treatment requires something above and beyond customary
international law. Moreover, the Claimants contend that numerous tribunals have
confirmed that the distinction between the /ex specialis fair and equitable treatment
provisions found in many BITs and the minimum standard may be illusory in any
event, because the minimum standard has evolved to provide a broad scope of

investment protection.

According to the Claimants the protection of an investor’s legitimate expectations
constitutes an integral aspect of fair and equitable treatment. The Claimants

acknowledge that legal stability is not the only goal outlined in the BIT’s Preamble,

262

899.

900.

901.

but maintain that providing a stable framework is certainly one of the BIT’s most

central goals.

The Claimants aver that they are not arguing that BITs are a form of risk insurance,
are designed to guarantee the profitability of investments, or are a mechanism to
avoid risks stemming from general conditions in the economy. Rather, in congruence
with principles of good faith and the decisions of numerous investment treaty
tribunals, the Claimants maintain that the BIT’s fair and equitable treatment standard
requires Argentina to honour the Claimants’ legitimate expectations and provide a
stable legal and business framework as Argentina undertook to do in the BIT’s
Preamble, the Argentine President’s submittal letter to the Argentine Congress, the
public proclamations of Argentine officials, the Legal Framework, and in the

Claimants’ investment instruments

Argentina begins its discussion of FET by stating that “the fair and equitable standard
under the ...BIT corresponds to the minimum standard under customary international
law.” According to Argentina this is how the parties to the Treaty have understood it
and Article II (2) (a) of the BIT does not require treatment in addition to or beyond
that which is required by the minimum standard under customary international law.
As far as the content of the notion is concerned, Argentina refers to the award in
Waste Management*“ and concludes that there is a violation of the international
minimum standard “when it is shown that an investor has been treated in such an
unjust or arbitrary manner that the treatment rises to the level that is unacceptable

from the international perspective.”

Even if the Tribunal did not accept that the fair and equitable standard of treatment set

out in Article II (2) (a) of the BIT as equivalent to the international law minimum

“4 Waste Management Award, supra (0317) 1 98.

263

902.

903.

904.

standard, Argentina contends that the fair and equitable standard of treatment is not a
guarantee against changes in the regulatory framework on the basis of its legitimate

interests.

Argentina concludes that that the fair and equitable standard of treatment interpreted
in accordance with the general rule of interpretation requires the host state to act in
good faith and accord transparent and reasonable treatment free from arbitrariness and
discrimination, and it does not protect the alleged legitimate expectations of a stable

legal and business framework.

In addition, Argentina asserts that a violation of the fair and equitable treatment
standard cannot be determined in the abstract and that accordingly, the vicissitudes of
the economy of the host State are relevant to determine the investor’s legitimate
expectations. Moreover, in assessing a possible breach of the fair and equitable
standard of treatment, the host State is to be afforded a margin of appreciation in the
exercise of its regulatory powers in the public interest and for public purpose reasons.
Argentina concludes that in sum, to evaluate whether the fair and equitable treatment
has been breached, the circumstances of the case must be taken into account and the
host State must be given a margin of appreciation to take measures in the public

interest.

In its Rejoinder Argentina contends that the statement that the fair and equitable
treatment includes an obligation to satisfy or not to frustrate the legitimate
expectations that the investor had when making the investment does not coincide, in
any language, which may be attributed to the terms “fair and equitable treatment.” In
conclusion, Argentina contends that the fair and equitable treatment standard,
interpreted in accordance with the general rule of interpretation, requires good-faith,
transparent and reasonable treatment, free from arbitrariness and discrimination, and
does not protect legitimate expectations to the extent of an absolute stability of the

commercial and legal framework, divorced from real circumstances.

264

905.

906.

907.

908.

2. The Tribunal’s Analysis of the Legal Standard
The arguments exchanged by the parties raise the following two main issues:

(a) Whether the standard of fair and equitable treatment (FET) is a
standard which merely reflects the international minimum
standard, as contained in customary international law, or offers
an autonomous standard that is additional to general

international law; and

(b) What is the substantive content and scope of the FET standard?
In other words what conduct attributable to the State can be

characterized as unfair and inequitable?

We shall address in turn the two issued raised by the FET.

a. The Relation of Fair_and Equitable Treatment _with the
International Minimum Standard
As far as the relation between FET and the minimum standard of international law is
concerned we note that several ICSID tribunals have dealt with this question. Two

main approaches have been adopted by those Tribunals.

Under the first approach, FET merely reflects the international minimum standard of
treatment, as contained in customary international law, inasmuch the respective case

before the Tribunal is concerned. This position can be found in CMS v. Argentina:

“282. There is one additional aspect the Tribunal must examine having
heard the arguments of the parties. That is whether the standard of fair
and equitable treatment is separate and more expansive than that of
customary international law, as held by the tribunal in Pope and Talbot,
or whether it is identical with the customary international law minimum
standard as argued by Argentina.

  

283. The Tribunal is mindful of the discussion prompted by these
arguments, particularly with reference to the NAFTA Free Trade

265

909.

910.

Commission’s Note of Interpretation identifying the fair and equitable
treatment standard with that of customary international law (footnote
omitted). This development has led to further treaty clarifications as in
the Chile-United State Free Trade Agreement (footnote omitted).

284. While the choice between requiring a higher treaty standard and
that of equating it with the international minimum standard might have
relevance in the context of some disputes, the Tribunal is not persuaded
that it is relevant in this case. In fact, the Treaty standard of fair and
equitable treatment and its connection with the required stability and
predictability of the business environment, founded on solemn legal
and contractual commitments, is not different from the international
law minimum standard and its evolution under customary law.

   

The second approach is to interpret the relevant provisions in BITs autonomously on
the basis of their respective wording. In other words FET is regarded as an
autonomous concept. This approach can be found in Azurix v. Argentina. The

Tribunal said:

“The clause, as drafted, permits to interpret fair and equitable treatment
and full protection and security as higher standards than required by
international law. The purpose of the third sentence is to set a floor, not
a ceiling, in order to avoid a possible interpretation of these standards
below what is required by international law. While this conclusion
results from the textual analysis of this provision, the Tribunal does not
consider that it is of material significance for its application of the
standard of fair and equitable treatment to the facts of the case. As it
will be explained below, the minimum requirement to satisfy this
standard has evolved and the Tribunal considers that its content is
substantially similar whether the terms are interpreted in their ordinary
meaning, as required by the Vienna Convention, or in accordance with
customary international law.”

 
  

While one may, as the Azurix tribunal, from the textual analysis of Article II(2)(a) of
the BIT conclude that the purpose of the third sentence is to set a floor, not a ceiling,
in order to avoid a possible interpretation of these standards below what is required by

international law, this Tribunal does not consider that this sentence is of material

345

CMS Award, supra (0 97 ) | 282-284.
© Azurix Award, supra (n 97) { 361.

266

911.

912.

significance for its application of the standard of fair and equitable treatment to the
facts of the case. The scope and content of the minimum standard of international law
is, as the FET standard, undefined or weakly defined. It is common ground that the
minimum standard of international law has evolved over time. As can be seen from
the quotations above from Azurix, it is difficult to make a distinction between the FET
and the international minimum standard, as contained in customary international law.
Although the Azurix tribunal found that the FET clause in the BIT permits to interpret
FET as a higher standard than required by international law, it stated after this
declaration that the minimum requirement to satisfy this standard has evolved and the
Tribunal considers that its content is substantially similar whether the terms are
interpreted in their ordinary meaning, as required by the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties (hereinafter the “Vienna Convention”) or in accordance with
customary international law. This Tribunal therefore does not find it necessary to
further discuss whether FET is a standard which merely reflects the international
minimum standard, as contained in customary international law, or offers an

autonomous standard that is additional to general international law.

This Tribunal finds that the position according to which FET is equivalent to the
international minimum standard is more in line with the evolution of investment law
and international law and with the identical role assigned to FET and to the
international minimum standard. In this Tribunal’s view, the specific role played by
both the general international minimum standard and the FET standard as found in
BITs is to ensure that the treatment of foreign investments, which are protected by the
national treatment and the most-favoured investors’ clauses, do not fall below a
certain minimum, in case the two mentioned standards do not live up to that

minimum.

Thus, in the Tribunal’s view the FET is not to be viewed with reference to national
law — in which case it could be lower than required by international law — but has to

be interpreted with reference to international law, the result being that it cannot go

267

913.

914.

below what is required by international law, which is the standard to be applied. But if
national law or the treatment accorded to some foreigners exceeds this minimum
international standard, it is one of the former that has to be applied. This Tribunal thus
considers, like the El Paso Tribunal,*4” that the FET of the BIT is the international
minimum standard required by international law, regardless of the protection afforded

by the national legal orders.

b. The Content and Scope of Fair and Equitable Treatment

The term “fair and equitable treatment” is not defined. Pursuant to Article 31 (1) of
1969 Vienna Convention, a treaty is to be interpreted “in good faith in accordance
with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in
the light of its object and purpose.” As the Annulment Committee in the CMS case
has noted ... the fair and equitable standard has been invoked in a great number of
cases brought to ICSID arbitration and ...there is some variation in the practice of
arbitral tribunals in this respect.” *8
The Tribunal agrees with the general description given by Claimant in its Memorial in
the following citation:

“Tt has become clear that the basic touchstone of fair and equitable is to

be found in the legitimate expectations of the parties. In addition to

protecting an investor's legitimate expectations, the fair and equitable

treatment includes: the requirement of a stable, consistent, and
predictable legal framework; transparency; procedural propriety and

 

*7 El Paso Award, supra (n 307) 337.

CMS Gas Transmission Company v The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No ARB/O1/8, Decision
of ad hoc Committee on the ior i (25 2007) [ “CMS
Decision on Annulment”| note 86.

348.

268

  

due proce

coercion.”

; good faith, and freedom from harassment and

 

915. However, within this general acceptable definition, some tribunals have extended the
scope of the FET to a point where, in the view of this Tribunal the sovereign power of

the state to regulate its economy is negated, as will be developed below.

3. The Different Conceptions used by Arbitral Tribunals

916. Some Tribunals have used a very broad conception of FET. The exigencies of FET

have been described in Tecmed as follows:

“To provide to international investments treatment that does not affect
the basic expectations that were taken into account by the foreign
investor to make the investment. The foreign investor expects the host
State to act in a consistent manner, free from ambiguity and totally
transparently in its relations with the foreign investor, so that it may
know beforehand any and all rules and regulations that will govern its
investments, as well as the goals of the relevant policies and
administrative practices or directives, to be able to plan its investment
and comply with such regulations. Any and all State actions
conforming to such criteria should relate not only to the guidelines,
directives or requirements issued, or the resolutions approved
thereunder, but also to the goals underlying such regulations. The
foreign investor also expects the host State to act consistently, i.e.
without arbitrarily revoking any pre-existing decisions or permits
issued by the state that were relied upon by the investor to assume its
commitments as well as to plan and launch its commercial and business
activities. The investor also expects the state to use the legal
instruments that govern the actions of the investor or the investment in
conformity with the function usually assigned to such instruments, and
not to deprive the investor of its investment without the required
compensation.”**?

 

 

 

917. However, the ad hoc Annulment Committee in the MTD case did not adopt the very

broad definition in Tecmed on which the MTD tribunal had relied. It said:

* Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits { 229 with reference to R.Dolzer and C. Schreuer, Principles of
International Investment Law (Oxford 2008) p. 133.
55° Tecmed Award, supra (n 95) J 154.

269

“According to the Respondent, “the TecMed programme for good
governance” is extreme and does not reflect international law. The
TECMED dictum is also subject to strenuous criticism from the
Respondent's experts, Mr. Jan Paulsson and Sir Arthur Watts. They
note, inter alia, the difference between the TECMED standard and that
adopted in other cases, including one the Tribunal also cited in a
footnote but without comment.

The Committee can appreciate some aspects of these criticisms. For
example the TECMED Tribunal’s apparent reliance on the foreign
investor’s expectations as the source of the host State’s obligations
(such as the obligation to compensate for expropriation) is
questionable. The obligations of the host State towards foreign
investors derive from the terms of the applicable investment treaty and
not from any set of expectations investors may have or claim to have. A
tribunal which sought to generate from such expectations a set of rights
different from those contained in or enforceable under the BIT might
well exceed its powers, and if the difference were material might do so
manifestly.”**"

 

 

Secondly, in the Committee’s view the formulation of the fair and
equitable treatment standard adopted by the Tribunal was_ that
contained in paragraph 113 of the Award, where it said:

“in terms of the BIT, fair and equitable treatment should be understood
to be treatment in an even-handed and just manner, conducive to
fostering the promotion of foreign investment. Its terms are framed as a
pro-active statement — ‘to promote,’ ‘to create,’ ‘to stimulate’ — rather
than prescriptions for a passive behavior of the State or avoidance of
prejudicial conduct to the investors.”

 

The TECMED dictum was cited in support of this standard, not in
substitution for it.”

Moreover, the ad hoc Committee addresses the definition of FET given by the MTD

tribunal and states as follows:

“...a standard formulated in the terms of paragraph 113 is defensible.
No doubt the extent to which a State is obliged under the fair and
equitable treatment standard to be pro-active is open to debate, but that

55! MTD Decision on Annulment, supra (n 318) 4] 66-67.
352 Thid 470.

270

is more a question of application of the standard than it is of
formulation. In any event the emphasis in the Tribunal’ s formulation is
on “treatment in an even-handed and just manner.”

918. As pointed out by the Claimants, the Committee also made the following remarks
recognising the significance of an investor’s legitimate expectations under investment

treaties:

“.. legitimate expectations generated as a result of the investor's
dealings with the competent authorities of the host State may be
relevant to the application of the guarantees contained in an investment
preaty, nis is expressly accepted by the Respondent and in the case-
Jaw.

919. Another slightly far-reaching conception which implies that the State is under an
obligation to stabilise the legal and business framework in which the foreign

investment was made, was adopted by the Tribunal in Occidental:

“Although fair and equitable treatment is not defined in the Treaty, the
Preamble clearly records the agreement of the parties that such
treatment ‘is desirable in order to maintain a stable framework for
investment and maximum effective utilization of economic resources.”
The stability of the legal and business framework is thus an essential
element of fair and equitable treatment.”***

920. The Tribunal further noted:

“The relevant question for international law in this discussion
is...whether the legal and business framework meets the requirement of
stability and predictability under international law....there is certainly
an obligation not to alter the legal and business environment in which
the investment has been made. In this case it is the latter question that
triggers a treatment that is not fair and equitable.”**°

   

353
354
355

Ibid { 71.

MTD Decision on Annulment, supra (n 318) { 69.
Occidental Award, supra (n 338) { 183.

356 Thid, (191.

271

921. This conception was also adopted by ICSID tribunals in some of the already decided
Argentinian cases. In those cases the Preamble of the Treaty was relied upon in order
to identify the object and purpose of the BIT. The CMS tribunal referred to the
Preamble of the Argentina-US BIT to construe the FET standard:

“The Treaty Preamble makes it clear, however, that one principal
objective of the protection envisaged is that fair and equitable treatment
is desirable ‘to maintain a stable framework for investments and
maximum use of economic resources.’ There can be no doubt,
therefore, that a stable legal and business environment is an essential
element of fair and equitable treatment.”

   

922. The tribunal in LG&E expressly approved the standard set by those Tribunals when
analysing the BIT, and concluded:

“In considering the context within which Argentina and the United
States included the fair and equitable treatment standard, and its object
and purpose the Tribunal observes in the Preamble of the Treaty that
the two countries agreed that “fair and equitable treatment of
investment is desirable in order to maintain a stable framework for
investment and maximum effective use of economic resources.” In
entering the Bilateral Treaty as a whole, the parties desired to “promote
greater economic cooperation” and “stimulate the flow of private
capital and the economic development of the parties”. In light of these
stated objectives, this Tribunal must conclude that stability of the legal
and business framework is an essential element of fair and equitable
treatment in this case, provided that they do not pose any danger for the
existence of the host State itself.”**

923. Moreover, the Tribunal referred, inter alia, to the CMS and Occidental cases and
concluded:
“These Tribunals have repeatedly concluded based on the specific
language concerning fair and equitable treatment, and in the context of
the stated objectives of the various treaties, that the stability of the legal

and business framework in the State party is an essential element in the
standard of what is fair and equitable treatment. As such, the Tribunal

557 CMS Award, supra (n 97) 274.
558 LG&E Decision on Liability, supra (n 309) § 124.

272

considers this interpretation to be an emerging standard of fair and
equitable treatment in international law.” *°

oko a

“Thus, this Tribunal, having considered, as previously stated, the
sources of international law, understands that the fair and equitable
standard consists of the host State’s consistent and transparent
behavior, free of ambiguity that involves the obligation to grant and
maintain a stable and predictable legal framework necessary to fulfil
the justified expectations of the foreign investor.”*”

 

924. There are, however, ICSID tribunals that have adopted much narrower conceptions of
FET. Such an approach, which considers that FET is only violated by wilful bad faith

behaviour of the State, has been adopted by the Tribunal in Genin:

“While the exact content of this standard is not clear, the Tribunal
understands it to require an “international minimum standard” that is
separate from domestic law, but that is, indeed, a minimum standard.
Acts that would violate this minimum standard would include acts
showing a wilful neglect of duty, an insufficiency of action falling far
below international standards, or even subjective bad faith.”**'

 

925. The tribunal in the EDF case stated that:

“The Tribunal shares the view expressed by other tribunals that one of
the major components of the FET standard is the parties’ legitimate and
reasonable expectations with respect to the investment they have made.
Claimant has specifically referred to this component. It comes into
consideration whenever the treatment attributable to the State is in
breach of representations made by it which were said to be reasonably
relied upon by the Claimant...

 

The idea that legitimate expectations, and therefore FET, imply the
stability of the legal and business framework, may not be correct if
stated in an overly-broad and unqualified formulation. The FET might
then mean the virtual freezing of the legal regulation of economic

359
300

Ibid, { 125.

Ibid, { 131.

36! Alex Genin and others v Republic of Estonia, \CSID Case No. ARB/99/2, Award (25 June, 2001)
367.

273

926.

927.

activities, in contrast with the State’s normal regulatory power and the
evolutionary character of economic life. Except where specific
promises or representations are made by the State to the investor, the
latter may not rely on a bilateral investment treaty as a kind of
insurance policy against the risk of any changes in the host State’s legal
and economic framework. Such expectation would be neither
legitimate nor reasonable.”*

The Tribunal in the Parkerings case held that:

“It is each State’s undeniable right and privilege to exercise its
sovereign legislative power. A State has the right to enact, modify or
cancel a law at its own discretion. Save for the existence of an
agreement, in the form of a stabilisation clause or otherwise, there is
nothing objectionable about the amendment brought to the regulatory
framework existing at the time an investor made its investment. As a
matter of fact, any businessman or investor knows that laws will evolve
over time. What is prohibited however is for a State to act unfairly,
unreasonably or inequitably in the exercise of its legislative power.”*

Although there are different conceptions of FET emerging from ICSID case-law, the
legitimate expectations of the investors have generally been considered central in the
definition of FET, whatever its scope. As the Tribunal in the E/ Paso case stated,
“Tt]here is an overwhelming trend to consider the touchstone of fair and equitable
treatment to be found in legitimate and reasonable expectations of the Parties, which
derive from the obligation of good faith.” 3 Thus the Tribunal in Waste Management
II stated: “In applying this standard it is relevant that the treatment is in breach of
representations made by the host state which were reasonably relied on by the

claimant”.“® The tribunal in Saluka expressed the same idea, when stating: “The

362

° EDF (Services) Award (n 282) | 216-217.

°8 Parkerings Award, supra (n 282) 4 332.

5% E] Paso Award, supra (n 307) { 348.

56 Waste Management Award, supra (n 317) 98.

274

928.

929.

standard of “fair and equitable treatment” is therefore closely tied to the notion of

legitimate expectations which is the dominant element of that standard.” 366

4. The Tribunal’s understanding of fair and equitable treatment

In the Tribunal’s view, meeting the investor’s legitimate concern of legal consistency,
stability and predictability is a major but not the only ingredient of an investment-
friendly climate in which the host state in turn can reasonably expect to attract foreign
investment. However, the FET standard shall nevertheless not be understood to
amount to a stabilisation clause, but will leave a measure of governmental space for
regulation. As stated by the tribunal in E/ Paso the often repeated formula to the
effect that “the stability of the legal and business framework is an essential element of
fair and equitable treatment”, if strictly applied is not realistic and “the BIT’s purpose
is not that the States guarantee that the economic and legal conditions in which
investments take place will remain unchanged for ever.”*°"
Even the Claimants accept the view that legal stability is not the only goal outlined in
the BIT’s Preamble, but maintain that providing a stable investment framework is
certainly one of the BIT’s most explicit goals. Moreover, in their Reply the Claimants
stated that:

“To summarize, Argentina rebuts a strawman by arguing that it was not

required to freeze its legal system in place upon issuing guarantees in

the Legal Framework and Claimants’ investment instruments.

Claimants are not arguing the BITs are a form of risk insurance, are

designed to guarantee the profitability of investments, or are a
mechanism to avoid risks stemming from general conditions in the

economy.” Rather, in congruence with principles of good faith and the
decisions of numerous investment treaty tribunals, Claimants maintains

that the BIT’s fair and equitable treatment standard requires Argentina

 

 

* Saluka Investment BV v The Check Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award (17 March 2006)

{hereinafter “Saluka Partial Award”) ¥ 302.
°87 El Paso Award, supra (n 307) { 350.

275

930.

931.

932.

to honor Claimants’ legitimate expectations and provide a stable legal
and business framework as Argentine undertook to do in the BIT’s
Preamble, the Argentine President’s submittal letter to the Argentine
Congress, the public proclamations of Argentine officials, the Legal
Framework, and in Claimants investment instruments.**

This Tribunal cannot follow the line of cases in which fair and equitable treatment

was seen as implying the stability of the legal and business framework.*?

The Tribunal follows the overwhelming practice by ICSID tribunals mentioned
above, which considers that the concept of fair and equitable treatment must be
analysed with due consideration of the legitimate expectations of the Parties, but it
will discuss the interpretation to be given to such a statement. At the outset the
Tribunal notes that of course all expectations that an investor would like to rely on in
order to maximise their benefits cannot be considered legitimate and reasonable. The
Tribunal will below specify what in its opinion can be viewed as legitimate and

reasonable expectations.

a. The Linkage of Fair and Equitable Treatment with Objective
Legitimate and Reasonable Expectations of Foreign Investors
In the Tribunal’s view foreign investors’ legitimate and reasonable expectations, as
well as their violation, have to be examined objectively. The Tribunal agrees with the
following statement by the CMS Annulment Committee:
“Although legitimate expectations might arise by reason of a course of
dealing between the investor and the host state, these are not, as such

legal obligations, though they may be relevant to the application of the
fair and equitable treatment clause contained in the BIT.”*”

*68 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, {{ 208.
5 See also El Paso Award, supra (n 307) 4 352.
57° CMS Decision on Annulment, supra (n 348) J 89.

276

933.

934.

935.

936.

This Tribunal considers that the notion of “legitimate expectations” is an objective
concept, that is the result of balancing interests and rights, and it varies according to
the context. Thus these expectations, as well as, their violation, have to be examined

objectively.

b. Legitimate Expectations can be breached even in the absence
of bad faith of the State
Although action in bad faith is a violation of fair and equitable treatment, a violation
of the standard can be found even if there is a mere objective disregard of the rights
enjoyed by the investor under the FET standard. Thus such a violation does not
require bad faith on the part of the State. This has been stated in several ICSID

awards.
In CMS the Tribunal said:

“The Tribunal believes this is an objective requirement unrelated to
whether the Respondent has had any deliberate intention or bad faith in
adopting the measures.” in question. Of course, such intention and bad
faith can aggravate the situation but are not an essential element of the
standard.”

Likewise in Azurix, the Tribunal explained:

“To encourage and protect investment is the purpose of the BIT. It
would be incoherent with such purpose and the expectations created by
such a document to consider that a party to the BIT has breached the
obligation of fair and equitable treatment only when it has acted in bad
faith or its conduct can be qualified as outrageous or egregious.”*”

57! CMS Award, supra (n 97) { 280.
5? Azurix Award, supra (n 97) 372.

277

937.

938.

939.

This analysis was also followed in LG&E, where the Tribunal said that it “was not

convinced that bad faith or something comparable would ever be necessary to find a

9373

violation of fair and equitable treatment and more recently in E/ Paso.>"4

c. Fair_and_ Equitable Treatment_May Protect Investors from
Harassment and Coercion

 

There is some authority that the FET standard may also apply in situations of
harassment and coercion directed at the investor. In Pope & Talbot SLD, a
government regulatory authority, had launched a “verification review” against the
investor that was confrontational and aggressive. The tribunal held that this
investigation amounted to a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard

contained in Article 1105 of the NAFTA:

“The relations between the SLD and the Investment during 1999 were
more like combat than cooperative regulation, and the Tribunal finds
that the SLD bears the overwhelming responsibility for this state of
affairs... In its totality, the SLD’s treatment of the Investment during
1999 in relation to the verification review process is nothing less than a
denial of the fair treatment required by NAFTA Article 1105, and the
Tribunal finds Canada liable to the Investor for the resultant
damages.”*”*

In its subsequent award, the Pope & Talbot tribunal described these actions by the

regulatory authority as “threats and misrepresentations” and as “burdensome and

confrontational” and confirmed its finding of a violation of the FET standard.>”°

373

LG&E Decision on Liability. Supra (n 309) { 129.
3

4 EI Paso Award, supra( n 307) 357.

* Pope & Talbot Inc v Government of Canada, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Award on the Merits of Face
2(10 April, 2001) { 81.

5% Pope & Talbot Inc vy Government of Canada, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Award in Respect of
Damages (31 May, 2002) {{{ 67-69.

278

940.

941.

942.

In Tecmed, an unlimited license for the operation of a landfill had been replaced by a
license of limited duration. The tribunal applied a provision in the BIT between
Mexico and Spain guaranteeing fair and equitable treatment according to international
law. The tribunal found that the denial of the permit’s renewal was designed to force
the investor to relocate to another site, bearing the costs and the risks of a new
business. The tribunal said:

“Under such circumstances, such pressure involves forms of coercion

that may be considered inconsistent with the fair and equitable

treatment to be given to international investments under Article 4(1) of

the Agreement and objectionable from the perspective of international
317

Jaw.

Also the LG&E provides some authority for the proposition that an imposed alteration
of a contract under the label of renegotiations and enforced waiver of a right to seek
remedies amounts to a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard. With
respect to gas distribution licences, the Tribunal held:

“Argentina also has acted unfairly and inequitably in forcing the

licensees to renegotiate public service contracts, and waive the right to

pursue claims against the Government, or risk rescission of the

contracts. Even though the Gas Law provided for the renegotiation of

public service contracts, in practice there was no real renegotiation, but
rather the imposition of a process.”

d. Legitimate Expectations Result from_a Confrontation of the
Objective Expectations of Investors and the Right of the State

to Regulate.

A balance should be established between the legitimate expectations of the foreign
investor to make a fair return on its investment and the right of the host state to

regulate its economy in the public interest. The Saluka tribunal stated:

5” Tecmed Award, supra (n 95){163.
58 LG&E Decision on Liability, supra (n 309) § 137.

279

“No investor may reasonably expect that the circumstances prevailing
at the time the investment is made remain totally unchanged. In order
to determine whether frustration of the foreign investor's expectations
was justified and reasonable, the host State’s legitimate right
subsequently to regulate domestic matters in the public interest must be
taken into consideration as well.”*

“A foreign investor protected by the Treaty may in any case properly
expect that the Czech Republic implements its policies bona fide by
conduct that is, as far as it affects the investors’ investment, reasonably
justifiable by public policies and that such conduct does not manifestly
violate the requirements of consistency, transparency, even-handedn
and non-discrimination. In particular, any differential treatment of a
foreign investor must not be based on unreasonable distinctions and
demands, and must be justified by showing that it bears a reasonable
relationship to rational policies not motivated by a preference for other
investments over the foreign-owned investment.”**

   

Thus an interpretation of the fair and equitable treatment standard in the light of the
object and purpose of the BIT should strike a balance between the interests of foreign

investors and States pursuance of the public interests.

e. Legitimate _ Expectations Necessarily Vary _with __ the
Circumstances
A violation of FET standard cannot be determined in the abstract. What is fair and
reasonable in the light of a given circumstance may well not be so in the light of a
different one. Thus_legitimate expectations necessarily vary with the surrounding

circumstances. In Noble Ventures the tribunal explained that:

 

“Although in this respect Art. II(2)(a) mirrors standard clauses in BITs
and other international instruments and courts and tribunals have been
concerned with violations of fair and equitable treatment standards, the

5? Saluka Partial Award, supra (n 366) J 305.
380 Thid, 307.

280

945.

946.

947.

948.

question whether those standards have been violated has to be
considered in the light of the circumstances of each case.”**!

Accordingly, the vicissitudes of the economy of the host State are relevant to
determine the investor’s legitimate expectations. If a State faces a serious economic
crisis, this fact must be taken into consideration in assessing the scope of protection
due to a foreign investor. Thus, for instance, in finding that the fair and equitable

standard of treatment had not been breached, the Noble Ventures tribunal took into

“the ind; A «0 citnation” ; «3
account “the indisputably dramatic economic situation” in Romania. 82

Also the Saluka tribunal did not consider investors’ expectations in absolute terms,
existing in a vacuum and unchangeable in the light of the circumstances of the case

and the environment. The Tribunal stated:

“Moreover, the scope of the Treaty’s protection of foreign investment
against unfair and inequitable treatment cannot exclusively be
determined by foreign investors’ subjective motivations and
considerations. Their expectations, in order for them to be protected,
must rise to the level of legitimacy and reasonableness in light of the
circumstances. ”***

Also the tribunal in Continental stressed the importance of the circumstances, when

evaluating a violation of FET:

“Moreover, the content of the obligation incumbent upon the host state
to treat a foreign investor in a fair and equitable manner, even when
applicable “at all times” as specified in Art. II(2)(a) of the BIT, varies
in part depending on the circumstances in which the standard is
invoked: the concept of fairness being inherently related to keeping
justice in variable factual contexts.”**

More recently the tribunal in E/ Paso concluded:

*8! Noble Ventures Award, supra (n 332) {{ 181.

*® Noble Ventures Award, supra (n 332) {{ 182.
383 Saluka Partial Award, supra (n 366) § 304.
5 Continental Award, supra (n 316) J 255.

281

“In sum, the Tribunal considers that FET is linked to the objective
reasonable legitimate expectations of the investors and that these have
to be evaluated considering all circumstances. As a consequence, the
legitimate expectations of a foreign investor can only be examined by
having due regard to the general proposition that the State should not
unreasonably modify the legal framework or modify it in contradiction
with a specific commitment not to do so, as will be shown below.” ***

949. This Tribunal agrees with that statement of the tribunal in E/ Paso.

5. How to define the standard of Fair and Equitable Treatment

a. Fair_and_Equitable_Treatment_Implies_that_there_Is No
Unreasonable or _Unjustified Modification of the Legal

Framework
950. Despite the standard reference to “the stability of the legal and business framework’,
this cannot, as stated by the Tribunal in El Paso, “mean that when concluding a BIT a
state gives any guaranty to foreigners concerning its economic health and the
maintenance of the economic conditions for business prevailing at the time of the
investment.”**° This Tribunal agrees with the Tribunal in Saluka, which stated that:
“This Tribunal would observe, however, that while it subscribes to the
general thrust of these and similar statements [referring to the stability
of the business and legal framework], it may be that, if their terms were

to be taken too literally, they would impose upon host States’
obligations which would be inappropriate and unrealistic.”**”

951. This Tribunal further shares the views of the tribunal in Parkerings, which stated:

“It is each State’s undeniable right and privilege to exercise its
sovereign legislative power. A State has the right to enact, modify or
cancel a law at its own discretion. Save for the existence of an
agreement, in the form of a stabilisation clause or otherwise, there is

*85 El Paso Award, supra (n 307) | 364.
58 E] Paso Award, supra (n 307) { 365.
387 Saluka Partial Award, supra (n 366) J 304.

282

nothing objectionable about the amendment brought to the regulatory
framework existing at the time an investor made its investment.”***

952. As the tribunal in E/ Paso stated:

“Under a FET clause, a foreign investor can expect that the rules will
not be changed without justification of an economic, social or other
nature. Conversely, it is unthinkable that a State could make a general
commitment to all foreign investors never to change its legislation
whatever the circumstances, and it would be unreasonable for an
investor to rely on such a freeze.”

953. The same point was also made by the tribunal in Continental:

“On the other hand, it would be unconscionable for a country to
promise not to change its legislation as time and needs change, or even
more to tie its hands by such a kind of s i
type or origin arose. Such an implication as to stability in the BIT’s
Preamble would be contrary to an effective interpretation of the Treaty;
reliance on such an implication by a foreign investor would be
misplaced and, indeed, unreasonable.”*

 

954. This Tribunal shares the views of the Tribunal in E7 Paso, which stated that

 

“fair and equitable treatment is a standard entailing reasonableness
and proportionality. It ensures basically that the foreign investor is not
unjustly treated, with due regard to all surrounding circumstances. FET
is a means to guarantee justice to foreign investors.

There can be no legitimate expectations for anyone that the legal
framework will remain unchanged in the face of an extremely severer
economic crisis. No reasonable investor can have such an expectation
unless very specific commitments have been made towards it or unless

the alteration of the legal framework is total.”**!

 

*88 parkerings Award, supra (n 282) 4 332.

El Paso Award, supra (n 307) 372.
5° Continental Award, supra (n 316) J 258.
*! El Paso Award, supra (n 307) {¥ 373-374.

283

955.

956.

b. Fair_and Equitable Treatment _Implies_that_there_is_ No

Modification of the Legal Framework when Contrary Specific
Commitments Have Been Made towards the Investor

 

The Tribunal holds that even a reasonable general regulation can be considered a
violation of the FET standard, in case it violates a specific commitment towards the

investor.

The tribunal in Continental addressed the question of what can be considered a
specific commitment giving rise to “reasonable legitimate expectations” to the foreign
investor. It insisted on the “specificity of the undertaking” that can give rise to
reasonable legal expectations and for that purpose distinguished:*””

e Political statements, which have the least legal value, “regrettably but

notoriously” so;

e general legislative statements engender reduced expectations, especially
with competent major international investors in a context where the
political risk is high. Their enactment is by nature subject to subsequent
modification, and possibly to withdrawal and cancellation, within the limits

of respect of fundamental human rights and ius cogens;

e unilateral modification of contractual undertakings by governments, notably
when issued in conformity with a legislative framework and aimed at
obtaining financial resources from investors deserve clearly more scrutiny,
in the light of the context, reasons, effects, since they generate as a rule

legal rights and therefore expectations of compliance;

Continental Award, supra (n 316) J 261.

284

957.

958.

e centrality to the protected investment and impact of the changes on the
operation of the foreign owned business in general including its profitability
is also relevant; - good faith, absence of discrimination (generality of the
measures challenged under the standard), relevance of the public interest
pursued by the State, accompanying measures aimed at reducing the

negative impact are also to be considered in order to ascertain fairness.

More recently, the Tribunal in E/ Paso stated that no general definition what
constitutes a specific commitment can be given, but that two types of commitments
might be considered “specific”; those specific as to their addressee and those specific

regarding their object and purpose.*°> Further, the Tribunal in E/ Paso explained

“First, in order to prevent a change in regulations being applied to an
investor or certain behaviour of the State, there can indeed exist
specific commitments directly made to the investor — for example in a
contract or in a letter of intent, or even through a specific promise in a
person-to-person business meeting — and not simply general statements
in treaties or legislation which, because of their nature of general
regulations, can evolve. The important aspect of the commitment is not
so much that it is legally binding — which usually gives rise to some
sort of responsibility if it is violated without a need to refer to FET —
but that it contains a specific commitment directly made to the investor,
on which the latter has relied.

Second, a commitment can be considered specific if its precise object
was to give a real guarantee of stability to the investor. Usually general
texts cannot contain such commitments, as there is no guarantee that
they will not be modified in due course. However, a reiteration of the
same type of commitment in different types of general statements
could, considering the circumstances, amount to a specific behaviour of
the State, the object and purpose of which is to give the investor a
guarantee on which it can justifiably rely.”**

 

The Tribunal will follow the same logic as the tribunals in Continental and El Paso

for deciding whether the Claimants can be considered to have had legitimate

*°3 BI Paso Award, supra (n 307) {{ 375.

34 Thid, {9 376-377.

285

959.

960.

expectations that the Regulatory Frameworks for gas would not be modified during

the full course of its investment.

F. THE TRIBUNAL’S APPLICATION OF THE FAIR AND
EQUITABLE STANDARD TO THE FACTS OF THE CASE

In the 1980s, government ownership of the most essential economic activities
characterised Argentina’s economic model. By 1980s, the GOA almost completely
owned, and to a substantial extent operated the entire energy sector. In the case of the
Argentine oil and gas industry, the public sector dominated the exploration,
production, development, transportation, refining, and distribution of hydrocarbons.
The private sector played only a secondary role, restricted to activities under service
contracts with YPF, the former state-owned oil company, and with Gas del Estado,
which owned and operated the gas transportation and distribution system. In the early
1990s the GOA privatised the utilities sector and deregulated the oil and gas
industries. The new Legal Framework was designed to provide the stability and
predictability needed to attract long-term foreign investments to the hydrocarbon
sector. This new legal framework was modified during the Argentine economic crisis.
It is the measures adopted then and thereafter by Argentina that are impugned by

Claimants as a breach of its right to fair and equitable treatment under the BIT

1. The Parties’ Positions

The Claimants contend that Argentina’s price interference measures were unfair and
inequitable. In particular Articles 14 and 15 of Decree 1055/89, the Gas Law and
Decree 27131/93 grant natural gas producers the right to freely dispose of and market
their natural gas production at deregulated prices. The Argentine Government
incorporated this right in the Sierra Chata Concession and the Aguaragiie Contract. In
this case, Argentina reinforced its specific guarantees of free marketing of natural gas

at freely agreed prices through its reform of the entire natural gas regulatory system.

286

961.

962.

963.

The Government expressly committed to refrain from imposing price controls or price
freezes on natural gas distributors’ tariffs and provided that tariffs would be adjusted
to accurately reflect the cost of purchased gas. Similarly, the legal framework for
power generation included the guarantee that, when reporting their cost for purposes
of fixing the energy spot price, power generators would calculate and report their

variable costs of production in US Dollars, including the cost of gas.

Moreover, the Claimants contend that the GOA interfered with the price of natural
gas through numerous different measures taken after the pesification of the economy
and that in fact, Argentina implemented most of the price interference measures at
issue after 2003, the latest point in time that most observers, including Argentina’s
own witnesses and experts, agree marks the end of the Argentine financial crisis.
According to the Claimants, another notable fact is that Argentina continues to

unlawfully interfere in natural gas prices over eight years after pesification.

The Claimants argue that also Argentina’s export curtailments and re-routings were
unfair and inequitable. As to Argentina’s assertion that the Claimants had no direct
rights under the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty because they are not a party to that
treaty is in the Claimants’ view misguided. The Claimants argue:

“First, the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty forms part of Argentine

domestic law and prevails over domestic laws in case of inconsistency.

As a result, it forms part of the Argentine Legal Framework governing

natural gas exports, including Claimants’ gas exports. Second, and just

as importantly, Claimants invoke the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty

not merely as a part of Argentine law, but as collaborative evidence to

support the reasonableness of Claimants’ expectation that their export

rights were firm. ”*°>
Finally, the Claimants contend that Argentina’s imposition of export withholdings

violated the FET standard by creating a 20% Export Withholding on all gas exports.

°° Claimants’ Reply on the Merits J 240.

287

964.

965.

966.

967.

968.

Regarding the adaptation of domestic agreements (pesification) Argentina argues that
it was considered legitimate both by Argentine courts and several ICSID tribunals.
Moreover, Argentina points out that the Claimants were “part of the exclusive group
of privileged parties which were expressly exempted from pesification in part of their
business” (i.e. natural gas purchase and sale agreements for export purposes which

were originally denominated in US dollars were excluded from the pesification).

According to Argentina, the need to adapt the licences of public utilities’ companies,
including gas transporting and distributing companies, cannot be considered a breach
of the FET standard either, as such licences belong to the companies that act on their

behalf, and the Claimants do not have the right to tell them how to operate.

Moreover, Argentina asserts that “in view of the circumstances experienced in
Argentina due to the 2002 crisis, the measures adopted by Argentina aimed at
restoring the natural gas price in a gradual and progressive manner are lawful and

reasonable.”

Argentina also contends that the Claimants’ expectation that natural gas restrictions or
re-routings would be imposed cannot be considered legitimate, since one of the basic
tenets of the legal framework governing hydrocarbons is conditional upon the priority

of domestic supply.

Finally Argentina contends that the Claimants may not make a claim on tax matters —
such as export withholdings and royalties — alleging a violation of the FET standard,
since Article XII of the BIT expressly exclude such types of claims. In any, case, if
such type of claims were not excluded, Argentina contends that the imposition of
export withholdings would not violate the FET standard. Argentina argues that there

is no legitimate expectation that the host State’s legislation would not be modified.

288

969.

970.

971.

972.

2. The Tribunal’s Analysis

a. General Approach

The Tribunal does not doubt that the legal rights that Argentina granted through the
BIT, the legal framework, the Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts, and the Sierra
Chata Export Permit, as well as the GOA’s public assurances, were fundamental to
the Claimants’ decisions to invest in Argentina. However, in the Tribunal’s view no
tule or even clear commitment embodied in a general piece of legislation can in itself
be held a special commitment towards foreign investors, as such a conclusion would

immobilise the legal order and prevent any adaptation to changed circumstances.

Further, a declaration made by a Head of State, e.g. the president of the Republic, is
clearly a political statement to which only a limited confidence can be given. Such
“representations” can of course contribute to inducing potential investors to invest in
the sectors concerned. But, as the tribunal in E/ Paso stated . “it is one thing to be
induced by political proposals to make an economic decision, and another thing to be

able to rely on these proposals to claim legal guarantees.”*”*

Not even the fact that the Preamble of the BIT states inter alia: “Agreeing that fair
and equitable treatment of investment is desirable in order to maintain a stable
framework for investment and maximum effective use of economic resources” can be
held as a special commitment towards foreign investors, although the preamble
pursuant to article 31(2) of the Vienna Convention is a means of interpretation of the

treaty.

Therefore the Tribunal considers that the legitimate expectations of any investor

entering in the gas market had to include the real possibility of reasonable changes

%°© El Paso Award, supra (n 307) { 395.

289

973.

974.

975.

and amendments in the legal framework, made by the competent authorities within
the limits of the powers conferred on them by the law, unless the GOA makes a

specific commitment not to modify the existing framework.

b. Argentina’s Price Interference _Measures__and Domestic
Marketing Restrictions

 

Articles 14 and 15 of Decree 1055/89, the Gas Law and Decree 2731/93 grant natural
gas producers the right to freely dispose of and market their gas at deregulated
prices.*?” The GOA incorporated this right into the Sierra Chata Concession and the
Aguaragiie Contract.** Thus the right to free marketing of natural gas at freely-
agreed prices is not only provided for in the Legal Framework but also enshrined in
both the Claimants’ investments instruments. Therefore, the Tribunal considers that
the GOA has made a commitment that gives rise to legitimate expectations for future
state conduct concerning the right to free marketing of natural gas at freely agreed

prices.

A de facto price freeze of natural gas resulted, inter alia, from the mandatory
currency conversion of the prices the Claimants local customers paid to the

Claimants.

The Tribunal has above found that ENARGAS is only authorised to intervene when
prices passed through to tariffs exceed certain market levels. Since the Tribunal has

also found that ENARGAS authority to regulate gas distribution prices is limited to

7 See Gas Law, Arts. 13 and 83 as well as Decree 2731/93, Annex I, Art. 1: “As from January 1,
1994, the price of natural gas is deregulated and, as from that date, gas supply and demand operations
shall be freely agreed upon, pursuant to the provisions in this Decree and the supplementary rules
issued by the Energy Secretariat.” Moreover, Art. 13 of the Gas Law states: “Without prejudice of the
rights granted to distributors under their licenses, any user may contract the purchase of natural gas
directly with producers or marketers, freely agreeing the transactions’ terms.” See also Decree
1212/89, Art. 10.

**8 Decree 2446/92, Art. 9, Decree 1969/93, Art. 3.

 

290

976.

977.

978.

protecting consumers from market collusion and price-fixing, ENARGAS exceeded
the scope of its authority when it prohibited the pass-through of any increases of gas
wellhead prices. Moreover, this Tribunal has found that the Secretary of Energy
exceeded the scope its authority by preventing power generators from factoring gas

price increases into their calculation of electricity spot prices.

As far as the GOA prevented gas distributors and power generators to pass through
any increase in the well-head prices of gas demanded by the producers to tariffs, the
renegotiation of prices could not prosper and, as a result, there was a de facto price
freeze on natural gas in the domestic market, where the parity of the peso to the dollar
no longer existed, the value of the peso having fallen to around 0.28 US dollars in

May 2002.

Pursuant to Article 8 of Decree 214/02*” the GOA instructed courts with jurisdiction
over these matters to maintain and preserve existing contracts in Peso terms. In
practice this measure precluded parties from terminating contracts prior to their
expiration due to the GOA’s alteration of the contract price or contract fixing

mechanism.

Also the prices received by the Claimants following the First and Second Gas
Agreements, which the Claimants did not sign, were regulated, a process to which the
Claimants had not agreed. As mentioned above the re-routing measures issued by the
Secretary of Energy (SE 503/04) of 21 May 2004 resulted in a loss of revenue for the
Claimants equal to the difference of the price they would have received under the gas
sale agreements and the much lower prices received for volumes routed to third

parties.

* Exhibit C-42.

291

979.

980.

981.

982.

983.

Also through the Resolution SE 503/04 of 26 May 2004, issued by the Secretary of
Energy, which authorised the Undersecretariat of Fuel to re-route the Claimants’ gas

production was in contradiction to GOA’s above mentioned specific commitment.

The GOA has, as mentioned above, incorporated the right to freely dispose of and
market their gas at deregulated prices into the Sierra Chata Concession and the
Aguaragiie Contract. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that also pesification, as far
as it interfered with the Claimants’ freely negotiated contracts, and the other above
mentioned measures amount to an objective breach of the FET standard due under the
Treaty. The Tribunal thus holds that the standard established in Article II(2)(a) of the
Treaty has been reached and that to the extent that it results in a detriment to the

Claimants’ rights it will as such give rise to compensation.

c. The Export Restrictions

The Tribunal has above found that it established that the Claimants’ rights to export
authorised volumes of natural gas under the Sierra Chata concession have been
severely impaired since firm export volumes were re-routed to the domestic market

for over 70% of MASDA’s Sierra Chata gas production.

By restricting the gas export of the Claimants’, GOA disregarded Claimants’ right to
freely market the gas they produce, as well as the Claimants’ firm export rights under

the Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit.

The Tribunal finds that the shortage of gas in Argentina in 2004 has been established.
The parties have made contradictory assessments concerning the causes of this
shortage. However, in any case, this shortage is independent of the systematic crisis in
2001-2002 and, therefore, has to be considered on its own and not as a corollary of
the aforementioned crisis. Export permits were given after an evaluation of the needs
of the domestic supply. Leaving aside the provisions concerning the exports of excess

gas, export authorisations were set as firm and definitive permits. Suspension or

292

984.

985.

986.

987.

removal of these permits was only possible under the circumstances provided for in
the law. Argentina has not proven that the producers who were authorised to export

firm volumes of natural gas had violated their legal obligations.

Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that also GOA’s export restrictions amount to an
objective breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard due under the Treaty.
The Tribunal thus holds that the standard established in Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty
has not been observed and that to the extent that its results in a detriment to the

Claimants’ rights it will as such give rise to compensation

d. Export Withholdings

Although the Export Withholdings are a matter of taxation they are a violation of an
“investment agreement” or “investment authorization” as referred to in Article VII
(1)(a) or (b) of the BIT. These are Hydrocarbons Concessions and Contracts as well
as the Sierra Chata Permit, all of them being in the name of the Claimants (or one of
them). These instruments contain in fact commitments of the State. Thus this Tribunal
has under Article XII(2)(c) of the BIT jurisdiction also as far as the Export

Withholdings are concerned.

The Tribunal has above found that the exemption from any present or future tariffs,
duties or withholdings provided for in Decree 1589/89 and the exemption from
specific discriminatory taxes provided for in Plan Argentina and the Conversion
Decree were through Decree 1969/93 incorporated in the Sierra Chata Concession.
This specific commitment constitutes the type of commitment that gives rise to

legitimate expectations.

By imposing Export Withholdings, the GOA abrogated the Claimants’ rights, which
frustrated the Claimant’s legitimate expectations. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes
that this measure amounts to an objective breach of the fair and equitable treatment

standard due under the Treaty. The Tribunal thus holds that the standard established

293

988.

989.

990.

in Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty has not been observed and that to the extent that its
results in a detriment to the Claimants’ rights it will as such give rise to

compensation.

G. FULL PROTECTION AND SECURITY
1. The Parties’ Positions

According to the Claimants, the full protection and security (FPS) provision of the
BIT provides protection beyond the customary international law standard. The
Claimants consider that FPS imposes an obligation of vigilance and due diligence
upon the GOA. To comply with FPS, a government’s conduct must conform to its
own national laws and be no less than “the minimum standard of vigilance and of care
required by international law.” The Claimants consider that it is not limited to
physical security or the performance of the basic functions of the state. Moreover, the
Claimants contend that the view has developed that measures which violate the fair
and equitable treatment standard also violate the state’s obligation to provide

investors with full protection and security as well.

The Claimants contend that in this case, the GOA has failed to provide the Claimants
with full protection and security in at least three ways: (1) by undermining the legal
stability governing the Claimants’ investment; (2) by seeking to coerce the Claimants
to renegotiate their vested legal and contractual rights; (3) by harassing Claimants
through both official and unofficial means, and (4) by creating a hostile environment

against foreign investors.

Further, the Claimants argue that the GOA used its sovereign power to enact
numerous measures that have: (i) dismantled the Legal Framework designed to
protect the Claimants’ investment; (ii) deprived the Claimants of their legal and
contractual rights to deregulated prices and free marketing of production; (iii)

imposed Export Withholdings; and (iv) imposed gas export restrictions and quotas, all

294

991.

992.

993.

with full knowledge that these measures abrogate the essential rights it granted to the
Claimants through the Legal Framework, the Hydrocarbon Concessions and
Contracts, and the Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit. The Claimants assert that

Argentina had a duty to protect the Claimants from the effects of these measures.

Moreover, the Claimants assert that Argentina’s coercive negotiation tactics violate
the FPS standard. Argentina first unilaterally reset the applicable legal framework and
then repeatedly used producers’ severely weakened bargaining position to elicit
commitments to depressed prices and additional injections to the domestic market.
Argentina also constructed the “agreements” to punish producers like the Claimants
that chose to retain their right and upheld their commercial commitments instead of
relenting to Argentina’s demands. According to the Claimants, “instead of upholding
the Claimants’ rights, Argentina designed so-called “agreements” to undermine those
rights, and then when its coercive measures did not comply with such “agreement”, it

punished producers who chose to keep their rights.

Further, the Claimants contend that Argentine officials have also resorted to harassing
the Claimants. The Government sent letters to Claimants’ customers that undermined
the Claimants’ legal position in pending litigation. The Energy Secretariat sent a letter
to AES Gener S.A., one of Mobil’s customers, which stated that the export
restrictions and curtailments did not constitute a force majeure event but were the
result of the producers’ behaviour. Argentina had no legitimate interest in taking this

action.

Finally, the Claimants argue that it is undisputed that Argentina further undermined
the legal security of the Claimants’ investment with its non-transparent practice of
issuing ad hoc re-routing orders that sent the Claimants’ gas production to anonymous

customers at arbitrarily stipulated prices.

295

994.

995.

996.

997.

998.

999.

According to Argentina, “like the fair and equitable treatment standard, the protection
and security standard relates to the international law minimum standard. Thus
interpreted, the protection and security standard requires to provide the police

protection required under customary international law.”

Alternatively, if the Tribunal did not accept the interpretation of the protection and
security standard set out in Article II.2(a) of the BIT as equivalent to the international
law minimum standard, such provision would only impose on Argentina a due

diligence obligation to provide investors with physical protection.

Further, Argentina argues that even if the protection and security standard were
hypothetically considered to include the obligation to provide legal protection, the
State would fulfil such obligation by keeping its judicial system fully available to the

investor.

Finally Argentina argues that the Claimants’ tax related claim regarding the alleged
violation of the protection and security standard is excluded by virtue of Article XII

of the BIT.

Argentina concludes that the measures challenged in this case do not violate the
protection and security standard. In fact Argentina has complied with its due diligence
obligation of providing physical protection to the Claimants. Furthermore, the

Argentine judicial system was at all-time fully available for the Claimants.

2. The Tribunal’s analysis

Article II.(2)(a) of the BIT requires that Argentina provides “full protection and
security” to the Claimants’ investment. The Tribunal considers, as the tribunal in E/
Paso, that the full protection and security standard is no more than the traditional
obligation to protect aliens under customary international law and that it is a residual

obligation provided for those cases in which the acts challenged may not in

296

1000.

1001.

themselves be attributed to the Government, but to a third party.“°° The commentators
and case-law generally agrees that this standard imposes an obligation of vigilance
and due diligence upon the government. The AAPL case approvingly quotes

Professor Freeman’s definition of due diligence:

“The “due diligence” is nothing more nor less than the reasonable
measures of prevention which a well-administered government could
be expected to exercise under similar circumstances.”*""

The AMT Tribunal explained:

“The obligation incumbent on Zaire is an obligation of vigilance, in the
sense that Zaire as the receiving state of investments made by AMT, an
American company, shall take all measures necessary to ensure the full
enjoyment of protection and security of its investment and should not
be permitted to invoke its own legislation to detract from any such
obligation. Zaire must show that it has taken all measure of precaution
to protect the investments of AMT on its territory.

These treatments of protection and security of investment required by
the provisions of the BIT of which AMT is beneficiary must be in
conformity with its applicable national laws and must not be any less
than those recognized by international law. For the Tribunal, this last
requirement is fundamental of the determination of the responsibility of
Zaire. It is thus an objective obligation, which must not be inferior to
the minimum standard of vigilance and of care required by
international law.”

 

This Tribunal agrees with the following statement by the Tribunal in E/ Paso:

“The minimum standard of vigilance and care set by international law
compri a duty of prevention and a duty of repression. A well-
established aspect of the international standard of treatment is that
States must use “due diligence” to prevent wrongful injuries to the
person or property of aliens caused by third parties within their

 

4° El Paso Award, supra (n 307) | 522.

4°! Asian Agricultural Producers Ltdv Sri Lanka, 1CSID Case No ARB/87/3), Award (27 June, 1990) J
71.

4“ American Facturing & Trading, Inc (AMT) v Republic of Zaire, \CSID Case No ARB/93/1, Award
(27 February, 1997) { 6.05-6.06

297

1002.

1003.

1004.

territory, and, if they did not succeed, exercise at least “due diligence”

to punish such injuries. If a State fails to exercise due diligence to

prevent or punish such injuries, it is responsible for this omission and is

liable for the ensuing damage. It should be emphasised that the

obligation to show “due diligence” does not mean that the State has to

prevent each and every injury. Rather, the obligation is generally

understood as requiring that the State take reasonable actions within its

power to avoid injury when it is, or should be, aware that there is a risk

of injury. The precise degree of care, of what is “reasonable” or “due,”

depends in part on the circumstances.”**
Consequently, the Tribunal finds that for the FPS standard to keep its own identity, it
must be understood as the obligation of the host State to act with due diligence
providing investors’ physical protection to their investments and, if it comes to it,
facilitate investors’ access to justice. Going beyond this would lead to the confusion

of this standard with other standards, particularly with the FET standard.

However, the Claimants do not complain about a violation by Argentina of an
obligation of prevention of repression. The same interpretation was made not only by
the tribunal in El Paso, but also by the tribunal in Tecmed:

“The Arbitral Tribunal considers that the Claimant has not furnished

evidence to prove that the Mexican authorities, regardless of their level,

have encouraged, fostered, or contributed their support to the people or

groups that conducted the community and political movements against

the Landfill, or that such authorities have participated in such

movement.”“*
The Claimants did not specify or determine the duty to act against a third party that
would have been breached by Argentina under the BIT: all the impugned acts that
allegedly violate the FPS standard are allegedly attributable to the GOA and not to
any third party. In the present case none of the measures challenged by the Claimants

were taken by a third party; they all emanated from the State itself. Consequently, the

493 El Paso Award, supra (n 307) { 523.
44 Tecmed Award, supra (n 95) | 176.

298

1005.

1006.

1007.

measures should only be assessed in the light of other BIT standards and cannot be

examined from the angle of full protection and security.

On these grounds the Tribunal concludes that no violation of the full protection and

security clause has been established.

H. ARTICLE II(2)(c): THE UMBRELLA CLAUSE
The so-called umbrella clause contained in Article II(2)(c) provides as follows:

“Each party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with
regard to investments.”

1. The Parties’ Positions

According to the Claimants, Argentina violated the BIT by failing to observe its
obligations under Article II(2)(c). The Claimants contend that Argentina has since
January 2002 repeatedly violated the Legal Framework, the Claimants’ Hydrocarbon
Concessions and Contracts, the Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit, and other specific

commitments it had undertaken with regard to the Claimants’ investments:

« “By a series of measures taken since January 2002, which (i) interfered with
Claimants’ contracts by forcefully converting Dollar-denominated
receivables into Peso receivables at an artificially low exchange rate while
simultaneously preventing Claimants’ main customers from agreeing to price
readjustments, and (ii) forced gas sales to third parties at well below-market
regulated prices. Through these measures, Argentina breached its obligation
to allow Claimants to market their production freely at deregulated prices.
These measures specifically violated the GOA’s obligations under Articles
14 and 15 of Decree 1055/89, Article 9 of Decree 1212/89, Articles 13 and
83 of the Gas Law, Article 1 of Annex I of Decree 2731/93, Article 3 of
Decree 1969/93, and Article 4 of Decree 2446/92.

  

¢ By imposing increasingly onerous Export Withholdings, the GOA repeatedly
violated its obligation to refrain from imposing future Export Withholdings
on Claimants. These measures violated the GOA’s obligations under Article
3 of Decree 1589/89, Articles 4 and 13 of the Chihuidos Memorandum of
Understanding, and Articles 2 and 6 of Decree 1969/93.

299

e Export Withholdings also violate Argentina’s guarantee of tax stability and
its commitment not to impose discriminatory taxes on Claimants, or taxes
that levy specifically their business or their assets, thus violating Article 13
of the Chihuidos Memorandum of Understanding and Article 6 of Decree
1969/93.

e  Argentina’s measures imposing Export Withholdings also violated the
GOA’s obligation to provide Claimants with royalty rate stability under
Articles 59 and 62 of Law 17,319, Article 10 of Decree 2411/91, and
Article15 of the Chihuidos Memorandum of Understanding, Article 10 of
Decree 824/95, and Article 7 of Decree 1969/93.

¢ By placing a series of increasingly burdensome restrictions on Claimants
exports, the GOA repeatedly violated its obligation to guarantee Claimants
firm export rights to export their hydrocarbon production. Through its
measures restricting hydrocarbon exports, the GOA violated its obligations
to Claimants under Articles 1 and 2 of the Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit
and Articles 1 through 3 of the Chile-Argentina Energy Treaty.

 
 

e Argentina has also violated its obligations to compensate Claimants for
violating the rights granted under the Legal Framework (specifically Article
6 of Decree 1589/89), the Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts, and the
Sierra Chata Gas Export Permit. Although the GOA expressly undertook
several compensation obligations towards Claimants—including — the
obligations under Article 5 of the Chihuidos Memorandum of
Understanding, and Article 5 of Decree 1969/93—Argentina never
compensated Claimants for their losses.”

 

  

1008. According to Argentina it follows from the interpretation of Article II(2)(c) of the
BIT that:

(a) “for the umbrella clause to be applicable the host State must have assumed
a legal obligation;

 

(b) the umbrella clause refers to specific obligations assumed vis-a-vis a
specific investment, and the foreign investor cannot invoke provisions
arising from the general laws of the host state;

(c) the umbrella clause only entitles the foreign investor to invoke obligations
owed directly to it by the host state;

(d) the umbrella clause does not transform any contractual claim into a Treaty
claim; and

(e) there can be no breach of the umbrella clause in the absence in the breach

of the obligation which is relied on under the law applicable to such
obligation.”

300

1009.

1010.

Argentina contends that none of the obligations invoked by the Claimants constitutes
a specific commitment assumed by Argentina directly to MEDA and MASA.
Therefore, there is no single obligation that may be invoked by the Claimants in this
case under the umbrella clause. Further, Argentina argues that in any case, even if the
provisions of the general legislation of the host state could give rise to obligations
covered by the umbrella clause, the obligations alleged by the Claimants in this case

are non-existent.

2. The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal will not discuss the jurisdictional aspects involved in the Respondent’s
argument, as these were dealt with above in the part of the award concerning
jurisdiction. Regarding the merits of the argument, however, the Tribunal agrees with
Argentina that for the umbrella clause to apply, the host state must have assumed a
legal obligation. Moreover, the Tribunal agrees with Argentina that Article II (2) (c) is
concerned with consensual obligations arising independently of the BIT itself (i.e.
under the law of the host state or possibly under international law), which are not
entered into erga omnes but with regard to particular persons and that they must be
specific obligations concerning the investment. This position finds support in the
Annulment Decision in the CMS case. The Committee stated:

“In speaking of “any obligation it may have entered into with regard to

investments”, it seems clear that Article II(2)(c) is concerned with

consensual obligations arising independently of the BIT itself (i.e.

under the law of the host state or possibly under international law):

Further they must be specific obligations concerning the investment.

They do not cover general requirements imposed by the law of the host
state.”

Consensual obligations are not entered into erga omnes but with regard
to particular persons. Similarly the performance of such obligations or

301

1011.

1012.

1013.

XI.

1014.

requirements occurs with regard to, and as between, obligor and

oblige.“
The standard of protection of the treaty will be engaged only when there is a specific
breach of the treaty rights and obligations or contract rights protected under the treaty.
Purely commercial aspects of a contract might not be protected by the treaty, at least
unless there is significant interference by governments or public agencies with the

rights of the investor.

None of the measures complied in this case can be described as a commercial
question as they are all related to decisions by the government or public authorities

that have resulted in the interferences and breaches noted.

The Tribunal must therefore conclude that the obligation under the umbrella clause of
Article II(2)(c) of the BIT has not been observed by Argentina, to the extent the
obligations pertinent to the investment to which Argentina has specifically entered
into with the Claimants have been breached and have resulted in the violation of the

standards of protection under the BIT.

ARE THE MEASURES CHALLENGED BY THE CLAIMANTS
AUTHORISED BY ARTICLE IV(3) OR ARTICLED XI OF THE BIT
OR CAN THEY BE EXCUSED ON ACCOUNT OF THE STATE OF
NECESSITY?

While Argentina denies having committed any breach of the BIT through its various
measures challenged by the Claimants, Argentina also relies on three defences of a
general character that would in its view render in any event its action entirely lawful.
The first and second defences are based on the BIT, the first one on Article IV (3) and

the second one on Article XI. The third defence is based on the doctrine of “state of

495 CMS Decision on Annulment, supra (n 348) 1 95.

302

1015.

1016.

necessity” in customary international law, as codified by the International Law
Commission (“ILC”) in the ILC Articles on Responsibility of States for

Internationally Wrongful Acts.

The Tribunal will first examine the defence based on Article IV (3) of the BIT.
Thereafter, the Tribunal will address Article XI of the BIT and Article 25 of the ILC
Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts. Also those two
Articles are invoked by Argentina to avoid any responsibility for the alleged
violations of the BIT. The Tribunal will concentrate on the arguments based on
Article XI before dealing with the defence based on the “state of necessity” in
customary international law. As it was also stated first by the Tribunal in Continental
and thereafter by the Tribunal in E/ Paso, “the application of Article XI in the present
case (if warranted) may be such as to render superfluous a detailed examination of
the defence of necessity under general international law applied to the particular facts
of the present dispute”.*°% However, general principles of international law, including
those embodied in Article 25, must be taken into account in the interpretation of
Article XI. Article XI is the /ex specialis and Article 25 is the lex generalis. As stated

in the Decision on Annulment in CMS:

 

“Article XI is a threshold requirement: if it applies, the substantive
obligations under the Treaty do not apply. By contrast, Article 25 is an
excuse which is only relevant once it has been decided that there has
otherwise been a breach of those substantive obligations.”*”

  

A. Can the Violations Committed by Argentina Be Excused on the Basis
of Article IV (3)

Article IV (3) of the BIT provides:

46 Continental Award, supra (n 316) {162 and El Paso Award, supra (n 307) 4 552.
497 CMS Decision on Annulment, supra (n 348) { 129.

303

1017.

1018.

1019.

1020.

“Nationals or companies of either Party whose investments suffer
losses in the territory of the other Party owing to war or other armed
conflict, revolution, state of national emergency, insurrection, civil
disturbance or other similar events shall be accorded treatment by such
other party no less favourable than accorded to its own nationals or
companies of any third country, whichever is the more favorable
treatment, as regards any measures it adopts in relation to such losses.”

1. The Parties’ Positions

Argentina contends that Article IV. 3. is a special provision as compared to the other
provisions of the BIT. Thus, under normal circumstances States are bound by Article
II. 1 of the BIT, whereas if any of the events under Article IV. 3. arises, States are
only under the obligation to accord treatment no less favourable than that accorded to

its own nationals or to nationals of a third State.

Thus, Argentina argues that if foreign investors suffer losses in cases of “state of
national emergency” or “other similar events”, the only obligation of the State under
the Treaty, pursuant to Article IV.3, is not to discriminate if it decides to take
measures in relation to such losses. Therefore, Argentina concludes that it fully
complied with the special regime under the BIT for emergency situations and

therefore, it did not violate any of the Treaty provisions.

The Claimants contend that Article IV. 3 of the BIT is irrelevant in this case and refer
to Professor Dolzer’s statement. “[w]hile Art. XI addresses the legal status of host
states in periods affecting public order, international peace and security, Art. IV sec. 3
pertains to the investor’s right of compensation for losses owing to war and similar
situations.” Therefore, the Claimants argue that “[b]y its plain meaning, this provision
entitles an investor to non-discriminatory treatment in the payment it receives for
losses sustained during wartime when such treatment might not otherwise be available

under customary international law.”

Moreover, the Claimants argue that “nothing about Article IV 3. suggests that it may

be used by a party to avoid the responsibility to pay compensation for acts that violate

304

1021.

1022.

BIT’s other provisions” and that “[e]ven less so can it be read as a general escape
clause from treaty obligations and thus, does not result in excluding wrongfulness,

liability and eventual compensation.”

2. The Tribunals Analysis

The Tribunal finds that Argentina’s interpretation is not supported by the wording of
Article IV.3 of the BIT and can therefore not agree with this interpretation. On the
contrary, the Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that Article IV.3 of the BIT applies
to measures a State adopts in relation to the losses referred to in that article, e.g. the
investor’s right to compensation owing to war and similar situations, but not to
measures that cause such a loss. In the Tribunal’s view, the plain meaning of the
provision is, as stated by the Tribunal in E/ Paso “that the standard of treatment of
the BIT — national treatment and most favoured nation treatment — have to be applied
when a State tries to mitigate the consequences of war or other emergency.”4*
Moreover, the analysis of the same provision made by the Tribunal in CMS is in line
with this. That Tribunal stated:

“The plain meaning of the Article is to provide a floor treatment for the

investor in the context of the measures adopted in respect of the losses

suffered in the emergency, not different from that applied to nationals

or other foreigners. The Article does not derogate from the Treaty

rights but rather ensures that any measures directed at offsetting or

minimizing losses will be applied in a non-discriminatory manner.”*””
The Tribunal therefore concludes that Article IV (3) does not deal with the matter at
hand and consequently the violations by Argentina cannot be excused pursuant to that

provision.

498 El Paso Award, supra (n 307) 559.
4° CMS Award, supra (0. 97) 4 375.

305

XII.

1023.

1024.

1025.

ARE THE VIOLATIONS COMMITTED BY ARGENTINA
EXCLUDED FROM THE SCOPE OF THE BIT UNDER ARTICLE XI?

Argentina has in order to justify its conduct invoked Article XI of the BIT. The
provision reads:

“This Treaty shall not preclude the application by either Party of

measures necessary for the maintenance of public order, the fulfilment

of its obligations with respect to the maintenance or restoration of

international peace or security, or the Protection of its own essential

security interests.”
Before dealing with this defence it is, however, appropriate to emphasise the
difference between the two defences based on Article XI of the BIT and on Article 25
of the ILC Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts,
which reflects general international law. Under Article XI of the BIT, measures
necessary for the purposes mentioned in the Article are not in breach of the BIT. On
the contrary, if the rules of general international law regarding necessity apply, this is,
as stated by the Tribunal in E/ Paso, “a ground for precluding the wrongfulness of an

act not in conformity with an international obligation.”*!°

Thus, in order to analyse the consequences of Article XI, the first question to answer
is whether there was a situation of emergency as defined by that Article when the
measures complained by the Claimants were taken. If the answer is in the affirmative,
all the acts considered necessary by the Tribunal to cope with this situation are
excluded from the scope of the BIT, the contrary being true of the acts not considered
necessary by the Tribunal when the measures complained by the Claimant were taken.
If the answer is in the negative, the Tribunal has to examine the different measures
taken in order to determine whether they are or not in violation of one of the BIT

standards of treatment of foreign investments. To analyse the consequences of Article

4° El Paso Award, supra (n 307) 1 553.

306

1026.

1027.

25, the reverse approach is required. The Tribunal should first analyse whether or not
the measures constitute a violation of the standards of treatment of the BIT. If the
answer is no, this marks the end of the inquiry. If the answer is in the affirmative, the
Tribunal has to consider whether the illegality can be set aside on account of a state of

necessity.

This Tribunal has, however, in order to analyse the consequences of Article XI
decided to first answer the question whether by its behaviour Argentina has
contributed to endangering its public order or essential security interests. If the answer
is in the affirmative, the defence under Article XI shall not apply since the challenged
measures would fail to qualify as “necessary” under that Article. If the answer is in
the negative, the Tribunal has to examine whether there was a situation of emergency
as defined by Article XI, in which case, in the affirmative, all acts considered
necessary by the Tribunal to cope with that situation are excluded from the scope of

the BIT.

Taking into account the differences between the situation regulated under Article 25
of the ILC Articles and that addressed by Article XI of the BIT, the conditions of

application are not the same. As stated by the tribunal in Continental

“The strict condition to which the ILC text subjects the invocation of
the defence of necessity by a State is explained by the fact that it can be
invoked in any context against any international obligation. Therefore
“it can only be accepted on an exceptional basis.” This leads the
Tribunal to the conclusion that invocation of Art. XI under this BIT, as
a specific provision limiting the general investment protection
obligations (of a “primary” nature) bilaterally agreed by the
Contracting Parties, is not subject to the same conditions of application
as the plea of necessity under general international law.”*"!

  

4"! Continental Award, supra (n 316) J 167.

307

1028.

1029.

1030.

Nevertheless, there is a link between the two types of regulation. First of all, they
both intend to provide flexibility in the application of international obligations,
recognising that the necessity to protect national interest of a paramount importance
may justify setting aside or suspending an obligation, or preventing liability from its
breach. Further, the practical result of applying the carve-out of Article XI, rather than
the defence of necessity, may be the same: condoning conduct that would otherwise
be unlawful and thus removing the responsibility of the State. These connections may
be relevant as to the interpretation of the bilateral provision in Article XI of the BIT,
in that the customary concept of necessity may be relevant in this respect. The
Tribunal will therefore focus on the analysis of Article XI and the conditions of its
application, referring to the customary rule on State of Necessity (as enshrined in Art
25 of the ILC) only insofar as the concept there used assist in the interpretation of

Article XI.

Article XI of the BIT raises the following questions. Who is entitled to interpret
Article XI authoritatively? Do the provisions of that Article apply to the present
dispute? If so, does its applicability exonerate Argentina from any responsibility for

BIT violations?

I. Who is entitled to Interpret Article XI? Is Article XI self-judging?

a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina contends that the Contracting Parties to the BIT, i.e. Argentina and the
United States of America understood that each Contracting Party had the exclusive
right to judge whether the measures taken under Article XI were necessary to
maintain public order or to protect their essential security interests, subject only to the
principle of good faith. Therefore, the Tribunal should upon evaluating whether
Article XI is applicable in the instant case take into account the intention of the

Contracting Parties to determine by themselves, whether the circumstances allow

308

1031.

1032.

them to take measures under XI and upon such analysis assess whether said article

has been invoked in good faith.

b. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants contend that Article XI of the BIT is not self-judging. In the
Claimants view, the BIT is unambiguous that all of its provisions, including Article
XI, are subject to investor-State Arbitration. Without qualification, through Article
VII of the BIT, Argentina has consented to the jurisdiction of ICSID arbitration
tribunal to adjudicate disputes under the BIT, and thus, the BIT’s provisions fall under
exclusive purview of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Article XXI of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (“GATT”) carves like Article XI of the BIT out an
exception for a country’s “essential security interests”, but unlike Article XI of the
BIT, the GATT Article explicitly indicates that it is self-judging. The difference in
language in that instrument is obvious: “action which it considers necessary” in
Article XXI of the GATT as compared to “measures necessary” in Article XI of the
BIT.

According to the Claimants, a similar situation arose in the Nicaragua case,*, where
the ICJ had to decide whether the “essential security interests” provision of the 1956
Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation (“FCN”) between Nicaragua and the
US was self-judging. Article XXI of the FCN: “provided: “the present Treaty shall
not preclude the application of measures . . . necessary to protect its essential security
interests.” The Court concluded that the reference to “essential security interests in
Article XXI(1) of the FCN fell within the Court’s jurisdiction as defined in the
disputed settlement provision of Article XXIV of the same Treaty. The ICJ then

42 International Court of Justice, Case Concerning Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against
Nicaragua (Nicaragua v United States of America) (“Nicaragua”).

309

1033.

1034.

compared Articled XXI of the FCN with Article XXI of the GATT and then noted the

obvious distinction between “necessary” and “which it considers necessary.

Moreover, the Claimants argue that the US certainly knows how to draft a self-
judging exception when it wants to do so. The Protocol appended to the BIT with
Russia,*'> which was negotiated in the same period as the US-Argentina BIT, states
that “the Parties confirm their mutual understanding that whether a measure is
undertaken by a Party to protect its essential security interests is self-judging.” There
is no similar statement in the Protocol to the US-Argentina BIT, even though
paragraph six of the Protocol makes specific reference to Article XI of the Treaty and

explains what another of its provisions means.

Further, the Claimants contend that, even, if guod non, it could be inferred that the
US intended that Article XI be self-judging, that intention alone would not suffice to
make it so. According to Article 31(2) of the Vienna Convention, reference to
extraneous agreements for guidance in interpreting treaty language refers to
agreements “in connection with the conclusion of the treaty” and either entered into or
accepted by all treaty parties. Likewise, Article 31(3) of the Vienna Convention refers
to subsequent agreements and subsequent practice with regard to the treaty in
question (not other treaties) that establishes an agreement regarding its interpretation.
In addition, Article 31(4) of the Vienna Convention requires the establishment of both
parties’ intentions to give any term of the treaty a special meaning; as noted, it is
accepted that, under customary international law, conclusive evidence is necessary to
establish such a mutual intention at the time of concluding a treaty. No evidence has
been produced by Argentina or its legal expert to show the required mutual intent

between the US and Argentina on this issue.

413 Treaty Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment signed on 17 June

1992.

310

1035.

1036.

1037.

The question of the self-judging nature of Article XI of the BIT came up, and was
answered in the negative by the tribunal in CMS.‘"* That tribunal determined that
Article XI of the BIT is not “self-judging” and is subject to substantive review, rather
than merely a “good faith” analysis. All subsequent tribunals examining this same
evidence — including LG&E, Enron, Sempra and, Continental Casualty — have agreed

that Article XI is not self-judging.*!°

Finally, according to the Claimants even if one would conclude that, Article XI is
self-judging and subject to a mere good faith standard, Article XI would be of no
benefit to Argentina. The permanent repudiation of the Claimants’ rights in response
to a temporary “emergency” that has long since ended is simply not a good-faith

invocation of Article XI.

c. The Tribunal’s Analysis

Pursuant to Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention a treaty shall be interpreted in
good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the
treaty and in the light of its object and purpose. Thus any interpretation has to begin
with an examination of the terms of the treaty in their ordinary meaning. The wording
of the treaty is deemed to express the intention common to the Parties, and what the
Parties effectively agreed to, even though a Party may have wished something else on
one or another point. Consequently, in principle treaty rules must be regarded as being
objective in nature. This means that, unless the contrary is specified, they are not self-

judging.

44

CMS Award, supra (n 97) 4 370,373.
“15 LG&E Decision on Liability, supra (n 309) | 212, Enron Award, supra (n 314) 4 339, Sempra
Award, supra (n 315) { 338, Continental Award, supra (n 316) 187-188.

311

1038.

1039.

1040.

1041.

The Tribunal considers that in principle, the ordinary meaning of a treaty is that given
to its terms at the time of its conclusion. As stated by the tribunal in E/ Paso, changes
occurring elsewhere, at a later stage, for instance when other, similar treaties are
being negotiated or when a model treaty is being submitted to a national authority for
approval, even if they happened before the treaty to be interpreted is ratified or comes
into force, are irrelevant for establishing the meaning given to it.16 Consequently,

Argentina cannot rely on BITs negotiated after 1991 or on the 1992 Model Treaty.

A treaty provision like Article XI of the BIT allowing for exceptions to the rights
guaranteed in the same treaty must be attributed the ordinary meaning resulting from
their text. A self-judging clause cannot be read into them, in particular when the treaty
contains compromissory clauses, as in the instant case. This clearly results from the

case-law.

In Nicaragua, which apparently in this context, is the leading case, where the ICJ was
confronted with an “essential security interest” clause in Article XXI of the
Nicaragua-US Treaty of FCN. The same Treaty also contained a compromissory
clause placing disputes pertaining to the interpretation and application of its
provisions under the ICJ’s jurisdiction. The ICJ held that the clause was not self-
judging and found that it had jurisdiction to determine whether the essential security
interests’ clause was applicable. In this judgment, the ICJ rules that, in the absence of
qualifying language, the text of the relevant provision must be interpreted as it is,
according to its ordinary meaning, and cites e contrario Article XXI of the GATT,

which, as Claimants submit, contains qualifying language.

The Tribunal is of the view that the Nicaragua judgment is of particular importance

in the instant case because it relates to a treaty which though not a BIT, also defines

416 El Paso Award, supra (n 307) 591

312

1042.

and protects rights of individuals of one Party on the territory of the other and because
the 1991 Argentina-US BIT, like the Nicaragua-US Treaty of FCN, contains a
compromissory clause. The Nicaragua judgment was rendered in 1986 and the BIT
was concluded in 1991. It is most unlikely that within this five year time-span the
United States could have forgotten the judgment in Nicaragua which amounted to
saying that if one wants a treaty clause to be self-judging, one has to use appropriate
language and to obtain the other Party’s consent. For these reasons, the Tribunal
concludes that at the relevant time, the US did not seek to attribute self-judging

character of Article XI of the BIT.

This conclusion gets also support in decisions of ICSID tribunals concerning Article
XI of the BIT. The tribunal in CMS determined that Article XI of the BIT is not self-
judging and is subject to substantive review, rather than a merely a good faith”
analysis:

“The Tribunal is convinced that when States intend to create for

themselves a right to determine unilaterally the legitimacy of

extraordinary measures importing non-compliance with obligations
assumed in a treaty, they do so expressly.”

 

The Tribunal continued:

“(T]he Tribunal concludes first that the clause of Article XI is not a
self-judging clause... [I}f the legitimacy of such measures is challenged
before an international tribunal; it is not for the State in question but for
the international jurisdiction to determine whether the plea of necessity
may exclude wrongfulness....

The Tribunal must conclude next that this judicial review is not limited
to an examination of whether the plea has been invoked or the
measures have been taken in good faith. It is a substantive review that
must examine whether the state of necessity or emergency meets the
requirements laid down by customary international law and the treaty

313

1043.

1044.

1045.

1046.

provisions and whether it thus is or is not able to preclude
wrongfulness.””

The above positions were also taken by the arbitral tribunal in LG&E. In its decision

on liability the Tribunal held:

“Certainly, the language of the BIT does not specify who should decide
what constitutes essential security measures — either Argentina itself,
subject to a review under good faith standard, or the Tribunal: Based on
the evidence before the Tribunal regarding the understanding of the
Parties in 1991 at the time the Treaty was signed, the Tribunal decides
and concludes that the provision [Article XI] is not self-judging.”*"*

This passage is of particular interest because it emphasises that what matters is the
Parties common intention at the signature in 1991, when negotiations had been

concluded rather than subsequent events.

Also the Tribunals in Enron and Sempra concluded “that Article XI [of the BIT] is

not self-judging and that judicial review in its respect is not limited to an examination

of whether its invocation or the measures adopted were taken in good faith.”*"

Moreover, the Tribunal in Continental reached the same conclusion as to the non-self-

judging nature of the recourse to Article XI of the Bir.*”

More recently, the Tribunal in E/ Paso shared the same view. In its award the

tribunal said:

“[T]he Tribunal considers that Article XI of the 1991 Argentina-US
BIT is not self-judging. In other words, it is the duty of the Tribunal
first to interpret Article XI and then to decide whether or not the
situation that prevailed in Argentina at that time of the impugned

“7 CMS Award, supra (n 97) {9 370, 373-374.

LG&E Decision on Liability, supra (n 309) { 212.
49 Enron Award, supra (n 314) J 339, Sempra Award, supra (n 315) 1 388.
*° Continental Award, supra (n 316) {ff 187-188.

418

314

1047.

1048.

1049.

1050.

measures can be subsumed under the exceptions listed in that
Article."

The Tribunal finds the case-law reported above persuasive.

According to Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention, the terms of a treaty must be
interpreted “in their context”. That notion is defined by Article 31(2) of the
Convention as including in addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes,
(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the parties in
connection with the conclusion of the treaty and (b) any instrument which was made
by one or more parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by

the other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.

The Tribunal considers that the BIT’s preamble and the body of the text show that this
Treaty aims at creating a stable investment climate in both countries. If the exceptions
allowed by Article XI were considered self-judging, that purpose could not be
achieved. There are no “agreements relating to the treaty made between all the parties
in connection with the conclusion” of the BIT (Article 31(2) (a) of the Vienna
Convention), nor is there any “instrument, which was made by one or more parties in
connection with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the other parties as an
instrument related to the treaty.” Other BITs and the Model Treaty, invoked by

Argentina are certainly not connected with the conclusion of the BIT.

However, pursuant to Article 31(3) of the Vienna Convention there shall be taken into
account together with the context: (a) any subsequent agreement between the parties
regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions; (b) any

subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the agreement of

#1 El Paso Award, supra (n 307) { 610.

315

1051.

1052.

1053.

the parties regarding its interpretation; and (c) any relevant rules of international laws

applicable in the relation between the parties.

The above-mentioned sub-paragraphs (a) and (c) of Article 31(3) of the Vienna
Convention do not seem relevant in this context. However, sub-paragraph (b) — any
subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the agreement of
the parties regarding its interpretation — may have been relevant here, if Argentina had
contended that the view on self-judging provisions of BITs or other agreements had
changed after the signature of the BIT. However, Argentina has not done so in this

case.

Further, the object and purpose of the BIT (Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention)
has to be examined. The purpose of BITs such as the present one is to establish a
climate inducing investors of one State to invest on the territory of the other by
creating, for both sides, reasonable conditions for the making of investments. As
stated by the Tribunal in E/ Paso “self-judging exceptions such as that allegedly
introduced into Article XI of the Argentina-US BIT by tacit consent would give
extremely large powers to the State on whose territory the investment was made — the

reference to good faith is of little help — expose the investors to large risks.”4??

Although the Vienna Convention places priority of textual interpretation in
paragraphs | to 3 of Article 31, it however, makes space for the intentions of the
parties in a somewhat subsidiary manner. In its paragraph 4, which provides that “[a]
special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so
intended.” Article 31 (4) must be read in conjunction with Article 32 of the
Convention. Article 32 provides that recourse may be had to “supplementary means

of interpretation, including the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances

#2 El Paso Award, supra (n 307) { 604.

316

1054.

1055.

1056.

of its conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of
Article 31, or to determine the meaning, when the interpretation according to Article
31: (a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or (b) leads to a result which is

manifestly absurd or unreasonable.”

The next question to consider is this whether the results of the interpretation of Article
XI based on Article 31 of the Vienna Convention are confirmed if one turns to the

supplementary means of interpretation mentioned in Article 32 of that Convention.

The Tribunal has not found anything that would suggest that the interpretation of
Article XI based on Article 31(1) to (3) of the Vienna Convention is wrong,
ambiguous or obscure or would lead to a result which is manifestly absurd or
unreasonable. On the contrary, insofar as any of the elements mentioned in Article 32
can be identified their use would confirm or at least not contradict the conclusion that
Article XI does not have self-judging character. No preparatory work to the contrary
has been identified. Declarations made in connection with other BITs or the 1992
Model Treaty do not qualify as preparatory work related to the present BIT. Neither
have any circumstances surrounding the present BITs conclusion been shown that
would contradict the same conclusion. In the light of the ICJ’s judgment in the
Nicaragua case it is clear that, to render a treaty provision self-judging, the intention
to do so must be explicitly stated — which it was not — in particular where the treaty

contains a compromissory clause, as is the case in the BIT.

On the grounds set out above, the Tribunal considers that Article XI of BIT is not
self-judging. Consequently, it is the Tribunal’s task to interpret Article XI and to
decide whether the situation that prevailed in Argentina at the time of the impugned

measures can be subsumed under the exceptions mentioned in that Article.

317

1057.

1058.

1059.

2. The Interpretation of Article XI: a General Approach and
Admissibility of the State’s Defence under Article XI

The Tribunal considers that the state of emergency referred to in Article XI can be of

an economic nature, as stated by several other ICSID tribunals.*?°

No responsibility
should be found for damage suffered during the period of emergency, as the BIT does
not apply in such a period, except if the State has substantially contributed to create it

as it will be examined below.

However, damages might be awarded for measures taken during the state of
emergency and not cancelled when the state of emergency has ceased to exist or taken

when such state had ceased to exist.

This Tribunal finds it plain that Argentina’s crisis faced in late 2001 and which
continued into 2002 may fall within the scope of Article XI. As the tribunal in

Continental stated:

 

“It is impossible to deny, in the Tribunal’s view, that a crisis that
brought about the sudden and chaotic abandonment of the cardinal
tenet of the country’s economic life, such as the fixed convertibility
rate which had been steadfastly recommended and supported for more
than a decade by the IMF and the international community; the near
collapse of the domestic economy; the soaring inflation; the leap in
unemployment; the social hardships bringing down more than half of
the population below the poverty line; the immediate threats to the
health of young children, the sick and the most vulnerable members of
the population, the widespread unrest and disorders; the real risk of
insurrection and extreme political disturbances, the abrupt resignations
of successive Presidents and the collapse of the Government, together
with a partial breakdown of the political institutions and an extended
vacuum of power; the resort to emergency legislation granting
extraordinary legislative powers to the executive branch, that all of this,
taken together, does not qualify as a situation where the maintenance of
public order and the protection of ntial security interest of
Argentina as a state and as a country was vitally at stake. The fact that

 

 

#3 CMS Award, supra (n 97) 359, LG&E Decision on Liability, supra (n 309) 4238, Enron Award,

supra (n 314) 4374, Continental Award, supra (n 316) {179 and El Paso Award, supra (n 307) { 611.

318

1060.

1061.

Argentina’s Congress declared a “public emergency” in economic,
financial, exchange, social and administrative matters in conformity
with Art. 76 of its Constitution, and enacted a specific “Public
Emergency Law” to cope with the crisis, is powerful evidence of its
gravity such as that could not be addressed by ordinary measures. The
protection of essential security interests recognized by Art. XI does not
require that “total collapse” of the country or that a “catastrophic
situation” has already occurred before responsible national authorities
may have recourse to its protection. The invocation of the clause does
not require that the situation has already degenerated into one that calls
for the suspension of constitutional guarantees and fundamental
liberties. There is no point in having such protection if there is nothing
left to protect.”

 

It is plain that Article XI shall be interpreted on the basis of the Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties. Further, as stated above, the conditions of application of
Article 25 of the ILC Articles on the Responsibility for Internationally Wrongful Acts
and Article XI of the BIT are not the same. Thus, Article XI of the BIT, as a specific
provision limiting the general investment protection obligations bilaterally agreed by
the Contracting Parties, is not necessarily subject to the same conditions of
application as the plea of necessity under general international law. However, as also
recognised in Continental’ and El Paso™®, concepts used in Article 25 of the ILC
Articles on the Responsibility for Internationally Wrongful Acts “assist in the
interpretation of Article XI itself.” When interpreted in the light of these principles,
the requirement under Article XI that the measures must be “necessary” presupposes
that the State has at least not significantly contributed to creating the situation which

it relies upon when claiming the lawfulness of its measures.

Pursuant to Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention, a treaty shall be interpreted in
good faith and in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of

the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose. As can be seen

“4 Continental Award, supra (n 316) 180.
*5 Thid 168.
6 Fl Paso Award, supra (n 307) { 613.

319

1062.

1063.

1064.

from its preamble, the object and purpose of the BIT is inter alia to “maintain a stable

framework for investment and maximum effective use of economic resources.”

However, such economic stability can of course not be total. Also the environment for
foreign investment changes, especially when extraordinary circumstances appear. The
host State is usually not responsible for the consequences of a state of emergency.
However, if the host state has significantly contributed to the situation, it will be
responsible. A contrary opinion would, as stated by the Tribunal in E/ Paso, mean that
Article XI of the BIT is not being interpreted in the light of its object and purpose, for
that Treaty cannot possibly allow for the possibility that if the host State itself has
caused or significantly helped to cause, intentionally or by omission, the situation and
the consequences complained of, that State may shirk its obligation under the BIT by

invoking Article XI.”*7”

The ordinary meaning of “necessity” under Article XI of the BIT implies that the
State invoking necessity did not create the situation of necessity. This based on the

legal principle that “no one should reap advantages from its own wrong.**

Article 31(3)(c) of the Vienna Convention provides that in the interpretation of a
treaty, there shall be taken into account together with the context ”any relevant rules
of international law applicable in the relations between the parties.” Although the BIT
takes precedence over customary international law in the relation between the US and
Argentina, this does not mean that customary international law is irrelevant in the
case at hand. As stated by the Iran-US Claims Tribunal in the Amoco case:

“\..the rules of customary international law may be useful in order to
fill in possible lacunae of the Treaty to ascertain the meaning of

“7 E1 Paso Award, supra (n 307) 4 615.

“8 Bing Cheng, General Principles of law as applied by international courts and tribunals, 1953, para
150 (Exhibit C-457).

320

1065.

1066.

1067.

undefined terms in its text or, more generally to aid interpretation and

implementation of its provisions””
Article 31(3)(c) of the Vienna Convention provides that customary international law
shall be taken into account in interpreting a treaty This was confirmed by the ICJ in
the Oil Platform case:

“The Court cannot accept that [the essential security interest provision]

was intended to operate wholly independently of the relevant rules of

international law... The application of the relevant rules of

international law relating to this question thus forms an integral part of

the task of interpretation ...”**°
There can be no doubt that one of those general rules of international law is the one
codified in Article 25(2) of the ILC’s Articles on the Responsibility of States for
Internationally Wrongful Acts which provides in part, that: “In any case, necessity
may not be invoked by a State as ground for precluding wrongfulness if... (b) The

State has contributed to the situation of necessity.”

Both parties note that the ILC Commentary on Article 25 explains that in order for a
claim of necessity to be precluded under Article 25(2) (b), the State’s contribution to
the situation of necessity must be “sufficiently substantial and not merely incidental
or peripheral.”**! It is common ground between the parties that this rule, as framed by

the Commission, forms part of general international law.

#9 Amoco International Finance Corporation, Claimant v. Islamic Republic of Iran, National Iranian
Oil Company, National Petrochemical Company and Kharg Chemical Company Limited, (‘Amoco v
Iran”), Case No 56, Chamber 3, Award No 310-65-3 (14 July, 1987) { 112.

8 Tran vy United States, Case Concerning Oil Platforms, ICI Judgment on the Merits (6 November,
2003) para 41 (Exhibit AL RA-7).

3! Report of the International Law Commission on the work of the 33" Session, UN. GAOR 56" Sess.
Supp. No 10 Ch IV: Commentaries to the Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts, commentary to Art. 25 { 20.

321

1068.

1069.

1070.

1071.

The rule has also been applied by ICSID tribunals in interpreting Article XI of the
BIT. The tribunal in LG&E stated as follows:

“The State must not have contributed to the production of the state of
necessity. It seems logical that if the State has contributed to cause the
emergency, it should be prevented from invoking the state of necessity.
If there is fault by the State, the exception disappears, since in such
case the causal relationship between the State’s act and the damage
caused is produced.”**?

  

In Continental the tribunal stated, in connection with “essential security interests”
referred to in Article XI of the BIT as follows:

“\.if a Contracting Party to the BIT has contributed to endangering its

essential security interest, for the protection of which it has then

adopted the challenged measures, those measures may fail to qualify as

necessary” under Art. XI, since that Party could have pursued some

other policy that would have rendered them unnecessary.”**
The Tribunal concludes that there is a rule of general international law, according to
which Article XI is not applicable if the State concerned has significantly contributed
to creating the necessity. This means that the rule in question may be used under
Article 31 (3) of the Vienna Convention to ascertain the meaning of Article XI of the
BIT. Thus, the Article cannot be invoked by a State having itself created such

necessity or having substantially contributed to it.

Before examining whether Argentina has contributed to creating the situation on
which it relies under Article XI, it is appropriate to determine which Party bears the
burden of proof in that regard. This Tribunal considers that the existence of the
conditions for the application of Article XI, i.e. whether: (a) public order or essential
security interests are at stake, and (b) whether the measures are necessary to maintain

the former or protect the latter, is to be proven by the Respondent, since it relies on

43. 1G &E Decision on Liability, supra (n 309) { 256.
43 Continental Award, supra (n 316) { 234.

322

1072.

1073.

such facts to preclude a finding that the measures breached the BIT. Conversely, it is
incumbent upon the Claimants to prove Argentina’s contribution to bringing about the
necessity of the measures since it relies on such a contribution as a defence against the

application of Article XI.

3. The Application of Article XI: Has Argentina Contributed to the
Economic Crisis of 2001

a. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants contend that “Argentina’s economic “emergency” of 2001 was almost
entirely a result of its own economic policy failures”. In order to substantiate their
position the Claimants have produced a report by a macroeconomic expert, Professor
Sebastian Edwards, dated 26 April 2010 and accompanied by many exhibits
(“Edwards Report’). The Tribunal will examine the Edwards Report as detailing the

Claimants’ position.

According to the Edwards’ Report, “the Argentine economic crisis of 2001-2002 was
primarily self-induced.”**> The Report explains that “by failing to implement the
package of policies required to support the currency board, Argentina created a weak
economic system that was susceptible to crises and highly likely to amplify external
shocks” and that during 1999-2000, and in spite of repeated warnings by the
international financial community, a number of misguided policies were
implemented.” Further, the Report asserts that “throughout 2001 a series of serious
policy blunders were made by the Government of Argentina, which transformed a

recession into an economic crisis that resulted in the abandonment of the currency

44 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, | 420.
45 Expert Report of Professor Sebastian Edwards dated 26 April, 2010 [hereinafter “Edwards
Report”) 4 6 and { 87.

323

board. “ In order for a pegged exchange rate regime — and in particular, for a currency

board regime such as the one implemented in Argentina through the “Convertibility

Law” in 1991 — to work properly, a number of supporting policies have to be

implemented. These supportive policies include: (a) Fiscal balance; (b) labour

markets flexibility; (c) a trade policy that truly opens the economy; and (d) a

consistent and credible overall policy stance. Argentina was fully aware of this, but

failed to implement many of these required supporting policies:

48 Thid, J 82.

Fiscal balance: Pegged exchange rate countries — and in particular
currency board countries — need fiscal discipline. In the absence of
balanced fiscal accounts, the currency board would not be credible,
and the public would end up withdrawing deposits from the banking
sector. This would restrict liquidity and will result in higher interest
rates. The increase in interest rates would, in turn, provoke a decline
in investment and a reduction in the rate of economic growth.
Furthermore, during economic expansion, the public sector should
run surpluses and build up fiscal reserves. These reserves should then

be used during periods of economic downturn.**°

Labour market flexibility: In the absence of exchange rate
flexibility, the economy needs labour market flexibility in order to
accommodate external shocks. If the country has a pegged exchange
rate, depreciation is ruled out by definition. Competitiveness must
therefore be achieved through a reduction in labour costs. However,

if the labour market is heavily regulated and inflexible, labour costs

324

1074.

will not decline, and competitiveness will not improve. In this case

the outcome will be a higher rate of unemployment.**”

An open trade sector: Under fixed exchange rates the degree of
openness of the economy is very important. If the economy has a low
degree of openness and fixed exchange rates, a modest external
shock will result in a large decline in growth, since in a relatively
closed economy, GDP will have to contract significantly in order to
bring about a modest reduction in imports. If, on the other hand, the
economy is very open to trade, even a large external shock will have

only a minor impact on economic activity.

A strong credible policy stance: For a currency board to be
successful it is essential that the Government’s resolve to maintain
the peg remains credible. If the Government’s credibility wanes, the
public will reduce its holdings of the domestic currency: When this
happens, bank deposits and bank liquidity will decline. An erosion of
credibility will, in turn, translate into higher domestic interest rates, a
slowdown in economic growth, new round of deposit withdrawals

and further losses in credibility.*”

Recommendations to that effect were made repeatedly by the World Bank, IMF and
independent analysts. It follows that the GOA knew precisely what it needed to do to

make the currency board work. It also fully understood that if it did not implement the

325

1075.

1076.

required reforms. Argentina’s economy would remain highly vulnerable to external

factors, and a future currency crisis would be inevitable,“°

Despite this knowledge, Argentina did not implement the measures required to
ensure a proper and credible functioning of the currency board. The only exception
was the strengthening of the banking system, where progress was made. First, in the
fiscal arena, Argentina ran large and increasing deficits throughout the entire 1992-
2000 period. During many of the “good years”, when GDP growth was strong, and
Argentina could have run surpluses to build up a fiscal reserve fund which can then be
used during lean years characterized by slow growth: Argentina did not follow this
simple countercyclical rule for fiscal policy. Instead it ran a pro-cyclical fiscal policy.
During the “good years” when GDP growth was strong, the country still made very
large deficits. Argentina real GDP growth exceeded 5% in 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994,
1996, and 1997.4"

Moreover, Argentina’s fiscal problems were compounded by the GOA’s efforts to
conceal the true magnitude of the problem. Once discovered these manipulations
damage the credibility of the currency board system. Although, the GOA could have
implemented a variety of measures to strengthen fiscal discipline, one of the most
obvious and significant steps that it could have taken — but did not — was to control
provincial spending. Doing so would have required the Government to fundamentally
reform Argentina’s “Co-Participation Law” of 1988, which created very strong
incentives for fiscal indiscipline on the part of the country’s provincial governments.
The Argentine federal government administered most of the country’s main taxes,

including income taxes; value added taxes and wealth taxes. The Co-Participation

+9 Thid, Wf 84-85.
+41 Ibid. Wf 86 and 96-97.

326

1077.

1078.

1079.

1080.

Law provided for large transfers of those revenues from the federal government to the

provincial governments.

In addition, in the decade leading up to 2001 “emergency”, the GOA also failed to
significantly open its economy by reducing barriers to foreign trade. Between 1991
and 2001, Argentina had the lowest degree of openness of a group of 31 Latin

American and Caribbean countries.“

Finally, Argentina failed to liberalize its rigid labour market. When Argentine
economy eventually experienced “negative demand shocks” in the late 1990s, labour

market rigidities rendered Argentine business largely impotent to respond.“

Taken together the above analysis shows that, during the 1990s, Argentina’s leaders
failed to implement fundamental reforms that they knew were necessary for the
Argentine economy generally and the currency board, in particular, for domestic
political reasons, the economy and the currency board were left highly vulnerable.
The result was that when external shocks occurred starting in 1998, they had a far

more serious impact on Argentina (and its currency board) than they should have had.

During most of 2001, Argentina still had a chance of solving its problems without
abandoning convertibility and devaluing the peso. Achieving this, however, required
convincing market participants — both domestic and foreign — that the country could
finally put in place deep and durable policy measures that would address the country’s
long time economic problems and weakness. This meant dealing with labour market
regulations and inflexibilities, eliminating protectionist practices that kept the
economy relatively closed to the rest of the world, and reforming the onerous and

highly inefficient system of union-run social services (“obras sociales’). In addition,

42 Edwards Report, supra (n 435) { 115.
43 Edwards Report, supra (n 435) J 109-114.

327

1081.

it was fundamentally important to address the highly destabilizing and perverse Co-
Participation Law, and to avoid further increases in public debt that were not reflected
in the official deficit numbers. However, instead of addressing the country’s long-
term problems, the government embarked on a series of short term manoeuvres many
of which further eroded confidence, reduced credibility, and signalled a lack of

commitment to the Convertibility Law.“4

According to the Claimants, one of the most important policy mistakes of 2001 was
postponing fiscal and provincial adjustments until after the October 2001 elections.
The Minister of Economy, Domingo Cavallo announced a “Zero Deficit” policy
based on short term policies such as the reduction in government employees’ salaries
and pensions. Those measures, which were announced in July 2001, did not address
the long-term factors behind the crisis such as the Co-Participation Law, and thus,
lacked credibility. Political dynamics during the first three quarters of 2001 were
dominated by the government coalition’s concern about the congressional elections in
October of that year. Campaigning required funding, and thus before October of 2001,
provincial governors were unwilling to agree on a reduction of transfers to the
provinces. On 15 October 2001, immediately after the congressional elections, the
government sought to reach an agreement with the governors, in order to reform the
Co-Participation Law, reducing the size of the public sector and restructuring
provincial debts. Partisan politics, however, prevailed, and the governors refused to
consider reforming the Co-participation Law or enacting other long term reforms. As
the negotiations dragged on, depositors withdrew their funds from the banking sector,
and Argentina continued losing credibility. In November 2001 Standard&Poor

lowered Argentina’s long-term sovereign rating to “selective default”. At his point

44 Thid, Wf 117 and 119.

328

1082.

1083.

1084.

both the Argentine public and international actors lost nearly all confidence in the

GOA’s willingness to support the currency board.“

Contrary to what is contended by Argentina and its experts, external shocks did not
play a decisive role in unleashing the crisis. Those shocks were not unique to
Argentina. They also affected other Latin American countries. Indeed some other
nations in the region were affected more significantly then Argentina. These external
shocks were neither unexpected nor were they unusual. They were part of the normal
behaviour of the international business cycle. These shocks were not permanent; they

were temporary and after some time they reversed themselves. “°

The Claimants contend that temporal limitations are inherent in Article XI and points
out that the LG&E Tribunal found that the situation that allegedly justified the
application of Article XI ended in April 2003 and that the Continental Tribunal found
that Argentina could not invoke Article XI for measures it took starting in 2003.
These dates roughly accord with the opinion of most experts, including Argentina’s,
concerning the end point for Argentina’s financial crisis. That Argentina has offered
no evidence that its so-called situation of necessity persisted past the end-points

determined by other tribunals and experts, renders its invocation of Article XI

 

temporally irrelevant to the vast majority of issues in this case, including its

interference with natural gas prices and all of its export restriction and withholding
measures.

b. Argentina’s position

In its Counter-Memorial, Argentina, referring to Article 25 of the ILC Articles,

denies having contributed to the state of necessity. According to Argentina such

45 Thid, Wf 121-123.
446 Thid, J 135.

329

1085.

1086.

1087.

contribution must be sufficiently substantial, and not merely incidental or peripheral,
to disregard the existence of the state of necessity. Thus not just any state contribution
to a situation of collapse is enough to rule out the possibility of asserting the state of
necessity defence. Arguing otherwise would, according to Argentina, entail distorting

the concept of necessity.

Argentina did not contribute to the occurrence of the state of necessity to an extent
such that the possibility of raising such defence is precluded, as it is evident that it
never in the least sought to give rise to a situation in which it would stand as the main
victim.*”

On the contrary, the instant case involved countless external factors that critically
contributed to the emergency situation building up: 1. Sudden reversion of the flow of
capitals; 2. Weakening in Argentina’s trading partners’ demand; 3. Marked decline in
the prices of goods exported by Argentina; 4. Strong depreciation of the Brazilian
currency — Brazil being Argentina’s main trading partner and competitor; 5.
Appreciation of the U.S. dollar and resulting over-appreciation of the Argentine peso;
6. Hike in the Federal Reserve’s interest rates, bringing about a policy of economic
contraction during a recession stage of the Argentine economy. In these external
factors the Argentine Republic had little, if any, involvement, and which accumulated
to concoct an explosive cocktail that largely exceeded the causation threshold required
under the ILC Articles. Taking no action at all would have been detrimental to the

society as a whole.“*

Regarding the defence of necessity, in its Rejoinder, Argentina deals separately with

Article XI and Article 25 of the ILC Articles. However, Argentina refers essentially to

47 Thid, 1 661.
+8 Thid, Wf 656-657.

330

1088.

1089.

Article 25 when dealing with the issue of “non-contribution.”“” Argentina addresses
issues raised by the Edwards Report by relying on a Report by Professor Nouriel
Roubini dated 8 August 2010 presented with the Rejoinder (the “Roubini Report”),
the Report by Professors Mario Damill and Robert Frenkel dated 30 August 2010 also
presented with the Rejoinder (the “Second Damill-Frenkel Report” ) and a Report
by Professor Barry Eichengreen (the “Eichengreen Report”) dated 13 August 2010
presented with the Rejoinder as well. Further Argentina invokes another Report by
Professors Mario Damill and Robert Frenkel and dated 26 November 2009 (the’’First
Damill- Frenkel Report”) presented with Argentina’s Counter-Memorial on the
Merits. The main purpose of the Second Frankel-Damill Report is to respond to the
observations about and objections to their earlier report contained in the report by
Professor Sebastian Edwards dated 26 April 2010.4°° These Reports will be analysed

hereafter to the extent that they deal with Argentina’s contribution to the crisis.

Argentina argues that the GOA attempted to run fiscal surpluses at the time of the
currency board system and caused primary expenditure (i.e. excluding debt interest

payments) to fall below the revenues raised while such system was in force.

According to the Roubini Report, Argentina’s fixed exchange rate regime was not
viable or sustainable, since it was not consistent with economic or macroeconomic
fundamentals that have worsened because of domestic and external shocks. Thus,
when such regime becomes unsustainable, there will be a run on the reserves of the
central bank (when capital controls are not imposed). After this occurred in

Argentina, the only feasible and economically sensible option — after the currency

“© Rejoinder of the Argentine Republic §{] 748-782.

450 Second Report for the Arbitration Proceeding Entitled “Mobil Exploration and Development
Argentina Inc. Suc. Argentina and Mobil Argentina Sociedad Anénima v. the Argentine Republic of 30
August 2010, prepared by Professors Mario Damill and Roberto Frenkel [hereinafter “Second
Damill-Frenkel Report”| 3.

331

1090.

1091.

crisis forced the abandonment of the currency board — was a move to a float. The
experience of Argentina with a currency crisis and a move to a float was not an

exception but rather a rule among economies with fixed rates in the last decade.**!

In the case of Argentina, while for the first few years the currency board was viable
based on economic fundamentals, starting in 1998 it became increasingly vulnerable
and eventually not viable because of: i) a series of shocks of the economy; ii) large
and eventually unsustainable external imbalances and loss of competitiveness; iii)

large fiscal imbalances and debt accumulation; iv) structural vulnerabilities.

The external shocks identified by Roubini and starting in 1998 made the pegged
parity increasingly unsustainable. Those shocks included a) a “sudden stop” of
capital inflows in 1998 and 1999, making the cost of borrowing in international
capital markets higher and its quantity much more limited; b) weakening of demand
in major trading partners of Argentina, notably in Brazil during 1998; c) the strong
fall in oil and other commodity prices that sharply worsened Argentina’s terms of
trade; d) the sharp devaluation of the Brazilian currency against the U.S: dollar in
early 1999; e) the general strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the euro and other
major currencies between 1998 and 2001, causing Argentina to lose competitiveness
in European and other markets, because the nominal value of the Argentinean peso
was tied to U.S. dollar; f) the tightening of monetary policy by the U.S. Fed between
mid-1999 and mid-2000, driven by concerns in the U.S. about macroeconomic

heating. The combination of these shocks led starting the second half of 1998, to

45! Expert Report of Nouriel Roubini dated 8 August, 2010[hereinafter “Roubini Report”| {9 12-13

and 15.
422 Thid, 117.

332

1092.

1093.

slowdown of GDP growth and then an outright recession that continued and worsened

until 2001.47

In Argentina, persistent fiscal deficits led to an accumulation of growing stock of
public debt, particularly as the economy began to shrink and interest rates rose after
1998. The fiscal deficits worsened after 1998 because of two factors; the worsening
recession that led to a fall in revenues and a cyclical increase in spending, and the
sharp increase in interest payments resulting from the sharp increase in the foreign
debt sovereign spread and domestic interest rates following the collapse of capital
flow to emerging markets in 1998. After 1998, fiscal deficit and debt accumulation
was exacerbated by the increase in nominal and real interest rate for Argentina. That
increase was driven by a combination of external and domestic factors: the sudden
stop of capital flows to emerging markets in 1998; the worsening domestic fiscal
position and the inability of successive governments to achieve primary surpluses

large enough to stop an unsustainable debt dynamic.***

In addition to the external shocks, lack of competitiveness, external imbalances and
fiscal vulnerabilities, Argentina had a number of structural vulnerabilities that made
its economy a poor candidate for a permanent fixed exchange rate or a currency
board. Those structural vulnerabilities included: small degree of openness of the
economy caused by an older history of inward-oriented trade policies; labour market
rigidities; downward rigidity of nominal prices that required a long period of deflation
to undo the real appreciation of the currency caused by domestic and external shocks;

a very large debt to exports ratio and an enormous currency mismatch due to the fact

453 Thid, Yl 18-19.
4 Thid, YW 21-22.

333

1094.

1095.

1096.

that almost all of Argentina’s domestic and external government debt was

denominated in dollars.“

According to the Roubini Report these factors made the fixed exchange rate

 

inconsistent with economic fundamentals and lead to a currency crisis. Argentina’s

macroeconomic hands were tied since it could not adjust its currency peg without
bankrupting many firms and the government, it lacked an independent monetary
policy, and its high existing debts left it unable to run a countercyclical fiscal

policy** 6
Roubini concludes:

“In summary, the Argentine currency board regime was not sustainable
and had to be abandoned given the external and other shocks that hit
the economy. Given the macroeconomic conditions of Argentina,
including a most severe economic depression, the currency board had
to be abandoned. Also, the only really feasible and desirable exchange
rate regime after the collapse of the peg was a floating exchange rate
regime such as the one adopted by the local economic authorities in
Argentina; alternatives such as dollarization were undesirable and/or
unfeasible. The ensuing pesification of foreign currency liabilities was
also the unavoidable consequence of the abandonment of the currency
board and necessary to dampen the massive and severe real and
financial dis of the economy following the currency board
collapse.”**”

    

 

 

According to the Second Damill-Frenkel Report since, economic science in general —
and Edwards Report macroeconomics in particular — is not an experimental discipline,
Edwards arguments must be understood as opinions of the author, rather than as
scientific arguments subject to tests. Such opinions are grounded on Edwards’ own

knowledge as an economist and on references to other opinions and studies which are

485 Thid, J 24.
456 Thid, YJ 30-31.
457 Thid, J 113.

334

1097.

cited to reinforce the persuasiveness of his arguments.*°* Damill and Frenkel are of
the view that external factors were the “proximate cause or trigger of the crisis. Such
factors were the fall in the price of exports, the revaluation of the U.S. dollar, the
generalised fall in the emerging markets’ bond prices and the ensuing increase in
country risk premiums and interest rates following the crisis in Southeast Asia, and

the devaluation of the Brazilian currency.*”

As to individual issues raised by the Edwards Report, inter alia the following is noted

by Damill and Frenkel:

“Edwards’ statement that labour market flexibility is one of the reforms
which the GOA failed to implement is cantered upon the salary-
exchange ratio. A larger drop in nominal salaries than that experienced
would have probably led to more recession, bankruptcies, more or less
widespread financial problems and a higher decoration in fiscal
accounts as a result of the fall in the revenue from taxes and
contributions to retirement plans. A sharp fall in salaries would
probably tend to worsen the problems faced by the economy. "“

   

“as to the measures which, according to Edwards should have been
adopted in 2001 to avoid the devaluation, the default on public debt and
the pesification, the main measure consisted in “a comprehensive
voluntary debt exchange, with the assistance of the international
community, by exchanging existing bonds for bonds with longer
maturities and lower interest rates.” Such extraordinary financial
operation could only have taken place in the event that IMF or another
financial institution or government had granted a subsidy or a certain
type of guarantee for the new bonds issued by the GOA. A voluntary
debt exchange was conducted in June 2001 (the so-called megaswap).
However, the IMF did not take part therein and interest rates for the
new bonds were considerably higher than those of the original bonds
swapped: The megaswap had no respite to the escalation of the
crisis."

  

 

458 Second Damill-Frenkel Report, supra (n 450) { 26.

© Tid, 4 28.

4° Thid, Wl 34-47.

461 Second Damill-Frenkel Report, supra (n 450) {ff 44-45.

335

1098.

1099.

With regard to the fiscal evolution, Edwards expresses opinions which are based
upon citations or figures from secondary sources, selected as he deems fit. According
to Edwards there was a noticeable improvement in the Argentine tax performance
during the early years of the currency board: the consolidated adjusted deficit
improved during 1992-1996, declined in 1997, climbed to 3.7% of GDP in 1998, to
6.6% in 1999 and it was 5.4% of GDP in 2000. According to Damill’s and Frenkel’s
estimate, based on more reliable sources, the consolidated public sector average
deficit for the 1991-1994 period was of only 0.56% of GDP. During such period
Argentina’s Public sector had a positive primary result of 1.3 of GDP vis-d-vis an
average deficit of 4.4% of GDP between 1981 and 1991. The difference between the
deficit figures derives mainly from the fact that the normalization of debts incurred by
the public sector, particularly to pensioners and State providers before the
implementation of the currency board system was in Edwards’ secondary source
recorded as an expense. Between 1995-1997, there was a slight deterioration in the
Argentine fiscal situation. The average deficit for such three-year period was about
2.56% of GDP per year, i.e. two points of GDP higher than the average percentage for
the 1991-1994 period. Such increase was mostly the result of the imbalance in public
accounts which derived from the reform of the pension system which was both
approved and implemented in 1994. Fiscal surplus cannot be assumed to be
synonymous with immunity against crises. Neither does tax result showing a modest

deficit lead to a critical outcome.“

The reform in the distribution of taxes between the Federal State and the provinces,
which is described by Edwards as a necessary reform, entails a major institutional-
political problem, Argentina being a federal State. Mainly for that reason the

implementation of such change constitutes a complex institutional-political task, as

4© Thid, Wf 60-67.

336

1100.

1101.

1102.

well as a considerable source of conflict. Such reform poses a problem which not only
takes time to solve, but requires negotiations and agreements as well, since the

potential conflicts involved may produce short-term negative effects.*°

As to Edwards’ argument that the negative external shocks were only temporary, it
should be observed that that the temporary nature of an external shock does not

preclude its ability to cause harm. Temporary shocks may have long-lasting effects.**

Edwards’ argument that the Argentine economy is “closed” and that such fact would
have made things more difficult during the last phase of the currency board is
misleading. At the beginning of the 1990’s there was a shift to a new trade regime,
where the economy was much more exposed to competition from imported goods.
Even though trade policies may be modified through policies the modification of
“openness measures”, such as the ratio between international trade flows (export plus
import) and product, does not exclusively depend on such policies. Any change in
these relationships takes time and depends on people’s behaviour and, what is very
important, is affected by the devaluation of the real exchange rate as the value in local
currency of exports and imports is a function of the exchange rate. The degree of
openness increased until 1997, decreased in 1998-2001, to increase again thereafter.
Thus it may hardly be argued that trade protectionism hindered the design of

Argentina’s economic policy under the currency board system.*®

The Eichengreen Report’s conclusions also confirm the explanations provided by
Damill-Frenkel and by Roubini, as well as the impact of external shocks on the

development of the crisis. The existence of external shocks was a key element in the

43 Thid, 71.
4 Tid, 474.
465 Tid, gf 115-116.

337

1103.

1104.

1105.

1106.

emergence of the crisis and this is the conclusion at which well-known international

macroeconomic experts have arrived.
In the opinion of Professor Eichengreen:

“Argentina in fact made considerable progress in reforming its
economic system in the early and mid-1990s. Commercial banks were
privatized. Banks were relatively well capitalized. The authorities
avoided incurring short-term debt that posed rollover risk. The capital
account of the balance of payments was liberalized. Nonbank public
enterprises were privatized. Tariffs and quotas were reduced. Initiatives
were taken to reform labour as well as product markets. One reflection
of these facts is that Argentine bond spreads were running below the
Emerging Markets Index Plus average for emerging-market economies
in 1997. Another reflection is the praise that Argentina received for its
policies at the IMF-World Bank meetings in 1998"*°°

  

 

Argentina concludes that it has been sufficiently demonstrated in this arbitration
proceeding that the Argentine Republic did not contribute to create any of the crises
which led to the adoption of the measures contested by the Claimants (unlike the

Claimants, which did contribute to the energy shortage problems).

c. The Tribunal’s Analysis

At the outset, the Tribunal emphasises that States are basically free to adopt
economic and monetary policies of their choice. This Tribunal is not subjecting past

economic policies to any judicial, administrative or political review.

In addressing the question whether Argentina contributed to the situation of
emergency on which it relies, the Tribunal will be guided essentially by two
considerations. It acknowledges on one hand Argentina’s right as a sovereign state to
choose the economic policy best suited to the needs of the population and on the other

hand it will take due account of the fact that the protection offered by the BIT to the

466 Expert Report of Barry Eichengreen dated13 August, 2010 {10.

338

1107.

1108.

1109.

Claimants’ investment is suspended to the extent that Article XI is applicable. The
Tribunal will also take into account the fact that the Claimants bear the burden of

proof of the facts regarding Argentina’s contribution to the economic crisis of 2001.

Although the experts diverge in their analysis of Argentina’s responsibility for
causing the economic and currency crisis, there are a few aspects on which there is

some convergence of opinions.

Roubini, who is Argentina’s expert, acknowledges the significant role that
Argentina’s fiscal deficits and debt accumulation played in provoking the currency
crisis of 2001. Although maintaining that Argentina’s fiscal problems were partly
aggravated by recession and external interest rates after 1998, his report suggests that
the GOA’s lack of fiscal control was already a problem at that time, as is shown by
the following quotations:

“Argentina's fiscal deficits and debt accumulation worsened after
1998,”

“In the case of Argentina, while for the first two years the currency
board was viable based on economic fundamentals, starting in 1998 it
became increasingly vulnerable and eventually not viable because of :
i) large fiscal imbalances and debt accumulation...,”

 

“In Argentina, persistent fiscal deficits (and a partially botched social
security privatisation in the 1990s) led to an accumulation of a growing
stock of public debt, particularly as the economy began to shrink and
interest rates rose after 1998."4°7

Also the Claimants’ expert, Edwards, considers the absence of fiscal discipline as one

of the causes of the economic and currency crisis of 2001.46

467 Roubini Report, supra (n 451) Jf 16-17 and 21.
468 Edwards Report, supra (n 435) 95.

339

1110.

1111.

1112.

1113.

Roubini also concurs with Edwards’ view that Argentina’s failure to liberalise labour
markets and trade policies played a significant role in bringing about the 2001
currency crises. He concedes that also the “small degree of openness of the economy

caused by an older history of inward-oriented trade policies and trade market
99469

rigidities” “made the fixed rate regime fragile and vulnerable to shocks.
As mentioned above, the experts diverge in their analysis of responsibility for
causing the Argentina economic and currency crisis. The Edwards Report considers
such crisis to have been primarily self-induced by Argentina. The Roubini Report
holds that the essential factors of the crisis were external shocks and attributes the
currency collapse to macroeconomic factors, although he concedes that “fiscal
slippages did occur in Argentina in the 1990’s"47°

The Second Damill-Frenkel Reports does not provide much evidence in support of its
various contentions. This is conspicuous since that Report was meant to rebut the
Edwards Report, a comprehensive detailed and well-documented work*”'Thus the
n472 i.

remark that Edwards’ arguments “must be understood as opinions of the author’

misguided.

The evidence filed in these proceedings shows clearly that both internal and external
factors caused the crisis that occurred in Argentina at the end of 2001. Having fully
considered the parties’ arguments and the evidence before it, a majority of the
Tribunal concludes that Argentina’s failure to control several internal factors, in

particular the fiscal deficit and debt accumulation and labour market rigidity,

© Roubini Report, supra (n 451) {{ 24 title of Section V.

Roubini Report, supra (n 451) | 42.
47! Edwards Report, supra (n 435) is accompanied by 142 exhibits.
4° Second Darmill-Frenkel Report, supra (n 450) 926.

470

340

1114.

1115.

substantially contributed to the crisis. The progressive worsening of internal factors

diminished Argentina’s ability to respond adequately to external shocks.

The Tribunal’s conclusions find support in IMF Independent Evaluation Offices
(IEO) Evaluation Report of 2004: “The IMF and Argentina 1991-2001.""” The
Report was examined [and presumably approved] by the Argentinean authorities and

benefited from substantial contributions by Roubini.*”

The majority of this Tribunal finds the following passages of the IEO Executive

Summary significant:

“The crisis resulted from the failure of Argentine policymakers to take
necessary corrective measures sufficiently early, particularly in the
consistency of fiscal policy with their choice of exchange rate regime.
The IMF on its part erred in the pre-crisis period by supporting the
country’s weak policies too long, even after it had become evident in
the late 1990s that the political ability to deliver the necessary fiscal
discipline and structural reforms was lacking.”

 

 

“While fiscal policy improved substantially from previous decades, the
initial gains were not sustained, and the election-driven increase in
public spending led to a sharp deterioration in fiscal discipline in 1999.
As a result, the stock of public debt steadily increased, diminishing the
ability of the authorities to use countercyclical fiscal policy when the
recession deepened.”

“Insufficient attention was paid to the provincial finances, the
sustainable level of public debt for a country with Argentina’s
economic characteristics was overestimated, and debt sustainability
issues received limited attention.”

 

“The IMF correctly identified structural fiscal reforms, social security
reform, labor market reform, and financial sector reform as essential to
enhancing the medium-term viability of the convertibility regime, by
promoting fiscal discipline, flexibility, and investment.”

“8 Annex 51 to the Edwards Report, supra (n 435) Independent Evaluation Office, The IMF and
Argentina 1991-2001, [2004] [hereinafter “IMF, Evaluation Report” | and (Exhibit C-662).
44 MF Evaluation Report p. vii.

341

“Some gains were made in the early years, but the long-standing
political obstacles to deeper reforms proved formidable. Little progress
was made in later years, and the earlier reforms were even reversed in
some cases.”

1116. Moreover, the majority of the Tribunal notes the following passages of the same
report:
“In the early 1990's, the IMF, the Argentine authorities, and most
outside observers were in broad agreement that for convertibility to

remain viable, the restrictive labor market practices that have evolved
over the previous half century would have to be revised.”

+ 476

 

“However progress in this critical area was negligible.

“Fiscal policy was the single most prominent topic of discussion
between the IMF and the Argentine Authorities for virtually the entire
period of convertibility. While fiscal policy often dominates the
interactions with member countries, it assumed a particular importance
in the case of Argentina. For one thing, there was a history of fiscal
irresponsibility that had in the past contributed to repeated cycles of
defaults and hyperinflation. Moreover, the choice of convertibility
regime made fiscal policy especially important.”

It is clear that Argentina's vulnerability arose from the inconsistency
between the weakness of fiscal policy and its choice of the
convertibility regime...If Argentina’s public sector had generated
surpluses in its fiscal account during the pre-crisis years, it could have
avoided the tightening liquidity constrains in 2000 and the all funding
crisis in the public sector in 2001. Argentina also would have enjoyed
greater flexibility in using fiscal possibility to cope with the impact of
adverse shocks and would have been spared from the need to contract
policy when output was already declining.*”*

 

1117. A number of statements made by qualified international experts and by Argentina’s
former leaders confirm the substance of the Edwards Report as well as the analysis of

the IEO Report.

“5 IMF Evaluation Report p. 3-4
476 IMF Evaluation Report p. 31.
477. IMF Evaluation Report p. 23.
478 IMF Evalutaion Report p. 14.

342

1118. The 1996 World Bank Report emphasized the need for “fiscal adjustment” at both the
provincial and central governments levels that “must come” from expenditure

reduction since the potential for revenue increases is limited.*”

1119. The former Argentine Minister of the Economy and Finance Domingo Cavallo

stated:

“The most important lesson to be learned from the Argentine
experience relates to the importance of fiscal policy and, particularly,
of fiscal discipline during good times. In my 1994 interview, I
emphasized the role of fiscal balance as a precondition for stability.
However, stability requires more than just that. During periods of rapid
growth and favorable external conditions, it is necessary to generate a
fiscal surplus as a cushion for the negative external shocks that may
show up unexpectedly at any moment. Argentina should have done this
between 1991 and 1994, and again between 1996 and 1998, but it did
not. Therefore, at the time of external shocks, it depended on foreign
financing precisely at a time when foreign expectations turned sour.”**”

1120. Eduardo Duhalde, President of Argentina, at the time of the crisis, observed in an

Article published in the Financial Times on 12 July 2004.

“In the case of Argentina, no one bears more of the blame for the crisis
than Argentina itself. We spent more than we earned; we failed to
complete the full cycle of economic reforms; and we tied ourselves to
the most productive economy in the world without building our own
productivity. Of course, this was compounded by the global decline in
commodity price, by protectionism in key markets and by shifts in
global capital flows. Yet Argentina’s crisis is largely home grown.”**!

4 World Bank, Argentina Provincial Finances Study: Selected Issues in Fiscal federalism, July 1966,
pp. iv-v (Exhibit C-630).

Domingo Cavallo, Eleven Years Later: What Went Wrong in Argentina 2003-2006, HARV.INT’L.
REV 42. 45 (2005) (Exhibit C-559).
48! Eduardo Duhalde, Argentina Regrets, Financial Times (USA Edition), 12 July 2004 (Exhibit C-
629).

343

1121.

1122.

1123.

1124.

The Nobel Economist Gary Becker has concluded that: “The Argentine problem
arose because spending by the Government, including the provinces, was very

excessive and not controlled.”“*?

In an article published on 25 March 2002, Michael Mussa, Senior Fellow, Institute
for International Economics in Washington D.C., wrote:
“Enumerating the many things that contributed to Argentina’s tragedy,
however, should not obscure the critical failure of Argentina’s
economic policy that was a fundamental cause of the disaster — namely
the chronic inability of the Argentinean authorities to run a responsible
fiscal policy. This is an old and a sad story for Argentina.”
The Tribunal finds, like the Tribunal in Continental, that “[e]ven ex post
facto...qualified economic observers remain in disagreement as to the exact causes of
the crisis and the mix of measures that might have avoided it. However, since
Article XI is not “self-judging”, the Tribunal has, as said by the Tribunal in E/ Paso,
“the power and the duty to make sure that all conditions for its application are
satisfied, including the absence of a substantial contribution by Argentina to the crisis

of 2001.78

The Tribunal agrees that economic science in general — and macroeconomics in
particular — is not an experimental discipline and that “in economic matters, the
analysis of causation, that is the determination of which facts caused a certain other
fact, or whether a certain fact was among the contributory causes of that certain other

fact and whether its impact was material, does not lend itself to the same scientific

48 “F] problema argentino surgi porqueel gasto deol gobierno, incluyendo a las provincias,fue muy

exceesivo y no fue controlado.” Falta mucho para la recuperacién Argentina, dice Gary s. Becker:
reflexiones del Nobel de Economia 1992, LA NACION, 17 August 2005 (Exhibit C-561).

4° Michael Mussa, Argentina and The Fund From TriumphcTo Tragedy; Institute for International
Economics, Washington D.C., 25 March 2002 p. 6 Annex 49 the Edwards Report.

484 Continental Award, supra (n 316) 224.

485 EI Paso Award, supra (n 307) { 665.

344

1125.

1126.

1127.

analysis as in the domain of the so-called exact sciences and of natural
phenomena.”**° However, the evidence presented by the Claimants, including
statements by Messrs. Cavallo and Duhalde, regarding the actions and omissions by
Argentina until the end of 2001, support the conclusion of a majority of the Tribunal
that Argentina contributed to the crisis to a substantial extent, so that Article XI

cannot come to its rescue.

Arbitrator Remiro Broténs in disagreement states his reasons in a separate opinion.

4. Article XI of the BIT is subject to temporal limitations.

Having regard to the fact that that the majority of the Tribunal has found that
Argentina has substantially contributed to the situation on which Argentina relies
under Article XI, there is no need to evaluate whether the impugned measures were
“necessary” for the maintenance of public order, the fulfilment of its obligations with
respect to the maintenance or restoration of international peace or security, or the
protection of Argentina’s own essential security interests within the meaning of the
BIT. However for completeness of the analysis, the Tribunal unanimously emphasises
that temporal limitations are inherent in Article XI of the BIT. The Tribunal considers
that all the measures adopted or kept in force by the GOA after the date on which the
2001- 2002 crisis in Argentina was over were in no event necessary because of that
crisis. The defence under Article XI of the BIT would therefore not be available

regarding measures taken after the end of the crisis.

The LG&E Tribunal found that crisis ended on 26 April 2003.**’ The tribunal in

Continental found that Argentina could not invoke Article XI for measures it took

486 Continental Award, supra (n 316), footnote 356.
487 LG&E Decision on Liability, supra (n 309) J 226.

345

1128.

1129.

1130.

starting 2003 485 and according to Argentina’s expert Eduardo Ratti the crisis ended

even earlier.“*°

The Tribunal considers that the crisis which would have justified application of
Article XI absent Argentina’s substantial contribution to its occurrence ended at the

latest in April 2003.

However, the shortage of natural gas in Argentina is an undisputed fact. The parties
disagree concerning the reasons of this shortage. The Tribunal considers that this
shortage is not a part of the crisis that broke out in late 2001 and ended at the latest in
April 2003, and therefore has to be considered on its own and not as a corollary of
that crisis. This view is also supported by the fact that in January 2002 gas export
contracts were not included in the pesification. In fact, the export of natural gas
provided a great amount of foreign currencies. The Tribunal recognises that the
domestic supply of natural gas is a primary and fundamental objective in Argentina,
as in any country. The same applies to taxes as a means to fulfil the needs of public
services, including supply of energy. However, these are foreseeable circumstances

that must be taken into account in a precautionary and prudent legislation.

As regards export permits, the legislation in force before the adoption of the
challenged measures warned repeatedly that the needs of the domestic market had to
be guaranteed. Export permits were given after an evaluation of the domestic supply.
Leaving aside the provisions concerning the exports of excess gas, export
authorisations were set as firm and definitive permits. Argentina has not shown that

the producers who were authorised to export firm volumes of natural gas had violated

488 Continental Award, supra (n 316) {ff 221, 266 and 320.
48° Ratti Witness Statement, supra (n 276) {ff 15-16.

346

their legal obligations. Therefore, the Tribunal considers that Argentina’s measures

adopted to cope with the gas shortage do not fall within Article XI of the BIT.

1131. As to the export withholdings and the basis of calculation of the royalties, the

challenged measures, although they were provided for by virtue of the Emergency

Law, were only applied once the GOA took measures that restrict exports forcing the

rerouting of volumes of gas to the domestic market. Therefore, the Tribunal considers

that the relevance of Article XI of the BIT must be considered only from the

perspective of the 2004 energy shortage. This leads to the same conclusion that has

been reached as to the measures that restrict exports of natural gas forcing the

rerouting of volumes of gas to the domestic market.

XIII. DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON LIABILITY

1132. Based on the above reasoning and findings, the Tribunal DECIDES as follows:

a)

b)

c)

d)

The Tribunal has jurisdiction over this dispute as presented by the Claimants

taking into account the conclusions under paragraph 284, 285 and 864;

Argentina breached its obligations under Article II(2)(a) of the BIT by
failing to accord fair and equitable treatment to MEDA’s and MASA’s
investment. as well as its obligations under Article II(2)(c) of the BIT to the
extent the obligations pertinent to the investment to which Argentina has
specifically entered into with the Claimants have been breached and have

resulted in the violation of the standards of protection under the BIT;

All other Claims by MEDA and MASA are rejected;

The Argentine Republic is liable to MEDA and MASA for the
aforementioned violations of the BIT and the damages thereby suffered by

MEDA and MASA must be compensated by Argentina, as will be

347

determined in a separate quantum phase of these arbitration proceedings,
and in respect of which this Tribunal retains jurisdiction. The Tribunal will
issue a separate order concerning the further proceedings for the quantum

phase;

e) Any decision on costs of the arbitration is reserved.

Done in English and Spanish, both versions being equally authentic.

348

 

An. ddd

? Professor Piero Bernardini Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: Weel 24,613 Date: Dawe, 2%, wie

Subject to the attached individual opinion

 

Justice. Gustaf Moller
"ate the Tribunal

Date: Apr a9

 

 

SEPARATE OPINION OF PROFESSOR ANTONIO REMIRO BROTONS, ARBITRATOR

In order to proceed in logical order, | will explain my opinion in accordance with the following
structure:

A. Overview (paras. 1-10)

B. The Emergency Law and its Consequences Concerning the Natural Gas Free Market (paras.
11-122)

|. Article XI of the Bilateral Investment Treaty (paras. 11-75)
Il. Fair and Equitable Treatment (paras. 76-99)
IIL. State of Necessity (paras. 100-122)

C. Measures Concerning Export Restrictions, Export Withholdings and Royalties (paras. 123-
126)

FESSOR
A. Overview

1. | agree with the Tribunal’s decision that it has jurisdiction over the dispute “taking into
account the conclusions under paragraphs 284, 285 and 864” (para. 1132(a)), as well as its
determination that the Argentine Republic is liable for breaching its obligations under Article
11.2(a) of the Treaty between the Argentine Republic and the United States of America
Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment, by failing to provide
fair and equitable treatment to the Claimants’ investment, and Article II.2(c), "to the extent
the obligations pertinent to the investment to which Argentina has specifically entered into
with the Claimants have been breached and have resulted in the violation of the standards of
protection under the BIT" (paras. 1132(b) and (c)).

2. | disagree, however, with respect to the reasoning of certain parts of the Decision.
Therefore, despite my respect for the majority’s view, | feel obliged to express my opinion.

3. My disagreement with the Tribunal’s line of reasoning concerns, most of all, the
interpretation of Article XI of the Treaty, under which the obligations undertaken by one Party
shall not impede the application of measures necessary for the maintenance of public order or
the protection of its own essential security interests, and its relation with the “state of
necessity” under rules of general or customary international law, as put forward especially in
paragraphs 1015, 1024-1029, 1057-1071, 1105-1124, 1126, and 1128.

4. The Tribunal (paras. 1024, 1060) claims to acknowledge and deems appropriate to

emphasize the differences between, on the one hand, the provisions of Article XI of the Treaty
and, on the other, the “state of necessity” as a circumstance that excludes the wrongfulness of

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

an act attributable to the State, as set out in Article 25 of the International Law Commission’s
(ILC) Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts (2001). The
Tribunal, however, holds (para. 1015) that Article XI of the Treaty is lex specialis and Article 25
of the ILC Draft Articles is lex generalis and, less acceptable to me, uses the conditions for the
application of “necessity” under Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles (par. 1028, 1060) as the
interpretative canon for Article XI of the Treaty.

5. Not only that. For the Tribunal, which largely follows the E/ Paso award (paras. 1024,
1060, 1062, 1123, 1124), the question of whether Argentina substantially contributed to the
situation it attempted to mitigate with its measures (a requirement it takes from the “state of
necessity”) comes before the consideration of whether such measures are “necessary” to
address threats to the “public order” or “essential security interests;” thus, if the answer to the
first question is affirmative, it is no longer necessary to answer the second one as Article XI
would not apply, given that no one can benefit from their own mistakes (paras. 1026, 1060,
1063, 1070, 1126). In the Tribunal’s view, again following E/ Paso, the object and purpose of
the Treaty requires the State be held liable if it has contributed, intentionally or by omission, to
the state of emergency (para. 1062).

6. The Tribunal comes to the conclusion that Argentina’s failure to control several internal
factors, in particular the fiscal deficit, debt accumulation and labor market rigidity,
substantially contributed to the crisis, while their progressive worsening, diminished the
government’s ability to face concurring external factors; consequently, the Tribunal rules out
the application of Article XI of the Treaty (paras. 1113, 1124).

7. In my opinion, the Tribunal does not take into account the theoretical and operational
differences between Article XI of the Treaty, the safeguard clause, and the “state of necessity”,
a circumstance that excludes the wrongfulness of an act pursuant to general rules of
international law. The interpretation of Article XI cannot be supplemented by more rigorous
requirements than those for the “state of necessity”. That cannot be the reason to rule out the
application of Article XI of the Treaty.

8. The reason why, in my opinion, Article XI of the Treaty fails to cover Argentina’s
measures concerning pesification and its consequences in the natural gas market, which are at
issue in this case, is that Article Xl was not designed to support a change of paradigm but only
to suspend a paradigm in a state of emergency. Not only does Article XI have temporal
limitations, but also structural ones. It cannot uphold measures that are not temporary but
virtually permanent, although they may be formally disguised as temporary. Under a bona fide
interpretation of Article XI, it is just not possible to use a state of emergency as an excuse to
substantially alter the foundations of the neoliberal model underlying the obligations assumed
under the Treaty. In order to achieve that goal, it is necessary to renegotiate or terminate the
treaty.

9. Moreover, leaving Article XI aside, | do not believe that in a situation of crisis like the one
experienced by Argentina the “fair and equitable treatment” standard provides for absolute
protection of the legal stability commitments assumed by the host State towards the investor.
It is fair and equitable for the foreign investor to share the burden placed on the shoulders of
society as a whole, provided there is no arbitrariness or discrimination, and provided further

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

that the situation is not used to pave the way for a permanent change in the economic model
underlying the protection system agreed on. In the case at hand, the latter requirement is not
met. That is where the breach of the standard lies.

10. Finally, considering that the Tribunal determined in the Decision that Argentina has
breached the “fair and equitable treatment” standard vis-d-vis the Claimants, the Decision was
supposed to devote some paragraphs to rebutting the appropriateness of the “state of
necessity,” which was relied on by the Respondent to exclude the wrongfulness of its acts.

JESSIE IAG
B. The Emergency Law and its Consequences Concerning the Natural Gas Free Market

|. Article XI of the Bilateral Investment Treaty

11. Article XI of the Treaty between the Argentine Republic and the United States of America
Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment provides that the
obligations undertaken by one of the Parties in relation to the treatment of the other Party’s
investments and investors "shall not preclude the application...of measures necessary for the
maintenance of public order...or the protection of its own essential security interests."

12. Since the Treaty shall not preclude the application of these measures (those necessary
for the maintenance of public order or the protection of the State’s essential security
interests), Article XI becomes a safeguard clause that excludes the application of the Treaty’s
substantive provisions when such measures are taken. Thus, Article XI defines the operational
scope of the Treaty’s material obligations.

13. In view of its own terms, this provision’s analysis should come before any other on
Argentina’s violation — or not — of the rules on the treatment afforded to U.S. investments and
investors. If the provision is applicable, any violation of the treatment standards under the
Treaty would be irrelevant for the Tribunal to decide. If one concludes that the measures
adopted, in this case the Emergency Law and the acts performed under such law, were
necessary for the purposes mentioned above, it is unnecessary to further develop any
arguments as to whether there was a violation of the treaty, or alternatively, no violation due
to the exercise of the regulatory power.’

14. Moreover, the role played by Article XI, in the context of the Treaty and its logical order
in Tribunal’s reasoning, reveals its absolute theoretical independence from the “state of
necessity” as a circumstance that excludes the prima facie wrongfulness of an act, something
that can only be analyzed once the wrongful act — in this case, the violation of one or more
treatment standards under the Treaty — has been verified.”

* Sempra Energy International v. The Argentine Republic, |CSID Case No. ARB/02/16 (US/Argentina BIT)
Decision on the Argentine Republic's Application for Annulment of the Award, 29 June 2010, § 187.

> Continental Casualty Company v. Argentina, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/9 (US/Argentina BIT) Award, 5
September 2008, § 162; Sempra Energy International v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/16 (US/Argentina BIT) Decision on the Argentine Republic's Application for Annulment of the
Award, 29 June 2010, § 204; El Paso Energy International Company v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case
No. ARB/03/15 Award, 31 October 2011, § 552.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

4

15. The conceptual — and operational — independence of Article XI of the Treaty from the
“state of necessity” has not always been duly noted in the past, even Argentina itself as
Respondent was not a stranger to the confusion in some of its less recent arguments, amidst
the high number of lawsuits filed in connection with foreign investments in its territory arising
from the government measures taken in the first decade of this century.’ Article XI is not the
tabernacle of the customary “state of necessity”.

16. Therefore, it is useful to insist that Article XI, on the one hand, and the “state of
necessity” as a general rule of customary international law, on the other, are inherently
different and operate in different and separate stages of the process of application of the law
to the facts.

17. This conclusion has been increasingly supported by case law, as evidenced by the
reasoning of the tribunal in Continental,* as well as that of the Annulment Committees in
CMS,* Sempra‘ and Enron,’ and the tribunal in E/ Paso.®

18. However, the proper conclusions of this line of reasoning are not always drawn, not only
with regard to the logical order of the reasoning underlying the decision (as can be noted in
our Decision, para. 1025), but also in connection with the interpretation of the provisions at
stake where — as in our case, following E£/ Paso — the tribunal resorts to the elements that
characterize the “state of necessity” — required under Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles — to
sustain the explanation of Article XI of the Treaty.

FOC Ie

19. In El Paso, the tribunal states that “[o]f course, Article XI has to be interpreted taking
into account general principles of international law, some of those being embodied in Article
25.”° Article XI, the tribunal adds, “is the lex specialis, Article 25, the lex generalis.”

20. This last remark could be accurate if it were simply construed to mean that Article XI,
incorporated in a treaty, is a particular rule while Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles aims at
codifying a general rule. It would not be accurate, however, if it were meant to suggest that

3 Sempra Energy International v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/16 (US/Argentina BIT)
Decision on the Argentine Republic's Application for Annulment of the Award, 29 June 2010, § 176.

* Continental Casualty Company v. Argentina, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/9 (US/Argentina BIT) Award, 5
September 2008, § 163-167

° CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/O1/8 (US/Argentina
BIT) Argentine Republic's Application for Annulment, 8 September 2005, § 129-135.

° Sempra Energy International v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16 (US/Argentina BIT)
Decision on the Argentine Republic's Application for Annulment of the Award, 29 June 2010, § 159, 165,
185-189 195-209, 218, 219.

” Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, 12 ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3
(United States/Argentina BIT) Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic, 30
July 2010, § 405.

° El Paso Energy International Company v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/15 Award, 31
October 2011, § 553 and 554.

* See § 552.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

Article XI of the Treaty embodies, for the bilateral relations between Argentina and the United
States, the general rule of Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles.

21. In El Paso, the tribunal still finds that "the requirement under Article XI that the
measures must be ‘necessary’ presupposes that the State has not contributed, by acts or
omissions, to creating the situation which it relies on when claiming the lawfulness of its
measures."”°

22. The tribunal justifies this first by referring to the object and purpose of the Treaty ("to
promote and improve the investment climate between the Contracting Parties, notably by
establishing some stability regarding the status of investments") which, as inferred from the
Treaty’s Preamble, would call for liability of the host State for the consequences resulting from
a state of emergency if such State has substantially contributed to it because, if this were so,
the Treaty cannot allow the host State to avoid its obligations by resorting to Article XI.”7

23. Second, the Tribunal adds, if Article 31.3(c) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, dated May 23, 1969, provides that the interpretation of treaty rules should take into
account, inter alia, “any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between
the Parties,”"? one of such rules would be that embodied in Article 25.2(b) of the ILC Draft
Articles, pursuant to which "necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for precluding
wrongfulness if...[t]he State has contributed (in a sufficiently substantial fashion and not
merely incidental or peripheral, as noted in the commentary) to the situation of necessity."
24. As already noted, the Decision in this case assumes almost literally the same rationale
and its consequences.

FOSS Rr

25. From my point of view, there is no objective ground that justifies this inference. When
Article 31 of the Vienna Convention sets out what has been considered a "golden rule" or
general rule of interpretation, it simply provides, in subsection 1, that "[a] treaty shall be
interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of
the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose” (emphasis added).

26. Relying on Article 31.3(c) of the Vienna Convention to justify the incorporation into
Article XI of the rigorous rule of “state of necessity” is ignoring the raison d’étre of a legal
provision that, when requiring that interpretation takes into account, together with the
context, "any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the
parties," attempts to save the unity of international law, ensure the observance of its
imperative rules and consistency amongst different international obligations, without
interfering with the interpretation of particular rules in accordance with the interpretative
canon already established. The “state of necessity” rule is certainly not pertinent to the
interpretation of a rule such as Article XI of the Treaty, which is very different conceptually. By
way of example, the benefit intended to be achieved from the “state of necessity” rule could

* See § 613.
*' See § 614 and 615.
* See § 616.
* See § 617 and 618.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

also be achieved in opposite direction through reliance on the fundamental principle of a
State’s permanent sovereignty over its natural resources.

27. . The award rendered in Continental was also relied on, arguing that such award
expressly verifies the link between Article XI of the Treaty and Article 25 of the ILC Draft
Articles, because both attempt to render the application of international obligations more
flexible and end up forgiving conducts that would otherwise be illegal; there lies the
importance that the customary concept of “necessity” might have when it comes to
interpreting Article XI.”

28. The tribunal in Continental, however, did not follow this path. Quite the opposite. Faced
with the task of defining the content of the “necessity” concept in Article XI to determine
whether the measures challenged by the claimant were necessary, the tribunal rejects the idea
— given the different roles played by Article XI and “state of necessity” — that the interpretation
of Article XI goes hand in hand with the requirements set by customary international law on
the application of necessity. Considering that the wording of Article XI is rooted in the model
clause included in U.S. friendship, commerce and navigations treaties — which, in turn, reflect
the wording of Article XX of the 1947 GATT, — the tribunal deemed more appropriate to refer
to GATT and WTO case law, which has largely addressed this concept within the context of
economic measures that abrogate GATT obligations.” And faced with the argument that
Argentina could not benefit from a “necessity” to which it had contributed, the tribunal
concluded that Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles could not be the yardstick as to the
application of Article XI of the Treaty.”

29. As correctly pointed out in our case by the Respondent, it is one thing to interpret a
phrase ("measures necessary") taking into account " any relevant rules of international law
applicable in the relations between the parties" and a very different one to add requirements
or demands to that expression that are not included in it.

30. On the other hand, Article 31.4 of the Vienna Convention provides that a “special”
meaning will be given to a term if it is established that the parties so intended but, in the case
at hand, there is no evidence that the parties intended to have Article XI interpreted on the
basis of the requirements of “state of necessity” imposed by Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles.

31. The Committee that annulled the award rendered in Sempra found that the tribunal
exercised a manifest excess of powers by failing to correctly apply Article XI of the Treaty and
concluded that Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles was not an interpretative guide of the terms
used in Article XI, but rather "[t]he most that can be said is that certain words or expressions
are the same or similar.””” The application of Article XI only requires that the measures be
“necessary” to protect the objectives mentioned in the Article, not that they be necessary in
accordance with the requirements of the “state of necessity”.

* Continental Casualty Company v. Argentina, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/9 (US/Argentina BIT) Award, 5
September 2008, § 168.

* § 192 et seq.

*® § 234. Therefore, | believe the quote of this subsection included in the decision is out of place in the
case at hand (par. 1069).

” Sempra Energy International v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/16 (US/Argentina BIT)
Decision on the Argentine Republic's Application for Annulment of the Award, 29 June 2010, § 199.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

32. Certainly, Article XI of the Treaty is not meant to replace as lex specialis or incorporate
the “state of necessity” as an interpretative rule. By introducing the “state of necessity”
conditions into Article XI of the Treaty by way of “interpretation”, any operational exegesis of
such provision based on its language and the intention of the parties therein reflected is
neutralized; that is, any useful effect of Article XI of the Treaty is destroyed, which goes against
the most basic rules of text interpretation.

33. Another thing is for the members of a tribunal to apply a more severe and restrictive
interpretation of the terms of Article XI in view of its object and purpose if they consider such
Article is restricted to protecting investments and investors."® This, however, would be a
mistake because the object and purpose of these treaties also include the development of host
countries (“greater economic cooperation,” “the economic development of the Parties...,”)
they may not disregard the public interest to be safeguarded by the host State and, thus, they
are to balance the interests of the State and those of investors.”°

34. In the E/ Paso award, the tribunal recalls that “an interpretation of the fair and equitable
treatment standard in the light of the object and purpose of the BIT may not exclusively rely on
the interests of foreign investors,” referring to and expressly citing the “father of the ICSID
Convention” (Aron Broches), who in a lectures held at the Hague Academy of International Law
in 1972 stated as follows: “The purpose of the Convention is to promote private foreign
investment by improving the investment climate for investors and States alike. The drafters
have taken great care to make it a balanced instrument serving the interests of the host States

as well as investors.””°

FOC Ie

35. Once the true nature of the rule embodied in Article XI of the Treaty is established and
the initiatives to disguise it as the “state of necessity” are ruled out, Article XI should be
interpreted within its own context in accordance with the general rule of Article 31.1 of the
Vienna Convention.

36. Article XI should not be interpreted restrictively or broadly, but according to its own
terms, in accordance with its ordinary meaning within the context in which it was drafted and
considering its object and purpose.

37. As correctly noted by the tribunal in E/ Paso, pursuant to this rule "any interpretation has
to begin with an examination of the terms of the treaty taken in the ordinary meaning. The
wording of the treaty is deemed to express the intention common to the Parties, and what the
Parties effectively agreed to, even though a Party might have wished otherwise on one or

*® Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3
(US/Argentina BIT) Award, 22 May 2007, § 331; Sempra Energy International v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/16 (US/Argentina BIT) Award, 28 September 2007, § 373.

 

 

*° CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic, |CSID Case No. ARB/01/8 (US/Argentina
BIT) Award, 12 May 2005, § 359-360.

”° E/ Paso Energy International Company v. The Argentine Republic, ICID Case No. ARB/03/15 Award, 31
October 2011, [Aron Broches, “The Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States”, 136 Collected Courses, Hague Academy of International Law,
(1972-11) p. 335 and p. 348. Emphasis added.]

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

another point. As long as such wishes are not expressed, the content of the treaty’s provisions
is paramount, and what is not there cannot be read into them... **

38. Therefore, the application of Article XI of the Treaty depends on the measures adopted
and implemented by Argentina being measures “necessary” for the maintenance of “public
order” or for the protection of its “essential security interests”. No more, no less. In this
regard, let us recall that the parties’ intention to provide an evolving meaning to terms of
general nature, whose ability to evolve could not have been ignored by them and which are
used in treaties executed for an indefinite or long period of time, should be presumed.”

FOC Ie

39. This is the sense in which the terms “public order” and “security” ought to be
understood in a treaty — like the one at hand — executed for ten years and automatically
renewable for an indefinite term unless one of the parties terminates it (Article XIV).

40. | believe we may share the criterion expressed in Continental, under which “public
order” is a synonym for “public peace” which can be threatened by actual or potential
insurrections, riots and violent disturbances; thus, the acts required to preserve or restore civil
peace and ordinary social life, or to prevent and suppress events which might affect it — even if
they are caused by serious economic and social difficulties — fall within the scope of application
of Article XI of the Treaty.”*

41. As to the concept of "essential security interests," it is undeniable that, particularly since
the end of the Cold War, the concept has featured additional aspects other than the traditional
military and defense against external threats dimension. Nowadays, we come across terms
such as economic security, energy security, ecological security, human security...In Continental,
the tribunal believes that the core of security interests includes not only political and military
interests but also the economic security of States and of their population, concluding that a
severe economic crisis may qualify under Article XI as affecting an “essential security
interest.”**

42. CMS and LG&E had already reached similar conclusions. In CMS, the tribunal noted that
nothing in the object and purpose of the treaty could itself exclude economic crises from the
scope of Article Xl; what needed to be determined was how serious a crisis was supposed to be
to qualify as an essential security interest.”°

* E] Paso Energy International Company v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/15 Award, 31
October 2011, § 590
ICI, Costa Rica v. Nicaragua, Dispute regarding navigational and related rights, Judgment of 13 July

 

2009.§ 66: "... where the parties have used generic terms in a treaty, the parties necessarily having been
aware that the meaning of the terms was likely to evolve over time, and where the treaty has been
entered into for a very long period or is “of continuing duration,” the parties must be presumed, as a
general rule, to have intended those terms to have an evolving meaning."

® Continental Casualty Company v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9 (US/Argentina BIT) Award, 5
September 2008, § 174.

46175, 178

°° CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8 (US/Argentina
BIT) Award, 12 May 2005, § 359-361.

 

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

43. In LG&E, the tribunal rejected the interpretation under which Article XI is only applicable
to circumstances related to military action or war; concluding that a severe economic crisis
does not threaten a State’s essential security interest would minimize the chaos economy can
create in the lives of the population and a government’s capacity: "When a State’s economic
foundation is under siege, the severity of the problem can equal that of any military
invasion."*°

44. Likewise, in Sempra, the tribunal finds that nothing prevents it from interpreting that an
economic emergency is included within the context of Article XI. Essential security interests
may ultimately include events other than traditional military threats, which are the root of that
legal concept in customary law.””

45. In El Paso, the tribunal "wishes to emphasize that a state of emergency can be of an
128

economic nature, as stated by other ICSID tribunals in the Argentinian cases.
46. Thus, there is no basis to hold that Article XI is not applicable to economic states of
emergency. The threat to public order and the State’s security posed by its failure to meet the
basic services and needs of the population is not less serious than the threat of armed conflict
ora chain of terrorist attacks.

FOSS Rr

47. Based on the above premises, it can be easily deduced that the measures taken by
Argentine authorities during the greatest economic and social crisis in its history were related,
at their inception, to the maintenance of public order and the protection of essential security
interests.

48. As summarized in LG&E, Argentina’s essential security interests were threatened in
December 2001. The State was faced with an extremely serious threat to its existence, its
political and economic survival, the possibility to keep its basic public services running and the
preservation of internal peace.”°

49. In Continental, the tribunal provided a very accurate description of the crisis to conclude
that it was covered by Article XI of the Treaty. The tribunal, after listing the series of political,
economic and social calamities, noted that the fact that the Argentine Congress had declared a
“public emergency” and enacted a specific law to face the crisis was powerful evidence of its
seriousness — impossible to address through ordinary measures. The protection of essential
security interests recognized by Article XI, the tribunal adds, does not require that “total
collapse” of the country or that a “catastrophic situation” has already occurred or that the

2° 1G&E v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1 (United States/Argentina BIT) Decision on Liability, 3
October 2006, § 238, 251-253.

2” Sempra Energy International v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16 (US/Argentina BIT)
Award, 28 September 2007, § 374.

?8 El Paso Energy International Company v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/15 Award,
31 October 2011, § 611.

 

 

* LG&E v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/1 (United States/Argentina BIT) Decision on Liability, 3
October 2006, § 231-238, 257;

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

10

situation has already degenerated into one that calls for the suspension of constitutional
guarantees. There is no point in having such protection if there is nothing left to protect.*°

50. If what happened in Argentina was not a national emergency, it is hard to think of
another situation that would be. It was precisely to address a situation like the one
experienced by Argentina at the end of 2001 that a provision such as Article XI was stipulated.

FOSS Rr

51. Were these measures “necessary”? As already stated — but it bears repeating — the
standard to assess whether a measure is “necessary” under Article XI of the Treaty, which is a
safeguard clause for such measures against the application of the other rules of the Treaty,
does not have to match the standard of “state of necessity” as a state that excludes the
wrongfulness of an act, pursuant to rules of general or customary international law,
irrespective of the relation between such rules and Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles.

52. Thus, by relying on the application of Article XI of the Treaty, Argentina is not supposed
to prove that the measures taken were the “only way” to address a situation to which it had
not substantially contributed with its own acts, as it would otherwise have to do if it relied on
“state of necessity”. Article XI does not contain these requirements.

53. For the Continental tribunal, the measures under Article XI are “necessary” when the
State has no other reasonable, less restrictive and equally effective alternative to pursue the
permitted regulatory objective. The tribunal is of the view that not every sacrifice can properly
be imposed on a country’s people in order to safeguard a policy that would ensure full respect
towards the State’s international financial obligations before a breach of those obligations can
be considered justified as being “necessary” under Article XI of the Treaty. The standard of
“reasonableness and proportionality” does not require as much.**

54. Moreover, while in view of the language used in Article XI it is inadmissible — as held
unanimously by ICSID tribunals** and endorsed by the Decision (paras. 1030-1056) — to state
that the Parties to the Treaty may unilaterally judge for themselves whether a measure is
necessary or not to safeguard their public order or protect their essential security interests, it
is only logical to expect that arbitrators, as an expression of self-control, behave prudently so
as to recognize a certain margin of appreciation to States to take the measures they deem
reasonable in good faith within the context in which they were adopted.

*° Continental Casualty Company v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9 (US/Argentina BIT) Award, 5
September 2008, § 179-180

* Continental Casualty Company v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9 (US/Argentina BIT) Award, 5
September 2008, § 227.

* CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/01/8 (US/Argentina
BIT) Award, 12 May 2005, § 359, 370, 373; LG&E v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1 (United
States/Argentina BIT) Decision on Liability, 3 October 2006, § 212-214; Enron Corporation and
Ponderosa Assets, L.P v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3 (US/Argentina BIT) Award, 22 May
2007, § 332,337, 339; Sempra Energy International v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/16
(US/Argentina BIT) Award, 28 September 2007, § 374, 388; Continental Casualty Company v. Argentina,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9 (US/Argentina BIT) Award, 5 September 2008, §187; El Paso Energy
International Company v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/15 Award, 31 October 2011, §
588-610.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

11

FOSS Rr

55. Argentina was faced with an acute systemic crisis, "tragic and unprecedented" in the
world, as described by Kenneth Rogoff, IMF Chief Economist. The recession, of an economic
nature at the outset, led to a critical state of national emergency when it resulted in an
institutional and social collapse without precedent in Argentine history, fueled by the absolute
absence of external support, high foreign debt, depression, deflation, high unemployment
rates, outrageous indigence levels and extreme poverty, social disintegration, lootings and
urban violence, power vacuum, and a perspective of chaos in late 2001. The prospects were of
the worst kind in 2002, with the media publishing catastrophic headlines every day.

56. Based on these premises, it is my understanding that the measures taken by Argentine
authorities to address the crisis were reasonable and proportional to the crisis. They were the
measures that a good family father would have taken, pursuant to the traditional standard set
out in the Civil Code to assess due diligence. They were measures even more reasonable than
those proposed in the alternative, despite not being the “only” measures available — a matter |
believe to be insoluble considering that renowned economists have conflicting opinions about
the issue which, while not substitutes for arbitrators’ legal analysis, are part of the background
information of such analysis.

57. Undoubtedly, those measures were taken essentially for the sake of maintaining public
order, conceived as social order, and defending Argentina’s institutional, economic and human
security. Those measures required significant sacrifices from the population in general and
from investors as well, both local and foreign, who could not expect to be protected in an ivory
tower while the State was burning in flames. Ultimately, they were effective, because they
eliminated the threats.

58. Indeed, the measures proved to be adequate means, a reasonable and effective
response, to preserve the financial and economic system, escape from the chaos, pave the way
for rapid economic growth and avoid hyperinflation. The measures were advantageous, not
only for the people but also for local and foreign investors. The State’s authority needed to be
rebuilt, the social weave, severely injured, needed to be restored, and greater damage to the
business activity had to be prevented. The measures allowed for the maintenance of public
order, seriously threatened, without resorting to solutions outside the scope of the
Constitution; the protection of essential security interests, amidst popular discontent, without
resorting to repression; and the preservation of the financial and economic system, which was
heading for collapse.

59. Even in the E/ Paso award, the tribunal notes that “the measures adopted in the context
of the crisis were not arbitrary but reasonable and consistent with the aim pursued. They were
intended to face the extremely serious crisis that Argentina was going through and emanated
”33 and acknowledges that “the
subsequent evolution of the Argentinian economy might give some confirmation of the

from the police power regularly exercised by governments’

adequacy of the policy followed,”** although eventually, by majority vote, the tribunal decided

® EI Paso Energy International Company v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15 Award, 31
October 2011, § 322.
* § 324.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

12

not to grant the benefit under Article XI of the Treaty because “Argentina’s failure to control
several internal factors, in particular the fiscal deficit, debt accumulation and labor market
rigidity, substantially contributed to the crisis,” while their progressive worsening affected
Argentina’s ability to “respond adequately to external shocks.”**

60. In line with this, in the case at hand, somewhere in the Decision (e.g., para. 878) the
Tribunal notes that the Argentine Government tried to take the best measures to address the
crisis and pointed out that whether such measures were indeed the best was difficult to
assess, given the different opinions put forward by those who have analyzed the situation. The
Tribunal acknowledges, based on the documents presented and the oral hearings, that the
measures taken were seemingly the result of reasoned judgment, which did not prevent the
Tribunal from depriving them of the benefit under Article XI of the Treaty because the majority
considered that Argentina’s failure to control several internal factors, in particular the fiscal
deficit and debt accumulation and labor market rigidity, substantially contributed to the crisis.
The progressive worsening of internal factors diminished Argentina’s ability to respond
adequately to external shocks (paras. 1113, 1124).

FS Rr

61. The Claimants presented their case as though it were an ordinary dispute in an ordinary
scenario, alien to the circumstances surrounding the situation described above and, therefore,
taking the measures adopted out of context. As noted by the Respondent, which accused the
Claimants of placing their claims in an inert space, the Claimants seek to present each measure
separately, as if we were dealing with an abstract academic exercise instead of public policies
aimed at addressing the country’s problems in the face of the most dramatic situation in its
history. Rebuilding the system after the convertibility regime, whose abrogation was an
inevitable result of economic reality, called for the adjustment of a high number of rules and
agreements that were linked to a fixed currency exchange system strongly supported by the
international financial community. Thus, the measures are to be construed as a set of
measures where the rearrangement of the natural gas prices needed to be understood in the
context of the adjustment of all contracts in the domestic sphere.

62. If no measure had been taken after pesification, with thousands of contracts affected by
it, serious damage would have been caused to both citizens and companies. In particular, it is
untenable to argue that by isolating the core energy sector things might have worked out fine
on their own. There lies the appropriateness of bringing Article XI of the Treaty into play to
justify the authoritative intervention of public power and exclude the application of the
substantive provisions of the Treaty whose operational scope is limited by the safeguard
clause.

63. In LG&E, the tribunal noted that "[a] State may have several responses at its disposal to
maintain public order or protect its essential security interests. In this sense,...Argentina’s
enactment of the Emergency Law was a necessary and legitimate measure on the part of the
Argentine Government. Under the conditions the Government faced in December 2001, time
was of the essence in crafting a response. Drafted in just six days, the Emergency Law took the
swift, unilateral action against the economic crisis that was necessary at the time...; the

35 § 656, 665.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

13

provisions of the Emergency Law that abrogated calculation of the tariffs in U.S. dollars and PPI
adjustments, as well as freezing tariffs, were necessary measures to deal with the extremely
serious economic crisis."**

64. Likewise, in Continental, after analyzing the alternative measures available when the
challenged measures were taken, the tribunal concludes that devaluating the peso and
pesifying contracts was “inevitable” in the situation Argentina was facing in view of the
unsustainability of the parity with the U.S. Dollar and in order to achieve a balanced
distribution of the costs deriving from devaluation and the abandonment of convertibility once
the fiction of the peso-dollar peg had been proved wrong by markets. The measures were
sufficient to face the crisis and were reasonably and proportionally applied.”

65. In sum, based on the evidence available, Argentina’s conduct generally met the
requirements under Article XI to safeguard its hypothetical inconsistency with Argentina’s
substantial obligations.

66. The Tribunal, however, considers that the application of Article XI depends on verifying
first that the State has not substantially contributed to the state of emergency that required
the adoption of measures under Article XI. The Tribunal reaches this decision following E/ Paso,
by way of interpretation, on the basis of Article 25.2(b) of the ILC Draft Articles which governs
the “state of necessity’, a concept that, as | have tried to prove, is quite different. Based on
that interpretation, the Tribunal concluded that Article XI is not applicable because, in its
opinion, Argentina substantially contributed to the crisis that it later attempted to mitigate
with the challenged measures.

67. This requirement is not expressly nor impliedly set out in Article XI, nor can it be inferred
from the general rule of interpretation embodied in Article 31 of the Vienna Convention, which
has already been discussed. | must add that, even if | agreed with the Tribunal’s premise —
which | do not, — | would still be in disagreement with the Tribunal’s conclusion. As will be
noted further below, | believe Argentina’s behavior was not a substantial cause for the
systemic crisis that broke out in early 2001.

FOC Ie

68. Now, temporary restrictions are inherent in Article XI of the Treaty. The tribunals that
have upheld the application of Article XI to Argentina’s situation addressed by the Emergency
Law share this view: “This exception is appropriate only in emergency situations; and once the
situation has been overcome, i.e. certain degree of stability has been recovered, the State is no
longer exempted from responsibility for any violation of its obligations under the international
law and shall reassume them immediately.”*®

69. LG&E’s tribunal was more analytical when considering these restrictions. In the
judgment of the tribunal, “from 1 December 2011 until 26 April 2003, Argentina was in a
period of crisis during which it was necessary to enact measures to maintain public order and

*© 1G&E v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1 Decision on Liability, 3 October 2006, § 239-242.

>” Continental Casualty Company v. Argentina, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/9 (US/Argentina BIT) Award, 5
September 2008, § 200, 206-214, 223-233.

38 |G&E v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1 Decision on Liability, 3 October 2006, § 261.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

14

protect its essential security interests.”*° These dates coincide, “on the one hand, with the...
measure freezing funds, which prohibited bank account owners from withdrawing more than
one thousand pesos monthly and, on the other hand, with the election of President Kirchner,”
and were chosen in view of the “notorious events that occurred.”*°

70. According to the LG&E tribunal, the outbreak of the crisis is to be set on December 1,
2001, a month before the enactment of the Emergency Law, because the state of emergency
had already begun when the Law was approved (January 6, 2002), as successively extended.**
The tribunal draws a distinction between "factual emergency," which would allow for Article XI
of the Treaty to cover the measures taken until April 26, 2003, and "legislative emergency,"
which it attempts to discard in order to avoid the logical consequence that might imply the
coverage of the measures taken during the Law operation, which is still in place.” The tribunal
rightly notes that emergency periods should be “strictly exceptional and should be applied
exclusively when faced with extraordinary circumstances.”

71. Arationale like the one in LG&E could be and is indeed shared by the Tribunal in the case
at hand (para. 1128), although certain flexibility should be applied when defining the end of
the state of emergency because it is too simple to set a fixed date to put an end to a period of
factual emergency. Thus, in Continental, the tribunal denied Argentina the benefit of Article XI
with respect to the measures taken in early 2003; conversely, the tribunal in CMS held that the
crisis period ended somewhere between late 2004 and early 2005, arguing that while the crisis
had not been completely overcome, particularly in the social sector, its repercussions were not
as intense and widespread, and the Argentine economy had substantially improved.”*

72. If this flexibility were applied, it would be correct to suggest that the state of emergency
ended throughout 2004.

FOSS Rr

73. However, Argentina urges the Tribunal to analyze whether the emergency measures
were necessary to prevent a return to the crisis. Argentina argues that the duty to fulfill treaty
obligations does not imply restoring the system in force before the crisis but to comply with
treatment standards in the new context, which requires analyzing the new factual
circumstances. The consequences of worsening living conditions, in particular for low-income
citizens — cast into poverty and indigence — is a feature of the new social reality, claims the
Respondent. Argentina is today the “country of the new poor” and poverty and indigence
levels determine public policy. The country, Respondent adds, is faced with the challenge of
social reconstruction in a polarized society, with significant sectors off the market both in
terms of asset acquisition and education. Suggesting that the crisis ended somewhere
between late 2002 and mid 2003 on the basis of references to economic recovery is wrong
from a conceptual viewpoint. When a country hits the bottom, the crisis is not over. Argentina

» See § 226.

“ See § 230.

** In 2009, Law 26,563 extended the state of emergency for two additional years, until the end of 2011.
” See § 227-228.

* See § 228.

“* CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/O1/8 (US/Argentina
BIT) Award, 12 May 2005, § 249-250.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

15

has still to recover the lost growth, it has not left the state of emergency behind. Reversing the
measures taken, Respondent concludes, would bring back the threats of a crisis.

74. This argument, however, goes beyond the boundaries of Article XI, which was conceived
to address specific situations within the framework of an agreed model of investment and
investor treatment intended to be restored in all its terms and consequences once the
circumstances that threatened the maintenance of public order or essential security interests
are overcome.

75. In reality, taking into account the years that have gone by, what Argentina is saying is
that the application of the treaty’s neoliberal model is a permanent threat to Argentina’s
public order and security, which makes permanent the measures taken on the basis of
emergency.”° This, however, is alien to Article XI and part of another analysis, namely, the
scope of the State’s regulatory power to satisfy public interest and meet the commitments
assumed towards the investments and investors protected under the Treaty. It is one thing to
suspend the model for a while and a very different one to abandon it altogether when public
interest is not deemed served by such model. If that were the case, what would be pertinent is
the renegotiation of the treaty or its termination.

ll. Fair and Equitable Treatment

76. Undoubtedly, there is tension between the State’s regulatory power and the stability of
the regulatory framework promised to the investor, which is considered an essential element
of legitimate expectations. Fair and equitable treatment of the investor and investments
requires that these expectations be respected. This tension significantly increases when the
State has to face serious economic and social crises, systemic crises.

77. In El Paso award, the tribunal rightly noted that while "FET is linked to the objective
reasonable legitimate expectations of the investors,” these expectations "have to be evaluated
considering all circumstances."“° The standard entails "reasonableness and proportionality."””
Following this criterion, "[t]here can be no legitimate expectation for anyone that the legal
"8 The El

Paso tribunal notes that "... the measures adopted in the context of the crisis were not

 

framework will remain unchanged in the face of an extremely severe economic crisi

arbitrary but reasonable and consistent with the aim pursued. They were intended to face the

extremely serious crisis that Argentina was going through and emanated from the police

power regularly exercised by governments."

“° CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/O1/8 (US/Argentina
BIT) Award, 12 May 2005, § 107.
“© EI Paso Energy International Company v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/15
(US/Argentina BIT), Award, 31 October 2011, § 364.
a7
§ 373.
“8 § 374.
“ § 322.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

16

78. Even tribunals mostly inclined to set limits to the State’s regulatory power and expand
investor’s expectations recognize that upon a crisis, it is unthinkable for such crisis not to have
consequences or for businesses to carry on as if nothing happened.*°

FOSS Rr

79. Tension increases even more when the investor, as in the case at hand, relies on the fact
that the State assumed a particular and specific commitment of regulatory stability under the
umbrella clause embodied in Article |I.2(c) of the Treaty, pursuant to which: "Each Party shall
observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments."

80. First, it is necessary to fully understand what umbrella clause means.** While this general
provision could be perfectly interpreted as a redundancy of pacta sunt servanda, it has
generally been construed as transforming certain contract obligations assumed by the host
State vis-d-vis the investor into treaty obligations and, therefore, such clause submits their
enforceability to the dispute resolution mechanisms provided for in the treaty, avoiding the
jurisdiction of the State’s courts and/or other mechanisms agreed under contract.

81. In any case, applying the umbrella clause gives rise to two problems. The first problem
lies in defining the boundaries between the contract obligations covered by the clause and
those that are left out. In my opinion, there must be express stability commitments directly
assumed by the host State vis-a-vis the investor in order for a contract obligation to be
protected under the umbrella clause.

82. The second problem relates to the treatment that should be accorded to a contract
obligation that is to be handled as a treaty obligation. It has been argued that one of the
purposes of the umbrella clause was to prevent the State from depriving investors from their
contract rights — considered by them as acquired rights — through a legislative or regulatory
change of the applicable legal framework. If this were so, simply verifying the breach of
contract obligations would be enough to hold that the treaty has been violated.

83. In my opinion, this point of view is inadmissible because it fully ignores the State’s
regulatory power, which is an attribute inherent in sovereignty whose exercise should be
rooted in public interest and be judged under the circumstances. Therefore, if treaty coverage
is extended to certain contract obligations, what follows is examining such obligations in light
of the treatment standards agreed upon. No more, no less.”

°° CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8 (US/Argentina
BIT) Award, 12 May 2005, § 356; Sempra Energy International v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/02/16(US/Argentina BIT) Award, 28 September 2007, § 269, 346-347.
°* CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic, |CSID Case No. ARB/01/8 (US/Argentina
BIT) Argentine Republic's Application for Annulment, 8 September 2005, § 89-100; Pan American
Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Company v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/13
(US/Argentina BIT) BP America Production Company, Pan American Sur S.R.L., Pan American Fueguina,
S.R.L. and Pan American Continental, S.R.L. v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/8, Decision on
Preliminary Objections, 27 July 2006, § 96-116; Continental Casualty Company v. Argentina, ICSID Case
No. ARB/03/9 (US/Argentina BIT) Award, 5 September 2008, § 296-301.

* pan American Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Company v. Argentina, \CSID Case No.
ARB/03/13 (US/Argentina BIT) BP America Production Company, Pan American Sur S.R.L., Pan American

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

17

84. This is the position the Tribunal in this case seems to uphold when it concludes (paras.
1013, 1132(b)) that Argentina has violated the umbrella clause embodied in Article |I.2(c) of
the Treaty "to the extent the obligations pertinent to the investment to which Argentina has
specifically entered into with the Claimants have been breached and have resulted in the
violation of the standards of protection under the BIT" (emphasis added). Of course, this is also
my view.

FOSS Rr

85. Now, under the circumstances, have investors been treated unfairly, inequitably,
discriminatorily or arbitrarily? Or have they been deprived of their assets or defenses? The
Tribunal understands and concludes that Argentina has breached the fair and equitable
treatment standard (paras. 969-987 and 1132(b), in particular). | reach the same conclusion
but following a different path.

86. Analyzing the impact of the Emergency Law (No. 25,561) and Decree No. 214/02 on
pesification of the economy and the abrogation of the Convertibility Law, as well as the
subsequent provisions on foreign investment treatment as of that date, implies considering
from the outset whether, under the circumstances, the legislative change —i.e., the loss of the
legal stability Claimants claim to be an acquired right — breached the “fair and equitable
treatment” standard under the Treaty.

87. In the E/ Paso award, the tribunal found the State may not unreasonably change the
legal framework in violation of a very specific commitment not to do so, even if faced with an
extremely serious economic crisis.°? If it did, it could be said that the exercise of the State’s
regulatory power in disregard of a particular and specific obligation to keep the investment’s
legal framework in force is not consistent with the treatment standards under the Treaty,
which are applicable when the tribunal concludes there is no state of emergency. The State
has to be liable for its mistakes, notwithstanding the fact that all circumstances must be taken
into account when assessing the standards agreed on and the consequences of their breach.

88. The way I see it, even if Article XI of the Treaty were set aside, the loss of legal stability
Claimants consider to be an acquired right would not breach the “fair and equitable
treatment” standard under Article |I.2(a) of the Treaty if the significance of public interest in a
state of emergency like the one experienced by Argentina and the role that State institutions
are to play faced with such contingency are weighted, which would be required to exercise its
undeniable regulatory power to its fullest.

89. It would have been irresponsible in that case not to take the measures challenged by the
Claimants. They resemble travelers who are victims of a sunken ship and, when offered a seat
in a lifeboat, waive their tickets claiming to be brought to shore in first class. It was fair and
equitable for investors to share the burden imposed to others, whose dreams, expectations,
hopes and also savings were vanished. There was no discrimination against them or

 

Fueguina, S.R.L. and Pan American Continental, S.R.L. v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/8, Decision on
Preliminary Objections, 27 July 2006, § 112; LG&E v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1 (United
States/Argentina BIT) Decision on Liability, 3 October 2006, § 124.

°° E/ Paso Energy International Company v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/15
(US/Argentina BIT), Award, 31 October 2011, § 364, 374.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

18

arbitrariness; simply, the same yardstick was used, the general rule. The Claimants, as the rest
of the investors, were treated as mere mortals, not better or worse, under the circumstances —
bad for all, disastrous for some (not the Claimants).

90. In response to those who take the requirements for the application of Article XI to their
fullest, turning such provision into an avant Ia lettre clone of “state of necessity”, it could be
suggested that, conversely, Article XI was conceived to eliminate any doubt regarding the
consistency between the “fair and equitable treatment” standard and the measures adopted
in a state of emergency and applied in violation of specific legal stability commitments. It could
be argued that one of the reasons why host States have accepted standards as flexible as these
concerning the treatment received by investors has been the incorporation of safeguard
clauses like the one embodied in Article XI of the Treaty.

91. The pesification of the economy and the repeal of the Convertibility Law had a strong
impact on the dollarized economy. Contract obligations agreed in USD were converted into
pesos at par and adjustment clauses as well as clauses that provided for dollar or other foreign
currency indexation, or which were based on price indexes of foreign countries, were
abandoned. The Argentine peso soon reached an exchange rate of 4 - 1 as against the dollar
when the Government allowed it to float freely (Decree No. 260/02). Contracts had to be
adjusted to the new circumstances through renegotiation by the parties, which were invited to
equally share the effects of the change, following the principle of shared sacrifice, or through
court order when agreement was impossible (Decree No. 214/02, Article 8). Insofar as the
Administration prevented gas distributors and energy generators from passing the increases in
prices requested by producers through to tariffs, the renegotiation was unsuccessful and,
therefore, a de facto freeze of natural gas prices followed in the domestic market, where the
value of the peso had dropped to 0.28 USD in May 2002 and producers were not allowed to
cancel their contracts.

92. There is no doubt this is not what the Claimants had expected when they invested in
natural gas production. They claim the State interfered with price setting after pesifying the
contracts and forbidding natural gas distributors and energy generators to pass through to
consumers the cost overruns represented by the prices agreed with gas producers upon
renegotiating the contracts with no strings attached. According to the Claimants — which hold
themselves out as beneficiaries of specific commitments and guarantees made by the
Argentine Government, — their situation was substantially different from that of the rest of the
Argentine economy.

93. In my view, such a statement is unacceptable in the context of a crisis like the one
Argentina went through. Even if we were to admit that the Argentine Government allegedly
committed to providing a stable legal framework to investors as of the date of the investment,
the dramatic change in circumstances from the last decade of the 20" century to the early 21%
century gave rise to a situation from which such commitment could not escape and corrected
the assessment of the “fair and equitable treatment” standard that would have otherwise
covered the Claimant’s requests.

FOC Ie

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

19

94. Should we conclude, then, that the measures taken by Argentina stood up to and were
consistent with the standards under the Treaty and, in particular, with the “fair and equitable
treatment” standard embodied in Article II.2(a)?

95. Once again, the problem lies in setting the time periods within which to frame this
interpretation of the standard. The criterion needs to be the one applied to the measures
taken in a state of emergency invoking Article XI of the Treaty. If we understand that the
"factual emergency," in the terms of the LG&E award, ended in late April 2003 or later, after
the one-hundred-day grace period that is usually given to the administration (in this case,
President Kirchner) after inauguration, the measures taken or extended afterwards could not
benefit from the interpretation explained above. Any breach of a legal stability clause set out
in contracts or licenses executed with the Claimants could not hide behind the State’s exercise
of its regulatory power.

96. | have already stated, applying a flexible criterion, that the state of emergency ended
“throughout 2004,” which would make me lean towards rescuing the First Gas Agreement
signed on April 2, 2004 by the Argentine Government with the largest natural gas producers to
ensure market supply, thus setting a price schedule that was supposed to provide a reasonable
return on their investment and promising convergence to complete market deregulation when
the Agreement came to an end (December 2006).

97. It is, however, an established fact that the promises contained in the First Gas
Agreement were not met, which leads me to the conclusion that the adjustment and
renegotiation process concerning natural gas production and supply contracts carried out from
2004 — upon violating the commitments undertaken by Argentina vis-d-vis the Claimants to
ensure them a free market, free disposition of production, price deregulation, royalties and
fiscal stability — breached the standard of “fair and equitable treatment” to which the
Claimants were entitled under the Treaty.

98. Notwithstanding the above, other gas producers entered into agreements with the
Government to ensure supply in exchange of guarantees of reasonable returns to producers
through prices. This issue will need to be considered, of course, when determining the
quantum of damages. Argentina has argued that, as a result of the agreements and programs
sponsored by the Argentine Government, the wellhead price of natural gas recorded increases
higher than transportation and distribution tariffs and, for most of demand, above the level
prior to 2002 — exceeding, in some cases, the long-term contract projections signed in the
1990s. Thus, Argentina argues, the prices collected by the Claimants do not significantly differ
from their projections, aside from the fact that the peso devaluation reduced their production
costs in dollar terms.

99. That being said, there is no doubt there was a change from free prices to regulated
prices and that the latter would remain in force irrespective of the exceptional circumstances
that had justified such change, thus completely destroying the previous regulatory framework
and breaching the specific obligations undertaken vis-a-vis the Claimants. Even in times of

* LG&E v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1 (United States/Argentina BIT) Decision on Liability, 3
October 2006, § 139: "The Tribunal [...] recognizes the economic hardships that occurred during this
period, and certain political and social realities that at the time may have influenced the Government's

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

20

“economic emergency,” the Argentine Supreme Court does not validate legislation that
overrides legally acquired rights on a permanent basis.

Ill. The State of Necessity

100. | have serious doubts about the appropriateness of giving a role to the “state of
necessity” in an investment dispute between a host State and an investor, especially when it is
framed within a treaty that includes a safeguard clause such as that embodied in Article XI of
the U.S.-Argentina Treaty.

101. Is the “state of necessity” a defense that can operate in investor-State arbitration? This is
no longer — or not only — about the practical consequence that, since the requirements of the
safeguard clause (Article XI) are less stringent than those of the “state of necessity” under
customary international law, an arbitrator who is not willing to apply the safeguard clause
would be even less willing to ground a decision on the “state of necessity”.

102. This is about being very clear -something which is often confusing (as it is in the
Decision, paras. 1028, 1062, 1063, 1066) — that the ultimate non-enforcement of the Treaty’s
substantive provisions in view that the safeguard clause (Article XI) is applicable in a particular
case, does not eliminate the host State’s hypothetical international responsibility for acts that
can be challenged by the investor’s State, either because such State believes its rights have
been overridden or when it exercises diplomatic protection of its nationals, provided the
requirements for such mechanism are met.

103. It is in this context that the host State could invoke the “state of necessity” to exclude
the wrongfulness of its behavior, leaving the door open — in any case — for the reparation of
any damage or injury caused. The operation of Article XI of the Treaty does nothing but
safeguard the application of the measures necessary to maintain public order and the State’s
essential security interests vis-a-vis treaty obligations while the state of emergency is in force,

 

 

but does not affect — in any case — the assessment of its lawfulness under rules of customary
international law or other obligations undertaken in other treaties or any other source of
obligations recognized by international law.

104. Be that as it may, analyzing the “state of necessity” defense at least briefly is — as already
stated — mandatory because it was relied on by the Respondent and extensively discussed
during the proceedings, where markedly different viewpoints were put forward and the
Tribunal — after ruling out the application of Article Xl — reached the conclusion that the
measures taken by Argentina breached the “fair and equitable treatment” standard of
investments and investors under Article II.2(a) of the Treaty.

105. It has to be presumed that if the factual situation does not meet the requirements for
the application of Article XI of the Treaty, it will be harder for it to do so for the “state of
necessity”, which is a more stringent standard. The Parties agree on the exceptional nature of
this defense, subject to strict and rigorous requirements. International case law, such as that

 

response...But...Argentina went too far by completely dismantling the very legal framework constructed
to attract investors."

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

21

of the International Court of Justice®® or ICSID tribunals,” confirms this view. Conversely, it
could be argued that if these requirements were met in the case at hand, they would meet the
requirements under Article XI more easily,°” a conclusion that would also please those who
claim that this safeguard clause is to be construed on the basis of the “state of necessity” as an
interpretative rule.

FOC Ie

106. The first condition is that the party relying on the “state of necessity” has not
contributed to the state of emergency. This contribution, as specified by the ILC in its
commentary to Article 25 of its Draft Articles, must be substantial. However, as noted by the
Annulment Committee in the Enron decision, it is worth wondering if the substantial nature of
that contribution calls for evidence that the State has deliberately attempted to create the
situation to escape a claim for wrongful behavior or if a lower or higher degree of recklessness
or negligence when making its decisions would be enough.**

107. In the case at hand, as already stated, the Tribunal incorporated this condition to Article
XI of the Treaty by way of interpretation. My disagreement with this decision, which destroys
the very own significance of such provision as a safeguard clause, has already been noted.
However, even if — hypothetically — | had accepted the premise set by the Tribunal, my
conclusion would still have been the opposite because, in my view, the measures taken by the
Respondent were not the substantial cause of the systemic crisis the Respondent attempted to
address.

108. According to the Claimants, who follow to the letter the opinions put forward by
Professor Edwards in his written reports and oral deposition before the Tribunal, it was
Argentina’s wrong policies, and not external shocks, the cause for the crisis that broke out in
late 2001. The Claimants argue that Argentine authorities never had the will to implement the
reforms they knew were indispensable to avoid that situation.

109. Irrespective of the reply by the Respondent to the opinions of Professor Edwards, and
the value they might have to ground a legal decision,*®® our case involves a number of factors,
both internal and external (reversal of capital flows, decrease in exports, lower prices for
exports, the strong depreciation of the Brazilian currency — Argentina’s largest trading partner
and competitor, — appreciation of the USD, increase in interest rates of the Federal Reserve,
implementation of an economic contraction policy in a recessive phase of the Argentine

°° Cl, Gabcikovo-Nagymaros,

°° CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/O1/8 (US/Argentina
BIT) Award, 12 May 2005, § 317; Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3 (US/Argentina BIT) Award, 22 May 2007, § 304.

°” LG&E v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability, 3 October 2006, § 245, 258.

 

 

5 Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, 12 ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3
(United States/Argentina BIT) Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic, 30
July 2010, § 387-389.
°° Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, LP. v. Argentine Republic, 12 ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3
(United States/Argentina BIT) Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic, 30
July 2010, § 392-393.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

22

economy, with which Argentina itself had little or nothing to do,...) which, together, led to the
outbreak of the crisis.

110. Professor Roubini, at odds with Edwards, noted that “minimizing the importance of such
external shocks and their association with collapses of many currency pegs, including
Argentina, is inconsistent with the facts." According to Roubini, these “large, severe and
persistent" factors were an essential element of the outbreak of the crisis; no other emerging
country in similar circumstances has been faced with them in equal magnitude, succession,
and pace. In my opinion, it cannot be argued that Argentina’s contribution to the crisis was
substantial so as to prevail over external shocks.

111. Moreover, Argentina did try to implement the recommendations of international
organizations; in fact, Argentine governments implemented major changes in economic policy
following such recommendations, such as relaxing the labor market and opening to foreign
trade so much so, as stated by Roubini, that Argentina became the “poster country” of the
Washington Consensus. The IMF Managing Director presented Argentina as an example to
follow: “Argentina has a story to tell the world...” The increase in disbursements to repay the
debt was the main cause for fiscal deficit; the long-term cost of capital refinancing has more to
do with the capital market than elements under the Argentine Government’s control. Fiscal
deficit is not a synonym with economic collapse and default on debt: developed countries have
fiscal deficits much higher than Argentina’s deficit during the entire crisis. With or without
fiscal problems, there would have been a crisis.

112. As concluded by the tribunal in LG&E: “There is no serious evidence in the record that
Argentina contributed to the crisis resulting in the state of necessity. In these circumstances,
an economic recovery package was the only means to respond to the crisis. Although there
may have been a number of ways to draft the economic recovery plan, the evidence before
the Tribunal demonstrates that an across-the-board response was necessary, and the tariffs on
public utilities had to be addressed.”°

FOC Ie

113. The second condition that, under Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles, must be fulfilled for
the “state of necessity” to operate is that the measures adopted be the “only way” to
safeguard the State’s essential interests from the grave danger of social dissolution and
political anarchy. If we were to follow the criterion adopted by the Annulment Committee in
Enron, this defense will be excluded only if there is a feasible and effective alternative that
does not entail a violation of international law or a less serious breach of such law.

114. However, who gets to decide if there is any such alternative? The tribunal when it
renders the award, having the benefit of knowledge and experience that were not available to
the Government when it had to take the measures? The tribunal, applying the reasonableness
standard of a “good family father” adequately qualified, on the basis of the information
available as of the date on which the decision was made? Or else — as equally reasonable
people may argue — should the State have a margin of appreciation? The Annulment

® LG&E v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1 (United States/Argentina BIT) Decision on Liability, 3
October 2006, par. 257.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

23

Committee in Enron was faced with these same questions, considering that the tribunal that
had rendered the award had failed to consider a number of essential matters to assess
whether the “only-way” requirement had been met and, if it had considered them, had been
unable to explain the reasons that led the tribunal to its decision.

115. Arbitration case law supports recognizing that a host State has a margin of appreciation.
In Continental, the tribunal held that “a time of grave crisis is not the time for nice judgments,
particularly when examined by others with the disadvantage of hindsight.”

116. The Respondent noted that before taking the challenged measures it tried to overcome
the situation with other measures that proved to be insufficient. De la Rua’s Administration did
everything in an attempt to maintain the effectiveness of the Convertibility Law (Law No.
23,928), including public expenditure reduction programs (a 13-% reduction in state worker’s
salaries and pensions) and tax increases, with the support of the IMF (rescue plan in 2000 of
forty billion USD from international Organizations and foreign States.) In March 2001, the
Argentine Government implemented new measures: 1) a debt swap (megaswap) for
approximately 30 billion USD to improve maturities; 2) the modification of the exchange rate
parity by adding the Euro to the USD as the basis for conversion; 3) a program to adjust public
expenditure to real earnings (zero deficit).

117. However, these measures fueled mistrust rather than trust by markets and citizens and
massive bank deposit withdrawals followed (25% in 2001) as well as capital flight, a dramatic
reduction in reserves (40% in 2001), the IMF suspension of disbursements of agreed loans (1.6
billion USD for the last quarter of 2001,) and fear of default on Argentina’s sovereign debt.
Therefore, on December 3, 2001 (Decree No. 1570), the Government was forced to freeze
bank deposits — which, in practice, translated into the abandonment of the convertibility
system — until the restructuring of the foreign debt was completed. On January 6, 2002,
Emergency Law No. 25,561 was enacted as the only possible and effective response to the
crisis.

118. Even before the state of emergency was declared, renowned economists (Krugman,
Musso, Frenkel & Danill) had warned that pesification was the “only way” to overcome the
crisis. The Central Bank reserves would have been insufficient to meet demand. Dollarization
would have not avoided the collapse of the banking system. If contracts had not been
adjusted, social tensions impossible to handle would have unleashed. The LG&E tribunal, after
specifically describing the state of emergency in Argentina, concluded that the Emergency Law
was the kind of swift unilateral action against the crisis necessary at the time. This view was
shared by the Continental tribunal.

119. It is always possible to resort to a “but-for” line of reasoning to argue that other
measures could have been taken. It is not possible, however, to prove that alternative

® Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, LP. v. Argentine Republic, 12 ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3
(United States/Argentina BIT) Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic, 30
July 2010, § 367-378.

® Continental Casualty Company v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9 (US/Argentina BIT) Award, 5
September 2008, § 181

 

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

24

measures would have proven more effective. Conversely, it can be argued that the measures
actually implemented substantially contributed to avoiding that the worst catastrophic
outcome of the crisis became true.

FOSS Rr

120. With regard to the other requirements listed in Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles, the
third requirement — i.e., that an essential interest of another State or of the international
community as a whole be not impaired — is completely alien to the case submitted to this
Tribunal.

121. The fourth requirement, equal treatment, is fully met. | hereby incorporate by way of
reference the considerations on discrimination and arbitrariness included in the Decision
(paras. 865-893).

122. The fifth and last requirement is that the treaty does not prohibit reliance on the “state
of necessity”. According to the Claimants, both the object and purpose of the U.S. - Argentina
Treaty, as well as its specific provisions, would imply such prohibition. In their opinion, such
Treaty was mainly executed to protect investors during harsh times, so interpreting that the
Treaty would allow Argentina to rely on the “state of necessity” defense would be totally
inconsistent with the primary object and purpose of its execution, even more so in light of the
background of Argentine history. However, the consequences the Claimants intend to draw
from the object and purpose of the Treaty are exaggerated. The Treaty’s object and purpose
are, as already noted, something more than simply protecting investments.

C. Measures Concerning Export Restrictions, Export Withholdings and Royalties

123. As far as the measures on export restrictions and the re-routing of a specified amount of
gas to the domestic market are concerned — as well as those on export withholdings and
royalties, — it is worth noting first that the Respondent itself seems to hesitate when referring
to the appropriateness of relying on Article XI of the Treaty to justify such measures. On the
first pages of its Rejoinder, the Respondent focuses the application of Article XI on the
measures concerning contract pesification, while relying on the tribunal’s lack of jurisdiction
for the remainder measures, on the fork-in-the-road provision for export restrictions and gas
re-routing to the domestic market, and the tax-matter exception provided for in Article XII.2 of
the Treaty for export withholdings. It is only later that the Respondent goes back to Article XI
looking for shelter with respect to all these measures and argues that the 2004 energy crisis
created a situation that could have affected “public order”.

124. The natural gas shortage in Argentina in 2004 is a proven fact. The Parties have
submitted conflicting opinions on its cause. In any case, | believe this “crisis” is independent
from the systemic crisis that broke out in the austral summer of 2001-2002 and, therefore, it
should be assessed by its own merits and not as a corollary of the latter. In January 2002,
export contracts were not affected by pesification. In fact, the export of natural gas made
available a large amount of foreign currency to producers. Article XI of the Treaty or the
interpretation we have proposed on the fair and equitable standard in the above paragraphs

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

25

may not cover for the measures taken to ensure domestic supply to the detriment of
producers’ export and fiscal stability rights previously recognized by the State. Undoubtedly,
natural gas domestic supply is a primary and fundamental objective in any country, as well as
collecting taxes, rates and duties to meet public service needs, including energy supply.
However, these circumstances are completely foreseeable and need to be considered in any
cautious and prudent law.

125. In fact, with regard to export permits, the legislation in force before the challenged
measures were implemented provided over and over again that domestic market needs had to
be met. These legal guarantees go against Argentina’s argument, not for it. Export permits
were granted after assessing domestic supply needs. Setting the provisions concerning excess
gas exports aside, export authorizations were given as firm and final permits whose suspension
or cancellation was only possible under the circumstances provided by law. Thus, Argentina
should have demonstrated that producers holding export rights over certain natural gas
volumes had breached their legal obligations. From this perspective, | understand that the
measures taken were not — are not — necessary pursuant to a reasonable interpretation of
Articles XI and II.2 (a) of the Treaty.

126. As far as the export withholdings and the calculation basis for the payment or royalties
are concerned, the challenged measures were protected by the Emergency Law, but they were
applied only after the Government decided to restrict exports and force the re-routing of
certain natural gas volumes to the domestic market. Therefore, the appropriateness of Article
XI of the Treaty needs to be considered only from the 2004 energy crisis viewpoint, which
leads to the same conclusion reached on these measures. Argentina has breached the fiscal
stability commitment assumed vis-a-vis the Claimants, covered by the umbrella clause, which
is inconsistent with the fair and equitable treatment standard. A different issue is establishing
the consequences with respect to damage and injury caused, which will be considered when
determining the amount of reparation.

Separate Opinion Professor Antonio Remiro Brotons, Arbitrator

 

 

Professor Antonio Remiro Broténs
Arbitrator

Date: frees, 22, 2012

