INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDING BETWEEN

MOBIL EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT ARGENTINA INC., SUC. ARGENTINA
AND
MOBIL ARGENTINA S.A.

CLAIMANTS
and

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

RESPONDENT

ICSID Case No. ARB/04/16

 

DECISION ON THE PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY
ALL MEMBERS OF THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

 

CHAIRMAN OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE COUNCIL
Dr. JIM YONG KIM

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. GIULIANA CANE

Date: June 4, 2015

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Claimants: Representing the Respondent:

Mr. R. Doak Bishop Dra. Angelina Maria Esther Abbona
Mr. Guillermo Aguilar-Alvarez Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Craig S. Miles Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ms. Silvia M. Marchili Argentina

King & Spalding LLP Posadas 1641

1100 Louisiana Street, Suite 4000 C1112ADC Buenos Aires

Houston, Texas 77002-5213 Argentina

United States of America
and

Mr. José A. Martinez de Hoz, Jr.

Ms. Jimena Vega Olmos

Pérez Alati, Grondona, Benitez Arntsen &
Martinez de Hoz (H) Abogados

Suipacha 1111, 18th Floor

C1008AAW Buenos Aires

Argentina

and

Mr. Eugene J. Silva II
Ms. Gwendolyn Dawson
Exxon Mobil Corporation
5959 Las Colinas Blvd
Irving, Texas 75039-4202
United States of America

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS 2
1. The Argentine Republic’s Proposal for Disqualification..........0.0cccccee teeta 2
2. The Claimants’ Reply 3
3. Arbitrators’ Explanations 5
DECISION BY THE CHAIRMAN 5
1. Timeliness 5
2. Request for Oral Hearing before the Chairman .........0.0.0cccccsee cece eeeeeeneneteseeeeeeeees 6
3. Merits 6
DECISION 10

 

iii

A. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On December 19, 2003, Mobil Exploration and Development Argentina Inc. Suc.
Argentina and Mobil Argentina S.A. (“Claimants”) submitted a Request for
Arbitration to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”

or the “Centre”) against the Argentine Republic (““Argentina” or “Respondent”).

On August 5, 2004, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for
Arbitration pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment

Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (“ICSID Convention’).

. The Arbitral Tribunal was constituted on August 14, 2008. Its members are
Judge Gustaf M@ller, a national of Finland, appointed as President pursuant to Article
38 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 4(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules”), Prof. Piero Bernardini, an
Italian national, appointed by the Claimants, and Prof. Antonio Remiro Broténs, a

national of the Kingdom of Spain, appointed by the Argentine Republic.

Following written submissions, a hearing on jurisdiction and merits was held in
Washington D.C. from April 1 through 13, 2011. On December 14, 2012, after
consultation with the parties, the Tribunal appointed Dr. Nils Janson, a U.S. and
Panamanian national, as an independent financial expert. On April 10, 2013, the
Tribunal issued a Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability. Prof. Remiro Broténs attached

a separate opinion to the Decision.

On July 11, 2013, the Tribunal fixed a calendar for the parties’ submissions on
quantum. On July 11, 2013, the Claimants filed a submission on quantum; on August
21, 2013, the Respondent filed observations to the Claimants’ submission on quantum;
on November 12, 2013, the Independent Financial Expert issued a Report (“the
Report”); on December 9, 2013, the Claimants filed observations to the Report; on
January 14, 2014, both parties simultaneously filed observations to the Report, and on
February 14, 2014, both parties simultaneously filed rebuttal comments on the Report.

A hearing on quantum was held in Washington D.C. from May | to 3, 2014. During

the hearing, the Tribunal and the parties had the opportunity to ask Mr. Janson

questions on his Report.

On December 22, 2014, the Argentine Republic requested the removal of Mr. Janson
as the Tribunal’s Independent Financial Expert, on the basis that he lacked
independence. After due consideration of the parties’ written submissions and
explanations furnished by the Independent Financial Expert, the Tribunal rejected the
Respondent’s motion on March 11, 2015. The Tribunal issued its Decision on March

23, 2015.

On April 15, 2015, the Argentine Republic proposed the disqualification of the three
members of the Tribunal, in accordance with Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and
ICSID Arbitration Rule 9 (“Proposal”). On April 16, 2015, the Centre informed the
parties that the proceeding had been suspended until the Proposal was decided,
pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6). The Centre also established a procedural

calendar for the parties’ submissions on the Proposal.

In accordance with the procedural calendar, the Respondent filed its arguments on the
Proposal on April 23, 2015; the Claimants replied to the Proposal on April 30, 2015;
and Judge Moller, Prof. Bernardini and Prof. Remiro Broténs furnished a joint
explanation on May 4, 2015, as envisaged by ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3). Both

parties submitted additional comments on the Proposal on May 14, 2015.
B. PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS
1. The Argentine Republic’s Proposal for Disqualification

The Respondent’s arguments on the proposal to disqualify all members of the Tribunal
were set forth in its submissions of April 15, 2015, April 23, 2015, and May 14, 2015.

These arguments are summarized below.

. Argentina’s Proposal alleges that the facts indicate the Tribunal manifestly lacks the

qualities required by Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention, i.e. reliability to exercise

independent and impartial judgment.

11. Argentina claims that:

(i) | Mr. Janson failed to disclose the existence of a marketing agreement between
Castalia (his employer) and Competition Policy Associates (Compass), a
predecessor to Compass Lexecon. Compass Lexecon is the consulting firm that
Mr. Manuel Abdala and Professor Pablo Spiller, the Claimants’ experts on

damages, joined in 2011;

(ii) | The Claimants and Mr. Janson failed to provide evidence on the scope of the
marketing agreement and the date of its termination despite the Tribunal’s

request for this information; and

(iii) The Tribunal noted the failure to produce this information, but still refused to

remove Mr. Janson as the Tribunal’s Independent Financial Expert.

Argentina alleges that these facts demonstrate that the “Tribunal acted in a manifestly
unreasonable manner from a procedural standpoint” showing a “clear predisposition of

the Tribunal and its arbitrariness in deciding the challenge to Mr. Janson.”

12. In Argentina’s view, a reasonably impartial person would conclude that there is an
appearance of bias against the Argentine Republic and that the Tribunal lacks the
requisite independence. Thus, the Respondent argues that this is a manifest lack of

the qualities required by Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention.!

13. In addition, the Argentine Republic requested that the Chairman of the ICSID
Administrative Council (or a person to be appointed by the Chairman) convene an in-

person hearing to address the Proposal.
2. The Claimants’ Reply

14. The Claimants’ arguments on the Proposal to disqualify all members of the Tribunal
were set forth in their submissions of April 30, 2015 and May 14, 2015. These

arguments are summarized below.

! Argentina’s submission of April 23, 2015, (935-36, 74.
3

20.

2 Universal Compression international Holdings,

According to the Claimants, the Proposal lacks factual and legal support and fails to
meet the standard imposed by Articles 14 and 57 of the ICSID Convention. In the
Claimants’ view, the Proposal reflects Respondent’s disagreement with the Tribunal’s
March 23, 2015 decision confirming Mr. Janson’s appointment as Independent

Financial Expert in this case.

Referring to Universal v. Venezuela, the Claimants submit that “a manifest lack of
the required qualities must be proved by objective evidence. A simple belief that an
arbitrator lacks independence or impartiality is not sufficient to disqualify an

arbitrator” (emphasis in original).

. The Claimants submit that sufficient evidence was provided to prove that the

agreement between Castalia and Compass was terminated years before Mr. Janson
was appointed as an Independent Financial Expert in this case, and years before
Messrs. Abdala and Spiller joined Compass Lexecon. The Claimants also submit that
the agreement was unrelated to this case and extremely limited in scope, as it referred

only to a marketing alliance for the Pacific Rim.*

. The Claimants further state that the Tribunal’s decision not to remove Mr. Janson was

issued after careful consideration of the factual and legal arguments provided by the

parties, the explanations furnished by the Expert and the evidence on record.

. The Claimants also argue that Mr. Janson’s failure to disclose the past relationship

between Castalia and Compass is insufficient to prove an absence of impartiality or

independence.

In view of the above, the Claimants request that the Respondents’ Disqualification

Proposal be rejected in its entirety.

 

.L. U., v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case

No. ARB/10/9), Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify Prof. Brigitte Stern and Prof. Guido Santiago Tawil,
Arbitrators, May 20, 2011, (71.

3 Claimants’ Observations of April 30, 2015, p. 3.

*Id.,p.5.

3. Arbitrators’ Explanations
21. The three arbitrators jointly furnished explanations on May 4, 2015, stating that they:

“.,.[A]re of the opinion that their Decision on the Respondent’s request for the
removal of Mr. Janson as Tribunal Expert was appropriate under the
circumstances. It was rendered after giving both Parties and the Expert full
opportunity to present their observations. It was a fully reasoned decision taken
within the powers conferred by ICSID Arbitration Rules. The fact that Argentina
does not share the reasoning and conclusions of the Tribunal does not equate to a
lack of impartiality and independence of the members of the Tribunal based on
objective criteria. We therefore respectfully request that the Chairman of the
Administrative Council declines to sustain it.”

C. DECISION BY THE CHAIRMAN

1. Timeliness

22. Arbitration Rule 9(1) reads as follows:
“A party proposing the disqualification of an arbitrator pursuant to Article 57 of
the Convention shall promptly, and in any event before the proceeding is declared
closed, file its proposal with the Secretary-General, stating its reasons therefor.”
23. The ICSID Convention and Rules do not specify a number of days within which a

proposal for disqualification must be filed. Accordingly, the timeliness of a proposal

must be determined on a case by case basis.>

24. In this case, the Proposal was triggered by the Tribunal’s ruling of March 23, 2015
refusing Argentina’s request to remove the Independent Financial Expert. Argentina
filed this Proposal on April 15, 2015. The time period between March 23, 2015 and
the date of the Proposal falls within an acceptable range and hence, this
disqualification proposal shall be considered to have been filed promptly for the

purposes of Arbitration Rule 9(1).

5 See ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V., ConocoPhillips Hamaca B.V. and ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria B.V.
v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30), Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a
Majority of the Tribunal, May 05, 2014, 439, footnote 26 (“Conoco”).

5

2!

n

26.

2

28.

29.

30.

n

2. Request for Oral Hearing before the Chairman

. Article 58 of the ICSID Convention states that the decision on any proposal to

disqualify the majority of arbitrators shall be taken by the Chairman of the ICSID

Administrative Council.

The Respondent requested a hearing to address the Proposal with the Chairman of the
ICSID Administrative Council or with a person to be appointed by the Chairman. The

Claimants have not advanced a position in this regard.

Under the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Chairman has
discretion to determine the procedure that will be followed in deciding a
disqualification proposal. The sole procedural guidance in the Rules is that the
Chairman shall use his best efforts to make the decision within thirty days after he has

received the proposal.

The Chairman notes that the parties have been given a full opportunity to argue their
positions with respect to the Proposal. The parties have comprehensively briefed the
Chairman on the relevant facts and law. An oral hearing is not necessary in these

circumstances.

Accordingly, the Chairman has decided the Proposal on the basis of the written
submissions presented by the parties and the explanations provided by the challenged
arbitrators, as required by Article 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration
Rule 9.

3. Merits

Article 57 of the ICSID Convention allows a party to propose the disqualification of

any member of a tribunal. It reads as follows:

“A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the disqualification of any of
its members on account of any fact indicating a manifest lack of the qualities
required by paragraph (1) of Article 14. A party to arbitration proceedings may, in
addition, propose the disqualification of an arbitrator on the ground that he was
ineligible for appointment to the Tribunal under Section 2 of Chapter IV.”

31. A number of decisions have concluded that the word “manifest” in Article 57 of
the Convention means “evident” or “obvious,” and that it relates to the ease with which

the alleged lack of the required qualities can be perceived.”

32. The disqualification proposed in this case alleges that the challenged arbitrators

manifestly lack the qualities required by Article 14(1).
33. Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention provides:

“Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high moral
character and recognized competence in the fields of law, commerce, industry or
finance, who may be relied upon to exercise independent judgment. Competence in
the field of law shall be of particular importance in the case of persons on the Panel
of Arbitrators.”

34. While the English version of Article 14 of the ICSID Convention refers to
“independent judgment,” and the French version to “toute garantie d’indépendance
dans l’exercice de leurs fonctions” (guaranteed independence in exercising their
functions), the Spanish version requires “imparcialidad de juicio” (impartiality of
judgment). Given that all three versions are equally authentic, it is accepted that

arbitrators must be both impartial and independent.*

35. Impartiality refers to the absence of bias or predisposition towards a party.

Independence is characterized by the absence of external control. Independence and

© See Conoco supra note 5 [47 footnote 28.
7 C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention, Second Edition (2009), page 1202 134-154.

® The parties agree on this point: Respondent’s Submission of April 23, 2015, 65; Claimants’ Observations
of April 30, 2015, p. 3. So does ICSID jurisprudence: Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador
(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5), Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of Professor Francisco Orrego
Vicuiia (December 13, 2013), 65 (“Burlington”); Abaclat and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case
No. ARB/07/5), Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal (February 14, 2014), 174
footnote 28 (“Abaclat”); Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20), Decision on the Parties’ Proposals to Disqualify a majority of the
Tribunal (November 12, 2013) {58 (“Blue Bank”); Repsol, S.A. and Repsol Butano, S.A. v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/38), Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of Arbitrators
Francisco Orrego Vicufta and Claus von Wobeser (December 13, 2013), {70 (“Repsol”); and Conoco supra
note 5 4150.

 

 

7

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

impartiality both “protect parties against arbitrators being influenced by factors other

than those related to the merits of the case.”?

Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID Convention do not require proof of actual
dependence or bias; rather, it is sufficient to establish the appearance of dependence

or bias.!°

The legal standard applied to a proposal to disqualify an arbitrator is an “objective
standard based on a reasonable evaluation of the evidence by a third party.” As a
consequence, the subjective belief of the party requesting the disqualification is not

enough to satisfy the requirements of the Convention. ''

The challenging party has referred to other sets of standards and guidelines in its
arguments. While these rules or guidelines may serve as useful references, the
Chairman is bound by the standard set forth in the ICSID Convention. Accordingly,

this decision is made in accordance with Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID Convention.

The Tribunal provided both parties with the opportunity to present their arguments on
the Request for the Removal of the Independent Financial Expert. The Tribunal also
invited the Expert to furnish explanations. The Tribunal weighed the evidence before
it and considered the arguments and explanations submitted. After due deliberation,

the Tribunal issued its reasoned decision.

While Argentina is dissatisfied with the Tribunal’s decision, “the mere existence of an
adverse ruling is insufficient to prove a manifest lack of impartiality or independence,

as required by Articles 14 and 57 of the ICSID Convention. If it were otherwise,

° Burlington supra note 8 66, Abaclat supra note 8 75, Blue Bank supra note 8 459, Repsol supra note 8
471, Conoco supra note 5 451.

‘© Burlington supra note 8 66, Abaclat supra note 8 76, Blue Bank supra note 8 {59, Repsol supra note 8
471, Conoco supra note 5 452.

4 Burlington supra note 8 67, Abaclat supra note 8 77, Blue Bank supra note 8 {60, Repsol supra note 8
472, Conoco supra note 5 53.

proceedings could continuously be interrupted by the unsuccessful party, prolonging

the arbitral process.”!”

41. In the Chairman’s view, a third party undertaking a reasonable evaluation of the
Tribunal’s decision not to remove Mr. Janson as the Tribunal’s Independent Financial
Expert would not conclude that it demonstrates a manifest lack of the qualities
required under Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention. Accordingly, the

disqualification proposal must be rejected.

'2 Abaclat supra note 8 at (80.

D. DECISION

42. Having considered all the facts and arguments submitted by the parties, and for the

reasons stated above, the Chairman rejects the Respondent’s Proposal to disqualify

the challenged arbitrators.

 

