Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce
Case No. V (064/2008)

 

IN THE MATTER OF THE ARBITRATION

MOHAMMAD AMMAR AL-BAHLOUL

Vv.

THE REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN

 

FINAL AWARD

 

Place of Arbitration:

Stockholm, Sweden
June 8, 2010

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahtoul v. Republic of Tajikistan

 

 

 
     

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A 1
t UE PTGS saserierorrrceeocesnrnnncconesweres wel
WL The Arbitral Tribunal ..........sccseorenerpenseseneeeneesennee cen
lil, Partial Award on Jurisdiction and Liability ...........
IV. Procedural History .............
B. The Parties’
L Summary of the Claimant's Submissions...........
ll. The Respondent's Submissions.
Ill. Relief Claimed ...
C. The Tribunal's Analysis. 10
iF i 10
1 Burden of Proof ............. 10
2. Applicable Legal Principles — sar Eeaereunes ao 1
ll. Claim for Specific Performance (22.1)..........
it Claim for Compensatory Damages (22.2-22.5)....
1. Standard for Assessing COMPENSATION o.oo... cess cesses sersesesarenrsreonranentananereenes VT
2. for C. ing Ce 18
3. regarding C: i 25
|v. Claim for Compensatory Damages if Licenses are not issued (22.6) ....
V. Claim for Future Damages (22.7)......
VI. Interest. 27
D. Costs 27
E. The Decision Ka I

 

“suoly
-BOJUNWCD JeyJO pue suepso ‘sGuIpeajd ‘seonou We UNM parses Ainp YGnoWwle “enn
-eyuesaudes € yBnosy) Jo Anosuip Jaupis |EUNgU, 6) @/0joq seadde jou pip yuapuodsey

UejsiyHfe | ‘aqUeYSN SZOPEL WeeNS JEIYOR OF
ueysMyHfe | Jo onGNday eX) Jo ANJSMpU| pu ABs9UR Jo Aysiulyy Oy} JO s9yS!UIPY OU

Due ‘ueysiHfe| ‘SqUEYSN SZOKEL 'Zy HEPOY WEdSOlg ‘WUOPISOld OU} JO ed1O
uByspale | JO SyGnday ay) 40 japiselg BUY

ssesseippe Guimoroy ay) ye Ayjsnpuj pue Afseuy jo ANSIUIN OM
40 J3SIUIN, 84) PUE UeIS)HTE| 40 ONGndey EY jo JUEPIseig 24} JO LORUEHE ayy 0} NEW
d1uOsD@I@ Aq puke |lewuIE paueysiBes Aq UORE.nIQue SIYy Ul Paves Wee sey juepuodsey

‘(quepuodsay,, seyeuleioy) UBISP4fe1 Jo ONGndey a4, jUepUodsag

“WSN 'ZOZOB ‘OD ‘san
-U2Q 'D0Pp SUNS ONS ,.2b OZE IE SedIYO YUM ‘O77 UBWAH 9 ZUqNT ‘UVEW Ly me;
ey) JO ‘ar 'ysy6uy -4 sewer ‘Aowoye mau e Aq pajuesaidas mou sem ey yey} jeuNqUL
BY} POUUOJU! JUEWIE!D ‘JBYEeIaY4| “G00 Jequiaides gz WO, Se jesUNCD se UMEIPYYN
pey sayy yeu) jeunquy ay) paunoyu) sKawione yiog ‘E00z Jequueydes gz Jo ene! Ag

‘8002 ‘S
aun uo juewres> Aq paubls Aawoye jo semod e 0} yuensind ‘eujsny ‘euUelA OLOL-Y
"ve essensso5uliddiny ‘Guipying aBueyox3 yoois eu ye Sedo YM “yUeMYDS YOUpeLy
UG Pur eUYSNY "BUUIA, O/O1-¥ ‘POL “AS J8JIIVEVEW Je S@OWyO UWA ‘UeyyWY UBUPY
JOssajosy ‘skawoye siy Aq uoReuque siy) Ul payuasaudas uaeq peYy Ajenul jweWIE!D

“(quewie|9, J8yBUIEIY) 'QZ0}-y LISNy 'euUaIA ‘osseysioyYeLEW
vOL 12 Suipisas UaziIO UeWsny Ue ‘jnoJYEgTy JeWWY PRUWeYyoWY qUEWIEID

some out

WoRSNposU| wv

ueysnyfe 1 jo oyGndoy “A INo|Ueg-1y Jey pew WEYoHY
(8002/90) A ON UoReNQy 99S

SCC Arbaration No. V (0654/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajkistan

Claimant and Respondent are collectively referred to herein as the "Parties."

The Arbitral Tribunal

In his Request for Arbitration dated May 30, 2008 (the “Request’). Claimant appointed
Dr. Richard Happ, a national of Germany, as his party-appointed arbitrator. Dr.
Happ's mailing adcress is Luther Rechtsanwaltsgeselischaft mbH, Gansemarkt 45,
20354 Hamburg, Germany.

The Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (the “SCC Institute"),
on June 3, 2008, forwarded the Request to Respondent to the attention of the
President of the Republic and the Minister of the Ministry of Energy and Industry and
requested an Answer by June 17, 2008, This period was subsequently extended to
dune 29, then to July 14 and finally to July 25, 2008,

Upon Respondent's failure to submit an Answer or otherwise appear and failure to
appoint an arbitrator in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the SCC Institute (the
“Rules"), the SCC Institute notified the Parties by letter of August 13, 2008 of the
appointment by the Board of the SCC Institute of Professor Ivan S. Zykin, as co-
arbitrator on behalf of Respondent, and Mr. Jeffrey M. Hertzfeid, as Chairman of the
Tribunal.

Professor Zykin is a national of the Russian Federation. His mailing address is
Andrey Gorodissky & Partners, ul, Znamenka 13, Bidg. 3, 3° floor, 119019 Moscow,
RF

Mr. Hertzfeld is @ national of the USA. His mailing address is 5, Boulevard
Malesherbes, 75008 Paris, France.

Each of the signed a g his i and
independence of the Parties.

 

SCC Arbitration No. V (084/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

m. Partial Award on Jurisdiction and Liability

10. On 2 September 2009, the Tribunal rendered a Partial Award on Jurisdiction and
Liability (the "Partial Award”). it confirmed its junsdiction and found Respondent liable
for breach of its obligation under Article 10 (1) ECT as a result of its failure to ensure
the issuance of licenses pursuant to four hydrocarbon exploration agreements signed
on December 20, 2000 by and between Claimant and the Respondent's State
Committee for Oil & Gas (referred to in the Gocuments themselves as “Treaties”, but
hereafter referred to as the “Agreements'). It denied all other claims brought by
Claimant The dispositive provisions of the Partial Award were as follows’

"A. The Tribunal hes jurisdiction over Claimant's claims that Respondent has
breached its obligations owing to Claimant under Articles 10(1), 10(7) and 13 of
Part lll of the Energy Charter Treaty;

B. Respondent has breached its obligations owing to Claimant under Article 10(1) of
the Energy Charter Treaty, by failing to perform its contractual undertaking to ensure
the License to carry out solely and exclusively geological exploration, and natural
resource exploitation works and activities pursuant to the following four Agreements
signed on December 25, 2000 by and between Claimant and the State Committee on
Oil & Gas of the Republic of Tajikistan:

i Treaty on geological exploration and operation works on the project of East
Soupetau area in the Republic of Tajikistan, perspective for Hydrocarbon raw
material (oil, gas):

i. Treaty on geological exploration and operation works on the project of Rengan
area in the Republic of Tajikistan, perspective for Hydrocarbon raw material
(oil, gas),

if Treaty on geological exploration and operation works on the project of
Surgazon area in the Republic of Tajikistan, perspective for Hydrocarbon raw
material (oil, gas), and a

lv. Treaty on geological exploration and operation works on the project of
Yaigyzkak area in the Republic of Tajikistan, perspective for Hydrocarbon raw
material (oil, gas).

SCC Arbitration No, V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioul v, Republic of Tajikistan

C. All other claims brought by Claimant in this arbitration are denied.

D. The Tribunal retains jurisdiction for the purpose of determining the relief to be granted
with respect to the breach referred to in para, B above

E. Until a final award on requests for relief or until the arbitration is otherwise terminated,
the determination and allocation of the costs of the arbitration is deferred.”

11. The Partial Award is an integral part of this Final Award and incorporated into it by
reference.

WV. Procedural History

12. The procedural history of this arbitration up to the rendering of the Partial Award has
been accounted for in the Partial Award (at paras. 10-57) and need not be reiterated
here. A brief account of the factual background of the arbitration was also provided in
the Partial Award (at paras. 58-91) and likewise need not be repeated here. Following
the Partial Award and after consultation with the Parties, the Tribunal on 18
September 2009 by Procedural Order No, 12 set out the further procedural timetable
for the arbitration. Claimant had commented on the timetable by letter of 15
September 2009. Respondent did not react.

13. On 7 September 2009, the Tribunal sent 2 draft of the procedural timetable to the
SCC and requested an extension of time until 30 April 2010 for the rendering of the
final award. After consultation with the Parties, the SCC by letter of 16 September
2009 granted the requested extension.

14. On 3 October 2009, Claimant submitted a Request for Modification and Interpretation
of the Partial Award. By Procedural Order No. 13 of 6 October 2009, the Tribunal
invited Respondent to comment on Claimant's request by 15 October 2009. No
comments were received, By decision of 16 October 2009, the Tribunat denied the
Claimant's request.

16.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Claimant filed his Request for Relief on 30 October 2010 in accordance with the
procedural timetable. Together with his Request for Relief, he submitted

(1) A signed valuation report prepared by Mr. John 8. Gustavson of Mineral
Appraiser, LLC, Boulder, Colorado, USA, and

(2) A signed Expert Witness Statement of Mr. John B. Gustavson.

By letter of 18 November 2009, Claimant requested to be allowed to file a

i ing damages, ion and remedies in
international investment law. The Tribunal granted this request by Procedural Order
No. 14 of the same day, setting a time limit until 15 December 2009. The
supplemental submission was filed by Claimant on 15 December 2009. Respondent
did not comment on it. Simultaneousty. the Claimant requested clarification whether
the oral hearing in the arbitration could take place in Paris, rather than Stockholm, for
reasons of convenience. The Respondent did not object to this request.

 

Respondent did not file a Counter-Memorial on Claimant's Request for Relief,
although given an opportunity to do so.

By Procedural Order No. 16 of 5 January 2010, the Tribunal determined that the oral
hearing would take place in Paris from 15-17 February 2010, subject to the Claimant
paying in full the further advance deposit requested by the SCC.

By letter of 18 January 2010, the Arbitration Institute of the SCC confirmed that the
Claimant had paid the advance deposit in full. Therefore, by Procedural Order No.
16 of 19 January 2010, the Tribunal confirmed the time and place for the hearing. It
pointed out that Respondent up to that date had not participated, and that its non-
appearance at the hearings without good cause would not prevent the Tribunal from
holding the hearing and making a Final Award. The Tribunal invited Respondent to
confirm by 25 January 2010 if if intended to participate in the hearing. No comments
were received from Respondent.

By e-mail of 5 February 2010, the Tribunal informed the Parties that some of the
materials on which Claimant's Expert based its 30 October 2009 appraisal seemed

21

24

25.

SCC Arbitration No. V (0684/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioui v Republic of Tajikistan

not to have been submitted. The Tribunal requested Claimant to provide any missing
materials by e-mail in pdf format by 11 February 2010 at the latest The Claimant
‘submitted by two e-mails of 10 and 11 February 2010 in total 15 exhibits as the
material relied upon by its expert witness. Hard copies of these exhibits were
‘submitted at the hearing.

The oral hearing took place in Paris on February 15-16, 2010. Claimant appeared in
person and was represented by his attorney, Mr. English. Respondent failed to appear
and gave no explanation for its non-appearance. The Tribunal took expert witness
testimony from Claimant's expert witness, Mr. John B. Gustavson. At the end of the
hearing, the Tribunal declared the evidence closed.

The hearing was transcribed by a cout reporter The transcript (hereinafter
"Transcript") was sent to the parties for amendments and/or corrections and was then
finalized by the court reporter.

By Procedural Order No. 17 of 17 February 2010, the Tribunal indicated the further
procedural timetable setting out the deadlines for cost submissions and comments on
cost submissions.

On 12 March 2010, within the set schedule, Claimant submitted his Memoria! on
Costs setting out the costs of the quantum phase of arbitration By e-mail to the
Parties of 15 March 2010, the Tribunal confirmed receipt of the Claimant's Memorial
on Costs and requested a more detailed substantiation of its cost and expense
summary within 10 days. On 22 March 2010, the Tribunal received a more detailed
substantiation of costs.

The Respondent did not submit a cost submission of its own nor did it comment on
the cost submissions of Ciaimant

The Tribunal has now deliberated and renders the present Award. As agreed with
counsel at the close of the February hearings. on February 17, 2010, the Tribunal
requested the SCC Institute to grant an extension of time for rendering of this Award
until June 15, 2010, which was duly granted by the SCC Institute on the same date.

27

30.

u

‘SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
‘Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioul v Repubiic of Tajhustan

B. The Parties’ Submissions

Summary of the Claimant's Submissions

The Claimant's submissions are refiected in his 30 October 2009 Request for Relief
(the “Request for Relief, his 15 December 2009 Supplementary Brief on Remedies
(the “Supplementary Brief) and his counsel's submissions during the oral hearing,
Those submissions are in writing and the submissions of his counsel have been
transcribed by the Court Reporter,

Essentially, the Claimant submits that in 2001 he had the ability to build up third-party
capital necessary for the exploration for hydrocarbons for the four areas (Rengan,
Sargazon, Yalgyzkak and East Soupetau) for which he should have been granted
licenses by the Respondent. Such capital would have been built up from different
sources, such 88 government grants, loan facilities by ollrig operators and private
equity funding (cf. Transcript, Day 2, p. 26-31). The exploration would have been
successful and allowed him to procure further capital for the production, transportation
and sale of the hydrocarbons.

During the oral hearing, Claimant's expert, Mr. Gustavson, testified, infer alia, on the
probabilities of finding oil and gas in the four areas, the cost of exploration and
Production and the value of the Claimant's contractual nights. His witness testimony
was based on 2 written witness statement and a written appraisal report (see above
para. 15)

Claimant acknowledged that, in the post-2001 period, certain hydrocarbon licenses for
the subject areas had apparently been issued by Respondent to other companies.
Licenses for the areas of Rengan and Sargazon had been issued to Gazprom
(Transcript, Day 2, p.5) and for Yalgyzkak to the company Tethys Petroleum Ltd. (id,
line 24). Contradictory statements were made regarding the situation in the East
Soupetau area, as is discussed hereinbelow at paragraphs 57-61,

The Claimant submitted that under international law he was entitled to an order
compelling Respondent to issue to him exclusive licenses for the four license areas.

32.

34,

‘SCC Arbitration No V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioul v. Repudtic of Tajikistan

He further argued that he was entitled to compensation for the damages caused by
delay im issuing the licenses. The compensation was to be calculated as the
difference in the value the licenses would have had without the breach (i.e. if the
licenses had been issued in 2001) and the value they had in 2009, assuming the
licenses were issued by Respondent

For the evaluation of the licenses, Claimant relied on the expert opinion by Mr.

Mr. based his tion on an of the Expected
Value (EV) of the licenses to be granted. The EV was explained as the Net Present
Value (NPV) at its Probability of Success (POS) of a venture less the NPV of its
probability of failure (being 1,00 - POS). Mr. Gustavson analysed all four areas
covered by the four Agreements and calculated the difference of the Expected Values
between the two scenarios.

 

Claimant explicitly considered other methods for the calculation of his damage, such
as the cost method (Transcript, Day 2, p. 24) or the market value (Transcript, Day 2,
p. 24-25), to be inappropriate in the present case. Claimant's counsel explicitly
confirmed that market value was different from the Expected-Value calculation
(Transcript, Day 2, page 26). No alternative calculation was submitted.

The Respondent's Submissions

Respondent did not participate in this phase of the arbitration and did not make any
submissions.

Relief Claimed

In his Request for Relief. Claimant asked the Tribunal to issue an award:

"22.1 Ordering the Respondent to issue necessary exclusive licenses "to carry out
solely and jon, and natural
works and activities” for the exploration areas agreed upon in the four agree-
ments, namely:

 

22.2

22.3

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioul v, Republic of Tajikistan

‘i. Treaty on geological exploration and operation works on the project of East
Soupetau area in the Republic of Tajikistan, perspective for Hydrocarbon raw
material (oil, gas);

fi. Treaty on geological exploration and operation works on the project of Ren-
gan area in the Republic of Tajikistan, perspective for Hydrocarbon raw mate-
rial (oil, gas);

iii, Treaty on geological exploration and operation works on the project of Sar-
gazon area in the Republic of Tajikistan, perspective for Hydrocarbon raw
material (oll, gas);

iv. Treaty on geological exploration and operation works on the project of Yal-
gyzkak area in the Republic of Tajikistan, perspective for Hydrocarbon raw
material (oil, gas). This must be completed within six months as of the date
of the coming into force of this Award.

Awarding the Claimant compensatory damages in the East Soupetau area ac-
cording to the expert's opinion in the amount of $ 27,780,000 for josses (lost
profits, etc.) caused by the breach of the contract manifest in the decision of the
partial award. Specifically for the wrongful delay of the issuance of the neces-
‘sary exclusive license in the period trom July 2, 2001 to October 30, 2009.

Awarding the claimant compensatory damages in the Rengan area according to
the expert's opinion in the amount of $ 55,160,000 for losses (lost profits, etc.)
caused by the breach of contract manifest in the decision of the partial award.
Specifically for the wrongful delay of the issuance of the necessary exclusive Ii-
cense in the periad from July 2, 2001 to October 30, 2009.

Awarding the claimant compensatory damages in the Sargazon area according

~ to the expert's opinion in the amount of $87,220,000 for losses (lost profits, etc.)

caused by the breach of contract manifest in the decision of the partial award.
Specifically for the wrongful delay of the issuance of the necessary exclusive li-
conse in the period from July 2, 2001 to October 30, 2009.

Awarding the claimant compensatory damages in Yalgyzkak area according to
the expert's opinion in the amount of $58,300,000 for iosses (lost profits, etc.)
caused by the breach of contract manifest in the decision of the partial award.
Specifically for the wrongful delay of the issuance of the necessary exclusive li-
cense in the period from July 2, 2001 to October 30, 2009.

36.

37.

SCC Arbitration No. V (0684/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahlaul v. Republic of Tajikistan

22.6 Ordering that in the event that the four licenses are not issued within 6 months
as of the date of the coming into force of this Award, the Tribunal shall decide
that the Respondent is obliged to compensate the Claimant for damages sut-
fered for any future lost profits to be calculated by the experts at a future date.

22.7 Stating that Respondent is to be held responsible for future damages that result
from Respondents actions or omission of actions and cannot be calculated yet.

22.8 Awarding to the Claimant the costs of the arbitration in their entirety, including
the Claimant's own legal fees and expenses, the fees of the expert, the fees and
expenses for the Arbitral Tribunal and the fees of the Arbitration Institute of the
Stockhoim Chamber of Commerce.

22.9 Awarding to the Claimant compound interest in the amount of $ 240,010,000 for
the period of July 2, 2001 (or the date of breach) untit October 30, 2009 (Date of
the Expert Report), calculated by the experts as marginal rate plus reference
rate”

Neither in the subsequent written submissions nor in his Counsel's oral submissions
has Claimant explicitly deviated from these prayers for relief,

c. The Tribunal's Analysis
Introduction

1. Burden of Proof

As in the first phase of this arbitration, the principal difficulty encountered by the
Tribunal has related to the factual evidence submitted in support of Claimant's legal
positions. The Tribunal has repeated on a number of occasions during this arbitration
that Respondent's non-appearance in this arbitration does not relieve Claimant from
the burden of proving his factual allegations.

Under Section 25 of the Swedish Arbitration Act, the Parties are to supply the
evidence to support their case, Article 26(1) of the SCC Rules provides that the

10

39.

40.

41.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

weight to be given to the evidence shall be for the arbitral tribunal to determine. While
Swedish law does not contain any specific statutory provisions dealing with the
allocation of the burden of proof (although it might, exceptionally and not of relevance
here, stipulate a reversal of the burden of proof), or any rules concerning the standard
of proof required, it is generally considered that a party wha raises a claim needs to
prove the circumstances which form its legal and factual basis.

The Tribunal recognizes that, in investment treaty cases, the behaviour of the
respondent State sometimes may make it difficult for the Claimant to establish the
precise amount of damages suffered. This being said, we consider that the following
standard should nonetheless apply. While, on the one hand, total certainty should not
be required in order to assess damages if the existence of damages has been
established, on the other hand, the assessment of damages cannot be based on
conjecture or speculation. A persuasive factual basis for the assessment must be
shown.

2. Applicable Legal Principles

In the Tribunal's view, it is appropriate to start by recalling the legal principles which
govern its analysis. This dispute has been brought by Claimant on the basis of Article
26 of the Energy Charter Treaty ("ECT"). Article 26 (6) ECT prescribes that an
arbitration tribunal shall

“decide the issues in dispute in accordance with this Treaty and applicable rules
and principles of international law.~

The ECT gives little guidance on the issue of damages and other forms of relief. It
does not explicitly prescribe the consequences of a breach of its provisions. Article 26
(8) ECT, however, indicates that monetary damages and other forms of remedies can
be granted by a tribunal. It provides as follows:

“An award of arbitration concerning 4 measure of a sub-national government or
authonity of the disputing Contracting Party shall provide that the Contracting Party
may pay monetary damages fn lieu of any other remedy granted...”

42.

43.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioul v. Republic of Tajikistan

The Tribunal considers that the applicable rules and principles of international law
concerning damages are well reflected in the Draft Articles on the “Responsibility of
States for Internationally Wrongful Acts,” prepared in 2001 by the International Law
Commission of the United Nations. (the “ILC Articles"). Although without binding
legal force, the ILC Articles are widely viewed as the most authoritative statement of
the law in this area that exists today.

The ILC Articles pertinent in this case are Articles 29, 31, 34, 35 and 36. They read as
follows:

Article 29
Continued Duty of Performance

The legal consequences of an international wrongful act under this part do
not affect the continued duty of the responsible State to perform the obliga-
tion breached.

Article 31
Reparation

The responsible State is under an obligation to make full reparation for the
injury caused by the internationally wrongful act.

2. Injury includes any damage, whether material or moral, caused by the inter-
nationally wrongful act of a State.

Article 34
Forms of reparation

Full reparation for the injury caused by the internationally wrongful act shall
take the form of restitution, compensation and satisfaction, either singly or in
combination, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

Article 35
Restitution

A State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an obligation
to make restitution, that is, to re-establish the situation which existed before
the wrongful act was committed, provided and to the extent that restitution:

(a) |s not materially impossible;
(b) Does not involve a burden out of all proportion to the benefit deriv-
ing from restitution instead of compensation.

45,

47

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammed Ammar Al-Bahioul v. Repudiic of Tajicstan

Article 36
Compensation

1, The State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an obliga-
tion to compensate for the damage caused thereby, insofar as such damage
is not made good by restitution.

2. The compensation shall cover any financially assessable damage including
loss of profits insofar as it is established.

The Tribunal will analyze Claimant's requests for relief on the basis of these
principles. Insofar as Claimant in his submissions has relied on awards and decisions
of other tribunals, or insofar as pertinent awards and decisions are in the public realm,
the Tribunal has taken them into consideration for its analysis. While the Tribunal
does not consider such awards or decisions as binding precedent, they may
nonetheless offer helpful guidance.

Claim for Specific Performance (22.1)

In his Request for Relief, the Claimant asks the Tribunal to order specific
performance:

‘to issue necessary exclusive licenses “to carry out solely and exclusively
geological exploration, and natural resources exploitation works and activities" for
the exploration areas agreed upon in the four agreements...”

i is Claimant's position that “this order should apply retroactively to July 2, 2001, and
should void any of the licenses given contrary to Claimant's rights.” (Request for
Relief, p. 9).

The Tribunal considers that specific performance is a permissible remedy in
international law. An international tribunal has the power to grant specific
performance.

The Energy Charter Treaty does not preclude this power The obligation of
Contracting Parties under the umbrella clause of Article 10 (1) ECT to “observe any
obligations entered into” implies the possibility for a tribunal in case of breach to order

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

that Contracting Party to comply with Its obligations, Moreover, it is a generally
recognized international law principle that, where the breach is of a continuing
character, a Contracting Party has @ continuing duty to perform the obligation
breached. See Article 29 of the ILC Articles, paragraph 43, supra.

49, Article 26(8) ECT, by stipulating that an arbitral award shail provide that a Contracting
Party may pay monetary damages ‘in lieu of any other remedy granted,” implicitly
recognizes the power of a tribunal to grant non-monetary relief. This being said, it is
also noteworthy that the ECT provision does not purport to compey the Contracting
Party to implement such non-monetary relief, since it requires the award to provide in
such case for the option of damages in lieu thereof. This presupposes that Claimant
has proved the amount of such an alternative damage payment.

50. Possible problems of enforcement do not in and of itself make specific performance
an impermissible remedy. As the !CSID tribunal in the case of Micula v. Romania
pointed out, the two concepts of remedies and enforcement are distinct.’ Claimant
therefore has a right to formulate his request for relief in whichever manner he
chooses.

51. However, it remains for the Tribunal to consider whether the remedy sought, even if
permissible in principle, is in fact materially possible under the particular
circumstances before it.

52. The ILC Articles contemplate restitution as the principal remedy for internationally
wrongful conduct. See Article 35 of the ILC Articles, paragraph 43, supra. Where
damage is not made good by way of restitution, then the ILC Articles envisage
monetary cornpensation for the damage shown to be caused by the misconduct. See
Article 36 of the ILC Articles, paragraph 43, supra. The goal of restitution is to restore
the investor to his position before the wrongful conduct, in the present case, the
wrongful contact occurred on or before July 2, 2001 and restitution would entail
obliging the State to perform the contractual obligation which it should have performed
at that time, i.e. to issue retroactively to that date exclusive licenses in the four

' Pera, 166, Micula and others v. Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/20, Decision on Jurisdiction and Ad-
missibility of 24.September 2008 (Alexandrov, Enlermann, Levy).

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

geographic areas covered by the four Agreements referred to in paragraph 35, supra.
This remedy, however, should not be granted where its implementation is materially
impossible. See Article 35(a) and (b) of the ILC Articles. If such case, the ILC Articles
would envisage a claim for damages as the available alternative.

53. Counsel has argued in the present case that specific performance in the form of
compulsory issuance of exclusive licenses for the four areas should be granted. The
Tribunal has considered the following relevant factors.

54, Nine years have elapsed since Claimant has left Tajikistan. Ouring that period
Claimant has had no activities in the country, nor has it been shown that Claimant
engaged in exploration and development activities in the oil and gas sector elsewhere.
Claimant has. had no working relationship with Tajikistan and indeed has had difficulty
even obtaining visas to visit the country.

55. A very similar situation was present in the 1986 LETCO v. Liberia ICSID arbitration.
In that case, the State had withdrawn certain concessions which had been granted to
LETCO. The tribunal decided that, taking into account the fact that LETCO's activities
in Liberia were terminated more than two years previously and that Liberia's fallure to
Participate in the arbitration made it doubtful that the govemment would cooperate in
recommencing the concession, "only reparation in the form of money damages will be
adequate.*

56. During the past nine year period, according to Claimant's own evidence, third parties
have become active in the four geographic areas where Claimant had been promised
exclusive licenses. There is no evidence that their nights were obtained through bad
faith conduct on their part Claimant's expert, Mr. Gustavson, testified that the
Rengan, Sargazon and East Soupetau areas were occupied by Gazprom, and that
the Yalgyzkak area was occupied by Tethys Petroleum.

57. The Claimant presented somewhat contradictory positions as regards the East
Soupetau area. On the first day of the hearings, Claimant’s counsel stated that

? Para 44, Liberian Eastern Timber Corporation [LETCO] v. Government of Republic of Liberia, ICSID
Case No. ARB/83/2, Final Award 31 March 1986.

59.

61.

‘SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

“operators outside of Mr. Al-Bahtoul's control now in fact occupy every treaty area
involved in this award.” (Transcript, Day 1, p.5)

Counsel further stated in response to a question from the Tribunal as to whether there
were operators already working in the four areas: “We submitted exhibits that were
constituent parts of what our expert analyzed, and our expert will testify to the fact that
when he was looking at the operating situation of the region, he identified that these
different companies, Gazprom, Tehys, Manas and Energy Partners Austria, had
[stated] in both their public reporting and media documents that they were operating
in these specific areas.”

(Transcript Day 1, pp. 27-28)

When asked by Claimant's counsel whether over the past 8-9 year period other
companies were “occupying the specific areas that...the four licenses were involved
with,” Mr, Gustavson, Claimant's expert, replied: "Yes, as an example, Gazprom
Specifically went in during the time period you mentioned, | believe starting in 2003
and 2004, and actually secured licenses and agreements with the government for
investments, in one Gazprom press release, so that they had pledged $500 million of
investment, the two fields being the Rengan and the Soupetau.”
(Transcript Day 1, pp. 98-99)

On the second day of the hearings, Counsel somewhat qualified his pasition from the
prior day, stating that “East Soupetau, as we heard after the expert testimony, is likely
not occupied by @ particular company. | think the East Soupetau area és probably the
Jeast likely of the areas that, if we re-enter the country, we will face least the problem
of a company being there already that we have to deal with." (Transcript Day 2, p. 6)

However, faced with the Claimant's somewhat contradictory positions, the Tribunal is
compelled to find that the evidence does not sufficiently establish the availability of
East Soupetau to justify ordering the issuance of an exclusive license to Claimant.

Claimant's counsel himself recognized that enforcement of specific performance was
likely to encounter conflicting claims where third parties were occupying the areas.
He stated at the hearing that “even in the event that we are awarded injunctive relief in
the form of demand to issue licenses, it is very likely that when we go to try to enforce

63,

o7

SCC Arbitration No. V (0864/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioul v. Republic of Tajixistan

those licenses, there will be people occupying those licenses and they will be
extremely difficult to get.” (Transcript Day 1, p. 21)

For all of the reasons stated above, it is the Tribunal’s opinion that the circumstances
here present render it materially impossible to implement a remedy of specific
performance. Claimant's request for this relief is therefore denied.

Claim for Compensatory Damages (22.2-22.5)

Claimant has formulated a claim for compensatory damages on the basis of the delay
in the issuance of the licenses. He argues that the licenses, if issued today. would
have a considerably lower value than had they been issued in 2001.

1. Standard for Assessing Compensation

Article 36 (1) of the ILC Articles confirms that compensation is due insofar as damage
caused by the wrongful act of the State has not been made good by way of restitution
Such compensation covers any financially assessable damages and lost profits, if
established.

The Claimant requests compensation not for the value of the licenses which should
have been issued, but for the difference in value between two hypothetical scenarios:
the value in 2001, had there been no breach, ie. Respondent had issued the licenses
in 2001, and the value in 2009 as per the date of valuation by his expert witness Mr.
Gustavson. This damage could not have been made good by restitution, even if the
Tribunal had granted the ciaim for specific performance.

The Energy Charter Treaty does not provide the Tribunal with any guidance as to the
standard of compensation to be applied (except in cases of expropriation, which the
Tribunal in the Partial Award has established not to exist in the present case).

The Tribunal considers, however, that it need not decide which of the various
standards and methodologies applied in other cases by other tribunals might be
‘suitable in this case. The Ciaimant has chosen its own methodology. The Claimant
has submitted a valuation based on the difference in the value of the licenses in the

7

‘SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

two hypothetical scenarios stated above. The Tribunal notes that a value-based
approach has been applied by a considerable number of investment tribunals for
tweaty breaches other than expropriation. The Claimant's expert witness, Mr.
Gustavson, explicitly excluded an assessment of damages of the basis of the
amounts invested (asset-based approach) as inappropriate on the facts of the present
case (Transcript, Day 1, page 96).

2. Methodology for Calculating Compensation

69. The value of an asset can be assessed with different methodologies. Claimant's
expert witness used the Discounted Cash Flow — Method (“DCF-method") to assess
the “Expected Value” of the licenses in the two hypothetical scenarios. The DCF-
method is a forward-looking projection calculating the present value of future cash
flows to be generated from a project. As the World Bank explains, DCF-value

“means the cash receipts realistically expected from the enterprise in each
future year of its economic life as reasonably projected minus that year's
expected cash expenditure, after discounting this net cash flow for each

year by a factor which reflects the time value of money, expected inflation,
and the risk associated with such cash flow under realistic circumstances.

70. Provided certain requirements are met, it is an accepted method of assessing the
value of an asset. It needs to be pointed out that the DCF-method does not calculate
lost future profits. Lost Profits is conceptually different from the value of future cash-
flows,

71. Asa general rule assets need to qualify as a going concern and have a proven track
record of profitability in order to be valued in accordance with the DCF-method. The
World Bank defines 2 “going concern” as follows:

". a "going concem" means an enterprise consisting of income-producing
assets which has been in operation for a sufficient period of time to gener-
ate the data required for the calculation of future income and which could
have been expected with reasonable certainty, if the taking had not oc-

 

* World Bank Guidelines on the Treatment of Foreign Direct Investment, 1992, Sec. tV 6, available at
NUtp:/ta.law_uvic.ca/otherinvestmentinstruments htm.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/208)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioul v. Republic of Tajikistan

curred, to continue producing legitimate income over the course of its eco-
nomic life in the general circumstances following the taking by the State.“

72. The Tribunal notes that, in other cases, investment treaty tribunals have rejected the

73.

application of the DCF-method where the project had not even started but was in a
mere planning stage’ or had operated for less than two years.°

The four Agreements with respect to which Cisimant was entitled to receive licenses
do not meet the standard for a going concer. The Respondent had denied to the
Claimant the licenses necessary for starting exploration and Claimant had started
neither exploration nor production. No oil or gas has been produced or even found by
Claimant, and no income has been derived from any of the four areas, In fact, insofar
as the Tribunal is aware, since the conclusion of the Agreernents Claimant has not
pursued any activities in the four project areas. The calculation of damages is thus an
entirely forward-looking analysis without any past record of profitability.

However, the Tribunal considers that under exceptional circumstances a DCF-
analysis might be appropriate where the investment project at issue had not started
operation. The Tribunal recalls the considerations of the tribunal in the Vivendi
(resubmitted) case:

"8.3.4. In the Tribunal's view, the likelihood of lost profits must be suffi-
ciently established by Claimants in order to be the basis of compensable
damages. The Tribunal also recognises that in an appropriate case, a
Claimant might be able to establish the likelihood of lost profits with suffi-
cient certainty even in the absence of a genuine going concern. For exam-
ple, a claimant might be able to establish clearly that an investment, such
as a concession, would have been profitable by presenting sufficient evi-
dence of its expertise and proven record of profitability of concessions it (or
indeed others) had operated in similar circumstances.”

“World Bank Guidelines on the Treatment of Foreign Direct Investment, Sec. IV 8.

* PSEG and others v. Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5, Award of 19 January 2007(Vicuna, Fortier, Kauf-
mann-Kohler)

* See, e.9. Tecnicas Medicambientales Tecmed S.A v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AFVOO/2, Verea)

Award of 29. May 2003 (Naon, Rozas,

’

75,

76.

‘SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioul v. Repubiic of Tajikistan

bl

“8.3.10. A claimant which cannot rely on a record of demonstrated profit
ability requires to present a thoroughly prepared record of its (or others)
successes, based on first hand experience (its own or that of qualified ex-
perts) or corporate records which establish on the balance of the probabili-
ties it would have produced profits from the concession in question in the
face of the particular risks involved, other than those of Treaty violation.*"

The Tribunal considers that the application might be justified, inter alia. where the
exploration of hydrocarbons is at issue. The determination of the future cash flow from
the exploitation of hydrocarbon reserves need not depend on a past record of
profitability. There are numerous hydrocarbon reserves around the world, and
sufficient data allowing for future cash flow projections should be available to allow a
DCF-caiculation.

However, no hydrocarbons have yet been found in the four areas. The four
Agreements (Exhibits CL 4-7) provide that the exploration work was to be financed by
the Claimant on “Risk Conditions” (Article 2 of each of the Agreements), If the
exploration was successful, the Claimant would have had to perform "the obtaining of
industrial influx and determination of construction of the Operating Enterprise and
Pipelines till the consumption or loading place” (Article 3 of the Agreements). After
complete pay-off of the costs made by the Claimant, a Joint Venture was to be
created with an 80% (Claimant) / 20% (Respondent) profit sharing

‘The Tribunal thus considers that there are four steps to pass before cash flow can be
expected: financing of the exploration, finding hydrocarbons. financing the extraction
and the sale. To determine whether the OCF-method can be applied to assess the
value of the licenses, the following questions need to be analysed:

(1) Was Claimant able to finance the exploration for hydrocarbons?

(2) Would the exploration have been successful, i.e Claimant found oll & gas
reserves which could be exploited?

de Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal SA v. the Argentine Repubiic,

Compania de Aguas: , ICSID
(Case No. ARB/97/3, Schiedsspruch vom 20. August 2007 (Rowley, Kaufmann-Kohler, Bernal Verea)

2

78.

79.

80.

SCC Arbitration No, V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar A!-Bahioul v. Republic of Tajikistan

(3) Would Claimant have been able to finance and perform the exploitation of any
hydrocarbon reserves found?
(4) Would it have been possibile to sell any hydrocarbons produced?

In analyzing these questions, the Tribunal needs to have regard that, at each step, it
must be more likely than not that Claimant could have proceeded to the next step. A
DCF-calculation cannot be based on mere speculation.

(1) Was the Claimant able to finance the exploration for oil & gas?

The Claimant never contended that he had his own financial means to finance the
exploration in the four areas. His counsel submitted that Claimant had been in contact
with financing institutions and would have been able to acquire grants and/or loan
facllities for the exploration (see Transcript, Day 2, p. 26-29).

The evidence submitted is scarce, though. Essentially it consists of certain letters and
e-mails submitted by Claimant shortly before the oral hearing as part of the materials
on which the Claimant's expert would rely. The Tribunal has considered in particular
the following documents on which emphasis was laid during oral hearing:

* A letter of recommendation for the Claimant, issued by the Vienna branch of
Credit Lyonnais, dated 23 March 1998;

An undated excerpt of an e-mail written by Ms. Cosic, Investment Officer in the
oil, gas & chemical department of the International Finance Corporation (IFC),
to the Claimant. Ms. Cosic refers to a “briefing" about the Claimant's plans in
Tajikistan, She states that the Claimant's development plan seemed to be in a
planning stage, and describes how the IFC undertakes a due diligence of
projects to decide about a possible financing. She asked the Claimant to
submit an “independent assessment of the fields’ proved reserves”,

* A letter of recommendation for Claimant's company, Vivalo, from the
ambassador of Malaysia to Petronas, the Malaysian petroleum company,

81.

82.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahlou! v. Republic of Tajikistan

dated, 15 March 2002. He recommends giving the Claimant's request positive
consideration;

A letter of recommendation fpr Claimant's company, Vivalo. from the
ambassador of Respondent in Austria, dated 26 March 2000;

* A copy of an e-mail dated 30 August 2002 from a Mr. Grozier to Claimant,
submitting an outline proposal by drilling consultants (which was not submitted
to the Tribunal) and mentioning that he had some investors (not specified)
“who could be Interested based on this plan we are still in the initial
negotiations stage";

An e-mail from a Mr. Peter Darley from Halliburton, a well-known US company,
to Claimant dated 10 December 1999. Mr. Darley thanks Claimant for sending
some information on oil and gas prospects in Tajikistan, states that he
forwarded the information to colleagues concerned with the region and asks
for an explanation of the Claimant's role in developing those opportunities and
whether third party studies about exploitable reserves had been undertaken;
and

A fax message from the company Crosco, dated 27 February 2001, to the
ambassador of Respondent in Austria, inviting him to meetings in Zagreb to
discuss future projects in Tajikistan. Representatives of INA, Crosco and
Claimant's company Vivalo would be present.

The Tribunal carefully analysed these documents. It is clear that Claimant managed to
interest a number of third parties regarding hydrocarbon projects in Tajikistan. It is
also clear that third parties like the IFC and/or Crosco would have the means to
finance the exploration for hydrocarbons.

However, these documents do not go beyond a mere expression of interest. There is
no document on the record evidencing that any of these third parties was willing to
finance the exploration in one of the four areas at hand subject to the granting of the
licence by Respondent. Claimant has not explained what came out of these
discussions and has not called any of the persons as a witness.

85.

86.

87.

SCC Arbitration No, V (0684/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

In short, the Tribunal has no factual evidence to conclude that Claimant would have
acquired sufficient third-party financing for the exploration of the four areas, if he had
been granted the licenses.

The Tribunal nevertheless would not exclude that Claimant would have been able to
acquire third-party financing if Claimant had submitted evidence of his experience in
similar ventures. Claimant's counsel so argued (Transcript, Day 2, p. 29), but
submitted no evidence to sufficiently substantiate his assertions in this regard.

The Tribunal thus considers that Claimant has failed to discharge his burden of proof
that he would have been able to acquire third-party financing for the exploration.

been ssful, ie. would Claimant have fount
hydrocarbon reserves which could be exploited?

The Claimant's expert, Mr. Gustavson, testified about the geological Probability of
Success (POS) of finding exploitable hydrocarbon reserves in the four project areas.
According to his testimony, the POS were as follows

Rengan 13%
Sargazon 19%
Yalgyzkak 16%
East Soupetau 51%

The Tribunal is prepared to accept Mr. Gustavson's testimony, although the source
material on which he based his conclusions was not made available to it.

However, Mr. Gustavson's testimony means that in three of the four areas, it ts far
from likely that any hydrocarbon reserves would have been found. The Tribunal notes
that, according to the witness testimony of Mr. Gustavson, there is no evidence that
hydrocarbons have been found so far by the companies currently active in Rengan,
Sargazon or Yalgyzkak (Transcript, Day 1, p. 60). For purposes of a forward-looking
DCF-caiculation, only East Soupetau offered a real likelihood of containing

1

92,

‘SCC Arbitration No. V (9064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Banioul v. Republic of Tajikistan

hydrocarbons and, then, only with @ serious doubt as to whether the hydrocarbons
there could be economically exploited. (See infra, paragraph 92)

The Tribunal took note of the circumstantial evidence that, in Rengan and Sargazon,
Gazprom was in the process of investing approx. US$ 500 million into exploration. It
does not find this to be sufficient evidence that the areas contain proven reserves. As
the Claimant’s expert witness explained during the oral hearing, the decision to
explore an oil field is not based on the Probability of Success, but is also dependent
on the reserves hoped for: ".. even if the probability of success is very low, then if you
have the chance to finding a giant oilfield, then you might still go ahead” (Transcript,
Day 4, p. 138). Thus, the alleged investments undertaken by Gazprom are not
evidence, nor even an indication, that hydrocarbon reserves indeed exist in those
fields.

The Tribunal thus concludes that a discovery of reserves with reasonable likelihood
(for purposes of applying the DCF-method) only existed in the East Soupetau area. in
Rengan, Yalgyzkak and Sargazon, finding hydrocarbons was far from likely.
However, because of the internal rate of return hurdle referred to by Mr, Gustavson
(see infra, para. 92), those hydrocarbons were unlikely to be economically exploitable.

hydrocarbon reserves found?

Assuming that commercially exploitable hydrocarbon reserves would have been
found, the Tribunal considers it theoretically possible that Claimant could have
obtained third-party financing for the exploitation of oil. The conditions for such third-

Moreover, the evidence on the record is insufficient to conclude that third-party
financing could have been acquired for East Soupetau. While the Probability of
Success is the biggest of the four areas, Mr, Gustavson testified that the internal rate
of return hurdle commonly required by oll companies was particularly low for this area
according to his calculations and that this might render that area economically
unattractive (Transcript, Day 1, pp. 139-140),

93.

95.

97.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Consequently, any conclusion regarding a financing of the exploration would amount
to speculation. The Tribunal is not prepared to do this.

fou! i it res to be concluded and
obtain a constant cash flow?

Claimant did not have any positive experience with the selling of hydrocarbons. His
two joint ventures with the Respondent for the exploitation of oil fields failed for a
variety of reasons. There is nothing on the record showing that Claimant ever
successfully operated an oil or gas field in Tajikistan — or elsewhere - and derived any
profits from it. Consequently, the future profitable operation and exploitation of any
gas and oil reserves found may be possible, but cannot be projected with any
reasonable degree of certainty.

3. Conclusion regarding Compensation

In summary, Claimant asks the Tribunal to accept the assumption that he would have
been able to acquire financing for the exploration (but he had no definite offer of
financing, just expressions of interest), that upon exploration he would have found
hydrocarbons (although the probabilities were low and there is no evidence that any
other company seems to have found hydrocarbons so far) and that he would have
been able to exploit and sell the oil (although he had no proven experience in this
field).

In the Tribunal's view, this entails simply too many unsubstantiated assumptions to
justify the application of the OCF-method. The application of the DCF-Method fails
from the outset by virtue of the failure to prove that financing was in fact available for
the necessary exploration, even if Respondent had issued the licenses in 2001. The
Tribunal notes that this not only affects the application of the DCF-method, but also
destroys the causality between the breach committed by the State and the loss of the
alleged future cash flows (or “lost profits’, as it is characterized by Claimant).

Claimant has not submitted an alternative valuation of damages. Assuming that he
also asked for lost profits as an alternative to OCF-value (his submissions were

unclear), the Tribunal rejects this claim as being overly speculative for the reasons set

25

99,

=

100.

101,

v.

‘SCC Arbitration No. V (0864/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioul v. Republic of Tajikistan

out above. The Tribunal considers that Claimant might have been able to sell the
Agreements — and thus the right to the licenses ~ to a third party. However, this is of
‘no avail to Claimant. His expert testified that the Expected Value cafculated by him
was different from a possible market value (Transcript, Day 1, p. 96). This was also
the position taken by his counsel! (Transcript, Day 2, p. 25). It was furthermore
submitted that a valuation on the basis of comparable sales was not possible due to a
lack of comparable transactions (Appraisal Report, p. 16; Transcript, Day 1, p 8).
Claimant's expert further testified that he had not calculated the amount invested and
lost by Claimant (Transcript, Day 1, p.97), and Claimant's counsel explicitly relied on
this in his closing statement (Transcript, Day 2, p, 23-24).

The Tribunal thus has to conclude that it has no substantiated basis upon which to
make an assessment of damages, despite the Respondent's established liability and
on-going breach of the BIT.

Since Claimant has not proved that he has suffered damages on account of
Respondent's breach of the BIT, his claims for compensation are necessarily denied,

Claim for Compensatory Damages if Licenses are not issued (22.6)

Claimant further requests that the Tribunal order that, if the licenses are not issued
within six months as of the date of the coming into force of this Award, that
Respondent be obliged to compensate Claimant for further damages suffered for any
future lost profits to be calculated by the experts at a future date

Claimant's request here is premised on the Tribunal having ruled in its favor as
regards an order compelling Respondent to issue the requested licenses, Since the
‘Tribunal has denied that request, the present claim likewise fails.

Claim for Future Damages (22.7)

102, The Claimant further requests that the “Respondent is to be held responsible for

future damages that result from Respondent's actions or omissions of actions and
cannot be calculated yet.”

103,

105.

106.

107.

‘SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioul v. Republic of Tajikistan

This request is inadmissible as presented, since it falls outside the scope of the
Tribunal’s mandate in this arbitration. in this quantum phase of the arbitration, the
Claimant was provided the opportunity to present its evidence of damages resulting
from the Respondent's breach of the ECT as determined in the Tribunal’s Partial
Award on Jurisdiction and Liability. To the extent that Claimant is now suggesting that
Respondent should be held liable for other actions or omissions, or for damages
which have not yet occurred, or may not yet be calculated, but which may occur in the
future as a result of future circumstances, such matters are not properly before this
Tribunal.

. We form no opinion as to whether or not the Claimant may bring a further arbitration in

the future for such damages based on future circumstances.
Interest

The Tribunal has denied Claimant's request for compensatory damages.
Consequently no interest can be awarded. The Tribunal thus need not decide whether
the Claimant might have been entitled to compound interest at the requested rate,

D. Costs

The Tribunal is now faced with the task of deciding about the costs of the arbitration.
The SCC Arbitration Rules differentiate between Costs of Arbitration, which are
regulated in Article 43 and relate to the costs of the SCC Institute and the Tribunal,
and costs incurred by a party which are regulated in Article 44 of the Rules.

Article 43 reads in pertinent part as follows:

Article 43 Costs of the Arbitration

(1) The Costs of the Arbitration consist of:

i) the Fees of the Arbitral Tribunal;

Die Administrative Fee of the SCC institute;
a

iii) the expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal and the

27

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/208)
Mohammad Ammar A-Bahioul v. Republic of Tajikistan

SCC Institute,

(5) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the Arbitral Tribunal shail, at
the request of 4 party, apportion the Costs of the Arbitration between the
parties, having regard to the outcome of the case and other relevant
circumstances.

108. Article 44 reads in pertinent part as follows:

11

aa]

ak

1

-

N

&:

Article 44 Costs incurred by a party

Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the Arbitral Tribunal may in the
final award...upon the request of a party, order one party to pay any
reasonable costs incurred by another party, including costs for tegal
representation, having regard to the outcome of the case and other
relevant circumstances.

There is no evidence of any agreement between the Parties on the manner of sharing
costs. Therefore, the above rules shall guide the Tribunal

Claimant has advanced to the SCC Institute the full requested deposit towards the
Costs of Arbitration in the amount of EUR 582,000, covering both phases of the
arbitration, Claimant requests that the full Costs of Arbitration, as may be finally fixed
by the SCC Institute, be reimbursed by Respondent.

Claimant has made cost submissions for its incurred costs in both phases of the
arbitration. The Tribunal, in its Partial Award on Jurisdiction and Liability, had
deferred a determination of costs until the Final Award

Claimant's costs in connection with the first phase, which as mentioned above was
limited to the issues of jurisdiction and liability, amounted to EUR 1,106,000, including
Claimant's legal fees and other incurred costs.

Claimant's costs in connection with the second phase, leading to the Final Award in

respect of Claimant's requests for relief and proof of quantum, amounted to EUR

28

114.

115.

116.

117,

118.

119.

‘SCC Arbitration No. V (0684/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

36,500 in disbursements, US$21,299.81 in legal representation and US$35,084,04 in
expert costs.

Respondent did not comment on Claimant's incurred costs with respect to either
phase of the arbitration. Having reviewed Claimant's submissions in this regard, the
Tribunal has found them to be rather succinct. However, the amount of the costs
allegedly incurred is not disproportionate for a case of this size and complexity and we
are therefore inclined to uphold them as reasonable.

The SCC Arbitration Rules give the Tribunal a certain discretion to award and allocate
both the Costs of the Arbitration and the reasonable incurred costs of the Parties,
taking into account the outcome of the case and other relevant circumstances.

The proceedings in this arbitration have been bifurcated. In the first phase, Claimant
prevailed on the question of jurisdiction and on one of its claims of liability, On the
other hand, it lost on all of its other claims of liability, including its primary claims
related to the Baldjuvon and Petroleum SUGD joint venture companies. Claimant has
not prevailed in the second phase of this arbitration relating to its requests for relief
and damages.

At the same time, it Is relevant to note that the proceedings in this arbitration have
been rendered more complicated and more costly than they would otherwise have
been due in part to Respondent's failure to participate, even after the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal was established. The Tribunal went to great efforts throughout these
proceedings to assure that Respondent was given a full opportunity to participate at
every stage and, yet, Respondent persisted in disregarding its obligation to do so
under the ECT,

Taking the above circumstances into account, we consider it fair and equitable to
award to Claimant at least a portion of the Costs of the Arbitration and its incurred
costs, notwithstanding that Claimant has not prevailed on most of its claims

The Tribunal therefore, in its discretion, awards Claimant EUR 300,000 towards its
incurred costs.

‘SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioul v. Republic of Tajikistan

120. As Claimant has not requested interest on costs, in accordance with Section 42 of the
‘Swedish Arbitration Act, no interest shall be awarded.

121. We find further that Respondent should reimburse to Claimant fifty percent (50%) of
the Costs of the Arbitration (which are set out below in Section 122 below).

122. The Costs of the Arbitration have been determined by the SCC Arbitration Institute to
be EUR 524,977 and SEK 8,125, comprised of the following:

SCC Arbitration institute:
Administrative Fee EUR 49,083
Expenses EUR 14,312
Expenses SEK 6,125

Tribunal's Fees and Expenses:

Jeffrey Hertzfeld
Fees. EUR 200,000
Expenses EUR 3,479
Per Diem Allowance EUR 600
Dr. Richard Happ
Fees EUR 120,000
Expenses EUR 5,970
Per Diem Allowance EUR 1,050
Prof. Ivan Zykin
Fees EUR 120,000
Expenses EUR 8,983
Per Diem Allowance EUR 1,500

123, In accordance with Article 43(6) of the SCC Arbitration Rules, the Parties are jointly
and severally liable to the arbitrators and the SCC Institute for the Costs of the
Arbitration. As between the Parties, Respondent shall reimburse Claimant EUR
262,488 plus SEK 4,063 in accordance with para. 121 supra.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

E. The Decision

For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal now decides as follows:

I The Republic of Tajikistan is ordered to pay ta Mohammad Ammar AlBahloul
EUR 300,000, in reimbursement of a portion of Claimant's incurred costs in con-
nection with the arbitration under Article 44 of the SCC Arbitration Rules.

" The Parties are jointly and severally liable for payment of the Costs of the Arbitra-
tion under Article 43 of the SCC Arbitration Rules, The Costs of the Arbitration are
determined to be EUR 524,977 and SEK 8,125, comprised of the following:

SCC Arbitration Institute

Administrative Fee EUR 49,083
Expenses EUR 14,312
Expenses SEK 8,125

Tribunal's Fees and Expenses:

Jeffrey Hertzfeld
Fees EUR 200,000
Expenses EUR 3,479
Per Diem Allowance EUR 600
Dr. Richard Happ
Fees EUR 120,000
Expenses EUR 5,970
Per Diem Allowance EUR 1,050
Prof. Ivan Zykin
Fees EUR 120,000
Expenses EUR 8,983

Per Diem Allowance EUR 1,500

31

‘SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v, Republic of Tajikistan

The Costs of the Arbitration will be drawn from the advances paid to the SCC Insti-
tute.

As between the Parties, the Republic of Tajikistan is ordered to reimburse
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul the amount of EUR 262,488 plus SEK 4,063 as a
portion of the Costs of the Arbitration under Article 43 of the SCC Arbitration
Rules.

m. All other claims and requests for relief of elther Party are denied.

Pursuant to Section 41 of the Swedish Arbitration Act (SFS 1999: 116), the Parties are in-
formed that any action against this Award regarding the payment of compensation to the
arbitrators shall be brought before the Stockholm District Court within three (3) months
from the date upon which a Party received the Award.

Place of Arbitration: . Sweden
Date of Award: June 2010

   
 

TS

Dr. Richard Happ
Co-Arbitrator

  

Pr Ivan Zykin
bitrator

dB M. Hertzfeld

Chairman

