ARBITRATION INSTITUTE OF THE STOCKHOLM CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
CASE No. V (064/2008)

 

IN THE MATTER OF THE ARBITRATION

MOHAMMAD AMMAR AL-BAHLOUL

REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN

 

PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION AND LIABILITY

 

Vil.

VuUL

 

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

 

 

 

 

Table of Contents
THE PARTIES. \
THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL 2
3
FACTUAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE BASED ON CLAIMANT'S EVIDENCE AND
ALLEGATIONS 17

 

 

SUMMARY OF CLAIMANT'S POSITION...

A, Application of the Energy Charter Treaty............

 

B. Alleged Breaches of the Energy Charter Treaty...

C. Relief Claimed 37

SUMMARY OF RESPONDENT'S POSITION ON JURISDICTION (LETTER OF 3/3/09).......s.00:0000 40

 

INTRODUCTION TO THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS...

 

JURISDICTION AND APPLICABLE LA’

A. Bxistence of an Arbitration A 46

 

 

B. Claimant as an Investor under the Treaty...

 

C. Existence of an Investment in the Area of the Contracting Party...uessseseve

 

D. An Alleged Breach of an obligation under Part LI! of the BCT...

 

E. Significance of Cooling-Off Period in Article 26 (2) ECT...

F. Forum Selection. 55

 

LiaBILIry - THE MERITS OF CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS UNDER THE ECT.

 

A, Attribution of Conduct to the State.

 

B, Fair and Equitable Treatment under Article 10 (1) ECT.

 

i, Inconsistency or lack of transparency in the issuance of licenses and visas...

 

a. Licenses under the Exploration Agreements

 

 

b. Issuance of Licenses to the Two Joint Venture Companies..................:00006 165
c. Issuance of Travel Visas....... +167
ii Failure to Meet Legitimate Expectations in the Issuance of Licenses .. 21667
a. Legitimate Expectations under the December 2000 Exploration Agreements.........69
b. Legitimate Expectations regarding the Two Joint Venture Companies. 71

 

XL.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Babloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

 

iii, Due Process and/or Denial of Justice

 

P

 

Breach of Due Process in the Baldjuvon Proceedings. -
Breach of Duc Process in the Petroleum SUGD Procecdings.........:::sserecseesee 678

 

b.

¢. Breach by Malicious Misapplications of Law in the Petroleum SUGD
Proceedings.......s.sereesereeee

d. Breach of Due Process ss by Failure to Issue Licens: seen BL

 

Breach by virtue of Meeting of Minister of Energy with Third Party interested
in the Tajik Oil Sector......
C. Most Constant Protection and Security under Article 10(1) ECT......

 

 

 

D. Unreasonable and Discriminatory Measures under Article 10(1) ECT
E. Treatment Less Favourable than Required by International Law under Article 10(1) ECT 87

F. Obligations Undertaken towards Investors under Article 10(1) ECT...

 

i. Breach of the November 1998 Agreement...

 
 

ii, Breach of the four December 2000 Agreements .... al
iii. Failure to Issue Licenses to the Joint Venture Companies in breach of the Joint Venture
Agreements and in Disregard of Presidential Decree NO. 83-r. 90

 

G. National Treatment under Article 10(7) ECT...

 

H. Expropriation in violation of Article 13 ECT...

COSTS OF THE ARBITRATION

 

DECISION! 97

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

L. THE PARTIES

I. Claimant:
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul, an Austrian citizen residing at 104
Mariahilferstrasse, Vienna, Austria A-1070, (hereinafter “Claimant”)

Claimant has becn represented in this arbitration by his attomeys,
Professor Adnan Amkhan, with offices at Mariahilfer Str. 104, A-1070
Vienna, Austria and Dr. Kriedrich Schwank, with offices at the Stock
Exchange Building, Wipplingerstrasse 34, A-1010 Vienna, Austria,
pursuant to a power of attomey signed by Claimant on June 5, 2008.

2. Respondent:
The Republic of Tajikistan (hereinafter “Respondent”)

Respondent has been served in this arbitration by registered airmail and by
electronic mail to the attention of the President of the Republic of
Tajikistan and the Minister of the Ministry of Energy and Indusiry at the

following addresses:

The President of the Republic of Tajikistan
Office of the President, Prospekt Rodaki 42, 734025 Dushanbe, Tajikistan
mail@president.tj), and

The Minister of the Ministry of Knergy and Industry of the Republic of
Tajikistan
10 Bohtar Street, 734025 Dushanbe, Tajikistan (energo@rs.1j).

Respondent did not appear before the Tribunal either directly or through a

representative, although duly served with all notices, plcadings, orders and
other communications. On March 3, 2009 the Minister of the Ministry of

Page |

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Energy & Industry of the Republic of Tajikistan wrote to inform the SCC
Institute that Respondent contested jurisdiction of the Institute and sought
dismissal of the Request for Arbitration (see hereinbelow at paragraphs 45-
47.

3. Claimant and Respondent are collectively referred to herein as the

“Parties.”

Il. THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

4. In his Request for Arbitration dated May 30, 2008 (the “Request”),
Claimant appointed Dr. Richard Happ, a national of Germany, as his party-
appointed arbitrator. Dr. Happ’s mailing address is Luther
Rechtsanwaltsgesellschaft mbH, Gansemarkt 45, 20354 Hamburg,

Germany.

3 The Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (the
“SCC Institute”), on June 3, 2008, forwarded the Request to Respondent to
the attention of the President of the Republic and the Minister of the
Ministry of Energy and Industry and requested an Answer by June 17,
2008. This period was subsequently extended to June 29, then to July 14
and finally to July 25, 2008.

6. Upon Respondent’s failure to submit an Answer or otherwise appear and
failure to appoint an arbitrator in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of
the SCC Institute (the “Rules”), the SCC Institute notified the Parties by
letter of August 13, 2008 of the appointment by the Board of the SCC
Institute of Professor Ivan S. Zykin, as co-arbitrator on behalf of
Respondent, and Mr. Jeffrey M. Hertzfeld, as Chairman of the Tribunal.

Page 2

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar AJ-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Professor Zykin is a national of the Russian Federation. His mailing
address is Andrey Gorodissky & Partners, ul. Znamenka 13, Bldg. 3, 3!
floor, 119019 Moscow, RF.

Mr. Hertzfeld is a national of the USA, His mailing address is 5,
Boulevard Malesherbes, 75008 Paris, France.

Each of the arbitrators signed a declaration confirming his impartiality and
independence of the Parties,

II. PROCEDURE

10.

This arbitration has been brought by Claimant on the basis of the Energy
Charter Treaty (the “ECT” or the “Treaty”), a multilateral convention
which was signed in December 1994 and entered into effect on April 16,
1998 and whose stated purpose is to establish “a legal framework in order
to promote long-term cooperation in the energy field, based on
complementarities and mutual benefits, in accordance with the objectives
and principles of the Charter.” (Article 2), Austria became a party to the
ECT on December 16, 1997 and the Republic of Tajikistan on June 25,

1997, upon the deposit of their instruments of ratification.

Part III of the ECT sets out the obligations of Contracting States with
respect to the promotion, protection and treatment of investments of
investors of other Contracting States. Claimant alleges that Respondent
violated a number of these obligations to his detriment and to the detriment
of his investment in the Republic of Tajikistan. The substance of these

claims is discussed in detail later in this Award.

Article 26 of Part V of the ECT provides for the settlement of “Disputes
between a Contracting Party and an Investor of another Contracting Party

Page 3

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

relating to an Investment of the latter in the Area of the former, which

concern an alleged breach of an obligation of the former under Part IIT...”

Article 26(2) provides, in relevant part, that “Jf such disputes can not be
famicably settled] within a period of three months from the date on which
either party to the dispute requested amicable settlement, the Investor
party to the dispute may choose to submit it for resolution... ¢) in

accordance with the following paragraphs of this Article.”

Article 26(4) goes on to provide, in relevant part, that “Jn the event that an
Investor chooses to submit the dispute for resolution under subparagraph
(2)(c), the Investor shall further provide its consent in writing for the
dispute to be submitted to... (c) an arbitral proceeding under the
Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce.”

Article 26(3)(a) states: “Subject only to subparagraphs (b) and (c) [note:
not here relevant|, each Contracting Party hereby gives its unconditional
consent to the submission of a dispute to international arbitration or

conciliation in accordance with the provisions of this Article.”

Article 26(5)(a)(ii) states: “The consent given in paragraph (3) together
with the written consent of the Investor given pursuant to paragraph (4)

shall be considered to satisfy the requirement for:...(ii) an “agreement in

 

writing” for purposes of article LI of the United Nations Convention on the

Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards...”

Claimant asserts that he is entitled to the protection of the Treaty and the
benefit of the above provisions with respect to settlement of disputes
arising under Part IIT of the Treaty, as a national of Austria and an Investor

in Tajikistan pursuant to one or more of the following agreements and their

Page 4

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

implementation:

a. A June 5, 1998 “Gencral Agreement on geological exploration and
operation works on the projects of the Republic of ‘Tajikistan,
perspective for Hydrocarbon raw material (oil, gas),” between
Claimant and the State Committee for Oil & Gas of the Republic of
Tajikistan (hereafter the “State Committee”) regarding joint
exploration work in the Kashkakum area (hereafter the “June 1998
Agreement”).

b. A November 10, 1998 “Treaty on geological exploration and operation
works on the project of Alimtay in the Republic of Tajikistan,
perspective for Hydrocarbon raw material (oil, yas),” between
Claimant and the State Committee regarding joint exploration work in
the Alimtay area (hereafter the “November 1998 Agreement”).

c. A March 8, 2000 Agreement of Association aimed at creating a joint
venture to be called “Baldjuvon” for the purpose of “increasing oil and
gas extraction from the currently operating bores...in the South part of
the Republic of Tajikistan,” entered into by Petroleum and Gas Vivalo
International Co., Ltd., (hereinafter “Vivalo”), a Bahamian company
allegedly established and wholly owned by Claimant, ' on the one side,
and the State Committec, on the other, with a total authorized capital of
US$976,426, of which 60%, or US$585,856, was to be contributed by
Vivalo within a year (hereafter the “March 2000 Baldjuvon

Agreement”),

Petroleum & Gas Vivalo International Co,, I.td. was incorporated in the Commonwealth of
the Bahamas on October 6, 1998.

Page 5

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v, Republic of Tajikistan

d. A further March 8, 2000 Agreement of Association signed by the same
parties on similar tcrms aimed at creating a second joint venture to
operate in the Northern part of the Republic, with a total authorized
capital of US$3,940,125, of which 60%, or US$2,364,075, was to be
contributed by Vivalo within a year (hereafter the “March 2000
Northern Agreement”).

e. Four December 25, 2000 “Treaties on geological exploration and
operation works,” signed by Claimant and the State Committee with
respect to the East Soupetau area, the Rengan area, the Sargazon area
and the Yalgyshak area, respectively, each on similar terms as the
November 1998 Agreement referred to in subparagraph (b) above
(hereafter referred to collectively as the “December 2000

Agreements”).

f. A June 27, 2001 Constitutive Agreement and Charter of LLC
Baldjuvon (hereafter “Baldjuvon”), signed by Vivalo and the Southern
Oil & Gas Producing Subsidiary Enterprise (hereafter “SNG”) of the
State Unitary Enterprise “Tajikneftegaz,” with a view to “increasing
oil and gas recovery from the hydrocarbon fields now in operation in
the terrain of the Baldjuvon region of Republic of Tajikistan with:
Beshtentyak, Souldouzy, Uzunakhor” (hereafter the “June 2001
Baldjuvon Founding Documents,” collectively, or the “June 2001
Baldjuyon Constitutive Agreement” and “June 2001 Baldjuvon
Charter,” separately). The authorized capital is US$2,000,000 of
which Vivalo is to contribute 60% (US$1,200,000) within a year

g. A June 28, 2001 Constitutive Agreement and Charter of LLC
Petroleum SUGD (hereafter “SUGD”), signed by Vivalo and the
Subsidiary Enterprise “Sugdnaftugas” of the State Unitary Enterprise

“Tajikneftegaz” with a view to “increasing oil and gas recovery from

Page 6

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

the hydrocarbon fields now in operation at the terrain of the SUGD
area...” {(hereaficr the “June 2001 SUGD Founding Documents,”
collectively, or the “June 2001 SUGD Constitutive Agreement” and
“June 2001 SUGD Charter,” scparately). The authorized capital is
US$5,000,000 of which Vivalo is to contribute 60% (US$3,000,000)
within a year.

h. A January 17, 2003 Agreement between Vivalo and
Gazpromgeocomservice (RF) pursuant to which
Gazpromgcocomservice agreed to perform, pursuant to a scparate
US$4 million credit agreement and a certain technical program (neither
of which is in evidence), works to be defined at oil fields of Baldjuvon
and SUGD (hereafter the “January 2003 Gazprom Agreement”),

While exploration and exploitation licenses were issued pursuant to the
June 1998 Agreement in respect of the Kashkakum area and the November
1998 Agreement in respect of the Alimtay area, the licenses called for by
the four December 2000 Agreements were never issued to Claimant.
Moreover, according to Claimant’s testimony, no licenses were ever issued
to the Baldjuvon joint venture company and licenses were only issued to
the Petroleum SUGD joint venture company on December 20, 2002, and
then were kept secret from Vivalo until March 14, 2003.

The essence of Claimant’s claim is that the non-issuance of licenses under
the four December 2000 Agreements and the late issuance or non-issuance
of licenses for the two joint venture companies, required under Tajik law
for the conduct of oil and gas activities and promised by government
officials, frustrated the projects in which Claimant had invested and had
contracted to invest, either directly and through his wholly owned
company Vivalo, and deprived Claimant of his investment and of his

reasonable profit expectation therefrom.

Page 7

20.

21.

22.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

On February 9, 2003, Claimant wrote, on Vivalo letterhead, to Mr. A.
Yorov, Minister of the Ministry of Energy of Tajikistan putting him on
notice that the applied-for licenses had not been issued, requesting their
urgent issuance, and informing him that he had contacted the ECT
Secretariat who advised friendly negotiations before any action. There is
no evidence in the record of any response from Mr. Yorov or anyone else

in his ministry.

On February 23, 2003, Claimant wrote, again on Vivalo letterhead, to the
President of the Republic, asking for his intervention with the Ministry of
Energy to obtain the necessary licenses, and indicating that arbitration
would otherwise be commenced under the ECT in Stockholm. There is no

evidence in the record of any response to this letter.

On March 14, 2003, the Tajik Economie Court of the SUGD region
rendered a decision, in an action brought by the Tajik partner in Petroleum
SUGD against Vivalo, approving a reduction of the capital of Petroleum
SUGD to the level of the parties’ actual contributions. The Court found
that, while the Tajik partner had paid its share in full, Vivalo had
contributed only US$473,235, which corresponded to 9,46% of the total
capital. Claimant asserts, in this arbitration, that the Tajik Economie Court
proceeding was conducted without due process in violation of his rights
under the ECT and that his appeal from the Court’s decision was
wrongtully rejected by the appellate court on spurious procedural grounds

in further violation of the ‘Treaty.
As regards Baldjuvon, Claimant has testified that the company was

liquidated due to the non-payment of the balance of the Vivalo share of the

authorized capital and that his investment was therefore lost.

Page 8

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Claimant commenced the present arbitration with the filing of its Request
for Arbitration, dated May 30, 2008, with the SCC Institute.

As indicated in paragraph 5 above, the SCC Institute forwarded the
Request on June 3, 2008 to Respondent and, in accordance with the SCC
Rules, requested an Answer to the Request by June 17, 2008. This period
was subsequently extended to June 29, then to July 14, and finally to July
25, 2008.

In the absence of any response from Respondent, the SCC Institute by
letter of August 13, 2008 informed the Parties of the SCC Board’s decision
that the Tribunal shall consist of three arbitrators, the names of whom
appear in Section II above. The SCC Board fixed the seat of arbitration as
Stockholm and established the amount of the advance on costs to be paid
by the Parties in equal shares.

On September 12, 2008, after Claimant had paid his share of the advance
on costs and agreed to establish a bank guarantee covering Respondent’s
unpaid share, the SCC Institute forwarded the file to the Tribunal and set
March 12, 2009 as the date of the final award. Claimant subsequently paid

in cash Respondent’s share of the advance.

By Procedural Order No. 1, issued on September 17, 2008, thc Tribunal
proposed that a l’reparatory Meeting be held at the address of the
Chairman in Paris on October 13, 2008 to discuss the procedural rules and
calendar for the proceedings. The Tribunal invited the Parties to inform it
by September 24 if the proposed place for the meeting was inconvenient
for cither of them, noting that Article 20 of the SCC Rules allows the
Tribunal, after consultation with the Parties, to decide to conduct hearings

al any place which it considers appropriate.

Page 9

28.

29.

30.

31.

33.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

By letter of September 24, 2008, Dr. Schwank confirmed Claimant’s
participation at the proposed meeting in Paris. Respondent failed to

respond or express any view.

Having consulted the Parties, the Tribunal issued its Proccdural Order No.
2 on September 26, 2008, confirming the meeting as proposed and

 

hing a ive list of procedural issues for discussion at the meeting.
The Tribunal noted in its Order that, in accordance with Article 30(2) of
the SCC Rules, the failure of a party to appear at a hearing without a
showing of good cause will not prevent the ‘Iribunal from proceeding.

By email addressed to the Parties on October 1, 2008, the Tribunal asked
the Parties to indicate the names of the persons who will participate on
their behalf at the Preparatory Meeting.

On October 3, 2008, the Tribunal sent a further correspondence to
Respondent (with copy to Claimant) as a final notice of the Preparatory
Meeting, encouraging Respondent to confirm its participation and to
indicate the names of the persons who will attend on its behalf by no later
than October 10, 2008. This letter, together with further copies of the
previously served Procedural Orders No. 1 and No. 2 and the email of
October 1, 2008, were sent both by email, in pdf format, and by DHL to
Respondent.

The Preparatory Meeting took place as scheduled on October 13, 2008 in
Paris, and was attended on behalf of Claimant by Professor Amkhan
(counsel), Dr. Schwank (counsel) and Ms. Merran Loewenthal (assisting
both counsel). Respondent did not appear.

The meeting proceeded on the basis of the list of issues previously

circulated. The procedural decisions and instructions resulting from the

Page 10

34,

35.

36.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

meeting were set forth in Procedural Order No. 3 issued on October 17,
2008. Among other things, the Tribunal established a timetable for further
submissions and alternative dates for final hearings, depending on whether
or not Respondent subsequently decided to appear in the arbitration.
Claimant requested that English should be the language of the arbitration.
The Tribunal invited comments from Respondent on this question by
October 31, 2008

On November 4, 2008, not having received any comments from
Respondent regarding the language of the arbitration, the ‘I'ribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 4, confirming English as the language of the

arbitration.

Procedural Order No. 3 provided that Claimant’s Statement of Claim
(hereafter “SOC”) was due on December 5, 2008. On December 3,
Claimant requested an extension of time until December 19, 2008. On
December 4, the Tribunal invited Respondent to comment by December
11 on the request for an extension. Having received no comments from
Respondent, the Tribunal granted the extension pursuant to a Procedural
Order No. 5.

On December 17, 2008, Claimant asked for a further extension until
January 16, 2009 to complete and file its SOC, indicating that it was still
awaiting the arrival of crucial documents from ‘Tajikistan and the
completion of crucial expert witness statements in Tajikistan. The
Tribunal, by its Procedural Order No. 6, granted the requested extension,
while at the same time extending at its own initiative Respondent’s
corresponding time period to submit its Statement of Defence (hereafter
“SOD”), and rescheduling the final hearings from April 2009 to June 3-5,
2009 (as the dates that would apply in the event of Respondent's failure to
submit an SOD).

Page 11

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Following a request made by the Tribunal to the SCC Institute for an
extension of time to render the award, and the SCC Institute’s request for
comments by the Parties, the SCC Institute notified the Tribunal and the
Parties by letter of January 14, 2009 that the date for the final award was
extended to September 30, 2009.

On January 14, 2009, counsel for Claimant made one further request for an
extension until January 23, 2009 for the filing of its SOC, which it stated
was due to difficulties encountered in finalizing an cxpert report in
Tajikistan.

By Procedural Order No. 7 issued on January 15, 2009, the Tribunal
granted this final extension, and extended in like manner until April 24,
2009 the time period for Respondent to file its SOD.

Claimant served his SOC by email on January 23, 2009. There was some
delay in delivering the hard copy of the SOC with its exhibits due to

customs clearance difficulties.

Claimant stated in his SOC that he wished to submit an expert report in
support of his alleged damages at a later date. In order not to delay the
arbitration proceedings, and in order not to prejudice Respondent’s full
opportunity and time period to reply to the quantum evidence once
submitted, the Tribunal decided in a Procedural Order No. 8 issued on
February 2, 2009 to bifurcate the proceedings and to hear in the initial
phase only the issue of liability. Respondent was instructed that it may
therefore limit its forthcoming SOD to the issue of liability.

On Vebruary 4, 2009, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order No. 9
instructing Claimant to provide by February 15, 2009: a) proof of dispatch

Page 12

43.

SCC Arbitration No, V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar AI-Bahloul v, Republic of Tajikistan

of the hard copy of the SOC and its exhibits to Respondent, b) English
translations of certain exhibits which were in Russian only, and c) copies

of two exhibits in the list of exhibits which were found to be missing.

On February 13, 2009, Claimant served the missing and untranslated
documents referred to above. Claimant subsequently provided proof of the
timely dispatch of the SOC and its exhibits to Respondent.

Claimant submitted three witness statements with its SOC, as follows:

a) Claimant’s own witness statement dated February 11, 2009.

b) The statement of Mr. Mohammad Khasky, a Russian citizen, holding a
master’s degree in mechanical engineering from studies in Moscow. He
served as a technical director of Vivalo and as Chairman of the Board of
Petroleum SUGD, appointed by Vivalo, during the period 1999-2003. He
was not regularly involved in any activity of the Baldjuvon joint venture,
His statement is dated Belarus, February 11, 2009. It was submitted in
English, but was originally prepared by Mr. Khasky in Arabic. At the
hearing, signed copies of both versions were presented and confirmed by
Mr. Khasky.

¢) The statement of Mr, Faizullo Nasrulloyey, a Tajik lawyer, who
represented Vivalo in connection with the Petroleum SUGD appeal and the
Baldjuvon court proceedings in Tajikistan. His statement is referred to as
an expert opinion, and indeed he opines on questions of Tajik law and
practice. But he is also a fact witness recounting his involvement in the

fi ioned court p di Llis was submitted in a
Russian original with an English translation, dated January 22, 2009. Mr.
Nasrulloyev did not appear at the hearing. According to counsel, Mr.

Nasrulloyev feared for his safety. Without drawing any conclusions as to

Page 13

45.

46.

47.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

the legitimacy of his concerns, the Tribunal decided to admit his written
statement, given that Respondent was not, in any event, present to cross-
examine him, The Tribunal noted, however, that the weight that would be
given to his statement would be affected by the fact that the Tribunal had
had no opportunity to question him.

On March 3, 2009, the Minister of the Ministry of Energy of the Republic
of Tajikistan wrote a letter on behalf of Respondent to the SCC Institute,
with copy to Dr. Sct ik, Claimant’s rep ive in this arbi

which was received and acknowledged by the SCC Institute on March 17,
2009. The SCC Institute informed Respondent that, at this stage in the
proceedings, it should communicate directly with the Arbitral Tribunal,

and forwarded a copy of the Minister’s letter to the Tribunal.

Respondent, in its above-mentioned letter, challenged the right of the SCC

Institute to accept jurisdiction over the present dispute and, citing Article 7
of the 1999 SCC Rules, requested the SCC Institute to reject Claimant’s
Request for Arbitration because of clear evidence that the Institute does
not have jurisdiction over the dispute. Article 7 corresponds to Article 10
of the current Rules, which entered into effect as of January 1, 2007 and
which apply to this arbitration, Respondent’s arguments are set forth
below in Section VI of this Award.

In its March 3, 2009 letter, Respondent expressly stated that its letter
should not be considered “as an opinion to the claim to the petition, as
provided for in Article 21 of the said Regulation.” Article 21 of the 1999
SCC Rules corresponds to Article 24(2) of the current Rules, which refers
to Respondent’s SOD. Therefore, the Tribunal understands it to be
Respondent’s intention that its letter of March 3, 2009 shall not be
construed as an acceptance on its part to participate in these arbitration

proceedings,

Page 14

48.

49.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

On March 18, 2009, the Tribunal wrote to Respondent to the attention of
the Ministry of Energy and Industry and the President of the Republic of
Tajikistan, confirming receipt of a copy of the Minister’s letter of March 3,
2009 and indicating that the issue of jurisdiction together with the issue of
liability will be addressed by the Tribunal in the first phase of this
arbitration. The Tribunal indicated that it would in this connection address
the points made by Respondent in its March 3, 2009 letter. The Tribunal
invited Claimant to comment on Respondent’s jurisdictional arguments by
April 3, 2009 and reminded Respondent that it has been given, pursuant to
the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 7, until April 24, 2009 the opportunity
to submit an SOD in response to Claimant’s SOC of January 23, 2009.

On April 1, 2009, Claimant’s counsel submitted a letter to the Tribunal,
with copy to Respondent, commenting on the points raiscd in

Respondent’s letter of March 3, 2009.

On April 10, 2009, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 10 together
with two attachments, being i) an agenda for a pre-hearing telephone
conference to be held on May 12, 2009 and ii) a request to Claimant to
identify by May 22, 2009 the documentary evidence on which he will rely
in respect of certain specified issues. Noting that the time for Respondent
to submit its SOD had elapsed and that no submission or request for an
extension of time had been reccived, the Tribunal decided that it would
proceed with the arbitration in the absence of Respondent on the basis of
Article 30(2) of the SCC Rules and Section 24(3) of the Swedish
Arbitration Act which provides that the unexcused failure of a party to
submit a SOD or to appear at a hearing, or otherwise avail itsclf of the
opportunity Lo present its case, shall not prevent the Tribunal from
continuing with the proceedings and rendering an Award. The hearings to
be held in Stockholm from June 3-5, 2009 on the bifurcated issue of

Page 15

51.

52.

53

54.

5S.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

liability were therefore confirmed and a pre-hearing telephone conference
was confirmed for May 12, 2009.

The pre-hearing conference call took place as scheduled on May 12, 2009,
with the participation of representatives of Claimant. Respondent did not
call in or notify as to its unavailability. Minutes of the conference call
were issued on the same day. One correction to the minutes was requested
by Claimant and adopted on May 13, 2009.

Pursuant to the Tribunal’s request referred to in paragraph 50 above,
Claimant submitted to the Tribunal, with copy to Respondent,
supplemental exhibits on the issues that had been specified by the

Tribunal.

The hearings took place as scheduled during the period June 3-5, 2009.
The ‘Jribunal heard opening and closing statements of Claimant’s counsel
and took the testimony of Messrs. Al-Bahloul and Khasky. No

 

P' ive of Respond Pr d. The f dings were transcribed

by court reporters and a copy of the transcript was subsequently sent by
the Tribunal to both Parties.

On June 8, 2009, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order No. 11 closing
the evidence in this phase of the arbitration related to jurisdiction and
liability, giving Claimant until Junc 15 to submit its statement of costs to
date and to send copies of any exhibits marked at the hearing to
Respondent, and giving Respondent until July 15 to submit its comments
(but no new evidence) on the hearing transcript, the documents submitted

in evidence at the hearing, and Claimant’s statement of costs.

On June 15, 2009, Claimant submitted ils statement of costs for the period
August 2006-June 2009, which totalled 1,464,582.60 euros, consisting of

Page 16

56.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

legal representation (980,000 euros), arbitral expenses (SCC registration
fee, the advance deposits and bank charges) (358,582.60 euros) and
incurred expenses (126,000 euros).

No comments or submissions were made by Respondent on July 15, 2009
or thereafter.

The Tribunal has now deliberated and renders the present Partial Award.
The Tribunal has at the same time requested the SCC Institute to grant an

extension of time for rendering the Final Award.

IV. FACTUAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE BASED ON CLAIMANT’S
EViDENCE AND ALLEGATIONS

58.

59.

Claimant, Mr. Al-Bahloul, was born in Syria in 1962. He studied business
management at a university in Vienna, Austria, where he graduated in
1985 and thereafter established a business of his own engaged in
marketing and trading. He acquired Austrian citizenship on June 27, 1997
through the Austrian naturalization process and at all times since then has

continued to be an Austrian citizen and resident.

In 1997, Claimant met with the commercial representative of Tajikistan in
Austria and was presented with a catalogue of investment projects issued
by the Tajik government, including investments in the oil and gas sector.
‘This led to a trip to Dushanbe in the summer of 1998 at the invitation of
Prime Minister Azimov of Tajikistan during which Claimant expressed an
interest in investing in the field of exploration and production of oil and
gas. This in turn was followed by several meetings with Mr. Rakhmanoy,
Chairman of the State Committee for Oil & Gas, during which more

detailed discussions took place.

Page 17

60.

61.

62.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

Mr. Al-Bahloul’s discussions resulted in the signing of the June 1998
Agreement on oil and gas exploration and thereafter the November 1998
Agreement on oil and gas exploration with the State Committee. These
agreements contemplated geological exploration and operations in the oil
and gas sector in Tajikistan, in the first case in the Kashkakum area and in

the second case in the Alimtay area.

The terms of the two Agreements were almost identical. Claimant was to
provide at his risk and expense the necessary equipment and materials and
was to have the right to delegate and transfer his obligations and rights and
to attract and contract with any firm inside or outside Tajikistan to fulfil
the work. According to Article 7 of the Agreements, the Tajik party
committed, among other things, “to provide all necessary exhaustive
geological and technological material to Austrian Party Experts”, and “to
ensure the License to carry out solely and exclusively geological
explorations, and natural resources exploitation works and activities in
[Kashkakum, Alimtay] area.” It was further provided that these areas
could be extended in the future as may be determined.

On August 1, 1998, less than two months after the signature of the June
1998 Agreement, an exploration license for the Kashkakum area was
granted to Claimant signed by the Prime Minister on behalf of the
Government of the Republic of Tajikistan. Thereafter, on May 24, 1999,
some six months after signature of the November 1998 Agreement, the
Prime Minister issued a second license to Claimant for oil and gas
exploration in the East Alimtay area for the period May 6, 1999 to May 6,
2004. According to Claimant’s testimony, it had been decided that the
Alimtay area was more promising, and that work would commence there

rather than in Kashkakum.

Page 18

63.

64.

65.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

After obtaining the May 24, 1999 license, according to Claimant’s witness
statement and testimony, he began work in the Alimtay arca on the re-
drilling of an uncompleted but conserved well. However, after having
invested certain funds in the operation and having pursued the work for a
period of time in cooperation with the local ‘Tajik workers, Claimant
reached the conclusion that the operation would not succeed because of the
inadequate technology and level of experience of the Tajik side. He
therefore interrupted further work and sealed the well at some point early
in 2000.

Discussions then took place with the Prime Minister and the State
Committee and, in the context of the rising international oil prices in carly
2000, they agreed with Claimant to a new approach which involved setting
up joint venture entities for oil and gas exploration and production both in
the northern and southern parts of the country together with the State
Committee. Claimant was to have a controlling interest. This led to the
signing of the two March 2000 Agreements between Vivalo (signed by
Claimant as its General Director) and the State Committee, which
contemplated the founding of two joint ventures with Vivalo and the State
Committee as Founders. (See subparagraphs 17(c) and (d) above.) ‘The
March 2000 Agreements were not accompanied by any corporate charter
and no joint venture was in fact registered pursuant to these Agreements.
However, they do appear to have been at the origin of further negotiations
which led to the signature of the joint venture agreements concluded by

Vivalo and two State-owned Tajik production associations in June 2001.

On September 22, 2000, the President of Tajikistan issued Decree No, 397
entitled “About the establishment of Tajik and Austrian joint ventures
construction of a petroleum refinery.” The Decree approved a proposal of
the State Committee on the establishment of the Baldjuvon joint venture,

with the Tajik production association “Leninabadneftegas” as a 40%

Page 19

66.

67.

68.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

shareholder and the “Austrian company” Vivalo holding 60%? The
activity of Baldjuvon was to be based on the Baldjuvon gas and oil fields
and the construction of a petroleum refinery with refining of 500 thousand
tons of crude oil per year was envisaged for the Khatlon region. The
Decree stated that the designing, manufacturing and purchasing of
necessary equipment and material and their transportation for the
construction of the refinery is to be funded by Vivalo. Finally, the Decree
instructed the State Committee to prepare the necessary constituent
documents with Vivalo for registration, to determine with the Chairman of
the Khatlon region the place for construction of the refinery, and to supply

Vivalo with the necessary technical specifications.

According to Mr. Khasky’s testimony, the refinery project was not pursued
because the joint venture was unable to obtain access to the production of
the Khatlan region where the refinery would have been located, and

therefore the project made no economic sense.

Three months later, on December 25, 2000, Claimant and the State
Committee signed four more agreements on exploration and production,
ie. the December 2000 Agreements, which extended Claimant’s right to
oil exploration and production beyond the Kashkakum and Alimtay areas
to the East Soupetau area (in Northern Tajikistan), and the Rengan area,
the Sargazon arca and the Yalgyshak area (all in Southern Tajikistan not
far from Alimtay), respectively, on essentially the same terms as the earlier

exploration agreements.

On June 27 and 28, 2001, the Baldjuvon Founding Documents and the

Petroleum SUGD Founding Documents were signed. Baldjuvon was

Vivalo was in fact a Bahamas company, but is mistakenly identified here as Austrian. It seems
it was understood to be a special purpose vehicle established by Claimant, an Austrian
national.

Page 20

69.

70.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

finally registered on October 26, 2001 and Petroleum SUGD on November
9, 2001, and at that point came into existence as limited liability
companies under Tajik law. These agreements appear to have replaced the
two March 2000 Agreements in that they substituted state-owned Tajik
production enterprises for the State Committee as Founders and modified
the originally contemplated level of capital contributions to be made by the
parties. (See subparagraphs 17(f) and (g) above).

It will be useful to cite here certain key provisions of the two Constitutent
Agreements and Charters which are virtually identical, but for the identity
of the ‘lajik participant, the level of authorized capital and the territory of
operation within Tajikistan (all of which have already been indicated in

subparagraph 17(f) and (g) above).

The Constituent Agreements provided in relevant part:

Article 3.2: “Each of the Partners undertakes to pay his share into the
Joint Venture’s fund within a year in full.”

Article 3.4: “A decision to alter i.e. to increase or decrease the Authorized
Registered Capital, shall be taken at the General Meeting of the

Partners...”

Article 3.5: “Paying-up of contribution may be effected in form of:
money resources in national or hard currency;
Buildings, facilities, equipment, inventory and other material assets,

Propriety interest on any property, including intellectual one.”

Article 4.3: “Clear profit of Joint Venture is to be apportioned among the

Partners in proportion to their contributed share.”

Page 21

71.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Article 6.1: “The supreme managerial control body of Joint Venture is

General Meeting of the Partners.”

Article 6.3; “Authority of the managerial control bodies and delimitation

of their competence are defined in the Statute.”

Article 7.2: “This Agreement has been concluded for an unspecified

term.”

The Charters provided in relevant part:

Article 1.5: “Joint Venture is considered as created from the date of its
registration in the Registration Office and in its activity is guided by the
Civil Code of the Republic of Vajiki. the legislative Act of the Repub

of Tajikistan ‘About the Foreign Investments’, as well as by other legal

 

and standard acts and enactments of the Republic of Tajikistan, decisions

of the Partners, and this Statute.”

Article 2.1: “The basic purpose of creation of Joint Venture is to benefit by
way of:

Increasing the recovery of vil and gas from the oil and gas fields now in
operation on the territory of the Baldjuvon region of the Republic of
Tajikistan: Beshtentyak, Souldouzy, Uzounakhor;?

Recovery of oil and gas and trading in that at the world prices both within
the confines of the Republic of Tajikistan and beyond its boundaries;
Executing exploration work in the areas that are promising of
hydrocarbon resources;

Intake of advanced technologies for recovery of oil and gas and for

execution of exploration work.”

In the case of SUGD, this paragraph simply reads: “...0n the territory of the SUGD area of
the Republic of Tajtkistan.”

Page 22

72,

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/208)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

Article 2.3: “Joint Venture is entitled to engage itself into the activity
which is to be licensed the moment the license is granted, in compliance
with the condition of and for the term of validity as indicated in the

license.”

Article 4.4: “Ion expiry of the second and each subsequent fiscal year the
cost of clear assets of Joint Venture comes to be less than the Authorized
Registered Capital, Joint Venture is obliged to declare and register
decrease of its Authorized Registered Capital following the procedure of
the Statute. If the cost of the indicated assets becomes less than the
minimal extent of the Authorized Registered Capital, Joint Venture

becomes subject to liquidation.”

Article 7.2: “Joint Venture can be liquidated:
Due to systematic violation of provisions of the Laws of the Republic of
Tajikistan in force and of valid provisions of this Stutute,

Due to money-losing state of Joint Venture.

Article 7.5: “All the financial assets of Joint Venture, including sales
proceeds from the property left after effected settlements with the budget
and money lenders, should be transferred to full command of the

Partners.”

Despite the creation of the two joint venture companies, according to
Claimant’s testi > continui and technical probl

were encountered throughout 2002. According to Mr. Khasky, Vivalo's
technical manager and Chairman of Petroleum SUGD, the ‘Tajik partner
put all 1000 of its employees on the joint venture payroll, when only 300
had been agreed to by Vivalo; held the joint venture responsible for

payment of unpaid wages, taxes and debts incurred before its creation; cut

Page 23

73.

74.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Ai-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

off electricity from the oil wells; burdened the joint venture with the
obligation of providing public utilities, such as water supply, to the city;
and insisted that Vivalo continue to invest, despite the fact that no licenses
had been issued after repeated requests to and promises by the Ministry of
Energy.’ As a result of these conditions, Claimant finally sealed the
existing wells that Petroleum SUGD had been drilling and ceased

incurring further costs.

No exploration activity was ever carried out in the four additional areas
covered by the four December 2000 Agreements. Claimant asserts that
this was due to Respondent’s failure to provide the necessary licenses
despite its commitment to do under Article 7 of each of those Agreements.
He cites his letter request to Minister of Energy Yorov on April 30, 2002
to issue licenses for the above four areas so that he could engage a foreign
team and mobilize foreign technology. He also stated in that Ictter that he
has financed exploration works in Alimtay in the amount of $830,000 but,
because of the problems encountered, has not proceeded to work in

Kashkakum, Claimant asserts that he received no response to this letter.

Finally, in late 2002, President Rakhmonov of the Republic of Tajikistan
adopted Necree No, 83-r dated November 4, 2002 providing as follows:

 

“Tn compli with Regulations of Ge of Republic of Tajikistan
from December 30, 2001, No. 591 “About the order of licensing of activity
and services in the sphere of energy of Republic of Tajikistan” and on the
hasis of the proposal of the Ministry of Energy of the Republic of
Tajikistan allow the Ministry of Energy of the Republic of Tajikistan to
issue, in accordance with the established procedure, the license for search,

exploring, production and processing of oil and gas in the fields of

According to the evidence submitted, the State Committee in 2001 was subsumed into the
Ministry of Energy,

Page 24

75.

76.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Nijazbek — North Karachicum, Madanijat, Makhram, North Karatau,
Kanibadam, North Kanibadam, Ravat of Kanibadam district of Sogdijsk
region, and also in the fields of Cel-Rokho, Iritan, Obi-Shifo of Isfarinsk
district of Sogdijsk region to “Petroleum SUGD Limited.” It may be
noted that the areas referred to in the four December 2000 Agrccments are

not mentioned in this Decree.

At the December 12, 2002 Board meeting of Petroleum SUGD, Mr.
Khasky, Chairman of the Board, and indeed all of the Board membcrs,
expressed dissatifaction with the business to date. According to the
testimony of Mr. Khasky, while the licenses had still not been issued, work
was nonetheless taking place in the ficld, but at unsatisfactory performance
levels. Mr. Khasky proposed during the meeting that Vivalo's remaining
share of authorized capital, which had not to date been paid, should be paid
in by way of deliveries of equipment, material assets and services, through
a service contract which it had negotiated with the Russian company,
Gaspromgcocomservice, rather than fully in cash as originally
contemplated. This proposal was adopted by the vote of the Vivalo
directors to the Petroleum SUGD Board, since they held the necessary

majority.

‘Three days later, a General Meeting of the Petroleum SUGD sharcholders
was held, presided by Mr. Khasky. Invited guests included among others
Mr. Saidrahmanov, Deputy Minister of linergy; Mr. Mustafakulov,
Tepresentative of the Ministry of Justice; Mr. Nosimov, Trade
Representative of the Republic of Tajikistan in Austria. At the mecting,
the Tajik shareholder as well as the representatives of the Ministry of
Energy and the Ministry of Justice stated that Vivalo had failed to
complete its full contribution into the authorized capital, having
contributed only $455,725. The Deputy Minister of Energy also stated

that the Government’s decision to build an oil refinery was not being

Page 25

77.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

implemented (although, it may be noted, this related to Baldjuvon, not
Petroleum SUGD). The Vivalo representative, Mr. Khasky, replied that
Petroleum SUGD had not received the necessary licenses from the
Government, and that the capital it had so far invested had gone to solve
problems of payment of wages and taxes, and acquisition of equipment
rather than to develop the activity of the venture.

The Tajik shareholder moved that the authorized capital of Petroleum
SUGD be reduced to reflect the actual contributions of the partics, i.c. $2
million for the Tajik party and $455,724 for the forcign party, and that it
be recognized that in order to protect its right and interests in line with
Tajik legislation, the Tajik party is entitled to appeal to the Tajik
Economie Court. This motion was voted down by Vivalo, having the
majority vote. Mr. Khasky made a handwritten notation on the Protocol of
the meeting as follows: "We shall provide our share in the statutory fund
in full after receiving a license and holding a founding meeting in early
February 2003.”

Shortly after the above meeting, Sugdnettegaz, the Tajik partner, brought
an action against Vivalo before the Economic Court of the Sugdskaya
District seeking the annulment of the decision of the December 15 Annual
Meeting and the reduction of the authorized capital of Petroleum SUGD.
The hearing of the case was first scheduled for January 28, 2003 but was
postponed to February 3, then I’ebruary 13, February 27, March 5 and
finally took place on March 14, 2003. It is alleged that Vivalo requested a
further one-day extension until March 15, due to the absence of a visa for
Claimant, and that this request was denied. This being said, according to
Mr. Khasky’s testimony, he was in the Court building on March 14, but
did not attend the hearing. It was on that occasion that he encountered the
Tajik Trade Representative to Austria, who showed him and later gave him

copies of a serics of licenses issued by the Ministry of Energy to

Page 26

28.

79.

80.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Petroleum SUGD dated December 20, 2002, but not previously disclosed

to him.

In the meanwhile, Claimant had written a further letter to the Minister of
Energy on February 9, 2003 requesting once again the issuance of the
licenses, referring to Presidential Decree No. 83-r, and requesting
cessation of the Court action, Again, according to Claimant’s testimony,

there was no response.

At around this time, a letter was sent by a third party, an Austrian
individual by the name of Dr. Schenz, who was formerly employed as
CEO of Vivalo, to the Minister of Energy proposing a mecting to explore
investment possibilities in Tajikistan’s oil & gas sector during a
forthcoming trip to Dushanbe. Dr. Schenz is now a principal in an
Austrian company called Austrian Energy Partners, which appears to have
become a participant in Petroleum SUGD. Claimant raises a claim against

Respondent for alleged misconduct in this connection.

Finally, in a letter of February 25, 2003, Claimant appealed directly to the
President of the Republic, referring to Claimant’s existing investment in
Alimtay and the alleged lack of cooperation to date from the Tajik side,
and requesting the President’s intervention with the Minister of Energy in
order to obtain long-term licenses for which, he said, application had been
made more than six months earlier but without results. Claimant pointed
out that without such licenses no investment in oil production could be
legally carried out in ‘Tajikistan, and that if the licenses were not granted
he would have no alternative but “to apply to the international court in
Stockholm...” and “report to the Energy Treaty Charter and the
faternational Monetary Fund...”. There is no evidence in the record of

any response to this letter.

Page 27

81.

82.

83.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Following the March 14, 2003 court hearing referred to in para. 77 above,
a decision was rendered, holding that the shareholder decision taken at the
December 15, 2002 Annual Meeting was void, that the authorized capital
of Petroleum SUGD should be decreased to reflect the actual contributions
of the parties, and that the General Assembly of Petroleum SUGD should
implement the appropriate changes to the constituent documents and

register them.

Mr. Nasrulloyev alleges that the appeals filed by Vivalo from this court
decision were wrongfully rejected by the appellate instances without
regard to due process standards. In particular, he asserts that although the
appeal was filed within one month as required by law, the appellate court
untruthfully maintained that the filing was not in time. A further appeal in
cassation is said to have been rejected because of late payment of state
duties, a fact which Mr. Nasrulloyev contests. Finally, an application for
supervisory review to the Chairman of the Supreme Economic Court was
declined, although he acknowledges that such recourse is of a discretionary

character.

According to Mr. Nasrulloyev’s written statement, there had also been a
Board Meeting of Baldjuvon on December 15, 2002, although the protocol
of that mecting is not submitted in evidence. Mr. Nasrulloyev states that
an action was filed on August 29, 2003 by the Tajik shareholder, SNG,
with the Supreme Economic Court to declare the Decision of the
December 15, 2002 meeting invalid. He asserts that the court ignored the
lateness of the action which according to Article 49 of the Law on Limited
Liability Companies could only be brought within two months from the
date of the decision, in cases such as this where the participant in the

company knew or should have known about the decision.

Page 28

84.

85.

86,

87.

88.

89.

SCC Arbitration No, V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

The hearing in the Baldjuvon court action was set for September 22, 2003,
but postponed until January 6, 2004, Then, according to Mr.
Nasrulloyev’s statement, without notifying Vivalo, the court decided to
advance the hearing that had been scheduled and to hold it instead on
December 15, 2003, At that hearing, the Court upheld the Tajik parter’s
application. An appellate hearing took place on February 11, 2004, which
upheld the lower court decision. Supervisory review was denicd.

In the interim, according to Mr. Nasrulloyev, a General Meeting of
Baldjuvon took place on Novemiber 28, 2003. in the absence of the forcign
investor, at which a decision was taken to expel the foreign investor from

the company.

At this point, the Ministry of Finance and the Tajik partner jointly filed an
action against Vivalo in the Economie Court to have Baldjuvon LLC
declared as a failed enterprise.

Mr. Nasrulloyev brought a counterclaim in that action seeking to have the
November 28, 2003 decision declared void and to oblige the Ministry of
Energy to grant licenses to Baldjuvon.

Scveral hearings were set in the Baldjuvon case — on February 25, 2004,
March 5, 2004, and March 31, 2004. On each occasion, according to Mr.
Nasrulloyev’s testimony, he received notice of the hearing only hours
before the hearing was to take place, making it impossible for him to
attend, A decision was rendered on April 2, 2004 granting the Ministry's
and the Tajik partner’s application and denying Vivalo’s.

Mr, Nasrulloyey filed an appeal from this decision, which was apparently

rejected at a court hearing on June 25, 2004, a hearing which he maintains

Page 29

90.

91

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

was notified lo him only on July 2, 2004, that is, after the hearing had
already taken place.

There is no documentary evidence on the record to explain what has
transpired after this date and prior to the commencement of this arbitration
with respect to either of the joint venture companies. According to
Claimant’s testimony, Petroleum SUGD has continued to operate without
his receiving any information on its activity. In paragraph 45 of
Claimant’s SOC, he refers to the website www.cnergypartners.al,
According to that websitc, another Austrian company, LPA
Beteiligungsgesellschalt now operates Petroleum SUGD, and Dr. Schenz,
mentioned earlier, appears as one of the principal persons in that company.
Claimant believes that Baldjuvon was liquidated, but has submitted no

evidence of this,

Mr. Nasrulloyev has expressed the opinion that gross violations of
substantive and procedural law have been committed by the Tajik
Economic Courts by virtue of the foregoing circumstances, which have
caused the wrongful expulsion of Vivalo from Baldjuvon and the wrongful
reduction of its share in Petroleam SUGD.

V. SUMMARY OF CLAIMANT’S POSITION

92.

A. Application of the Energy Charter Treaty

Claimant asserts that he is entitled to the benefit of the investor protection
provisions of the Energy Charter Treaty, as an Austrian citizen who has
made an Investment, within the meaning of the Treaty, both directly and
through his wholly-owned Bahamian company, Vivalo, in the energy
sector in the territory of the Republic of Tajikistan, noting that both
Austria and Tajikistan are signatories to the Treaty.

Page 30

93.

94.

95.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of ‘Vajikistan

An “Investment” is defined in Article 1(6) of the ECT to mean:

“Every kind of asset, owned or controlled directly or indirectly by an
Investor and includes:

(a) tangible and intangible, and movable and immovable, property, and
any property rights such as leases, mortgages, liens and pledges;

(b) a company or business enterprise, or shares, stock or other forms of
equity participation in @ company or business enterprise, and bonds and
other debts of a company or business enterprise;

(c) claims to money and claims to performance pursuant to contract
having an economic value and associated with an Investment;

(d) intellectual property;

(e) returns;

() any right conferred by law or contract or by virtue of any licences and
permits granted pursuant to law to undertake any Economic Activity in the

Energy Sector”

“Economic Activity in the Energy Sector” is defined in Article 1(5) of the
ECT to mean “an economic activity concerning the exploration,
extraction, refining, production, storage, land transport, transmission,
distribution, trade, marketing, or sale of Energy Materials and
Products...” “Energy Materials and Products” are defined in Annex EM
of the ECT and include “Petroleum oil and oils obtained from bituminous
minerals, crude” (para. 27.09 of the EM Annex) and “Liguified petroleum
guses and other gaseous hydrocarbons...” (para, 27.11 of the EM Annex),

Claimant alleges that Respondent breached its obligations owing to him as
an Investor, under Part lof the Treaty; that Claimant duly informed
Respondent of the alleged breaches of obligations; and despite the passage

of anumber of years, no resolution has been reached.

Page 31

96.

97.

98.

SCC Arbitrativn No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Therefore, Claimant asserts that he has properly invoked the jurisdiction of
this Arbivral Tribunal established under the Rules of the Arbitration
Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, in accordance with
Article 26 of the ‘lreaty, to resolve the dispute.

While Claimant's counsel maintain that Respondent acted in violation of
Tajik law in its dealings with Claimant, they stress that this is relevant in
the present arbitration only as a matler of evidence and fact, and that the
basis for Claimant’s legal claims in this arbitration is that Respondent
violated its Treaty obligations under the ECT and principles of
international law. In this connection, Claimant also relies on the
provisions of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969) and
the UN International Law Commission’s Draft Articles on Responsibility
for Internationally Wrongful Acts.

B. Alleged Breaches of the Energy Charter Treaty

The obligations which Claimant asserts have been violated by Respondent
are contained in Article 10(1) and (7) and in Article 13 of Part III of the
Treaty, entitled “Promotion, Protection and Treatment of Investments”. It

is useful to set forth these provisions, in relevant part, here:

“Article 10 Promotion Protection and Treatment of Investments
(1) Kach Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions of this

Treaty, encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and

 

spa ditions for I of other Ce ing Parties to make
Investments in its Area. Such conditions shall include a commitment ta
accord at all times to Investments of Investors of other Contracting Parties
fair and equitable treatment, Such Investments shall also enjoy the most
constant protection and security and no Contracting Party shall in any

way impair hy unreasonable or discriminatory measures their

Page 32

SCC Arbitration Nu, V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v, Republic of Tajikistan

management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal. in no case shall
such Investments be accorded treatment less favourable than that required
hy international law, including treaty obligations. Each Contracting Party
Shall observe any obligations it has entered into with an Investor or an

Investment of an Investor of any other Contracting Party.”

“ (7) Each Contracting Party shall accord to Investments in its Area of
Investors of other Contracting Parties, and their related activities

ludi use, or disposal,
treatment no less favourable than that which it accords to Investments of
its own Investors or of the Investors of any other Contracting Party or any
third state and their related activities including management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal, whichever is the most

favourable,"

“Article 13 Expropriation

(1) Investments of Investors of a Contracting Party in the Area of any
other Contracting Party shall not be natonalized, expropriated or
subjected to a measure or measures having effect equivalent to
nationalization of expropriation (hereinafier referred to as

“Expropriation”) except where such Expropriation is,

(a) for a purpose which is in the public interest;

(h) not discriminatory;

(c) carried out under due process of law; and

(d) accompanied by the payment of prompt, adequate and effective

compensation.

Such compensation shail amount to the fair market value of the Investment

expropriated at the time immediately before the Expropriation or

Page 33

99.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

impending Expropriation became known in such a way as to affect the

value of the Investment (hereinafter referred to as the “Valuation Date").

(3) For the avoidance of doubt, Expropriation shall include situations
where a Contracting Party expropriates the assets of a company or
enterprise in its Area in which an Investor of any other Contracting Party

has an Investment, including through the ownership of shares.”

In particular, Claimant claims that:

(a) Respondent has failed to create stable, cquitable, favourable and
transparent conditions for Claimant’s investment, in breach of Article
10(1) above, which, according to Claimant, is factually interlinked with

Respondent’s failure to accord fair and equitable treatment;

(b) Claimant’s investments were not accorded fair and equitable treatment,
in breach of Article 10(1) above, Claimant alleges in support of this
position: (i) inconsistency and lack of transparency in Respondent’s
behaviour on the matter of granting licenses and in refusing Claimant entry
visas at a later stage of the investment necessary in order to attend to his
business and to defend his investment in judicial proceedings; (ii) failure
to issue the necessary licenses which were legitimately expected by
Claimant on the basis of the exploration agreement, the provisions of the
two joint venture agreements, Presidential Decrees No, 397 and 83-r , and
the continuing assurances of the Minister of Energy; (iii) the constant
failure by Respondent to observe the fundamental principle of due process
in the Tajik court actions, as evidenced by Mr. Nasrulloyev’s witness
statement: and (iv) the mecting between the Minister of Energy and a third
party on February 16, 2003 to discuss future investment in Petroleum
SUGD a month before the decision of the SUGD court on March 14, 2003.

Page 34

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v, Republic of Tajikistan

(c) Claimant’s investments were not accorded constant protection and
security, in breach of Article 10(1) above. In this connection, Claimant
refers to Mr. Khasky’s testimony to the effect first, that demands were
made by Tajik sccurity forces for immediate cash payments for alleged
debts incurred by the predecessor to the Petroleum SUGD joint venture
and second, that the Tajik directors of Petroleum SUGD told him that they
could not guarantee his personal safety if he failed to support their
proposal to reduce Vivalo’s share of the joint venture’s authorized capital.
In addition, Claimant maintains that the alleged miscarriages of justice by
the Tajik courts in reducing Claimant's shareholding in Petroleum SUGD
and in dissolving Baldj ituted | hes of the obligation of full

 

protection and security;

(d) Claimant’s investments were impaired by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures affecting its management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment or disposal, in breach of Article 10(1) above. In particular,
Claimant here relics on the facts referred to above in connection with the
fair and equitable treatment obligation, as well as the denial of the
opportunity (by refusing licenses) to commence drilling operations as
agreed upon in the explorations agreements; negating promises concerning
the provision of qualified local expertise for Alimtay drilling operations,
insisting on the use of obsolete government-owned drilling equipment:
denying entry visas to Claimant in order to manage his business affairs;
and frustrating the Gazpromgcocomservice Service Contract first, by not
issuing the necessary licenses and second, by proceeding to dissolve
Baldjuvon and reduce Vivalo’s shareholding in Petroleum SUGD, thus
affecting the use and enjoyment of the investment.

(e) Claimant’s investments were subject to treatment less favourable than

that required by international law, in breach of Article 10(1) above. As
regards the Baldjuvon joint venture, Claimant points to the Tajik Court’s

Page 35

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

decision of December 15, 2003 to hear the claim of the Tajik shareholder
ten months after the expiry of any right to appeal the December 15, 2002
Board decision; the rendering of the decision without informing Vivalo,
the other shareholder; and the failure to notify Vivalo or its legal
representative of a hearing on April 2, 2004 thus depriving it of the right to
be heard. As regards Petroleum SUGD, the court’s failure to postpone the
March 14, 2003 hearing by one day to allow Vivalo’s representative to
attend; the dismissal of appeals for no apparent legal reason; and the
misapplication of relevant Tajik law in reaching the decision to reduce

Vivalo’s share interest in the joint venture.

(f) Respondent has breached its obligation to observe the obligations it has
entered into with the Investor and the Investor’s Investment, pursuant to
Article 10(1) above. Here, Claimant refers to (i) the failure of the State
Committee for Oil & Gas to observe Respondent’s contractual obligations
under the Alimtay Exploration Agreement by failing to cooperate with
Claimant by providing the promised expertise and otherwise facilitate the
exploration activities pursuant to the Agreement; (ii) the failure of the
State Committee for Oil & Gas to issue the licenses necessary to allow
Claimant to commence his cxploration activities with respect to the East
Soupetan, Rengan, Sargazon and Yalgyzkak areas, covered by the
December 2000 Agreements which, in turn, prevented Claimant from
exploiting the commercial possibilities and attracting additional funding
which was crucial for making the exploration a success: and (iii) the
failure of the Ministry of Energy to issue the necessary licenses which
would have allowed Vivalo lo continue its investment in the Baldjuvon
and/or Petroleum SUGD joint ventures, in breach of the joint venture

agreements and in disregard of Presidential Decree No. 83-r.

(g) Claimant’s investments were accorded treatment less favourable than

that accorded to national investors and Investors of other Contracting

Page 36

100.

101.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Parties to the ECT, or any third State, in breach of Article 10(7).
Specifically, Claimant argues that it was a breach of the national treatment
standard to permit the Tajik party of the two joint ventures to receive 40%
of the share capital in return for outdated machinery, equipment and other
tangibles, while refusing Vivalo the opportunity to contribute its share of
authorited capital in anything other than cash.

(h) Finally, it is argued that Claimant’s investments were subject to
measures equivalent to expropriation in breach of Article 13 above, by
virtue of Respondent’s (i) failure to issue exploration licenses with respect
to the four December 2000 Agreements; (ii) failure to issue the necessary
licenses with respect to the Baldjuvon joint venture and the subsequent
dissolution of the joint venture by the Supreme Court of Tajikistan on
application of the Ministry of Finance; (iii) failure to issue the necessary
licenses with respect to Petroleum SUGD, and the subsequent forced
reduction of Vivalo’s share interest in the joint venture; and (iv) the failure
of Respondent to offer to pay Vivalo dividends from production of oil and
gas products in respect of its reduced share in Petroleum SUGD since
March 14, 2003.

Claimant relies on the principles of attribution contained in the UN Draft
Articles on Responsibility for Internationally Wrongful Acts for the
principle that the State is responsible for the acts and omissions of the
Government, including its executive, legislative and judicial branches, and

its administrative authorities.

C. Relief Claimed

Claimant in his SOC has asked the Tribunal to render an award in the
following manner (paras. 243.1-243.14 SOC):

Page 37

°

°

°

°

°

°

SCC Arhitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

declaring that the Republic has breached its obligations under Articles
10(1), 10(7) and 13 of the ECT;

declaring that Respondent has breached its obligations owed to
Claimant under the various agreements, joint ventures agreements, and

under Tajik law;

ordering the Republic to issue the necessary licences for the
exploration areas agreed upon in the six exploration agreements,
namely: Yalgyzkak, East Soupetan, Rengan, Sargazon, Alimtay and
Kashkakum.

ordering the Republic to reinstate the Baldjuvon Joint Venture and
reinstate Vivalo’s shares at their original share of 60%;

ordering the Republic to issue the necessary licences for the reinstated

Baldjuvon Joint Venture;

ordering the Republic to reinstate Vivalo’s shares in the “Petroleum

Sugd” Joint Venture at their original share of 60%;

ordering the Republic to issue the necessary licences for the reinstated

“Petroleum Sugd” Joint Venture;

awarding Claimant compensatory damages of USD 830,000 in respect
to the Alimtay Exploration Agreement, or such sum as the Arbitral

Tribunal deems just and proper compensation;

awarding Claimant compensatory damages of USD 5,923,000 in
respect to the “Baldjuvon” Joint Venture, or such sum as the Arbitral

Tribunal deems just and proper compensation;

Page 38

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

awarding Claimant compensatory damages of USD 73 million with

°

respect to “Petroleum Sugd” Joint Venture, or such sum as the Arbitral

Tribunal deems just and proper compensation;

o awarding to Claimant both pre-award and post-award interest at the
minimum rate of interest specified in the EU Directive 2000/35/EC
dated 29 June 2000 on combating late payment in commercial

transactions;

© an order reserving the right to review the compensatory sums awarded
to Claimant with respect to “Baldjuvon” and “Petroleum Sugd” Joint
Ventures in the event that more information becomes available
concerning the volume of oil and gas production in both or either of
the Joint Ventures;

o awarding to Claimant the costs of the arbitration in their entirety,
including Claimant's own legal fees and expenses, the fees and
expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal and the fees of the Arbitration
Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce; and

°

awarding to Claimant such further or other relief, as may be deemed

appropriate.

Subsequent to submission of the SOC, the Tribunal decided to bifurcate
the proceedings and reserve the issue of quantum of damages and/or other
remedies for a possible second phase and to limit the first phase of the
proceedings to the issues of jurisdiction and liability. Claimant, at the
hearings, therefore limited his request to the Tribunal for the first phase of

the proceeding to an award as follows:

a) declaring that the Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and decide

upon all of Claimant’s claims;

Page 39

103.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

b) declaring that Respondent has breached its ECT obligations under
Articles 10(1), 10(7) and 13, and

c) awarding Claimant the costs incurred by him for this first phase of the
arbitration proceedings, including Claimant’s own legal fees and all other

expenses.

In light of the bifurcation, the Tribunal accepts Claimant’s limited request

in respect of the first phase of the proceedings as formulated above.

VI. SUMMARY OF RESPONDENT’S POSITION ON JURISDICTION (LETTER OF
3/3/09)

104.

105.

Respondent’s defence in this arbitration has been limited to a challenge to
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction set forth in a Ictter addressed by the Minister of
the Ministry of Energy and Industry of the Republic of Tajikistan on
March 3, 2009 to the SCC Institute, with copy to Dr. Schwank, Claimant’s
representative, and referred to in paragraphs 45-47 of this Award.

Respondent argues that this ‘I'ribunal has no jurisdiction over the present

dispute for the following reasons:

There is, according to Respondent, no written agreement between the
Parties submitting the dispute to arbitration before the SCC Institute,
whereas Article 5 of the SCC Rules (Respondent crroneously referred to
the April 1, 1999 Rules, but the present Rules have not fundamentally
altered the cited provision) requires the Request for Arbitration to include
a copy of the relevant arbitration agreement. Morcover, Respondent

argues, Articles 26 and 27 of the ECT also requires a written agreement

Page 40

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

between the disputing parties,

A ding to Respond the Foundation A on creation of
Petroleum SUGD dated Junc 28, 2001 and signed by the unitary enterprise
“Sugdneftegaz (Republic of Tajikistan), Petroleum and Gas Babylon
International Co. Ltd. (Commonwealth of Bahamas) and “EPA
Betailingungsgezellshaft” (Republic of Austria) contains a provision in
Article 8 that disputes between the company and any legal and natural
persons, including foreign persons, are to be considered in accordance with
the laws of the Republic of Tajikistan. Moreover, Article 7 of the “joint
agreement” of the Petroleum SUGD signed by the partics of the company
on April 3, 2003 provides that any disputes between the founders and
between the company and other legal and natural persons, including
foreigners, shall be resolved by the Supreme Economic Court of the
Republic of Tajikistan in accordance with the law of the Republic of
‘Tajikistan. In accordance with Article 22 of the Tajik Law “On Foreign
Investments,” investment disputes between the parties to the investment
activities arc resolved in accordance with the terms of the agreements

between the parties.

Respondent further relics on the following provisions of the Tajik Code of
Economic Proceedings [Civil Procedure Code] and asserts that only the
economic courts of the Republic of Tajikistan have the power to hear cases
involving foreign entities in disputes related to State-owned asscts: Article
26, Article 34 and Article 227.

Respondent believes that the SCC Institute should have rejected, and asks

that it now reject, the request for arbitration because of the absence of clear

evidence of jurisdiction.

Page 41

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/208)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

VIL INTRODUCTION TO THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

106.

107.

108.

109,

110.

By Procedural Order No. 8, the Tribunal bifurcated the present arbitration,
and decided to render an award in the first instance on the questions of
jurisdiction and liability, leaving the question of remedies and quantum for

a later stage as the case may be.

Therefore, the Tribunal’s analysis set out in Sections VIII and TX below of
this Award is limited to the question of jurisdiction pursuant to the ECT
and to determination of whether or not Respondent has breached any
obligations invoked by Claimant, as specified in Section V.B and V.C

above.

Respondent, in its letter of March 3, 2009 referred to in Section VI above,
has challenged the jurisdiction of the SCC Institute as an arbitral
instilution competent to deal with the present dispute. Consequently, it has
implicitly challenged as well the jurisdiction of this Tribunal appointed
pursuant to the SCC Rules. The Tribunal addresses Respondent’s
arguments in its discussion of the question of jurisdiction in Section VI

below.

In its analysis of both jurisdiction and merits, the Tribunal has considered
not only the positions of Claimant as summarized in Section V but also the
numerous detailed arguments in support of those positions made at the
hearing and in the written memorials. To the extent that these arguments
are not referred to expressly, they must be deemed to be subsumed in the

analysis.
Counsel for Claimant have done an able job setting forth the legal

standards that they contend are applicable in determining whether a breach

of obligations has occurred in violation of the investor protections set out

Page 42

111

112.

113,

SCC Arhitratian No. V (064/2008).
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul vy, Republic of ‘Vajikistan

in Part III of the ECT. They have submitted ten volumes of prior arbitral
decisions, scholarly articles, and other legal materials bearing on the
interpretation of the provisions of the ECT and similar provisions of other
investment protection treaties, And they have made clear written and oral

presentations on the Treaty and applicable international law.

The jurisprudence of prior cases, while of course not binding on the
Tribunal, has been very helpful. However, the Tribunal has kept two
considerations in mind. First, while investment treaties tend to be broadly
similar in the protections they provide, they are not identical, and it is our
duty to interpret the specific text of the ‘I'reaty before us. Secondly,
general statements of principle from prior arbitral decisions cannot be
taken in a vacuum; they are made in a particular factual context which may

or may not be comparable to the case before us.

As Claimant has correctly pointed out, in accordance with Article 31 of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969, “A treaty shall be
interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be
given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in light of its object and
purpose.” We have been guided by this principle in interpreting the
Treaty.

The principal difficulty we have encountered in the present case relates not
to the law or the applicable legal standards, but to the factual evidence
submitted in support of Claimant’s legal positions. The Tribunal has
repeated on a number of occasions during this arbitration that Claimant
bears the burden of proving the factual allegations essential to support its
legal claims, notwithstanding Respondent’s non-appearance in the
proceedings. Although Swedish law, the applicable procedural law in this
arbitration, does not contain any specific statutory provisions dealing with

allocation of the burden of proof or rules concerning the standard of proof

Page 43

114.

115.

116,

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

required, it is generally accepted that a party who raises a claim needs to

prove the circumstances which form its legal and factual basis.

With respect to many of Claimant’s claims, the Tribunal has found the
evidence to be too limited, circumstantial, unsubstantiated or insufficiently
substantiated to permit the Tribunal to draw the factual conclusions

advocated by Claimant, even accepting Claimant’s legal arguments.

Claimant has represented to the Tribunal that extensive efforts were made
to obtain further documentary cvidence in support of his case, but were not
successful since such evidence is located in Tajikistan where Claimant and
his representatives no longer have access to it. While the Tribunal can
understand that currently Claimant may have no or very limited access to
documents in Tajikistan, this does not allow the Tribunal to make far-

reaching assumptions to the detriment of Respondent.

Beyond the letters written by Claimant or Vivalo to Government officials
and the witness statements of Claimant and Claimant’s representatives
prepared for and submitted in this arbitration, the factual evidence in this
case has been essentially limited to the following: i) the agreements
themselves which gave rise to Claimant’s investments, ii) copies of the
licenses in fact issued by Respondent in connection with certain of those
agreements, iii) copies of board and/or shareholder minutes of Petroleum
SUGD relating to the December 2002 and February 2003 meetings, iv)
copy of the decision of the SUGD economic court of March 14, 2003, v)
copies of the Presidential Decrees No. 83-1 and No. 397, and vi) various
extracts of Tajik legislation. There is not a single letter, telefax, email or
other communication emanating from the Tajik Government or either of
the Tajik partners in the two joint venture companies to flesh out the

matters in dispute. Nor has the Tribunal seen a copy of any of the joint

Page 44

117.

118.

119,

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

venture applications for licenses, which were allegedly made and which

were allegedly rejected or delayed by Respondent.

As a result, the Tribunal has before it a very fragmentary picture, making it
difficult without engaging in considerable speculation to draw affirmative

conclusions with respect to many of Claimant’s factual allegations.

Finally, it is recalled that Claimant’s Tajik legal expert, Mr. Nasrulloyev,
who had submitted a witness statement in this arbitration along with
materials on Tajik law, failed to appear to testify at the hearings, on the
ground that he feared for his safety in Tajikistan if he were to do so. The
Tribunal has no concrete information on which to evaluate this explanation
for Mr. Nasrulloyev’s no Nonetheless, after di ion with

counsel at the hearings, the Tribunal decided to admit the witness

 

statement of Mr. Nasrulloyev, with the reservation that its weight as
evidence would be affecicd by the fact that the Tribunal had not had an
opportunity to pose questions to him about his statement. The Tribunal
also noted at that time that Mr. Nasrulloyev, in light of his representation
of Vivalo in the court proceedings in Tajikistan related to this dispute,
does not qualify as an independent expert. As the Tribunal indicated, his
report has a “mixed” character, being in part a legal opinion on principles
of Tajik law and in part a fact witness statement with respect to the
conduct of the Tajik court proceedings in which he was personally
involved. (See subparagraph 44(c) above).

Thus, the Tribunal has made its findings of fact as set forth in this award

taking into account the evidence submitted and giving that evidence the

weight which the Tribunal considers appropriate.

Page 45

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v, Republic of Tajikistan

VIII. JURISDICTION AND APPLICABLE LAW

120.

121,

123.

A. Existence of an Arbitration Agreement

Submission of the present dispute to the jurisdiction of a tribunal
established under the SCC Rules requires an arbitration agreement
between the Parties to that effect. Respondent in its letter of March 3,
2009 (see Section VI above) contends that such an agreement does not
exist. Respondent cites Articles 26 and 27 of the ECT as requiring a
written arbitration agreement between the disputing parties, but notes that
Claimant himself is not a party to the ECT, although it is not disputed that
the Republic of Tajikistan became a Contracting Party to the ECT upon its
deposit of instruments of ratification on June 25, 1997. Respondent further
cites the SCC Rules as requiring Claimant to produce such an arbitration

agreement with its Request for Arbitration.

Article 26 of the ECT deals with disputes between an Investor and a
Contracting Party. Article 27, on the other hand, deals with disputes

between Contracting Parties themselves, and is therefore not here relevant.

It is widely recognized in international arbitral law and practice that the
dispute settlement clause in an investment treaty between two or more
signatory States constitutes an “offer,” which a qualified investor may
“accept” by filing a claim. With the acceptance of the offer, an arbitration

agreement comes into existence.

 

agreement in writing is expressly provided for in Article 26, and, most

As regards the L’ such a mechanism for mecting the requirement of an

 

relevant to the present case, by the provisions contained in Article
26(2)(c), (3)(a), (4)(c) and (5)(a)(ii). According to those provisions
(quoted earlier in this Award at paras. 13-16), Tajikistan as a Contracting

Page 46

124.

125.

126.

127,

128.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Party to the Treaty has given its unconditional consent to the submission to
international arbitration by an “Investor” of a dispute arising under Part III
of the Treaty.

Moreover, pursuant to the above-mentioned provisions, Tajikistan has
agreed that such an Investor may, by expressing its written consent to do
so, choose to submit such dispute relating to its “Investment” in the “Area”
of the Republic to an arbitral proceeding under the Rules of the Arbitration
Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce.

Claimant, by his letter of May 16, 2008 attached as part of Annex 14 to its
Request for Arbitration in the present case, gave his written consent to
arbitrate his dispute consisting of claims based on Part III of the ECT
before the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce.

According to Article 26(5)(a)(ii) of the Treaty, the consent given by the
Republic of Tajikistan and the consent given by the Investor-Claimant,
referred to in the preceding paragraphs, satisfy the requirement for an
arbitration agreement in writing for purposes of Article II of the New York
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral

Awards.

The SCC Rules provide that Claimant’s Request for Arbitration shall
include “a copy or description of the arbitration agreement or clause
under which the dispute is to be settled.” (SCC Rules, Article 2(iv))
Paragraph 42 of Claimant’s Request for Arbitration provided such a
description and quoted the text of Article 26 of the ECT.

Thus, a valid arbitration agreement exists, subject to determining whether

Claimant is an “Investor” within the meaning of the Treaty and whether

Page 47

129.

130.

131.

132.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

the dispute relates to his “Investment” within the “Area” of Respondent, as

those terms are defined in the Treaty.

Claimant as an Investor under the Treaty

Claimant has alleged that he is a citizen of Austria. Austria is a
Contracting Party to the ECT by virtue of the deposit of its instruments of
ratification on December 16, 1997. Pursuant to Article 1(7) of the ECT, an
“Investor” for purposes of the Treaty includes “a natural person having
the citizenship or nationality of or who is permanently residing in that
Contracting Party (that is, a Contracting Party other than the host State of

the Investment] in accordance with its applicable law.”

As proof of his Austrian nationality, Claimant has submitted a copy of his
Austrian passport and his 1997 certificate of naturalization (he was born in
Syria). (See paragraph 58 above). Nationality certificates and passports
are considered to constitute prima facie proof of nationality. There is
nothing in the record to cast doubt on the authenticity or validity of these

documents.

‘Thus, the Tribunal considers it to be established that Claimant is an
Austrian national and thus qualified to be considered as an “Investor” of a
Contracting Party to the ECT, other than Tajikistan.

As the naturalization certificate dates from 1997, ic. before the first
alleged investment was made in June 1998, Claimant would also have
qualified as an Investor under the Treaty at the time of making his alleged

investment (whether one considers this to be necessary or not).

Page 48

Cc

133.

134,

135.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahlou] v. Republic of Tajikistan

Existence of an Investment in the Arca of the Contracting Party

A dispute exists between Claimant and the Republic of Tajikistan, as
presented by Claimant in his Request for Arbitration and in his SOC.
However, the Treaty requires that the dispute relate to an “Investment” in
the “Area” of the Contracting Party.

Pursuant to Article 1(6) of the ECT (cited supra, in its entircty, at para. 93
supra), the following are among the assets included within the term
“Investment”:

“kvery kind of asset, owned or controlled directly or indirectly by an
Investor and includes:

(a) tangible and intangible, and movable and immovable, property and
any property rights...,

(b) ...shares, stock or other forms of equity participation in a company or
business enterprise...,

(c) ...claims to performance pursuant to contract having an economic

value and associated with an Investment;

@)...any right conferred by law or contract or by virtue of any licences and
permits granted pursuant to law to undertake any Economic Activity in the
Energy Sector.

‘Investment’ refers to any investment associated with an Economic Activity

in the Energy Sector..."
The definition of “Economic Activity in the Energy Sector” is sct forth at

Para. 94 supra and includes among other things the exploration and

extraction of oil and gas.

Page 49

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

136. The dispute presented by Claimant in this arbitration relates to:

i) six oil and gas exploration agreements concluded by Claimant in his
personal capacity with the Chairman of the State Committee for Oil & Gas
of the Republic of Tajikistan regarding different areas within the Republic,

and

ii) shares in two Tajik joint venture companies, Baldjuvon and Petroleum
SUGD, established by Vivalo, a Bahamanian company allegedly owned
and controlled by Claimant, and Tajik statc-owned enterprises in the oil
and gas sector, for the principal purpose of exploiting certain oil fields in
the Republic of Tajikistan.

137. The six exploration agreements are the “General Agreement” of June 1998

relating to the Kashkagun area (CL-2), the “Alimtay” Agreement of
November 1998, relating to the Alimtay area (CL-3) and the four
“Treaties” concluded in December 2000, relating to the East Soupetau
area, the Rengan area, the Sargazon areca and the Yagyshak area,
respectively (CL-4 to cL-7)5

138, The above agreements have a similar structure. Claimant is to finance, at

his own risk, oil and gas exploration works. Should they prove successful,
Claimant first is to be reimbursed for his expenses by the oil. Afterwards,
the parties arc to create a joint venture to perform further operations. ‘he
State Committee for Oil & Gas was to supply the necessary geological and
technological material and to ensure the licenses required to carry out

exploration and exploitation activities.

139. Since the exercise of the exploration and exploitation rights pursuant to

these agreements requires the issuance of a license, they cannot be

Claimant’s exhibits have been marked “CL” for legislation and legal documents, “CA” for
legal authorities and cases, and “C” for other documentary evidence and witness statements.

Page 50

140.

141.

142.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Vajikistan

considered to constitute “rights conferred by law...to undertake any
Economic Activity in the Energy Sector” pursuant to Article 1(6)(f) of the
ECT. However, they do give Claimant a contractual right - vis-a-vis the
State Committee for Oil & Gas of the Republic of Tajikistan — to the
issuance of the necessary licenses to start these activities and to provide
the necessary geological and technological material. As such, they may

be considered as “claims to performance pursuant to contract having an
economic value and associated with an Investment” pursuant to Article
1(6)(c) of the ECT. It is clear that they relate to an Economic Activity in

the Energy Sector, and therefore satisfy that requirement as well.

The six oil and gas exploration agreements thus constitute “Investments”
within the meaning of Article 1(6) of the ECT. Since all of the
Investments envisage oil exploration at sites located within the territory of
the Republic, it is equally evident that they constitute Investments in the
“Area” of the Contracting Party, “Area” being defined in the Treaty as
territory under the Contracting Party’s sovereignty (Article 1(10) of the
ECT).

Shares in ‘Vajik joint venture companies are the kind of asset which can
qualify as an “Investment” under the Treaty since they fall within Article
1(6)(b). However, the foreign shareholder of the two joint ventures here in
question is not Claimant but Vivalo, a company registered in the Bahamas
and thus not an Investor of another Contracting Party. In addition, it is not

a claimant in the case at hand.

llowever, the Energy Charter Treaty protects not only directly, but also
indirectly, owned or controlled investments. It applies to assets held
through an intermediary company in a non-ECT State. Ilere, Claimant
alleges that he owns and controls 100% of the shares in Vivalo, namely

5,000 shares (except for one share held for him in trust), and thus

Page 51

143.

144,

SCC Arbitration No, V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

indirectly owns the shares in the Baldjuvon and Petroleum SUGD joint

venture companies.

As evidence of Claimant’s control of Vivalo, Claimant has referred to
various letters in evidence which Claimant wrote to ‘Tajik government
authorities on Vivalo Ictterhead in his capacity as Vivalo’s General
Director. However, this would not constitute proof of his control of
Vivalo. As Understanding No. 3 to the ECT indicates, “control” is shown
by the ability to exert influence over the management of a company, Thus,

being a part of management cannot constitute control.

However, as evidence of Claimant’s ownership of Vivalo, Claimant has
produced i) an extract from the Company share register reflecting 5,000
shares registered in his name and stamped “Registrar General’s Dept, May
27, 2009, Nassau Bahamas,” ii) a Certificate of Good Standing of the
Company signed by the Acting Registrar General of the Commonwealth of
the Bahamas, dated May 25, 2009, and iii) a certification signed by
Claimant as sole director of the Company dated May 20, 2009 declaring
that, since the Company’s incorporation on October 6, 1998, he has been
and is the sole beneficial owner of all 5,000 shares in the Company, that
the shares are fully paid up, and that one of the 5000 shares is held for him
in trust by a Mr. Charles Mackey pursuant to an attached Declaration of
‘Trust.

While this evidence would have been stronger had it been accompanied by
a notarized cerlification of the Company secretary, the Tribunal, in the
absence of any evidence to the contrary, is inclined to accept the evidence
as giving rise to a reasonable probability that Claimant is indeed and has
been from the time of incorporation of Company on October 6, 1998 its
sole legal (but for one share held in trust for his benefit) and beneficial

shareholder.

Page 52

146,

=

147,

148.

149.

150.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul vy. Republic of Tajikistan

Tn light of this, the shares in the two Tajik joint venture companies which
are or were held by Vivalo, following the signature of the Foundation
Documents of those companies in June 2001 constitute Investments of

Claimant under the ECT for jurisdictional purposes.

An alleged breach of an obligation under Part ITI of the ECT

For jurisdiction to be established, the dispute must concern an alleged
breach of the Contracting Party’s obligations under Part IIT of the ECT.
Claimant alleges that Respondent breached several of its obligations under
Part TI, including under Articles 10 and 13 of the ECT.

In recent years, tribunals have generally held that in order to have
jurisdiction over treaty claims, a claim must pass the so-called “Oil-
Platforms Test”: the facts as alleged by Claimant, if assumed to be true,
must be able to constitute breaches of the respective investment treaty.
See Happ/Rubins, Digest of ICSID Awards and Decisions 2003-2007, pp.
332/333. The Tribunal endorses this approach.

Assuming that the facts as alleged by Claimant will be proven, it is at least
possible that those facts constitute a breach of the ECT. Whether this is
indeed the case needs to be determined on the merits. Given that the ECT
requires only an “alleged” breach for jurisdictional purposes, we consider

that Claimant’s submissions are sufficient to meet the jurisdictional test.

Significance of the Cooling-off Period in Article 26(2) of the ECT

The ECT requires that a dispute should be settled amicably, if possible.
Only if no such settlement has been possible within a period of three
months from the date on which either party to the dispute requested

Page 53

152.

153.

154,

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

amicable settlement may the Investor submit the dispute to arbitration.
Such period is sometimes called the “waiting pcriod” or “cooling-off’

period.

It is debatable when Claimant may have triggered the three-month period.
It could be argued that it did so as early as February 2003 when Vivalo
wrote to the Minister of Energy and to the President of the Republic of
Tajikistan requesting the issuance of licenses and the cessation of court
actions by the Tajik partners in the joint venture companics, and indicated
that it would be obliged to bring the matter to the international court in
Stockholm and to report to the Secretariat of the Energy Charter Treaty if
this were not done. However, these letters were written by Vivalo, and not

by Claimant himself.

If, on the other hand, the three-month period were considered to run from
the date when Claimant filed his notice of dispute, Claimant has not
complied with the waiting period. The notice of dispute dates from March
12, 2008 (see letter attached as part of Annex 14 to the Request for
Arbitration), while the claim has been submitted on May 30, 2008, i.e. the
date on which the Request was reccived by the Stockholm Arbitration
Institute. In this case, the three-month period would have expired on June

12, 2008, approximately two weeks later.

This argument was not raised by Respondent in ils letter of March 3, 2009

as one of the grounds on which it challenged jurisdiction.

There have been conflicting views among arbitral tribunals as to whether a
cooling-off period (which is contained in most recent bilatcral investment
treaties) constitutes a mere procedural requirement, such that failure to
comply would not affect jurisdiction, or a jurisdictional requirement. The

argumentation in many cases has seemed to be fact-driven, i.e, whether the

Page 54

155,

156.

157.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

State had in fact been given an opportunity to negotiate (and simply failed
to do so) or not. In cases where the State did not react to the notice of
dispute, tribunals have considered that dismissing the claim and asking
Claimant to resubmit it would be an unnecessary formality. This is an

eminently sound approach.

‘There is nothing in the record showing that Respondent demonstrated a
willingness to find an amicable scttlement to the dispute raised by
Claimant either at the time of Vivalo’s letters of February 2003 or at the
time of the 2008 formal notice of dispute. In this regard, it is noteworthy
that Respondent, in its letter of March 3, 2009 objecting to the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal, did not raise non-compliance with the cooling-off period
as an issue. Thus, it seems clear that Respondent was not interested in
settling the dispute amicably, Insisting on compliance with the three-

month period thus would be an unnecessary formality.

Consequently, it is the Tribunal’s opinion, based on the factual
circumstances of this case that, even if Claimant failed to comply with the
three-month period, it does not affect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction or the
admissibility of the claims brought by Claimant.

Forum Selection

In its letter of March 3, 2009, Respondent objects (o the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal on the ground that, under Tajik law and the bylaws of the joint
venture company Petroleum SUGD, the dispute should be settled before
the Tajik courts. While Respondent does not refer to the Baldjuvon joint
venture company, it may be noted that the same dispute resolution

provisions are contained in its bylaws as in those of Petroleum SUGD.

Page 55

158.

159.

161.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

This objection has no merit. Firstly, Article 26 of the ECT gives the
investor the choice to submit the dispute either to national courts, or to
previously agreed dispute settlement procedures, or to arbitration. Thus,
national courts and contractually stipulated clauses constitute only

alternatives to arbitration, but do not prevail over it.

Secondly, Respondent has confused treaty claims with contract claims.
Respondent’s reference to the dispute resolution clause in the Foundation
Documents of Petroleum SUGD is off-point. The claim here is not a
contract claim by Vivalo against its joint venture partners for breach of the
joint venture agreements. It is a claim by the Investor against the host
State for breach of obligations under the ECT. These are distinct actions.
Neither precludes the other. As regards the treaty-based action, the ECT
expressly permits an arbitral tribunal established pursuant to its terms to
decide the question of breach of obligations under Part ITI of the Treaty by
Respondent, applying for this purpose the provisions of the Treaty and

applicable rules and principles of international law.

While Respondent has not at all referred to the six exploration agreements
which the State Committee for Oil & Gas concluded with Claimant, it may
be noted here that those agreements provide that all disputes based on
them “are to be settled in order determined by Legislation of Republic of

Tajikistan and by International Law Acts.” We interpret the reference to
International Law Acts to refer to applicable treaties, which by virtue of

their ratification, become part of the legislation of the Republic.

Article 37 of the Tajik Law on Foreign Investment explicitly states that, in
case of conflict with national law, the provisions of international treatics
shall prevail: “Jf an international treaty of the Republic of Tajikistan

establishes rules other than those contained in the legislation of the

Page 56

162.

163.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Republic of Tajikistan, rules of the international treaty apply.” (Annex to
Exhibit CA-1)

Thus, the jurisdiction of this Tribunal and the choice of applicable law in a
dispute arising under the ECT are to be determined in accordance with the
terms of the ECT.

For the reasons stated in this Section VIII, the Tribunal therefore
concludes that it has jurisdiction to hear Claimant’s claims in this
arbitration based on violation of his rights under Part III of the ECT. In
accordance with Article 26(6) of the ECT, the Tribunal “shall decide the
issues in dispute in accordance with this Treaty and applicable rules and

principles of international law.’

TX. LIABILITY - TILE MERITS OF CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS UNDER THE ECT

A.

164.

165.

Attribution of Conduct to the State

Claimant has alleged that Respondent is liable for breaches of obligations
under Part III of the ECT. In order to find that Respondent is in breach of
the ECT, we must find that its international responsibility is incurred, i.e.
that the actions or omissions alleged to be in breach of the Part III
obligations under the Treaty are in fact attributable to the State. The
attribution to the State of acts or omissions of state bodies or persons
authorized to perform governmental functions is generally accepted to be a

question of customary international law.

An effort was made by the International Law Commission of the United
Nations to codify the applicable legal principles. In 2001, the Commission
finalized a sct of draft articles on the “Responsibility of States for
Internationally Wrongful Act” (hereafter “the Draft Articles’) which,

Page 57

166.

167.

168.

169.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y, Republic of Tajikistan

although without legal force, is widely viewed as the most authoritative

statement of the law in this area that exists today.

According to Article 4 of the Draft Articles:

“1. The conduct of any State organ shall be considered an act of that State
under international law, whether the organ exercises legislative, executive,
Judicial or any other functions, whatever position it holds in the
organization of the State, and whatever ils character as an organ of the

central Government or of a territorial unit of the State.”

Article 5 of the Draft Articles extends the principle of attribution to the
conduct of a person or entity, which would include a State-owned

enterprise, in the following circumstance:

“the conduct of a person or entity which is not an organ of the State
under article 4 but which is empowered by the law of that State to
exercise elements of the governmental authority shall be considered an act
of the State under international law, provided the person or entity is acting

in that capacity in the particular instance.”

In the present case, the acts or omissions allegedly in breach of the ‘l'reaty
are those of the State Committee for Oil & Gas and the Ministry of Energy
(principally regarding the failure to issue licenscs for oil and gas
exploration and exploitation), and the ‘Tajik economic courts (in respect of
alleged denial of justice and lack of duc process in proceedings which
allegedly affected and/or expropriated Claimant's investment in the two

joint venture companies).

As previously mentioned, the functions of the State Committee for Oil &

Gas were subsumed within the Ministry of Energy, once the Ministry was

Page 58

170,

171.

172.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

established in 2001. They are organs of the State’s governmental structure.
The economic courts of Tajikistan comprise part of the State judiciary, and
as such are also recognized as organs of the Stale. Thus, in accordance
with the Draft Articles, the conduct of the State Committee, the Ministry
of Energy and the Tajik economic courts are attributable to the State, and
Claimant’s claims based on alleged Part III breaches resulting from the

conduct of these organs are properly before us.

The SOC is not entirely clear as to whether Claimant also considers
actions of the state-owned enterprises which were partners in the two joint
venture companies to give rise to breaches of Respondent’s Part Il
obligations. According to Article 5 of the Draft Articles, actions of state-
owned enterprises may be attributed to the State if the actions are made in

the exercise of governmental authority.

Article 22 of the ECT deals specifically with state enterpriscs. In
particular, and insofar as Article 22 may be relevant to the present case,
Article 22(1) requires a Contracting Party to ensure that ils state
enterprises conduct their activities in relation to the sale or provision of
goods and services in its Area in a manner consistent with the Contracting
Party’s obligations under Part III, and Article 22(2) forbids a Contracting
Party from encouraging or requiring a state enterprise to conduct its
activities in its Area in a manner inconsistent with the Contracting Party’s
obligations under other provisions of this Treaty, which presumably
includes Part III.

llowever, it must be noted that Article 22 is not contained in Part III of the
Treaty (although it does cross-refer to Part III obligations), and the
question of the arbitrability of claims based on Article 22 has not been
tested to date. In the recent award in the case of AMTO v. Ukraine, the

Page 59

173,

174.

175.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

tribunal considered that Article 22 should not be understood as a rule of
strict liability for the state, but rather as an independent obligation.®

Irrespective of how Article 22 is to be understood, the Tribunal need only
reach these questions if there is a sufficient factual basis establishing the
alleged acts of the state-owned enterprises in the first place. Little, if any,
direct evidence of the conduct of the Tajik partners in the two joint
ventures has been presented in this case. We have the assertion of Mr.
Khasky that a Tajik director in Petroleum SUGD threatened him by saying
that, if he would not support its proposal to reduce Vivalo’s share in the
joint venture Petroleum SUGD, his physical security could not be
guaranteed, but nothing to substantiate it. We have his further assertion
that the Tajik partner in Petroleum SUGD had a contractual obligation to
supply workers and equipment to the joint venture of a certain quality, but
we have not seen any agreement that may have been concluded between
the joint venture partners on this particular issue. In the absence of

supporting evidence, these allegations must fail.
The Tribunal therefore finds it unnecessary to reach the legal question of
the arbitrability of a breach of Article 22 or to give further consideration to

the question of the attribution to the State of misconduct by State-owned

enterprises.

B. Fair and Equitable Treatment

Claimant alleges that Respondent is in breach of its obligations under the
first sentence of Article 10(1) of the ECT which reads as follows:

“Each Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions of this

Limited Liability Company Amto v. Ukraine, SCC Case No, 080/2005 (ECT), Award of March
26, 2008, para. 112.

Page 60

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar A]-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

Treaty, encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and
transparent conditions for Investors of other Contracting Parties to make

Investments in its Area.”

176. However, in his SOC, Claimant took the position that the obligation under
the first sentence of Article 10(1) is mutually interlinked with the
obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment as set forth in the second

sentence of Article 10(1), which reads as follows:

“Such conditions shall include a commitment to accord at all times to
investments of Investors of other Contracting Parties fair and equitable

treatment.”

177. In order to avoid repetition, Claimant therefore chose to consolidate his
arguments under these two provisions of Article 10(1) and treat them
together in his factual and legal case of breach of the fair and equitable
treatment obligation. (See SOC, paras. 151-155).

178. ‘There is precedent in prior i treaty arbitrations for this h
Indeed, the tribunal in the ECT arbitration, Petrobart v. The Kyrgyz

 

Republic, went even further and stated in its Award of March 29, 2005
that all of the provisions of Article 10(1) were interlinked: “The Arbitral
Tribunal does not find it necessary to analyse the Kyrgyz Republic’s action
in relation to the various specific elements in Article 10(1) of the Treaty
but notes that this paragraph in its entirety is intended to ensure a fair and

equitable treatment of investments.”7

7 CH Schreuer, Fair and Equitable Treatment (FET): Interaction with other Standards,

Transnational Dispute Management, Vol. 4, issue 5, September 2007, p. 1.

Page 61

179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

‘The Tribunal will therefore adopt Claimant’s approach and consider his
arguments under the first two sentences of Article 10(1) together as claims

under the fair and equitable treatment standard.

Claimant relies on four grounds for his allegation of breach of the fair and
equitable treatment obligation (see supra para. 99 (b)):

i) inconsistency and lack of transparency in the issuance of licenses and in
the issuance of visas;

ii) failure to meet legitimate expectations regarding the issuance of
licenses;

iii) failure to observe due process in court proceedings; and

iv) unfair treatment by opening negotiations with a new potential investor
for Petroleum SUGD before the decision of the SUGD economic court on
March 14, 2003 and without informing Claimant.

We will address each of these grounds in turn.

i) Inconsistency or Lack of Transparency in the Issuance of Licenses
and Visas

The first question is whether there has been demonstrated an inconsistency
and lack of transparency in respect to the issuance of oi] and gas

exploration and exploitation licenses.

The notion of transparency as an element of fair and equitable treatment
has been expounded upon in a number of investment treaty arbitration
decisions. Interpreting transparency in the context of the NAFTA treaty,
the tribunal in Metalelad v. Mexico considered it “to include the idea

that all relevant legal requirements for the purpose of initiating,

 

leting and sfully operati made, or intended to be

made, under the Agreement should be capable of being readily known to

Page 62

184,

185.

186.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

all affected investors of another Party. There should be no room for doubt

or uncertainty on such matters."*

The notion of consistency as an element of fair and equitable treatment has
been found to stand for the proposition that the forcign investor should be
entitled to expect the host State to act “without arbitrarily revoking any
pre-existing decisions or permits issued by the state that were relied upon
by the investor to assume its commitments as well as to plan and launch its

commercial and business activities.” See Teemed v. Mexico

Neither of these criteria is intended however to go so far as to require the
State to freeze its legal framework, but rather to act in an open manner and
consistent with commitments it has undertaken. As noted by the Tribunal
in CMS y, Argentina : “It is not a question of whether the legal
Jramework might need to be frozen as it can always evolve and be adapted
to changing circumstances, but neither is it a question of whether the
Framework can be dispensed with altogether when specific commitments to

the contrary have been made.”"”

a) Licenses under the Exploration Agreements

Claimant received a license pursuant to the June 1998 Agreement within
two months after signature of the agreement and pursuant to the November
1998 Agreement with six months after signature. Both of these
agreements had been signed with the State Committee for Oil & Gas. The
parties decided not to proceed under the first license, but rather to proceed

Metalelad Corporation v, Mexico, ICSID Case No. ARB(AFY97/1, Award of August 30,
2000, para. 76.
See Tecmed v. Mexico, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award of May 29, 2003, para. 154.

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentina, \CSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Award of May
12, 2008, para. 277.

Page 63

187.

188.

189,

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

with exploration activity under the second license relating to the Alimtay

area, since this arca appeared to have greater potential.

According to the testimony, which stands unrebutted, the State failed to
issue licenses pursuant to any of the four December 2000 Agrccments,
despite the fact that these agreements were also signed by the State
Committee for Oil & Gas and that the State Committee had contractually
agreed in each of the four agreements to ensure the issuance of such
licenses. No explanation is offered for this failure. ‘he assurances given
by the State Committce in the December 2000 Agreements were not
different in their terms from those given in the June and November 1998
Agreements, for which licenses had been issued by the Prime Minister of

the Republic without delay.

On its face, therefore, this would suggest that the State may indeed have
acted inconsistently towards the Investor. And, as a matter of
transparency, it would seem reasonable to expect the State to have made
known to Claimant that it intended to deal differently with the issuance of
these licenses than it had done with the first two. Indeed, had all six of
these agreements been signed on or around the same time period, the
Tribunal would have had little difficulty reaching this conclusion.
However, there was an interval of more than two years between the first
two agreements and the last four agreements, and we have little
information as to the evolving conditions in the country during that period
or, for that matter, the discussions that may have taken place at the time of
signature of the last four exploration agreements. Such information could
have a bearing on a finding as to whether the State’s conduct here can be

characterized as inconsistent or lacking in transparency.

There is no doubt, however, that Respondent had undertaken clear

contractual commitments towards Claimant under these agreements. We

Page 64

190.

191

SCC Arbitration No, V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

believe therefore that the analysis of Claimant’s treaty rights with respect
to the non-issuance of licenses pursuant to the December 2000 Agreements
can be better addressed under the umbrella clause in Article 10 of the ECT,

to which we will return later in this Award.

b) Issuance of Licenses to the Two Joint Venture Companies

The two joint venture companics, which were registered and came into
existence in October and November 2001 respectively, needed licenses for
their oil and gas activities. It is clear from the language of the Charters of
these companies and is uncontested by Claimant that to obtain these
licenses the companies needed to make applications in accordance with the
applicable legislation. (See Article 2.3 of the Charters, cited earlier).
Claimant’s February 25, 2003 letter, on Vivalo letterhead, to the President
of the Republic states that such applications had been made “more than six
months ago,” which would suggest that applications may have been filed

around August 2002.

The Tribunal however has not been shown any of these applications.
There is no evidence as to precisely when these licenses were applied for,
whether they complied with the applicable legal requirements, what
specific license rights were sought and for what period of time, and
whether any questions were raised by the Government in response to these
applications. There is some indication, although not substantiated, that
licenses were initially offered by the Government for a three-year period,
which Claimant found to be too short, and which may therefore have
caused a certain delay in processing the applications. When questioned
about the licensing process by the Tribunal at the hearings, Mr. Khasky
testified that, although he was Chairman of the Board of Petroleum SUGD,

he was not involved in the mechanics of filing license applications, which

Page 65

192.

193.

194,

195.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahioul v, Republic of Tajikistan

was the responsibility of the company’s General Director, an appointee of

the Tajik partner.

As regards Petroleum SUGD, the fact that the applications were indeed
made cannot be doubted. Presidential Decree 83-r, adopted on November
4, 2002 approved a proposal of the Ministry of Energy to issue licenses to
Petroleum SUGD, and licenses were then issued on December 20, 2002.
Accepting for present purposes that the applications were filed in August
2002, as indicated above, the Tribunal finds that there was in fact no

refusal to issue licenses or unreasonable delay in doing so.

It appears from the record that Claimant learned of the issuance of these
licenses only on March 14, 2003, when Mr. Khasky chanced to meet the
Tajik Trade Representative to Austria at the Tajik courthouse during the
Petroleum SUGD hearings. Thus, it would seem that the General Director
of Petroleum SUGD may have failed to inform Mr. Khasky when he
received these licenses. However, even though this failure is criticisable,
there is no factual basis for attributing it to the State, which had in fact

issued the licenses to the applicant.

As regards the Baldjuvon joint venture, while it appears that no licenses
were ever issued for its activity, there is also no direct evidence
whatsoever that any license applications were ever filed. Mr. Khasky
testified that he was not involved with the Baldjuvon joint venture and had
only visited that company on one occasion. He had no knowledge of
whether or not the joint venture had applied for licenses. He merely

assumed they had.
The Presidential Decree No. 397 adopted in September 22, 2000, before

the Baldjuvon joint venture was established, did not deal with the question

of licenses at all, but rather with the possible construction of a refinery in

Page 66

196.

197.

198.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

the Khalton region by a future Baldjuvon joint venture to be established by
Vivalo and a Tajik state enterprise called “Leninabadneficgaz” (It may be
noted that this enterprise did not ultimately become the partner in the
Baldjuvon joint venture which was later established). ‘This project,
according 1o Mr. Khasky, was subsequently abandoned because of lack of

access to local oil production.

We therefore find no basis for a claim of unfair or inequitable treatment

based on denial of licenses to the Baldjuvon joint venture.

©) Issuance of Travel Visas

Similarly, the allegation of lack of transparency or consistency with
respect to the issuance of visas for Claimant’s travel to Tajikistan to
defend his business interests or for other purposes is not sufficiently
documented to permit an affirmative finding by the Tribunal. There is no
proof that a visa was applied for, or when, or that such application
complied with the applicable rules, even if Claimant may in good faith
have thought that he had complicd with the rules.

Therefore, the claim based on this allegation is rejected for insufficient

evidence.

ii. Failure to Mect Legitimate Expectations in the Issuance of

199.

Licenses
Claimant’s second argument under the heading of fair and equitable

treatment is that Respondent failed to meet Claimant’s legitimate
expectations with respect to the issuance of licenses.

Page 67

200.

202.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y, Republic of ‘Tajikistan

To establish a failure to meet legitimate expectations, several factors must
be demonstrated — the nature of the expectation, the reliance on the

expectation and the legitimacy of that reliance.

The legal standard for legiti ions has been di d in the

NAFTA arbitration, Thunderbird v. Mexico, as follows:

“{...Jthe concept of ‘legitimate expectations’ relates, [...] to a situation
where a Contracting Party's conduct creates reasonable and justifiable
expectations on the part of an investor (or investment) to act in reliance on
said conduct, such that a failure by the NAII'A Party to honour those

expectations could cause the investor (or investment) to suffer damages. vit

The point was made in Parkerings-Companie AS y. Lithuania, that
legitimate expectations can be based on the legal order of the host State

and/or explicit or implicit assurances:

“The expectation is legitimate if the investor received an explicit promise
or guaranty from the host-State, or if implicitly, the host-State made
assurances or representations that the investor took into account in
making the investment. Finally, in the situation where the host-State made
no assurance or representation, the circumstances surrounding the
conclusion of the agreement are decisive to determine if the expectation of
the investor was legitimate. In order to determine the legitimate
expectation of an investor, it is also necessary to analyse the conduct of

the State at the time of the investment."

International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation y. Mexico, UNCITRAT. (NAFTA), Award of
January 26, 2006, para. 147.

Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. Lithuania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05S/8, Award of September 11,
2007, para. 331.

Page 68

203.

204.

205.

206.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Claimant argues that it had a legitimate expectation that licenses would be
issued based on the exploration agreements, the two joint venture
Foundation Documents, Presidential Decrees No. 397 and 83-r and the
repeated assurances of the Minister of Energy and the President of the

 

Republic,
4) Legitir E: ions under the De ber 2000 Exp
Agreements

With respect to the December 2000 Agreements, i.c, the four exploration
agreements relating to the East Soupetau, Rengan, Sargazon, and.
Yalgyzkak areas, the Tribunal agrees that it was reasonable for Claimant to
expect that licenses would be issued within a reasonable period of time
following the signature of these agreements. Indeed, this had already been
the case with the two initial exploration agreements, and all six of the
exploration agreements contained a similar provision pursuant to which
Respondent expressly “ensured the License to carry out solely and
exclusively geological exploration, and natural resources exploitation

works and activities” in the respective areas.

Did Claimant rely upon this expectation with respect to the December

2000 Agreements for which licenses were not granted?

While the December 2000 Agreements may well have constituted a
valuable asset in the hands of Claimant,'’ there is no evidence that
Claimant incurred any expenses following the signature of these
Agreements in preparation for exploration work in the specified areas upon

issuance of licenses. According to the record, the only identified area in

Claimant submitted as Exhibit C-6 to its SOC a table reflecting the following annual estimated
production values for three of the four areas covered by the December 2000 Agreements.
Sargazon - $44 million; Rengan - $56 million; and East Soupetau - $65,992 million. No
figure was provided for Yalgyzkak,

Page 69

207.

208.

209.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

which Claimant had commenced work was the Alimtay area, and that was
pursuant to the November 1998 Agreement for which a license had been
duly issued. That work stopped in 2000. No exploration work was carried

out since 2000."*

Nor does the evidence support a conclusion that Claimant relied upon
issuance of the four further exploration licenses when making his initial
investment in the two joint venture companies. Indeed, none of the four
areas covered by the December 2000 Agreements are mentioned as being
included in the areas of activity spccificd for the Baldjuvon joint venture
(which refers to the Beshtentyak, Souldouzy, and Uzounakhor areas) or the
Petroleum SUGD joint venture (which refers to the Sugd area). Therefore,
we find insufficient evidentiary basis to conclude that Claimant’s
investment in those joint ventures was made in reliance upon licenses

being issued in respect of these four exploration agreements.

While the minutes of the December 15, 2002 Sharcholders Meeting of
Petroleum SUGD indicate, and as Mr. Khasky confirmed in his testimony,
that the joint venture managed to conduct oil and gas activities despite the
absence of the required license, there is nothing to indicate that these
activities took place in any of the areas granted to Claimant under the
December 2000 Agreements.

Claimant stated in his testimony at the hearings that he needed all six
exploration agreements to be licensed in order to continue with his
invesiments, However, this goes to support his expectation, but does not
establish that he in fact relied upon that expectation to his financial
detriment.

See SOC para. 48,

Page 70

210.

211

212.

213.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

Therefore, it is the Tribunal’s opinion that Claimant had a right to rely
upon Respondent’s commitment to issue the four further cxploration
licenses, but his claim based on legitimate expectations fails for lack of
evidence of actual reliance thercon. This being said, as previously noted,
Respondent had indeed obligated itself to issue licenses under the
December 2000 Agreements and failed to do so, a matter to which we will

return in our discussion of the umbrella clause of the ECT.

5) Legitimate Expectations regarding the Two Joint Venture Companies

With respect to the joint venture companies, in evaluating Claimant’s
legitimate expectation regarding the issuance of licenses, it may be useful
to recall the circumstances preceding the establishment of these

companies.

The idca of eventually creating a joint operating company had already
been envisaged in the June and November 1998 Agreements, in the event
of positive exploration results. Following meetings between Claimant and
the State Committee for Oil & Gas, a first set of joint venture agreements
were signed in March 2000 by Vivalo and the Chairman of the Stale
Commititce. The agreements gave no assurance with respect to the
issuance of licenses but, given the earlier assurances of the Committee in
the first two exploration agreements and the subsequent issuance of the
necessary licenses, it might have been reasonable for Claimant to expect
that the necessary licenses for the joint ventures’ activities would also be

forthcoming.

As far as we know, the joint ventures contemplated by the March 2000
Agreements were not established. Instead, more than a year later, in June
2001, two new joint venture agreements were negotiated and signed by
Vivalo with Tajik state-owned oil production enterprises. These

Page 71

214.

215,

216.

217.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

agreements consisted of Constituent Agreements and Charters. These
were the Baldjuvon and Petroleum SUGD Foundation Documents. They
contained no assurance as to the issuance of licenses, contrary to the six
exploration agreements, but indicated that licenses would be needed for the

companies’ oil and gas activities.

It took more than seven months to register the Foundation Documents of
the two joint ventures, at which point the companies came into existence.
There is no evidence of any discussions on the question of licenses during
this period, Claimant's initial capital contributions were made only after

the registration of the companies.

Nonetheless, taking into account the history of the relations between
Claimant and Respondent, Claimant may well have had a legitimate
expectation that licenses would be issued if properly applied for, and
Claimant may well have relied on this expectation in making its initial
capital contribution in the ventures and in participating in the activities of

the joint ventures.

However, the Tribunal finds that, as to Petroleum SUGD, Respondent
satisfied this expectation by issuing the licenses on December 20, 2002. If
we assume that the licenses were only applied for in August 2002 (see
Para. 190 supra), it is difficult to reasonably expect that they should
necessarily have been issued earlier than they were. As to Baldjuvon,
Claimant failed to produce evidence sufficient to prove that the necessary

license applications were in fact filed at all.

Moreover, the Tribunal finds no basis for any legitimate expectation that
licenses would necessarily be issued to the joint ventures prior to full
payment of the shareholders’ capital contributions. A literal reading of the

Foundation Documents does not support such an expectation. The Charter

Page 72

218.

219.

220.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

states simply that payment of capital in full must be made within one year.
If the parties had intended this to mean one year from the issuance of
licenses as opposed to one year from the establishment of the company,

they would have had to express that intention with greater clarity.

iii. Due Process and/or Denial of Justice

Claimant’s third basis for alleging unfair and inequitable treatment relates
to the question of due process and/or denial of justice in the ‘Tajik court
actions, with respect to his investments in both Petroloum SUGD and
Baldjuvon.

Claimant asserts that Respondent failed to observe “fundamental principles
of due process” (SOC paras. 174, 197). In particular, he complains that
the courts, in the proceedings regarding Baldjuvon and Petroleum SUGD,
breached applicable procedural and substantive laws. He asserts as a
breach of due process that he was not given nolice of court hearings and
that the court (in the Petroleum SUGD proceedings) did not adjourn a
hearing to allow him to take part.

Vivalo, and not Claimant, was a party in these proceedings. Article 10 (1)
ECT, read literally, protects only the investment and not the investor.
Vivalo, being a Bahamian company, would not even constitute an
investment protected under the ECT’. Llowever, this Tribunal considers that
it would be contrary to the object and purpose of the ECT to allow a
Contracting Party to deny due process to a foreign company owned by an
ECT national. In the case at hand, this is even more conclusive since the
shares in the joint ventures held by that company — being the object of the
court proceedings - constitute investments indirectly owned by the

Investor.

Page 73

221.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v, Republic of Tajikistan

It is recognized in literature and jurisprudence that the duty to provide due
process is part of the obligation to provide fair and equitable treatment.
Many commentators and tribunals also see denial of justice as part of fair
and equitable treatment. In this section, we shall adhere to that position.
The obligation to provide due process has several facets, some of which

overlap:

--The obligation to notify an investor of hearings and not to decide about a
claim in his absence or in gross violation of procedural rules. Breaches
may also exist if the procedure is delayed, if the Government influences
administrative or court procedures, or if the composition of courts

responsible for a certain procedure is altered.'®

--The obligation not to maliciously misapply the substantive law. This has
been well formulated as follows by the tribunal in the Mondev y. USA
arbitration _ “The test is not whether a particular result is surprising, but
whether the shock or surprise occasioned to an impartial tribunal leads,
on reflection, to justified concerns as to the judicial propriety of the
outcome, bearing in mind on the one hand that international tribunals are
not courts of appeal, and on the other hand that Chapter 11 of NAFTA
(like other treaties for the protection of investments) is intended to provide
a real measure of protection. In the end, the question is whether, at an
international level and having regard to generally accepted standards of
the administration of justice, a tribunal can conclude in the light of all the
available facts that the impugned decision was clearly improper and
discreditable, with the result that the investment has been subjected to
unfair and inequitable treatment. This is admittedly a somewhat open-

ended standard, but it may be that in practice no more precise formula can

See J. Paulsson, Denial of Justice in International Law (Cambridge University Press: 2005),
pp. 131-178,

Page 74

6

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

be offered to cover the range of possibilities.” '*

In addition, tribunals have identified facets of the standard not mentioned

by Claimant.

-- The obligation not to use powers for improper purposes, i.e. purposes

not covered by the law authorizing the powers.!7

-- The obligation not to act intentionally against the investor to harm his
inyestment, As stated in the case of Waste Management v. Mexico:
“The tribunal has no doubt that a deliberate conspiracy -- that is to say, a
conscious combination of various agencies of government without
Justification to defeat the purposes of an investment agreement — would
constitute a breach of article 1105(1). A basic obligation of the State
under Article 1105(1) is to act in good faith and form, and not deliberately

to set out to destroy or frustrate the investment by improper means.”'*

-- ‘the obligation not to exercise unreasonable pressure on an investor to
reach certain goals. As noted in the case of Pope & Talbot v. Canada:
“Briefly, the Tribunal found that when the investor instituted the claim, in
these proceedings, Canada's Softwood Lumber Division (“SLD”) changed
its previous relationship with the Investor and the Investment from one of
cooperation in running the Softwood Lumber Regime to one of threats and
misrepresentation. Figuring in this new attitude were assertions of non-

existent policy reasons for forcing them tv comply with very burdensome

Mondev International Ltd v. United States of America, SCSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2,
Award of October | 1, 2002, para. 127.

Saluka v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award of March 17, 2006, para. 307; see also
C. McLachlan, L. Shore and M. Weiniger, International Investment Arbitration: Substantive
Principles (Oxford University Press: 2007), para. 7.124; PSEG Global Ine, et al v. Republic of
Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5, Award of January 19, 2007, para. 247.

Waste Management v. Mexico, (CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/03, Award of April 30, 2004,
para, 138.

Page 75

”

20

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

demands for documents, refusals to provide them with promised
information, threats of reductions and even termination of the Investment's
export quotas, serious misrepresentations of fact in memoranda to the
Minister concerning the Investor's and the Investment's actions and even

suggestions of criminal investigation of the Investment’s conduct.”!”

In the Teemed case, the Tribunal concluded that the refusal to extend the
license was a means to pressure the investor to relocate the waste site at its
own costs, and that this was in breach of fair and equitable treatment:
“This statement reveals the two goals pursued by INE upon issuing the
Resolution. On the one hand, it denies the renewal of Cytrar’s Permit
without any compensation whatsoever for the loss of the financial and
commercial value of the investment. On the other hand, this denial is
described as a means to pressure Cytrar and force it to assume a similar
operation in another site, bearing the costs and risks of a new business,
mainly because by adopting such course of action, INE expected to
overcome the social and political difficulties directly related to the
Landfill’s relocation. Under such circumstances, such pressure involves
Sorms of coercion that may be considered inconsistent with the fair and
equitable treatment to be given to international investments under Article
4(1) of the Agreement and objectionable from the perspective of

international law.””°

222. Considering the facts alleged by Claimant relying on the witness statement

of Mr. Nasrulloyev, the legal analysis concentrates on the following
questions:

a) Has a breach of due process been shown in the Baldjuvon
Proceedings?

b) Has a breach of due process been shown in the Petroleum SUGD

Pope & Talbot v. Canada, Award on Damages of May 31, 2002, para. 68.

Tecmed v. Mexico, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award of May 29, 2003, para. 154.

Page 76

223.

224.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Proceedings?
c) [las there been clear and malicious misapplication of Tajik substantive
law in the Petroleum SUGD Proceedings?

d) Has a breach of due process occurred by failure to issue licenses?

We will deal with these questions in turn.

a) Breach of Due Process in the Baldjuvon Proceedings

Claimant alleges that the Tajik court in the Baldjuvon proceedings acted in
violation of due process standards by accepting to hear a claim to annul a
Board decision taken 10 months earlier, whereas the right to challenge
such decision must be asserted with a two-month period according to the
T I law. A ding to Mr. Nasrulloyev, the applicable r dural

tule is found in Article 49, para. 1 of the Tajik Law “On Limited Liability

Companies” which provides in relevant part as follows: "Jn case the
participant in a company took part in the general meeting of participants
in the company, where the appealed decision was taken, this application
may be filed within two month from the date of adoption of such a

decision.”

The Tribunal notes that Article 49(1) deals with appeals against decisions
taken at a Participants’ Meeting, whereas Claimant’s SOC at para. 197(a)
refers to the meeting having been a meeting of the Board of Directors. The
minutes of the meeting in question have not been submitted in evidence.
Article 49(3) of the Tajik Law “On Limited Liability Companies”
prescribes no time limit for challenging in court a decision of the Board of
Directors, It reads in relevant part as follows: “The decision of the board
of directors...adopted in breach of the requirements of this Law, other
legal acts of the Republic of Vajikistan, the statutes of the company, and
which violates the rights and legitimate interest of a participant in the

Page 77

226.

227.

228.

229.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

company, may be found null and void by the court following the
application of this participant in the company.”

Claimant further alleges that Vivalo was not notified of the court hearing
which took place on April 2, 2004. On this, we have only Mr.
Nasrulloyev’s unsubstantiated statement. We have not been provided with
any of the court documents or the court decision following this hearing or,
for that matter, the appellate court decision which was allegedly rendered
thereafter,

While the allegations made by Claimant with respect to the above
proceedings could indeed, when taken together and if proved, constitute a
denial of due process, this Tribunal is not in a position to make such a

determination on the basis of the limited evidence on the record.

6) Breach of Due Process in the Petroleam SUGD Proceedings

On March 14, 2003, after several previous adjournments, the SUGD
economic court had scheduled a hearing on March 14, 2003 in the action
brought by Sugdneftegaz, the Tajik partner in Petroleum SUGD, against
Vivalo. The evidence establishes that Claimant requested this hearing be
adjourned until March 15, 2003 or later in order to permit him to obtain a
visa to attend, The decision of the court, submitted in evidence (Ex. C-
18), refers to a telefax dated March 14, 2003 pursuant to which a request
for such an adjournment was made on March 14. While the Tribunal has
not seen a request dated March 14, Claimant has submitted a letter to the
same effect addressed to the Court by Mr. Khasky on March 3 and another
letter by Claimant on March 10 (Ex. C-19).

The court states in its decision that it considered the application and

decided to proceed on the basis of Article 119 of the Tajik Procedural

Page 78

230.

231.

232.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Code in the absence of the defendant. Article 119 provides: “Jn case of
failure of the defendant to appear in the proceeding of the Economic
Court, when duly notified of the time and place of the court hearing, the
dispute may be resolved in his absence.” The court commented in its
decision that the representative of defendant on several prior occasions had
failed to appear at scheduled hearings and cited as an example the hearing
scheduled for February 3, 2003 when, it said, Mr Khasky was known to be
in the city and, although duly informed of the hearing, failed to appear

without a valid reason.

Mr. Khasky’s testimony in this arbitration acknowledges that he was in the
building of the court on March 14, 2003, but did not attend the hearing.
He has given no explanation for this, It should be recalled that Vivalo was
the named defendant in this action and that Mr. Khasky was the authorized

representative of Vivalo in Tajikistan.

In light of the foregoing facis, we cannot find a violation of due process

standards in the court’s decision to proceed with the hearing,

Claimant in its SOC relies on the witness statement of Mr. Nasrulloyev to
support the allegation that the subsequent appeal from the SUGD
economic court decision was improperly dismissed on the ground that it
was time-barred, when it was, according to him, filed in time. The
Tribunal has not been presented with the necessary supporting evidence
for this allegation. Mr. Nasrulloyev states that the appeal was filed on
April 12, 2003 by Claimant, and was sent from Vienna to Tajikistan.
Although Mr. Nasrulloyev refers in his statement to a postal receipt as
proof of timely filing, this receipt has not been submitted in evidence. We
can therefore draw no conclusion as to whether or not the appeal was in
fact timely filed. Without such a finding, the appellate court’s dismissal of

the appeal cannot be said to have violated international law due process

Page 79

233.

234.

235.

SCC Arbitration No, V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

standards.

c) Breach by Malicious Misapplication of Law in the Petroleum SUGD
Proceedings

It is the position of Mr. Nasrulloyev that the SUGD economic court
consciously misapplied Tajik law for the purpose of reducing Vivalo’s
share in Petroleum SUGD by interpreting the requirement that a
shareholder's capital contribution must be paid in full within one year to
mean one year from registration of the company as opposed to one year
from the commencement of a company’s activity which, in the case of
Petroleum SUGD, he argues, would only commence from the date when
licenses were issucd. It is uncontested that Vivalo had not paid in the
balance of its capital contribution within one year from registration of the

joint venture company.

In support of his position, Mr. Nasrulloyev cites Article 49 of Part 3 of the
‘Tajik Civil Code which provides: “... The right of a legal entity to carry
out activities, to engage in which one must obtain a license...commences
on receipt of such a license or in a specified period of time and is
terminated upon the expiration of its actions, unless otherwise stipulated
by law or other legal acts.” This provision makes no reference, however,

to the timing of payment of charter capital.

The court, in reaching its conclusion that Vivalo had failed to pay in the
balance of its capital within the required time period, relied upon the text
of Constituent Agreement previously cited at para. 70 above and on the
Tajik Law on Limited Liability Companics which provides that “Each
participant of the company shall pay in full its contribution to the charter
capital of the company within the period, which is stipulated in the

Page 80

237.

238.

239.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

founding agreement and which may not exceed one year from the moment

of State registration of the company.” (Article 18(1)).

In reaching its decision to order the reduction of Vivalo’s share in
Petroleum SUGD, the court relied on Article 22(2) of the ‘lajik Law on
Limited Liability Companies which provides: “Jn case of non full payment
of the charter capital of the company within one year from the moment of
its State registration, the company shall either reduce its charter capital to
the actual amount paid in and register its reduction in the established

manner, or take a decision on liquidation of the company.”

While this Tribunal finds the position taken by the court to be more
persuasive than that taken by Mr. Nasrulloyev, it is not the role of this
Tribunal to sit as an appellate court on questions of Tajik law. Suffice it to
say, we do not find the Tajik court’s application of Tajik law on this issue
to be malicious or clearly wrong, and therefore find no basis for

Claimant’s claim of denial of justice.

d) Breach of Due Process by Failure to Issue Licenses

Claimant alleges essentially the same facts here as in the claim based on
unfair and inequitable treatment with respect to the issuance or non-

issuance of licenses.

The Tribunal considers that this claim fails here for the reasons already

given in that section of the present Award.

Page 81

240.

241,

242.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

e) Breach by Virtue of Meeting of Minister of Energy with Third Party
Interested in the Tajik Oil Sector

Claimant alleges in its SOC that on February 16, 2003, a month before the
decision of the SUGD economic court regarding reduction of Vivalo’s
share in Petroleum SUGD, a meeting took place between Minister Yorov
of the Ministry of Energy and Dr. Richard Schenz, a former general
manager of Vivalo and thereafter CEO of a company called Austrian
Energy Pariners, (o discuss future cooperation in the development of oil
fields in the SUGD arca. The only evidence submitted in this regard is a
copy of a letter from Dr. Schenz to the Minister, dated February 26, 2003,
in which he expresses thanks to the Minister for a meeting which Dr.
Schenz had on February 16 with a Mr. Bertoluzi (no title mentioned). The
letter requests a meeting with the Minister on Dr. Schenz’ next visit to
Dushanbe scheduled for March 2-4, 2003, in order to discuss the
“possibilities for cooperation in the oil and gas sector between Tajikistan
and Austria.” There is no specific mention of Petroleum SUGD in this
letter, There is nothing to indicate whether a meeting in fact did take place
thereafter during Mr. Schenz’ March trip, let alone what might have
transpired at such a meeting. If there was a response from the Minister to

this letter, it has not been submitted.

It does appear from the 2009 website of Austrian Energy Partners, cited by
Claimant, that today they are major participants in Petroleum SUGD.
Indeed, this is also reflected in the Ministry’s letter of March 3, 2009,
which made reference to that company as a participant in Petroleum

SUGD.
This being said, the evidence before this Tribunal is insufficient evidence

to support a claim of Treaty violation. ‘There is no proof a meeting with

the Minister in fact took place prior to the March 2003 court hearing (even

Page 82

Cc.

243.

244,

245.

246.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

assuming that such a meeting would be objectionable as a legal matter). If
such a meeting did take place at that time, there is no evidence of what
transpired. We have no information as to when or under what
circumstances Austrian Energy Partners may have become a participant in

Petroleum SUGD.

Most Constant Protection and Security under Article 10(1) ECT

Three circumstances have been referred to by Claimant as constituting a
violation of its Article 10(1) right to protection and security: demands by
the Tajik security forces for cash payments for alleged debts of the
predecessor of the Petroleum SUGD joint venture; a Tajik director’s
alleged statement to Mr. Khasky that his safety could not be guaranteed if
he failed to support the Tajik partner’s proposal on share reduction; and
the alleged miscarriages of justice in the courls in failing to protect

Claimant’s share interest in the joint venture companies.

As to the first circumstance, there is a complete absence of supporting
evidence in the record documenting any alleged demands made by ‘lajik

security forces.

We have already addressed the second circumstance in the section of this
Award dealing with acts attributable to the State and the arbitrability of
disputes arising under Article 22 of the ECT. As we have noted, there is
again a lack of substantiating evidence to support Mr. Khasky’s bare

allegations.

As regards the third circumstance, it is true that, while the concept of
protection and security in investment treaties has developed principally in
the context of physical security, some tribunals have applied it more

broadly to encompass legal security as well. Therefore, it could arguably

Page 83

247.

248.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

cover a situation in which there has been a demonstrated miscarriage of
justice. However, this is not a matter of strict liability and the burden of
proof is on Claimant. As stated by the tribunal in the Teemed case: “...the
guarantee of full protection and security is not absolute and does not

2h

impose strict liability upon the State that grants it. An investor is not

guaranteed that he will prevail in a court action under all circumstances.

On the facts before us, as discussed earlier in the section of the award on
due process, we are unable to find that the Tajik courts could not

legitimately reach the substantive law conclusions which they did.

D. Unreasonable and Discriminatory Measures under Article 10(1)
ECT

The conduct of the State alleged by Claimant under this heading is
essentially the same conduct alleged in connection with his claim under
the heading of unfair and inequitable treatment. Indeed, many arbitral
decisions and commentators have observed that the two standards are
highly overlapping. In the Plama decision, the tribunal found that, “while
the standards can overlap on certain issues, they can also be defined
separately, Unreasonable or arbitrary measures...are those which are not
Sounded in reason or fact but on caprice, prejudice or personal preference.
With regard to discrimination, it corresponds to the negative formulation
of the principle of equality of treatment. It entails like persons being
treated in a different manner in similar circumstances without reasonable

or justifiable grounds.”*

Tecmed v. Mexico, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award of May 29, 2003, para. 177.

Plama Consortium Limited v. Bulgaria, \CSYD Case No. ARB/03/24, Award of August 27,
2008, para. 184.

Page 84

249.

250.

251

252.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

Claimant asserts as measures falling under this heading: the failure to issue
licenses to permit commencement of drilling operations under the
exploration agreements; the failure to provide qualified personnel and the
quality of equipment promised for the joint venture activity; the denial of
travel visas; and the frustration of the Gazpromgeocomservice Service
Contract by not issuing licenses to the joint ventures and by dissolving

Baldjuvon and reducing Vivalo’s share interest in Petroleum SUGD.

For the reasons discussed in the section of this Award addressing unfair
and inequitable treatment, the claims bascd on failure to provide qualified
personnel and quality equipment and the denial of travel visas, assuming
they can be characterized as “measures,” fail for lack of sufficient

evidence.

As regards the failure to issue licenses pursuant to the December 2000
Agreements, no evidence has been presented to support a finding that this
failure was founded in caprice or prejudice such that it might be
i ized as “ ible” within the ing of this provision of
the Treaty. The reasons for the State’s non-performance are unknown.
We consider therefore that the State’s non-performance here is better
addressed in the context of the umbrella clause of the ECT, to which we

relum in sub-section F below.

As regards the frustration of the Gazpromgeocomservice Service Contract,
it is recalled that that contract was proposed by Vivalo to the Petroleum
SUGD joint venture as an alternative form of capital contribution by
Vivalo to the joint venture companies, in lieu of the balance of Vivalo’s
contractually agreed cash contribution. According to Claimant’s and Mr.
Khasky’s testimony, the proposal to contribute this contract rather than
case in payment of the balance of Vivalo’s capital contribution was

motivated by Claimant’s belief that Vivalo’s initial cash contribution has

Page 85

253.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

been misappropriated by the joint venture or the Tajik partner. However,
no proof of such misappropriation has been submitted nor any evidence

that would justify attributing it to the State.

Moreover, it is not clear to this Tribunal, in light of the language of the
corporate Charters defining possible forms of capital contributions, that
such a contract falls within any of the specified forms of capital

contribution.

Claimant further alleged, without substantiating evidence, that the Minister
of Energy had refused any contribution other than cash. However, the
decision to accept a different form of capital contribution was a matter for
agreement between the partners. The Tajik participant was under no
obligation to accept a change in the form of capital contribution originally

agreed by the two participants.

The reduction of Claimant’s share in Petroleum SUGD and the liquidation
of Baldjuvon resulted from determinations by the Tajik courts that the full
contributions to the charter capital had not been completed within the time
period required by Tajik law and the Charters of those companies. They
further found that, as a matter of Tajik law, the consequence for this could
be either reduction of the share of the party who had not completed its
capital contribution or liquidation of the company. It is not for this
‘Tribunal to rule on the correctness of the court’s decision, but merely on
whether the decision manifestly misapplied the law. As stated earlier, we
have found no basis for reaching such a conclusion and therefore conclude
that the share reduction and liquidation cannot be found to be the result of

unreasonable or discriminatory measures on the part of the State judiciary.

Page 86

2B

E

255.

256.

257.

258.

CMS Gi

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

Treatment Less Favourable than Required by International Law
under Article 10(1) ECT

Claimant's allegations under this heading are essentially the same as those
made under the heading of denial of due process. The Tribunal’s

reasoning there applies here as well.

Claimant’s claim under this heading therefore fails for insufficient

evidence.

Obligations Undertaken towards Investors under Article 10(1) ECT

The last sentence of Article 10(1) of the ECT provides that “Mach
Contracting Party shall observe any obligations it has entered into with an
Investor or an Investment of an Investor of any other Contracting Party.”
This provision, which appears in similar language in many investment

treaties, is commonly referred to as the “umbrella clause.”

‘This protection is broadly stated, referring as it does to “any obligation”
and, as such, by the ordinary meaning of the words, includes both statutory
and contractual obligations. The ICSID Ad Hoc Committee, in annulling
the decision in CMS v Argentina, took a narrower view, and considered
that the words “entered into” suggest that the obligation is limited to those
of a consensual nature. In both cases, however, it is clear that the
obligation must have been entered into “with” an Investor or an
Investment of an Investor. Therefore, this provision does not refer to

general obligations of the State arising as a matter of law.

In the present case, Claimant has asserted several grounds of breach of the

State’s obligations under this provision: i) failure of the State Committee

 

ransmission Company v. Argentina, Annulment Decision of September 25, 2007,

para. 95(a).

Page 87

259.

260.

261.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan

for Oil & Gas to observe its contractual obligations under the November
1998 Agreement by failing to provide the promised expertise and
otherwise facilitate the exploration activities pursuant to that Agreement;
ii) failure of the State Committce to ensure the issuance of the licenses
necessary to commence exploration activities under the December 2000
Agreements; iii) failure of the Ministry of Energy to issue the necessary
licenses for the activity of the Raldjuvon and Petrolcum SUGD joint
ventures in breach of the joint venture agreements and in disregard of

Presidential Decree No, 83-r.
i. Breach of the November 1998 Agreement

With respect to the November 1998 Agreement, Claimant has testified
that, after having commenced work at an existing well in the Alimtay area
in Southern Tajikistan, he found it necessary to close down those
operations and seal the well in carly 2000 because of what he considered to
be the low level of competence of the Tajik workers and the poor quality
of the Tajik equipment. This led to discussions with the Prime Minister of
Tajikistan and the Chairman of the State Committee for Oil & Gas and a
proposal to set up joint venture operating companics which would be

controlled by Claimant’s Bahamian company, Vivalo.

While the March 2000 Agreements set out the general concept, those
agreements were not in the end used to establish the joint venturcs. As we
have seen, new joint venture agreements were concluded in June 2001 by
Claimant, not with the State Committee, but with State-owned production

associations.
After the joint ventures were established, operations recommenced in the

Alimtay area, but once again problems were encountered similar to those

previously encountered regarding the quality of the workers and

Page 88

262.

263.

264.

265.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar A]-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

equipment supplied by the Tajik side. In addition there were new issues
regarding liability for unpaid wages, taxes and other debts incurred by its
partners before creation of the joint venture, and other liabilities and
burdens. As a consequence, Vivalo once again decided to cease work in
the fields.

Claimant seeks to characterize the above difficulties as a breach of the

 

 

State C ittee’s obligati under the Ne ber 1998 Agr
However, apart from the obligation to ensure the license to carry out the
work, the State C ittec’s obligations under that Agi isted

only of providing “all necessary exhaustive geological and technological
materials...”and “execution of Norms of Legislation of Republic of
Tajikistan granting tax privilege to foreign investors”. We therefore do
not find here a breach of obligation based on the evidence presented with

respect to the November 1998 Agreement.

ii. Breach of the December 2000 Agreements

The four December 2000 Agreements contain a clear and unconditional
obligation on the part of the State Committee, as a party to the
Agreements, to ensure the issuance of licenses to Claimant necessary for

the commencement of exploration work in the four respective areas.

The licenses were not forthcoming. The Agreements were for an
unlimited duration (Article 10 of each Agreements states that it “acts
without period restriction”). There is no indication that they were

terminated or revoked.
Claimant has therefore established a prima facie breach of contract and,

consequently a breach of the State’s duly to observe its obligations entered

into with an Investor.

Page 89

266.

267.

268.

269.

270.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

It is Respondent’s, and not Claimant’s, burden to rebut such a prima facie

breach of obligation, Respondent has not attempted to so.

Nor does any evidence on the record suggest an excuse for Respondent’s
non-performance. The State Committee entered into the December 2000
Agreements at a time when it was well aware of the difficulties that had
been d under the ber 1998 Agi , and hel

ensured the issuance of the further licenses required under the new

 

agreements.

Therefore, under this provision of Article 10(1) of the ECT, the Tribunal
finds that Claimant has stated and proved a valid claim for which
Respondent is liable.

iii. Failure to Issue Licenses to the Joint Venture Companies in
Breach of the Joint Venture Agreements and in Disregard of

Presidential Decree No, 83-r.

This claim fails for reasons previously stated in this award in the
discussion under the heading of Fair and Equitable Treatment. In addition,
it fails because the joint venture agreements are not obligations undertaken
by a State organ, but rather by State-owned enterprises, and there is no
basis for concluding that the State-owned enterprises signed these
agreements acling in a governmental capacity, even assuming, arguendo,
that the claim is arbitrable under Article 22 of the ECT.

As regards Presidential Decree No. 83-r, even if it is viewed as creating an
obligation of the State towards the Investor to issue licenses to Petroleum
SUGD, that obligation was in fact performed by issuance of the licenses
on December 20, 2002. No breach of obligation has occurred.

Page 90

G.

271.

273.

274.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

National Treatment under Article 10(7) ECT

This is the so-called National Treatment standard which is a common
protection in many investment treaties, aimed at assuring that foreign

investors receive equal treatment with nationals of the host country.

Claimant argues here that it was a breach of the national treatment
standard to permit the Tajik party in the (wo joint ventures to receive 40%
of the share capital in return for “outdated” machinery, equipment and
other property, while refusing Vivalo the opportunity to contribute its
share of authorized capital in anything other than cash.

The Tribunal notes that no such “refusal” by Respondent or any entity
whose actions are attributable to Respondent is on the recond What is on
the record are the court judgments by which the decision to allow Vivalo
to contribute the Gazpromgeocomservice contract as a contribution in kind
has been annulled. As we haye set out, those decisions cannot be
considered to constitute a breach of the ECT. Moreover, the judgments do
not deny Vivalo the right to make contributions in kind.

The Tribunal would like to make an additional remark: capital
contributions to joint venture companies are matters of contractual
agreement between the founders of the joint venture. At the time when
Vivalo signed the joint venture agreements in June 2001, it was or should
have been well aware of the condition and value of the equipment and
other property being proposed for contribution by the Tajik production
associations who were the co-founders of the companies. It accepted that
contribution and its yaluation at 40% of total capital by signing the

agreements.

Page 91

275.

276.

277.

278.

279.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

There is no evidence that the agreements were not freely negotiated by the
parties or that Vivalo did not freely accept the obligation to contribute its
capital in cash. The fact that it later wished to renegotiate the form of its

contribution does not mean that the original arrangements were improper.

Moreover, there is no evidence that the form or valuation of the parties’
capital contributions was imposed on Vivalo by the State. Vivalo was
under no obligation to conclude the joint venture agreements if it was not

satisfied with the terms that had been negotiated,

Therefore, we find no breach of Article 10(7) of the Treaty.

Expropriation in Violation of Article 13 ECT

Claimant’s claims under Article 13 of the Treaty are based on a theory of
indirect expropriation, namely that the State has taken measures having an
effect equivalent to expropriation. In particular, Claimant argues that his
Investment in the Baldjuvon and Petroleum SUGD joint ventures have
been expropriated by virtue of i) the State’s failure to issue exploration
licenses with respect to the four December 2000 Agreements; ii) the
State’s failure to issue licenses to Baldjuvon followed by the company’s
dissolution by the Supreme Court of Tajikistan on application of the
Ministry of Finance; iii) the State’s failure to issues licenses to Petroleum
SUGD and the subsequent forced reduction of Vivalo’s share interest in
the joint venture; and iv) the failure of the State to offer to pay dividends
from Petroleum SUGD’s activities since March 14, 2003.

The legal standard for indirect expropriation has been discussed in many
investment treaty arbitrations. For present purposes, it may be useful to
refer to the formulation of this standard that is found in the Tecmed v.
Mexico award: “.../t is understood that the measures adopted by a State,

whether regulatory or not, are an indirect de facto expropriation if they

Page 92

280.

281,

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

are irreversible and permanent and if the assets or rights subject to such
measure have been affected in such a way that ‘...any form of exploitation
thereof...’ has disappeared, i.e. the economic value of the use, enjoyment
or disposition of the assets or rights affected by the administrative action
or decision have been neutralized or destroyed... Under international law,
the owner is also deprived of property where the use or enjoyment of
benefits related thereto is exacted or interfered with to a similar extent,
even where legal ownership over the assets in question is not affected, and
so long as the deprivation is not temporary. The government's intention is
less important than the effects of the measures on the owner of the assets
or on the benefits arising from such assets affected by the measures; and
the form of the deprivation measure is less important than its actual

effect."4

As regards the State’s failure to issue licenses under the four December
2000 Agreements, we have already found that this constitutes a breach of
the State’s obligation under the umbrella clause of Article 10(1). Does it

also amount to an expropriation ?

As the standard set out in the Teemed case cited above suggests, for an
indirect expropriation to have occurred in respect of Claimant’s contract
rights under the December 2000 Agreements, the conduct of the State must
result in an irreversible and permanent taking or destruction of Claimant’s
tights. In case of contractual rights, a temporary non-fulfilment of the
State’s contractual obligations is not sufficient to constitute an
expropriation. The State must terminate the contract or at least definitively
refuse to perform its obligation under it. A temporary deprivation will not
suffice to constitute expropriation, cven if il may give rise to a claim of
damages for losses sustained during the period when the investor has been

deprived of the use or enjoyment of his contract rights.

Tecmed v. Mexico, ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/2, Award of May 29, 2003, para. 116.

Page 93

282,

283.

284.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

The December 2000 Agrcements were of unlimited duration. There is no
evidence in the record that they were terminated by either party. Indeed, as
one of his claims for relief in this arbitration, Claimant has sought specific
performance of the State’s obligations under those Agreements, Thus,
while it is true that the failure to issue licenses within a reasonable time
period after signature of the Agreements was a breach of the obligations of
the State under those Agreements, and might have adversely influenced
until now Claimant’s opportunity to exploit what he believes to be highly
yaluable asscts, no permanent taking of Claimant’s contractual rights has
been shown, such that this Tribunal could consider Claimant’s rights to

have been destroyed.

We therefore do not consider the non-issuance of the exploration licenses
under the four December 2000 Agreements as having amounted to an
expropriation under the ‘Treaty. In light of this finding, we need not reach
the further question as to whether the failure to issue the licenses here
would constitute a “measure” within the meaning of the Section 13 of the

Treaty.

As regards the State courts’ dissolution of the Baldjuvon joint venture and
reduction of Vivalo’s share interest in the Petroleum SUGD joint venture,
both of these decisions appears to have resulted from the application of the
Tajik law in effect at the time of the court decisions rendered. In both
cases, according to the court’s analysis, the result was dictated by the fact
that Vivalo had failed to comply with its legal obligation to pay in full its
capital contribution within one year from registration of the respective
joint venture. Claimant contests the Court’s interpretation of the law, but
the Tribunal does not find the Court’s position to be manifestly in

contradiction with the Tajik legislation.

Page 94

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

285. Consequently, the reduction of Vivalo’s share in Petroleum SUGD did not
deprive it of anything to which it had an entitlement, since it had failed to
pay for the balance of its share interest within the time frame and in the
manner required by law and by the Founding Documents, and therefore
had lost its right to do so. This being said, Claimant continues to be the
legal owner of the shares for which it did pay the corresponding capital
contribution, and should therefore be entitled to enjoy the legal rights of a
shareholder, including the right to participate in any dividends which the
company may declare. In his testimony at the hearings, Claimant asserted
at one point that Petroleum SUGD has gone bankrupt and been
dissolved.”> At another point, he asserted that he is still a shareholder of
the joint venture.” In view of these conflicting statements and the absence
of substantiation of the facts, the Tribunal feels unable to find that there
has been an expropriation of Claimant’s remaining investment. While we
have already set out that Petroleum SUGD now seems to be held in part by
the Austrian company KPA (referred to in para. 79 supra), the facts are so
fragmentary that a considerable amount of speculation would be necessary
to conclude that Claimant has lost his investment in Petroleum SUGD.

286. There is no evidence of any State action that has prevented the exercise of
Claimant’s shareholder rights in Petroleum SUGD. Even accepting
Claimant’s assertion that it has received no notices of shareholder
mectings, no financial information on joint venture performance, and no
payment of dividends, such information and payments are normally
provided by the management of the joint venture, and not by the State or a
State organ. Nor is there any indication that these rights no longer exist,
even if they are not being respected by the joint venture company. We

lack any substantiated factual basis to determine whether the company’s

5 Transcript, day 1, pages 154-155, lines 21 ef seg.

© ‘transcript, day 1, page 137, lines 19-2]

Page 95

287.

288.

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

conduct could be attributed to the State. Thus, we find no basis for a claim

of expropriation here.

With respect to the dissolution of Baldjuvon, for the reasons stated earlier,
we do not find that the Tajik courts violated the Treaty by their decision
ordering the liquidation of Baldjuvon. This being said, in the context of a
liquidation, Vivalo should be entitled to its share of any liquidation
balance after the payment of creditors. However, we have no evidence as
to whether any assets remained for distribution to the partners after taking
into account debts owing to the Company’s creditors and, if so, whether
the Court had approved the distribution of that balance without payment to

Vivalo of its pro rata share.

In the absence of such evidence, we conclude that a case of expropriation
has not been established.

X. COSTS OF THE ARBITRATION

289.

290.

291.

Claimant filed its statement of costs as of June 15, 2009 with respect to the
first phase of the arbitration, According to the statement, Claimant costs
for the period August 2006-June 2009 totalled 1,464,582.60 euros, and
consisted of legal representation (980,000 euros), arbitral expenses (SCC
registration fee, the advance deposits and bank charges) (358,582.60

euros) and incurred expenses (126,000 curos).

Respondent was given an opportunity to comment on Claimant’s costs, but

did not do so.
The Tribunal has found for Claimant on jurisdiction and has upheld one of

Claimant’s claims of liability. The other claims of liability have been

rejected,

Page 96

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan

292, The arbitration will therefore continue to a sccond phase during which
Claimant will be asked to present his requests for relief and supporting
evidence with respect to the claim for which Respondent has been held

liable.

293. Under these circumstances, the Tribunal has decided to defer a
determination of costs and an award with respect thereto, until the
tendering of a Final Award in the arbitration or until the arbitration is

otherwise terminated.

Xi. DECISIONS

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal now DECIDES as follows:

A. The Tribunal has jurisdiction over Claimant’s claims that Respondent
has breached its obligations owing to Claimant under Articles 10(1),
10(7) and 13 of Part III of the Energy Charter Treaty;

B. Respondent has breached its obligation owing to Claimant under
Article 10(1) of the Energy Charter Treaty, by failing to perform its
contractual undertaking to ensure the License to carry out solely and
exclusively geological exploration, and natural resource exploitation
works and activities pursuant to the following four Agreements signed
on December 25, 2000 by and between Claimant and the State
Committee on Oil & Gas of the Republic of Tajikistan:

i. Treaty on geological exploration and operation works on the

project of East Soupetau area in the Republic of lajikistan, perspective

for Hydrocarbon raw material (oil, gas);

Page 97

Q

SCC Arhitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of ‘Tajikistan

ii, Treaty on geological exploration and operation works on the
project of Rengan area in the Republic of Tajikistan, perspective for

Hydrocarbon raw material (oil, gas);

iii, Treaty on geological exploration and operation works on the
project of Sargazon area in the Republic of ‘Tajikistan, perspective for

Ilydrocarbon raw material (oil, gas); and a

iv. Treaty on geological exploration and operation works on the
project of Yalgyzkak area in the Republic of Tajikistan, perspective for

Hydrocarbon raw material (oil, gas).

. All other claims brought by Claimant in this arbitration are denied.

The Tribunal retains jurisdiction for the purpose of determining the
relief to be granted with respect to the breach referred to in para. B

above.

. Until a final award on requests for relief or until the arbitration is

otherwise terminated, the determination and allocation of the costs of
the arbitration is deferred.

RRR

Page 98

SCC Arbitration No. V (064/2008)
Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahlou! v. Republic of Tajikistan

We hereby certify that, for purposes of Article 1 of the New York Convention of 1958
on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, this Partial Award
on Jurisdiction and Liability was made in Stockholm, Sweden, on the date set forth
below.

This Partial Award has been signed in cight (8) originals, two for each of the Partics,

one for each member of the Arbitral Tribunal and one for the Arbitration Institute of
the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce.

Place of Arbitration: Stockholm, Sweden

 

Date: Seypdlenadins 2, 2009

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

   

“Bad

Dr. Richard Happ ProfeSsor Iva Zykin

Arbitrator en
ea AC} hwy Ad
leffrey M, Hertzfeld

Chairman of the Tribunal

 

Page 99

