[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION. PLEASE CHECK AGAINST ORIGINAL.]
Page 1 (12)

DECISION of the
SWEDISH SUPREME COURT

Case No.

given in Stockholm on | July 2011 6 170-10

APPELLANT

The Russian Federation

Embassy of the Russian Federation
Gjérwellsgatan 31

112 60 Stockholm

Counsel: Advokat Thomas Tendorf
Al Advokater KB
Riddargatan 13 A
114 51 Stockholm

COUNTERPARTY
Franz J. Sedelmayer
Wendelsteinstrasse 2
DE-82409 Pullach im Isartal

Germany

Counsel: Advokat Jonas Léttiger
Eversheds Advokatbyra AB
Norrlandsgatan 16

111 43 Stockholm

Document ID 56779

 

SUPREME COURT Postal Address Telephone 08-561 666 00 ‘Opening Hours
Riddarhustorget 8 Box 2066 Telefax 08-561 666 86 08:45 — 12:00
103 12 Stockholm E-mail: 13:15 — 15:00
hogsta.domstolen@dom.se
www.hogstadomstolen.se

[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION. PLEASE CHECK AGAINST ORIGINAL.]
SUPEREME COURT O 170-10 Page 2

Counsel: Advokat Dag Wersén
Advokatfirman Wersén AB
Grev Turegatan 13 B

114 46 Stockholm

MATTER

Execution of enforcement measure

APPEALED DECISION
Decision of Svea Court of Appeal

Decision of the Court of Appeal see Appendix

DECISION OF THE SUPREME COURT

The Supreme Court does not grant the appeal.

The Supreme Court’s prior decision on stay of execution shall no longer

apply.

The Russian Federation is ordered to compensate Franz J. Sedelmayer for his
costs in the Supreme Court in the amount of SEK 253,300, out of which SEK
252,600 relates to fees for legal counsel, plus interest pursuant to Section 6 of
the Interest Act from the day of the Supreme Court’s decision until the date of

payment.

[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION. PLEASE CHECK AGAINST ORIGINAL.]
SUPEREME COURT O 170-10 Page 3

MOTIONS BEFORE THE SUPREME COURT ETC.

The Russian Federation has moved that the Supreme Court, in reverting the
decision of the Court of Appeal, upholds the decision of the District Court.
Further, the Russian Federation has moved the Supreme Court to order Franz
J. Sedelmayer to compensate the Russian Federation for its costs in the

District Court as well as in the Court of Appeal.

Franz J. Sedelmayer has disputed any changes to the decision of the Court of

Appeal.

The parties have claimed compensation for costs incurred during the

proceedings before the Supreme Court.

On 8 March 2010, the Supreme Court decided that further measures to
enforce the decision of Svea Court of Appeal of 17 December 2009 in the
matter OA 4239-08 should not be taken until further notice.

GROUNDS

Background and the issue of the present matter

1. After Franz J. Sedelmayer had initiated arbitration proceedings to
resolve a dispute that had arisen between him and the Russian Federation and
an arbitration award had been rendered in 1998, the Russian Federation
initiated challenge proceedings at the Stockholm District Court regarding the
validity of the arbitration award. In 2002, the District Court decided in favor
of Franz J. Sedelmayer and ordered the Russian Federation to compensate
Franz J. Sedelmayer for his costs. Franz J. Sedelmayer requested the

Enforcement Authority to enforce the District Court’s judgment.

2. On 12 September 2003, the Enforcement Authority ruled that the
judgment of the Stockholm District Court could be executed. When

[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION. PLEASE CHECK AGAINST ORIGINAL.]
SUPEREME COURT O 170-10

investigating the enforcement matter, the Enforcement Authority found,
among other things, that the Russian Federation was the registered owner of
the real property Lidingé Kostern 5, a multi-family property. Approximately
sixty individuals were registered as residents at the property and two
companies, Fastighetsmaklare Dick Lindstrém AB and NBN Networks AB
(the business purpose of which was stated as arranging travel tours for
tourists in Russia and Sweden etc.), had their respective registered address at
the property. The question arose whether or not the rental payments collected
by the Russian Federation from lessees at the property could be subject to

distraint.

3. In its decision of 9 May 2005, the Enforcement Authority held that the
requested execution measure could not be granted. On 25 April 2008, Nacka
District Court upheld the Enforcement Authority’s decision. Upon Franz J.
Sedelmayer’s appeal of the District Court’s decision, Svea Court of Appeal
held that distraint of the property and the rental payments paid by the people
registered at the property and the company that has its business address there

is not barred.

4. The Russian Federation has claimed that it enjoys diplomatic immunity
with respect to the jurisdiction of Swedish courts in the enforcement matter,
and that enforcement of the judgment of the Stockholm District Court with
respect to the currently relevant property is barred. The Russian Federation
has, with respect to the matter of enforcement, claimed that the property is

used for official purposes of the Russian Federation.

5. The main issue in the matter is whether, due to state immunity with
respect to a foreign state’s property, distraint of the property Lidingd Kostern
5 and rental payments collected by the Russian Federation from the office and

the apartments located at the property is barred or not.

Page 4

 

[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION. PLEASE CHECK INST ORIGINAL.]|
SUPEREME COURT O 170-10 Page 5

Jurisdiction in the enforcement matter

6. The question of a state’s immunity from jurisdiction should not be

decided upon separately in matters of enforcement in the foreign state’s

property.

Immunity from enforcement with respect to a foreign state’s property

7. State immunity is deemed as an inherent consequence of the principle
that states are sovereign and mutually equal, and consequently do not have
jurisdiction over each other. In general, it can be said that the principle of
state immunity has evolved from a previous right for states to claim absolute

immunity to a current more restrictive practice.

8. The more restrictive practice on states’ immunity from jurisdiction has
led to the view that immunity currently applies only sovereign acts, i.e. acts
by the state as a state. A state’s commercial or other actions under private law
are, in the more restrictive theory on immunity, excluded from the right to

claim immunity before another state’s courts.

9. Immunity from enforcement in state property is a consequence of the
view that states are equal. It has been viewed as a bigger intrusion in a state’s
sovereignty to subject its property to distraint than subjecting the state to the
jurisdiction of foreign courts. Internationally, courts have been reluctant to
not grant diplomatic immunity from enforcement measures. It appears that the
evolution towards a more restrictive scope of the immunity, as is the case
with jurisdiction, has not taken place with respect to immunity from
enforcement measures. Further, there is a lack of international case law with
respect to limitations in the immunity from enforcement measures. In the
Government Bill Immunity of states and their property, it is noted that in
Western countries also the principle on immunity from enforcement measures
in international case law has evolved towards a more restrictive theory,

pursuant to which immunity from enforcement applies to state property that is

[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION. PLEASE CHECK AGAINST ORIGINAL.]
SUPEREME COURT O 170-10 Page 6

used for official state purposes, but enforcement measures are permitted with
respect to property that is used or intended to be used for commercial
purposes, even if the state has not rescinded its immunity (Government Bill
2008/09:204 pages 45 and 56; cf. e.g. Hazel Fox, The Law of Sate Immunity,
2" edition, 2008, page 599 pp., and August Reinisch, European Court
Practice Concerning State Immunity from Enforcement Measures, in the

European Journal of International Law, Vol. 17 (2006), page 803 pp.)

10. In its rulings NJA 1999 p. 821 and NJA 2009 p. 905, the Supreme
Court has applied the restrictive immunity theory with respect to state
immunity from jurisdiction. In the latter ruling, it was held that a state could
not claim immunity as a ground for inadmissibility as defense against a claim
for rental payments under a lease agreement for the premises of the state’s

embassy in Sweden.

11. Inthe rulings NJA 1942 p. 65 and p. 342 on the so-called
Sequestration-boats (Sw. Kvarstadsbdtarna) the Supreme Court stated that the
principle of immunity was particularly rigorously upheld with respect to
enforcement measures. There are no rulings of later date in which the
Supreme Court has had to decide on the issue of immunity from enforcement
measures. However, in the ruling NJA 2009 p. 905 the Supreme Court held
that a judgment ordering a party to make a payment in general is enforceable,
also when the paying party is a state. The Supreme Court also stated that,
even if there is great discrepancy in the opinions of states on when immunity
can be claimed, it is generally agreed that it is possible to enforce judgments
on payment at least with respect to certain state property. However, in said
case it was not necessary for the Supreme Court to rule on the enforcement

issue.

12. On 2 December 2004, the General Assembly of the United Nations
adopted a convention on immunity of states and their property (United
Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their

Property). The convention is largely — but not entirely — a codification of

 

[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION. PLEASE CHECK AGAINST ORIGINAL.]
SUPEREME COURT O 170-10 Page 7

customary law. On several issues, it forms a compromise between the
opinions of different states. In 2009 the Swedish Parliament decided in favor
of the government’s proposal set out in Government Bill 2008/09:204
mentioned in item 9 above that Sweden should ratify the convention and
incorporate it into Swedish law. Neither the convention, nor the Act
(2009:1514) on jurisdictional immunities of states and their property has

entered into force.

13. The convention provides rules on immunity from enforcement measures
in connection with court procedures in Articles 18-21. Articles 18 and 19, that
govern state immunity prior to and after a court ruling, provide the main rule
that no enforcement measures with respect to state property may be taken
other than as provided in the Articles. Under certain circumstances it is
possible to use enforcement measures subsequent to a court ruling even if the
state has not approved it. The permissibility of the enforcement is in these
cases, as far as is relevant for the present matter, dependent on for what
purpose the state holds the relevant property. Property that, as far as is now
relevant, may be subject to enforcement measures subsequent to a court
ruling is described in Article 19 (c) in the English wording as “property [...]
specifically in use or intended for use by the State for other than government
non-commercial purposes”. There is no official Swedish language version. A

translation is available in the act that has not yet entered into force.

14. The 2004 convention must be considered to state the principle currently
accepted by many states that enforcement may be taken with respect to at
least some state property, namely with respect to property that is used for
other purpose than government non-commercial purposes (see Article 19 (c)).
However, there is an apparent disagreement — with respect to subject matter
and over time — on what should be considered a holding for government non-
commercial purposes. Thus, the meaning of the phrase must be narrowed
down. In this context, the phrase must generally be considered to entail that
immunity from enforcement measures can be claimed at least with respect to

property that is used for a state’s official functions. However, the phrase

[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION. PLEASE CHECK AGAINST ORIGINAL.]
SUPEREME COURT O 170-10 Page 8

 

cannot be considered to mean that immunity from enforcement measures can
be successfully claimed solely based on the fact that a property is owned by a
state and used for government non-commercial purposes. Enforcement
measures should however be held impermissible if the purpose of the holding
of the property is of a more specific nature, such as when the property is used
for state acts proper and similar purposes of official nature or when the
property is of such particular nature as stated in Article 21 of the 2004 UN

convention.

15. An individual property may be used for several, various purposes.
Through the provisions on state immunity provided under international law in
the Vienna convention, the physical integrity of, inter alia, embassy
personnel, the residences of diplomats (and certain other personnel), official
vehicles and archives is protected (Articles 22, 24, 30 and 37 of the Vienna
convention on Diplomatic Relations of 18 April 1961, SO 1967:1; Act
1976:661 on immunities and privileges in certain cases). The limits of state
immunity and diplomatic immunity do not coincide. Thus, the limits of state
immunity cannot be immediately decided by a comparing with the limits of
diplomatic immunity. It is clear, however, that the real property of a state,
which is to a substantial extent — but not necessarily mainly — used as
premises for the state’s officials (or for a different official use which is tied to
the representation based on a bilateral agreement), should be covered by
immunity from enforcement measures, since the property is used for the

carrying out of diplomatic functions.

16. However, it is not clearly evident what applies if the real property is
used to some extent for official purposes or purposes nearly linked to the
official purposes (such as providing apartments to the personnel covered by
diplomatic immunity), but is mainly used for other purposes represented by
the foreign state, for purposes that are a prerequisite to or consequence of a
state run operation that is commercial or otherwise non-official in nature, or
both. In these situations it must be decided whether the different purposes of

the use together make up the specific nature that is required to safeguard the

[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION. PLEASE CHECK AGAINST ORIGINAL.]
SUPEREME COURT O 170-10 Page 9

property from enforcement measures. When deciding on these matters it is
possible that the respect for state immunity with respect to property used for
official purposes and that a foreign state cannot be forced to hand over
information it does not wish to hand over, may have the consequence that the
regular rules on evidence requirements in enforcement matters cannot be fully

upheld.

Assessment of the present matter

17. From the agreement of 1927 between the Union of Socialist Soviet
Republics and Sweden (as later confirmed to apply between Sweden and the
Russian Federation) with respect to the rights and obligations of the Russian
trade delegation’s in Stockholm (SO 1928:8) it is clear that the trade
delegation is connected to the representation of the Union in Sweden and that
it should enjoy exterritorial privileges for its premises in Stockholm. In a
written notice from the trade delegation received by the Swedish Ministry for
Foreign Affairs on 26 May 1976 the trade delegation informed that it would
move from its old premises at the property Liding6 Kostern 5 to new
premises at Ringvagen 1, Lidingé. Thus, the property Kostern 5 can no longer
be considered to be notified as official premises of the trade delegation
pursuant to the agreement of 1927. Nevertheless and as noted above, the
Russian Federation has claimed that the property is exclusively used for the
official purposes of the Russian Federation and thus enjoys immunity from

enforcement measures.

18. The claim that the property is exclusively used for the official purposes
of the Russian Federation has been disputed by Franz J. Sedelmayer, who has
claimed that it is used for commercial purposes. Franz J. Sedelmayer has

submitted into evidence his own investigation, as well as the investigation of
mainly publicly available written sources carried out by the Enforcement

Authority, relating to the actual use of the property at the time of the decision
of the Enforcement Authority, in order to show that the property was used as

residence for approximately sixty people, out of which no one was notified as

[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION. PLEASE CHECK AGAINST ORIGINAL.]
SUPEREME COURT O 170-10 Page 10

a diplomat with the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and ten were Swedish

citizens, and that two Swedish companies had their address at the property.

19. The Russian Federation has stated, in response to Franz J. Sedelmayer’s
claims, that the ground floor of the building is an archive used both by the
trade delegation and the embassy, as well as a garage used for diplomatic
vehicles. Before the Svea Court of Appeal, the Russian Federation stated that
the property is not a regular commercial housing property, that out of the 48
apartments on the property four were used as residence for diplomats, that
eleven apartments were used as residence for other personnel working for the
trade delegation or the embassy, that 13 apartments were used by students or
researchers as a result of the agreement between the Russian Federation and
Sweden on financial and technical-scientific cooperation within the fields of
agriculture and foods industry and which can be realized inter alia through
exchange students and researchers, that 14 apartments were used as
temporary residence and offices for people with official assignments to
Sweden and that six apartments were used by people with special needs and
the daughter of a former diplomat. The Russian Federation has further
claimed that the tenants pay compensation only for actual costs. Before the
Supreme Court, the Russian Federation has, among other things, added that
the property comprises premises used for official purposes of such nature that
they cannot be further divulged without breaching the Russian Federation’s
right to integrity and that as from | July 2010 all apartments will be used by

people who have diplomatic immunity.

20. The assessment as to whether the use of the property is of such specific
nature that distraint of the property would be barred should, since the property
was not notified as official premises of the trade delegation and since what
has been claimed by Franz J. Sedelmayer cannot be left without
consideration, in this case be based on the actual use of the property. The
relevant time of use for this assessment is, in conformity with what must be
considered to have been established internationally, when the application was

received by the Enforcement Authority. Thus, changes in the use of

[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION. PLEASE CHECK AGAINST ORIGINAL.]
SUPEREME COURT O 170-10 Page 11

 

apartments and premises that have taken place thereafter shall not be taken

into consideration.

21. The evidence in the matter provides that the property Lidingd Kostern 5
is a housing property, which at the time relevant for the assessment was not
used for official purposes of the representation of the Russian Federation or
the trade delegation related thereto. However, according to what the
Federation stated before the Court of Appeal, 15 apartments were used for
diplomats or personnel at these, and two premises were used as archive and
storage of diplomatic vehicles. This use relates to such apartments, premises
or property, the physical integrity of which is protected by the Vienna
Convention. The question whether this use is sufficient grounds to make
distraint of the property inadmissible then turns on the other use of the

property.

22. The other use of the property was for purposes under private law but
that were of non-commercial, but also non-official nature. Some apartments
have been let to researchers and students who visit Sweden as a result of a
bilateral agreement between the Russian Federation and Sweden, but the
provision of the apartments is based on agreements between these individuals
and the Russian Federation and not on an official state act between the
Russian Federation and the Swedish state. These lease agreements cannot be
considered so closely connected to the fulfillment of the agreement that such

use is for official purposes.

23. In light of the above, it is clear that the property Lidingd Kostern 5 was
not to a substantial part used for the official purposes of the Russian
Federation. The nature of the use has not otherwise been of such specific
nature as to grant the property immunity from enforcement in the present

enforcement matter.

24. Acclaim for rent is an asset that has arisen through an act that is of a

private nature, and typically it is an asset that is of a commercial nature. The

[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION. PLEASE CHECK AGAINST ORIGINAL.]
SUPEREME COURT O 170-10 Page 12

fact that the rent is meant to only cover or assist in covering the costs for the

administration of the building is irrelevant in this respect.

25. In light of the above, enforcement of the decision of the District Court
ordering the Russian Federation to compensate Franz J. Sedelmayer for his
costs through distraint of the property Lidingd Kostern 5 and of the rental
payments related to that property is not barred. Thus, the decision of the
Court of Appeal shall be upheld.

{ILLEGIBLE SIGNATURES]

The decision has been made by: Supreme Court Justices Leif Thorsson,
Kerstin Calissendorff (Reporting Justice), Per Virdesten, Gudmund Toijer
and Johnny Herre

Reporting clerk: Kerstin Norman

True copy:
{ILLEGIBLE SIGNATURE]

