International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
1818H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433 U.S.A.
Telephone: (202) 458-1534 Faxes: (202) 522-2615 / 522-2027
Web site: http://www.worldbank.org/icsid

CERTIFICATE

MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A.
Vv.

Republic of Chile

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7)
Annulment Proceeding

I hereby certify that the attached document is a true copy of the Decision on the
Application for Annulment of the Republic of Chile signed by the Members of the ad hoc
Committee.

AUTON

Ana Palacio
Secretary-General

Washington, D.C., March 21, 2007

 

MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. & MTD Chile S.A.
v.
The Republic of Chile

(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/7)

(Annulment Proceeding)

 

Decision on Annulment

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee

H.E. Judge Gilbert Guillaume
Professor James Crawford
Dr. Sara Ordofiez Noriega

Secretary of the Committee

Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu

Representing the Claimants: Representing the Respondent:
Mr. Oscar M. Garibaldi Mr. Claudio Castillo Castillo
Mr. Eugene D. Gulland, and Jefe Division Juridica

Ms. Karin Kizer

Ministerio de Economia de Chile

Covington & Burling and

Washington, D.C.

Mr. Ronald E.M. Goodman and
Ms. Gaela K. Gehring Flores
Winston & Strawn LLP
Washington, D.C.

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 21 March 2007

op>

™

TABLE OF CONTENTS

paragraph

THE ANNULMENT PROCEEDINGS...
THE DISPUTE BETWEEN THE PARTIES
THE TRIBUNAL’S AWARD
(1) Overview
(2) The Tribunal’s findings on fair and equitable treatment... ccseeceeeeseeseteeeeteeneeeeee 27
(a) The fair and equitable treatment standard

(b) Application of the standard to the facts ...

(c) The Tribunal’s treatment of Chile’s notice argumen

(d) The Tribunal’s finding on the role of FIC approval.

(e) The Tribunal’s finding on regulatory risk

f) The Tribunal’s conclusion on fair and equitable treatment

(3) The Tribunal’s finding on contributory faul
(4) The Tribunal’s assessment of damages.... we
THE GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT .......ceeeceescsceceeeeseseseseseseseseseseeseseseseseaeseaeseeeeeed
(1) Introduction
(2) Manifest excess of powers
(3) Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure........ceecseecesesesseeeeeeeeeeeeee
(4) Failure to state reasons
(5) The scope of annulment authority
THE GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT APPLIED
(1) Relationship between grounds for annulment.
(2) Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure
(3) Fair and equitable treatment: manifest excess of powers
(a) Failure to apply international law.

(b) Failure to apply Chilean law...

(c) Unauthorised ex aequo et bono determination:

(4) Fair and equitable treatment: failure to state reasons
(a) The implications of FIC approval

(b) Chile's "urban policy"

 

 

 

 

 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(c) Inconsistency of Chilean conduct and the "unity of the State” oo... 87

(d) Conclusion 90
(5) Contributory fault 93
(6) The of d 102
(7) Conclusions 107
COSTS 109
DECISION 113

 

A. THE ANNULMENT PROCEEDINGS

1. On 20 September 2004, the Republic of Chile (“Chile” or “the Respondent”) filed
with the Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or “the Centre”) an application requesting the annulment of an Award dated 25
May 2004 rendered by the Tribunal in the arbitration commenced by MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd.
and MTD Chile S.A. (collectively “the Claimants” or “MTD”).

2. The Application was made within the time period provided in Article 52(2) of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States (the “ICSID Convention”). In it, the Respondent sought annulment of the Award on
three of the five grounds set out in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention, specifically that:
the Tribunal had manifestly exceeded its powers; that there has been a serious departure from
a fundamental rule of procedure; and that the Award has failed to state the reasons on which
it is based. The Application also contained a request, under Article 52(5) of the Convention
and Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration
Rules”), for a stay of enforcement of the Award pending decision on the Application for

Annulment.

3. The Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application on 30 September 2004 and
on that date, in accordance with Rule 50(2) of the, ICSID Arbitration Rules, transmitted a
Notice of Registration to the parties, at the same time forwarding to the Claimants copies of
the Application and accompanying documentation. The parties were also notified that,
pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2), the enforcement of the Award was being

provisionally stayed.

4. By letter of 18 January 2005, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the Arbitration Rules,
the parties were notified that the ad hoc Committee had been constituted, and was composed
of Judge Gilbert Guillaume, Professor James Crawford and Dr. Sara Ordofiez Noriega. The
parties were further notified by letter of 24 January 2005, that Judge Gilbert Guillaume had
been designated President of the Committee, and on 16 March 2005, the Centre sent to the
parties copies of Declarations signed by Members of the Committee pursuant to ICSID

Arbitration Rule 52(2).

5. The first session of the Committee was held on 23 March 2005, at the premises of the
World Bank in Paris, France, and several issues of procedure were agreed and decided. Also,
at that meeting, the Claimants made a request under Arbitration Rule 54(2) for the stay of
enforcement of the Award to be terminated unless appropriate security was put in place by
Chile. The Committee, having heard oral arguments of the parties in that regard, established
the schedule for the parties to file any further submissions that they would have in writing.
By agreement of the parties, the thirty-day deadline for a decision under Arbitration Rule
54(2) was extended on the understanding that the Committee would make its decision

promptly after the written submissions.

6. In its Decision of 1 June 2005, the Committee ordered that the stay of execution be
continued without the need for Chile to put any security in place.' It did so on the ground
that the only prejudice the Claimants would suffer was in respect of delay which is, however,
incidental to the Convention system of annulment and could be remedied by the payment of
interest in the event the annulment application is unsuccessful. In particular the Committee
noted Chile’s representations (a) that the ICSID Convention has been fully implemented
under Chilean law, with the consequence that an ICSID award is to be given exactly the same
effect as a final judgment of the Chilean courts, and (b) that in conformity with its established

practice, Chile will promptly comply with the present Award, if it is not annulled.”

7. In accordance with the procedural timetable laid down by the Committee at its first
session on 23 March 2005, and as agreed by the parties, the Respondent filed its Memorial in
support of the request for annulment on 25 July 2005, the Claimants filed a Counter
Memorial on 7 December 2005, the Respondent filed a Reply on 25 January 2006, and on 8
March 2006, the Claimants filed a Rejoinder. The Respondent’s Memorial was accompanied
by an Expert Opinion of Mr. Jan Paulsson; annexed to its Reply was a Supplemental Opinion
of Mr. Paulsson and an Expert Opinion by Sir Arthur Watts. The Claimants’ Counter-
Memorial was accompanied by an Expert Opinion of Professor Christoph H. Schreuer;
Supplementary Comments by Professor Schreuer were annexed to its Rejoinder.

' MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. & MTD Chile S.A. v. The Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7)

(Annulment Proceeding), Decision on the Respondent’s Request for a Continued Stay of Execution,
available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/MTD.pdf.

2 Decision on the Respondent’s Request for a Continued Stay of Execution, paras. 29, 35 (citing Chilean
Presidential Decree No. 1304, Diario Oficial, 9 January 1992).

8. A one-day hearing in this annulment proceeding was held at the World Bank offices
in Paris on 10 April 2006, at which counsel for both parties presented their arguments and
submissions, and responded to questions from the Members of the Committee. The parties
subsequently made observations on the transcripts made of the hearing, which have been
taken into account by the Committee. Present at the hearing were: Members of the
Annulment Committee: H.E. Judge Gilbert Guillaume, Professor James Crawford, and Dr.
Sara Ordofiez Noriega; Secretary of the Committee: Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu; Claimants’
representatives: Mr. Oscar Garibaldi, Mr. Eugene D. Gulland, and Ms. Karin Kizer, of
Covington & Burling, and Mr. Azmil Khalid and Mr. Vincent Lee of MTD Equity Sdn Bhd.
and MTD Chile S.A.; and representatives of the Respondent: Mr. Ronald E.M. Goodman,
Ms. Gaela K. Gehring Flores, Ms. Geraldine Fischer, and Mr. Kelby Ballena of Winston &
Strawn LLP, Mr. Claudio Castillo Castillo, Head of the Legal Division, Ministry of
Economic Development and Reconstruction of Chile, Mr. Eduardo Bobadilla Brinkmann,
Legal Counsel of the Ministry of Economic Development and Reconstruction of Chile, and
Mr. Eduardo Escalona Vasquez, Legal Counsel of the Ministry of Economic Development

and Reconstruction of Chile.

9. In the absence of any agreed request by the parties to vary the rules of procedure laid
down in the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules, the annulment proceeding was
conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 3 of Chapter IV of the

ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules.

10. In the course of the present proceedings, Members of the Committee have deliberated
by various means of communication, including a meeting in Paris on 11 April 2006, and have

taken into account all pleadings, documents and testimony before them.

B. THE DISPUTE BETWEEN THE PARTIES

11. Following discussions with various Chilean officials, MTD Equity Sdn Bhd (a
Malaysian company) and its wholly owned subsidiary, MTD Chile S.A. (a Chilean
company), decided to pursue negotiations concerning a mixed-use planned community in the
small town of Pirque, south of Santiago. The proposed site was zoned for agricultural use

and, as the Claimants knew, would require rezoning in order to be developed. Following

negotiations with the Chilean owner of the land, Mr. Jorge Fontaine Aldunate, and with three
Chilean agencies, the Foreign Investment Commission (“FIC”), the Servicio de Vivienda y
Urbanizacion (“SERVIU”) and the Secretario Regional Ministerial (“SEREMI”), the
Claimants entered into a Promissory Contract on 13 December 1996. The Promissory
Contract was conditional upon FIC’s approval of the Claimants’ investment. It provided for
the development of the land in two tranches and the creation of a Chilean corporation, El
Principal Inversiones S.A. (“EPSA”) to be owned 51% by the Claimants and 49% by Mr.

Fontaine.

12. On 14 January 1997, the Claimants filed an application with the FIC for approval of
an initial investment of US$17.136 million, for a project described as development of “a
township of 600 hectares of Fundo El Principal de Pirque, which will be a self-sufficient
satellite city, with houses, apartments for diverse socio-economical strata, schools, hospitals,
universities, supermarkets, commerce of all sorts, services and all other components
necessary for self-sufficiency.”? The application was approved by the FIC on 3 March 1997.
A standard Foreign Investment Contract was signed by the FIC and the Claimants on 18
March 1997; it provided that MTD would “develop a real estate project on 600 hectares of
Fundo El Principal de Pirque. The aforementioned project consists of the construction of a
self-sufficient satellite city, with houses, apartments, schools, hospitals, commerce, services,
etc..”* After signature of this first Contract, the Claimants made a US$8.4 million capital
contribution to EPSA and with US$8.736 million purchased 51% of the shares in EPSA from

Mr. Fontaine.

13. On 8 April 1997 the Claimants submitted a second application with the FIC for the
investment of additional working capital of US$364,000, which was approved. A second
standard Foreign Investment Contract, likewise specifying the location of the project, was

signed on 13 May 1997.5

14. Both Foreign Investment Contracts contained the following clause:

3 Award, para. 51.

Award, para. 54.

Much later, on 9 September 1999, a third Foreign Investment Contract was concluded. It did not
specify the location of the Project. See Award, para. 84.

4. In any event, it is established that the Foreign Investor shall be subject
to the current laws and regulations in effect regarding its activities. The
present authorization is without prejudice to any others which, pursuant to
such laws and regulations must be granted by the competent authorities.

It was not disputed that the word “others” in clause 4 refers to other authorizations required

by Chilean laws and regulations.

15. The zoning of the site at Pirque was covered by the Plano Regulador Metropoliano de
Santiago (“PRMS”) and zoning changes for the Project were handled by the SEREMI. On 16
April 1998, the Claimants were informed that the Project was inconsistent with the
Government’s urban development policy. On 3 June 1998, the SEREMI wrote to MTD
stating that the PRMS would not be changed: therefore the zoning changes required for the
Project to go ahead were not approved. The Claimants’ request for assistance from the FIC

was rejected. On 4 November 1998, the Minister formally rejected the Project.

16. On 2 June 1999, the Claimants notified the Respondent that an investment dispute
existed under the terms of a 1992 Agreement between the Government of Malaysia and the
Government of the Republic of Chile for the Promotion and Protection of Investments (the
BIT).° At the end of the three-month negotiation period required by Article 6(3) of the BIT
before the dispute could be brought to arbitration, the dispute remained unresolved. At the
Respondent’s request, the negotiation period was extended by 30 days but no agreement was

reached.

17. On 26 June 2001, the Claimants filed the request for arbitration. The Claimants
alleged, first, that the Respondent had breached its obligation of fair and equitable treatment
under the BIT when, having created and encouraged the strong expectation that the Project
was feasible from a regulatory viewpoint in the specific proposed location, it subsequently

disapproved that location after the Claimants had irrevocably committed their investment.

18. Secondly, the Claimants relied on the most-favoured-nation clause in Article 3(1) of

the BIT, which provides that investments “shall receive treatment which is fair and equitable,

6 Agreement between the Government of Malaysia and the Government of the Republic of Chile for the

Promotion and Protection of Investments, 11 November 1992 (in force as of 4 August 1995). See Spanish
version of the BIT, available at http://www.unctad.org/sections/dite/iia/docs/bits/chile_malasia_sp.pdf.

and not less favourable than that accorded to investments made by investors of any third
State.” The Claimants argued that the MFN clause attracted several provisions of other
Chilean BITs. In particular it relied on Article 3(1) of the BIT with Denmark,’ requiring the
host State to observe “any obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments,” an
obligation which in this case extended to the Foreign Investment Contracts. The Claimants
also contended that the Respondent had breached Article 3(3) of the Treaty with Croatia,
which relates to impairment by unreasonable and discriminatory measures, as well as Article
3(2), which provides that when a contracting party had “admitted an investment in its

territory, it shall grant the necessary permits in accordance with its laws and regulations.”*

19. Thirdly, the Claimants argued that the refusal to grant the necessary permits amounted

to an indirect expropriation in breach of Article 4 of the BIT.

20. In respect of these breaches MTD claimed “all damages to which it may be entitled
under applicable law, including, without limitation, (a) all damnum emergens suffered by
MTD as a consequence of the Respondent's breach of the Investment Contracts and the
Treaty, including the amounts invested under the Investment Contracts and all costs and
expenses incurred by MTD in its efforts to carry out the Project; (b) all Jucrum cessans that
MTD would have derived from its investment had the Republic of Chile allowed the Project

to go forward,” together with costs and compound interest.

21. The Respondent submitted that any damage suffered was caused by a lack of due
diligence by the Claimants. The trust placed in Mr. Fontaine, the lack of independent
professional advice in the urban sector and the acceptance of an exorbitant land valuation at
the time of making the investment were the effective causes of the Claimants’ losses. At no
stage did the Respondent or any of its officers commit to grant the planning approval which,

as the Claimants knew or ought to have known, was required by law. On the contrary,

7 Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Chile and the Government of the Kingdom of

Denmark the Promotion and | Protection of , 28 May 1993 (in force: 3
November 1995): 1935 UNTS 263, available at
hitp://www.unetad.org/sections/dite/iia/docs/bits/chile_denmark.paf
The text of the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Chile and the Government of
the Republic of Croatia concerning the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of , 28 ber 1993
{in force: 15 June 1996), available at ttp://www.unetad.org/sections/dite/ia/does/bits/chile_croatia.pdf.
Request for Arbitration, para. 74(iii).

 
  

 

according to the Respondent, MTD was told in the most explicit terms, at a meeting on 6
November 1996 attended by the Minister and the SEREMI, that there was a major obstacle to
the Project in terms of the PRMS. In these circumstances MTD could have had no legitimate
expectation as to the feasibility of the Project from a regulatory point of view, a position
unaffected by the terms of the Foreign Investment Contracts concluded between the FIC and

MTD.

Cc. THE TRIBUNAL’S AWARD

22. By an award of 25 May 2004, the Tribunal (Dr. Andres Rigo Sureda, President;
Messrs Marc Lalonde and Rodrigo Oreamuno Blanco) held, on the one hand, that Chile had
breached its obligation of fair and equitable treatment under Article 3(1) of the BIT but, on
the other hand, that the Claimants had failed to protect themselves from business risks
inherent in their investment in Chile. Responsibility for the loss being equally divided, the
Tribunal concluded that the Respondent should pay 50% of the assessed damages, viz.,
US$5,871,322.42, plus compound interest, and that each party should pay its own costs and

50% of the costs of arbitration.

qd) Overview

23. | Most aspects of the Tribunal’s Award are not contested before the Committee and

need only be briefly noted. The Tribunal held that:

(a) MTD Equity was an investor under Article 1(c)(ii) of the BIT; MTD Chile,
being wholly-owned by MTD Equity, was deemed to be a Malaysian national
for purposes of arbitration proceedings in accordance with Article 6(2); thus

both Claimants had standing to claim under the BIT.'°

(b) There was no breach of the MFN clause (in relation to Article 3(1) of the
Denmark BIT) by reason of any alleged breach of the Foreign Investment
Contracts. As those Contracts made clear, the authorization to invest was only
the beginning of a process which would require further permits and approvals.

Since Chile was not in breach of the Foreign Investment Contracts in refusing

‘Award, paras. 92-94,

24.

(©)

(d)

(e)

permission for the Project, there was nothing on which the umbrella clause in

Article 3(1) of the Denmark BIT could operate.'!

Adequate reasons having been provided for Chile’s refusal to modify or avoid
the PRMS, there was no basis for considering such refusals to be

wo 2
discriminatory.

The Respondent did not breach the MFN clause (in relation to Article 3(2) of
the Croatia BIT) by refusing to change the PRMS to allow the Project to
proceed. The Claimants had no right to a change in the normative framework
of the country where it invested, and the PRMS was part of that framework.

All that the Claimants could expect was that the law be applied.'°

Since the Claimants “did not have a right to the amendment of the PRMS,” the
refusal of permission did not amount to an expropriation; rather the issue was
one of unfair treatment by the State when it approved an investment which was

against the policy of the State itself at that time.'*

Chile also does not contest certain findings of the Tribunal which were consequential

upon its finding of a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard. In particular it does

not contest:

(f)

(g)

(h)

the Tribunal’s finding that the Claimants failed to take adequate and
reasonable measures to investigate planning issues and to protect themselves in

their contractual dealings with Mr Fontaine; '>
except on two points, its calculation of the total damages;'°

its finding that compound interest is payable.”

What Chile does contest in these annulment proceedings are the following findings:

Award, paras. 179-89.

Award, paras. 190-96.

Award, paras. 197-205.

Award, paras. 207-14.

Award, para. 168-78.

Award, paras. 215-48. See infra para. 25(k) for the points of disagreement.
Award, paras. 249-51.

(ji the Tribunal’s finding that “approval of an investment by the FIC for a project
that is against the urban policy of the Government is a breach of the obligation

to treat an investor fairly and equitably,”'*

G) its finding that the damages must be shared equally between the parties, on the

basis that each was partly responsible for the loss,'” and

(k) __ two specific aspects of the damages calculation: one concerning the assessed
price of the land; one concerning the Tribunal’s choice of 4 November 1998 as
the cut-of point for damages calculation when 3 June 1998 (or even some

earlier date) should have been chosen.”

26. Before turning to the grounds for annulment invoked by Chile and their application to
these aspects of the Award, it is helpful to set out in more detail the reasons given by the

Tribunal for reaching the challenged decisions.

(2) The Tribunal’s findings on fair and equitable treatment
(a) The fair and equitable treatment standard

27. Article 2 of the BIT is entitled “Promotion and Protection of Investments.” Article
2(2) provides that:
Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall at all times be

accorded fair and equitable treatment and shall enjoy full protection and
security in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

Article 3(1) (entitled “Most Favoured Nation Provisions”) provides:

Investments made by investors of either Contracting Party in the territory of

the other Contracting Party shall receive fair and equitable treatment, and no

less favourable than that granted to the investments made by investors of any

third State.
There are thus not one but two provisions in the BIT providing that investments “shall
receive fair and equitable treatment.” Furthermore, Article 4(1) of the Croatia-Chile BIT

provides that the right to fair and equitable treatment shall “not be hindered in practice.”

Award, para. 166; see, generally, Award, paras. 107-67; Request for Annulment, paras. 52-81.
Award, paras. 242-46; Request for Annulment, paras. 82-83.
Award, para. 240(ii); Request for Annulment, paras. 84-85.

-10-

After drawing attention to the various sources of the obligation in the BIT,?! the Tribunal

referred in generic terms to the “obligation to treat investments fairly and equitably.”””

28. | While noting that the parties appeared to agree on the meaning of the fair and

equitable treatment standard, the Tribunal discussed aspects of the standard, concluding that:

[I]Jn terms of the BIT, fair and equitable treatment should be understood to be
treatment in an even-handed and just manner, conducive to fostering the
promotion of foreign investment. Its terms are framed as a pro-active
statement . . . rather than prescriptions for a passive behavior of the State or
avoidance of prejudicial conduct to the investors.”*

After citing a passage from the award in the TECMED case” it concluded: “This is the

standard that the Tribunal will apply to the facts of this case.””>

(b) Application of the standard to the facts

29. Turning to the application of this standard to this dispute, in its presentation of this

part of its claim the Claimants identified the key question as follows:

Whether the state of Chile may properly enter into a binding foreign
investment contract that specifies the purposes and location of a particular
investment project while, at the same time, knowing (and not telling the
investor) that the Government will never allow the investor to carry out the
project that is the premise of the contract.”°

To this question the Tribunal gave a negative answer.”

30. In principle, given the Tribunal’s interpretation of the fair and equitable treatment
standard (to which the Committee will return), Chile could have responded to this question in
four ways. First, it could have argued that it was not the policy of Chile at the time the
investment was made that the Project would never be allowed and that the definitive decision

not to allow it was taken later: on that basis there would have been no inconsistency between

au

Award, paras. 105(i), 107, 113, 116.

See infra paras. 78-79 on the relation between the various sources of obligation and the Tribunal’s
dispositif.
3 Award, para. 113; see also Award, paras. 109-13 for the discussion.

Award, para. 114 (citing Técnicas Medioambientales TECMED S.A. v. United Mexican States, 1CSID
Case No. ARB(AF)00/2, (2003) 10 ICSID Reports 130, 192-93, para. 154).

25 Award, para. 116.

Award, para. 129 (quoting Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 36).

22

24

26

-ll-

the Foreign Investment Contracts and the eventual planning decision. Second, it could have
argued that Chile’s urban development policy for the region was settled and was adverse to
the Project but that the Claimants were expressly put on notice of this fact. Third, it could
have argued that the “binding foreign investment contract” to which the Claimants refer did
not entail any commitment by Chile as to the location of the Project but was simply
indicative. Fourth, it could have argued that irrespective of the answers to the first three

questions, the Claimants took the risk that their project might not be approved.

31. It must be stressed that while the Respondent made the second, third and fourth of
these arguments before the Tribunal, it did not make the first. To have done so would have
been inconsistent with its primary defence on the facts, which was based on the alleged
meeting of 6 November 1996. Under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, an annulment
proceeding is not an appeal, still less a retrial; it is a form of review on specified and limited
grounds which take as their premise the record before the Tribunal. Thus the core question
for the Committee is — assuming for the moment that the Tribunal made no annullable error
in its formulation of the fair and equitable treatment standard — whether any annullable error

was made in answering the three basic arguments put before it.

(c) The Tribunal’s treatment of Chile’s notice argument

32. Before the Tribunal, the Respondent placed heavy reliance on a meeting which it said
took place on 6 November 1996, between Mr. Edmundo Hermosilla (then Minister of
MINVU), the SEREMI (Mr. Sergio Gonzalez Tapia) and representatives of MTD, at which
explicit warnings were given that the Project was contrary to current planning regulations and
faced corresponding difficulties.”* This date is significant in that it was before MTD signed
the Promissory Contract (13 December 1996), applied for initial FIC approval of the
investment (14 January 1997) or did any other of the acts which qualified it as an investor in
Chile. The meeting was referred to in the letter from the SEREMI of 3 June 1998 which was
the first written notification to MTD that permission would not be granted to change or avoid

the PRMS. No contemporary record was kept of the meeting of 6 November 1996, and the

 

7 See Award, paras. 163, 166, 189, 196, 214, 240(ii) for different expressions of this finding.
‘Award, para. 48 (quoting Counter-Memorial, para. 24).

-12-

Claimants denied that it had occurred, or at least that it was attended by any representative of

MTD.

33. The Tribunal having set out the arguments of the parties” addressed this factual issue
at some length,*” but in the event declined to resolve it.*' Instead the Tribunal said that it
would “analyze the situation with and without the meeting and to what extent the conduct of
the parties is consequent with the statements allegedly made by Chilean officials and the
Claimants’ representatives,” at this and other meetings.** It noted that if categorically
negative warnings had been given at these meetings, it would have been “inconsequential for
the Claimants to seek the FIC’s approval for an investment considered unfeasible by high
level officials of the Respondent.” After discussing the scope and meaning of FIC approval

it concluded:

[W]hether the meeting of November 6, 1996 took place or not does not affect
the outcome of these considerations. In fact, if it did take place, it is even
more inexplicable that the FIC would approve the investment and the first two
Foreign Investment Contracts would be signed. Minister Hermosilla and the
FIC were different channels of communication of the Respondent with outside
parties, but, for purposes of the obligations of Chile under the BIT, they
represented Chile as a unit, as a monolith, to use the Respondent’s term.*4

Thus the Tribunal would have held that there was a breach of the fair and equitable treatment
standard whether or not the Claimants had been put on notice of the Respondent’s policy as
to urban development of areas to the south of Santiago such as Pirque. That being so, it did
not (as the Respondent notes)** make detailed findings as to what may have been said at

other meetings.

» Award, paras, 117, 124, 126.
0 Award, paras, 150-59.
Apart from the lack of any contemporary documentation of any kind (except the word “Malaysia” in
the Minister’s diary), it was unclear which MTD officers were present, if any. Evidence was adduced that two
of the main MTD officers involved were not in Chile at the time.

Award, para. 152. Other meetings or encounters, held or planned to be held between the parties in the
period prior to the SEREMI’s letter of 3 June 1998, are referred to at Award, paras. 44, 50, 58, 59, 60, 63, 67,
70, 71, 72, 73, 153. There were also controversies about inconsistent Chilean statements after that date, which
the Tribunal mentioned but did not resolve: Award, paras. 156-57.
3 Award, para. 158.
34 Award, para. 166.
35 See Application for Annulment, paras. 7, 11, 19, 20, 25, 27.

-13-

(d) The Tribunal’s finding on the role of FIC approval

34. In the event a more significant controversy in terms of the Tribunal’s conclusion
concerned the role of the FIC in the process of foreign investment. Before the Tribunal the
Claimants’ position was that they had a right vis-a-vis Chile to develop the Project on the
land in question by reason of their contract with the FIC, an organ of the Chilean State, albeit
that various permissions had to be obtained before this right could be implemented. The
Respondent’s position was that all the FIC could do in law, and all it did in fact, was to give

permission for the import of the necessary capital.

35. The Tribunal adopted neither of these positions. After succinctly stating the positions
of the Parties, the Tribunal concluded that the FIC’s approval, signified in the Foreign
Investment Contracts, had a distinct significance which was not limited to the right to import
capital:

Approval of a Project in a location would give prima facie to an investor the

expectation that the project is feasible in that location from a regulatory point
of view.*°

Even accepting the limited significance of the Foreign Investment Contracts
for purposes of other permits and approvals that may required, they should be
at least in themselves an indication that, from the Government’s point of view,
the Project is not against Government policy.*”

36. It gave three reasons for reaching this conclusion:

(1) | The terms of the Law establishing the FIC and giving it power to approve on
behalf of “the Chilean State the inflow of foreign capital under this Decree-Law and to

stipulate the terms and conditions of the corresponding contracts” (Article 12).**

(2) The requirement that the Application, and the resulting Foreign Investment
Contract, must specify the location of the investment: “A change in the location of the

investment would require a change in the contract and hence, the approval of the FIC.”*”

Award, para. 163.
Award, para. 189.
Award, para. 162.
Award, para. 162.

-14-

(3) The composition of the FIC, made up of Ministers and the President of the
Central Bank (Article 13): “the ministerial membership of the FIC is by itself proof of the
importance that Chile attributes to its function, and it is consequent with the objective to

coordinate foreign investment at the highest level of the Ministries concerned.”*°

(e) The Tribunal’s finding on regulatory risk

37. In any event, the Respondent argued, the risk is always on the investor to ascertain
local legal requirements and to obtain necessary approvals and permits, a position confirmed
by Article 4 of the Foreign Investment Contracts. Independently of any meetings held or
warnings given, the regulatory risk was exclusively on the investor. The Tribunal agreed up

to a point but drew a distinction:

The Tribunal agrees that it is the responsibility of the investor to assure itself
that it is properly advised, particularly when investing abroad in an unfamiliar
environment. However, in the case before us, Chile is not a passive party and
the coherent action of the various officials through which Chile acts is the
responsibility of Chile, not of the investor.*!

Chile claims that it had no obligation to inform the Claimants and that the
Claimants should have found out by themselves what the regulations and
policies of the country were. The Tribunal agrees with this statement as a
matter of principle, but Chile also has an obligation to act coherently and
apply its policies consistently, independently of how diligent an investor is.
Under international law (the law that this Tribunal has to apply to a dispute
under the BIT), the State of Chile needs to be considered by the Tribunal as a
unit.

(f) The Tribunal’s conclusion on fair and equitable treatment

38. | Thus the Tribunal drew a distinction between individual permissions and licenses,
which the investor had to obtain under the law of the host State, and the question whether the
Project was possible from a regulatory point of view.

The Claimants contacted officials of the Respondent from the very beginning

in May 1996. It is only in June 1998, almost two years after the supposed

November 6, 1996 meeting, that the SEREMI Gonzalez informed the
Claimants in writing about the policy against changing the zoning of El

Award, para. 163.
Award, para. 164,
Award, para. 165 (emphasis added).

-15-

39.
the Claimants. There was ample material on which the Tribunal could conclude that MTD
failed adequately to protect itself against regulatory risk, and that finding is not challenged by
the Respondent. What the Respondent challenges in these proceedings is the conclusion that
MTD’s damages should be reduced only by 50% on account of this finding. In its view the
real and evident cause of the Claimants’ loss was their failure to conduct adequate due

diligence prior to signing the contract with Mr. Fontaine. On that basis, imposing 50% of the

Principal and modifying the PMRS, and Minister Henriquez rejected the
Project...

The Tribunal is satisfied, based on the evidence presented to it, that approval
of an investment by the FIC based on a project which is against the urban
policy of the Government is a breach of an obligation to treat an investor fairly
and equitably.**

(3) The Tribunal’s finding on contributory fault

The second finding challenged by the Respondent concerns the contributory fault of

responsibility on Chile was both arbitrary and unexplained.

40.

Having discussed MTD’s failings in some detail, the Tribunal said:

The Tribunal decided earlier that the Claimants incurred costs that were
related to their business judgment irrespective of the breach of fair and
equitable treatment under the BIT. As already noted, the Claimants, at the
time of their contract with Mr. Fontaine, had made decisions that increased
their risks in the transaction and for which they bear responsibility, regardless
of the treatment given by Chile to the Claimants. They accepted to pay a price
for the land with the Project without appropriate legal protection. A wise
investor would not have paid full price up-front for land valued on the
assumption of the realization of the Project; he would at least have staged
future payments to project progress, including the issuance of the required
development permits.

The Tribunal considers therefore that the Claimants should bear part of the
damages suffered and the Tribunal estimates that share to be 50% after
deduction of the residual value of their investment calculated on the basis of
the following considerations.

Award, paras. 165-66.
Award, paras. 242-43,

-16-

(4) The Tribunal’s assessment of damages

41. As to quantum, the Tribunal relied on “the classic standard enounced by the
Permanent Court of Justice in the Factory at Chorzow: compensation should ‘wipe out all the
consequences of the illegal act and re-establish the situation which would, in all probability,
have existed if that had not been committed.””*> In calculating the amount of damages the
Tribunal accepted Chile’s argument that preparatory expenses prior to 18 March 1997 (the
date of signature of the first Foreign Investment Contract) were not recoverable,** but
allowed costs of financing.*” It then deducted the residual value of the land, which was taken
to be the amount offered by Mr. Fontaine in November 2001, an offer the Claimants should
have accepted.** The resulting award was 50% of this total by reason of MTD’s contribution

to the damage.

42. As to the points in time before and after which MTD’s costs could not be recovered,

the Tribunal said only that:

Chile’s responsibility is related to the approval of the transfer of funds by the
FIC in spite of the policy of the Government not to change the PMRS.
Therefore, the Tribunal considers that expenditures for the Project prior to the
execution of the first Foreign Exchange Contract on March 18, 1997 are not
eligible for purpose of the calculation of damages even if they could be
considered part of the investment. For the same reason, expenditures made
after November 4, 1998 — the date on which Minister Henriquez informed the
Claimants in writing that the PMRS would not be changed — are also to be
excluded from said calculation.”

D. THE GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT

qd) Introduction

43. In its Application the Respondent identifies a large number of perceived defects in the
Award’s finding of a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard and also in its
calculation of damages. In terms of the grounds for annulment enumerated in Article 52(1)

of the ICSID Convention, the focus is on gaps and apparent contradictions in the reasoning,

Award, para. 238.
Award, paras. 217, 240(ii).
Award, para. 240(iii).
Award, para. 244,

Award, para. 240(ii).

-17-

ie., on the failure to state the reasons on which the award is based (Article 52(1)(e)),
although there is also reliance on the ground of manifest excess of powers, in particular the
failure to apply the proper law and the arrogation without authority of the power to decide ex
aequo et bono (Article 52(1)(b)) and on serious departure from a fundamental rule of

procedure (Article 52(1)(d)). Something should be said about each of these.

(2) Manifest excess of powers

44. In the present case Chile does not deny that there was a protected investment or that
there is a dispute concerning that investment. No question of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to
decide that dispute is therefore raised. But the ground of manifest excess of powers is not
limited to jurisdictional error; it is established that a complete failure to apply the law to
which a Tribunal is directed by Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention can constitute a
manifest excess of powers, as also a decision given ex aequo et bono — that is to say, in the
exercise of a general discretion not conferred by the applicable law — which is not authorised
by the parties under Article 42(3) of the Convention. The Respondent claims that there was a
manifest excess of powers in the present case on the ground that the Tribunal failed to apply
international law or Chilean law as required, and that it effectively decided aspects of the

dispute on an ex aequo et bono basis.

45. Committees have sought to distinguish between failure to apply the law and error in

its application. The Committee in the MINE case said:

[A] tribunal’s disregard of the agreed rules of law would constitute a
derogation from the terms of reference within which the tribunal has been
authorized to function. Examples of such a derogation include the application
of rules of law other than the ones agreed by the parties, or a decision not
based on any law unless the parties had agreed on a decision ex aequo et bono.
If the derogation is manifest it entails a manifest excess of power.

Disregard of the applicable rules of law must be distinguished from erroneous
application of those rules which, even if manifestly unwarranted, furnishes no
ground for annulment... .

0 MINE (1989) 4 ICSID Reports 79, 87 (paras. 5.03-5.04) (emphasis added).

-18-

In CDC, the Committee put it in the following way: “Regardless of our opinion of the
correctness of the Tribunal’s legal analysis . . . our inquiry is limited to a determination of

whether or not the Tribunal endeavoured to apply English law.”*!

46. In an expert opinion submitted with the Reply and adopted by the Respondent, Sir
Arthur Watts argues that failure to apply the proper law as a ground of annulment should
extend to cases where the tribunal makes “a real and substantial mess of the law it was
9952

purporting to apply.””” In his opinion:

There comes a stage . . . at which a tribunal, in purportedly applying a rule of
law, gets it so wrong that it must be regarded as having disregarded the rule
and not really having applied it at all. The purported application of the rule
must be so inadequate, and suffused with such fundamental error, that it
transcends the mere commission of an error in applying the law and becomes
instead a veritable case of its non-application.**

47. Apart from its inconsistency with the test articulated in cases such as MINE and CDC,
the problem with this formulation is that it goes far down the slippery slope of appeal for
error of law — error of law combined with adjectives perhaps, but error of law nonetheless.
The Committee accepts that the notion of endeavouring to apply the law is not a merely
subjective matter. An award will not escape annulment if the tribunal while purporting to
apply the relevant law actually applies another, quite different law.™ But in such a case the
error must be “manifest,” not arguable, and a misapprehension (still less mere disagreement)

as to the content of a particular rule is not enough.

48. Similar considerations apply to a claim that a tribunal has decided ex aequo et bono.
It should be noted that Article 42(3) of the ICSID Convention concerns the determination ex
aequo et bono of disputes, i.e., of the substantial matter referred to the tribunal. This is
different from taking into account considerations of fairness in applying the law. For

example, individual rules of law will often require fairness or a balancing of interests to be

CDC Group (2005) 11 ICSID Reports 237, 252 (para. 45).
Opinion of 20 January 2006 annexed to the Respondent’s Annulment Reply, para. 25.

Id. para. 27.

In MINE the Tribunal had referred to Article 1134 of the French Civil Code rather than its Guinean
replica, Article 1134 of the Code Civil de l’Union Frangaise. The Committee held that the error did not warrant
annulment: (1989) 4 JCSID Reports 79, 96 (para. 6.40). Since there was no evidence that Article 1134 was
applied in any different manner in Guinea than in France, the mistake was without incidence.

-19-

taken to account. This is the case with the fair and equitable treatment standard itself, the

standard the Tribunal was required to apply.

(3) Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure

49. Relatively little needs to be said about this ground for annulment. Subsequent

committees have approved the following passage from the Wena Hotels annulment decision:

The Applicant has to identify the fundamental rule of procedure from which
the Tribunal departed and it has to show that such departure has been serious.

[Article 52(1)(d)] refers to a set of minimal standards of procedure to be
respected as a matter of international law. It is fundamental, as a matter of
procedure, that each party is given the right to be heard before an independent
and impartial tribunal. This includes the right to state its claim or its defence
and to produce all arguments and evidence in support of it. This fundamental
right has to be ensured on an equal level, in a way that allows each party to
respond adequately to the arguments and evidence presented by the other ....

The issue is thus due process, not the substance of the Award itself, a matter addressed by

paragraphs (b) and (e) of Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention

(4) Failure to state reasons

50. Of more significance to the present case is failure to state reasons. The first

Annulment Committee in the Vivendi case discussed this in the following terms:

[I]t is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that Article 52(1)(e)
concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an award,
not the failure to state correct or convincing reasons .... Provided that the
reasons given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues that were
before the tribunal, their correctness is beside the point in terms of Article
52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons may be stated succinctly or at length, and
different legal traditions differ in their modes of expressing reasons. Tribunals
must be allowed a degree of discretion as to the way in which they express
their reasoning.

In the Committee’s view, annulment under Article 52(1)(e) should only occur
in a clear case. This entails two conditions: first, the failure to state reasons
must leave the decision on a particular point essentially lacking in any
expressed rationale; and second, that point must itself be necessary to the
tribunal’s decision. It is frequently said that contradictory reasons cancel each

8s Wena Hotels, (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 129, 142 (paras. 56-57), referred to e.g., by the Committee in

CDC Group (2005) 11 ICSID Reports 237, 248-50 (paras. 34-37).

-20-

other out, and indeed, if reasons are genuinely contradictory so they might.
However, tribunals must often struggle to balance conflicting considerations,
and an ad hoc committee should be careful not to discern contradiction when
what is actually expressed in a tribunal’s reasons could more truly be said to
be but a reflection of such conflicting considerations.”

Committees in other annulment cases have expressed similar views.*”

51. | The Respondent appears to accept this test, emphasising principally that a Committee
can only fill gaps in the reasoning of a tribunal in limited circumstances, i.e., where the

missing reason is clearly implied or is so obvious as not to need stating.**

(5) The scope of annulment authority

52. In every annulment decision so far, the ad hoc committee has proclaimed that it is not
a court of appeal from the tribunal.’ This is obvious from the language of Articles 52 and 53
of the ICSID Convention as well as from its travaux. But Chile’s Application raises a
question as to the function of annulment in cases where (as here) there is no jurisdictional

error, no obvious procedural failing and no refusal to decide.

53. In his expert opinion appended to the Respondent’s Reply, Sir Arthur Watts argues for
a more expansive role for annulment Committees in relation to the substantive correctness of
ICSID awards. He acknowledges the contrary argument (put in the competing expert opinion

of Professor Schreuer):°!

It can be said, of course, that for an ad hoc Committee to engage in an
assessment of whether the tribunal’s misunderstanding or disregard of the
applicable law is or is not gross, or whether or not it relates to some major
aspect of the applicable law, or whether that major aspect is directly relevant
to the case which was before the tribunal, would be for it to enter to an

56 Vivendi (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 340, 358 (paras. 64-65).
37 See, e.g., Amco Asia I (1986) 1 ICSID Reports 509, 519-21 (paras. 38-44); MINE (1989) 4 ICSID
Reports 79, 88-89 (paras. 5.07-5.13); Amco Asia II (1992) 9 ICSID Reports 3, 48-49 (paras. 7.55~7.57); Wena
Hotels (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 129, 145-46 (paras. 77-82); CDC Group (2005) 11 ICSID Reports 237, 259-61
(paras. 66-72); Mitchell v DRC, decision of | November 2006, para. 21.

See e.g., Reply Memorial, para. 4; Expert Opinion of Sir Arthur Watts, paras. 35-55.
* See Kléckner (1985) 2 ICSID Reports 4, 119-20 (para. 61); Amco Asia I (1986) 1 ICSID Reports 509,
515 (para. 23); MINE (1989) 4 ICSID Reports 79, 87 (para. 5.04), 88 (para. 5.08); Amco Asia II (1992) 9 ICSID
Reports 3, 39 (para. 7.19), 51 (para. 8.08); Wena Hotels (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 129, 135 (para. 18); Vivendi
(2002) 6 ICSID Reports 340, 357-58 (paras. 62, 64); CDC Group PLC v. Republic of the Seychelles (2005) 11
ICSID Reports 237, 248-250 (paras. 34-37); Mitchell v. DRC , decision of 1 November 2006, paras. 19-20.
oo See C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (Cambridge, CUP, 2001) 88-94 & ff.
“ C. Schreuer, Opinion of 5 December 2005 annexed to Claimants’ Annulment Counter-Memorial.

-21-

unacceptable degree into the merits of the tribunal’s decision. But there is no
greater impropriety in an ad hoc Committee acting in this way in the interests
of ensuring the fundamental justice of the arbitral process than in such a
Committee taking it upon itself to consider complex (and arguable) cases of
alleged excess of power (and whether, if the excess has occurred, it is
manifest), or whether or not a tribunal has given reasons for its award when
the answer to that very question is wrapped in the pages of a complex award,
or with what reasons not advanced by the tribunal the ad hoc Committee
should nevertheless reconstruct (in reality, invent) the tribunal’s missing
reasoning, or with the assessment whether any of the adverbial or adjectival
requirements of Article 52(1) have been satisfied (‘properly,’ ‘manifestly,’
‘serious,’ ‘fundamental’). These are not easy matters to be resolved by
applying simple rules, but are matters for judgment, the exercise of which is
exactly the task which ad hoc Committees are well-placed to perform.

54. No doubt annulment committees have a role to perform within the ICSID system in
ensuring “the fundamental justice of the arbitral process.” It is true also that the grounds for
annulment do not distinguish formally (as, say, the UNCITRAL Model Law does) between
jurisdictional errors and errors concerning the merits of the dispute and that a manifest excess
of powers could well occur on a question of merits. At the same time the role of an ad hoc
committee in the ICSID system is a limited one. It cannot substitute its determination on the
merits for that of the tribunal. Nor can it direct a tribunal on a resubmission how it should
resolve substantive issues in dispute. All it can do is annul the decision of the tribunal: it can
extinguish a res judicata but on a question of merits it cannot create a new one. A more
interventionist approach by committees on the merits of disputes would risk a renewed cycle
of tribunal and annulment proceedings of the kind observed in Kléckner and AMCO. Given
that (after an uncertain start) successive decisions of ad hoc committees have established with
reasonable clarity the extent and limits of the grounds for annulment under Article 52, the
Committee believes that “the fundamental justice of the arbitral process” under the
Convention is best served by adhering to the established approach. It is reinforced in this
view by two considerations, one general and one specific. The general consideration is that

Article 52(1) as interpreted by successive committees does give scope for quality control.

oe Expert Opinion of Sir Arthur Watts, para. 28.

A reconvened tribunal following an annulment will no doubt have regard to the reasoning of an
annulment Committee, but it is not formally bound by its views as to any issue on which the first tribunal’s
award has been annulled. See Amco Asia II (1992) 9 ICSID Reports 3, 36-39 (paras. 7.10-7.17). Furthermore,
the ICSID practice so far has been to appoint different committee members on a second annulment, whereas

6B

-22-

The specific consideration is that in the present case, whether one likes the Tribunal’s
decision or not, it was reached on a rather narrow and specific ground, without systematic

implications for controversial issues of the law of investment protection.

E. THE GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT APPLIED

qd) Relationship between grounds for annulment

55. In its Annulment Memorial the Respondent tended to present its claim in an
aggregated way: for example, it complained of the Tribunal’s “failure to apply or explain
application of” international law or Chilean law. Of course an aspect of an award may be
vulnerable to challenge on more than one ground, but it is still necessary to distinguish the
different grounds for challenge. Failure to apply the proper law (in the sense explained in
paragraph 46 above) may involve a manifest excess of powers; failure to explain its
application concerns the distinct issue of failure to give reasons. The two may go hand in

hand in a given case but they are analytically distinct.

(2) Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure

56. It is convenient to deal first with the ground of annulment set out in Article 52(1)(d),
“that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.” The

Respondent argues that:

[I]n holding that there was a lack of fair and equitable treatment, the Tribunal
fails to consider or otherwise respond to abundant evidence presented by the
Parties with respect to material issues in dispute that would have affected
significantly its holding on liability as well as its assessment of compensation.
For example, the Tribunal fails to consider expert evidence presented by both
Parties on a range of issues, including the substantive interpretation of the
Foreign Investment Contracts and the DL 600, a key element to its
determination with regard to fair and equitable treatment. Furthermore, there
are numerous instances throughout the Award where the Tribunal simply
recounts the important arguments presented by each party but never analyzes
or makes determinations regarding such questions. Accordingly, the Tribunal

 

requests for interpretation or revision as far as possible go to the same tribunal as rendered the award: Art. 50(2),
51(3).
ot E.g., Respondent’s Annulment Memorial at 56.

-23-

seriously departs from its fundamental obligation to accord the parties the
right to be heard, and the Award should be annulled.

The matter was not, however, further developed in the Reply or in oral argument.°°

57. Under Article 52 there is a distinction between a departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure and a failure to give reasons for a decision. Failure to give reasons is a separate
ground for annulment and there is no reason to think that it is duplicated under the rubric of
Article 52(1)(d). Conceivably an award might recite the arguments of the parties in such a
defective or inaccurate way as to evidence a failure to hear the arguments in the first place.
But it cannot be suggested that this was the case here. The complaints referred to in the
passage cited above will accordingly be dealt with under the rubric of failure to give reasons.
There is no indication in the present case of any procedural failure by the Tribunal, let alone a

serious one.

(3) Fair and equitable treatment: manifest excess of powers

58. The scope of manifest excess of powers as a ground for annulment has already been
discussed. The Respondent complains that the Tribunal either failed to apply international
law and Chilean law to the issues to which they are respectively applicable, or that it applied

them in such a cursory and indefensible way as to be tantamount to their non-application.

59. This raises three questions: (1) what law was in truth applicable to a given issue, in
accordance with Article 42 of the ICSID Convention; (2) what law did the Tribunal purport
to apply to that issue; (3) is there any basis for concluding that the Tribunal’s decision
involved a manifest failure to apply the applicable law, in the limited sense explained in

paragraph 46 above?

60. Alternatively, the Claimants say that in default of any discernible law the Tribunal

decided key issues ex aequo et bono without being authorised to do so. The Parties agree that

6s Respondent’s Annulment Memorial, para. 104.

66 Transcript, 10 April 2006, at 12.

o Respondent’s Annulment Memorial, para. 203 refers to a passage from the Vivendi annulment decision
in support of annulment on this ground. See (2004) 6 ICSID Reports 340, 362 (para. 83). Although the
Committee mentioned in passing that the Tribunal had rendered a “densely reasoned award,” it did so in the
context of the distinction between “the manner in which the Tribunal proceeded, not the content of its decision.”
Failure to state reasons goes to the latter, not the former.

-24-

the Tribunal was not authorised under Article 42(3) to decide the dispute on an ex aequo et

bono basis, so here the question is whether it did so and with what consequence.

(a) Failure to apply international law

61. Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention provides:

(1) — The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of

law as may be agreed by the parties. In the absence of such agreement, the

Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute

(including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international law

as may be applicable.
The BIT was in force at the time of the events giving rise to the claim. MTD’s claim is one
for “an alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Agreement with respect to an
investment by such investor” (BIT, Article 6(1)(ii)), and thus international law as the proper
law of the BIT is applicable to that claim and to any defence thereto. The Respondent insists

—and the Claimants do not disagree — that the Tribunal had to apply international law as a

whole to the claim, and not the provisions of the BIT in isolation.
62. For its part the Tribunal also agreed. It said:

[FJor purposes of Article 42(1) of the Convention, the parties have agreed to

this arbitration under the BIT. This instrument being a treaty, the agreement

to arbitrate under the BIT requires the Tribunal to apply international law.”
It went on to apply international law to such questions as the scope of the MFN clause in
relation to other Chilean treaties, to the interpretation of the BIT, in particular its fair and

equitable treatment clause, and to reparation including causation and contribution.

63. As to the scope of the fair and equitable treatment standard itself, the Respondent

makes two main criticisms.” First it says that the Tribunal confused fair and equitable

 

68

See supra paras. 43-47.
Award, para. 87; see also id. para. 112: “This being a Tribunal established under the BIT, it is obliged
to apply the provisions of the BIT and interpret them in accordance with the norms of interpretation established
by the Vienna Convention on the Law of the Treaties, which is binding on the State parties to the BIT.”
In fact, Malaysia only became a party to the Convention in 1994, after the conclusion of the BIT: thus the
Vienna Convention qua treaty does not apply to the BIT (see Vienna Convention, Art. 4). But since the norms
of interpretation would apply in any event this point is without incidence so far as the Award is concerned.

The Respondent also criticises the Tribunal’s emphasis on the State of Chile as a single unit or
“monolith:” this is discussed in paras. 86-88, infra.

i)

   

-25-

treatment with most-favoured-nation treatment under Article 3(1) of the BIT, rendering this
aspect of the Award incomprehensible.”! Secondly and more importantly, that it
misapprehended the standard of fair and equitable treatment under the BIT, applying a
standard expressed in a dictum of the TECMED tribunal which in no way represents
international law and which cannot be derived from Articles 2(2) and 3(1) of the BIT by any

process of interpretation. The Committee will deal with these points in turn.

64. On the first point, the Committee referred in paragraph 27 above to the two provisions
of the BIT which incorporate the fair and equitable treatment standard. It noted the argument
that the most-favoured-nation clause in Article 3(1) of the BIT” imported an additional
element from the Croatia-Chile BIT.” The Tribunal discussed this issue in the following

terms:

The question for the Tribunal is whether the provisions of the Croatia BIT and
the Denmark BIT which deal with the obligation to award permits subsequent
to approval of an investment and to fulfillment of contractual obligations,
respectively, can be considered to be part of fair and equitable treatment... .
The Tribunal has concluded that, under the BIT, the fair and equitable
standard of treatment has to be interpreted in the manner most conducive to
fulfill the objective of the BIT to protect investments and create conditions
favorable to investments. The Tribunal considers that to include as part of the
protections of the BIT those included in Article 3(1) of the Denmark BIT and
Article 3(3) and (4) [sic — this should read Article 4(1)] of the Croatia BIT is
in consonance with this purpose. The Tribunal is further convinced of this
conclusion by the fact that the exclusions in the MFN clause relate to tax
treatment and regional cooperation, matters alien to the BIT but that, because
of the general nature of the MFN clause, the Contracting Parties considered it
prudent to exclude. A contrario sensu, other matters that can be construed to
be part of the fair and equitable treatment of investors would be covered by the
clause.

This passage appears to confuse the notion of fair and equitable treatment required by the

first part of Article 3(1) of the Malaysia-Chile BIT with the most-favoured-nation treatment

1
n

See Chile’s Annulment Reply, para. 57; Expert Opinion of Sir Arthur Watts, paras. 64~71.
Art. 3(1) of the BIT provides: “Investments made by investors of either Contracting Party in the
territory of the other Contracting Party shall receive fair and equitable treatment, and no less favourable than
that granted to the investments made by investors of any third State.”

Art. 4(1) of the Chile-Croatia BIT provides: “Each Contracting Party shall extend fair and equitable
treatment to investments made by investors of the other Contracting Party on its territory and shall ensure that
the exercise of the right thus recognized shall not be hindered in practice.”
™ Award, paras. 103-04.

-26-

which is required by the second half. The most-favoured-nation clause in Article 3(1) is not
limited to attracting more favourable levels of treatment accorded to investments from third
States only where they can be considered to fall within the scope of the fair and equitable
treatment standard. Article 3(1) attracts any more favourable treatment extended to third
State investments and does so unconditionally. However, the uncertainty in the Tribunal’s
handling of Article 3(1) was without incidence for its resolution of the case. As to Articles
3(1) of the Denmark BIT and 3(3) of the Croatia BIT, these are distinct from the notion of
fair and equitable treatment but MTD’s claims based on those provisions failed. As to the

additional stipulation in Article 4(1) of the Croatia BIT to the effect that the fair and equitable

treatment “shall not be hindered in practice,” no further reference was made to it in the

Award and there is no indication that it affected the outcome in any way.

65. On the second point, the Respondent focuses on the Tribunal’s apparent reliance on
the following passage from the award in the TECMED case for the content of the fair and

equitable treatment standard:

[T]o provide to international investments treatment that does not affect the
basic expectations that were taken into account by the foreign investor to make
the investment. The foreign investor expects the host State to act in a
consistent manner, free from ambiguity and totally transparently in its
relations with the foreign investor, so that it may know beforehand any and all
tules and regulations that will govern its investments, as well as the goals of
the relevant policies and administrative practices or directives, to be able to
plan its investment and comply with such regulations. Any and all State
actions conforming to such criteria should relate not only to the guidelines,
directives or requirements issued, or the resolutions approved thereunder, but
also to the goals underlying such regulations. The foreign investor also expects
the host State to act consistently, ie. without arbitrarily revoking any
preexisting decisions or permits issued by the state that were relied upon by
the investor to assume its commitments as well as to plan and launch its
commercial and business activities. The investor also expects the state to use
the legal instruments that govern the actions of the investor or the investment
in conformity with the function usually assigned to such instruments, and not
to deprive the investor of its investment without the required compensation. ”*

5 Award, para. 114 (quoting Técnicas Medioambientales TECMED S.A. v. The United Mexican States,

ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)00/2, (2003), 10 ICSID Reports 130, 192-93, para. 154).

-27-

66. According to the Respondent, “the TecMed programme for good governance” is
extreme and does not reflect international law.”° The TECMED dictum is also subject to
strenuous criticism from the Respondent’s experts, Mr. Jan Paulsson” and Sir Arthur
Watts.”* They note, inter alia, the difference between the TECMED standard and that
adopted in other cases, including one the Tribunal also cited in a footnote but without

comment.”

67. The Committee can appreciate some aspects of these criticisms. For example the
TECMED Tribunal’s apparent reliance on the foreign investor’s expectations as the source of
the host State’s obligations (such as the obligation to compensate for expropriation) is
questionable. The obligations of the host State towards foreign investors derive from the
terms of the applicable investment treaty and not from any set of expectations investors may
have or claim to have. A tribunal which sought to generate from such expectations a set of
rights different from those contained in or enforceable under the BIT might well exceed its

powers, and if the difference were material might do so manifestly.

68. | But however that may be, the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers in the

account it gave of the fair and equitable treatment standard, and this for three reasons.

69. The first is that legitimate expectations generated as a result of the investor’s dealings
with the competent authorities of the host State may be relevant to the application of the
guarantees contained in an investment treaty. This is expressly accepted by the Respondent
and in the case-law.*” The Committee examines below the question of MTD’s reasonable

expectations deriving from the conclusion of the Foreign Investment Contracts.

70. Secondly, in the Committee’s view the formulation of the fair and equitable treatment
standard adopted by the Tribunal was that contained in paragraph 113 of the Award, where it

said:

See Chile’s Annulment Reply, para. 57.
Mr. Jan Paulsson, Expert Opinion, 22 July 2005, paras. 9-14.
Expert Opinion of Sir Arthur Watts, paras. 93-106.
Award, para. 114 (citing Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/3, (2004) 11 ICSID Reports 361, 386, para. 98).

See Mr. Jan Paulsson, Expert Opinion, 22 July 2005, para. 15; see also Transcript of Annulment
hearing at 51 (Ms. Gehring Flores).

-28-

in terms of the BIT, fair and equitable treatment should be understood to be
treatment in an even-handed and just manner, conducive to fostering the
promotion of foreign investment. Its terms are framed as a pro-active
statement — ‘to promote,’ ‘to create,’ ‘to stimulate’ — rather than prescriptions
for a passive behavior of the State or avoidance of prejudicial conduct to the
investors.*!

The TECMED dictum was cited in support of this standard, not in substitution for it.

71. Thirdly, a standard formulated in the terms of paragraph 113 is defensible. No doubt
the extent to which a State is obliged under the fair and equitable treatment standard to be
pro-active is open to debate, but that is more a question of application of the standard than it
is of formulation. In any event the emphasis in the Tribunal’s formulation is on “treatment in
an even-handed and just manner.” In particular the Tribunal does not express the obligation
in such a way as to eliminate the distinction between acts and omissions or to avoid all
elements of risk for the investor. That is sufficient for the purposes of Article 52(1)(b) of the
ICSID Convention. In short, in articulating this standard there is no indication that the

Tribunal committed any excess of powers, let alone that it did so manifestly.

(b) = Failure to apply Chilean law

72. As noted above, the /ex causae in this case based on a breach of the BIT is
international law. However it will often be necessary for BIT tribunals to apply the law of
the host State, and this necessity is reinforced for ICSID tribunals by Article 42(1) of the
ICSID Convention. Whether the applicable law here derived from the first or second
sentence of Article 42(1) does not matter: the Tribunal should have applied Chilean law to
those questions which were necessary for its determination and of which Chilean law was the
governing law. At the same time, the implications of some issue of Chilean law for a claim

under the BIT were for international law to determine. In short, both laws were relevant.

73. The Tribunal said as much. The Claimants had argued that because breach of the
Foreign Investment Contracts was internationalised by reason of the umbrella clause in the
Danish BIT, therefore the Contracts themselves were governed by international law. The

Tribunal disagreed:

Award, para. 113; see Award, paras. 109-13, for the Tribunal’s discussion of the standard.

-29-

The breach of the BIT is governed by international law. However, to establish
the facts of the breach, it will be necessary to consider the contractual
obligations undertaken by the Respondent and the Claimants and what their
scope was under Chilean Law.

And in fact the Tribunal applied Chilean law in holding that there had been no breach of

contract by Chile:

The Tribunal accepts that the authorization to invest in Chile is not a blanket
authorization but only the initiation of a process to obtain the necessary
permits and approvals from the various agencies and departments of the
Government. It also accepts that the Government has to proceed in
accordance with its own laws and policies in awarding such permits and
approvals. Clause Four of the Foreign Investment Contracts would be
meaningless if it were otherwise. Therefore, the Tribunal finds that Chile did
not breach the BIT on account of breach of the Foreign Investment
Contracts."

74. Chile complains that despite its professions that it was applying Chilean law to such

questions, in fact the Tribunal did not do so:

The Tribunal fails . . . to mention or explain if or how it applied Chilean law to
those parts of its fair and equitable determination that require an interpretation
of the Foreign Investment Contracts.

The Tribunal’s silence on this issue signifies that the Tribunal failed
completely to apply Chilean law to determine the Parties’ obligations under or
to interpret the substantive meaning of the DL 600 and the Foreign Investment
Contracts; thus, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its power... .

There is, in fact, no evidence that the Tribunal applied Chilean law. It is true
that the Tribunal quoted or paraphrased parts of Articles Three and Twelve
through Fifteen of Chile’s Foreign Investment Law, the DL 600. But the mere
repetition of the articles of the statute is clearly not the application of Chilean
law. It is important to note that the Parties submitted lengthy argument,
evidentiary support, and fact and expert witness testimony on Chilean law
with respect to what the Tribunal coined as one of the ‘key issues’ or ‘key
element[s]’ of its determination with respect to fair and equitable treatment,
namely the scope of approval of the Foreign Investment Contracts. The
debate at the heart of this issue was whether Chile’s Foreign Investment Law
(the DL 600) or the Foreign Investment Contracts approved, as the Republic

Award, para. 187; see also id. paras. 86-87.
Award, para. 118.

-30-

of Chile asserted, merely the transfer of foreign capital, or, as MTD asserted,
the proposed project in the proposed location.**

75. In considering the implications of the Foreign Investment Contracts for fair and
equitable treatment, the Tribunal faced a hybrid issue. The meaning of a Chilean contract is a
matter of Chilean law; its implications in terms of an international law claim are a matter for
international law. The Committee will return to the reasons given by the Tribunal for its
decision on the implications of the FIC’s conduct. For present purposes it is sufficient to say
that the Tribunal applied Chilean law to issues governed by it (such as the scope of FIC
authority), and that there is no indication that it mischaracterised the scope of Chilean law in
its decision on the fair and equitable treatment standard. Whether it got Chilean law (or for
that matter international law) right on a matter falling within its jurisdiction is not for the

Committee to decide on an annulment application.

(c) Unauthorised ex aequo et bono determinations

76. Largely as a corollary of the arguments discussed in the previous two sections, The
Respondent argues that since “the underpinnings of the Tribunal’s determinations are
unidentifiable,” the inference should be drawn that “the Tribunal appears to be making its
determination ex aequo et bono (unless the Tribunal is guided, in fact, by no principles).”*°
In its Reply on the other hand, the complaint essentially concerns the damages determination.
There Chile argues that:

The Tribunal’s failure to make any reference to a legal precept in its reduction

of the damages award leads to the conclusion that the Tribunal made this
determination ex aequo et bono.*®

77. Asa general matter there is no indication that the Tribunal asserted any jurisdiction to
decide the dispute under Article 42(3) of the Convention, or that the substance of its
determination was made in a law-free zone on a basis of general equity. The Committee has
already dealt with the question what law the Tribunal did apply; it will deal in the following

sections with the adequacy of the Tribunal’s reasoning both as to substance and damages. In

s Chile’s Annulment Memorial, paras. 130-32.

85 Chile’s Annulment Memorial, para. 136.
86 Chile’s Annulment Reply, para. 68.

  

-31-

light of the Committee’s conclusions on those issues, there is no foundation for the claim that

the Tribunal exercised power to decide ex aequo et bono.

(4) Fair and equitable treatment: failure to state reasons

78. | The second major challenge to the decision on the merits concerns the Tribunal’s
failure to state reasons. It will be recalled that the consistent jurisprudence of annulment
committees treats this head of jurisdiction in terms of absence rather than inadequacy or
brevity of reasoning — “a failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an award,
not the failure to state correct or convincing reasons.”*” It is also established that outright or

unexplained contradictions can involve a failure to state reasons.

79. An initial issue concerns outright contradiction. In his Expert Opinion attached to the
Rejoinder, Sir Arthur Watts noticed that there appears to be a formal contradiction in Chapter
VII of the Award which contains the dispositif.** In paragraph 253(1) the Tribunal expressed
its principal finding as follows: “The Respondent has breached its obligations under Article
3(1) of the BIT.” In paragraph 253(7), the Tribunal holds that “All other claims filed in this
arbitration shall be considered dismissed.” As noted above, the obligation to accord fair and
equitable treatment to investments is repeated in the same terms in Articles 2(2) and 3(1) of
the BIT. If the Claimants could be considered to have made two separate claims for breach
of the fair and equitable treatment standard, one under Article 2(2) and another under Article
3(1), then the dispositif might seem to have upheld one claim and rejected the other without

explaining the difference between them.

80. In truth, however, there are neither distinct obligations of fair and equitable treatment
under Articles 2(2) and 3(1) of the BIT, nor were there distinct claims for breach of that
obligation.” The reference to “other claims” in paragraph 253(7) is a reference to the
various claims brought by MTD which the Tribunal dismissed, not the one claim it upheld,
and the failure to refer specifically to Article 2(2) in paragraph 253(1) was without incidence

for the outcome of the Award. It is not a basis for annulment.

Vivendi (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 340, 358 (para. 64): the whole passage is set out in para. 49, supra.
Expert Opinion of Sir Arthur Watts, 20 January 2006, paras. 62~71.

See supra para. 27.

See the Request for Arbitration, 26 June 2001, paras. 73, 74.

-32-

81. Turning to questions of substance, the Tribunal stressed the coexistence of two facts:
the FIC’s approval of the Project in terms which specified its location, giving rise to a
legitimate expectation that the Project was at least in principle possible from a regulatory
point of view, and the determination of the competent planning authorities at that time that
the Project was not possible. Relying on the principle of the “unity of the State” vis-a-vis
foreign investors, the Tribunal held that this amounted to a breach of the fair and equitable
treatment standard in Article 3(1). The Respondent, by argument and through expert
evidence, assails these three findings as essentially unreasoned and unsupported by

1

evidence.”' The Committee will first summarise the reasoning of the Tribunal on each of

them before applying the test for annulment laid down in Article 52(1)(e).

(a) The implications of FIC approval

82. The Respondent attacks as unreasoned the Tribunal’s finding that:

Approval of a Project in a location would give prima facie to an investor the

expectation that the project is feasible in that location from a regulatory point
+ ag, 92

of view.

It argues that “the Tribunal fails to explain how it was in fact possible for MTD to have

formulated any expectations, prima facie or otherwise, regarding its investment,””?

given the
evidence tendered by the Respondent that there could be no such expectation under Chilean
law arising from decisions of the FIC and the absence of any evidence that MTD had any

such expectation at relevant times.

83. The Tribunal began its consideration of the factual issues in dispute by setting out at
length the arguments of the Parties.’ It had earlier set out the facts in some detail, indicating
which were disputed.°> On the implications of FIC approval the following points are

recorded in the Award, either as undisputed facts or as findings of the Tribunal:

“ Respondent’s Annulment Memorial, paras. 138-82; Respondent’s Reply, paras. 6-50; see also the

Expert Opinions of Mr. Jan Paulsson attached to these pleadings.
2 Award, para. 163.

Respondent’s Annulment Memorial, para. 138.

Award, paras. 116-48.

Award, paras, 39-85.

-33-

84.

The FIC was aware of the proposed Project and was consulted by MTD about
it.

The FIC was an organ of the Chilean State composed of senior ministers and
officials; it was stated to have a coordinating role in the admission of
investment proposals made to it. “It is . . . evident from the DL 600 that the
FIC is required to carry out a minimum of diligence internally and

externally.”°”

The Foreign Investment Contracts, which was drafted by the FIC,

unequivocally specified the location and purpose of the investment.”*

Upon its conclusion the first Foreign Investment Contract bound MTD to
undertake the investment; a change in the location would have required further

FIC approval.”

Article 4 of the Foreign Investment Contracts made it clear that the
authorization given was “without prejudice to” other authorisations required
by Chilean laws and regulations. The FIC’s authorization to invest in Chile
was “not a blanket authorization but only the initiation of a process to obtain
the necessary permits and approvals from the various agencies and
departments of the Government . . . the Government has to proceed in
accordance with its own laws and policies in awarding such permits and

approvals.”'

The Project Agreement was conditional upon FIC approval of the

investment.'”!

(b) Chile’s “urban policy”

The Respondent argues that the “urban policy” on which the Tribunal relied is

unspecified and equivocal: sometimes the Tribunal presents it as the policy embodied in the

‘Award, paras. 44, 50.

Award, para. 163; see also Award, paras. 53, 162.

Award, paras. 51, 52, 54, 57, 162.

‘Award, paras. para. 162.

Award, para. 188. For the terms of Article 4 see supra para. 14.
Award, paras. 49, 158.

-34-

PRMS, on other occasions it is presented as a policy against changing the PRMS.'” As to
the latter, there was no such policy — and certainly not at the time of FIC approval of the
investment. As to the former, MTD was aware of the need for planning approval under the

PRMS.

85. On this question, the Tribunal found as follows:

. At the time the Project was approved by the FIC, the SEREMI was of the view
(and had informed the Minister) that it could not be implemented.'®? He never

deviated from that view.

. The Minister did not attend the relevant FIC meetings, despite provision for

attendance of other relevant ministers in DL 600.'°

. There was no proof that MTD was aware of the SEREMI’s opposition to the
Project before the signature of the Foreign Investment Contracts; it was
“reasonable to assume” that no categorical warnings had been given to MTD

as alleged by Chile.'°°

. The first written notification from Chile to MTD that the Project was unlikely
to be approved was the SEREMI’s letter of 3 June 1998.'°7

86. | The Respondent argues that “the policy against changing the zoning of El Principal
and modifying the PMRS”!°* had not been formed at the time of the first FIC decision. It
also argues that the idea of such a “meta-policy” makes no sense: there was nothing but the
PRMS and a discretion to modify it or not, a discretion which it was entirely for Chile to
exercise. As to this, two points may be made. The first is that Chile’s position before the

Tribunal was that the policy against urban development in Pirque already existed at that time

102 Respondent’s Annulment Reply, paras. 9-26. A point also forcefully made in the two Paulsson

opinions.
103 Award, paras. 74, 151, 154.
ad Award, paras. 66, 72, 74, 75, 79, 80.

105 Award, paras. 53, 161-63.

Award, para. 158; see also Award, para. 166.
Award, para. 165.

Award, para. 165.

-35-

of the first FIC approval.'” The second point is that there was evidence before the Tribunal,

recorded in the Award, that the position of the planning authorities never changed.''°

(c) Inconsistency of Chilean conduct and the “unity of the State”

87. Evidently the Tribunal placed considerable emphasis on “the unity of the State” in

reaching its determination under Article 3(1). It refers to the point no fewer that four times:

What the Tribunal emphasizes here is the inconsistency of action between two
arms of the same Government vis-d-vis the same investor even when the legal
framework of the country provides for a mechanism to coordinate.'!!

[I]n the case before us, Chile is not a passive party and the coherent action of
the various officials through which Chile acts is the responsibility of Chile, not
of the investor. !

Chile also has an obligation to act coherently and apply its policies
consistently, independently of how diligent an investor is. Under international
law (the law that this Tribunal has to apply to a dispute under the BIT), the
State of Chile needs to be considered by the Tribunal as a unit.

Minister Hermosilla and the FIC were different channels of communication of
the Respondent with outside parties, but, for purposes of the obligations of
Chile under the BIT, they represented Chile as a unit, as a monolith, to use the
Respondent’s term.

88. In Chile’s view this ignores the law of the host State and the necessary separation of
powers which is the basis for the rule of law. Organs of the State can have different
mandates and concerns: inconsistency of policy between them does not necessarily entail any
breach of international law. Just because the decisions of the FIC are attributable to the State
of Chile is no reason to accord the FIC more authority than it actually had, and to do so is to
confuse the distinct concepts of attribution and breach. Despite the Tribunal’s repetition of

the “unity” argument, it is left essentially unexplained.''°

Cf. supra para. 31.
to Cf. Award, para. 80.

i Award, para. 164.

12 Award, para. 164.

13 Award, para. 165.

ia Award, para. 166.

us See, e.g., Respondent’s Annulment Reply, paras. 62-65.

-36-

89. | The Committee agrees that to mix up attribution and breach would require explanation
and would indicate confusion. But it does not agree that the Tribunal committed such an
error. For example the conduct of the Mayor of Pirque in his official capacity was
attributable to the State,''® but the Tribunal did not suggest that this gave rise to any issue
under the BIT. Its point was that the FIC was a senior agency of the State whose formal acts
could be regarded as significant in terms of the admission of investment: this, as has been

seen, it explained.

(d) Conclusion

90. The question for the Committee is not whether the Tribunal’s reasoning is
unassailable but whether it is annullable under Article 52(1)(e). This is in the end a matter of

appreciation, bearing in mind the distinction between annulment and appeal.'!”

91. | The Committee would make the following points. First, the notion of regulatory
feasibility developed by the Tribunal (and applied consistently by it) is not a notion of
Chilean law and was not presented as such: it was put forward in the context of Article 3(1)
of the BIT. Secondly, it is not incoherent or contradictory to say that in a given situation a
Project may go forward for regulatory assessment on the basis that it might be approved in
accordance with the law of the host State. The Tribunal did not contradict itself in holding,
on the one hand, that MTD could have expected from its contacts and contracts with the FIC
that the Project was possible and, on the other hand, that it had no right to planning
permission. Thirdly, there was material before the Tribunal — not least the letter of SEREMI
Gonzalez of 3 June 1998 — which supported the Tribunal’s conclusion that the competent
authorities were at no stage prepared to consider the Project as feasible from a regulatory
perspective. The Respondent’s version of the meeting of 6 November 1996 was also
consistent with this conclusion (and the Claimants’ version did not contradict it).!'* Fourthly,
it was open to the Tribunal to stress, from the perspective of the protection of foreign
investment, the mandate and composition of the FIC; at any rate the Tribunal clearly

addressed that issue at some length in its reasoning. Moreover it did so not from the point of

16 See, e.g., Case concerning Elettronica Sicula S.p.a. (ELSI), \CJ Reports 1989 at 15, 48-49 (concerning

the Mayor of Palermo).
ny See supra paras. 48-52.

-37-

view of attribution — it is undisputed that the FIC is an organ of the Chilean State and that
foreign investment contracts are concluded by the FIC on behalf of the State — but from the
point of view of the significance to be attached to the legal act of contracting for a Project in

a specified location.

92. In the end the question is whether an informed reader of the Award would understand
the reasons given by the Tribunal and would discern no material contradiction in them. In the
Committee’s view the answer to that question in the present case is that the reasons are
sufficiently clear and sufficiently displayed and that they entail no contradiction: thus the

case for annulment under Article 52(1)(e) fails.

(5) Contributory fault

93. The Tribunal’s finding on this point has already been noted.'!? The Respondent

attacks it on two basic grounds, both alleging a failure to state reasons.

94. The first concerns causation. In the Respondent’s view the Tribunal’s own findings as
to the due application of Chilean law meant that the Project could never have gone ahead in
any event. There is in its view a fundamental discrepancy between the finding that the
Foreign Investment Contract gave MTD no right to planning permission (and related findings
that applications were properly rejected by the competent Chilean authorities), on the one
hand, and the decision that Chile caused any part of the loss, on the other. The Respondent
takes as an example the rejection by COREMA (the Comision Regional del Medio Ambiente,

Region Metropolitana) of an environmental impact statement for the Project:

The Tribunal’s finding that the COREMA acted properly in rejecting the EIS
is significant as it means that even if the PRMS could have been modified,
MTD could not have gone forward with its project because the COREMA had,
as the Tribunal itself found, validly rejected it. It is astounding that the
Tribunal recognizes this outcome but does nothing to dispose of the obvious
conflict. Based on the foregoing, it is unclear how the Tribunal could find that
Chile is directly responsible for MTD’s alleged damages. It is even more

 

ns MTD argued, and seems to have shown, that none of its senior representatives were present. There was

evidence that Mr. Fontaine attended but it is not suggested that he represented MTD.
no See supra paras. 37-38.

-38-

inconceivable that the Tribunal could announce its finding without providing
any explanation as to how it arrived at its conclusion.”

95. As the Tribunal recorded, the environmental impact statement was part of an effort by
the Pirque Municipal Council to avoid the impact of the PRMS through getting approval for a
Sectional Plan. The Sectional Plan proposal was submitted on 11 August 1998; the related
environmental impact statement was submitted on 8 September 1998 and rejected on 26
November 1998, after the Minister had finally informed MTD that the PRMS could neither
be modified nor avoided.'?! The principal reason COREMA rejected the environmental
impact statement — unsurprisingly — was that it was incompatible with the existing zoning for

the land, as just affirmed by the Minister.'”

96. The Tribunal considered the issue of the COREMA rejection, rather briefly, under the

tubric of the claim concerning unreasonable and discriminatory measures. It said:

To a certain extent, this claim has been considered by the Tribunal as part of
the fair and equitable treatment. The approval of an investment against the
Government urban policy can be equally considered unreasonable. On the
other hand, the changes of the PMRS related to Chacabuco or more recently
Modification 48, as explained by the Respondent, do not dispense with
specific changes of the PMRS when the land is zoned of ‘silvoagropecuario
interest.’ Therefore, there is no basis for considering the modifications made
to PMRS as discriminatory. The Tribunal is also satisfied by the explanation
regarding the rejection of the EIS by COREMA.'?

97. What the Respondent presents as a question of causation is only addressed by
inference in this passage. But the reason is perfectly clear: the breach of the fair and
equitable treatment standard discerned by the Committee was not any of the subsequent
decisions by Chilean agencies declining to allow the Project.'2* What was held to be in
breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard was the act of the FIC, an organ of the
Chilean State, in approving a specific investment by reference to a location where the
investment was not possible to be implemented. The Tribunal’s finding to that effect has

withstood an annulment challenge, for the reasons given above. Without the FIC’s decision

Respondent’s Annulment Memorial, para. 189.

Award, paras. 77, 81, 148.

Award, para. 195 (noting that there were other subsidiary reasons).

123 Award, para. 196.

“It was the policy of the Respondent and its right not to change it. For the same reason, it was unfair to
admit the investment in the country in the first place.” Award, para. 214.

-39-

to admit the investment, the loss would not have occurred. By contrast no separate question
of causation arose with respect to COREMA’s decision of 26 November 1998, or any of the
other decisions under Chilean law. The position would have been different had the Tribunal
awarded damages by way of /ucrum cessans for the loss of the Project but it did not, given

that MTD never acquired any right to have the Project go ahead.

98. The second ground of complaint as to this finding is that, even if some apportionment
of responsibility was appropriate (a process referred to in Respondent’s pleadings as

125

comparative negligence) ~ the Tribunal gave no reason for apportioning the loss on a 50:50

basis:
Due to the Tribunal’s failure to state its reasons upon which it diminished the
Award by an arbitrary and unexplained fifty percent (and not 100 percent), as
well as its manifest failure to apply any law that the Parties agreed to in the

BIT (whether the Tribunal applied equity or other unidentified precepts to
make its fifty percent reduction), the Award must be annulled. '?°

99. It may be noted that the Respondent does not challenge the decision on contribution as
a manifest excess of powers, and rightly not. In the words of Article 39 of the ILC’s Articles

on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts of 2001:

‘Contribution to the injury

In the determination of reparation, account shall be taken of the contribution to
the injury by wilful or negligent action or omission of the injured State or any
person or entity in relation to whom reparation is sought.”

Part II of the ILC Articles, in which Article 39 is located, is concerned with claims between
States, though it includes claims brought on behalf of individuals, e.g., within the framework
of diplomatic protection.'*’ There is no reason not to apply the same principle of

contribution to claims for breach of treaty brought by individuals.

100. The Tribunal had found a breach of treaty at the time of the admission of the
investment: without the act constituting the breach (the decision of the FIC), the investment

would not have gone ahead. At the same time the Tribunal found that MTD had significantly

Respondent’s Annulment Memorial, para. 193.
Respondent’s Annulment Memorial, para. 194.
See ILC Articles, Art. 33(2) and commentary, para. (4).

-40-

contributed to its own loss, in the manner explained in some detail in the Award. The issue
of contribution being thereby raised, the Tribunal proceeded forthwith to an appreciation of
the comparative contribution. It estimated MTD’s contribution to the damage to be 50%
“after deduction of the residual value of their investment calculated on the basis of the

following considerations.”!7*

101. The Committee agrees with the Respondent that some further reasons for a 50:50 split
of damages could have been offered at this stage. But the Tribunal had already analysed the
faults on both sides in some detail, holding both to be material and significant in the
circumstances. As is often the case with situations of comparative fault, the role of the two
parties contributing to the loss was very different and only with difficulty commensurable,
and the Tribunal had a corresponding margin of estimation. Furthermore, in an investment
treaty claim where contribution is relevant, the respondent’s breach will normally be
regulatory in character, whereas the claimant’s conduct will be different, a failure to
safeguard its own interests rather than a breach of any duty owed to the host State. In such
circumstances, it is not unusual for the loss to be shared equally. International tribunals
which have reached this point have often not given any “exact explanation” of the

. . 2
calculations involved.'”°

In the event, the Tribunal having analysed at some length the
failings of the two parties, there was little more to be said — and no annullable error in not

saying it.

(6) The assessment of damages

102. The final area of controversy concerns the assessment of damages. The Respondent

objects to this determination on two grounds.

103. First, it objects that the Tribunal gave no reason “for holding Chile responsible for the
unreasonable price paid for the land.”'*° What the Tribunal did, as noted, was to take the
price actually paid, to deduct the amount which MTD should have accepted for the land when
128 Award, paras. 242-43.

19 As Gray notes in relation to the Costa Rica Packet case (1897): C Gray, Judicial Remedies in
International Law (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1987) 23. In that case Arbitrator Martens said little more than that

“the losses sustained . . . are not entirely the necessary consequences of this precautionary detention”: 5 Moore,
International Arbitrations (1898) 4948, 4953.

-41-

offered by the vendor, and to halve the resulting amount because of MTD’s failure to protect
itself, a failure which included its failure to protect itself against a refusal of planning
permission. In the context, in the Committee’s view, the procedure adopted by the Tribunal

was adequately explained.

104. Secondly, the Respondent complains of the arbitrary and unexplained way in which, it

says, the Tribunal fixed the cut-off date for taking into account as damages the expenses
incurred by MTD on the Project:'*!

The Tribunal fails to explain why it used Minister Henriquez’ letter of 4
November 1998 as the point after which MTD’s expenditures would be
excluded from the damages calculation. The Republic of Chile presented
evidence to the Tribunal of several meetings between MTD and Chilean
government officials, which occurred before Minister Henriquez’ letter was
written, that could have been used as alternative cut-off dates — as well as
points at which MTD could have mitigated its losses — for the Tribunal’s
damages determinations. During these various meetings the Republic of Chile
contended that MTD was warned of the regulatory obstacles facing its Project,
but the Tribunal fails to determine the substance of many of these meetings.'*

And it goes on to list a series of “dates the Tribunal could have used as alternative cut-off
dates for its damages determination.”'** In failing to explain the choice of 4 November 1998,
the Respondent argues, the Tribunal failed to state the reasons on which a material part of the

decision was based. '**

105. In the passage cited above (as elsewhere in its pleadings), the Respondent
misconceives the basis on which the Tribunal made its decision. Had the breach of the fair
and equitable treatment standard depended on what was said at particular meetings with
Chilean officials prior to the conclusion of the first Foreign Investment Contract, it would
have been necessary for the Tribunal to make definitive findings as the content of those
meetings. '*° But this was not the basis for the decision. Rather the Tribunal emphasised that,

an organ of the Chilean State having formally agreed in a written contract for the importation

 

Respondent’s Annulment Reply at 55.

See supra para. 39 for the Tribunal’s determination on this point.

Respondent’s Annulment Memorial, para. 195.

183 Id. para. 196.

It is also said to be a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. /d., para. 203. The
Committee has already dealt with this as a separate ground for annulment. See supra paras. 55-56.

-42-

of substantial foreign capital for this specific Project, it was not until 3 June 1998 that an
official statement that it would be “inconveniente” (i.e., inappropriate) to amend the PRMS
was made to MTD in writing, and not until 4 November 1998 that the responsible Minister
made it clear in writing that the Project would not proceed. The reasons for the Tribunal’s
decision in that regard were — as the Committee has already held — given in the Award. That
being so it is not to the point that the cut-off for calculation of expenditures failed to take into

account what may have been said at prior meetings.

106. In other words, the Tribunal having held that there was a breach of the fair and
equitable treatment standard as a result of the Foreign Investment Contract concluded on 18
March 1997, the question to be determined was for how long thereafter it was reasonable for
the MTD to incur expenses in the quest for a change in the PRMS to allow the Project to take
place. The Tribunal cited the Claimants’ argument that, having made the major authorized
commitment of capital in early 1997, “it was reasonable and consistent with MTD’s
obligation to mitigate damages for MTD to continue seeking Government approvals even
after it became apparent that Government officials were opposing the Project.”'*° The
Tribunal took as the cut-off date 4 November 1998, the date on which the Minister finally
informed MTD in writing of his decision that the PRMS would not be changed. In effect, an
organ composed of Chilean officials of ministerial rank having admitted in writing the
investment, the Tribunal held that it was reasonable for the Claimants to continue to incur
expenditure in quest of the Project until a final and definitive ministerial decision was made
and communicated in writing to them that their quest could not succeed. The Committee
agrees with the Respondent that the reasons given by Tribunal for this aspect of its quantum
decision were extremely succinct. But they were not elusive. In the circumstances the
Committee is not prepared to annul this minor aspect of the decision under Article 52(1)(e) of

the Convention.

 

185 Alternatively, to the extent that things said at those meetings were relied on by the Respondent by way

of defence, the Tribunal would have had to hold that the content of the meetings had not been proved.
186 Award, para. 114 (quoting Rejoinder, para. 131).

-43-

(7) Conclusions

107. In the event the Respondent’s application for annulment must be dismissed. But the
Committee would wish to emphasise again the actual basis on which the Tribunal’s decision
has been upheld. In the present case, a foreign investor failed to complete due diligence on a
point fundamental to the investment. Land-use control is a core concern for the State,
especially in the peripheries of urban areas. Whatever contracts foreign investors may make
with the owners of rural land cannot be allowed to disrupt the due application of the law of
the host State, nor should the vagueness inherent in such treaty standards as “fair and
equitable treatment” allow international tribunals to second-guess planning decisions duly

made (as the decisions here were made) in accordance with that law.

108. But criticism of the Tribunal on such grounds misapprehends the very specific basis
of its decision, one which it was open to the Tribunal to reach. The Tribunal itself upheld the
authority of Chilean planning law against arguments based on a “right to planning

permission.” >”

But the flow of foreign investment is also important and the State has
undertaken obligations in this regard. In the event what emerged with credit from the
examination was the planning process; what could do with improvement, as the Tribunal

138

itself pointed out, ~” was co-ordination at the level of the FIC.

F. COSTS

109. The Award not having been annulled, the ruling on the costs of the proceedings before
the Tribunal stands and the stay of enforcement is automatically lifted as from the date of this

Decision (Arbitration Rule 54(3)).

110. It remains to deal with the question of the costs of these annulment proceedings, as to
which the Committee has a discretion. In all but one of the concluded annulment
proceedings, Committees have made no order for the parties’ own costs and have held that

ICSID’s costs should be borne equally by the parties. They did so not only where the

See, e.g., Award, para. 188.
Award, para. 163.

-44-

application for annulment succeeded in whole or part but also where it failed.'*” In the latter
cases, the party successful, at least in part before the Tribunal, and successful in any case

before the committee had to pay half the costs resulting from the request for annulment.

111. This result might be thought anomalous. However, in the interest of consistency of
ICSID jurisprudence and in the circumstances of the present case, the Committee proposes to
follow the existing practice. It does so noting that this practice is not without flexibility and
admits of exception. In this regard, it observes that in CDC Group PLC v Republic of the
Seychelles, the committee ordered the unsuccessful respondent to pay both the claimant’s and
ICSID’s costs of the annulment proceedings. The committee noted that the annulment
application was “fundamentally lacking in merit” and that the respondent’s case was “to any
reasonable and impartial observer, most unlikely to succeed.”'*° The same cannot be said
here. As the Committee has already observed, Chile has expressed reasonable concerns

transcending the amounts at stake.

112. The costs of the parties’ own representation during the annulment proceedings are
likewise within the Committee’s discretion. The present case involved a complex and novel
question of public importance concerning the assessment of regulatory risk in a case where a
formal contract of foreign investment was concluded specifying the location of the
investment. Taking into account that both parties were held to be at fault in relation to the

dispute, the Committee decides to make no order as to the costs of representation before it.

Bo In the following seven cases, committees declined to order party costs against the unsuccessful party

and split ICSID’s costs of the proceedings: K/éckner (1985) 2 ICSID Reports 4, 163; Amco Asia I (1986) 1
ICSID Reports 509, 542; MINE (1989) 4 ICSID Reports 79, 110; Amco Asia IT (1992) 9 ICSID Reports 3; Wena
Hotels (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 129, 152; Vivendi (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 340, 371; Mitchell v DRC, decision
of 1 November 2006, para 67.

140 (2005) 11 ICSID Reports 237, 266 (para. 89).

-45-

G. DECISION

113. For the foregoing reasons, the Committee DECIDES:
(1) _ The Respondent’s request for annulment is dismissed.

(2) _ Each party shall bear one half of the costs incurred by the Centre in connection

with this annulment proceeding.

(3) Each Party shall bear its own costs of representation in connection with this

annulment proceeding.

/ Signed /

JUDGE GILBERT GUILLAUME
President of the Committee
Date: 16 February 2007

 

/ Signed / / Signed /
PROFESSOR JAMES CRAWFORD DRA SARA ORDONEZ NORIEGA
Member Member
Date: 15 February 2007 Date: 12 February 2007

-46-

MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. & MTD Chile S.A.
v.
La Republica de Chile

(Caso CIADI No. ARB/01/7)

(Procedimiento de Anulacién)

 

Decision de Anulacion

 

Miembros del Comité ad hoc

El Honorable Juez Gilbert Guillaume
Profesor James Crawford
Dra. Sara Ordéfiez Noriega

Secretario del Comité

Sr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu

En representacion de las Demandantes: En representacién del Demandado:
Sr. Oscar M. Garibaldi Sr. Claudio Castillo Castillo
Sr. Eugene D. Gulland, y Jefe Division Juridica

Srta. Karin Kizer

Covington & Burling

Washington, D.C.

Ministerio de Economia de Chile

y

Sr. Ronald E.M. Goodman and
Srta. Gaela K. Gehring Flores
Winston & Strawn LLP
Washington, D.C.

Fecha de Despacho: 21 de marzo de 2007

op>

am

TABLA DE CONTENIDOS

Parrafo.

EL PROCEDIMIENTO DE ANULACION
LA DISPUTA ENTRE LAS PARTES
EL LAUDO DEL TRIBUNAL
(1) Generalidades
(2) Las conclusiones del Tribunal sobre trato justo y equitativo.
(a) Elestandar de trato justo y equitativo
(b) Aplicacion del estandar a los hechos
(c) El tratamiento del Tribunal al argumento de Chile sobre notificacion
(d) La conclusion del Tribunal sobre el significado de la aprobacion del CIE
(e) Laconclusién del Tribunal sobre el riesgo de regulacion..
(f) La conclusién del Tribunal sobre el trato justo y equitativo
(3) La conclusion del Tribunal sobre la culpa concurrente. .
(4) La conclusion del Tribunal sobre la evaluacion de los dajios.
LOS ARGUMENTOS DE LA ANULACION
(1) Introduccion
(2) Manifiesta extralimitacion de facultade:
(3) Quebrantamiento grave de una norma de procedimiento.
(4) Falta de motivacion del Laudo....
(5) Ambito de la autoridad de anulaci
LAS CAUSALES DE NULIDAD INVOCADAS .. oo..cccecceceeeeeeeeneeeeeeetenetseeeeeeenes 55
(1) Relacion entre las causales de anulacion
(2) Quebrantamiento grave de una norma de procedimiento
(3) Tratamiento justo y equitativo: manifiesta extralimitacion de facultade:
(a) No aplicacion del derecho internacional
(b) No aplicacién del derecho chileno
(c) Decisiones ex aequo et bono no autorizadas.
(4) Trato justo y equitativo: falta de motivacion
(a) Los efectos de la aprobacion del CIE
(b) La "politica urbana" de Chile .
(c) Incoherencia entre la conducta chilena y la "unidad del Estado"... eee
(d) Conclusion
(5) Culpa concurrente.
(6) La evaluacion de los dajfio:
(7) Conclusiones
COSTAS
DECISION

 

 

 
  
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
  
 
 
 
  
  

 

 

 

 

 

A. PROCEDIMIENTO DE ANULACION

1. El 20 de septiembre de 2004, la Republica de Chile (“Chile” o “la Demandada”)
interpuso ante la Secretaria General del Centro Internacional de Arreglo de Diferencias
Relativas a Inversiones una Solicitud de anulacion de un Laudo de fecha 25 de mayo de 2004
dictado por el Tribunal en el arbitraje iniciado por MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. y MTD Chile S.A.

(conjuntamente “las Demandantes” 0 “MTD”).

2. La Solicitud fue presentada dentro del plazo establecido en el Articulo 52(2) del
Convenio sobre Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a Inversiones entre Estados y Nacionales de
Otros Estados (el “Convenio CIADI”). En ella, la Demandada pretendia la anulacion del
Laudo con fundamento en tres de las cinco causales estipuladas en el Articulo 52(1) del
Convenio CIADI, especificamente que: el Tribunal se habia extralimitado manifiestamente
en sus facultades; que hubo un quebrantamiento grave de una norma de procedimiento; y que
el Laudo habia omitido expresar las razones en las que se sustento. La Solicitud, asimismo,
contenia una peticion, bajo el Articulo 52(5) del Convenio y la Regla 54(1) de las Reglas de
Arbitraje del CIADI, para una suspension de la ejecucién del Laudo mientras estuviese

pendiente la Solicitud de Anulacién.

3. La Secretaria General del CIADI registro la Solicitud el 30 de septiembre de 2004 y
con esa fecha, de conformidad con la Regla 50(2) de las Reglas Procesales Aplicables a los
Procedimientos de Arbitraje del CIADI (las “Reglas de Arbitraje”), transmitid una
Notificacion de Registro a las partes, enviando simultaneamente a los Demandantes copias de
tal Solicitud y de la documentacion anexa. Las partes también fueron notificadas de que, con
arreglo a la Regla de Arbitraje del CIADI 54(2), la ejecucion del Laudo quedaria suspendida

provisionalmente.

4. Mediante carta de 18 de enero de 2005, conforme a la Regla 52(2) de las Reglas de
Arbitraje, las partes fueron notificadas de que el Comité ad hoc habia sido constituido y
estaba conformado por el Juez Gilbert Guillaume, el Profesor James R. Crawford y la Dra.
Sara Ordofiez Noriega. Las partes fueron posteriormente notificadas, por medio de carta de
24 de enero de 2005, de que el Juez Gilbert Guillaume habia sido designado Presidente del

Comité y, el 16 de marzo de 2005, el Centro envié a las partes copias de las Declaraciones

firmadas por los Miembros del Comité con arreglo a la Regla 52(2) de las Reglas de Arbitraje
del CIADI.

5. La primera sesion del Comité se efectud el 23 de marzo de 2005, en las dependencias
del Banco Mundial en Paris, Francia, y en ella fueron acordados y decididos diversos puntos
sobre procedimiento. Asimismo, en dicha reunion, las Demandantes formularon una peticién
bajo la Regla de Arbitraje 54(2) para que se pusiera fin a la suspension de la ejecucion del
Laudo a menos que Chile ofreciera una garantia apropiada. El Comité, escuchados los
argumentos orales de las partes al respecto, establecid el cronograma para la presentacion,
por escrito, de las alegaciones ulteriores que éstas formularen. Por acuerdo entre las partes, el
plazo de treinta dias para una decision bajo la Regla 54(2) de las Reglas de Arbitraje fue
prorrogado, en el entendido de que el Comité pronunciaria su decision oportunamente una

vez presentados por escrito los argumentos.

6. En su Decision de 1 de junio de 2005, el Comité ordend que se mantuviera la
suspensi6n de la ejecucién del Laudo, sin necesidad de que Chile constituyera una garantia.!
Lo anterior, sobre la base de que el unico perjuicio que sufririan las Demandantes era el
retardo que, en el evento de que la Solicitud de anulacién fuese rechazada, podria ser
remediado mediante el pago de intereses y que es incidental al sistema de anulacion del
Convenio. En particular, el Comité puso de presente, segtin las declaraciones de Chile: (a)
que el Convenio CIADI ha sido implementado integramente bajo el derecho chileno, con la
consecuencia de que un laudo del CIADI produce exactamente el mismo efecto que una
sentencia definitiva de los tribunales chilenos, y (b) que de conformidad con la practica

establecida, Chile dara pronto cumplimiento al presente Laudo, si éste no es anulado.”

7. De conformidad con el calendario de procedimiento fijado por el Comité en su
primera sesién de 23 de marzo de 2005, y segun lo acordado entre las partes, la Demandada
presentd su Memorial de sustentacién de la Solicitud de anulacion el 25 de julio de 2005; las
Demandantes presentaron un Contra Memorial el 7 de diciembre de 2005; la Demandada
presento una Réplica el 25 de enero de 2006 y, el 8 de marzo de 2006, las Demandantes
presentaron una Duplica. Al Memorial de la Demandada se adjunté una Opinion Experta del

Sr. Jan Paulsson; y a su Réplica fue anexada una Opinion Complementaria del Sr. Paulsson y

El texto de la resolucién se encuentra online en http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/MTD.pdf.

una Opinion Experta de Sir Arthur Watts. El Contra Memorial de las Demandantes fue
acompafiado de una Opinion Experta del Profesor Christoph H. Schreuer. Comentarios

adicionales del Profesor Schreuer fueron anexados en la Duplica.

8. Dentro del procedimiento de anulacién, el 10 de abril de 2006, en las oficinas del
Banco Mundial en Paris, se llevo a cabo una audiencia de un dia de duraci6n, en la que los
abogados de ambas partes presentaron sus argumentos y peticiones y contestaron las
preguntas de los Miembros del Comité. Las partes, posteriormente, hicieron observaciones a
las transcripciones de la audiencia, las que fueron tenidas en cuenta por el Comité.
Estuvieron presentes en la audiencia: los Miembros del Comité de Anulacion: S.E. Juez
Gilbert Guillaume, Profesor James R. Crawford, y Dra. Sara Ordéfiez Noriega; el Secretario
del Comité: Sr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu; los representantes de las Demandantes: Sr. Oscar
Garibaldi, Sr. Eugene D. Gulland, y Srta. Karin Kizer, de Covington & Burling, y Sr. Azmil
Khalid y Sr. Vincent Lee de MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. y MTD Chile S.A.; y los representantes
de la Demandada: Sr. Ronald E.M. Goodman, Srta. Gaela K. Gehring Flores, Srta. Geraldine
Fischer, y Sr. Kelby Ballena de Winston & Strawn LLP, Sr. Claudio Castillo Castillo, Jefe de
la Di

 

n Juridica, Ministerio de Economia, Fomento y Reconstruccion de Chile, Sr.
Eduardo Bobadilla Brinkmann, Abogado del Ministerio de Economia, Fomento y
Reconstruccién de Chile, y Sr. Eduardo Escalona Vasquez, Abogado del Ministerio de

Economia, Fomento y Reconstruccién de Chile.

9. En ausencia de solicitudes para modificar las reglas de procedimiento establecidas en
el Convenio CIADI y las Reglas de Arbitraje, el procedimiento de anulacion fue tramitado de
conformidad con las disposiciones aplicables de la Seccion 3 del Capitulo IV del Convenio

CIADI y las Reglas de Arbitraje.

10. Enel curso del presente procedimiento, los Miembros del Comité han deliberado por
diversos medios de comunicaci6n, incluyendo una reuni6n en Paris el 11 de abril de 2006, y
han tomado en consideracién todas las alegaciones, documentos y testimonios presentados

ante ellos.

 

2 Decisién sobre la Solicitud del Demandado de Suspensién Permanente de la Ejecuci6n, parrs. 29, 35,

citando el Decreto Supremo No. 1304, Diario Oficial, 9 de enero de 1992.

B. LA DISPUTA ENTRE LAS PARTES

11. Tras discusiones con diversos funcionarios chilenos, MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. (una
compaiiia de Malasia) y la subsidiaria de su propiedad, MTD Chile S.A. (una compaiiia
chilena), decidieron continuar las negociaciones relativas a la construccién de una comunidad
planificada de uso mixto en la pequefia localidad de Pirque, al sur de Santiago. EI sitio
propuesto estaba zonificado para uso agricola y, como las Demandantes sabian, requeriria
una nueva zonificacion para que pudiera ser desarrollado el proyecto. Con posterioridad a las
negociaciones llevadas a cabo con el propietario del terreno, el Sr. Jorge Fontaine Aldunate,
ciudadano chileno, y con tres agencias del gobierno de Chile [El Comité de Inversiones
Extranjeras (“CIE”), el Servicio de Vivienda y Urbanizacion (“SERVIU”) y el Secretario
Regional Ministerial (“SEREMI”)], los Demandantes celebraron con el Sefior Fontaine un
Contrato de Promesa el 13 de diciembre de 1996. El Contrato de Promesa estaba
condicionado a la aprobacion por el CIE de la inversion de las Demandantes. Dicho contrato
contemplaba el desarrollo del terreno en dos segmentos y la creacién de una sociedad chilena,
EI Principal Inversiones S.A. (“EPSA”), que perteneceria en un 51% a las Demandantes y en

un 49% al Sr. Fontaine.

12. El 14 de enero de 1997, las Demandantes presentaron ante el CIE una solicitud para la
aprobacion de una inversion inicial de US$17.136 millones, para desarrollar un proyecto
descrito como “un township, en 600 hectareas del Fundo El Principal de Pirque, el cual sera
una ciudad satélite autosuficiente, con casas, departamentos para diversos estratos
socioeconémicos, escuelas, hospitales, universidades, supermercados, comercio de toda
clase, servicios y todo otro componente necesario para la autosuficiencia.”? La solicitud fue
aprobada por el CIE el 3 de marzo de 1997. Un Contrato de Inversion Extranjera estandar
fue firmado entre el CIE y las Demandantes el 18 de marzo de 1997; en él se disponia que
MTD “desarrollarda un proyecto inmobiliario en 600 hectareas del Fundo El Principal de
Pirque. El referido proyecto consiste en la construccion de una ciudad satélite autosuficiente,
en casas, departamentos, colegios, hospitales, comercios, servicios, etc..”* Una vez firmado
este contrato, las Demandantes efectuaron un aporte de capital de US$8.4 millones a EPSA y

con US$8.736 millones compraron el 51% de las acciones en EPSA al Sr. Fontaine.

Véase Laudo parr. 51.

Véase Laudo parr. 54.

13. El 8 de abril de 1997, las Demandantes presentaron ante el CIE una segunda solicitud
para invertir US $364.000 en capital de trabajo adicional, la cual fue aprobada. Un segundo
Contrato de Inversion Extranjera estandar, que igualmente especifica la ubicacién del

proyecto, fue firmado el 13 de mayo de 1997.°
14. Ambos Contratos de Inversion Extranjera contienen la siguiente clausula:

4. En todo caso, se deja establecido que el Inversionista Extranjero
quedard sujeto a la actual legislacion y reglamentos vigentes en lo relativo a
sus actividades. La presente autorizacién es sin perjuicio de cualesquiera
otras que, en conformidad a tales legislacién y reglamentacion, deban ser
otorgadas por las autoridades competentes.

No fue objeto de discusion que la palabra “otras,” en la clausula 4, se refiere a otras

autorizaciones requeridas por las leyes y reglamentos chilenos.

15. La zonificacién del sitio en Pirque estaba comprendida en el Plan Regulador
Metropolitano de Santiago (“PRMS”) y los cambios de zona para el Proyecto eran manejados
por el SEREMI. El 16 de abril de 1998, las Demandantes fueron informadas de que el
Proyecto era incompatible con la politica de desarrollo urbano del Gobierno. El 3 de junio de
1998, el SEREMI escribid a MTD sefialandole que el PRMS no seria modificado; por lo
tanto, los cambios de zonificacién requeridos para que el Proyecto pudiera continuar no
fueron aprobados. La solicitud de asistencia de las Demandantes al CIE fue rechazada. El 4

de noviembre de 1998 el Ministro rechazo formalmente el Proyecto.

16. El 2 de junio de 1999, las Demandantes notificaron a la Demandada la existencia de
una diferencia sobre inversién bajo los términos del Tratado de 1992 suscrito entre el
Gobierno de Malasia y el Gobierno de la Republica de Chile para la Promocion y Proteccién
de Inversiones (el TBI).° Al término del periodo de negociacién de tres meses exigido por el
Articulo 6(3) del TBI, para poder someter la diferencia a arbitraje, la disputa seguia sin ser
resuelta. A solicitud de la Demandada, el periodo de negociacion fue prorrogado por 30 dias,
sin alcanzarse acuerdo alguno.

; Mas tarde, el 9 de septiembre de 1999, se celebré un tercer Contrato de Inversion Extranjera. Este no

especificé la ubicacién del Proyecto. Véase Laudo, parr. 84.
Tratado entre el Gobierno de Malasia y el Gobierno de la Repiiblica de Chile para la Promocién y
Proteccién de Inversiones, del 11 de noviembre de 1992 (Fecha de entrada en vigor: 4 de agosto de 1995).
Vease El Texto en espaol ~—s del_~«SOS TBI. = que_—'se_—sencuentra.—sonline~—en
http://www.unctad.org/sections/dite/iia/docs/bits/chile_malasia_sp.pdf.

17. El 26 de junio de 2001, las Demandantes presentaron la solicitud de arbitraje. Las
Demandantes alegaron, en primer término, que la Demandada habia infringido su obligacion
de tratamiento justo y equitativo, contemplada en el TBI, toda vez que, habiendo creado e
incentivado la sdlida expectativa de que el Proyecto era factible desde el punto de vista de la
regulaci6n en la especifica ubicacién propuesta, y habiendo suscrito un contrato confirmando
ese emplazamiento, posteriormente desautoriz6 esa ubicacién cuando ya los Demandantes

habian comprometido irrevocablemente su inversién.

18. En segundo lugar, las Demandantes se basaron en la clausula de la nacién mas
favorecida del Articulo 3(1) del TBI, que establece que las inversiones “recibirdn un
tratamiento justo y equitativo, y no menos favorable que aquel concedido a las inversiones
hechas por los inversionistas de cualquier tercer Estado.” Las Demandantes argumentaron
que la clausula NMF hace aplicables varias disposiciones de otros TBI suscritos por Chile; en
particular el Articulo 3(1) del TBI con Dinamarca,’ que exige al Estado receptor dar
cumplimiento a “cualquier obligacién que pudiere haber contraido en relacién con
inversiones,” una obligacién que en este caso se extendia a los Contratos de Inversion
Extranjera. Las Demandantes también adujeron que la Demandada habia violado el Articulo
3(3) del Tratado con Croacia, que se refiere a dafios ocasionados por medidas no razonables y
discriminatorias, asi como el Articulo 3(2), que establece que cuando una parte contratante
haya “aceptado una inversion en su territorio, otorgara los permisos necesarios de acuerdo

con sus leyes y reglamentos.”*

19. En tercer lugar, las Demandantes sostuvieron que la negativa a otorgar los permisos

necesarios constituia una expropiacion indirecta en violacion del Articulo 4 del TBI.

20. En relacion con estas infracciones MTD reclamé, “ todos los dafios a que pueda estar
facultada bajo el derecho aplicable, incluyendo, sin limitacin, (a) todo damnum emergens

sufrido por MTD como consecuencia de la violacién por el demandado de los contratos de

7 Tratado entre el Gobierno de la Republica de Chile y el Gobierno del Reino de Dinamarca concerniente

a la Promocién y Proteccién Reciproca de Inversiones, del 28 de mayo de 1993 (en vigor: 3 de noviembre de
1995): 1935 UNTS 263; también en hitp:/wwww-unctad.org/sections/dite/iia/docs/bits/chile_denmark pa

EI texto del Tratado entre el Gobierno de la Republica de Chile y el Gobierno de la Repiiblica de
Croacia concerniente a la Promocién y Proteccién Reciproca de Inversiones, del 28 de noviembre de 1993 (en
vigor: 15 de junio de 1996), se encuentra online en
http://www.unctad.org/sections/dite/iia/docs/bits/chile_croatia.pdf.

inversion y el Tratado, incluyendo las sumas invertidas bajo los contratos de inversion y
todos los costos y gastos incurridos por MTD en sus esfuerzos por llevar a cabo el Proyecto;
(b) y lucrum cessans que MTD habria obtenido de su inversién si la Republica de Chile

nd

hubiese permitido que el Proyecto continuara,”” mas las costas e interés compuesto.

21. | La Demandada sostuvo que todo el dafio sufrido fue causado por la falta de debida
diligencia por las Demandantes. La confianza puesta en el Sr. Fontaine, la ausencia de
consejo profesional independiente en el sector urbano y la aceptacion de una valoracion
exorbitante del terreno al tiempo de efectuar la inversion fueron las causas efectivas de las
pérdidas de las Demandantes. En ningun momento la Demandada o cualquiera de sus
funcionarios se comprometid a otorgar una aprobacion de urbanismo que, como las
Demandantes sabian o debian haber sabido, era exigida por la Ley. Por el contrario, de
acuerdo con la Demandada, MTD fue informada en los términos mas explicitos, en una
reunion del 6 de noviembre de 1996, a la que asistieron el Ministro y el SEREMI, de que
existia un obstaculo mayor en el Proyecto, en términos del PRMS. En estas circunstancias
MTD no podia haber tenido una expectativa legitima de la factibilidad del Proyecto desde el
punto de vista de la regulacion, un aspecto cuyo alcance sobrepasa los términos de los

Contratos de Inversion Extranjera celebrados entre el CIE y MTD.

Cc. EL LAUDO DEL TRIBUNAL

22. | Mediante Laudo de 25 de mayo de 2004, el Tribunal (Dr. Rigo Sureda, Presidente;
Sefiores Lalonde y Oreamuno Blanco) sostuvo, por una parte, que Chile habia violado su
obligacion de trato justo y equitativo bajo el Articulo 3(1) del TBI pero, por otra, que las
Demandantes habian omitido protegerse de los riesgos del negocio inherentes a su inversion
en Chile. Estando dividida por partes iguales la responsabilidad por el dafio, el Tribunal
concluy6 que la Demandada debia pagar el 50% de los dafios evaluados, a saber,
US$5.871.322.42, mas el interés compuesto, y que cada parte debia pagar sus propias costas

y el 50% de las costas de arbitraje.

Solicitud de Arbitraje, para. 74(iii).

23.

@

Generalidades

La mayoria de los aspectos de la decision del Tribunal no fueron controvertidos ante

el Comité y solo necesitan una breve referencia. El Tribunal sostuvo que:

(a)

(b)

(©)

(d)

(e)

Laudo.
Laudo.
Laudo.
Laudo.

MTD Equity era un inversionista bajo el Articulo 1(c)(ii) del TBI; MTD Chile,
siendo totalmente de propiedad de MTD Equity, se consideraba un nacional de
Malasia para los efectos del procedimiento arbitral con arreglo al Articulo
6(2); de este modo, ambas Demandantes tenian legitimacion para reclamar

bajo el TBI.'°

No hubo infraccion de la clausula NMF (en relacién con el Articulo 3(1) del
TBI con Dinamarca) por causa de cualquier violacion alegada de los Contratos
de Inversion Extranjera. Tal como aparece claro en dichos Contratos, la
autorizacion para invertir era unicamente el comienzo de un proceso que
requeriria ulteriores permisos y aprobaciones. Dado que Chile no habia
vulnerado los Contratos de Inversion Extranjera al rehusar el permiso para el
Proyecto, no habia nada sobre lo cual pudiese operar la clausula “paraguas” del

Articulo 3(1) del TBI con Dinamarca.'!

Habiéndose dado razones adecuadas para la negativa de Chile a modificar o
prescindir del PRMS, no existia fundamento para considerar que tales

: 2 soe + 12
negativas fuesen discriminatorias. 2

El Demandado no vulnero la clausula NMF (en relacion con el Articulo 3(2)
del TBI con Croacia) al negarse a cambiar el PRMS para permitir que el
Proyecto pudiera ejecutarse. Las Demandantes no tenian derecho alguno a la
modificacién del marco normativo del pais donde invirtid, y el PRMS era parte
de dicho marco. Lo tnico que las Demandantes podian esperar era que se

aplicara la Ley.'?

Dado que las Demandantes “no tenian derecho a la modificacién del PRMS,”

la denegacion de autorizacion no implicé una expropiacion sino, mas bien, el

, parrs. 92-94,
, pars. 179-89.
, pars. 190-96.
, pars. 197-205.

trato injusto por parte del Estado al aprobar una inversién contraria a su propia

politica vigente.'*

Chile ademas no controvierte ciertas conclusiones del Tribunal que son consecuencia

de su afirmacion de una vulneracion del estandar de trato justo y equitativo. En particular no

La conclusién del Tribunal de que las Demandantes no adoptaron las medidas
adecuadas y razonables para investigar los problemas de urbanismo y para

protegerse en sus relaciones contractuales con el Sr. Fontaine;'°
Salvo en dos aspectos, su estimacion de los dafios totales;!°

Su conclusién de que debe pagarse interés compuesto.'7

Las siguientes conclusiones son controvertidas por Chile en este procedimiento de

24.
discute:
()
(g)
(h)
25.
anulacion:
(i)
@)
(k)

La conclusion del Tribunal de que la “aprobacion por parte del CIE de una
inversion para un proyecto que contraviene la politica urbana del Gobierno
constituye una violacién al deber de dispensar a un inversionista un trato

justo y equitativo”; 1s

Su conclusién de que los dafios deben ser compartidos por igual entre las
partes, sobre la base de que ambas fueron parcialmente responsables de
éstos;"” y

Dos aspectos especificos de la evaluacién de los dafios: uno concerniente al
precio estimado del terreno; el otro relativo a la eleccion del Tribunal del 4 de
noviembre de 1998 como el punto de corte para el calculo de los dajfios,
cuando se deberia haber escogido el 3 de junio de 1998, o incluso una fecha

anterior.”°

Laudo, parrs. 207-14.
Laudo, parrs, 168-78.

Laudo, parrs. 215-48. Para los puntos controvertidos ver parrafo 25(k) siguiente.

Laudo, parrs. 249-51.

Laudo, parr. 166. Véase generalmente Laudo, parrs. 107-67; Solicitud de Anulacién, parrs. 52-81.
Laudo, parr. 242-46; Solicitud de Anulacién, parrs. 82-83.

Laudo, parr. 240(ii); Solicitud de Anulacién, parrs. 84-85.

-10-

26. Antes de analizar las causales de nulidad invocadas por Chile y su aplicacion a estos
aspectos del Laudo, es util establecer con un mayor detalle las razones esgrimidas por el

Tribunal para llegar a las decisiones impugnadas.

(2) Las conclusiones del Tribunal sobre trato justo y equitativo
(a) El estandar de trato justo y equitativo

27. El Articulo 2 del TBI se titula “Promocién y Proteccién de las Inversiones.” El
Articulo 2(2) prescribe que:
A las inversiones de los inversionistas de cualquiera de las Partes
Contratantes se les otorgard, en todo momento, un tratamiento justo y

equitativo y gozardan de proteccion y seguridad plenas en el territorio de la
otra Parte Contratante.

El Articulo 3(1), titulado “Nacion Mas Favorecida,” establece:

Las inversiones hechas por los inversionistas de cualquiera de las Partes
Contratantes en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante recibiran un
tratamiento justo y equitativo, y no menos favorable que aquel concedido a las
inversiones hechas por los inversionistas de cualquier tercer Estado.
En consecuencia, no existe una, sino dos disposiciones en el TBI que establecen que las
inversiones “recibirdn un tratamiento justo y equitativo.” Mas aun, el Articulo 4(1) del TBI
Croacia-Chile establece que el derecho a un trato justo y equitativo “no serd obstaculizado en
la practica.” Después de llamar la atencién a las diversas fuentes de la obligacién en el
TBI,”' el Tribunal se refirié en términos genéricos a la “obligacién de tratar las inversiones

en forma justa y equitativa.””

28. Al tiempo que el Tribunal puso de presente que las partes parecian estar de acuerdo en

el significado del estandar de trato justo y equitativo, analizo aspectos de dicho estandar, que:

[A]l tenor del TBI, trato justo y equitativo debe entenderse como trato
imparcial y ecudnime, que contribuya a alentar la promocién de la inversion
extranjera. En vez de imponer un comportamiento pasivo por parte del Estado
o d los comportami perjudiciales para los inversioni: el TBI
define su objetivo en forma activa ....7°

21

> Laudo, parrs. 105(i), 107, 113, 116.

2 Sobre la relacién entre las diversas fuentes de obligacién y la decisin del Tribunal, véanse parrs. 79—
80 siguientes.

3 Laudo, parr. 113, y para las discusiones véase Laudo, parrs. 109-13.

-ll-

Después de citar un parrafo del laudo en el caso de TECMED,”* concluyo: “Este es el criterio

que el Tribunal aplicaré a los hechos del presente caso.”*°

(b) = Aplicacién del estandar a los hechos

29. En su reclamo, las Demandantes formularon el asunto central en lo atinente a la

aplicacion de este estandar a la disputa, de la siguiente manera:

[S]i el Estado de Chile puede validamente celebrar un contrato de inversion
extranjera vinculante, que especifica el proposito y la ubicacién de un
proyecto particular de inversion, sabiendo, al mismo tiempo (y sin decirselo al
inversionista), que el Gobierno nunca permitira que el inversionista realice el
proyecto que es el objeto del contrato”

. . . . .
A este cuestionamiento el Tribunal dio una respuesta negativa.””

30. En principio, dada la interpretacion del Tribunal del estandar de trato justo y
equitativo (al que el Comité se referira mas adelante), Chile podria haber contestado la
interrogante en cuatro formas. Primero, argumentando que no era la politica de Chile, al
tiempo de efectuarse la inversion, que el Proyecto nunca pudiere ser aprobado y que la
decision definitiva de no permitirlo fue adoptada con posterioridad; de haber sido esta la
respuesta, no se habria presentado contradiccién entre los Contratos de Inversion Extranjera y
la decision final de urbanismo. Segundo, pudo haber alegado que la politica de desarrollo
urbano de Chile ya estaba establecida para la region y era adversa al Proyecto; ademas, que
las Demandantes fueron notificadas expresamente de este hecho. Tercero, pudo haber
indicado que “e/ contrato de inversién extranjera vinculante,” al cual las Demandantes se
refieren, no importé un compromiso de Chile en relacién con la ubicacién del Proyecto, sino
que su sefialamiento fue meramente indicativo. Cuarto, pudo haber argitido que, con
independencia de las respuestas a las tres primeras preguntas, las Demandantes asumieron el

riesgo de que su proyecto pudiera no ser aprobado.

31. | Cabe hacer hincapié en que no obstante que la Demandada formuld el segundo,
tercero y cuarto argumentos ante el Tribunal, no esgrimié el primero. Haberlo hecho habria
sido inconsistente con su principal defensa de los hechos, basada en la alegada reunién del 6
* Técnicas Medioambientales TECMED S.A. v. The United Mexican States, Caso CIADI No.
ARB(AF)00/2, (2003) 10 Informes CIADI 130, 192-93 (parr. 154), citado en el Laudo, parr. 114.

2s

Laudo, parr. 115.

26 Réplica de las Demandantes, parr. 36, citado en el Laudo, parr. 129.

-12-

de noviembre de 1996. Conforme al Articulo 52 del Convenio CIADI, un procedimiento de
anulacion no constituye una apelacion y menos atin un nuevo juicio; se trata de una forma de
revision respecto de causales especificas y limitadas, que deben analizarse con base en el
expediente conocido por el Tribunal. De este modo, la pregunta central para el Comité es —
suponiendo por el momento que el Tribunal no incurrié en un vicio de nulidad en la
formulacién del estandar de tratamiento justo y equitativo — si el Tribunal incurrié en algan

vicio de nulidad, al responder los tres argumentos fundamentales expuestos ante él.

(c) El tratamiento del Tribunal al argumento de Chile sobre notificacion

32. La Demandada hizo mucho énfasis ante el Tribunal en una reuni6n que dijo tuvo lugar
el 6 de noviembre de 1996, entre el Sr. Edmundo Hermosilla (entonces Ministro de MINVU),
el SEREMI (Sr. Sergio Gonzalez Tapia) y los representantes de MTD, en la que se hicieron
advertencias explicitas en cuanto a que el Proyecto contravenia las regulaciones urbanisticas
vigentes y enfrentaba las correspondientes dificultades.** Esta fecha es relevante pues es
anterior a la suscripcion por MTD del Contrato de Promesa (13 de diciembre de 1996), a la
presentacion ante el CIE de la solicitud de aprobacion inicial de la inversion (14 de enero de
1997), y a la realizacion de cualquiera de los otros actos que lo calificaron como inversionista
en Chile. A esta reunion se alude en la carta del SEREMI del 3 de junio de 1998, que fue la
primera notificacion escrita a MTD de que no se otorgaria autorizacion para cambiar o
prescindir del PRMS. No se conserva ningun registro coetaneo de la reunién del 6 de
noviembre de 1996, y las Demandantes negaron que ella hubiese tenido lugar, o al menos que

a ella hubiese asistido algun representante de MTD.

33. El Tribunal, tras exponer los argumentos de las partes,”? traté este aspecto factico con
alguna extensién*® pero en definitiva declind resolverlo.*' En lugar de ello, el Tribunal
declar6é que “analizara la situacién suponiendo, primeramente, que la reunién se hubiera

celebrado, y luego que no hubiera tenido lugar, y examinard hasta qué punto la conducta de

 

Véase Laudo, parrs. 163, 166, 189, 196, 214, 240(ii) para diferentes expresiones sobre esta conclusién.
Memorial de Contestacién, parr. 24, citado en Laudo, parr. 48.

» Laudo, parrs. 117, 124, 126.

0 Laudo, parrs. 150-59.

Sin perjuicio de la ausencia de toda documentacién contemporanea de cualquier especie (excepto la
palabra “Malasia” en la agenda del Ministro), no es claro cuales funcionarios de MTD estaban presentes, si es
que alguno lo estuvo. Se invocé prueba de que dos de los principales funcionarios de MTD involucrados no
estaban en Chile en esa época.

-13-

las partes es congruente con las declaraciones hechas supuestamente por funcionarios

hil y por los repr de las Di de .”? Destacd que si en estas reuniones
se hubieran hecho categéricamente advertencias negativas, habria sido “ilégico que las
Demandantes solicitaran la aprobacién del CIE para una inversion considerada inviable por

933

altos funcionarios de la Demandada. Luego de discutir el ambito y sentido de la

aprobacion del CIE, concluyo:

El hecho de que la reunion del 6 de noviembre de 1996 se hubiera celebrado 0

no, no afecta el resultado de estas consideraciones. En efecto, si en verdad la

reunion tuvo lugar, es atin mas inexplicable que el CIE aprobara la inversion

y que se suscribieran los dos primeros Contratos de Inversion Extranjera. El

Ministro Hermosilla y el CIE eran dos canales de comunicacién diferentes de

la Demandada con terceros, pero, a los efectos de las obligaciones contraidas

por Chile en virtud del TBI, ambos representaban a Chile como una unidad,

como un monolito, para usar la expresién de la Demandada.**
De esta forma, el Tribunal habria sostenido que existié una infraccion del estandar de trato
justo y equitativo, bien sea que las Demandantes hubiesen sido informadas 0 no de la politica
chilena sobre desarrollo urbano de las areas del sur de Santiago, tales como Pirque. En vista
de ello, no efectué (como la Demandada indica)*® andlisis detallados en relacién con lo que

pudo haberse declarado en otras reuniones.

(d) = La conclusion del Tribunal sobre el alcance de la aprobacion del CIE

34. | Una controversia mas significativa en cuanto a la conclusién del Tribunal, atafie al rol
del CIE en el proceso de inversion extranjera. Las Demandantes argumentaron ante el
Tribunal que tenian derecho frente a Chile para desarrollar el Proyecto en el terreno en
cuestién, dado el contrato firmado con el CIE, organo del Estado chileno, aun cuando
diversos permisos tuviesen que ser obtenidos antes de que este derecho pudiese ser ejercitado.
Seguin la Demandada, todo lo que el CIE podia hacer en derecho, y todo lo que de hecho

hizo, era otorgar autorizaci6n para la importacién del capital necesario.

» Laudo, parr. 152. Otras reuniones 0 encuentros, sostenidos 0 concertados entre las partes en el periodo
anterior a la carta del SEREMI del 3 de junio de 1998, son mencionados en el Laudo, parrs. 44, 50, 58, 59, 60,
63, 67, 70, 71, 72, 73, 153. También hubo controversias sobre declaraciones chilenas inconsistentes, posteriores
a esa fecha, que el Tribunal mencioné sin resolverlas: Laudo, parrs. 156-57.

s Laudo, parr. 158.

Laudo, parr. 166.

Véase Solicitud de Anulacién, parrs. 7, 11, 19, 20, 25, 27.

-14-

35. El Tribunal no adoptd ninguna de estas posiciones. Después de establecer
sucintamente las posturas de las Partes, el Tribunal concluy6é que la aprobacion del CIE,
expresada en los Contratos de Inversion Extranjera, tenia un significado adicional, no
limitado al derecho de importar capital:

La aprobacion de un proyecto en una determinada ubicacién permitiria a un

inversionista suponer, prima facie, que su ejecucién en esa ubicacion es
factible desde el punto de vista normativo.*°

Aun aceptando la limitada importancia de los Contratos de Inversion
Extranjera a efectos de la concesion de otros permisos y aprobaciones, dichos
Contratos deberian constituir al menos una indicacion de que, desde el punto
de vista del Gobierno, el Proyecto no transgrede las politicas del Gobierno.”

36. El Tribunal expuso tres razones para arribar a su conclusion:

(1) | Los términos de la Ley que establece el CIE y le confiere la facultad “de
aprobar, en representacion del Estado de Chile, el ingreso de capitales del exterior de
conformidad con este decreto ley y para establecer los términos y condiciones de los

respectivos contratos” (Articulo 12).5 8

(2) El requisito de que la Solicitud y el Contrato de Inversion Extranjera
consiguiente, deben especificar la ubicacion de la inversion: “Una modificacién de la
ubicacion de la inversion requeriria la modificacion del contrato y, por ende, la aprobacion

del CIE.”®

(3) | La composicion del CIE, integrado por Ministros y el Presidente del Banco
Central (Articulo 13): “/a composicién ministerial del CIE es, en si misma, prueba de la
importancia que atribuye Chile a la funcion de este érgano y es congruente con el objetivo de

coordinar la inversion extranjera al mds alto nivel de los ministerios en cuestién.””

(e) La conclusion del Tribunal sobre el riesgo de la regulacion

37. La Demandada alego que, en todo caso, siempre recae sobre el inversionista el riesgo
de determinar los requerimientos legales locales y de obtener las aprobaciones y permisos

necesarios, lo que confirmaria el Articulo 4 de los Contratos de Inversién Extranjera. Con

Laudo, parr. 163.
Laudo, parr. 189.
Laudo, parr. 162.
Laudo, parr. 162.
Laudo, parr. 163.

-15-

independencia de cualesquiera reuniones sostenidas o advertencias dadas, el riesgo de
regulacion era exclusivamente del inversionista. El Tribunal lo acept6é hasta cierto punto,

pero hizo una distincién:

El Tribunal comparte la opinién de que es responsabilidad del inversionista
asegurarse de contar con el asesoramiento apropiado, especialmente si va a
invertir fuera de su pais, en un entorno desconocido. Sin embargo, en el caso
que nos ocupa, Chile no es una parte pasiva y la coherencia en el proceder de
los diversos funcionarios por intermedio de los cuales acttia no es
responsabilidad del inversionista sino de Chile.*'

Chile alega que no tenia obligacion de informar a las Demandantes y que
éstas debieron haber averiguado por si mismas cuales eran las normas y
politicas del pais. El Tribunal comparte, en principio, esta afirmacion, pero
considera que Chile también tiene la obligacion de actuar con coherencia y de
aplicar sus politicas de manera sistemdtica, independientemente de cuan
diligente sea el inversionista. Conforme al derecho internacional (que este
Tribunal debe aplicar a las diferencias surgidas en el marco del TBI), el
Estado de Chile debe ser considerado por el Tribunal como una unidad.

(f) La conclusion del Tribunal sobre el trato justo y equitativo

38. De esta forma el Tribunal hizo una distincion entre permisos y licencias individuales,
las que el inversionista tenia que obtener conforme al derecho del Estado receptor, y la

cuesti6n de si el Proyecto era factible desde el punto de vista de la regulacion.

Las Demandantes se pusieron en contacto con funcionarios de la Demandada
desde un principio, en mayo de 1996. Solo en noviembre de 1998, dos afios
después de la supuesta reunién del 6 de noviembre de 1996, el SEREMI
Gonzalez informé a las Demandantes por escrito de la politica contraria al
cambio de zonificacion de El Principal y a la modificacién del PRMS, y el
Ministro Henriquez rechazo formalmente el Proyecto... .

El Tribunal esta convencido, basandose en las pruebas que le han sido
presentadas de que la aprobaci6n por parte del CIE de una inversion para un
proyecto que contraviene la politica urbana del Gobierno constituye una
violacién al deber de dispensar a un inversionista un trato justo y equitativo.*

(3) La conclusién del Tribunal sobre la culpa concurrente
39. La segunda conclusion, que es controvertida por la Demandada, se refiere a la culpa

de las Demandantes. Existié abundante material para que el Tribunal pudiera concluir que

Laudo, parr. 164.
Laudo, parr. 165 (énfasis agregado).
Laudo, parrs. 165-66.

-16-

MTD no se protegié suficientemente contra el riesgo de regulacion, y tal conclusion no es
discutida por las Demandantes. Lo que la Demandada controvierte en este procedimiento es
la decision de que los dafios de MTD debieran ser reducidos sélo en 50% con base en esta
conclusion. A su juicio, la causa real y evidente del daiio de las Demandantes fue su omisiOn
de debida diligencia antes de firmar el contrato con el Sr. Fontaine. En este sentido, hacer
recaer el 50% de la responsabilidad sobre Chile era a la vez arbitrario y desprovisto de

explicacion.

40. _ Luego de analizar las omisiones de MTD con cierto detalle, el Tribunal declaré:

El Tribunal determin6 anteriormente que las Demandantes incurrieron en
gastos relacionados con su criterio empresarial, independientemente del trato
justo y equitativo que debié darseles segun el TBI. Como ya se senald, las
Demandantes tomaron varias decisiones que aumentaron el riesgo al que
estaban expuestas, independientemente del trato que recibieron de Chile.
Escogieron al sefor Fontaine como socio y aceptaron pagar un precio por los
terrenos para el Proyecto sin protegerse legalmente de forma adecuada. Un
inversionista prudente no habria pagado por adelantado el precio total de las
tierras, que se valoraron partiendo del supuesto de que se ejecutaria el
Proyecto; al menos, habria vinculado los pagos futuros al progreso del
Proyecto, incluido el otorgamiento de los permisos necesarios para su
ejecucion.

El Tribunal considera, por lo tanto, que las Demandantes deben asumir parte
de los daiios sufridos y estima esa parte en el 50%, una vez deducido el valor
residual de su inversion calculado segiin las consideraciones siguientes.

(4) La conclusién del Tribunal sobre la evaluacién de los datos

41. — Encuanto a la valoracion de los perjuicios, el Tribunal se basé en “e/ estandar clasico
enunciado por la Corte Permanente de Justicia en Factory at Chorzow: la compensacién
debe ‘borrar todas las consecuencias de la accion ilicita y reestablecer la situacién que, con

” © Al calcular el monto de

toda probabilidad, hubiera existido de no cometerse esa accién.
los dafios, el Tribunal acepto el argumento de Chile en cuanto a que los gastos preparatorios
anteriores al 18 de marzo de 1997 (fecha de la firma del primer Contrato de Inversién
Extranjera) no eran susceptibles de indemnizacién,** pero admitié los costos financieros.*”

Enseguida dedujo el valor residual del terreno, el que se estimo en la cantidad ofrecida por el

a Laudo, parrs. 242-43.
45 Laudo, parr. 238.
46 Laudo, parr. 217, 240(ii).

-17-

Sr. Fontaine en noviembre de 2001, una oferta que las Demandantes deberian haber

48 La indemnizacién resultante fue el 50% del total, debido a la contribucién de

aceptado.
MTD al dajio.
42. En cuanto a las fechas admisibles para el calculo de los dafios, el Tribunal expresd
unicamente:
El Tribunal ha llegado a la conclusion de que la responsabilidad de Chile se
relaciona con la aprobacion de la transferencia de fondos hecha por el CIE, a
pesar de que el Gobierno tenia la politica de no modificar el PRMS. Por lo
tanto, el Tribunal considera que los gastos para el Proyecto efectuados con
anterioridad a la ejecucién del primer Contrato de Inversion Extranjera el 18
de marzo de 1997 no son admisibles para el calculo de los dafios, aunque se
pudieran considerar parte de la inversion. Por la misma razon, los gastos
realizados con posterioridad al 4 de noviembre de 1998 -la fecha en que el
Ministro Henriquez informé por escrito a las Demandantes que el PRMS no se
modificaria- también deben excluirse de dicho cdlculo.”

D. LOS ARGUMENTOS PARA LA ANULACION

() —_sIntroduccién

43. — Ensu Solicitud, la Demandada identifica un gran numero de defectos observados en la
conclusion del Laudo acerca de una vulneracién del estandar de trato justo y equitativo asi
como en su estimacion de los dafios. En términos de las causales de nulidad, enumeradas en
el Articulo 52(1) del Convenio CIADI, el enfoque se centra en vacios y aparentes
contradicciones en el razonamiento, i.e., en la falta de motivacién del laudo (Articulo
52(1)(e)), a pesar de que también argumenta la causal de manifiesta extralimitacion de sus
facultades, en particular por la falta de aplicacién de la ley correspondiente y por la
arrogacion del poder de decidir ex aequo et bono (Articulo 52(1)(b)) y en quebrantamientos
graves de una norma de procedimiento (Articulo 52(1)(d)). Se hara referencia a cada uno de

ellos.

(2) Manifiesta extralimitacién de facultades

44. Enel presente caso, Chile no niega la existencia de una inversion protegida o de una

disputa concerniente a dicha inversion. Por lo tanto, no se ha planteado cuestionamiento

 

a Laudo, parr. 240(iii).
48 Laudo, parr. 244.
” Laudo, parr. 240(ii).

-18-

alguno sobre la jurisdiccién del Tribunal para decidir esa diferencia. Sin embargo, la causal
de manifiesta extralimitacion de facultades, no esta circunscrita al error jurisdiccional; se
establece que la omision completa en aplicar el derecho a que esta sujeto un Tribunal
conforme al Articulo 42(1) del Convenio CIADI puede constituir una manifiesta
extralimitacion de facultades, como también una sentencia dictada ex aequo et bono — esto es,
en el ejercicio de una discrecionalidad general no otorgada por el derecho aplicable — que no
esté autorizada por las partes bajo el Articulo 42(3) del Convenio. La Demandada reclama
que en el presente caso hubo una manifiesta extralimitacion de facultades debido a que el
Tribunal no aplicé el derecho internacional o el derecho chileno como era debido, y que

decidié aspectos de la disputa ex aequo et bono.

45. Los Comités han intentado distinguir entre la omision en aplicar el derecho y el error

en su aplicacion. El Comité en el caso MINE establecié:

[L]a prescindencia por el tribunal de las normas de derecho acordadas
constituiria una derogacion de los términos de referencia dentro de los cuales
el tribunal ha sido autorizado para funcionar. Ejemplos de tal derogacion
incluyen la aplicacién de normas de derecho diversas de las acordadas por
las partes, o una decision basada en ninguna norma de derecho salvo que las
partes hayan convenido en una decision ex aequo et bono. Si la derogacion es
manifiesta la misma implica un manifiesto exceso de poder.

La prescindencia de las normas de derecho aplicables debe ser distinguida de
la aplicacion errénea de dichas normas la cual, aun si es manifiestamente
injustificada, no constituye una causal de anulacién . . . *°

En CDC, el Comité lo expreso de la siguiente forma: “Sin perjuicio de nuestra opinion sobre
la correccién del andlisis juridico del Tribunal . . . nuestra averiguacién se limita a la

determinacion de si el Tribunal intenté 0 no aplicar el derecho inglés.”*!

46. En una opinion experta sometida con la Réplica y adoptada por el Demandado, Sir
Arthur Watts sostiene que la omisi6n en aplicar el derecho apropiado como un fundamento de
la nulidad debiera extenderse a los casos en los que el tribunal efectuia “un desorden efectivo
y sustancial del derecho que estaba tratando de aplicar.” En su opinion:

Llega un momento .. . en que un tribunal, al aplicar supuestamente una
norma de derecho, lo hace en forma tan errada que debe considerarse como si

0 MINE (1989) 4 Informes CIADI 79, 87 (parrs. 5.03—5.04) (énfasis agregado).
5 CDC Group (2005) 11 Informes CIADI 237, 252 (parr. 45).
Opinién del 20 de enero de 2006 anexada a la Réplica, parr. 25.

-19-

hubiera prescindido de la norma y en realidad no la hubiera aplicado en

absoluto. La supuesta aplicacién de la norma debe ser tan inadecuada, y

envuelta de un error tan elemental, que ella trasciende la mera comision de un

error en aplicar el derecho y deviene, en vez, en un caso auténtico de no

aplicacién.*
47. Aparte de su incompatibilidad con el criterio aplicado en casos tales como MINE y
CDC, el problema con esta formulacion consiste en que se desciende por la resbaladiza
pendiente de la apelacién por error de derecho, error de derecho quiza combinado con
adjetivos, pero en todo caso error de derecho. El Comité acepta que la nocion de esforzarse
por aplicar el derecho no es una materia meramente subjetiva. Un laudo no escapara de la
nulidad si el tribunal, mientras pretende aplicar el derecho relevante, realmente aplica otro
derecho completamente diferente.** Sin embargo, el error debe ser “manifiesto” e
indiscutible; no es suficiente un malentendido (y menos atn un desacuerdo) respecto del

contenido de una norma particular.

48.  Consideraciones similares se aplican a un reclamo de que un tribunal ha fallado ex
aequo et bono, esto es, con fundamento de equidad general no limitado por el derecho. Debe
destacarse que el Articulo 42(3) del Convenio CIADI se refiere a la resolucion ex aequo et
bono de disputas, i.e., de la materia sustancial sometida al tribunal. Esto es diferente de
tomar en cuenta consideraciones de justicia al aplicar el derecho. Por ejemplo, las normas
juridicas individuales a menudo requeriran que se tome en cuenta la Justicia o se haga un
balance de los intereses involucrados. Este es el caso del estandar de trato justo y equitativo,

que el Tribunal debia aplicar.

(3) Quebrantamiento grave de una norma de procedimiento

49.  Relativamente poco necesita ser dicho acerca de esta causal de nulidad. Sucesivos

comités han aprobado el siguiente extracto de la decision de anulacién en Wena Hotels:

 

El Solici tiene que identi, la norma fund I de pi limi de
la que el Tribunal se ha desviado y tiene que probar que dicha desviacién ha
sido seria.

3 Id., parr. 27.

“ En MINE el Tribunal se refirié al Articulo 1134 del Cédigo Civil francés en lugar de su homénimo de

Guinea, Articulo 1134 del Codigo Civil de la Unién Francesa. La Comisién sostuvo que el error no ameritaba la
anulacién: (1989) 4 Informes CIADI 79, 96 (parr. 6.40). Dado que no se acredité que el Articulo 1134 fuese
aplicado en Guinea de una manera diferente que en Francia, la equivocacién no tuvo repercusién.

-20-

[El Articulo 52(1)(d)] se refiere a un conjunto de criterios minimos de
procedimiento que deben ser respetados como un asunto de derecho
internacional. Es esencial, como una materia de procedimiento, que a cada
parte se otorgue el derecho a ser oida ante un tribunal independiente e
imparcial. Esto incluye el derecho de exponer su demanda o su defensa y de
producir todos los argumentos y la prueba en sustento de la misma. Este
derecho fundamental debe ser garantizado en un nivel igualitario, de una
manera que permita a cada parte responder adecuadamente a los argumentos
y pruebas presentados por la otra... .

El énfasis es asi en el debido proceso, no en la sustancia del Laudo en si mismo, asunto de

que tratan los parrafos (b) y (e) del Articulo 52(1) del Convenio CIADI.

(4) Falta de motivacién del Laudo

50. | De mayor relevancia para el presente caso es la falta de motivacion del Laudo. El
Tribunal, en el caso Vivendi, discutid esto en los siguientes términos:

[S]e acepta tanto en los casos como en la literatura que el Articulo 52 (1) (e)
se refiere a la omisién de expresar motivo alguno respecto de todo o parte de
un laudo, no a la falta de expresion de razones correctas 0 convincentes ....
Siempre y cuando las razones que dé un tribunal puedan ser comprendidas y
se relacionen con las cuestiones tratadas ante el tribunal, la exactitud de las
mismas no es pertinente. Mas aun, los motivos pueden manifestarse en forma
sucinta o con todo detalle, y las diferentes tradiciones judiciales difieren en su
manera de expresar las razones. Debe permitirse a los tribunales cierta
discrecionalidad en cuanto al modo en que expresen sus razones.

En la opinion del Comité, la anulacién conforme al Articulo 52 (1)(e) sélo
debe ocurrir en un caso muy manifiesto. En opinién del Comité, es necesario
que se satisfagan dos requisitos: en primer término, que la omision de
expresar los motivos en que se fund6 el Laudo debe suponer que la decisién
sobre una cuestién en particular carece de cualquier justificacion expresa y,
en segundo término, que esa cuestién debe ser en si misma necesaria para la
decisién del tribunal. Suele decirse que las razones contradictorias se
cancelan reciprocamente, y asi debe suceder si son genuinamente
contradictorias. Pero en ocasiones los tribunales deben compensar
consideraciones conflictivas una con otras, y un Comité ad hoc debe tener
mucho cuidado en no discernir que hay una contradiccién cuando lo que en
efecto se expresa en los fundamentos de un tribunal, segtin podria decirse con
mayor exactitud, no es sino el reflejo de tales consideraciones conflictivas.”

5s Wena Hotels, (2002) 6 Informes CIADI 129, 142 (parrs. 56-57), aludidos e.g. por la Comision en CDC
Group (2005) 11 Informes CIADI 237, 248-50 (parrs. 34-37).
Vivendi (2002) 6 Informes CIADI 340, 358 (parrs. 64-65).

-21-

En otros casos de anulacién, los comités han expresado puntos de vista similares.*”

51. | La Demandada parece aceptar este criterio, enfatizando principalmente que un Comité
sdlo puede Ilenar los vacios en el razonamiento de un tribunal en limitadas circunstancias, i.e.
donde la razon faltante esté claramente implicita 0 sea tan obvia que no requiera ser

expresada.**

(5) Ambito de la autoridad de anulacién

52. Hasta ahora, en cada decision de anulaci6n, el Comité ad hoc ha proclamado que ésta
no constituye una corte de apelacién de un tribunal.*? Esto se evidencia tanto en los términos
de los Articulos 52 y 53 del Convenio CIADI, como también en sus travaux.® Sin embargo,
la Solicitud de Chile plantea un problema sobre la funcion de la anulacién en casos en los
cuales (como el presente) no existe error jurisdiccional, falla procesal evidente, ni negativa a

decidir.

53. En su opinion experta, adjunta a la Réplica de la Demandada, Sir Arthur Watts
argumenta a favor de un rol mas amplio de los Comités de anulacién en relacién con la
correccion sustantiva de los laudos del CIADI, dandole un margen de revisién mas extenso.
El reconoce el argumento opuesto (planteado en la competente opinion experta del Profesor

Schreuer):“!

Puede sefalarse, por supuesto, que el hecho de que un Comité ad hoc se
dedique a determinar si el error o prescindencia del derecho aplicable
incurrido por el tribunal es o no grave, o si se refiere o no a algun aspecto
mayor del derecho aplicable, o si ese aspecto mayor tiene importancia directa
en el caso sometido ante el tribunal, implicaria inmiscuirse en un grado
inaceptable en los méritos de la decisién del tribunal. Pero no existe una
impropiedad mayor en un Comité ad hoc que actua de esta forma en el interés

37

Véanse, ¢.g,, Amco Asia I (1986) 1 Informes CIADI 509, 519-21 (parrs. 38-44); MINE (1989) 4
Informes CIADI 79, 88-89 (parrs. 5.07-5.13); Amco Asia II (1992) 9 Informes CIADI 3, 48-49 (parrs. 7.55—
7.57); Wena Hotels (2002) 6 Informes CIADI 129, 145-46 (parrs. 77-82); CDC Group (2005) 11 Informes
CIADI 237, 259-61 (parts. 66-72); Mitchell v DRC, resolucién de | de noviembre de 2006, parr. 21.

Véanse e.g., Memorial de Contestacién, parr. 4; Opinion Experta de Sir Arthur Watts, parrs, 35-55.
Véanse Kléckner (1985) 2 Informes CIADI 4, 119-20 (parr. 61); Amco Asia I (1986) 1 Informes
CIADI 509, 515 (parr. 23); MINE (1989) 4 Informes CIADI 79, 87 (parr. 5.04), 88 (parr. 5.08); Amco Asia II
(1992) 9 Informes CIADI 3, 39 (parr. 7.19), 51 (parr. 8.08); Wena Hotels (2002) 6 Informes CIADI 129, 135
(parr. 18); Vivendi (2002) 6 Informes CIADI 340, 357-58 (parrs. 62, 64); CDC Group PLC v. Republic of the
Seychelles (2005) 11 Informes CIADI 237, 248-50 (parrs. 34-37); Mitchell v. DRC , resolucién de 1 de
noviembre de 2006, parrs. 19-20.

“ Veéase C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (Cambridge, CUP, 2001) 88-94 & ss.

C. Schreuer, Opinién del 5 de diciembre de 2005 anexada a la Contra-Memoria de Anulacién de las
Demandantes.

59

6

-22-

de asegurar la justicia fundamental del proceso arbitral que dicho Comité
asuma considerar casos complejos (y discutibles) de presunto exceso de poder
(v si, de haberse producido un exceso, éste es manifiesto), o si el tribunal ha
expresado o no las razones para su decision cuando la respuesta a ese mismo
interrogante estdé envuelta en las paginas de un laudo complejo, 0 cuando no
habiendo el tribunal expresado las razones la Comisién ad hoc debe con todo
reconstruir (en realidad, inventar) el razonamiento del tribunal, o con la
determinacion de si alguno de los requerimientos adverbiales 0 adjetivos del
Articulo 52(1) han sido satisfechos (‘apropiadamente,’ ‘manifiestamente,’
‘serio,’ ‘fundamental’). Estas no son materias de facil resolucion mediante la
aplicacion de reglas simples, sino materias para razonamiento, cuyo ejercicio
es exactamente la labor que las Comisiones ad hoc estan bien posicionadas
para realizar.

 

 

54. Es innegable que los comités de anulacion tienen una funcién que desempefiar dentro
del sistema del CIADI, que consiste en asegurar “la justicia fundamental del proceso
arbitral.” Es cierto también que las causales de nulidad no distinguen formalmente (como,
por ejemplo, si lo hace el Derecho Modelo de UNCITRAL) entre errores jurisdiccionales y
errores relativos a los méritos de la disputa, y que una manifiesta extralimitacion de
facultades bien podria producirse respecto de una cuestion de méritos. Al mismo tiempo, el
rol de un Comité ad hoc en el sistema CIADI es limitado. No puede sustituir la
determinacién del tribunal sobre los méritos de la disputa, ni puede dirigir a un tribunal,
reasumiendo el caso, sobre la forma en que debe resolver los aspectos sustanciales en litigio.
Todo lo que puede hacer es anular la decision del tribunal: puede extinguir la res judicata
pero sobre una cuestién de méritos, mas no puede crear una nueva.°? Una aproximacién mas
intervencionista de los Comités sobre los méritos de las disputas tendria el riesgo de un ciclo
renovado de tribunal y procedimientos de anulacion, del tipo observado en Kléckner y
AMCO. Dado que (tras un comienzo incierto) sucesivas decisiones de comités ad hoc han
establecido con razonable claridad la extension y limites de las causales de anulacion
conforme al Articulo 52, el Comité considera que “/a justicia fundamental del proceso
arbitral” bajo el Convenio es mejor servida adhiriéndose a la postura establecida. Esto se

refuerza con dos consideraciones, una general y otra especifica. La consideracion general

Opinion Experta de Sir Arthur Watts, parr. 28.
Un tribunal reconvenido después de una anulacién, sin lugar a dudas considerard el razonamiento de
anulacién de la Comisién, pero no esta formalmente obligado por sus apreciaciones respecto de ningiin punto en
que el laudo del primer tribunal haya sido anulado. Véase Amco Asia II (1992) 9 Informes CIADI 3, 36-39
(parrs. 7.10-7.17). Mas atin, hasta ahora la practica del CIADI ha sido la de designar diferentes miembros de la
Comisién en una segunda anulacién, mientras que las solicitudes de interpretacién o revisién, en la medida de lo
posible, son dirigidas al mismo tribunal que dicté el laudo: Art. 50(2), 51(3).

-23-

consiste en que el Articulo 52(1), segtn las interpretaciones dadas por sucesivos comités,
permite un control de calidad. La consideracion especifica, en el presente caso, es que,
independientemente de si a uno le satisface o no la decision del Tribunal, a ella se llegd
realmente, con un fundamento acotado y especifico, sin inferencias sistematicas a los asuntos

controversiales de la ley de proteccién de la inversion.

E. LAS CAUSALES DE NULIDAD INVOCADAS

(1) _ Relacién entre las causales anulacién

55. | En su Memorial de Anulacion, la Demandada tiende a presentar su reclamo de una
forma condensada: por ejemplo, reclama la “omision [del Tribunal] en aplicar o explicar la
aplicacién’” del derecho internacional o del derecho chileno. Por supuesto, un aspecto de
un laudo puede ser susceptible de impugnacion por mas de una causal, no obstante lo cual es
necesario distinguir entre las diferentes causales de impugnacién. La omisién en la
aplicacion de la ley que corresponde (en el sentido explicado en el parrafo 46 anterior) puede
involucrar una manifiesta extralimitacion de facultades; la falta de explicacion acerca de su
aplicacion se refiere especificamente a falta de motivacién del laudo. Ambas causales

pueden estar relacionados intimamente en un caso, pero ellas son analiticamente diferentes.

(2) Quebrantamiento grave de una norma de procedimiento

56. Es conveniente, primero, tratar la causal de anulacién establecida en el Articulo
52(1)(d): “que hubiere quebrantamiento grave de una norma de procedimiento.” La

Demandada argumenta que:

[A]l sostener que falté un tratamiento justo y equitativo, el Tribunal no
considero, ni respondio de otra forma a la abundante prueba presentada por
las Partes respecto de aspectos esenciales en el conflicto, que hubieran
afectado significativamente tanto la declaracion de responsabilidad como la
evaluacién de la indemnizacion. Por ejemplo, el Tribunal no consideré las
opiniones de expertos presentadas por ambas Partes en una serie de puntos,
incluyendo la interpretacién sustantiva de los Contratos de Inversion
Extranjera y del DL 600, un elemento clave para su conclusion en relacion
con el trato justo y equitativo. Mas aun, existen numerosas referencias a lo
largo del Laudo en las que el Tribunal simplemente reproduce los argumentos
importantes expuestos por cada parte sin analizar 0 extraer conclusiones en
relacién con dichas cuestiones. Por consiguiente, el Tribunal se desvia

ot E.g., Memorial de Anulacién del Demandado, p. 56.

-24-

seriamente de su obligacion fundamental de otorgar a las partes el derecho de
ser oidas, y el Laudo debe ser anulado.©

El asunto, empero, no fue desarrollado posteriormente en la Réplica ni en los alegatos.

57. El Articulo 52 distingue entre quebrantamiento grave de una norma de procedimiento
y la falta de motivacion del laudo. La omision en declarar las razones es una causal
independiente de anulacion y no existe motivo para pensar que ella haya sido duplicada en el
epigrafe del Articulo 52(1)(d).” Cabe imaginar, en primer lugar, que un laudo pudiere
referirse a los argumentos de las partes de un modo tan defectuoso o impreciso que evidencie
que dichos argumentos no fueron oidos. Sin embargo, no puede sugerirse que esto haya
sucedido en el presente caso. Por lo tanto, los argumentos transcritos en el parrafo anterior
seran tratados bajo el titulo falta de motivacion. No existe indicacidn, en el presente caso, de
que se hayan cometido quebrantamientos de normas de procedimiento y, menos atin, que

estos hayan sido graves.

(3) Trato justo y equitativo: manifiesta extralimitacioén de facultades

58. Ya ha sido discutido el alcance de la manifiesta extralimitacion de facultades como
una causal de anulacién.® La Demandada reclama que el Tribunal, o bien omitié aplicar el
derecho internacional y el derecho chileno a los problemas a los que deberia haberlos
aplicado, o los aplicé de una forma tan superficial e insostenible que equivale a su no

aplicacion.

59. Esto plantea tres interrogantes: (1) gqué derecho era en realidad el aplicable a un
aspecto determinado, de acuerdo con el Articulo 42 del Convenio CIADI?; (2) gqué derecho
pretendio el Tribunal aplicar a ese aspecto?; (3) yexiste algun fundamento para concluir que
la decision del Tribunal implicé una manifiesta inaplicacion de la ley correspondiente, en el

sentido preciso explicado en el parrafo 46 precedente?

6s E.g, Memorial de Anulacién del Demandado, parr. 104.

66 Trascripcion, 10 de abril de 2006, p. 12.

o El Memorial de Anulacién del Demandado, parr. 203, invoca parte de la decision sobre anulacién en
Vivendi en apoyo de la nulidad sobre este fundamento: ver (2004) 6 Informes CIADI 340, 362 (parr.
83). Aunque La Comisién mencioné incidentalmente que el Tribunal habia emitido un “laudo
profusamente razonado,” lo hizo en el contexto de la distincién entre “la manera en que el Tribunal
procedid, no del contenido de su decisién.” La omisién en establecer los razonamientos apunta a este
Ultimo, no a lo primero.

os Véanse parrafos 43-47 anteriores.

-25-

60.  Alternativamente, la Demandada sostiene que, en defecto de algun derecho
identificable, el Tribunal decidié aspectos esenciales ex aequo et bono sin estar autorizado
para actuar de esa forma. Las Partes convienen en que el Tribunal no estaba facultado bajo el
Articulo 42(3) para dirimir la disputa sobre una base ex aequo et bono, de manera que la

cuestién aqui es si él actud de esa forma y con qué consecuencias.

(a) No aplicacion del derecho internacional

61. El Articulo 42(1) del Convenio CIADI estipula:

(1) El Tribunal decidira la diferencia de acuerdo con las normas de derecho
acordadas por las partes. A falta de acuerdo, el Tribunal aplicarad la
legislacién del Estado que sea parte en la diferencia, incluyendo sus normas
de derecho internacional privado, y aquellas normas de derecho internacional
que pudieren ser aplicables.

El TBI tenia vigencia al momento de los hechos que dieron origen a la demanda. La
demanda de MTD es por “/a presunta infraccién de algun derecho conferido o creado por
este Tratado con respecto a una inversion por dicho inversionista” (TBI, Articulo 6(1)(ii)),
de manera que el derecho internacional, en cuanto derecho apropiado del TBI, es aplicable a
esa demanda y a la consiguiente defensa. La Demandada insiste -y las Demandantes no
discrepan — en que el Tribunal tenia que aplicar a la demanda el derecho internacional en su

conjunto y no aisladamente las disposiciones del TBI.
62. Por su parte, el Tribunal también estuvo de acuerdo. Declard:

[A] los efectos del parrafo I del Articulo 42 del Convenio, las partes se han
sometido a este arbitraje segiin lo dispuesto en el TBI. Dado que dicho
instrumento es un tratado, el acuerdo de arbitraje en el marco del TBI exige
que el Tribunal aplique el derecho internacional.”

El Tribunal procedié a aplicar el derecho internacional a cuestiones tales como el alcance de

la clausula NMF en relacion con otros tratado chilenos, la interpretacion del TBI, en

° Laudo, parr. 87. Ver también id., parr. 112:

“Habida cuenta que este Tribunal se constituyé de conformidad con lo dispuesto en el TBI, el
mismo esté obligado a aplicar las disposiciones del TBI y a interpretarlas con arreglo a las normas
de interpretacién establecidas por la Convencién de Viena sobre el Derecho de los Tratados, que
es vinculante para los Estados que son parte del TBI.”

De hecho, Malasia s6lo se hizo parte de la Convencién en 1994, después de la suscripcién del
TBI: asi la Convencién de Viena en cuanto tratado no tiene aplicacin en el TBI (ver Convencién

-26-

particular su clausula de tratamiento justo y equitativo, y la reparacion, incluyendo causalidad

y culpa de la victima.

63. Con especto a la aplicacién del estandar de trato justo y equitativo, la Demandada
formula dos criticas principales.” Primero, sostiene que el Tribunal confundio el trato justo y
equitativo con el tratamiento de la nacién mas favorecida bajo el Articulo 3(1) del TBI,
haciendo incomprensible este aspecto del Laudo.”! Enseguida, y aun mas importante, el
Tribunal malinterpreté el criterio de trato justo y equitativo contemplado en el TBI, aplicando
un estandar expresado en un dictum del tribunal de TECMED que no representa el derecho
internacional y que no puede ser deducido de los Articulos 2(2) y 3(1) del TBI mediante

ningun proceso de interpretacion. El Comité tratara estos aspectos a continuacion.

64. En cuanto al primer punto, el Comité mencioné en el parrafo 27 anterior las dos

disposiciones del TBI que incorporan el estandar de trato justo y equitativo. Puso de presente

1?

que la clausula de la nacién mas favorecida del Articulo 3(1) del TBI importaba un

elemento adicional del TBI Croacia-Chile.” El Tribunal analiz6 este aspecto en los

siguientes términos:

La cuestion que se plantea al Tribunal es si las disposiciones del TBI Croacia
y del TBI Dinamarca relativas a la obligacion de conceder permisos, una vez
aprobada una inversion, y al cumplimiento de obligaciones contractuales,
respectivamente, pueden considerarse parte de un trato justo y equitativo ....
El Tribunal . . . ha llegado a la conclusién de que, en el marco del TBI, la
norma sobre trato justo y equitativo debe interpretarse en la forma que mejor
conduzca al cumplimiento del objetivo del TBI de proteger las inversiones y
crear condiciones favorables a la inversion. Estima que el considerar como
parte de las protecciones del TBI las incluidas en el parrafo 1 del Articulo 3
del TBI Dinamarca y en los parrafos 3 y 4 del Articulo 3 [sic este debiera
entenderse Articulo 4(1)] del TBI Croacia esté en consonancia con dicho

 

de Viena, Art. 4). Sin embargo, dado que las normas de interpretacién tendrian aplicacién en todo
caso, este aspecto no tiene incidencia en lo que se refiere al Laudo.

El Demandado también critica el énfasis que el Tribunal puso en el Estado de Chile como unidad
individual 0 “monolito”: esto es discutido en parrafos 87-89 siguientes.

Véase la Réplica de Anulacién de Chile, parr. 37; Opinién Experta de Sir Arthur Watts, parrs. 64-71.
El Art. 3(1) del TBI establece:

“Las inversiones hechas por los inversionistas de cualquiera de las Partes Contratantes en el
territorio de la otra Parte Contratante recibiran un tratamiento justo y equitativo, y no menos
favorable que aquel concedido a las inversiones hechas por los inversionistas de cualquier tercer
Estado.”

El Art. 4(1) del TBI Chile-Croacia establece:

“Cada Parte Contratante deberd otorgar un tratamiento justo y equitativo dentro de su territorio a
las inversiones de los inversionistas de la otra Parte Contratante y asegurard que el ejercicio de los
derechos aqui reconocidos no ser obstaculizado en la practica.”

-27-

objetivo. Confirma esta conclusién el hecho de que las exclusiones de la

clausula NMF se refieren a aspectos tributarios y a la cooperacién regional,

cuestiones ajenas al TBI que, debido al cardcter general de la clausula NMF,

las Partes Contratantes consideraron prudente excluir. A contrario sensu,

otras cuestiones que pueden considerarse parte del trato justo y equitativo a

los inversionistas si estarian cubiertos por esta clausula.
Este pasaje parece confundir la nocion de trato justo y equitativo exigida en la primera parte
del Articulo 3(1) del TBI Malasia-Chile con el tratamiento de la nacién mas favorecida
requerida en la segunda parte. La clausula de la nacién mas favorecida en el Articulo 3(1) no
se limita a atraer los niveles mas favorables de trato acordados para las inversiones de
terceros Estados sélo cuando los mismos puedan considerarse cubiertos por el estandar de
trato justo y equitativo. Tal como sucede con clausulas NMF en general, el Articulo 3(1)
implica cualquier tratamiento mas favorable extendido a inversiones de un tercer Estado en
forma incondicional. Sin embargo, la incertidumbre en el manejo por el Tribunal del
Articulo 3(1) no tuvo incidencia en su resolucion del presente caso. Por su parte, los
Articulos 3(1) del TBI con Dinamarca y 3(3) del TBI con Croacia son diferentes de la nocion
de tratamiento justo y equitativo, pero las alegaciones de MTD basadas en dichas
disposiciones fueron desestimadas. En relacién a la estipulacién adicional del Articulo 4(1)
del TBI con Croacia en el sentido de que el tratamiento justo y equitativo “no sera
obstaculizado en la practica,” el Laudo no contiene ninguna referencia al mismo y nada

indica que él haya afectado su resultado en alguna forma.

65.  Encuanto al segundo punto, la Demandada se centra en la aparente confianza puesta
por el Tribunal en el siguiente pasaje del laudo en el caso TECMED, respecto al contenido

del estandar de trato justo y equitativo:

[B]rindar un tratamiento a la inversién extranjera que no desvirtue las
expectativas bdasicas en razon de las cuales el inversor extranjero decidid
realizar su inversién. Como parte de tales expectativas, aquél cuenta con que
el Estado receptor de la inversién se conduciraé de manera coherente,
desprovista de ambigiiedades y transparente en sus relaciones con el inversor
extranjero, de manera que éste pueda conocer de manera anticipada, para
planificar sus actividades y ajustar su conducta, no sdlo las normas o
reglamentaciones que regirdn tales actividades, sino también las politicas
perseguidas por tal normativa y las practicas o directivas administrativas que
les son relevantes. Un accionar del Estado ajustado a tales criterios es, pues,
esperable, tanto en relacién con las pautas de conducta, directivas o

™ Laudo, parrs. 103-04.

-28-

requerimientos impartidos, o de las resoluciones dictadas de conformidad con
las mismas, cuanto con las razones y finalidades que las subyacen. El inversor
extranjero también espera que el Estado receptor actuard de manera no
contradictoria; es decir, entre otras cosas, sin revertir de manera arbitraria
decisiones o aprobaciones anteriores o preexistentes emanadas del Estado en
las que el inversor confid y basé la asuncién de sus compromisos y la
planificacion y puesta en marcha de su operacién econémica y comercial. El
inversor igualmente confia que el Estado utilizara los instrumentos legales
que rigen la actuacion del inversor o la inversion de conformidad con la
funcion tipicamente previsible de tales instrumentos, y en todo caso nunca
para privar al inversor de su inversion sin compensacién.

  

66. Segtn la Demandada, “el programa TecMed para buen gobierno” es extremo y no

1.7° El dictum en TECMED también es objeto de enérgico

refleja el derecho internacional
criticismo por parte de los expertos de la Demandada, Sr. Jan Paulsson” y Sir Arthur
Watts.’® Estos destacan, inter alia, la diferencia entre el estandar TECMED y aquel adoptado
en otros casos, incluyendo uno que el Tribunal también cité en una nota al pié de pagina, pero

sin hacer comentarios.”

67. El Comité puede apreciar algunos aspectos de estas criticas. Por ejemplo, en
TECMED |a aparente confianza del Tribunal en las expectativas del inversionista extranjero
como la fuente de las obligaciones del Estado receptor (tal como la obligacion de indemnizar
por expropiacion) es cuestionable. En principio, las obligaciones del Estado receptor hacia
los inversionistas extranjeros derivan de los términos del tratado de inversin aplicable y no
de algin conjunto de expectativas que los inversionistas puedan tener o reclamar. Un
tribunal que busca deducir a partir de dichas expectativas un conjunto de derechos distintos
de aquellos contenidos en, o que pueden hacerse cumplir bajo, el TBI bien podria extralimitar

sus facultades y, si la diferencia fuese sustancial, podria excederlos manifiestamente.

68. Con todo, el Tribunal no se extralimité manifiestamente en sus facultades en la

explicacién que dio sobre el de estandar de trato justo y equitativo, por tres razones.

*s Técnicas Medioambientales TECMED S.A. v. The United Mexican States, Caso CIADI No.

ARB(AF)00/2, (2003) 10 Informes CIADI 130, 192-93 (parr. 154), citado en Laudo, parr. 114.

Véase Réplica de Anulacién de Chile, parr. 57.

Sr. Jan Paulsson, Opinién Experta, 22 de julio de 2005, parrs. 9-14.

Opinién Experta de Sir Arthur Watts, parrs. 93-106.

” Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, Case CIADI No. ARB(AF)/00/3, (2004) 11
Informes CIADI 361, 386 (parr. 98), citado en Laudo, parr. 114, nota al pié 65.

-29-

69. La primera consiste en que, desde cualquier perspectiva, las legitimas expectativas
generadas como resultado de las tratativas del inversionista con las autoridades competentes
del Estado receptor, pueden ser relevantes para la aplicacién de las garantias contenidas en un
tratado de inversion. Esto es admitido expresamente por la Demandada y por la
jurisprudencia.*° El Tribunal examina mds adelante lo relativo a las razonables expectativas

de MTD derivadas de la celebracion de los Contratos de Inversion Extranjera.

70. En segundo lugar, a juicio del Comité, la formulacion del estandar de trato justo y
equitativo seguido por el Tribunal fue aquella contenida en el parrafo 113 del Laudo, donde

se establecié:
[A]l tenor del TBI, trato justo y equitativo debe entenderse como trato
imparcial y ecudnime, que contribuya a alentar la promocién de la inversion
extranjera. En vez de imponer un comportamiento pasivo por parte del Estado
o i los comportami perjudiciales para los inversioni el TBI
define su objetivo en forma activa (“promover,” “crear,” “estimular’).*!

La decision en TECMED fue citada en apoyo de este criterio, no en su reemplazo.

71. En tercer lugar, y por sobre todo, un criterio formulado en estos términos es
defendible desde el punto de vista del derecho internacional y no compromete una errénea
caracterizacion en el sentido indicado en el parrafo 46 precedente. Hasta qué medida un
Estado esta obligado a ser pro-activo bajo el estandar de trato justo y equitativo esta abierto a
debate, pero es mas una cuestin de aplicacién del criterio que de su formulacion; y, en todo
caso, el énfasis de la formulacién del Tribunal esta en el “trato imparcial y ecuanime.” En
particular, el Tribunal no expresa la obligacion en una forma tal que elimine la distincion
entre actos y omisiones 0 que evite todos los elementos de riesgo para el inversionista. Eso
es suficiente para los efectos del Articulo 52(1)(b) del Convenio CIADI. En breve, en la
articulacion de este criterio no existe indicio de que el Tribunal incurriera en una

extralimitacion de facultades, menos atin de que lo hiciera manifiestamente.

so Véase Sr. Jan Paulsson, Opinion Experta, 22 de julio de 2005, parr. 15. Véase también Trascripcién de

la audiencia de Anulacién, p. 51 (Srta. Gehring Flores).
Laudo, parr. 113, y para la discusién del Tribunal sobre el estindar véase Laudo, parrs. 109-13.

-30-

(b) No aplicacion del derecho chileno

72. Segun se ha sefialado anteriormente, la /ex causae en este caso, fundada en una
infraccién del TBI, fue el derecho internacional. Sin embargo, a menudo sera necesario para
los tribunales de TBI aplicar el derecho del Estado receptor, necesidad reforzada en el caso de
los tribunales CIADI por aplicacién del Articulo 42(1) del Convenio CIADI. Sea que el
derecho aplicable en este caso derive de la primera o de la segunda frase del Articulo 42(1) es
irrelevante: el Tribunal debiera haber aplicado el derecho chileno a aquellas materias en las
que era necesario para su decision y en las que el derecho chileno era el derecho que regia.
Al mismo tiempo, las implicaciones de algun punto de derecho chileno en una demanda
sujeta al TBI son materia que al derecho internacional corresponde determinar. En suma,

ambos derechos eran potencialmente relevantes.

73. El Tribunal sefialo otro tanto. Las Demandantes habian alegado que debido a que el
incumplimiento de los Contratos de Inversion Extranjera habia adquirido un cardcter
internacional como consecuencia de la clausula “paraguas” del TBI danés, los mismos

Contratos eran regidos por el derecho internacional. El Tribunal discrepo:

El incumplimiento del TBI se rige por el derecho internacional. No obstante,
para determinar los hechos del incumplimiento sera necesario considerar las

bli contre idas por la D dada y las D i .y
el alcance de dichas obligaciones segtin la legislacién chilena.”

De hecho, el Tribunal aplicd derecho chileno al sostener que Chile no habia incurrido en

incumplimiento contractual:

El Tribunal acepta que la autorizacién para invertir en Chile no tiene
caracter general y que sélo constituye el inicio de un proceso para obtener los
permisos y aprobaciones necesarios de los diversos organismos y
departamentos del Gobierno. También acepta que el Gobierno debe proceder
de conformidad con sus propias leyes y politicas para otorgar tales permisos y
aprobaciones. En caso contrario, la Clausula Cuarta del Contrato de
Inversion Extranjera careceria de sentido. Por lo tanto, el Tribunal llega a la
conclusion de que Chile no violé el TBI con motivo del incumplimiento de los
Contratos de Inversion Extranjera.

74. Chile alega que, a pesar de las declaraciones del Tribunal de haber aplicado derecho

chileno a dichas cuestiones, en la practica no lo hizo:

-31-

El Tribunal omite . . . mencionar o explicar si 0 cémo aplicé el derecho
chileno a aquellas partes de su determinacion respecto del trato justo y
equitativo que requieren una interpretacién de los Contratos de Inversion
Extranjera.

El silencio del Tribunal en este punto significa que el Tribunal omitid
completamente aplicar derecho chileno para determinar las obligaciones de
las Partes o para interpretar el significado sustantivo del DL 600 y de los
Contratos de Inversion Extranjera; de esta forma, el Tribunal manifiestamente
se extralimito en sus facultades ....

No existe, de hecho, prueba alguna de que el Tribunal aplicara derecho
chileno. Es cierto que el Tribunal cité o parafraseo partes de los Articulos
Tres y Doce a Quince de la Ley chilena sobre Inversion Extranjera, el DL
600. Sin embargo, la mera repeticion de los articulos de la ley, claramente no
es la aplicacién del derecho chileno. Es importante destacar que las Partes
presentaron extensos argumentos, sustento probatorio, y el testimonio de
testigos de los hechos y expertos sobre derecho chileno que el Tribunal acuni
como uno de los ‘puntos centrales’ o ‘elemento[s] clave’ de su conclusion
sobre el trato justo y equitativo, a saber el dmbito de la aprobacién de los
Contratos de Inversién Extranjera. El debate en el corazon de este aspecto
era si la Ley chilena sobre Inversion Extranjera (el DL 600) o los Contratos
de Inversién Extranjera autorizaban, como la Reptblica de Chile asever6,
simplemente la transferencia de capital extranjero, 0, como MTD afirmo, el
proyecto propuesto en la ubicacién propuesta.™

 

75. Al considerar los efectos de los Contratos de Inversion Extranjera en el trato justo y
equitativo, el Tribunal enfrenté un asunto hibrido. El significado de un contrato chileno es un
asunto de derecho chileno; sus implicaciones en términos de una demanda de derecho
internacional son un asunto de derecho internacional. El Comité retornara a las razones
esgrimidas por el Tribunal para su decision sobre las implicaciones de la conducta del CIE.
Para el presente propdsito, basta sefialar que el Tribunal aparentemente aplicd derecho
chileno a los aspectos regidos por éste (tal como el ambito de la autoridad del CIE), y que
nada sugiere que haya calificado erroneamente el alcance del derecho chileno en su decision
acerca del estandar de trato justo y equitativo. Si se aplicé el derecho chileno (0 en su caso el
derecho internacional) en forma correcta, en una materia comprendida dentro de la

jurisdiccion del Tribunal, no corresponde decidirlo al Comité en una solicitud de anulacién.

 

82

Laudo, parr. 187. Véase también id., parrs. 86-87.
83

Laudo, parr. 188.
Memorial de Anulacién de Chile, parrs. 130-32.

-32-

(c) Decisiones ex aequo et bono no autorizadas

76. En forma extensa, como corolario de los argumentos discutidos en las dos secciones
anteriores, la Demandada sostiene que, habida cuenta de que “/os fundamentos de las
determinaciones del Tribunal no pueden ser identificados,” cabria inferir que “el Tribunal
parece emitir su decision ex aequo et bono (a menos que el Tribunal, de hecho, no haya

9985

seguido principio alguno). En su Réplica, por otro lado, la alegacién concierne

esencialmente a la determinacion de los perjuicios. Al respecto Chile asevera que:
La omision del Tribunal en hacer referencia alguna a un precepto legal en su

reduccion de la indemni: luce a la lusion de que el Tribunal
emitid su decisién ex aequo et bono.*

77. En general, nada sugiere que el Tribunal haya declarado cualquier jurisdiccion para
dirimir la disputa bajo el Articulo 42(3) del Convenio, o que la sustancia de su decision haya
sido tomada con base en la equidad general. El Comité ya traté el tema de la ley aplicada por
el Tribunal; en las secciones siguientes se abordara el relativo a la suficiencia del
razonamiento del Tribunal, tanto en relacién con la sustancia como con los perjuicios. A la
luz de las conclusiones del Comité sobre estos aspectos, no existe fundamento para el

reclamo de que el Tribunal ejerciera poder para decidir ex aequo et bono.

(4) Tratamiento justo y equitativo: falta de motivacion

78. La segunda impugnacion a la decision es, en importancia, la que atafie a la omision
del Tribunal en declarar las razones en que se fundo para decidir. Cabe recordar que la
reiterada jurisprudencia de los comités ad hoc ha considerado que esta causal de nulidad hace
referencia a la ausencia de razonamiento, mas que a la brevedad o impropiedad del mismo —
“Ja omision de expresar motivo a/guno respecto de todo o parte de un laudo, no a la falta de

9987

expresion de razones correctas 0 convincentes. También se ha establecido que una

contradiccién absoluta e inexplicada, puede considerarse una falta de motivacién.

79. Una cuestidn inicial es la relativa a la contradiccion absoluta 0 categérica. En su

Opinion Experta, acompafiada a la Réplica, Sir Arthur Watts manifesté que aparentemente

Memorial de Anulacion de Chile, parr. 136.

Réplica de Anulacion de Chile, parr. 68.

Vivendi (2002) 6 Informes CIADI 340, 358 (parr. 64): el pasaje integro es trascrito en parrafo 79
siguiente.

87

-33-

existe una contradiccién formal en el Capitulo VII del Laudo que contiene la parte
dispositiva.** En el parrafo 253(1) el Tribunal expres6 su conclusién principal como sigue:
“La Demandada ha violado las obligaciones que le corresponden en virtud del parrafo | del
Articulo 3 del TBI.” En el parrafo 253(7), el Tribunal declara que “Todas las demas
reclamaciones presentadas en este arbitraje se consideran desestimadas.” Segin antes se
indicd, la obligacién de otorgar un trato justo y equitativo a las inversiones es reiterada en los

mismos términos en los Articulos 2(2) y 3(1) del TBI.”

Si pudiera estimarse que las
Demandantes interpusieron dos demandas separadas por incumplimiento del estandar de trato
justo y equitativo, una bajo el Articulo 2(2) y otra bajo el Articulo 3(1), podria parecer que la
parte dispositiva del Laudo acogié una demanda y rechazo la otra, sin explicar la diferencia

entre ambas.

80. Sin embargo, en realidad, no existen obligaciones distintas de tratamiento justo y
equitativo bajo los Articulos 2(2) y 3(1) del TBI, ni se interpusieron demandas diferentes por
el incumplimiento de esa obligacién.” La referencia a “otras reclamaciones” en el parrafo
253(7) alude a los diversos reclamos presentados por MTD que el Tribunal rechazo, no a la
demanda que acogio, y la falta de referencia especificamente al Articulo 2(2) en el parrafo
253(1) no repercutid en las conclusiones del Laudo. Ello no es un argumento para la

anulacion.

81. En cuanto a las cuestiones de fondo, el Tribunal enfatiz6 la coexistencia de dos
hechos: la aprobacion del CIE del Proyecto en términos que especificaba su ubicacién,
generando una legitima expectativa de que el Proyecto al menos era, en principio, factible
desde un punto de vista de la regulacion, y la determinacion por parte de las autoridades
urbanisticas competentes, en esa época, de que el Proyecto no era factible. Basado en el
principio de la “unidad del Estado” para con los inversionistas extranjeros, el Tribunal
declar6 que lo anterior constituia un incumplimiento del estandar de trato justo y equitativo
contemplado en el Articulo 3(1). La Demandada, mediante argumentos y testimonio experto,

ataca estas tres conclusiones como esencialmente infundadas y no demostradas.”' El Comité

Opinion Experta de Sir Arthur Watts, 20 de enero de 2006, parrs. 62-71.
Véase parrafo 27 anterior.

Véase la Solicitud de Arbitraje, 26 de junio de 2001, parrs. 73, 74.

Memorial de Anulacién del Demandado, parrs. 138-82; Réplica del Demandado, parrs. 6-50. Véanse
también las Opiniones Expertas del Sr. Jan Paulsson, adjuntas a estos alegatos.

-34-

resumira el razonamiento del Tribunal respecto de cada una de dichas conclusiones antes de

aplicar el criterio para la anulacion previsto en el Articulo 52(1)(e).

(a) Los efectos de la aprobacién del CIE

82. | La Demandada ataca como infundada la conclusion del Tribunal de que:

La aprobacion de un proyecto en una determinada ubicacién permitiria a un
inversionista suponer, prima facie, que su ejecucién en esa ubicacion es
factible desde el punto de vista normative.”

Sostiene que “el Tribunal omite explicar como fue de hecho posible para MTD formular

3 atendida

cualesquiera expectativas, prima facie 0 de otro modo, respecto de su inversion,
la prueba rendida por la Demandada de que no pudo existir tal expectativa bajo el derecho
chileno derivada de las decisiones del CIE y la ausencia de prueba de que MTD tuviese

alguna tal expectativa en las época relevante.

83. El Tribunal inicid su consideracion de los aspectos facticos en disputa exponiendo in
extenso los argumentos de las Partes.”’ Previamente habia explicado los hechos con cierto
detalle, indicando cuales eran controvertidos.”° En cuanto a los efectos de la aprobacién del
CIE, los siguientes puntos se encuentran consignados en el Laudo, sea como hechos no

discutidos 0 como conclusiones del Tribunal:

. El CIE estaba informado del Proyecto propuesto y fue consultado por MTD

acerca del mismo.°°

. El CIE era un organo del Estado chileno compuesto por ministros y
funcionarios; se declaré que tenia un rol de coordinacion en la admision de las
propuestas de inversion sometidas al mismo: “resulta evidente que, segun DL
600, el CIE debe desplegar un minimo de diligencia tanto interna como

externamente.””!

Laudo, parr. 163.
Memorial de Anulacién del Demandado, parr. 138.

“4 Laudo, parrs. 116-48.
a Laudo, parrs. 39-85.
%6 Laudo, parrs. 44, 50.

Laudo, parr. 163. Véase también Laudo, parrs. 53, 162.

-35-

. Los Contratos de Inversion Extranjera, redactados por el CIE, especificaban en

forma inequivoca la ubicacién y propésito de la inversion.**

. Con la suscripcion del primer Contrato de Inversion Extranjera MTD se
obligaba a efectuar la inversion; un cambio en la ubicacién del proyecto,

habria requerido otra autorizacion del CIE.”

. El Articulo 4 de los Contratos de Inversion Extranjera establecié claramente
que la autorizacin se daba “sin perjuicio de” otras autorizaciones exigidas por
la legislacion y los reglamentos chilenos. El Tribunal acepta que la
autorizacion del CIE para invertir en Chile “no tiene cardcter general y que
solo constituye el inicio de un proceso para obtener los permisos y
aprobaciones necesarios de los diversos organismos y departamentos del
Gobierno . . . el Gobierno debe proceder de conformidad con sus propias

leyes y politicas para otorgar tales permisos y aprobaciones.”

. El Contrato de Promesa estaba condicionado a la aprobacion de la inversion

por el CIE.'"!

(b) La “politica urbana” de Chile

84. La Demandada alega que la “politica urbana,” en que el Tribunal se bas0, es imprecisa
y equivoca: algunas veces el Tribunal la presenta como la politica incorporada en el PRMS, y

otras como una politica en contra del cambio del PRMS.'”

En relacién con esta ultima,
afirma la Demandada que no existié tal politica y ciertamente no existia al tiempo en que el
CIE aprobo la inversion; en cuanto la primera, MTD sabia que se necesitaba la aprobacion

urbanistica, conforme al PRMS.

85. Sobre el particular, el Tribunal concluyo que:

Laudo, parrs. 51, 52, 54, 57, 162.
Laudo, parr. 162.
Laudo, parrs. 188. En cuanto a los términos del Articulo 4, véase parrafo 14 anterior.
Laudo, parrs. 49, 158.
Réplica de Anulacién del Demandado, pars. 9-26; un punto también expuesto enérgicamente en
ambas opiniones de Paulsson.

-36-

. Para la época en que el Proyecto fue aprobado por el CIE, el SEREMI era de la
opinion (y asi lo habia informado el Ministro) de que aquél no podria ser

ejecutado.'° Bl jamas abandoné ese parecer.'™

. El Ministro no concurrié a las reuniones importantes del CIE, a pesar de la
norma del DL 600 que contempla la asistencia de otros ministros

relevantes.'°°

. No se probé que MTD tuviera conocimiento de la oposicion del SEREMI al
Proyecto antes de la firma de los Contratos de Inversién Extranjera; era
“razonable suponer” que ninguna advertencia categérica habia sido dada a

MTD, como Chile alegé.'°

. La primera notificacion escrita de Chile a MTD, de que era improbable que el

Proyecto fuera aprobado, fue la carta del SEREMI de 3 de junio de 1998. '°”

86. | La Demandada sostiene que “/a politica contraria al cambio de zona de El Principal y
de la modificacion del PMRS”'® no se habia formado para la época de la primera decision
del CIE. Asimismo, argumenta que la idea de una supuesta “meta-politica” carece de
sentido: no existia sino el PRMS y una discrecién para modificarlo 0 no, discrecién cuyo
ejercicio competia exclusivamente a Chile. A este respecto, cabe hacer dos precisiones: la
primera, que la posicién de Chile ante el Tribunal fue la de sostener que la politica en contra
del desarrollo urbano en Pirque ya existia al momento de la primera aprobacion del CIE"; la
segunda, que presento prueba ante el Tribunal, consignada en el Laudo, de que la posicion de

las autoridades urbanisticas nunca cambio.''°

(c) Incoherencia entre la conducta chilena y la “unidad del Estado”

87.  Evidentemente, el Tribunal puso considerable énfasis en la “unidad del Estado” para
llegar a su conclusion bajo el Articulo 3(1). El Laudo se refiere al punto no menos de cuatro

veces:

103 Laudo, parrs. 74, 151, 154.
ad Laudo, parrs. 66, 72, 74, 75, 79, 80.
Laudo, parrs, 53, 161-63.

Laudo, parr. 158. Véase también Laudo, parr. 166.
17 Cf parr.31 anterior

108 Laudo, parr. 165.

109

Laudo, parr. 165.

no Laudo, parr. 80.

-37-

Lo que el Tribunal pone de relieve aqui es la incoherencia en el proceder de
dos sectores del gobierno frente al mismo inversionista, incluso cuando el
marco juridico del pais otorga un mecanismo de coordinacién.!""

[E]n el caso que nos ocupa, Chile no es una parte pasiva y la coherencia en el
proceder de los diversos funcionarios por intermedio de los cuales actua no es
responsabilidad del inversionista sino de Chile.

Chile también tiene la obligacién de actuar con coherencia y de aplicar sus
politicas de manera sistematica, independientemente de cuan diligente sea el
inversionista. Conforme al derecho internacional (que este Tribunal debe
aplicar a las diferencias surgidas en el marco del TBI), el Estado de Chile
debe ser considerado por el Tribunal como una unidad.

El Ministro Hermosilla y el CIE eran dos canales de comunicacién diferentes
de la Demandada con terceros, pero, a los efectos de las obligaciones
contraidas por Chile en virtud del TBI, ambos representaban a Chile como
una unidad, como un monolito, para usar la expresion de la Demandada. i4

88. En opinion de Chile, lo anterior desconoce el derecho del Estado receptor y la
necesaria separacion de poderes que es la base del estado de derecho. Los organos del Estado
pueden tener diversas obligaciones y preocupaciones: la inconsistencia de politica entre ellos
no implica necesariamente una infraccién del derecho internacional. La sola circunstancia de
que las decisiones del CIE sean atribuibles al Estado de Chile no justifica conceder al CIE
mayor autoridad que la que realmente tenia, y proceder de esa forma es confundir los
conceptos diferentes de atribucion e incumplimiento. De esta forma, nuevamente, a pesar de
la repeticién por el Tribunal del argumento de la “unidad,” éste esencialmente es dejado sin
explicaci6n.''°

89. El Comité concuerda en que mezclar atribucién e infraccién requeriria de una
explicacion e importaria una confusion, si no una errénea caracterizacién del derecho. Sin
embargo, el Comité no comparte la idea de que el Tribunal hubiere incurrido en tal yerro.
Por ejemplo, la conducta del Alcalde de Pirque, en su condicién oficial, fue atribuible al
Estado,'!° pero el Tribunal no sugirié que esto diera lugar a algiin problema ante el TBI. Su

planteamiento es que el CIE era un organo del Estado de rango superior, cuyos actos formales

i Laudo, parr. 163.

12 Laudo, parr. 164.
3 Laudo, parr. 165.
4 Laudo, parr. 166.
us Véase e.g., Réplica de Anulacién del Demandado, parrs. 62-65.

-38-

podian ser considerados significativos en términos de la aceptacion de la inversion: esto,

como se ha visto, lo explicaba.

(d) Conclusion

90. La pregunta para el Comité no es si el razonamiento del Tribunal es inobjetable, sino
si es anulable con arreglo al Articulo 52(1)(e). Esto es, en definitiva, un asunto de

apreciaci6n, teniendo en cuenta la distincién entre nulidad y apelacién.''7

91. El Comité declara lo siguiente: primero, la nocién de factibilidad de regulacion
desarrollada por El Tribunal (y aplicada consistentemente ) no es un concepto de derecho
chileno y no fue presentada como tal: fue propuesta por el Tribunal en el contexto del
Articulo 3(1) del TBI. Segundo, no es incoherente o contradictorio afirmar que, en una
situacion dada, un Proyecto puede avanzar y continuar con la evaluacion de la regulacion,
sobre la base de que podria ser aprobado conforme al derecho del Estado receptor. El
Tribunal no se contradijo al sostener, por una parte, que MTD pudo haber esperado de sus
contactos y contratos con el CIE que el Proyecto fuese factible y, por otro, que no tenia
derecho a un permiso urbanistico. Tercero, se presentaron pruebas ante el Tribunal —entre las
que se destaca la carta del SEREMI Gonzalez de 3 de junio de 1998— que sustentaron la
conclusion del Tribunal de que las autoridades competentes en ningin momento estuvieron
dispuestas a considerar que el Proyecto era factible desde la perspectiva de la regulacién. La
version de la Demandada acerca de la reunién del 6 de noviembre de 1996 también era
consistente con su conclusi6n (y la version de las Demandantes no la contradijo).''* Cuarto,
era potestativo del Tribunal poner énfasis, desde la perspectiva de la proteccién de la
inversion extranjera, en las facultades y la composicién del CIE; el Tribunal en su
razonamiento se refirid claramente y con alguna extensién a ese aspecto. Mas aun, el
Tribunal lo hizo no desde el punto de vista de la atribucion —es indiscutible que el CIE es un
organo del Estado chileno y que los contratos de inversion extranjera son celebrados por el
CIE en representacion del Estado— sino desde la vision de la trascendencia que debe asignarse

al acto juridico de contratar para un Proyecto en una ubicacion especifica.

 

16 Véase e.g., Case concerning Elettronica Sicula S.p.a. (ELSI), CJ Reports 1989 p. 15, 48-49 (relativo

al Alcalde de Palermo).

Véanse parrafos 48-52 anteriores.

MTD sostuvo solamente, y parece haberlo acreditado, que ninguno de sus representantes superiores
estuvieron presentes. Se rindié prueba de que el Sr. Fontaine concurrié, pero no se sugiere que él
representara a MTD.

17
118

-39-

92. En definitiva, la pregunta es si un lector informado del Laudo comprenderia las
razones expuestas por el Tribunal e identificaria alguna contradiccion fundamental en ellas.
En opinion del Comité, la respuesta a dicho interrogante, en el presente caso, es que las
razones son suficientemente claras, estan suficientemente expuestas y no existe contradiccion
material en ellas. Por lo tanto, no se configura la causal de anulacion consagrada en el

Articulo 52(1)(e).

(5) Culpa concurrente

93.  Laconclusién del Tribunal a este respecto ya ha sido destacada.''? La Demandada la

impugna con dos argumentos basicos, ambos fundamentados en la falta de motivacion.

94. El primero se refiere a la relacion de causalidad. A juicio de la Demandada, las
propias conclusiones del Tribunal respecto de la debida aplicacién del derecho chileno
significaban que el Proyecto no habria podido continuar bajo ninguna circunstancia. En
concepto de la Demandada, la apreciacion del Tribunal contiene una discrepancia
fundamental entre la conclusion de que el Contrato de Inversion Extranjera no conferia a
MTD un derecho a un permiso urbanistico (y las inferencias adicionales de que las solicitudes
fueron debidamente rechazadas por la autoridades chilenas competentes), por un lado, y la
decision de que Chile habia causado parte de los dafios, por el otro. La Demandada pone
como ejemplo el rechazo por COREMA (la Comisién Regional del Medio Ambiente, Regién

Metropolitana) de la declaracion de impacto ambiental del Proyecto:

La conclusién del Tribunal de que COREMA actud adecuadamente al
rechazar la DIA es importante en cuanto significa que aun si el PRMS hubiese
podido ser modificado, MTD no podria haber proseguido con su proyecto por
cuanto COREMA, tal como el propio Tribunal declaré, lo habia rechazado
validamente. Es increible que el Tribunal reconozca esta conclusién pero no
haga nada para tratar el obvio conflicto. Basado en lo anterior, no es claro
como el Tribunal pudo deducir que Chile es directamente responsable de los
dans reclamados por MTD. Es aun mas inconcebible que el Tribunal pudiera
anunciar su inferencia sin suministrar ninguna explicacion de la forma en que
arribo a su conclusion.

95. Como el Tribunal dejé constancia, la declaracion de impacto ambiental era parte de un

esfuerzo del Concejo Municipal de Pirque por evitar el impacto del PRMS mediante la

9 Véanse parrafos 37-38 anteriores.

Memorial de Anulacién del Demandado, parr. 189.

-40-

obtencién de la aprobacion de un Plan Seccional. La propuesta de Plan Seccional fue
presentada el 11 de agosto de 1998; la declaracién de impacto ambiental correspondiente lo
fue el 8 de septiembre de 1998 y fue rechazada el 26 de noviembre de 1998, luego de que el
Ministro hubiese informado finalmente a MTD que el PRMS no podria ser modificado ni

1

evitado.'?! La causa principal por la que COREMA rechazé la declaracién de impacto

ambiental —como pareceria obvio — era su incompatibilidad con zonificacion existente del

terreno, justo como el Ministro lo habia afirmado. '?

96. El Tribunal consideré el rechazo por la COREMA en forma mas bien escueta; al tratar

las medidas irrazonables y discriminatorias, sefiald:
Hasta cierto punto, esta reclamacion ha sido examinada por el Tribunal como
parte del andlisis relativo al trato justo y equitativo. La aprobacién de una
inversion contraria a la politica urbana del Gobierno puede considerarse
igualmente irracional. Por otra parte, los cambios del PRMS en relacion con
Chacabuco 0, mds recientemente, la Modificacién No. 48, como explica la
Demandada, no eximen de la obligacion de realizar cambios especificos en el
PRMS cuando los terrenos estan clasificados como de “interés
silvoagropecuario.” Por consiguiente, no hay base para considerar que las
modificaciones introducidas al PRMS son discriminatorias. El Tribunal

también se da por satisfecho con la explicacion sobre el rechazo del EIA por
parte de COREMA,'*

97. Lo que la Demandada presenta como una cuestion de causalidad, cabe reconocer, solo
aparece en forma implicita en este pasaje. Pero la razon es perfectamente clara: la infraccion
del estandar de trato justo y equitativo percibida por el Comité no se produjo en ninguna de
las decisiones posteriores de las entidades chilenas que declinaron autorizar el Proyecto.'*4
Lo que se sostuvo que configuré el incumplimiento del criterio de tratamiento justo y
equitativo fue el acto del CIE, un organo del Estado chileno, al aprobar una inversion
especifica con referencia a una ubicacién en la que no era posible su ejecucién. La
conclusion del Tribunal a ese respecto resiste un cuestionamiento de nulidad, por los motivos
antes expuestos. Sin la decision del CIE de admitir la inversion, el dafio no se habria
producido. Por el contrario, ninguna cuestion independiente de causalidad fue alegada en

relacion con la decision de COREMA del 26 de noviembre de 1998, 0 con cualquiera de las

Laudo, parrs. 77, 81, 148.

Laudo, parr. 195 (nétese que hubo otros argumentos subsidiarios).

Laudo, parr. 196.

“Se trataba de la politica del Demandada y de su derecho a no modificarla. Por la misma razén, fue
injusto admitir la inversién en el pais.” Laudo, parr. 214.

-41-

otras decisiones tomadas conforme al derecho chileno. Distinta habria sido la posicion si el
Tribunal hubiese ordenado la reparacion de los perjuicios derivados de la pérdida por la no
ejecucion del Proyecto, por la via del lucro cesante, lo que no hizo, dado que MTD nunca

adquirié el derecho a que el Proyecto siguiera adelante.

98. El segundo argumento de reclamo en relacion con esta conclusion es que, incluso si

alguna distribucién de la responsabilidad fuese apropiada (un proceso aludido en los alegatos

125

de la Demandada como una negligencia comparativa), ~” el Tribunal no ofrecié razon alguna

para distribuir la pérdida en una base 50:50:
Atendida la omision del Tribunal en declarar sus razones sobre las cuales
redujo la indemnizacién en un cincuenta por ciento arbitrario y carente de
explicacion (y no en un cien por ciento), como también su manifiesta falta en
aplicar derecho alguno acordado por las Partes en el TBI (sea que el Tribunal

aplicara la equidad u otros preceptos no identificados para realizar su
reduccién de cincuenta por ciento), el Laudo debe ser anulado.'°

99. Cabe destacar que e la Demandada, correctamente, no cuestiona la decisién sobre
culpa de la victima como un exceso manifiesto de poderes. En palabras del Articulo 39 de
los Documentos de la CDI sobre Responsabilidad de los Estados por Hechos

Internacionalmente Ilicitos de 2001:

Contribucion al perj
Para determinar la reparacién se tendré en cuenta la contribucioén al
perjuicio resultante de la accién o la omisién, intencional o negligente, del
Estado lesionado o de toda persona o entidad en relacion con la cual se exija
la reparacion.

  

La Parte II de los Articulos de la CDI, en la que esta ubicado el Articulo 39, trata de los
reclamos entre Estados, aunque incluye reclamos presentados en representacién de
individuos, e.g. dentro del sistema de proteccién diplomatica.'27 No existe razon para no
aplicar el mismo principio de contribucién a demandas interpuestas por individuos por

incumplimiento de un tratado.

100. El Tribunal encontro un incumplimiento del tratado al momento de la admision de la

inversion; sin el acto constitutivo del incumplimiento (la decision del CIE), la inversion no se

125 Memorial de Anulacién del Demandado, parr. 193.

126 Memorial de Anulacién del Demandado, parr. 194.
Véanse Articulos de CDI, Art. 33(2) y comentario, parr. (4).

-42-

hubiese realizado. Asimismo, el Tribunal resolvio que MTD habia contribuido
significativamente a su propio daiio, como se explica con cierto detalle en el Laudo.
Habiendo sido alegado el tema de la culpa compartida, el Tribunal procedié inmediatamente
a efectuar una apreciacién de la contribucién comparativa. El Tribunal estimé que la
contribucién de MTD al dajio era de un 50% “una vez deducido el valor residual de su

inversion calculado segiin las consideraciones siguientes.”'**

101. El Comité concuerda con la Demandada en que podrian haberse dado en este punto
razones adicionales para una division 50:50 de los dafios. Sin embargo, el Tribunal ya habia
analizado las culpas de las partes con algun detalle, sosteniendo que, dadas las circunstancias,
ambas eran substanciales y significativas. Como sucede a menudo en situaciones de culpa
concurrente, y la funcién de las dos partes que contribuyeron al daiio era muy diferente, su
medicion entrafiaba dificultad, por lo que el Tribunal tenia un cierto margen de
discrecionalidad para su estimacion. Asimismo, en un reclamo atinente a un tratado de
inversion en el cual la concurrencia de culpas es relevante, el incumplimiento del demandado
normalmente tiene un cardacter regulatorio, en tanto que la conducta del demandante es
omisiva en la proteccién de sus propios intereses, mas que violatoria de deberes para con el
Estado receptor. En tales circunstancias, no es extrafio que el dafio sea compartido por partes
iguales. Los tribunales internacionales que han abordado este tema, con frecuencia, no han
dado ninguna “explicacién exacta” de los calculos efectuados.'?? En sintesis, habiendo el
Tribunal analizado con alguna extensién las omisiones de ambas partes, no habia mucho mas
que decir, y no se incurria en un error, que diera lugar a la anulacién del Laudo, por no

decirlo.

(6) La evaluaci6én de los dafios

102. La Ultima area de controversia se refiere a la valoracion de los perjuicios. La

Demandada objeta este calculo con base en dos argumentos.

128 Laudo, parrs. 242-43.

19 Seguin Gray destaca en relacién al caso Costa Rica Packet: C Gray, Judicial Remedies in International
Law (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1987) 23. En ese caso, el Arbitro Martens sefialé poco mas que “los
dafios producidos . . . no son completamente las consecuencias necesarias de esta detencién
provisional”: (1897) 5 Moore, International Arbitrations (1898) 4948, 4953.

-43-

103. Primero, que el Tribunal no dio razones “para declarar responsable a Chile por haber
pagado un precio no razonable por el terreno”.'*° Lo que el Tribunal hizo, segiin se sefald,
fue considerar el precio realmente pagado, descontar el monto que MTD debié haber
aceptado por el terreno cuando éste le fue ofrecido por el vendedor, y dividir en dos el monto
resultante, atendida la omision de MTD en protegerse a si misma, que incluyo la de no
haberse resguardado contra el rechazo del permiso urbanistico. En este contexto, a juicio del

Comité, el procedimiento que el Tribunal adopté fue explicado adecuadamente.

104. Segundo, la Demandada reclama por la forma arbitraria e inexplicable en que, segan

afirma, el Tribunal determino la fecha de corte para incluir como perjuicios los gastos en que

incurrié MTD por concepto del Proyecto: '*!

El Tribunal omite explicar por qué utilizé la carta del Ministro Henriquez del
4 de noviembre de 1998 como el punto a partir del cual los gastos de MTD
serian excluidos del calculo de los dafios. La Repiblica de Chile presenté
pruebas ante el Tribunal de diversas reuniones entre MTD y funcionarios del
gobierno chileno, las que tuvieron lugar con anterioridad a la redaccién de la
carta del Ministro Henriquez, y que pudieron ser utilizadas como fechas de
corte alternativas — asi como puntos en los que MTD pudo haber mitigado sus
pérdidas- para las determinaciones de los datos por el Tribunal. Durante
estas diversas reuniones la Republica de Chile sostuvo que MTD fue advertida
de los obstaculos de regulacién que su Proyecto enfrentaba, pero el Tribunal
omite determinar la importancia de muchas de estas reuniones.

La Demandada enumera a continuacién una serie de “fechas que el Tribunal pudo haber
utilizado como fechas de corte alternativas para su determinacién de datos.”'*> Al no
explicar la eleccién del 4 de noviembre de 1998, sostiene la Demandada, el Tribunal no

expres6 las razones sobre las cuales se basaba una parte esencial de su decision. '*

105. En el pasaje precitado (como también en sus alegatos), la Demandada se equivoca
respecto de la base sobre la cual se funda la decision del Tribunal. Si el incumplimiento del
estandar de trato justo y equitativo hubiese dependido de lo que se dijo en determinadas
reuniones con funcionarios chilenos, previas a la celebracién del primer Contrato de

Inversion Extranjera, el Tribunal habria tenido necesariamente que referirse en forma precisa

180 Memorial de Réplica del Demandado Anulaci6n p.55.

Para la determinacién del Tribunal sobre este punto, véase parr. 39 anterior.
Memorial de Anulacién del Demandado, parr. 195.

Id., pan
También se sostiene que es una seria desviacién de una regla fundamental de procedimiento (id parr.
203). La Comisién ya se ha referido a esto como un argumento separado de anulacién: véanse parrs.
55-56 anteriores.

132
133
134

 

-44-

al contenido de dichas reuniones.'** Sin embargo, ello no constituy6 la base de la decision.
Por el contrario, el Tribunal enfatizd que, habiendo un organo del Estado chileno acordado
formalmente, en un contrato escrito, la importacion de capital extranjero sustancial para este
Proyecto especifico, fue sdlo el 3 de junio de 1998 cuando se dirigié una declaracion oficial
por escrito a MTD, indicandole que seria “inconveniente” (i.e., inapropiado) modificar el
PRMS, y solo el 4 de noviembre de 1998 cuando el Ministro responsable dejé claro y por
escrito que el Proyecto no continuaria. Las razones de la decision del Tribunal sobre ese
particular — como el Comité ya lo ha sefialado — fueron dadas en el Laudo. De este modo,
carece de relevancia el hecho de no haber considerado lo que pudo haber ocurrido en las

reuniones anteriores, para determinar la fecha de corte para el calculo de los gastos.

106. En otras palabras, en vista de que el Tribunal declard que hubo una infraccion del
estandar de trato justo y equitativo como resultado del Contrato de Inversion Extranjera
celebrado el 18 de marzo de 1997, lo que procedia determinar era por cuanto tiempo desde
esa fecha en adelante era razonable que MTD incurriera en gastos en la busqueda de una
modificacion del PRMS para permitir que el Proyecto pudiese ejecutarse. El Tribunal citd el
argumento de las Demandantes de que, habiendo efectuado el mayor compromiso autorizado
de capital a comienzos de 1997, “resultaba r ble y consi. con la obligacién que
tenia MTD de mitigar los dafios, que continuara buscando las aprobaciones del Gobierno
incluso después de que llego a ser evidente que los funcionarios del Gobierno se oponian al

Proyecto.” 186

El Tribunal consider6 como fecha de corte el 4 de noviembre de 1998, fecha
en que el Ministro finalmente informo por escrito a MTD su decision de que el PRMS no
seria modificado. En efecto, dado que un organo compuesto de funcionarios chilenos de
rango ministerial habia admitido por escrito la inversion, el Tribunal declard que era
razonable que las Demandantes continuaran incurriendo en gastos en busqueda de hacer
viable el Proyecto hasta que la decision ministerial final y definitiva fue adoptada y
comunicada a ellas por escrito, sefialandoles que su objetivo no tendria éxito. El Comité

concuerda con la Demandada en que las razones dadas por el Tribunal respecto de su

decision sobre el quantum fueron extremadamente sucintas. Sin embargo, no fueron

185 Alternativamente, en la medida que las materias tratadas en dichas reuniones fueron asumidas por el

Demandado como una forma de defensa, el Tribunal habria tenido que declarar que el contenido de las mismas
no habia sido acreditado.
186 Réplica, parr. 131, citado en el Laudo, parr. 231.

-45-

evasivas. En estas circunstancias, el Comité no esta dispuesto a anular este aspecto menor de

 

la deci

 

on conforme al Articulo 52(1)(e) del Convenio.
(7) Conclusiones

107. En definitiva, la solicitud de anulacién de la Demandada debe ser desestimada. Sin
embargo, el Comité desea enfatizar nuevamente la verdadera base sobre la cual la decision
del Tribunal ha sido confirmada. En el presente caso, un inversionista extranjero falté a la
debida diligencia en un aspecto fundamental de la inversion. El control de uso de la tierra es
una preocupacion central para el Estado, especialmente en las periferias de las zonas urbanas.
Cualquiera sean los contratos que los inversionistas extranjeros puedan celebrar con los
propietarios de terrenos rurales, no puede permitirse que los mismos perturben la debida
aplicacion del derecho del Estado anfitrion, como tampoco que la vaguedad inherente en
dicho tratado de criterios tales como “tratamiento justo y equitativo” debiera permitir a los
tribunales internacionales revisar las decisiones de planificacién debidamente adoptadas

(como las que fueron tomadas en este caso) de conformidad con ese derecho.

108. Sin embargo, criticar al Tribunal con tales argumentos es malinterpretar el
fundamento mismo de su decisién, a la que podia llegar libremente. El mismo Tribunal
confirmé la autoridad del derecho urbanistico chileno contra los argumentos basados en un
“derecho a permiso urbanistico.”'*” No obstante, el flujo de inversién extranjera también es
importante y el Estado ha asumido obligaciones a este respecto. En definitiva, lo que aparece

138

acreditado es el proceso urbanistico, segin el mismo Tribunal declaré, “” pero lo que podria

haberse hecho mejor era la coordinaci6n al nivel del CIE.
F. COSTAS

109. Considerando que el Laudo no ha sido anulado, se mantiene lo resuelto en materia de
las costas de los procedimientos ante el Tribunal y se levanta automaticamente, a partir de la

fecha de esta decision la suspension de su ejecucién (Regla de Arbitraje 54(3)).

110. Resta por decidir lo relativo a las costas del presente este procedimiento de anulacién,

tema sobre el cual existe discrecionalidad por parte del Comité. En todos los procedimientos

17 Véase e.g. Laudo, parr. 188.

Laudo, parr. 163.

-46-

de anulacion concluidos, con la excepcién de uno, los Comités no han resuelto acerca de las
costas de las partes y han declarado que las del CIADI deben ser asumidas por ellas por
partes iguales. Procedieron de esa forma tanto en aquellas solicitudes de anulacién que
fueron acogidas como en las que fueron desestimadas.'*” En los casos mas recientes, la parte
exitosa, al menos parcialmente ante el Tribunal, y que haya triunfado en cierto grado ante el

comité, tuvo que pagar la mitad de las costas resultantes del proceso de anulaci6n.

111. Este resultado podria parecer andmalo. No obstante, con el interés de ser consistente
con la jurisprudencia del CIADI y dadas las circunstancias del presente caso, el Comité opta
por seguir la practica existente. Lo hace advirtiendo que esta practica no es inflexible y
admite excepciones. Al respecto, observa que en CDC Group PLC v. Republic of the
Seychelles, el Comité ordend al demandado perdedor a pagar tanto las costas del demandante
como las costas del CIADI del procedimiento de anulacion. El Comité puso de relieve que la
solicitud de anulacién “carecia fundamentalmente de mérito” y que el caso del demandado
“para cualquier observador razonable e imparcial era mds improbable que tuviera éxito.”'*°
Lo mismo no puede predicarse en este caso. Tal como el Comité ya ha observado, Chile ha

expresado preocupaciones razonables que trascienden los montos en discusi6n.

112. Las costas de representacion de cada una de las partes durante el proceso de
anulacion también pueden ser fijadas discrecionalmente por el Comité. En este proceso se
planted una cuestién compleja y novedosa de importancia publica, respecto de la evaluacion
relativa a los riesgos de regulacion en un caso en el que se habia celebrado un contrato formal
de inversion extranjera especificando la ubicacién de la inversion. Teniendo en cuenta la
culpa compartida de las partes en la disputa, el Comité opta por no dar ninguna orden en

relacion con las costas de representacion.

Bo En los siete casos siguientes, los Comités declinaron aplicar las costas de la parte en contra de la

perdedora y dividieron las costas de los procedimientos de CIADI: Kléckner (1985) 2 Informes CIADI 4, 163;
Amco Asia I (1986) 1 Informes CIADI 509, 542; MINE (1989) 4 Informes CIADI 79, 110; Amco Asia II (1992)
9 Informes CIADI 3; Wena Hotels (2002) 6 Informes CIADI 129, 152; Vivendi (2002) 6 Informes CIADI 340,
371; Mitchell v DRC , resolucién de 1 de Noviembre de 2006, parr. 67.

140 (2005) 11 Informes CIADI 237, 266 (parr. 89).

-47-

G. DECISION

113. Por las razones precedentes, el Comité DECIDE que:
(1) La Solicitud de anulacién de la Demandada es desestimada.
(2) Las partes sufragaran por mitades las costas y gastos incurridos por el Centro
en relacién con el presente procedimiento de anulacion.

(3) | Cada parte sufragara sus propios costos de representacién en relacién al

presente procedimiento de anulacion.

/ Firma /

JUEZ GILBERT GUILLAUME
Presidente del Comité
Fecha: 16 de Febrero de 2007

 

/ Firma / / Firma /
PROFESOR JAMES CRAWFORD DRA SARA ORDONEZ NORIEGA
Miembro Miembro
Fecha: 15 de Febrero de 2007 Fecha: 12 de Febrero de 2007

-48-

