INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Washington, D.C.

Case No. ARB/01/7

MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A.
(Claimants)
v.
Republic of Chile

(Respondent)

AWARD

Before the Arbitral Tribunal
comprised of:

Mr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President

Mr. Marc Lalonde
Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno Blanco

Secretary of the Tribunal

Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu

Date of dispatch to the parties: May 25, 2004

Representing the Claimants:

Messrs. Oscar M. Garibaldi,
Eugene D. Gulland,
Fernando Campoamor Sanchez,
Eric J. Pan and
Ms. Karin L. Kizer
Covington & Burlington
Washington, D.C.

Of Counsel
Messrs. Micahel Grasty Cousifio,
Jorge Bofill Genzsch and
Pablo Mir Balmaceda
Grasty Quintana Majlis & Cia.
Santiago, Chile

Representing the Respondent:

Ms. Karen Poniachik,

Messrs. Claudio Castillo Castillo,

Andrés Culagovski Rubio,

Mmes. Liliana Macchiavello Martin,

Carola Trucco Horwitz and

Mr. Francisco Javier Diaz Verdugo
Foreign Investment Committee
Republic of Chile

Mr. Ronald E. M. Goodman and

Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny
White & Case, LLP
Washington, D.C.

Of Counsel

Mr. Francisco J. Ilanes
Cariola, Diez, Pérez-Cotapos & Cia. Ltda.
Santiago, Chile

Il.

VI.

VIL.

PROCEDURE
1.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

Registration of the Request for Arbitration ...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal and Commencement of the

Proceeding. 2
3. Appointment of the present Tribunal... cs cceeceseeseseeseseeseseeeseeeseetseeeseeeeeeeees 4
4. Written and Oral Procedure «0.02.2... ceccecessesseeseessesessesseeseeseeseesessssessessnseneeneeneeneesees 5
THE FACTS 9
PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS. ........ccccesscssseseseseeseseseeeeeeeeenesesesesesesnsteneneeeeeeees 22
1 Applicable Law 22
2. Significance of an Investment Dispute 0.00.0... ceeceesseeseeeeeeeeeseeeseeeeeeeseeneeeenes 23
3. Jurisdiction 24
4 The Right of States to adopt Policy and enact Legislation ..........ccseeeeeeeeees 26
5. The Most-Favored-Nation (MEN) Clause ........csccssscsssessesseeeseeeseeeeeeseeeneeeenes 27
CONSIDERATIONS ON THE MERITS... ceeccsescseseeeeseeeeeeeeeeseeeeseseseseseeneneneeeeeenes 28
1. Fair and equitable treatment. 29

(ji Meaning of “fair and equitable treatment” .........cceeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeee 29

(ii) Allegations of the Parties

(iii) | The November 6, 1996 meeting .49

(iv) Significance of the Approval of the FIC 54

(v) The issue of the Clai ” diligence 58
2. Breach of the BIT by Breach of the Foreign Investment Contracts 62
3. Unreasonable and Discriminatory Measures . .67
4. Failure to Grant Necessary Permits
5. Expropriation 74
DAMAGES 78
1. Eligible Expenditure: 88
2. Damages Attributable to Business Risk. Residual value of the Investment....... 89
3. Date from which pre-award interest should accrue .........cssecesseseeseeseeeeeeeeeneeeeees 91
4. Applicable Rate of Interest ........ccccceeeeeseseeseseseseeeseeeseesseeasseeseseeeseseseeseeenees 91
COSTS 93
DECISION 93

 

PROCEDURE
1. Registration of the Request for Arbitration

1. By letter of June 26, 2001, MTD Equity Sdn (“MTD Equity”), a Malaysian
company, and MTD Chile S.A (“MTD Chile”), a Chilean company, (collectively “the
Claimants”or “MTD”) filed a request for arbitration with the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or “the Centre”) against the Republic of
Chile (“the Respondent” or “Chile”). The request, invoked the ICSID Arbitration
provisions of the 1992 Agreement between the Government of Malaysia and the
Government of the Republic of Chile for the Promotion and Protection of Investments

(“the BIT”).

2. The Centre, on June 27, 2001, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules
of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (“Institution
Rules”) acknowledged receipt of the request and on the same day transmitted a copy to

the Republic of Chile and to the Chilean Embassy in Washington, D.C.

3. On July 17, 2001, the Centre requested further information from the
Claimants, with regard to the fulfillment by both Claimants of the requirement set forth in
Articles 6(3)(i) and (ii) of the BIT concerning an attempt to resolve the dispute amicably
through consultation and negotiation at least three months before the request for
arbitration. The Centre also sought confirmation from the Claimants that neither of them
had submitted the dispute to courts or administrative tribunals of Chile, as precluded by
Article 6(3)(ii) and (iii) of the BIT; and that the majority of the shares in the second

Claimant, MTD Chile were, for purposes of Article 6(2) of the BIT, owned by investors

of Malaysia before the dispute arose. The Claimants responded by a letter of July 30,

2001.

4. The request was registered by the Centre on August 6, 2001, pursuant to
Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention, and on the same day the Acting Secretary-
General, in accordance with Institution Rule 7, notified the parties of the registration and
invited them to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible.

2. Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal and Commencement of the Proceeding

5. There were two successive arbitral tribunals in this case, the present Tribunal

having been appointed upon the joint resignation of the first set of arbitrators.

6. Following the registration of the request for arbitration by the Centre, the
parties agreed on a three-member Tribunal. The parties had agreed that each would
appoint an arbitrator and that the third arbitrator, who would be the president of the

Tribunal, would be appointed by agreement of the parties.

7. The Claimants appointed Mr. James H. Carter Jr., a national of the United
States of America, and the Respondent appointed Professor W. Michael Reisman, also a
national of the United States of America. By agreement, the parties appointed Mr.

Guillermo Aguilar Alvarez, a national of Mexico, as the presiding arbitrator.

8. All three arbitrators having accepted their appointments, the Centre by a letter
of March 5, 2002, informed the parties of the constitution of the Tribunal, consisting of

Mr. James H. Carter Jr., Professor W. Michael Reisman, and Mr. Guillermo Aguilar

Alvarez (“the first Tribunal”), and that the proceeding was deemed to have commenced

on that day, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1).

9. As agreed between the first Tribunal and the parties, in consultation with the
Centre, the first Tribunal held its first session in New York on May 29, 2002, with the

parties attending.

10. In advance of that session, the parties, by a joint letter dated May 24, 2002,
communicated to the Tribunal their agreement on several items on the agenda proposed
for the session. Those agreements by the parties were affirmed at the meeting and

incorporated in the minutes.

11. Arbitrators had requested a rate of remuneration higher than the Centre’s
current rate. The Respondent and the Claimants, by letters dated September 17, 2002 and
September 24, 2002, respectively, advised the Tribunal that they were unable to offer the

rate of remuneration proposed by the Tribunal members.

12. By a letter dated October 2, 2002, the Tribunal notified the parties that it
would not be able to serve on the basis of the fees agreed by the parties and that each of
its members would be resigning his appointment. By a joint letter of October 17, 2002,
members of the first Tribunal tendered their resignation to the Secretary-General of the

Centre.

13. On October 18, 2002, the Centre notified the parties of the resignations of Mr.

Aguilar Alvarez, Mr. Carter and Professor Reisman and informed them that the

proceeding was suspended pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 10(2). In accordance with
Arbitration Rule 11, the parties were by that letter invited to appoint new arbitrators by
the same method by which the initial arbitrators were appointed.
3. Appointment of the present Tribunal

14. By a letter of November 26, 2002, the Claimants informed the Centre of their
appointment of Mr. Marc Lalonde, a Canadian national, to fill the vacancy created by the
resignation of Mr. James H. Carter, and invited the Respondent to appoint a replacement
for Professor W. Michael Reisman and to engage in consultations aimed at reaching an
agreement on the person to replace Mr. Guillermo Aguilar Alvarez as the presiding

arbitrator.

15. By a letter of December 16, 2002, the Respondent notified the Centre that it
had appointed Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno Blanco, a national of Costa Rica, to fill the

vacancy created by the resignation of Professor W. Michael Reisman.

16. The parties, by separate letters of January 23, 2003, notified the Centre of
their appointment, by agreement, of Mr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, a national of Spain, to fill
the vacancy created by the resignation of Mr. Guillermo Aguilar Alvarez as the presiding

arbitrator.

17. All three arbitrators accepted their appointments and, on January 29, 2003, the
Centre notified the parties that the Tribunal had been reconstituted and the proceeding

recommenced on that day, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 12.

4. Written and Oral Procedure

18. At the first session of the first Tribunal on May 29, 2002, it was agreed that
the proceeding would be in English and Spanish. Documents filed in one language
would be followed within five business days by a translation in the other language. The
procedural arrangements agreed by the first Tribunal have been adhered to by the

Tribunal.

19. The following schedule was also agreed for the exchange of written
submissions: t he Claimants to file their Memorial by October 1, 2002; the Respondent to
file its Counter-Memorial by February 1, 2003; the Claimants to file their Reply by April

15, 2003; and the Respondent to file its Rejoinder by July 1, 2003.

20. It was also agreed that a hearing would be held from Monday August 4 to

Thursday, August 14, 2003, including Saturday, August 9, 2003.

21. The Claimants filed their Memorial on October 1, 2002, followed on October
8, 2002 by a Spanish language translation. These submissions were not transmitted to the

first Tribunal but were sent to the present Tribunal after it was constituted.

22. Upon the resignation of the members of the first Tribunal, the proceeding was
suspended on October 18, 2002, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 10(2) which
provides:

“Upon the notification by the Secretary-General of a vacancy on the Tribunal, the

proceeding shall be or remain suspended until the vacancy has been filled.”

23. Arbitration Rule 12 further provides:
“As soon as a vacancy on the Tribunal has been filled, the proceeding shall

continue from the point it had reached at the time the vacancy occurred. ...”

24. On December 26, 2002, the Respondent wrote to the Centre suggesting that
the effect of ICSID Arbitration Rules 10(2) and 12 was that suspension of the proceeding
upon the resignation of the first Tribunal meant a suspension of the schedule established
for the filing of submissions, and requested an extension for the filing of its Counter-
Memorial. The Claimants in a letter of January 10, 2003 rejected the Respondent’s
interpretation of Arbitration Rule 10(2), but agreed with the Respondent that the matter

should be determined by the new Tribunal upon its constitution.

25. After the present Tribunal was constituted, by Procedural Order No. | of
February 3, 2003, issued in English and Spanish, the Tribunal requested the parties to
present, no later than by February 14, 2003, any observations that they may have on the
effect of the suspension of the proceeding on time limits for filing pleadings. On that

day, the parties simultaneously filed submissions.

26. On February 18, 2003, the Claimants requested the Tribunal “to address one

new argument” asserted in the Respondent’s submission of February 14, 2003.

27. By Procedural Order No. 2, dated February 20, 2003, the Tribunal decided:

“that the meaning of the term ‘suspension’ in Rules 10 and 12 of the [ICSID]
Arbitration Rules applies to all matters related to the proceeding, including time
limits, and not only to matters related to action required from the Tribunal,

that the time limit to present the counter-memorial originally fixed [for] February
1, 2003 [be] extended by 103 days [the duration of the suspension] to May 15,
2003.”

28. The Tribunal in that Order then directed the parties:

“(a) to consult each other on the subsequent schedule of the proceeding and
other pending matters, including the matter related to business records, and

(b) advise the Tribunal of the result of their consultations not later than March
14, 2003.”

29. By a letter of March 14, 2003, the Claimants notified the Tribunal that the

parties were still in discussions on the modified schedule.

30. By a letter of March 17, 2003, the Claimants advised the Tribunal of their
agreed schedule for the submission of the remaining pleadings and notified the Tribunal
that the parties had resolved the matter related to the business records referred to in
Procedural Order No. 2. The Respondent in a letter of March 18, 2003, confirmed the

agreement of the parties as communicated in the Claimants’ letter of the previous day.

31. Following a request by the Tribunal that the hearing commence a day later
than that proposed by the parties, and correspondence with the parties in that regard, the
Tribunal, by a letter dated April 21, 2003, formally took note of the agreed schedule for
the submission of the remaining pleadings and proposed dates of the hearing from

December 9, 2003 to December 19, 2003, including Saturday, December 13.

32. On June 9, 2003, the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial in English and

the Spanish version on June 16, 2003.

33. By letters of July 11, 2003 and July 14, 2003, respectively, the Claimants and
the Respondent notified the Tribunal of each other’s witnesses and experts that should be

made available for cross examination at the oral hearing.

34. On September 15, 2003, the Claimants filed their Reply in English language,

followed on September 23, 2003 by Spanish translations.

35. On October 14, 2003, counsel for the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal
concerning their participation in the proceeding stating that:

“due solely to budgetary constraints faced by the Republic of Chile, White &
Case LLP must withdraw as counsel of record for the Respondent in respect of
[this] case. For the avoidance of doubt we wish to emphasize that our withdrawal
does not relate in any way to the merits of the issues raised in the case. We shall
assume limited role as advisor to the Republic of Chile with regard to this matter.

All communications and service of documents henceforth may continue to be

addressed to us, as well as the other advisors of the Republic in regard to this
matter”.

36. On November 21, 2003, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder in Spanish

language, followed by the English language version on December 1, 2003.

37. As previously agreed, the hearing on merits was held from December 9 to 19,
2003, in Washington, D.C., at the seat of the Centre. The hearing was conducted in
English and Spanish and full verbatim transcripts in both languages were made and

distributed to the parties.

38. Pursuant to Rule 38(1) of the Arbitration Rules, on March 26, 2004, the

Tribunal declared the proceeding closed, having deliberated by various means.

THE FACTS

39. The facts described below follow the narrative of the Claimants and, unless

noted, have not been contested by the Respondent.

40. In 1994 Dato’! Nik of MTD visited Chile as a member of a trade delegation
organized by the Malaysian Ministry of Public Works. During this visit, he met with
government officials and business leaders who emphasized Chile’s encouragement of
foreign investment. Dato’ Nik so reported to the Management Committee of MTD. He
also met with Mr. Musa Muhamad, the Malaysian External Trade Commissioner in the

Malaysian embassy in Santiago, who encouraged MTD to invest in Chile.”

41. In April 1996, Dato’ Nik heard from Mr. Muhamad about “an opportunity to
build a large planned community near Santiago.” Dato’ Nik informed Dato’ Azmil
Khalid who at the time was traveling in the United States. Dato’ Azmil Khalid traveled
directly from the United States to Chile to investigate this opportunity. There he met
with Messrs. Muhamad and Antonio Arenas, a local businessman. They informed Dato’

Khalid that they had found “the perfect location for a planned community.”

42. Dato’ Khalid visited the site in the small town of Pirque and met with the
owner of the land, Mr. Jorge Fontaine Aldunate. Mr. Fontaine is reported to have said
that “he would like to work with MTD to build a mixed-use planned community on the

Malaysian model”. Although the site was zoned for agricultural use, Mr. Fontaine is

'“Dato’” is a Malaysian title of honor.
* Memorial, para. 13.
5 Ibid., paras. 14-15.

‘ Tbid.,

Ibid.,
° Ibid.,
"Ibid,
*Tbid.,
* Ibid.,

alleged to have said that the land was unproductive and “could readily be rezoned,

particularly if it would attract foreign investment.”

43. Dato’ Khalid returned to Malaysia and reported to MTD’s Management
Committee about this opportunity in Chile. The Management Committee decided to
investigate it further. For this purpose, Messrs. Lee Leong Yow (Vincent Lee), MTD’s
Group General Manager and Head of Operations, and Nazri Shafiee, expert in land
valuation, traveled to Chile from May 14 to May 18, 1996. Dato’ Nik was also in Chile
on May 16-17, 1996. He visited the project site and met with Mr. Fontaine and his

family.>

44. Messrs. Lee and Shafiee visited the Foreign Investment Commission (FIC) on
May 16, 1996. There they met with Mr. Joaquin Morales Godoy, Senior Legal Counsel.‘
The next day, Mr. Shafiee met with Mr. Fernando Guerra Francovich, the head of
Servicio de Vivienda y Urbanizacién (“SERVIU”).’ After these meetings, Messrs. Lee
and Shafiee concluded that MTD should pursue the investment opportunity and so
reported to MTD’s Management Committee.’ Based on their report, the Management
Committee decided “to pursue negotiations with Mr. Fontaine while continuing to study

the feasibility of a joint venture to develop the Project.”®

para. 16.
para. 13.
paras. 20-22.
para, 23.
paras. 25-26.
para. 27.

45. MTD engaged Banco Sud Americano in Santiago to appraise the land. In
September 1996, the appraisers submitted their report valuing the land of Mr. Fontaine,
3000 hectares, at $34,385,487. The appraisal assumed that the land could be developed as

an upscale community after changing the existing zoning for agricultural use.

46. In September 1996, the negotiations of MTD with Mr. Fontaine appeared to
have reached a dead end because of disagreement on which hectares to develop and the
control of the joint venture: Mr. Fontaine wanted: (i) to develop all 3000 hectares while
MTD wished to develop first the 600 located at the lowest elevations; and (ii) a 50/50

split of the equity while for MTD it was essential to have control.!!

47. Negotiations resumed in November 1996. The law firm Vial & Palma
represented MTD, specifically attorneys Alberto Labbé Valverde and José Miguel
Olivares. The parties prepared a “Promissory Contract” dated as of November 21,

1996,

48. On November 6, 1996, according to the Respondent, a meeting took place
between Mr. Edmundo Hermosilla, Minister of MINVU, Mr. Sergio Gonzalez Tapia,
Secretario Regional Ministerial (*SEREMI”), and representatives of MTD.'* That this
meeting took place, who attended and what was said at the meeting is a matter of

controversy between the parties.

!° Tbid., para. 28.
" Thid., para. 29.
”? Thid., para. 30.
'S Counter-Memorial, para. 24.

49.In December 1996, Messrs. Dato’ Azmil Khalid and Lee negotiated the
documents implementing the Promissory Contract and signed them on December 13,
1996.4 The Promissory Contract would take effect only after FIC’s approval of the
MTD’s investment and provided for: (i) development of the land at first in two tranches
of 600 and 630 hectares, the second tranche at the option of MTD; and (ii) the creation of
a Chilean corporation, “El Principal Inversiones S.A.” (“EPSA”), to be owned 51 per

cent by MTD Chile S.A. and 49 per cent by Mr. Fontaine.'°

50. On December 13, 1996, after signature of the Promissory Contract, Dato’
Khalid and Mr. Labbé met with Mr. Eduardo Moyano, Executive Vice President of the

FIC.'®

51. On January 14, 1997, MTD filed an application with the FIC for approval of
an initial investment of US$ 17.136 million. The application described the project as
follows:

“{D]evelop a township of 600 hectares of Fundo El Principal de Pirque, which

will be a self-sufficient satellite city, with houses, apartments for diverse

socioeconomic strata, schools, hospitals, universities, supermarkets, commerce of

all sorts, services, and all other components necessary for self-sufficiency”
(Exhibit 12 at 3. Translation of the Claimants).”

52. The application specified the location as “Pirque, Metropolitan Region” and

that “the investment would provide initial capital to a newly formed corporation named

'§ Memorial, para. 30.
'S Tbid., para. 31.
'© Tbid., para. 32.

MTD Chile S.A., which would use the capital to acquire a 51 percent stake in El

Principal S.A., which would own the land and develop the Project.’"”

53. The application was approved by the FIC at its session of March 3, 1997. The
following members of FIC attended: the President of FIC (the Minister of Economy,
Development and Reconstruction), the President of the Central Bank, the Undersecretary
of Finance, the Undersecretary of Mining, and the Undersecretary of Planning and
Cooperation. The FIC informed MTD of the approval by letter dated March 6, 1997 and

enclosed the standard contract used by Chile for these purposes.'*

54. The Foreign Investment Contract was signed on March 18, 1997 by the
President of FIC on behalf of Chile and Mr. Labbé on behalf of MTD. The Foreign
Investment Contract provides that MTD will develop “a real estate project on 600
hectares of Fundo El Principal de Pirque. The aforementioned project consists of the
construction of a self-sufficient satellite city, with houses, apartments, schools, hospitals,

commerce, services, etc.” (“the Project”).!°

55. After signature of the Foreign Investment Contract, MTD injected US$ 8.4
million into EPSA as a capital contribution and with US$ 8.736 million MTD purchased
51% of the EPSA shares from Mr. Fontaine “who was receiving them in return for his

contribution to EPSA of 600 hectares of land.’”” The funds contributed by MTD came

" Thid., para. 33.

'8 Thid., paras. 35 and 36.

° Exhibit 14 to the Memorial at 2.
°° Ibid., para. 43.

from the resources of the MTD group and US$ 12 million from a loan made to MTD by

the Arab-Malaysian Bank in Kuala Lumpur.”!

56. In March 1997, MTD representatives met three architectural firms of Santiago
“to assist in the design work, performing engineering studies and obtaining regulatory
approvals”: Darraidou, Larrain & Uranga (DLU), San Martin & Pascal and URBE. In
April 1997, MTD selected DLU “to assist in obtaining zoning changes, subdividing the
land, and designing prototype models of the houses and other structures.””> According to
the Claimant, all three firms confirmed that the process to change the zoning would need
to be initiated by the Municipality of Pirque and the change would need to be endorsed

by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development (“MINVU”).4

57. MTD submitted a second application to FIC on April 8, 1997 for approval to
invest additional working capital of US$ 364,000. The second application was approved
by FIC and MTD informed by letter dated April 22, 1997. The letter of approval enclosed
the form of the standard foreign investment contract. The contract for this additional
investment was signed on May 13, 1997. Its second clause provides that the investment
will be used “[t]o make capital contributions and/or increases to the Chilean receiving
company called MTD Chile S.A., which is developing a real estate project on 600

hectares of the Fundo El Principal de Pirque.””°

2! Thid., para. 43.
 Tbid., para. 44.

3 Ibid.

* Ibid.

5 Memorial, para. 39.

58. On April 22, 1997, representatives of MTD and Mr. Labbé met with Messrs.
Alberto Carbacho Duarte, the MINVU architect with overall responsibility for the
Southern region of Santiago, which includes Pirque, and Mr. Sergio Lepe Corvalan, an
official in the same office. According to the Claimants, Messrs. Carbacho and Lepe
explained that “because Pirque was covered by the Plano Regulador Metropolitano de
Santiago (PMRS) [...] the MINVU would need to coordinate and approve the necessary
zoning changes for the Project...the review process would be handled at the MINVU by

the Secretario Regional Ministerial (SEREMI).””°

59. On May 16, 1997, representatives of MTD met with the Mayor of Pirque, Mr.

Manuel José Ossandon .””

60.On May 20, 1997, Dato’ Azmil Khalid met with Minister Edmundo
Hermosilla. The same day, the MTD team met with Mr. Ricardo Lagos Escobar, then

Minister of Public Works.

61. The Mayor of Pirque formally endorsed the Project by a letter dated August

14, 1997 and offered his assistance in obtaining approvals.”*

62. During this period, Minister Hermosilla was replaced by Mr. Sergio

Henriquez Diaz.

63. On September 29, 1997, at an official state dinner on the occasion of the visit
of the Prime Minister of Malaysia to Chile, President Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle of Chile

°6 Thid., para. 45.
?7 Thid., para. 46.
°8 Thid., para. 50.

delivered a toast making reference, inter alia, to “the innovative real estate project in

12° The next day appearance of the President at the

Pirque” Memorial, para. 5
inauguration of the Project was cancelled because of an alleged meeting with the
President of Brazil. According to the Respondent, the speech to be read by the President,

that was already in the hands of the Claimants, was withdrawn. This fact is contested by

the Claimants.

64. Around November, 1997, “MTD heard from its consultants that SEREMI
Gonzalez of the MINVU was showing reluctance about modifying the PMRS for

Pirque.”*”

65. On December 12, 1997, the Diario Oficial published the approval of the
modification of the PMRS to include the Chacabuco area, North of Santiago, in order to
permit its development under the system of Zonas de Desarrollo Urbano Condicionado

(“ZDUCs”).!

66. In early 1998, MTD engaged the services of Mr. Pablo Heilenkétter, an
attorney with expertise in land use regulation and real estate development. Since
SEREMI Gonzalez was unwilling to initiate the process to change the zoning, Mr.
Heilenkétter and other consultants considered other alternatives under the Ley General de
Urbanismo y Construccion (“LGUC”): “(i) the preparation of a sectional plan limited to

a modification for the zoning in the area of the Project; (ii) the preparation of a communal

» Tbid., para. 51.
°° Thid., para. 54.
*! Tbid., para. 54.

plan for the Municipality of Pirque that would also include a zoning change for the area
of the Project; and (iii) an application under article 55 for the construction of housing to

complement a pre-existing activity.”

67. Mr. Heilenkétter met with Mr. Lepe on March 6, 1998, and two weeks later
with Mr. Gonzalez together with other consultants of MTD. According to the Claimants,
Mr. Gonzalez informed them that he did not wish to undertake another modification to
the PMRS “because it had just been changed in December 1997 to incorporate the

Chacabuco area.”

68. As MTD understood the LGUC, it was possible to pursue a change by way of
a sectional plan and the Consejo Regional de la Region Metropolitana (“CORE”) would
“ultimately decide whether to approve the sectional plan, and it could do so over the

MINVU’s objection.”*4

69. At this point, the Mayor of Pirque proposed to the Municipal Council to
prepare a sectional plan to obtain a change in zoning. The Council approved such

approach and the Mayor informed EPSA on March 31, 1998.

70.On April 13, 1998, MTD representatives and consultants met with Mr.

Quintana, the CORE President. He suggested that, since Pirque did not have a Communal

* Ibid., para. 55.
* Ibid., paras. 56-57.
* Tbid., para. 58.

Regulatory Plan, the Municipality should submit with its sectional plan a strategic plan

outlining Pirque’s anticipated growth.*°

71. Sometime in April 1998, Dato’ Azmil Khalid met with FIC Executive Vice-
President Moyano “to discuss the slow progress of the zoning change request”. Mr.

Moyano reportedly said that he would make inquiries.*°

72. On April 16, 1998, the Mayor of Pirque, and MTD representatives and
consultants met with Mr. Sergio Gonzalez who informed them that the Project was
inconsistent with MINVU’s urban development policy*’. After the meeting, the Mayor
wrote to SEREMI Gonzalez asking for “guidance about presenting a sectional plan to the

MINVU for the development of the Project.”**

73. On April 20 1998, Mayor Ossand6n requested a meeting with the new
MINVU Minister, Mr. Henriquez. The meeting took place on May 6, 1998 and it was

also attended by representatives and consultants of MTD.*?

74. The SEREMI’s office responded to the letter of April 16 on June 3, 1998 and
explained: that “it would be inconvenient to initiate any changes to the PMRS pending
completion of studies aimed at revising the Plan Regional de Desarrollo Urbano
(PRDU)”; that “a sectional plan could not be used to obtain a change in zoning for the

Project because only the SEREMI could initiate changes to the PMRS”; and that “before

* Tbid., para. 60.
* Tbid., para. 66.
*” Tbid., para. 61.
* Tbid., para. 63.
* Tbid., para. 62.

the investment contracts were signed, Minister Hermosilla had informed Mr. Fontaine
and the Malaysian businessmen that it would not be possible to develop the Project in

Pirque.”*”

75. At the request of MTD and as a consequence of the letter of June 3, another
meeting with Minister Henriquez took place on June 12, 1998. The Minister endorsed the
letter of SEREMI Gonzalez and confirmed that the MINVU would “neither initiate nor

support any modification to the PMRS that would allow the Project to proceed.”*!

76. The same day, Mr. Heilenkétter met with Mr. Banderas of the FIC who
informed him that “the FIC could not assist MTD and that its role is strictly limited to
approving the inflow of foreign investment funds into Chile”.*? At the request of Mr.
Labbé, another meeting took place with Messrs. Moyano and Banderas. Mr. Moyano
confirmed at the meeting that the approval of the FIC was without prejudice to other
necessary approvals and that the FIC’s authority was limited to the approval of the flow

of funds into the country.*

77. The Council of the Municipality of Pirque approved the Sectional Plan on July
3, 1998 and the Mayor submitted it to the SEREMI of MINVU on August 11, 1998. On
September 8, 1998, the Mayor also submitted an Environmental Impact Study (“EIS”) to

the Comision Regional del Medio Ambiente, Regién Metropolitana ((COREMA”). On

4 Tbid., para. 63.
4" Thid., para. 64.
® bid, para. 66
4 Tbid., para. 67.

September 15, 1998, the COREMA informed the Municipality that it would review the

EIS and announced the review in a public statement.

78. MTD’s representatives held meetings with Mr. José Miguel Insulza, Minister
of Foreign Affairs, who suggested that the Malaysian Government write him and
President Frei requesting assistance to address MTD’s situation. The Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Malaysia wrote to Mr. Insulza and the Malaysian Prime Minister to President

Frei on September 11 and September 15, 1998, respectively.*°

79. On September 25, 1998, the SEREMI of the MINVU returned the sectional
plan to the Mayor of Pirque without evaluating the plan on its merits. The letter of
SEREMI Gonzalez indicated that “only the SEREMI could change the PRMS, that doing
so would be ‘inconvenient’, and that a sectional plan could not be used to modify the

PMRsS.”*

80. On October 19, 1998, MTD’s representatives and their advisors met with the
MINVU Minister, Mr. Henriquez, and SEREMI Gonzalez. Mr. Henriquez re-affirmed
that the policy of the Government was to encourage development of Santiago towards the
North and not the South where Pirque is located. Hence, he would not support the
required zoning change, and the Project should be built elsewhere in Chile. On October
27, 1998, Mr. Shafiee sent Mr. Henriquez a letter thanking him for the meeting and

including draft minutes of the meeting. The Minister responded on November 4, 1998

 Tbid., paras. 70-71.
45 Thid., para. 69.
4 Tbid., para. 72.

20

formally rejecting the Project. He stated that the SEREMI of the MINVU “will not
initiate a change to the Regulating Plan for the Santiago Metropolitan Region to make
this project possible”. In a press release of the same day, MINVU indicated that it had
rejected the Project because it conflicted with existing urban development policy and that

the Mayor of Pirque no longer supported the Project.*”

81. On November 26, 1998, the COREMA rejected the EIS because the sectional

plan was incompatible with the existing zoning for the land.**

82. On December 15, 1998, the MINVU issued a more detailed press release

about the rejection of the Project.”

83. On June 2, 1999, MTD notified the Respondent that an investment dispute
existed under the Malaysia-Chile Bilateral Investment Treaty (the BIT). At the end of the
three-month negotiation period required by the BIT before the dispute may be brought to
arbitration, no solution to the dispute had been found.® At the request of the Respondent,
the parties agreed to a 30-day extension of the negotiation period. Negotiations

continued without an agreement being reached at the expiry of the extension”!

84. On September 9, 1999, a third Foreign Investment Contract was signed
between Chile and MTD for the purpose of providing an additional US$ 25,000 of

working capital to MTD Chile. As stated in the Memorial, “The third Contract was

47 Thid., paras. 74-75.
48 Tbid., para. 77.
® Tbid., para. 75.
* Tbid., para. 80.
*! Ibid., para. 81.

21

Ill.

executed after the State of Chile had announced that the Project was incompatible with its

urban-development policy and does not reference the Project in Pirque.”

85. On October 8, 1999, MTD informed representatives of the Respondent that it
would pursue this matter in formal dispute settlement proceedings under the auspices of
ICSID. MTD continued to meet with representatives of the Respondent until it filed the

request for arbitration in June 2001.°°

PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS
1. Applicable Law

86. Article 42(1) of the Convention is the relevant provision for determining the
law applicable to the merits of the dispute between the parties. This article requires the
Tribunal to “decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as may be agreed by
the parties”. This being a dispute under the BIT, the parties have agreed that the merits of
the dispute be decided in accordance with international law. Applicable law has not been
a matter of controversy between the parties except as it pertains to the issue of whether
the Respondent has failed to meet its obligations, under the Foreign Investment
Contracts, to grant the necessary permits for the Claimants to carry out their investment
in Chile. The Claimants argue that the alleged failure of the Respondent has to be
considered under international law because Article 3(1) of the Bilateral Investment
Treaty between Chile and Denmark (the “Denmark BIT”) has the effect of

internationalizing the obligations of the Respondent under the Foreign Investment

* Tbid., para. 40.
* Tbid., paras. 82 and 84.

22

Contracts. The Respondent denies that Article 3(1) of the Denmark BIT had such effect
and maintains that Chilean law applies on the basis of Article 42(1) of the Convention.
The Respondent affirms that, in the absence of agreement between the parties, “The
applicable law in regard to the foreign investment contracts is Chilean domestic

legislation, according to the provisions of the Washington Convention.”**

87. At this point, the Tribunal will limit itself to note that, for purposes of Article
42(1) of the Convention, the parties have agreed to this arbitration under the BIT. This
instrument being a treaty, the agreement to arbitrate under the BIT requires the Tribunal
to apply international law. The Tribunal will analyze further this issue when considering
the effect of Article 3(1) of the Denmark BIT.
2. Significance of an Investment Dispute

88. At the beginning of its Counter-Memorial, Chile has made statements and
provided statistics in support of Chile as “a place to invest”. Indeed, between 1974 and
2001, US$ 82.9 billion in foreign investment were authorized, and more than four
thousand companies invested in Chile. Chile has also pointed out that the case before the
Tribunal is the first time that foreign investors appear before ICSID claiming that Chile

violated DL 600° and engaged in discriminatory practices.*°

89. The Tribunal, in noting the success of the Respondent in attracting foreign
investment, wishes to record its understanding that a dispute before an ICSID Tribunal is

not necessarily a black mark on the record of a country or an investor. Bilateral

* Rejoinder, para. 126 and footnote 61.
*5 Decree Law 600, the Foreign Investment Law of the Republic of Chile.
*6 Counter-Memorial, paras. | and 2.

23

investment treaties are relatively new and it is not unreasonable that their application or
the many factors that affect foreign investment be a source of disagreement. The fact that
disagreements are brought to the decision of a third party, such as an ICSID arbitral
tribunal, and that a country has offered to do so in a treaty strengthens rather than detracts
from a country’s endeavor to attract foreign investment and treat investors fairly and
equitably.
3. Jurisdiction

90. As regards the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of this Tribunal,
the Claimants maintain that their dispute with the Respondent is a legal dispute that arises
out of an investment made in Chile by a national of another Contracting State, Malaysia.

The Respondent has not raised any objections about this matter.

91. The Respondent consented to ICSID arbitration under the BIT and the

Claimants consented when they filed their request for arbitration.

92. Article 6(1) of the BIT provides:

“Each Contracting Party consents to submit to the International Centre for the
Settlement of Investment Disputes [...] any dispute arising between that
Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party which involves:
(i) an obligation entered into by that Contracting Party with the investor of the
other Contracting Party regarding an investment by such investor, or (ii) an
alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Agreement with respect to
an investment by such investor.”

93. MTD Equity is a “national of another Contracting State”: it is a corporation
organized under the laws of Malaysia and has its seat and operations in Malaysia. It is

also an “investor” under the terms of Article 1(c)(ii) of the BIT, which defines investor as

24

including: “any corporation, partnership, trust, joint venture, organization, association or
enterprise incorporated or duly constituted in accordance with applicable laws of that
Contracting Party and have their seat and operations in the territory of that same

Contracting Party.”

94. MTD Chile is wholly owned by MTD Equity and is a corporation organized
under the laws of Chile. Under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and Article 6(2)
of the BIT, such a corporation is to be deemed as a Malaysian national for purposes of

arbitration proceedings under the ICSID Convention.

95. The dispute between the parties qualifies as a dispute under each of the
categories of Article 6(1) of the BIT. It involves an obligation entered into by the
Respondent with the Claimants regarding their investment in Chile and an alleged breach

of their rights under the BIT in respect of such investment.

96. The requirement of Article 6(3)(i) of the BIT that the parties try to solve the
dispute “amicably through consultation and negotiation” for at least three months before
resorting to arbitration has also been satisfied. Negotiations took place for a period
exceeding three months and through a one-month extension after the Claimants notified,
on June 2, 1999, the President of Chile and the Minister of Economy that a dispute had

arisen and invoked Article 6 of the BIT.

97. The Tribunal is satisfied that the dispute between the parties arises out of an
investment made by MTD Equity, a national of Malaysia, in Chile and that the

investment so made qualifies as such under the Convention and the BIT.

25

4. The Right of States to adopt Policy and enact Legislation

98. The Tribunal concurs with statements made by the Respondent to the effect
that it has a right to decide its urban policies and legislation. Indeed, the States parties to
the BIT have agreed that their commitment to encourage and create favorable conditions
for investors and admit their investments is “subject to [each party’s] rights to exercise
powers conferred by its laws, regulations and national policies.”” Furthermore, in the
definition of investment, the term “investment” is understood to refer to “all investments
approved by the appropriate Ministries or authorities of the Contracting Parties in

accordance with its legislation and national policies.”°*

99. Thus, by entering into the BIT, the Contracting Parties did not limit the
exercise of their authority under their national laws or policies except to the extent that
this exercise would contravene obligations undertaken in the BIT itself. An arbitral
tribunal in the specific case of ICSID would not consider the policies or legislation of a
country and changes thereto unless a connection can be established with the investment
concerned. This connection may be “established if those general measures are adopted in
violation of specific commitments given to the investor in treaties, legislation or
contracts. What is brought under the jurisdiction of the Centre is not the general
measures in themselves but the extent to which they may violate those specific

commitments.” *?

*7 Article 2(1).
* Article 1(b).
*° CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Republic of Argentina. Case No. ARB/O1/8. Decision on Jurisdiction,

para. 27.

26

5. The Most-Favored-Nation (MFN) Clause

100. The Claimants have based in part their claims on provisions of other
bilateral investment treaties and have alleged that these provisions apply by operation of
the MFN clause of the BIT. The Respondent has not argued against the application of
these provisions but, in the case of Article 3(1) of the Denmark BIT and Article 3(3) and
(4) of the bilateral investment treaty between Chile and Croatia (“the Croatia BIT”), the
Respondent has qualified its arguments by stating that, even in the event that the clause
concerned would apply, the facts of the case are such that it would not have been
breached. Because of this qualification in the Counter-Memorial and the Rejoinder, the
Tribunal considers it appropriate to examine the MFN clause in the BIT and satisfy itself
that its terms permit the use of the provisions of the Denmark BIT and Croatia BIT as a

legal basis for the claims submitted to its decision.

101. The first paragraph of the MFN clause of the BIT - (Article 3(1)) - reads
as follows:

“1, Investments made by investors of either Contracting Party in the territory of

the other Contracting Party shall receive treatment which is fair and equitable, and

not less favourable than that accorded to investments made by investors of any
third State.”

102. The other provisions of this Article extend the clause to compensation
related to losses suffered because of wars or like events or limit its application by

excluding benefits provided in regional cooperation and taxation related agreements.

103. The question for the Tribunal is whether the provisions of the Croatia BIT

and the Denmark BIT which deal with the obligation to award permits subsequent to

27

approval of an investment and to fulfillment of contractual obligations, respectively, can

be considered to be part of fair and equitable treatment.

104. The Tribunal considers the meaning of fair and equitable treatment below
and refers to that discussion. The Tribunal has concluded that, under the BIT, the fair and
equitable standard of treatment has to be interpreted in the manner most conducive to
fulfill the objective of the BIT to protect investments and create conditions favorable to
investments. The Tribunal considers that to include as part of the protections of the BIT
those included in Article 3(1) of the Denmark BIT and Article 3(3) and (4) of the Croatia
BIT is in consonance with this purpose. The Tribunal is further convinced of this
conclusion by the fact that the exclusions in the MFN clause relate to tax treatment and
regional cooperation, matters alien to the BIT but that, because of the general nature of
the MFN clause, the Contracting Parties considered it prudent to exclude. 4 contrario
sensu, other matters that can be construed to be part of the fair and equitable treatment of

investors would be covered by the clause.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE MERITS

105. The Claimants allege that the Respondent has breached:

ji Articles 2(2) and 3(1) of the BIT and Article 4(1) of the Croatia BIT by
treating their investment unfairly and inequitably;

(ii) Article 3(1) of the Denmark BIT by breaching the Respondent’s
obligations under the Foreign Investment Contracts;

(iii) Article 3(2) and (4) of the Croatia BIT by impairing through unreasonable
and discriminatory measures the use and enjoyment of the Claimants’ investment
and by failing to grant the necessary permits to carry out an investment already
authorized; and

28

(iv) _ Article 4 of the BIT by expropriating their investment.

106. The alleged breaches of the Denmark and Croatia BITs are based on the
MEN clause of the BIT. The Tribunal will now consider each of these claims and the
allegation made by the Respondent that the Claimants acted irresponsibly and contrary to
the prudent and diligent standard of behavior expected from an experienced investor.
1. Fair and equitable treatment

107. Article 2(2) of the BIT requires that “Investments of investors of either
Contracting Party shall at all time be accorded fair and equitable treatment [...]” The
Croatia BIT provides that the right to fair and equitable treatment shall “not be hindered
in practice” (Article 4(1)). There is no dispute between the parties about the applicability
of these provisions, but they disagree on key facts to determine whether the standard of
fair and equitable treatment has been breached. They also disagree on the significance of
actions taken by the Respondent in relation to the approval of the investment and the
execution of the Foreign Investment Contracts, and the significance of the conduct of the

Claimants in reaching and executing their decision to invest in Chile.

108. The parties appear to agree on the meaning of fair and equitable treatment,
but in view of comments made by them in the memorials, the Tribunal will address this
matter first and then will consider the facts underlying the Claimants’ submission for
purposes of applying this standard of treatment.

@ Meaning of “fair and equitable treatment”

109. The parties agree that there is an obligation to treat investments fairly and

equitably. The parties also agree with the statement of Judge Schwebel that “the meaning

29

of what is fair and equitable is defined when that standard is applied to a set of specific
facts” As defined by Judge Schwebel, “fair and equitable treatment” is “a broad and
widely-accepted standard encompassing such fundamental standards as good faith, due

process, nondiscrimination, and proportionality”.

110. The parties have commented on whether the fair and equitable standard is
part of customary international law or additional to customary international law in
reference to recent awards of arbitral tribunals established under NAFTA before and after
the interpretation of Article 1105(1) by the NAFTA Free Trade Commission. The Free
Trade Commission has interpreted “fair and equitable treatment” as not requiring
treatment in addition to or beyond that which is required by the international law

minimum standard.

111. The Tribunal notes that Chile has not argued that this is how “fair and
equitable treatment” should be understood under the BIT. Chile has simply drawn
attention to this interpretation and the consequences it had on the application of the
standard of fair and equitable treatment by NAFTA arbitral tribunals. The Tribunal
further notes that there is no reference to customary international law in the BIT in

relation to fair and equitable treatment.

112. This being a Tribunal established under the BIT, it is obliged to apply the
provisions of the BIT and interpret them in accordance with the norms of interpretation

established by the Vienna Convention on the Law of the Treaties, which is binding on the

© Opinion of Judge Steven Schwebel, para. 23. Witness Statement submitted with the Memorial.

“Ibid.

30

State parties to the BIT. Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention requires that a treaty be
“interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the

terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.”

113. In their ordinary meaning, the terms “fair” and “equitable” used in Article
3(1)” of the BIT mean “just”, “even-handed”, “unbiased”, “legitimate”.°? These terms
are also used in Article 2(2) of the BIT entitled “Promotion and Protection of

Investments”™.

As regards the object and purpose of the BIT, the Tribunal refers to its
Preamble where the parties state their desire “to create favourable conditions for
investments by investors of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting
Party”, and the recognition of “the need to protect investments by investors of both
Contracting Parties and to stimulate the flow of investments and individual business
initiative with a view to the economic prosperity of both Contracting Parties”. Hence, in
terms of the BIT, fair and equitable treatment should be understood to be treatment in an
even-handed and just manner, conducive to fostering the promotion of foreign
investment. Its terms are framed as a pro-active statement —“to promote”, “to create”, “to

stimulate”- rather than prescriptions for a passive behavior of the State or avoidance of

prejudicial conduct to the investors.

114. Faced with a similar task, the tribunal in TECMED described the concept

of fair and equitable treatment as follows:

Article 3(1): “Investments made by investors of either Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting

Party shall receive treatment which is fair and equitable, and not less favourable than that accorded to investments

made by investors of any third State.”

The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English, fifth edition.

“ Article 2(2): “Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall at all time be accorded fair and equitable
treatment and shall enjoy full protection and security in the territory of the other Contracting Party.”

31

“[...] to provide to international investments treatment that does not affect the
basic expectations that were taken into account by the foreign investor to make
the investment. The foreign investor expects the host State to act in a consistent
manner, free from ambiguity and totally transparently in its relations with the
foreign investor, so that it may know beforehand any and all rules and regulations
that will govern its investments, as well as the goals of the relevant policies and
administrative practices or directives, to be able to plan its investment and comply
with such regulations. Any and all State actions conforming to such criteria
should relate not only to the guidelines, directives or requirements issued, or the
resolutions approved thereunder, but also to the goals underlying such regulations.
The foreign investor also expects the host State to act consistently, i.e. without
arbitrarily revoking any preexisting decisions or permits issued by the state that
were relied upon by the investor to assume its commitments as well as to plan and
launch its commercial and business activities. The investor also expects the state
to use the legal instruments that govern the actions of the investor or the
investment in conformity with the function usually assigned to such instruments,
and not to deprive the investor of its investment without the required
compensation.”

115. This is the standard that the Tribunal will apply to the facts of this case.
The facts or their significance are controversial and the Tribunal will first describe the
allegations of the parties as they relate to them.

(ii) Allegations of the Parties

116. According to the Claimants, the Respondent breached the fair and
equitable treatment provisions of the BIT and the Croatia BIT when it “created and
encouraged strong expectations that the Project, which was the object of the investment,
could be built in the specific proposed location and entered into a contract confirming
that location, but then disapproved that location as a matter of policy after MTD
irrevocably committed its investment to build the Project in that location.”®

Furthermore, to the extent that, as alleged by MINVU, the Respondent was always

5 Técnicas Medioambientales TECMED S.A. v. The United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)00/2, award
dated May 29, 2003, para. 154. See also Waste Management, Inc.v.United Mexican Status, 1CSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/3, para. 98.

°° Memorial, para. 102.

32

opposed to the Project even before the signing of the Foreign Investment Contracts, then
the Respondent acted “duplicitously and in bad faith, for at that time - according to the
MINVU’s argument - the State of Chile had already made a decision to block the

Project.”°”

The Respondent disputes such allegations by referring to meetings the
Claimants had with Government officials and by questioning the significance attributed

by the Claimants to the approval of their investment by the FIC.

117. The Respondent places great significance on the November 6, 1996
meeting with Minister Hermosilla and SEREMI Gonzalez. The Claimants deny that such
meeting ever took place. According to the Respondent, in this meeting, the Chilean
officials warned Claimants’ representatives that “the PMRS, which categorically forbade
urban development in Pirque, posed a serious impediment to the Project”, and that
“because the Project was inconsistent with the goals of the PMRS, one of which was to
promote urban densification, the office of the SEREMI would not be able to sponsor the
project before the CORE.” The Respondent concludes the narrative of the November 6
meeting by saying that that meeting “should have left MTD with grave doubts about the
viability of a real estate project in Pirque. At this point, a reasonable investor would have
undertaken rigorous due diligence as to whether, among other things, any further
developmental costs were warranted. Instead, despite having been put on clear notice
that its proposed Project faced serious risks, MTD proceeded to enter into a joint venture

agreement, further solidifying its commitment to the El Principal Project.”

“Ibid. para. 103.
8 Counter-Memorial, paras. 25-27.
© Tbid., para. 27.

33

118. The Respondent maintains that, through the many meetings that
representatives of the Claimants had with officials of the Chilean Government, the
Claimants were informed about the difficulty of achieving a change in the PMRS, that the
SEREMI of MINVU had the initiative to propose such change, and that a sectional plan
was not the proper vehicle to change the PMRS because it is an instrument hierarchically
lower from a normative point of view. The meetings that the Claimants had with various
urban planning firms in March 1997 and related correspondence show that already at that

time they were aware of the need to re-zone El Principal.”

119. The Respondent further alleges that the role of the FIC is only to approve
the capital transfer and not the details of the project itself, hence the limited nature of the
description of the purpose of the investment. The Foreign Investment Contracts
guarantee the foreign investor the same treatment as a national investor and provide that
the authorization to import capital into Chile is “without prejudice to any others which,
pursuant to such laws and regulations must be granted by the competent authorities.”
Therefore, the Foreign Investment Contracts required “MTD to obtain zoning permits,

environmental approvals and other applicable authorizations relating to the Project.””!

120. As regards claims of Chile’s extra-contractual liability, the Respondent
alleges that they “betray a fundamental misunderstanding of the FIC approval process
and other provisions of Chilean law”, and contests even the existence of a possibility of

extra-contractual liability: if a contract exists, “a claim may only be brought alleging the

” Tbid., paras. 48-96.
7! Tbid., paras. 31-32.

34

contractual breach; an additional claim alleging quasi-contractual liability is

p jit, 1972
inadmissible.”

121. According to the Respondent, the FIC is not obliged under article 15(c) of
DL 600, as the Claimants maintain, to obtain reports prior to deciding on foreign
investment applications except in limited circumstances required by legislation other than
DL 600 itself. There is no legal norm or regulation that imposes upon the FIC the
obligation to obtain from any other authority a report or pre-approval of a real estate

> The FIC is not required

project such as the proposed investment of the Claimants.”
either to seek a change in the PMRS after the approval of the foreign investment
application. If this were the case, then Article 9 of DL 600 and Clause Four of the

foreign investment contracts would be rendered meaningless and the FIC would operate

outside the scope of its authority.”

122. The Respondent explains that the FIC’s jurisdiction does not “extend to
determining the legal, administrative, technical or economic feasibility of those
investments, nor does it restrict or limit the authority or jurisdiction of any government
agency. The jurisprudence of domestic courts has uniformly recognized the limited
jurisdiction of the Committee and the limited scope of the Investment Contract.””°
According to the Respondent, the Claimants have completely misrepresented the

functions of the FIC by assigning to it the character of a “one-stop window”. As

” Tbid., para. 129 quoting expert Felid’s opinion.
® Tbid., para. 131.

” Tbid., para. 133.

7 Rejoinder, para. 37.

35

explained by expert Feliu, in public law the “principle of lawfulness” requires that, in
order for a public body to act as a “one-stop window”, it needs to be so authorized.”° It
was not the FIC’s “duty to reject MTD’s Foreign Investment Application due to
restrictions of land use, because the Committee did not have the legal authority to carry
out such an evaluation. MTD chose to take the risk associated with its investment, which
involved executing an urban development project in a restricted area, while speculating
that the policies regarding land use in Chile would be modified in its favor.””’ The
Respondent maintains that the reference to the Municipality of Pirque in the Application
does not modify “the authority of the Committee, nor does it make the Committee the

underwriter of the viability of the project.””*

123. The Respondent also dismisses the argument that it is extra-contractually
liable because the Minister of MINVU, as “relevant Minister” under article 13(d) of the
DL 600, did not attend the meeting which approved the Claimants’ request. The
Respondent maintains that this argument has no basis because under Article 14 the only
requirement for a meeting is that a certain quorum be achieved with or without the
“relevant Minister”. In any case, it is the SEREMI of MINVU who is responsible for
recommending the modification of the PMRS and the SEREMI acts independently of the
MINVU Minister. The Respondent affirms further that, if the Minister of MINVU had
attended the meeting, the outcome would have remained the same. He would presumably

have commented that the project was risky but that in itself would not have been grounds

7 Tbid., paras. 40-41.
7 Tbid., para. 47.
*8 Tbid., para. 50.

36

for rejecting the application since the investor had the right to seek a modification of the
PMRS: “It is not within the FIC’s authority or mandate to perform a risk assessment with
respect to the investments that are the subject of the capital inflows it approves. The
resolution of questions involving risk is wholly within the investor’s sphere, and such
issues have no bearing on the FIC’s approval or disapproval of foreign investment

applications.”

124. The Claimants deny that the November 6, 1996 meeting ever took place
and consider that the meeting is “crucial to the Respondent’s case: this is the sole
warning that MTD is alleged to have received before committing its investment”. The
documents presented as evidence of what was said at the meeting were written in 1998,
not in 1996.®° There are no contemporaneous records of the meeting except for the word
“Malaysia” in the appointment book of Minister Hermosilla. The Claimants note that “It
is striking that the Respondent’s witnesses — without contemporaneous documentary
record of the meeting — now remember details of the discussion so well seven years later,

but are unable to recall who attended.”*!

125. The Claimants point out that the warnings that MTD allegedly received
from architects, urban planners and government officials after signing the first Foreign
Investment Contract would have come too late.** The Claimants also note that, in its

Reply, the Respondent does not acknowledge that the President of Chile praised the

” Counter-Memorial, paras. 134-137. See also Rejoinder para. 68.
* Reply, para. 4.

*! Tbid., para. 18.

® Tbid., para. 7.

37

Project as innovative in September 1997 and the Claimants were never informed that the
cancellation of the President’s appearance the next day related to the withdrawing of
support for the Project.** In fact, the reason given was that the President could not attend

because of a conflicting meeting with the President of Brazil.

126. According to the Claimants, it was only in 1998 that they were informed
about the meeting of November 6, 1996, and that the approval of the investment
application only meant that MTD could import funds and that Chilean officials first
began to raise environmental concerns: “The Respondent does not explain why these
supposedly long-standing and important governmental positions and policies were not

communicated to MTD before 1998.”**

127. The Claimants address the Respondent’s assertion that, if they had acted
diligently, they “would quickly have discovered that its [their] Project was unfeasible” by
pointing out the following flaws: “First, if it was indeed so clear that the Project was not
feasible, why did none of the many officials with whom MTD representatives met inform
MTD of this impossibility until 1998? Second, the Respondent’s ‘due diligence’
argument is premised on the warnings supposedly given to MTD at the phantom meeting
of 6 November 1996.”*° In any case, “If the Project was in fact ‘unfeasible’ from the
beginning, the State of Chile should not have misled MTD by approving MTD’s
investment application and entering into Foreign Investment Contracts with MTD based

on the illusory promise of a housing project in Pirque. If, on the other hand, the Project

3 Tbid., para. 8.
* Tbid., para. 9.
' Tbid., para. 28.

38

was not an impossibility, the Respondent should not have rejected MTD’s requests for
necessary approvals on the pretext that the applicable norms necessarily preclude any

urban development in Pirque.”*°

128. The Claimants also note that the Counter-Memorial overlooks the
description of the Project in the application to the FIC, and, instead, focuses on the capital
contribution section. It is clear from the project description section and the Second
Clause of the Foreign Investment Contract, which are essentially the same, that the
project and its location are clearly identified and the contract states that the purpose of the
investment is exclusive and it could only be modified with the prior authorization of

Fic.”

129. The Claimants address the Respondent’s explanation that the specific
identification of the project in a foreign investment contract lacks significance and state
that: “No Governmental official told MTD of any such limitation before signing the
Foreign Investment Contracts.” The opinions of the experts submitted with the Counter-
Memorial and the testimony of Mr. Moyano focus on the fact that a foreign investment
contract does not automatically provide all governmental approvals necessary to realize a
project, but “they do not address the different question presented by this case: Whether
the state of Chile may properly enter into a binding foreign investment contract that

specifies the purposes and location of a particular investment project while, at the same

86 Tbid., para. 12.
*7 Tbid., paras. 31-34.

39

time, knowing (and not telling the investor) that the Government will never allow the

investor to carry out the project that is the premise of the contract.”**

130. The Claimants point out that although the Respondent refused to provide
copies of the minutes of the FIC meetings, it did provide records of attendance that show
that Ministers who were not permanent members of the FIC attended some meetings,
“presumably to discuss and vote upon foreign investment applications that were relevant
to their areas of responsibility, as required by Article 13 of DL 600.”*’ According to the
Claimants, if “the role of the FIC were simply to approve the inflow of funds (as opposed
to approving an investment for a particular project), then it would have been unnecessary
and illogical for DL 600: (i) to provide that a Minister who is not a permanent member of
the FIC is nevertheless a member for purposes of considering applications that are
relevant to that Ministry’s work; and (ii) to require the Executive Vice President of the
FIC to coordinate with other government agencies concerning information and
authorizations.””’ Furthermore, the Respondent is obliged to ensure under article 15(a) of
the DL 600 that the FIC coordinates and consults with Ministries concerned. Although
requested by the Claimants, the Respondent was not able to find any “responsive”

documents.”!

131. The Claimants argue that the Respondent’s position is inconsistent with

the availability of other procedures for bringing foreign capital into Chile without signing

* Tbid., para. 36.
® Tbid., para. 41.
°° Tbid., para. 42.
°" Ibid, para. 49.

40

a foreign investment contract and without necessarily identifying the object and purpose
of their investment: “If the FIC’s role were limited to approval of the inflow of funds
there would be no need for the FIC, because the Central Bank of Chile already has
authority to [sic] the inflow of funds without consideration of the underlying project.”””
The position of the Respondent is also inconsistent with the terms of the Foreign
Investment Contract: “If the object of the contract were limited to the inflow of funds,

the contract would not need to specify the purpose of the investment, or provide that the

purpose of the investment can be changed only with the FIC’s approval.”**

132. As regards Clause Four of the Foreign Investment Contract, the Claimants
point out that “It is one thing to argue that MTD must still satisfy norms and other
requirements in the process of realizing the [P]roject — which MTD always understood.
It is quite another matter for the Respondent to argue that Clause Fourth [sic] entitled it to
approve and accept MTD’s investment in Chile while knowing that the premise of the

contract could never be realized.”"*

133. The Claimants note that the Respondent has not _ presented
contemporaneous evidence to support the alleged actual reasons for the withdrawal of the
speech of the President at the inauguration of the Project: “If the President’s office had
“withdrawn” the text of a presidential speech that he sent to be read at the inauguration
ceremony, it would be reasonable to expect some record of such withdrawal. And if MTD

had used a presidential speech without permission, surely the Chilean Government would

” Tid, para. 43.
° Thid., para. 44.
* Tid., para. 46.

4l

have taken some action at least to indicate its displeasure. By contrast, the Claimants
have submitted to the Tribunal a copy of the fax that they received from the Government

with the approved words of President Frei’s message.””*

134. The Claimants take issue with the statement of the Respondent that “the
laws and regulations that govern urban planning and development in Chile — and in
particular modifications to the PMRS — are simple and transparent.”*° It is the opinion of
the Claimants that contrary to what the Respondent maintains, a sectional plan was an
appropriate instrument to modify the PMRS. According to them, this instrument
proposed by a municipality is not dependent on the MINVU for its initiation or
completion: “When a sectional plan is filed with the MINVU, the SEREMI is required to

analyze the request and forward it to the CORE with a favorable or unfavorable report.”””

135. The Claimants point out that uncertainty and confusion in the urban
planning and development are also evident in respect of the recently proposed
Modification No. 48 to the PMRS.** The CORE approved said modification by
Resolution No. 14/2003. However, the Contraloria General has refused to accept the
legality of the resolution “ruling that the CORE exceeded its authority by attempting to
regulate rural lands located outside of the established urban limits.” The decision has

been appealed by CORE..

°S Thid., para. 58.

°6 Tbid., para. 70.

°T Ibid., para. 71.

°S This modification of the PMRS permits Zonas de Desarrollo Urbano Condicionado in the area South of Santiago
that includes Pirque.

°° Reply, para. 72.

42

136. In the opinion of the Claimants, Modification No. 48 contradicts the
arguments of the Respondent as regards the uniqueness of Pirque from an environmental
point of view: “It demonstrates that Pirque is not a unique “key sector” that must be
exempted from urban development to protect the so called “environmental filter” of the

Santiago metropolitan region.”!”

The Claimants point out that it is striking that
“MINVU chose to submit a Declaracién de Impacto Ambiental (“DIA”), which involves
a lower level of environmental analysis than an EIS, even though Modification No. 48
would introduce sweeping changes to the use of land throughout the Santiago
Metropolitan Region, affecting over 34,000 hectares in comparison with the 600 hectares
covered by the Municipality of Pirque’s sectional plan. Further, the MINVU’s DIA is
much more vague and general than the EIS submitted with the sectional plan. Yet, in
stark contrast to the way the COREMA treated the EIS submitted by the Municipality of
Pirque, the COREMA concluded, after evaluating the DIA submitted by MINVU, that
the proposed modification of the PMRS would not generate any relevant adverse

environmental impacts.”"”!

137. The Claimants consider “disingenuous” the argument put forward by the
Respondent to the effect that the Claimants should have requested an amendment of the
PMRS instead of designing a sectional plan “because the Respondent made clear that it
would not allow realization of the Project under any procedure. MTD and the
Municipality of Pirque attempted the procedure of a sectional plan only after the MINVU

indicated that it would not initiate such a change itself and the Respondent, through the

1 Thid., para. 84.
101 Thid., para. 85.

43

MINVU, declined repeatedly to provide any guidance regarding the proper procedures to

be followed to modify the PMRS.”!

138. The Respondent argues that the Claimants cannot excuse their failure to
comply with the law by alleging ignorance of the law. The law was clear, the plot of land
in the Fundo EI Principal was exclusively for silvoagropecuario use and the foreign
investment contracts grant investors only the authorizations provided therein.'”
Referring to the cases decided by other arbitral tribunals relied on by the Claimants, the
Respondent affirms that “[i]n contrast, MTD never had any right to carry out its Project,
which was always contingent on the obtaining of the relevant authorizations by means of
the procedure established by law. MTD did not understand or did not want to understand
the regulations in force, choosing instead to follow procedures clearly contrary to the

law.7!%4

139. The Respondent points out that the two communications of 1998 that refer
to the November 6, 1996 meeting “were prepared and sent before any controversy existed
between MTD and the Government, which thus belying [sic] MTD’s argument that this
meeting has been fabricated by the Government.”!> The Respondent also addresses the
Claimants’ assertion that they did not receive any warning regarding the feasibility of
their investment project before signing the Foreign Investment Contract and that if “MTD

had been told in 1996 that the Project was not feasible, it would never have invested in

'© Ibid, para. 118.

13 Rejoinder, paras. 5-7.
1 Tid. para. 9.

105 Thid., para. 27.

44

the Project.” The Respondent comments that “this argument is based on an erroneous
assumption that the Government of Chile had the obligation to warn MTD about the
feasibility of its project before it invested. In fact, it was MTD that had the obligation to
obtain the necessary information regarding the legal and technical feasibility of its
project. This is particularly true, given that this information was public, transparent, and
readily available.”'°° The Respondent points out the failure of the Claimants to mention
that, ’under the legislation in force at that time, it was possible, though difficult and not
guaranteed, to obtain a modification of the PMRS, and that MTD tried to obtain such a

modification by means of an erroneous procedure that necessarily led to its rejection.”!”

140. The Respondent rebuts the argument that their officials were unresponsive
to the Claimants’ requests for assistance. In fact, “Due to the evident lack of competence
of MTD’s consultants, Mr. Carvacho and Mr. Leppe offered to assist the company by
guiding them through the steps necessary to attempt a modification of the PMRS, but

MTD never took them up on this offer.”

141. The Respondent reaffirms that it had no obligation to modify the PMRS
and to allow the Project to proceed. Every step taken by the Respondent’s officials was
taken in accordance to the law, including the rejection of the Sectional Plan. Sectional
plans cannot alter or modify the norm established by instruments of a higher hierarchy
and the modification of the PMRS was inconvenient because the MINVU SEREMI was

undertaking the study of the Regional Plan of Urban Development (“PRDU”). As

106 Thid., para. 30.
107 Thid., para. 36.
108 Thid., para. 69.

45

 Tbid.,

"° Ibid.

explained by the Respondent, “The PRDU is the urban planning instrument that
establishes the roles of the urban centers, their gravitational areas of reciprocal influence,
gravitational relations, and growth targets, among others.”' The study of PRDU for the
Santiago Metropolitan Region had began in 1994 after the entry into force of the PMRS,

and “it was being analyzed in 1998.”!"°

142. The contention that, according to Chilean law, the SEREMI had an
obligation to forward the sectional plan to the CORE contradicts the LGUC which
establishes the legal procedure for the elaboration of the norms of the PMRS, “what the
CORE approved or rejected was a proposal of the SEREMI and not a proposal of any
other agency. The CORE did not have the power to consider or approve planning
proposals of any other entities, including the sectional plans presented by the

municipalities.”!"!

143. The Respondent admits that “Chilean urban planning regulations are
complex, given their highly technical nature, but they are comprehensible, a diligent
investor would require competent professional assistance, as would a domestic

: sl 12
investor.

In any case, the Respondent argues that “complexity neither excuses MTD’s
negligence nor justifies MTD’s attempts to circumvent the legally established procedures.

MTD never followed these procedures but rather chose to evade them. MTD presented a

Sectional Plan, through the Municipality of Pirque, to modify the provisions of the

para, 83.

"! Rejoinder, para. 75.

'? Tbid.,

para, 93.

46

PMRS, even though it was well informed that [sic] procedure was contrary to the

regulations in force.”'"?

144. Respondent defends Modification No. 48 as proof of the evolution of the
urban planning framework in Santiago: “Land use regulation and the policies adopted in
these matters in the Santiago Metropolitan Area can evolve over time. That evolution is
carried out within a transparent administrative system, which mandates consultation with,
and approval of, multiple government agencies [...] All the modifications [between 1997
and 2002] were the result of the procedures established under Chilean law and sought the

public welfare of all the population.”'*

145. Chile argues that “The fact that the General Finance office of the
Republic''® has formulated observations to the resolution [sic] approves [sic] that
Modification No. 48 does not demonstrate to the ‘uncertainty and confusion related to the
tules governing development and urban planning in Chile, [...] it demonstrates the
functioning of the administrative regime and the Chilean democracy, and that the mere
fact that the authority proposes modifications to the norm is no guarantee they will be
implemented. This does not imply arbitrary conduct, but the normal process of creation

of standards under a democratic and transparent system.”!'°

146. According to the Respondent, it is wrong to characterize Modification No.

48 as a means to allow large-scale urban development in the area of Pirque. The

"3 bid.

"4 Tbid.,

para. 95.

"5 Contraloria General de la Reptiblica.
"6 Rejoinder, para. 96.

47

Respondent maintains that “MTD diminishes the impact of the conditions imposed on the
development of new projects. In fact, Modification No. 48 would eventually allow the
implementation of Conditional Urban Development Projects, only after the fulfillment of
much stricter requirements than those previously imposed on any other housing project in
the Santiago Metropolitan Area; the projects would have to be subjected to feasibility
studies regarding basic conditions of location, size and profile of the proposal. These
studies would be carried out by the municipalities where the project is located, by the
SEREMI of Agriculture and the SEREMI of Housing. Subsequently, with the unanimous
approval of those three agencies, the project would enter a technical evaluation phase by
the SEREMI of Housing, which would have to determine if seven determinant conditions
are fulfilled...the mere fulfillment of the requirements established in Modification No. 48

would not authorize the modification of land use.”!!7

147. For the Respondent, it is clear that Modification No. 48 would make it
more difficult for large-scale real estate projects to be carried out in areas currently
outside urban limits, since, as the Respondent explains, they “would have to go through
two different and consecutive stages: first, they will have to fulfill the new requirements
established in Modification No. 48 and, second, they will have to abide by the rules
currently in place for PMRS modification. Between 1996 and 1998, however, MTD

would only have had to fulfill this second stage.”"!®

"7 Thid., paras. 99-100.
"8 Thid., para. 101.

48

148. In the Rejoinder, Chile re-affirms its right to require that MTD comply
with Chilean environmental and urban planning regulations. The Project “constituted an
inappropriate attempt to use a Sectional Plan to modify the land use restrictions
established by the PMRS for that Municipality”. This was correctly pointed out by the
COREMA and “under article 16 of the General Law on the Environment, COREMA had

the obligation to reject it.”!"°

149. From these allegations, three key issues emerge: the significance of the
November 6, 1996 meeting, the scope of the approval by the FIC, and the conduct of the
Claimants as diligent investors. The Tribunal will now consider them in that sequence.

(iii) The November 6, 1996 meeting

150. The Respondent has attributed particular importance to the meeting
allegedly held with “Malaysian businessmen” on November 6, 1996 in order to show the
reckless behavior of the Claimants in proceeding to invest notwithstanding warnings of
the obstacles that their investment would face. The Claimants contest that such meeting
ever took place. As proof of that meeting, there is the word “Malaysia” in the calendar of
Minister Hermosilla and reference made to the meeting in two documents of the
Respondent dated two years later. There are no briefings prior to the meeting, nor written
record of what was discussed, nor any contemporaneous written record of who attended
the meeting. Neither Minister Hermosilla nor SEREMI Gonzalez could determine

whether any of the MTD representatives who attended the hearings in Washington were

"9 Tid, para. 105.

49

one of the “Malaysian businessmen” that allegedly attended the November 6, 1996

meeting.

151. This notwithstanding, the Respondent has described in considerable detail
the terms of the exchanges that took place at such meeting in the Counter-Memorial and
the Rejoinder and so did Messrs. Hermosilla and Gonzalez in their testimony. The
Malaysian representatives of the Claimants, except for Mr. Lee, have presented their
passports as proof that none of them was in Chile at the time. Mr. Lee lost his passport,
but he was present at the Washington hearings when Messrs. Hermosilla and Gonzalez

testified.

152. Given the factual controversy surrounding this meeting, the Tribunal will
analyze the situation with and without the meeting and to what extent the conduct of the
parties is consequent with the statements allegedly made by Chilean officials and the

Claimants’ representatives.

153. The alleged meeting of November 6, 1996 is one of many meetings that
took place before and after that date between representatives of the Claimants and
Chilean Government officials. Representatives of the Claimants met with Mr. Morales of
the FIC on May 16 and with Mr. Guerra of SERVIU on May 17, 1996. The timing of the
November 6 meeting coincides with the resumption during that month of negotiations of
MTD, through the firm Vial & Palma, with Mr. Fontaine, which led to the signature of
the Promissory Contract on November 21, 1996. Hence, the importance attributed to the

meeting by the Respondent to show that the Claimants had been warned about the

50

existing difficulties to build the Project by Chilean officials at the highest level and at an

early stage of the Claimants’ decision-making on the Project.

154. According to the Counter-Memorial, “Upon hearing that MTD had
selected Pirque as the location for its Project, SEREMI Gonzalez informed Minister
Hermosilla that the Project was not feasible. Minister Hermosilla conveyed this point to
MTD, explaining that the PMRS, which categorically forbade urban development in
Pirque, posed a serious impediment to the Project. He added that the PMRS could not be
circumvented and that the only way to develop a real estate project in Pirque was by
modifying the PMRS.””° Allegedly, the process for modifying the PMRS was explained
to the Claimants at their own request. SEREMI Gonzalez, “the official with sole

authority to initiate the modification process,”"”!

explained that “because the Project was
inconsistent with the goals of the PMRS, one of which was to promote urban
densification, the office of the SEREMI would not be able to sponsor the project before
CORE.”!” Mr. Hermosilla also suggested that “MTD find an alternative location for its

Project.’!?

155. This record of the meeting provided by the Respondent will be considered

by the Tribunal in the context of the subsequent conduct of the parties.

156. The FIC approved the first request of the Claimants for foreign investment

related to the Project on March 3, 1997. On March 18, 1997, the corresponding Foreign

20 Counter-Memorial, para. 25.

ny
12 y

3 Ibid.

bid.,
bid.

para. 27.

Sl

Investment Contract was signed. A second request for investment was approved by the
FIC on April 8, 1997 and another Foreign Investment Contract signed on May 13, 1997.
On September 29, 1997, the President of Chile at a state dinner in honor of the Prime
Minister of Malaysia praised the Project as innovative and “a tangible demonstration that
people may fully profit from the favorable conditions that the governments are creating”.
Then the next day the office of the President of Chile sent a public statement in similar
terms to be read at the ceremony to inaugurate the Project in Pirque after canceling his

appearance because of a meeting with the President of Brazil.

157. The Respondent alleges that the statement of the President intended to be
read at the inauguration had been officially withdrawn. There is no evidence of such
withdrawal nor of any disclaimer to this effect after the statement was actually read at the
inauguration. It is also claimed now by the Respondent that the President cancelled his
attendance at the inauguration at the request of the new Minister of MINVU, Mr.
Henriquez, and that the actual reason for the cancellation of the President’s attendance
was that: “Having learned of the difficulties that MTD’s project faced and of the
warnings that his predecessor had imparted to MTD, Minister Henriquez believed that
President Frei’s presence at the ceremony could be misinterpreted, and therefore urged
the President not to attend.”'*4 It is undisputed that the Claimants were not informed at
the time of the real reason for the cancellation of the President’s appearance or the
alleged withdrawal of his statement. They have apparently learned about it during the

course of these proceedings. Given that President Frei spoke at the state dinner only the

4 Counter-Memorial, para. 59.

52

evening before, there was no reason to suspect that there were other reasons for the
cancellation of the President’s appearance. The Respondent does not seem to have acted
in accordance with the allegedly clear warnings given to representatives of the Claimants

on November 6, 1996.

158. The Claimants’ own actions contradict also the allegation of what was said
at the November 6 meeting assuming that it took place. Irrespective of the inconsequent
business decisions taken notwithstanding the alleged clear warnings of the Respondent, a
matter to which the Tribunal will turn later, the Claimants, in their dealings with Mr.
Fontaine, sought protection in respect of the approval of their investment by the FIC.
They conditioned the taking effect of the Promissory Contract to the FIC’s approval of
the transfer of funds. It would seem reasonable to assume that, if the statements made to
them by Minister Hermosilla and SEREMI Gonzalez had been as clear as alleged, the
Claimants would have protected themselves accordingly by looking for another site or
canceling the proposed investment altogether. It would have been equally
inconsequential for the Claimants to seek the FIC’s approval for an investment
considered unfeasible by high level officials of the Respondent. The Tribunal will have

further to say about the Claimants’ diligence.

159. The scope of the approval of the first two investments of the Claimants by
the FIC is a key element in the consideration of whether the Respondent fulfilled its
obligation to treat the Claimants fairly and equitably and the Tribunal will turn to this
question now. At this point, the Tribunal is only concerned with the actual approval of

the inflow of funds for the Project and with the fact that Chile entered into the Foreign

53

Investment Contracts with the Claimants. The Tribunal will discuss later the claim that
Chile breached the Foreign Investment Contracts and, by operation of the MFN clause,
the BIT.

(iv) Significance of the Approval of the FIC

160. The parties disagree on the meaning of the approval of the investment by
the FIC under DL 600 and the significance of the absence of the Minister responsible for
the sector of the proposed investment from the meeting where the investment was
approved. Chile maintains that approval by the FIC does not mean more than an
authorization to import funds into the country. The description of the project in the
application to the FIC is too brief for it to be significant to the approval of the investment
and it would be, in any case, beyond the scope of the FIC’s authority to attribute to its

approval any other meaning.

161. According to Chile, who attends the meeting of the FIC is not important
provided there is a quorum for the meeting and the provisions of DL 600 do not require
that the sector Minister concerned be part of the quorum. In fact, according to the
Respondent, the practice of the FIC is that the sector Ministers do not attend the FIC
meetings except in the case of some sectors, e.g. mining, and that the documents related
to an investment are not distributed to the sector Ministers before a FIC meeting nor is
notice of the meeting sent to the non-permanent members of the FIC. In any case, argues
Chile, even if the Minister of MINVU had attended, the outcome would have been the
same given the limited role that the FIC plays. On the other hand, the Claimants consider

the approval of the FIC to be the approval of the investment and of the Project at the

54

described location, and to give them the right to develop the site. They attribute to the
absence of the Minister of MINVU from the meeting of the FIC that approved the

Project, the subsequent obstacles against which otherwise they would have been alerted.

162. DL 600 confers on the FIC the power to approve on behalf of “the Chilean
State the inflow of foreign capital under this Decree-Law and to stipulate the terms and
conditions of the corresponding contracts” (Article 12). The FIC members are all at the
ministerial level except for the president of the Central Bank (Article 13). Decisions are
taken by simple majority and a quorum for a meeting requires only the presence of any
three members (Article 14). In order for the FIC to exercise its functions, the Executive
Vice-Presidency is responsible, inter alia, for the coordination of foreign investments and
to carry out and expedite the procedures required by public institutions that must report or
grant their authorization prior to the approval of the applications submitted to the FIC
(Article 15). The applications require the investor to specify the location of the
investment and the requirement is repeated in the non-negotiable standard foreign
investment contract. It is this contract that, in terms of DL 600, evidences the
authorization of the FIC (Article 3). A change in the location of the investment would

require a change in the contract and hence, the approval of the FIC.

163. The Tribunal considers that the ministerial membership of the FIC is by
itself proof of the importance that Chile attributes to its function, and it is consequent
with the objective to coordinate foreign investment at the highest level of the Ministries
concerned. It is also evident from the DL 600 that the FIC is required to carry out a

minimum of diligence internally and externally. Approval of a Project in a location

55

would give prima facie to an investor the expectation that the project is feasible in that
location from a regulatory point of view. The practice whereby the non-permanent
member of the FIC is not notified of the FIC meetings and no information is distributed
to the Minister concerned prior to the meetings, when followed consistently, may impair
seriously the coordination function of the FIC. This is not to say that approval of a
project in a particular location entitles the investor to develop that site without further
governmental approval. The Foreign Investment Contracts are clear in that respect and
this matter is dealt with separately in this award. What the Tribunal emphasizes here is
the inconsistency of action between two arms of the same Government vis-d-vis the same
investor even when the legal framework of the country provides for a mechanism to
coordinate. This is even more so, if, as affirmed by the Respondent, the presence of the
MINVU Minister in the FIC meeting where the investment was approved would not have

made a difference.

164. Chile has argued that each organ of the Government has certain
responsibilities, that it is not its function to carry out due diligence regarding the legal and
technical feasibility of a project for investors, and that this is the investors’ responsibility.
The Tribunal agrees that it is the responsibility of the investor to assure itself that it is
properly advised, particularly when investing abroad in an unfamiliar environment.
However, in the case before us, Chile is not a passive party and the coherent action of the
various officials through which Chile acts is the responsibility of Chile, not of the
investor. Whether the Claimants acted responsibly or diligently in reaching a decision to

invest in Chile is another question.

56

165. The Claimants contacted officials of the Respondent from the very
beginning in May 1996. It is only in June 1998, almost two years after the supposed
November 6, 1996 meeting, that the SEREMI Gonzalez informed the Claimants in
writing about the policy against changing the zoning of El Principal and modifying the
PMRS, and Minister Henriquez rejected the Project. Chile claims that it had no
obligation to inform the Claimants and that the Claimants should have found out by
themselves what the regulations and policies of the country were. The Tribunal agrees
with this statement as a matter of principle, but Chile also has an obligation to act
coherently and apply its policies consistently, independently of how diligent an investor
is. Under international law (the law that this Tribunal has to apply to a dispute under the

BIT), the State of Chile needs to be considered by the Tribunal as a unit.

166. The Tribunal is satisfied, based on the evidence presented to it, that
approval of an investment by the FIC for a project that is against the urban policy of the
Government is a breach of the obligation to treat an investor fairly and equitably. In this
respect, whether the meeting of November 6, 1996 took place or not does not affect the
outcome of these considerations. In fact, if it did take place, it is even more inexplicable
that the FIC would approve the investment and the first two Foreign Investment
Contracts would be signed. Minister Hermosilla and the FIC were different channels of
communication of the Respondent with outside parties, but, for purposes of the
obligations of Chile under the BIT, they represented Chile as a unit, as a monolith, to use

the Respondent’s term.

57

167. This conclusion of the Tribunal does not mean that Chile is responsible for
the consequences of unwise business decisions or for the lack of diligence of the investor.
Its responsibility is limited to the consequences of its own actions to the extent they
breached the obligation to treat the Claimants fairly and equitably. The Tribunal will
now address the alleged Claimants’ lack of diligence and of prudent business judgment
raised by the Respondent.

Ww The issue of the Claimants’ diligence

168. The lack of diligence of the Claimants alleged by the Respondent rests on
the trust placed in Mr. Fontaine, the lack of adequate professional advice in the urban
sector and the acceptance of an exorbitant land valuation at the time they made the

investment.

169. The Respondent contends that the Claimants decided to invest in Chile
without conducting meaningful due diligence. They relied on self-serving statements of
Mr. Fontaine that the land was unproductive and could be readily re-zoned, “particularly

"> If the Claimants had made “even the most

if it would attract foreign investment
rudimentary of inquiries” they would have learned that Pirque actually possesses high-
quality agricultural land and plays an important role in the environmental health of the
Metropolitan Region. They would have also learned about the PMRS adopted just two
years earlier which “expressly prohibited urban development in Pirque and designated it

1126

as an exclusive silvoagropecuario zone. The Respondent finds it striking that the

25 Tid. para. 8.
26 Thid., para. 9.

58

two-man team of the Claimants arrived at its favorable recommendation to invest in Chile
after only four days in the country, particularly when it is considered that the investment

in El Principal “appears to have been MTD’s first venture outside of Southeast Asia.”!””

170. The Respondent contrasts the practices of the Claimants with those
followed by diligent foreign investors. Normally, “foreign investors routinely seek
contractual protections against losses arising from difficulties in obtaining governmental
authorizations by incorporating related representations and warranties, covenants,

28 The Claimants

conditions precedent or subsequent, or other protective provisions’
proceeded to enter into the Promissory Contract “despite a cursory understanding of
Chile’s foreign investment laws, a flawed land appraisal, warnings from government
officials regarding land use issues, and apparently no additional professional advice
regarding the risks inherent to its proposed development of a satellite city on land

restricted to urban development.”!””

171. The Respondent draws attention to other arbitral awards not mentioned in
Judge Schwebel’s opinion. The Respondent refers to the need of an arbitral tribunal to
take into account, quoting from the award in American Manufacturing & Trading v.

Republic of Zaire, the “existing conditions of the [host] country”'*°

when applying the
standards of a bilateral investment treaty: “In Chile, zoning modifications, such as those

required for the PMRS, involve a lengthy administrative process —a process that Chilean

"27 Ibid. paras. 9 and 11.

128
129

Ibid., para. 29.
Ibid

'39 ICSID Case No. ARB/93/1, 36 LL.M. 1531, at 1553 (1997).

59

Government officials explained to MTD at length.”'*' The Respondent also refers to
Azinian'” to emphasize that the Claimants, like the claimants in that case, were “alien to
the host State’s business environment, had not secured the resources and services needed
to implement the Project, and had not commissioned “any feasibility study worth the

name.”!*

172. The Respondent emphasizes that the Claimants accepted as true the
representations made by Mr. Fontaine that the land use restrictions on the Fundo El
Principal could be modified and did not carry any further investigation to verify their
validity.'** They also accepted the valuation of the land done by Banco Sud Americano
on the assumption that the land would be re-zoned for urban use and without specific

identification of the 600 hectare plot that the Claimants were interested in buying.'*°

173. The Respondent criticizes the assumptions underlying the valuation of Mr.
Fontaine’s land done by Banco Sud Americano. In the first place, the valuation ignored
the limitations imposed by the PMRS and “the appraisers assumed, without any analysis
or explanation, that the land in El Principal would be re-zoned for urban use.” According
to the Respondent, had the Claimants made “even the most primitive attempt to conduct
reasonable due diligence and consult with any urban planner, environmental expert,

architect, or, at the very least, a lawyer experienced in real estate development issues, the

‘5! Counter-Memorial, para. 109.

132

Robert Azinian et al. v. The United Mexican States, \CSID (AF) Case N. ARB (AF)97/2, ICSID REV. —Foreign

INV. L.J. 538 (1999).

'33 Counter-Memorial, para. 111.
'4 Rejoinder, para. 14.

'85 Thid., paras. 24-25.

60

erroneous nature of the appraisal’s re-zoning assumption would have been imparted to

MTD’s representatives.”"* 6

174. The appraisal also assumed that the road known as the Paseo Pie Andino
would be built within five years, and “improperly suggested that the mere proposal of the
unrealized Project raised the value of the land and erroneously assumed that the land
could be divided into “parcelas de agrado” of 0.5 hectares.” In fact, after the passage of

the PMRS, the minimum subdivision possible was four hectares.'*”

175. The Claimants decided on the value of the land only on the basis of that
appraisal without considering the specific value of the 600 hectares that would be the
basis of the initial investment, or how the value of the land was affected by the existing
road system, or applicable zoning restrictions. According to the Respondent, if a more
“exacting land appraisal” had been conducted, the Claimants, would have discovered that
the value of the 600-hectare area proposed for development under the Project was

between US$ 4.1 and US$ 4.6 million.'**

176. It is clear from the record that no specialist in urban development was
contacted by the Claimants until the deal had been closed. The firms contacted thereafter,
to the extent that there is a contemporary written record, do not seem to have been as

clear as they are now in their testimony about the difficulty of changing the zoning. The

'86 Counter-Memorial, para. 20.
'37 Tid. para. 22.
18 Tid. para. 23.

61

only thing that emerges with certainty is that the Claimants were in a hurry to start the

Project.

177. The Claimants apparently did not appreciate the fact that Mr. Fontaine
may have had a conflict of interest with the Claimants for purposes of developing El
Principal. He played lightly to them the significance of the zoning changes and they
seem to have accepted at first hand Mr. Fontaine’s judgment. The price paid for the land
was based on the Project going ahead and it was paid up-front without any link to the

progress of the Project.

178. The BITs are not an insurance against business risk’? and the Tribunal
considers that the Claimants should bear the consequences of their own actions as
experienced businessmen. Their choice of partner, the acceptance of a land valuation
based on future assumptions without protecting themselves contractually in case the
assumptions would not materialize, including the issuance of the required development
permits, are risks that the Claimants took irrespective of Chile’s actions.

2. Breach of the BIT by Breach of the Foreign Investment Contracts

179. The Claimants argue that the Respondent’s failure to observe its
contractual obligations, “constitutes a breach of its treaty obligation to observe the
contractual obligations it undertook regarding MTD’s investment. Because the breach at
issue is a breach of an international obligation, the matter is governed, first and foremost,
by international law. To the extent that the issue turns on the scope of the obligations

'89 “the Tribunal must emphasize that Bilateral Investment Treaties are not insurance policies against bad business
judgments.” Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/7 para. 69.

62

arising out of the Foreign Investment Contracts, the Contract must be interpreted in
accordance with its plain language and the general principles of contract law, in keeping
with the internationalization of contract obligations [...] This conclusion is particularly
relevant in this case, because the Foreign Investment Contracts do not contain a choice-

of-law clause.”!“°

180. The Claimants emphasize the fact that the Foreign Investment Contracts

' The location of

were contracts of adhesion because their terms were not negotiable.'*
the Project in Pirque was “a fundamental assumption of the bargain between MTD and
the State of Chile. MTD had a right to that location, and the State of Chile had a
correlative obligation to take such steps as might be necessary to permit the use of that
location for the development of the Project. The State of Chile breached that obligation
by blocking the development of the Project on the ground that it was to be located in the
very place designated in the Contracts.” '? The refusal of the Respondent to re-zone the
area concerned “frustrated the rights and legitimate expectations of MTD under the
Foreign Investment Contracts and treated the entire Foreign Investment Application

procedure as an empty formality.”'?

181. The Claimants also argue that the approval of the investment in Pirque has
the effect of approving the location of the Project and that the reference in clause Four of

the Foreign Investment Contracts to “other” authorizations refers to authorizations other

140 Reply, para. 104.
‘5! Memorial, para. 109.

'? Ibid.

'S Ibid.

para. 110.

63

than those granted in the Foreign Investment Contracts themselves: “it would be the
height of bad faith to construe Clause Fourth [sic] as giving the State of Chile the power
to destroy the basis of the bargain by erasing, after the fact, the very object of the

investment as specified in the Contracts.”!“*

182. As regards the obligation to grant the necessary permits for an authorized
investment, the Claimants affirm that “the Respondent is obligated under the Treaty to
grant the necessary permits to the extent that doing so is consistent with its laws and
regulations. The Respondent cannot seriously contend that modifying the PMRS to
permit large-scale urban development project in Pirque would have been inconsistent
with Chilean laws and regulations, for that is precisely what the Respondent is trying to

do, on a far larger scale, through Modification No. 48.”"*°

183. Chile argues that, even if Article 3(1) of the BIT between Chile and
Denmark were applicable, it has not been proven by the Claimants that Chile has violated
its obligations under that provision and “under international law, the violation of a

contract does not suppose an ipso facto violation of an international treaty.”'“°

184. Chile considers that it has complied with its obligations under the Foreign
Investment Contracts and that the mere mention of El Principal in the Foreign Investment
Contracts did not grant the Claimants an unfettered right to develop the Project in that

location. The authorization granted by the FIC under DL 600 is only an authorization to

'4 Ibid. para. 111.
'45 Reply, para. 117.
'46 Rejoinder, para. 126.

64

transfer capital and it is without prejudice and independent from other authorizations that
may be required under Chilean law. Foreign investors have no right to a preferential
treatment vis-d-vis local investors: “Just as a domestic investor cannot obtain a waiver of

the PMRS by executive fiat, neither could MTD.”""

185. Based on statements made by Chile in the Counter-Memorial, the
Claimants point out that the Respondent refused “for reasons of ‘inconvenience’” even
“to consider taking the administrative actions necessary to permit urban development on
the piece of land designated in the Contracts, a result that was entirely in its power and
discretion to achieve [...] To this it may now be added that, under the Respondent’s own
version of the facts, the State of Chile entered into Foreign Investment Contracts with the

intent that it would not allow the Project to be built in Pirque.”'**

186. The Claimants contest that the scope of the Foreign Investment Contracts
is governed by Chilean law and that under that law the FIC did not have “the capacity or
authority to approve the nature and location of the investment project”.'*” The Claimants
state that “Under basic principles of international law, the State of Chile may not evade
its international responsibility by invoking any alleged insufficiency in the authority of
the organ through which it acted.”"*° The Claimants also contest the argument that DL
600 guarantees treatment as a national investor and that they would have received better

treatment if authorization of the investment and the Foreign Investment Contract would

'§7 Counter-Memorial, para. 124.
'48 Reply, para. 105.

' Thid., para. 107.

'90 Thid., para. 108.

65

have given them the right to the modification of the PMRS. The Claimants argue that,
under the BIT, they are “entitled to certain standards of treatment even if the State of
Chile chooses not to extend the same treatment to its own national investors [...] [L]ocal
investors are not eligible to enter into foreign investment contracts and hence cannot
receive any of the special guarantees or advantages that DL 600 authorizes [...] [T]he
principle of non-discrimination under Article 9 of DL 600 protects foreign investors from
worse treatment than that accorded to national investors; it does not prevent them from

receiving the benefits provided in the foreign investment contracts,”'*!

187. The Tribunal considers the legal basis of the claim valid based on the wide
scope of the MFN clause in the BIT, as already discussed. The Tribunal notes the
statement of the Respondent that under international law the breach of a contractual
obligation is not ipso facto a breach of a treaty. Under the BIT, by way of the MFN
clause, this is what the parties had agreed. The Tribunal has to apply the BIT. The
breach of the BIT is governed by international law. However, to establish the facts of the
breach, it will be necessary to consider the contractual obligations undertaken by the

Respondent and the Claimants and what their scope was under Chilean law.

188. The Tribunal has found that Chile treated unfairly and inequitably the
Claimants by authorizing an investment that could not take place for reasons of its urban
policy. The Claimants have based their arguments on the fact that “the location of the
Project was a fundamental assumption of the bargain between MTD and the State of

Chile. MTD had a right to that location, and the State of Chile had a correlative

'S! Thid., para. 109.

66

152

obligation to take such steps as might be necessary to permit the use of that location for
the development of the Project.”'** The Tribunal accepts that the authorization to invest
in Chile is not a blanket authorization but only the initiation of a process to obtain the
necessary permits and approvals from the various agencies and departments of the
Government. It also accepts that the Government has to proceed in accordance with its
own laws and policies in awarding such permits and approvals. Clause Four of the
Foreign Investment Contracts would be meaningless if it were otherwise. Therefore, the
Tribunal finds that Chile did not breach the BIT on account of breach of the Foreign

Investment Contracts.

189. As already discussed under fair and equitable treatment, what is
unacceptable for the Tribunal is that an investment would be approved for a particular
location specified in the application and the subsequent contract when the objective of the
investment is against the policy of the Government. Even accepting the limited
significance of the Foreign Investment Contracts for purposes of other permits and
approvals that may required, they should be at least in themselves an indication that, from
the Government’s point of view, the Project is not against Government policy.

3. Unreasonable and Discriminatory Measures

190. The argument of the Claimants regarding unreasonable and discriminatory
measures is based on Article 3(3) of the Croatia BIT. This Article provides:

“Each Contracting Party shall protect within its territory investments made in

accordance with its laws and regulations by investors of the other Contracting

Memorial, para. 110.

67

Party and shall not impair by unreasonable or discriminatory measures the
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment, extension, sale and liquidation of

such investments.”

191. The Claimants allege that the unfair and inequitable measures described
earlier are also unreasonable and that the Respondent’s “refusal to re-zone the El
Principal Estate in Pirque to permit construction of the Project is discriminatory because
the State of Chile has permitted construction of other large-scale real-estate projects in

the Chacabuco area, north of Santiago.”!

192. Furthermore, the Claimants maintain that the acceptance and approval of
an environmental impact declaration (DIA) by COREMA in support of Modification No.
48 “illustrates the State of Chile’s unreasonable and discriminatory treatment of the EIS

submitted by the Municipality of Pirque in support of the proposed Sectional Plan.”!**

193. According to the Respondent, none of the modifications to the PMRS
referred to by the Claimants were achieved through sectional plans and followed the
standard PMRS modification procedure. Furthermore, Modification No. 48 “will make
the completion of large real estate projects more — rather than less — difficult in the

Metropolitan Region of Santiago.”'*°

194. The Respondent finds also inadmissible the comparison of the EIS with

the DIA prepared for Modification No. 48. An EIS is only required by the existing

'53 Memorial, para. 115.

154

Reply, para. 115.

'S5 Rejoinder, paras. 5-7.

68

environmental regulation when projects entail significant environmental impacts.’ In
contrast to the environmental consequences of the Project, “Modification No. 48 would
not generate direct impacts on the environment, it would set out conditions for the
development of future Urban Conditional Development Projects”. Projects presented
under Modification No. 48 will still need an EIS and satisfy “a more demanding

environmental evaluation than that applied to the Sectional Plan for Pirque.”!*”

195. The Respondent explains the justification given by COREMA to reject the
EIS. First of all, the COREMA followed the prescribed procedure. It accepted the EIS
for review within five days of receipt because prima facie there were no evident
administrative errors. The next step was to consult with other Government agencies with
jurisdiction over environmental matters. This is what COREMA did in the case of
MTD’s EIS. COREMA issued a negative evaluation regarding the substance of the EIS
only after “consulting with other agencies about the environmental impacts of MTD’s

Project.’!**

The Project was inconsistent with the PMRS, which for purposes of
evaluating an environmental impact study is considered an environmental regulation, and,

hence, the Project failed to comply with environmental regulations. The EIS also failed

to address identified environmental obstacles and was extremely vague.'?

196. Toa certain extent, this claim has been considered by the Tribunal as part

of the fair and equitable treatment. The approval of an investment against the

186 Thid., para. 108.

'S7 Thid., paras. 110-111.

'5§ Counter-Memorial, para. 153.
'9 Thid., para. 154.

69

Government urban policy can be equally considered unreasonable. On the other hand,
the changes of the PMRS related to Chacabuco or more recently Modification 48, as
explained by the Respondent, do not dispense with specific changes of the PMRS when
the land is zoned of “silvoagropecuario interest”. Therefore, there is no basis for
considering the modifications made to PMRS as discriminatory. The Tribunal is also
satisfied by the explanation regarding the rejection of the EIS by COREMA.
4. Failure to Grant Necessary Permits

197. This claim is based on the Croatia BIT by way of the MFN clause of the
BIT. Article 3(2) of the Croatia BIT reads as follows: “When a Contracting Party has
admitted an investment in its territory, it shall grant the necessary permits in accordance

with its laws and regulations.”

198. The Claimants consider that this “clause obligates the State, once the
investment is approved, to grant the necessary permits to the investor, in accordance with

the country’s laws and regulations.”!®

And further, “At the very minimum, this
provision obligates the [S]tate of Chile to grant to MTD such permits as may be
necessary to cover those aspects of the investment that were specifically considered by
the [S]tate in admitting the investment. Accordingly, if a formal re-zoning permit is
required for the development of the Project and if that permit can only take the form of an

amendment of the PMRS, the [S]tate of Chile is required by the quoted provision [Article

3(2)] to grant such permit by adopting such an amendment to the PMRS.”!“!

10 Memorial, para. 118.
'6l Thid., para. 119.

70

199. While the Claimants realize that permits must be granted in accordance
with the laws and regulations of the State and that the PMRS is one such regulation, they
consider that, to use such reasoning, misses the point: “It is the modification of the PMRS
— which is entirely within the State of Chile’s discretion — that is at issue here. There is
nothing in the State of Chile’s laws or regulations that would prevent the [S]tate of Chile
from modifying the PMRS to allow the Project to be fulfilled [...] The State of Chile
refused to make such modification not because it lacked the power to do so, but because
it chose not to do it for reasons of policy. Any interpretation that allowed the State to do
just that would turn the treaty obligation to grant necessary permits for an approved

99162

investment into a dead letter. On the other hand, when Chile had the will to modify

the PMRS, it found a way to justify it.

200. The Respondent dismisses the Claimants’ statement that no legal norm
prevented Chile from modifying the PMRS to allow the carrying out of the Project.'% If
the argument presented by the Claimants were correct, it would “render meaningless that
clause of the Chile-Croatia Treaty and the Foreign Investment Contracts — clauses found
in countless other bilateral investment treaties and foreign investment contract worldwide
— requiring foreign investors to comply with domestic laws and regulations.”"™ Under

such theory, “a foreign investor would be able [sic] circumvent the PMRS modification

' Thid., para. 120.
‘6 Counter-Memorial, para. 143.
'4 Tbid., para. 144.

71

process, while domestic investors could not — a result that would contravene the non-

discrimination provision of DL 600.”!°>

201. As to the modifications made to the PMRS, the Respondent affirms that
they reflect minor changes that underscore the firm commitment of Chile to respect this
instrument. The most significant modification of land use involved re-designating land at
La Platina from Ecological Preservation to a Complementary Green Area to allow the
construction of a zoological park. The modification introduced by Resolution 39 in 1997
incorporated new lands in the PMRS rather than changed the use of land already in the
PMRS, the municipalities of Colina, Lampa and Til-Til in the Province of Chacabuco.
Furthermore, “The incorporation of Chacabuco [...] was wholly consistent with the
original purpose of the PMRS, which was to allow urban development in Santiago’s
north, where Chacabuco is located, rather than in the southeast, where Pirque is
located.”!®° Chile does not deny that it can change the PMRS but asserts that it is not
obliged to do so, “[t]he simple fact that the PMRS could be modified did not mean that

MTD was entitled to its proposed modification.”

202. Chile points out that it is an unexplained indictment of the Claimants that
Chile adhered to its urban planning policy: Chile — like any other sovereign State - has
the power to establish its policies. In fact, it is a Government’s raison d’étre to enact laws
that reflect policy choices. MTD was aware of Chile’s policy before it purchased El

Principal and has “no credibility to decry that policy now and argue —without support —

'65 Thid., para. 145.
166 Thid., paras. 147-149.
‘67 Thid., para. 150.

72

that Chile was somehow automatically obligated as a matter of law to change a policy

benefiting the millions of residents of [sic] Metropolitan Region.”'®

203. The Respondent contests the argument that it failed to give the necessary
permits and hence it violated Article 3(2) of the Croatia BIT: “Even assuming that article
3(2) [...] is applicable to the present case, Chile has not violated that obligation. Chile
has demonstrated that the actions of its officials were not carried for [sic] for extra-legal
reasons such as the particular preferences or whims of government officials.” The
permits needed for the Project, as found by the tribunal in TECMED in interpreting a
similar provision, need to be granted in accordance with the laws of the State
concerned,!”° and there is no merit to the contention of the Claimants that, “Because the
breach at issue is a breach of an international obligation, the matter is governed, first and

foremost, by international law.”"”!

204. The Tribunal considers the legal basis of the claim valid based on the wide
scope of the MFN clause in the BIT, as already discussed. The Tribunal disagrees with
the Respondent’s statement that there is no merit to the contention of the Claimants that,
if there is a breach of an international obligation, “the matter is governed, first and
foremost, by international law”. The breach of an international obligation will need, by
definition, to be judged in terms of international law. To establish the facts of the breach,
it may be necessary to take into account municipal law. In the instant case, the Tribunal

'68 Thid., para. 151.
19 Rejoinder, para. 130.
Environmental Techniques TECMED S.A. v. the Mexican United States, (CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2,

Decision of May 29,2003.
'! Rejoinder, paras. 131-132.

73

will need to establish first whether the Respondent’s failure to modify the PMRS to the

benefit of the Claimants was in accordance with its own laws.

205. The Tribunal draws a distinction between permits to be granted in
accordance with the laws and regulations of the country concerned and those actions that
require a change of said laws and regulations. To the extent that the application for a
permit meets the requirements of the law, then, in accordance with the BIT and Article
3(2) of the Croatia BIT, the investor should be granted such permit. On the other hand,
said provision does not entitle an investor to a change of the normative framework of the

country where it invests. All that an investor may expect is that the law be applied.

206. As explained by the Respondent, the carrying out of the investment would
have required a change in the norms that regulate the urban sector in Chile. The PMRS
forms part of this normative framework, as repeatedly stated by the Respondent. Laws
and regulations may be changed by a country but it is not an entitlement that can be based
in Article 3(2) of the Croatia BIT. This clause is an assurance to the investor that the
laws will be applied, and to the State a confirmation that its obligation under that article
is confined to grant the permits in accordance with its own laws. The Tribunal concludes
that the Respondent did not breach the BIT by not changing the PMRS as required for the
Project to proceed.

5. Expropriation
207. The Claimants affirm that MTD made its investment “after receiving

authorization to do so from the State; was forced to halt the execution of its project

14

because it was informed that it lacked a necessary permit; attempted to obtain such permit
but the attempts were rebuffed; as a result it was unable to continue with the Project and

essentially lost the value of its investment. In these circumstances, the treatment suffered

by the investor constitutes an indirect expropriation.”!”

208. The Claimants argue that their investment has been expropriated by the
Respondent in breach of Article 4 of the BIT. The Claimants allege indirect expropriation
resulting from actions and failure to act by the Respondent, irrespective of whether “the
State intended or not to cause an indirect expropriation.”'”> In making this argument, the
Claimants rely on definitions of indirect expropriation by arbitral tribunals in the cases of
Metalclad Corp. v. United Mexican States!’ and CME Czech Republic B.V. (The
Netherlands) v. Czech Republic'”’ and consider that the facts of their case are analogous
to Metalclad and Biloune'”*: in these two cases “arbitral tribunals have found that the

failure or refusal of the host State to provide a necessary permit to the investor

constituted an indirect expropriation.”!””

' Memorial, para. 127.

"3 Thid., para. 124.

4 “covert or incidental interference with the use of property which has the effect of depriving the owner, in whole
or in significant part, of the use or reasonably-to-be-expected economic benefit of property even if not necessarily to
the obvious benefit of the host state.” (Metalclad Corp. v. United Mexican States, (CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1,
Award, 30 August 2000, 103, 16 ICSID Rev.-FILJ 165 (2001).

5 “De facto expropriation or indirect expropriation, i.e. measures that do not involve an overt taking but that
effectively neutralize the benefit of property of the foreign owner, are subject to expropriation claims. This is
undisputed under international law.” (CME Czech Republic B.V. (The Netherlands) v. Czech Republic, Partial
Award, 13 September 2001, 604 available at http://www.cnts.cz/doc10/en/pdf/cme-cr-eng.pdf (citing Sacerdoti, J.,
Bilateral Treaties and Multilateral Instruments on Investment Protection, 1997 Recueil des Cours 382 (1998)).

"6 Biloune and Marine Drive Complex Ltd v. Ghana Investments Centre and the Government of Ghana, 95 \.L.R.
183 (1994).

"7 Memorial, para. 126.

75

209. Chile is “bewildered” by this claim because “MTD continues to enjoy full
ownership of its interest in EPSA, and still has the right to seek zoning and other permits
and approvals required under Chilean law [...] MTD remains able to explore investment
opportunities in Pirque and has the right to seek a modification of the PMRS, and other
urban planning regulations.”'”* The Respondent draws attention to the award in Feldman
v. Mexico which found that “not all governmental regulatory activity that makes it
difficult or impossible for an investor to carry out a particular business, change in the
law or change in the application of existing laws that makes it uneconomical to continue

I The instant case does not concern “the

a particular business, is an expropriation.
change of an existing law or the application thereof. To the contrary, this case merely
involves the Republic of Chile’s consistent application of its policies, regulations and

laws.”!®2

210. In the same vein, the Respondent contests the reliance of the Claimants on
Biloune. There the arbitral tribunal held that “the combination of measures used against
the investor constituted constructive expropriation”. In the case before this Tribunal, the
Respondent argues that “Bi/oune simply does not support the theory that the denial of a
permit alone or, as in the case of MTD, the absence of a change in zoning, constitutes a

constructive expropriation [...] contrary to the facts in Biloune, Chilean Government

8 Counter-Memorial, para. 114 and Rejoinder, para. 10.
™ Counter-Memorial, para. 115.

' Ibid.

76

officials never assured MTD that a change in zoning would be unnecessary or that MTD

could proceed with its Project without modifying the PMRS.”!*!

211. The Claimants respond to Chile’s bewilderment about their expropriation
claim by pointing out that, by definition, an indirect expropriation claim “takes place
when the State deprives the investor of the use and benefit of the investment without

formally depriving the investor of title”!

212. The Claimants also contest the interpretation given by the Respondent to
Metalclad and Biloune: “MTD received authorization from the [S]tate of Chile to make
an investment to develop a project in Pirque, but was denied the ability to proceed with
the development because the State denied a key permit [...] Biloune is not a case about
the number of acts that a State must undertake against an investment [...] It is the overall
impact of the state action on the investment that determines the existence of indirect
expropriation. In this case, the refusal of the State of Chile to provide the key permit to
allow the development of the Project in Pirque resulted in a complete frustration of the

Project and a complete loss of in [sic] the value of MTD’s investment.”'*?

213. The Respondent contests again in the Rejoinder the arguments presented
by the Claimants on expropriation and insists on the irrelevance of the cases relied on by
the Claimants (Middle East Cement, TECMED) because no license was revoked or

permit renewal denied: “MTD has not identified any property right that has been seized

'S! Thid., para. 118.

182

Reply, para. 123.

'S Reply, footnote 35 at pages 54-55.

77

by Chile. Moreover, MTD has admitted that it has been judicially compelled to accept an
offer ‘approximately equivalent to US $10.069.206’ for its shares in EPSA, which hardly

supports their claim that these are essentially without value.”!**

214. As already stated, the Tribunal agrees with the argument of the
Respondent that an investor does not have a right to a modification of the laws of the host
country. As argued by the Respondent, “every State has the power to amend any of its
laws. The mere fact that Chile can change the PMRS does not mean, however, that Chile

is obligated to do so.”!*

The issue in this case is not of expropriation but unfair
treatment by the State when it approved an investment against the policy of the State
itself. The investor did not have the right to the amendment of the PMRS. It is not a
permit that has been denied, but a change in a regulation. It was the policy of the

Respondent and its right not to change it. For the same reason, it was unfair to admit the

investment in the country in the first place.

DAMAGES

215. The Claimants seek “full compensation for the damage they have
sustained as a consequence of the State of Chile’s treaty violations, so that the Claimants
are restored to the position they would be in had those treaty violations not occurred.”"**,

This entails the recovery of : “(i) the full cost of their investment (minus any remaining

'S Rejoinder, para. 142.

185

Counter-Memorial, para. 144,

'86 Memorial, para. 129.

78

value), (ii) pre-award compound interest at a commercially reasonable rate, and (iii) the

costs and expenses associated with this proceeding.”'*”

216. Chile contends that the Claimants have failed to prove the alleged losses
and their causal link to the alleged breaches. Chile points out several fundamental flaws
in their claim. First, they failed to mitigate their losses by entering into the Promissory
Contract notwithstanding Minister Hermosilla’s warning in the November 6, 1996
meeting that their project faced serious regulatory obstacles and without protecting
themselves against the risks posed by these obstacles. The failure of the Claimants to

mitigate losses is a cause of loss not attributable to the Republic of Chile.'*

217. Chile affirms that preparatory expenses till March 18, 1997 (date of
signature of the first Foreign Investment Contract) should not be recoverable. As regards
the other claimed losses, almost 80% occurred by transferring the funds to Chile between
March 19, 1997 and the meeting held with Minister Hermosilla on May 20, 1997. During
that period, architects, urban planners and governmental officials warned MTD that the
Project faced serious difficulties and Mr. Hermosilla repeated his early warning.’ After
May 20, 1997 and until September 25, 1998 when the SEREMI confirmed that the
sectional plan could not be used to amend the PMRS, the Claimants spent more than US$
1.4 million: “any reasonable investor would have long since developed serious

reservations about allocating additional funds to a questionable investment”.'° Even after

'87 Tid. para. 130.
'8§ Counter-Memorial, para. 165.
'89 Thid., para. 167.
19 Tbid., para. 168.

79

September 25, 1998, the Claimants continued to spend more than US$ 3.2 million on the
Project and then declined to take advantage of an opportunity to recover about half their
losses when they rejected the offer made by Mr. Fontaine to buy their shares of EPSA on

November 24, 2001.!7!

218. Chile also questions whether the Claimants themselves actually incurred
the losses: “Most of the alleged losses — including equity injections, debt servicing, salary
payments and various other expenses — are supported by documents relating to MTD
Construction or MTD Capital.”'”? Chile also finds that the Claimants have failed to
substantiate the fate of the amount injected in EPSA or “explain whether the use of those

funds constitutes recoverable losses.”"”>

219. The Respondent contends that there is no legal basis for the claim of
interest or bank guarantee charges related to the loan used to finance the investment.
Chile relies on the finding of the tribunal in Middle East Cement that “denied costs
related to a bank loan taken out by the claimant itself because such costs ‘are normal
commercial risks for the Claimant. They could only be claimed if, it were shown that
they were caused by conduct of the Respondent which was in breach of the BIT?”!™4,
Chile argues that, “[i]n the present case, Claimants not only did not take out the bank

loan, but they also failed to demonstrate how a ‘loss’ relating to debt service was a direct

'9! Thid., para. 169.

'° Thid., para. 172.

'3 Thid., para. 173 and Rejoinder, para. 153.

'°4 Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID CASE No. ARB/99/6,
Award, 12 April 2002, paras. 153-154. Quoted in para. 178 of the Counter-Memorial.

80

result of actions or in actions by the Republic of Chile. Claimants fail to show that they

incurred any losses related to debt servicing.”'”°

220. Chile contests the entitlement of Claimants to pre-award interest and
maintains that “international law, as a rule, does not allow compound interest”, and that,
if the Tribunal should find that compound interest is allowed, then it would be “required

to take into account the circumstances of the case and not award compound interest.”""°

221. As regards the level of the rate of interest, Chile offers the alternative of

the average dollar-based “interés corriente”'”’

used for bank lending in Chile or the
annual average of the London Inter-Bank Offering Rate (“LIBOR”) as more reasonable

alternatives to the 8% claimed by the Claimants.'**

222. Chile also argues that it is unclear how expenses under “salaries”, “travel

expenses” or “other” relate to the Project, and why they should be its responsibility.'”

223. The Respondent considers that the Claimants grossly understate the
current value of their investment, particularly the value of the land that according to the
valuation of the Claimants’ expert is twenty times less than it was at the time they bought

it20°

'°5 Thid., para. 178.

'°6 Thid., para. 183.

'°7 The statutory interest rate applied by courts in Chile.
18 Counter-Memorial, para. 184.

19 Thid., paras. 179, 180 and 182.

2 Tbid., paras. 185-189.

81

224. The Respondent requests that “the Tribunal order Claimants to bear the
expenses incurred by the Republic of Chile in connection with these proceedings, the fees
and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities

of the Centre, in their entirety.”?"!

225. The Claimants note that the Respondent does not dispute the standard of
compensation advanced in the Memorial.” They object to the interpretation given by
the Respondent to the Mihaly award on the issue of preparatory costs. In that case, the
tribunal found that “certain preparatory expenses incurred by the investor did not give
rise to an ‘investment’ for purposes of ICSID jurisdiction, in circumstances in which the
State had made it clear that it did not intend to admit any investment from the claimant
until execution of a binding investment contract.””” In the instant case, there is no
dispute that the investment was approved and three Foreign Investment Contracts

executed.

226. The Claimants also comment on the issue of mitigation of damages that
precisely “because the great majority of MTD’s expenses are evidenced by its initial
investment in early 1997, it was reasonable and consistent with MTD’s obligation to
mitigate damages for MTD to continue seeking Government approvals even after it
became apparent that Government officials were opposing the Project.” As for the

failure to accept the buy-out offer of Mr. Fontaine, the Claimants maintain that such offer

29 Tbid., para. 191.
Reply, para. 127.
2° Tpid. para. 130.
2 Tpid., para. 131.

82

was illusory because of the terms of payment. In neither of the payment alternatives
offered by Mr. Fontaine, the Claimants would be able to “cash out” their holdings in

EPSA.*

227. The Claimants reaffirm that MTD Equity and MTD Chile directly made
the initial investment with funds supplied to MTD Equity by MTD Capital: “Contrary to
the Respondent’s assertions, MTD Equity directly incurred all other Project-related
expenses, either directly through its owned subsidiary MTD Construction or by incurring
legally enforceable obligations to its parent, MTD Capital, to repay expenditures that it

made on MTD Equity’s behalf.”°°°

228. The Claimants maintain that the debt service and bank guarantee fees
claimed as part of the damages are “directly related to the State of Chile’s actions
destroying the value of MTD’s investment and denying MTD any opportunity to recoup
its costs and earn a return on capital. Because the Respondent’s conduct breached its
obligations to MTD under the Treaty, these payments fall squarely into the exception the
Middle East Cement tribunal carved out for commercial risk costs that are incurred as a

direct result of the State’s misconduct.”*°”

229. The Claimants argue that compound interest is not unfair or inappropriate
in the circumstances of this case because “the State of Chile cannot escape the fact that it

approved MTD’s application to invest in a project in Pirque and then frustrated that

2° Tbid., paras. 132-135.
296 Tbid., para. 139.
297 Tbid., para. 148.

83

8 Tbid.,
” Thid.,
2! Ibid,

*"" Tbid.,

investment. MTD’s possession of the land does not diminish its losses. In contrast to the
land owner in the Santa Elena case, which was ‘able to use and exploit [the property] to
some extent,’ MTD has not been able to use its investment in the land held by EPSA for

any kind of profitable activity.””"*

230. As regards the interest rate applicable to pre-award interest, the Claimants
recall that the dispute is not governed by Chilean law and therefore the interés corriente
applied by Chilean courts is not appropriate. Similarly, it is not appropriate to apply
LIBOR since they invest their dollars in local Malaysian markets: “At a minimum, MTD
should be awarded US$ 8.782 million in simple interest at its requested rate of 8
percent.” The Claimants also find no merit to “Chile’s argument that the ‘constructive
value’ of MTD’s 51 percent share in EPSA should be US$ 12.8 million, which is based
on a highly inflated estimate of land values and disallowance of most of MTD’s

investment expenses.””"”

231. The Claimants contest the current valuation of the land in the Sanchez
Report commissioned by the Respondent. They allege that the Sanchez Report relies on
valuation data for land that is not comparable to the land that EPSA owns. In particular,
“Sanchez relies on land values that he acknowledges have been affected by speculation
about the pending Modification No. 48, which would permit urban development in

Pirque.””!' The Claimants argue that “by relying on prices that may reflect speculation

para. 157.
para. 158.
para. 159.
para. 162.

84

212

about potential opportunities for urban development if Modification No. 48 comes into
effect, the Respondent is permissibly trying to capitalize on the effects of its own actions
upon market values. Having denied MTD the opportunity to develop its Project on the
ground that no urban development may be allowed, it cannot now take actions
encouraging a speculative increase in price and thereby reduce MTD’s compensation.””!”
The Claimants allege that the “PIX assessment,”? which values land at US$ 1.27 million,

is a more reliable measure of the impact of the State of Chile’s refusal to allow

development on the land.”?!*

232. The Claimants consider faulty the argument that MTD overpaid for its
shares in EPSA based on 1996 land values: “To begin with, MTD did not simply buy
land; it bought stock in a joint venture engaged in development of a business. The 1996
Palma Kitzing”'> value analysis was based on the valuation of the assets to be used in
such a venture, not bare land values, and assumed that the Project would be built.
Ironically, the Respondent itself submitted (for very different purposes) the 1995 URBE
Report, which estimated the value of the land for investment purposes in 1995-1996 at
more than US$ 25 million.”*!° In any case, “relying on the Sanchez Report’s post hoc
analysis as a basis to assess the value of the land in 1996 would be inconsistent with the
practice of other international tribunals, which have rejected appraisals that were not

prepared at the time the investor was injured.””'”

Ibid., para. 163.

213 Commissioned by the Claimants.

214 Reply, para. 163.

215 palma Kitzing is the firm contracted by Banco Sud Americano.
216 Tbid., para. 164.

2!7 Tbid., para. 166.

85

28 Tbid.,
2! Thid.,
9 Ibid.
>" Tbid.,

233. As regards Claimants’ costs, the Claimants consider that the Respondent
should bear all the costs associated with them because MTD’s large investment losses

were caused by the Respondent’s improper actions.”'*

234. In its Rejoinder, the Respondent contests the additional claim of US$ 3.2
million in interest for “delay resulting from Chile’s request for an extension to file its
Counter-Memorial.””'? The Respondent argues that “the Tribunal decided [...] that by
application of Rules 10 and 12 of the Rules of Arbitration, the ‘suspension’ included all
the issues related to the procedure, including time limits and the actions of the Tribunal.
For that reason, the sum of US$ 3.2 million in interest that the Claimants attribute to the
State must be rejected, since the procedure was suspended for all the ‘issues related to the

procedure.””””°

235. The Respondent also points out that: (i) the Claimants are entitled to
collect damages from their partner, Mr. Fontaine, in the amount offered by him to buy the
Claimants’ shares of EPSA; and (ii) the Claimants’ concerns about the economic
difficulties and solvency issues of their partner are of no relevance. The sum offered by
Mr. Fontaine must be deducted from the amount claimed, as well as interest from

November 24, 2001, the date of Mr. Fontaine’s offer.7”!

236. The Respondent clarifies that, in the URBE report, the land was not

appraised and this report only calculated the value of the project minus the costs,

para. 169.
para. 147,

paras, 150-151.

86

222

including the cost of land, a fact omitted by MTD. In contrast, Mr. Sanchez appraised the
600 hectares in El Principal and not the current value of the project, therefore, a
comparison between the two is “deceptive and inaccurate.””? The Respondent also finds
that MTD has not been able to substantiate the fate of the US$ 8.4 million injected into

EPSA.

237. The Tribunal will address the following issues regarding damages that
emerge from the parties’ allegations:

ji Eligible expenses for purposes of calculating damages;

(ii) Damages attributable to business risk;

(iii) Date from which interest should accrue; and

(iv) Applicable rate of interest.

238. The Tribunal first notes that the BIT provides for the standard of
compensation applicable to expropriation, “prompt, adequate and effective” (Article
A(c)). It does not provide what this standard should be in the case of compensation for
breaches of the BIT on other grounds. The Claimants have proposed the classic standard
enounced by the Permanent Court of Justice in the Factory at Chorzéw: compensation
should “wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and re-establish the situation
which would, in all probability, have existed if that had not been committed.””* The
Respondent has not objected to the application of this standard and no differentiation has

been made about the standard of compensation in relation to the grounds on which it is

Ibid., paras. 176-177.

3 Counter-Memorial, para. 173.

224

Quoted in Reply, para. 127.

87

justified. Therefore, the Tribunal will apply the standard of compensation proposed by
the Claimants to the extent of the damages awarded.
1. Eligible Expenditures

239. The Tribunal considers that the Claimants have proven that the
expenditures related to the Project were made by them or on their behalf and that they

were made for purposes of the investment in Chile.

240. The Tribunal considers as eligible for purposes of the calculation of
damages the following expenditures:
(i) Expenditures related to the initial investment in the amount of US$

17,345,400.00.

(ii) The Tribunal has found that Chile’s responsibility is related to the approval of
the transfer of funds by the FIC in spite of the policy of the Government not to
change the PMRS. Therefore, the Tribunal considers that expenditures for the
Project prior to the execution of the first Foreign Exchange Contract on March 18,
1997 are not eligible for purpose of the calculation of damages even if they could
be considered part of the investment. For the same reason, expenditures made
after November 4, 1998— the date on which Minister Henriquez informed the
Claimants in writing that the PMRS would not be changed — are also to be
excluded from said calculation. The total of expenditures during this period on
account of salaries, travel, legal services and miscellaneous items, as detailed in

Exhibit 93A submitted with the Reply, amount to US$ 235,605.37.

88

225

(iii) The Tribunal considers the financial costs related to the investment made to
be part of a business decision on how to finance the investment. As stated by the
tribunal in Middle East Cement and referred to by the parties in their allegations:
“They could be claimed, if it were shown that they were caused by conduct of the
Respondent which was in breach of the BIT.” ** Since the Tribunal has found
that Chile breached its obligation to treat the Claimants’ investment fairly and
equitably and this treatment is related to the decision of the Claimants to invest in
Chile, the Tribunal considers that the financial costs related to the investment in
the amount of US$ 3,888,582.95 are part of the eligible expenditures for purposes

of the calculation of damages.

241. The aggregate of the above eligible expenditures amounts to US$
21,469,588.32. However, the residual value of the investment and the damages that can
be attributed to business risk need to be deducted from such amount. The Tribunal will
now turn its attention to these matters.

2. Damages Attributable to Business Risk. Residual value of the Investment

242. The Tribunal decided earlier that the Claimants incurred costs that were
related to their business judgment irrespective of the breach of fair and equitable
treatment under the BIT. As already noted, the Claimants, at the time of their contract
with Mr. Fontaine, had made decisions that increased their risks in the transaction and for
which they bear responsibility, regardless of the treatment given by Chile to the

Claimants. They accepted to pay a price for the land with the Project without appropriate

Middle East Cement, para. 154.

89

legal protection. A wise investor would not have paid full price up-front for land valued
on the assumption of the realization of the Project; he would at least have staged future

payments to project progress, including the issuance of the required development permits.

243. The Tribunal considers therefore that the Claimants should bear part of the
damages suffered and the Tribunal estimates that share to be 50% after deduction of the

residual value of their investment calculated on the basis of the following considerations.

244. Mr. Fontaine has made an offer for MTD’s EPSA shares of US$
10,069,206. The Claimants are, by the terms of their shareholders’ arrangements with
Mr. Fontaine and as decided by an arbitral tribunal and confirmed by the Chilean courts,
obliged to accept this offer or buy him out. For this reason, the Tribunal considers that the
price offered by Mr. Fontaine for the shares of EPSA currently held by the Claimants
constitutes the residual value of the investment. Because only part of the offer is in cash,

the cash value of the remainder on a present value basis is US$ 9,726,943.48.°

245. The Tribunal notes that the Claimants had not accepted Mr. Fontaine’s
offer because it is not a full cash offer and are concerned about the uncertain financial
situation of Mr. Fontaine. This is of no relevance to this Tribunal, since the risk of
having chosen Mr. Fontaine as a partner should be borne by the Claimants. Chile had no
participation in his selection nor has it been claimed that the financial difficulties of Mr.

Fontaine can be attributed to Chile. The Claimants themselves have manifested that they

6 For purposes of this calculation, the Tribunal has used the US dollar two-year swap rate of May 6, 2004 for a
two-year swap effective May 21, 2004 published by Bloomberg. The two-year swap rate represents an interest rate
at which semiannual cash flows may be discounted until the maturity of the swap. There are no LIBOR rates for
period of more than one year.

90

knew all along about his financial difficulties. This is a business risk that the investors

shall bear.

246. To conclude, the Claimants should bear the risk inherent in Mr. Fontaine’s
offer and 50% of the damages after deducting the present value of such offer from the
total amount calculated in Section 1 above.

3. Date from which pre-award interest should accrue

247. The Tribunal considers that interest on the amount of damages for which
Chile is responsible should accrue from November 5, 1998, the day after Minister
Henriquez notified the Claimants that it was against his Government’s policy to modify

the PMRS.

248. The Claimants in their Reply increased the amount of their claim with the
interest accrued during the extension granted by the Tribunal to the Respondent to file the
Counter-Memorial. Chile has argued that the additional interest should not be awarded
since the suspension was for all the “issues related to the procedure.”””” The Tribunal has
awarded interest from November 5, 1998 for the reasons stated above and considers that
the extension of the term for the submission of the Counter-Memorial does not have a
bearing on this matter.

4. Applicable Rate of Interest
249. The Claimants have requested that the Tribunal apply a compound annual

interest rate of 8%. The Respondent has proposed the dollar-based annual rate of interest

27 Counter-Memorial, para. 147.

91

applicable in Chile or the average annual LIBOR. The Respondent has objected to a

compound interest rate as not being in accordance with international law.

250. This being an international tribunal assessing damages under a bilateral
investment treaty in an internationally traded currency related to an international
transaction, it would seem in keeping with the nature of the dispute that the applicable
rate of interest be the annual LIBOR on November 5 of each year since November 5,
1998 until payment of the awarded amount of damages. Based on the rates published
daily by Bloomberg, the annual LIBOR on November 5 of each year since November 5,
1998 are as follows: (i) 5.03813 % in 1998, (ii) 6.16 % in 1999, (iii) 6.71625 % in 2000,

(iv) 2.24625 % in 2001, (v) 1.62 % in 2002, and (vi) 1.4925 % in 2003.

251. The Tribunal considers that compound interest is more in accordance with
the reality of financial transactions and a closer approximation to the actual value lost by
an investor. As expressed by the tribunal in Santa Elena: “Where an owner of property
has at some earlier time lost the value of his asset but has not received the monetary
equivalent that then became due to him, the amount of compensation should reflect, at
least in part, the additional sum that his money would have earned, had it, and the income

generated by it, been reinvested each year at generally prevailing rates of interest.””°

28 Compaiiia de Desarrollo de Santa Elena, S.A. v. Republic of Costa Rica, \CSID Case No. ARB/96/1, Final
Award, 17 February 2000, para. 104.

92

VI.

VIL.

COSTS

252. Taking into account that neither party has succeeded fully in its allegations,
the Tribunal decides that each party shall bear its own expenses and fees related to this

proceeding and 50 % of the costs of ICSID and the Tribunal.
DECISION
253. For the reasons above stated the Tribunal unanimously decides that:

1. The Respondent has breached its obligations under Article 3(1) of the

BIT.

2. The Claimants failed to protect themselves from business risks inherent to

their investment in Chile.

3. The Respondent shall pay the Claimants the amount of US$

5,871,322.42.

4. The Respondent shall pay compound interest on such amount from
November 5, 1998 and determined as set forth in paragraphs 249- 251 above until

such amount has been paid in full.

5. The parties shall bear all their respective expenses and fees related to this

proceeding.

6. The parties shall share equally the fees and expenses incurred by ICSID

and the Tribunal.

7. All other claims filed in this arbitration shall be considered dismissed.

93

Done in Washington, D.C., in English and Spanish, both versions being equally
authoritative.

signed

Andrés Rigo Sureda
President of the Tribunal
Date: May 21, 2004

Signed Signed
Marc Lalonde Rodrigo Oreamuno Blanco
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: May 13, 2004 Date: May 21, 2004

94

