MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. & MTD Chile S.A.
v.
The Republic of Chile
(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/7)

(Annulment Proceeding)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Request for a Continued Stay of Execution
(Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules)

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee

The Hon. Judge Gilbert Guillaume
Professor James Crawford
Dr. Sara Ordojiez Noriega

Secretary of the Committee

Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu

Representing the Claimants: Representing the Respondent:
Mr. Oscar M. Garibaldi and Mr. Claudio Castillo Castillo
Mr. Eugene D. Gulland Jefe Division Juridica
Covington & Burling Ministerio de Economia de Chile
Washington, D.C. and

and Mr. Ronald E.M. Goodman and
Mr. Michael Grasty Cousiiio, Ms. Gaela K. Gehring Flores
Mr. Jorge Bofill Genzsch and Winston & Strawn LLP

Mr. Pablo Mir Balmaceda Washington, D.C.

Grasty Quintana Majlis & Cia.
Santiago Chile

A. Introduction

1. On 30 September 2004, the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID or the Centre), pursuant to Rule 50(2) of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules), registered an
application by the Republic of Chile (Chile) for the annulment of the Award of
the Tribunal rendered on 25 May 2004 (the Award), in the case of MTD Equity
Sdn. & MTD Chile S.A. v. The Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/07)
(the Application). Under the Award, the Republic of Chile is to pay
approximately USD5.87 million, plus interest, to MTD Equity Sdn. & MTD Chile
S.A. (MTD or the Claimants).

2. The Application contained a request, under Article 52(5) of the
Convention and Rule 54(1) of the Arbitration Rules, for a stay of enforcement of

the Award until the Application for Annulment is decided.

3. Upon registering the Application for Annulment on 30 September 2004,
the Secretary General of ICSID notified the parties that, pursuant to ICSID

Arbitration Rule 54(2), the enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed.

4. On 23 March 2005, at the first session of the Annulment Committee,
consisting of the Hon. Judge Gilbert Guillaume of France as President, and
Professor James Crawford of Australia and Dr. Sara Ordofiez Noriega of
Colombia as Members, MTD made a request under Arbitration Rule 54(2) for the
stay of enforcement of the Award to be terminated unless appropriate security

was put in place by Chile.

5. The Committee, having heard the oral arguments of the parties in that
regard, requested Chile to file any proposal that it might have by 11 April 2005,
and MTD to file any comments thereon by 18 April 2005. By agreement of the

parties, the thirty-day deadline for a decision under Arbitration Rule 54(2) was

extended on the understanding that the Committee would make its decision
promptly after the Claimants’ submission. Chile’s submission was filed on 11
April 2005 and the Claimants’ submission was filed, with the Tribunal’s

permission, on 20 April 2005.

6. On the same day Chile requested that it be allowed to file a further
submission in response. Although objected to by MTD, the Committee granted
Chile’s request to make the further submission, while allowing MTD an equal
amount of time to file a response. Each party filed its second round submission

as thus permitted on 25 April 2005 and 2 May 2005, respectively.

B. The Parties’ Contentions

7. In its observations dated 11 April 2005, Chile requested a continuance of
the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award in accordance with Article 54
of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. It submitted that Chilean law provides powerful
international guarantees which “render unnecessary the granting of any
additional security in order to continue such a stay”. It added that under Chilean
law, “arbitration awards issued by a duly constituted Tribunal or Committee in
accordance with the Convention, Regulations and Rules of ICSID, are fully

recognized as awards emanating from a competent authority”.

8. In particular “these obligations are formally sanctioned on an annual basis
in the Law of Budgets of the Public Sector” and more specifically for 2005, in
Law No.19,986, title no. 50, chapter no.01, program 03, sub chapter 26, item 02-
001 entitled “Cumplimiento de Sentencias Ejecutoriadas” (“Fulfillment of Final

Judgments”).

9. Furthermore, under article 28 of Decree Law no. 1263 of 1973 of the
Ministry of Finance, “El Ejecutivo podra ordenar pagos, excediéndose a las

sumas consultadas en los rubros correspondientes ... para el cumplimiento de

sentencias ejecutoriadas dictadas por autoridad competente”, which according to
Chile could be translated into English as follows: “The Executive will be able to
order payments exceeding the sums consulted in the corresponding areas ... for

the fulfillment of final judgments dictated by competent authority.”

10. According to the Respondent, the Executive is thus authorised to order
payments exceeding the sums anticipated in the budget and it exercises this
function through budgetary reassignment or additional sources of funding.
Therefore, “the amount of the reserve will always hold sufficient funds to fulfill

the Republic of Chile’s expenses in connection with a judgment against it.”

11. For these reasons Chile “request[s] that the Committee continue the
provisional stay of enforcement of the Award, without requiring any additional

security over and above that which Chilean law already expressly contemplates.”

12. In their response dated 20 April 2005, the Claimants “urge the Committee
not to continue the stay of enforcement against the Award unless ... Chile posts
financial security guaranteeing payment promptly upon a decision refusing to

annul the Award.”

13. MTD states that “having spent a decade pursuing the procedure specified
by the Chile-Malaysia BIT and ICSID Convention, MTD should not face any
additional delay in receiving payment if the Award is not annulled.” It stresses
that under article 52(5) of the Convention and Arbitration Rule 54(2),

“annulment is an exceptional and rarely granted remedy.”

14. | MTD submits that “Chile has not provided any meaningful assurance that
MTD would receive full payment (with interest) immediately upon a decision
refusing to annul the Award.” According to MTD, Chile only identifies the
procedure to be followed in order to request payment after the decision of the

Committee. MTD adds that the authorities cited by Chile do not guarantee such a

payment. In particular, the Budget law for the Public Sector for 2005 did not
earmark any funds to pay the Award. Decree law 1263 of 1973 “authorizes
payment of final judgments (sentencias), not final awards (laudos)” in excess of
the amount set forth in the Budget Law. Moreover the decree law authorizes
such payment but does not require it. In any case, Chile may not rely upon
provisions of its domestic law in an attempt to guarantee future compliance with

its international obligations.

15. The request for stay presented by Chile, according to MTD, also fails
because there is no showing that a stay is “required” (see CDC Group PLC v.
Republic of Seychelles, Case No. ARB/02/14, Decision on Whether to Continue
Stay and Order, July 2004). “The two-year delay MTD faces in enforcing the
Award” must be “counterbalanced by financial security guaranteeing prompt

payment if the Award is not annulled.”

16. According to the Reply of Chile dated 25 April 2005, “MTD’s principal
argument [is] that the mere incidence of delay in obtaining enforcement of the
Award as a result of the annulment proceedings requires the posting of financial
security by the Republic of Chile’. MTD had no ground of concern that the
Award might not be honored by Chile pursuant to its ICSID obligations. In fact,
MTD only stresses that it made its investment in 1996, has been receiving no
return on the capital since then and would have to wait another year or so for the

Committee’s decision.

17. Chile submits that accepting MTD’s argument would mean that all ad hoc
Committees “would automatically have to decide that each and every State
applying for annulment would have to post security”. Moreover it would imply
that the Committee will accept MTD’s substantive claims. Finally, Chile
contends that the two-year delay MTD faces until the day of payment is counter-

balanced by the interest it would receive if Chile’s application is not upheld.

18. Chile adds that it has not delayed the proceedings in the arbitration, and
that annulment is a serious remedy provided by the ICSID Convention which
Chile has the right to invoke and which it invoked within the prescribed time-

limit.

19. Chile contends also that the continuance of the stay is not at issue in the
present case, but only the question of the assurance to be given with respect to
financial security: “Had a briefing on the continuance of the stay been called for,
Chile would have addressed the extensive circumstances to be considered in
favor of continuation of such a stay, including the difficulty and costs imposed
by the necessity for...Chile, once having prevailed in the annulment proceedings,
to recoup an Award... from a private company in Malaysia which would have had
the free use of such wind fall amount for more than a year”; the seriousness of
the application for annulment; the harmful consequences of a payment upon the
economic and social development of Chile; the commitment taken by Chile in
writing to carry out its international obligation and the fact that the Award

carries interest and that the Claimants suffer no conceivable loss.

20. Answering questions posed by the Committee on 22 April 2005, Chile
states that it “lacks precise precedent showing that the term ‘sentencias’ in
Decree Law 1263 and 3346 include international Awards”. However it recalls
that Chile has promulgated the ICSID Convention as domestic law (decree No.
1304 published in the Diario oficial of 9 January 1992) and that Article 54 of the
Convention, in its Spanish version, as published, creates an obligation to enforce
the pecuniary obligations imposed by an award (“laudo”) as if it were a final

judgment (“sentencia’).

21. Finally, Chile submits that “a continuance of the stay of the enforcement
of the Award is appropriate and justified, and that a requirement of an additional
financial security ... is unwarranted and unsupported by the totality of the

circumstances presented by the annulment proceedings”. Chile reiterates its

commitment to “the fulfillment of its ICSID obligations upon the issuance of a

decision by the Committee”.

22. In its Rejoinder dated 2 May 2005, MTD recalls its concern about past
delays and expresses the fear that MTD will face new delays in the enforcement
of the Award, taking into account Chile’s change of administration scheduled for
March 2006 and Chile’s internal payment procedures. MTD notes that Chile
“cannot cite any authority showing that the term ‘sentencias’ (judgments) in
Decree-Laws 1263 and 3346 includes international arbitral Awards” and that it
“cites no provision of its domestic law that actually implements the obligation of
Article 54 [of the ICSID Convention], that is that converts an ICSID Award into

a domestic judgment or otherwise provides for its enforcement.”

23. MTD also contends that Chile does not meet its obligation to specify the
circumstances that require the stay. It submits that, even if such a stay was to be
decided, it must be accompanied by the posting of security. In this respect it
states that “the accrual of interest does not redress the full measure of harm to
MTD that would result from additional delays. Every month of delay in
repayment prevents MTD from undertaking projects and creating jobs with [its]

capital”.

Cc. The ad hoc Committee’s Views

24. Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention provides:

“(5) The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so
require, stay enforcement of the award pending its decision. If the
applicant requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his application,
enforcement shall be stayed provisionally until the Committee rules on
such request.”

25.

26.

Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides:
“Stay of Enforcement of the Award

(1) The party applying for the interpretation, revision or annulment of
an award may in its application, and either party may at any time before
the final disposition of the application, request a stay in the enforcement
of part or all of the award to which the application relates. The Tribunal or
Committee shall give priority to the consideration of such a request.

(2) If an application for the revision or annulment of an award contains
a request for a stay of its enforcement, the Secretary-General shall,
together with the notice of registration, inform both parties of the
provisional stay of the award. As soon as the Tribunal or Committee is
constituted it shall, if either party requests, rule within 30 days on whether
such stay should be continued; unless it decides to continue the stay, it
shall automatically be terminated.

(3) If a stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to paragraph (1)
or continued pursuant to paragraph (2), the Tribunal or Committee may at
any time modify or terminate the stay at the request of either party. All
stays shall automatically terminate on the date on which a final decision is
rendered on the application, except that a Committee granting the partial
annulment of an award may order the temporary stay of enforcement of the
unannulled portion in order to give either party an opportunity to request
any new Tribunal constituted pursuant to Article 52(6) of the Convention
to grant a stay pursuant to Rule 55(3).

(4) A request pursuant to paragraph (1), (2) (second sentence) or (3)
shall specify the circumstances that require the stay or its modification or
termination. A request shall only be granted after the Tribunal or
Committee has given each party an opportunity of presenting its
observations.

(5) The Secretary-General shall promptly notify both parties of the stay
of enforcement of any award and of the modification or termination of
such a stay, which shall become effective on the date on which he
dispatches such notification.”

On a request under Rule 54(1), the Committee has a discretion which it

should exercise, after both parties have had an opportunity to be heard, taking

into account any relevant circumstances. The effect of the stay is that the award

is not subject to enforcement proceedings under Article 54 of the Convention

pending the outcome of the annulment application. Since a stay is not automatic

the Tribunal could grant the request subject to conditions, including a condition

that an appropriate bond be provided.

27. The question whether a stay should be granted unconditionally or on
condition of a bank guarantee has been discussed in a number of earlier
proceedings.!

(a) In Amco Asia Corporation v Republic of Indonesia (First Annulment), the
Committee granted a stay on condition of the furnishing of a bank
guarantee.” A similar order was made in the second annulment proceeding
between the same parties.*

(b) In Maritime International Nominees Establishment v Republic of Guinea,
the Committee declined to impose the condition of a guarantee, on the
basis that this would be costly and would place the Claimant “in a much
more favourable position than it enjoys at the present time”.4

(c) In Wena Hotels Ltd v Arab Republic of Egypt, the Committee continued
the stay of execution conditional on the provision of a guarantee in the
amount of the award.>

(d) In CDC Group PLC v Republic of the Seychelles, the Committee held that
there was no evidence of “catastrophic consequences” to the Respondent
which could follow the immediate enforcement of the award, and that as a
matter of fairness to the Claimant the delay caused by the annulment
proceedings should be addressed by the provision of security as a
condition of a stay.°

(e) In Mitchell v Democratic Republic of Congo the Committee by majority
declined to make the stay conditional upon the posting of security on the

basis that it was “not convinced that the DRC, albeit its present political

1 See also C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention. A Commentary (Cambridge, 2001) 1052-1060.

2 Amco Asia Corporation v Republic of Indonesia (First Annulment) (1986) 1 ICSID Reports 509, 513
(para. 8); see Schreuer, 1056 for a brief account of the reasoning.
3 Amco Asia Corporation v Republic of Indonesia ‘Second Annulment) (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1),
Annulment decision of 3 December 1992, paras. 3.03, 3.07 (forthcoming in 9 ICSID Report:

Maritime International Nominees Establishment v Republic of Guinea, Interim Order No. 1, 12
August 1988, 4 ICSID Reports 111, 115 (para. 22).

Wena Hotels Ltd v Arab Republic of Egypt, Procedural Order No 1, 5 April 2001, referred to in the
final decision of the Committee, (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 129, 131 (para. 6).

CDC Group PLC v Republic of the Seychelles (Case No ARB/02/14), Decision of 14 July 2004, esp
paras. 21-22.

 

 

 

difficulties, will not comply in the future with its international obligations

driving from the ICSID Convention”.’

28. The Committee agrees with earlier decisions to the effect that, unless there
is some indication that the annulment application is brought without any basis
under the Convention, i.e., that it is dilatory, it is not for the Committee to assess
as a preliminary matter whether or not it is likely to succeed. In requesting
annulment, an applicant avails itself of a right given by the Convention. There is
no indication here that Chile is acting in a merely dilatory manner. Thus the
Committee does not need to form any view as to the likelihood of success of the

application for annulment in the present case.

29. As a general matter a respondent State seeking annulment should be
entitled to a stay provided it gives reasonable assurances that the award, if not
annulled, will be complied with. It should not be exposed, while exercising
procedural rights open to it under the Convention, to the risk that payment made
under an award which is eventually annulled may turn out to be irrecoverable
from an insolvent claimant. At the same time a Respondent seeking a remedy
under the Convention should demonstrate that for its part it will comply with the
Convention, and if there is doubt in that regard the Committee may order the

provision of a bank guarantee as a condition of a stay.

30. ‘It is true that the provision of a bank guarantee puts a claimant in a better
position than it would be if annulment had not been sought, since it converts the
undertaking of compliance under Article 53 of the Convention into a financial
guarantee and avoids any issue of sovereign immunity from execution, which is
expressly reserved by Article 55 of the Convention. On the other hand, a request
for annulment causes significant delay to the claimant, with the consequent
possibility of prejudice. Although this can be dealt with by an award of interest

7 Mitchell y. Democratic Republic of Congo (Case No ARB/99/7), Decision of 30 November 2004,

para. 42.

in the event that the annulment application fails, nonetheless there will have been
a further delay in the award becoming enforceable and this is a factor entitled to

some weight.

31. Despite this, in the Committee’s view the key feature of the situation is
that, by the express terms of Article 54 of the Convention, an ICSID award is to
be given the same effect as a final judgment of the courts of the Respondent
State. As compared with other international arbitral arrangements, final awards
under the ICSID Convention are directly enforceable, upon registration and
without further jurisdictional control, as final judgments of the courts of the host
State. It is true that immunity from execution is reserved (Article 55), but this
simply leaves the issue of immunity to be dealt with under the applicable law:
“Immunity from execution of the host State in its own courts would depend

entirely on its domestic law.”*

32. States Parties to the Convention have an obligation to give effect to
Article 54 of the Convention in their internal law. Exactly how this is done
depends on the constitutional arrangements of the State Party concerned; the
point for the Committee is to be satisfied that the State Party has taken
appropriate steps in accordance with its constitutional arrangements to give
effect to Article 54. Where it has done so, subsequent compliance by that State
with a final award will be a matter of legal right under its own law, as well as

under international law.

33. Chile states that the annual law of budgets of the public sector, and in
particular the law for the year 2005, contains an item entitled “fulfillment of
final judgments”. It recognizes that under this item only a token amount of
money is provided. However it adds that article 28 of Decree Law 1263 of 1973
of the Ministry of Finance authorizes the Executive to order payments exceeding

the sums anticipated, inter alia for the fulfillment of final judgments (“para el

. Schreuer, 1176.

cumplimiento de sentencias ejecutoriadas”). Moreover, under article 2(m) of
Decree Law 3346 of 1980, the Ministry of Justice is required to perform the
following functions: “(m) to take the necessary measures for the fulfillment of
the final judgments rendered against the Treasury” (“dictar las resoluciones
necesarias para el cumplimiento de las sentencias ejecutoriadas que condenen al

fisco”).

34. It is doubtful whether an award of an ICSID Tribunal falls within the term
“sentencias” in Decree-Laws 1263 and 3346. However the Respondent points
out that a Presidential decree has implemented the Convention as part of Chilean
law. Decree No. 1304, published in the Diario Oficial of 9 January 1992, recites
the Congressional approval given to Chilean ratification of the Convention and
specifies that:

“by the authority vested in me by articles 32 No. 17 and 50 No. 1 of the
Political Constitution of the Republic, I decree and order that [the
Convention] be executed and take effect as law and that an authorized
copy of its text be published in the Diario Oficial.”?

35. Chile represents—and the Committee has no basis for disagreeing—that
the effect of this provision is that an ICSID award is to be given exactly the same
effect as a final judgment of the Chilean courts, i.e., it must thereupon be
considered as a judgment for the purposes of Decree Laws 1263 and 3346. Chile
has further noted that it has always complied with its international payment
obligations and with all judgments or awards of international courts and
tribunals. It affirms that it will do so, if and to the extent that the award against

it becomes final, in the present case.

9

 

“en uso de la faculdad que me confieren los articulos 32 N° 17 y 50 ntimero
1) dela Constitucion Politica de la Reptiblica, dispongo y mando que se cumpla y Ileve a efecto como ley y
que se publique copia autorizada de su texto en el Diario Oficial.”

12

36. Having regard to the matters referred to above, in the Committee’s view
Chile has demonstrated that MTD will not be prejudiced by the grant of a stay,
other than in respect of the delay which is, however, incidental to the Convention
system of annulment and which can be remedied by the payment of interest in the
event that the annulment application is unsuccessful.

Decision

For the foregoing reasons the Committee, unanimously:

CONTINUES IN FORCE the stay in the enforcement of the award pending its

decision on the Application for Annulment.

Signed on behalf of the Committee:

Gilbert Guillaume

President

Date

