IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER THE TREATY BETWEEN THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA AND THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR CONCERNING THE
ENCOURAGEMENT AND RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF INVESTMENT SIGNED ON
27 AUGUST 1993 (the “Treaty” or “BIT”)

- and -

THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES, 1976 (the “UNCITRAL Rules”)

- between -

MURPHY EXPLORATION & PRODUCTION COMPANY - INTERNATIONAL
“Claimant”
- and -
THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR

“Respondent,” and together with Claimant, the “Parties”

 

FINAL AWARD

 

10 February 2017

Tribunal:

Me Yves Derains

Professor Kaj Hobér

Professor Bernard Hanotiau, Presiding Arbitrator

Registry:
Permanent Court of Arbitration

L
IL.
Il.
IV.

VI.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page i of iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THE PARTIES AND THEIR REPRESENTATIVES 1
OVERVIEW OF THE DISPUTE 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 2
REQUESTS FOR RELIEF. 4
SUMMARIES OF ARGUMENT AND ANALYSIS OF THE TRIBUNAL 5
1. Whether the Tribunal should reconsider its position with respect to the

Claimant’s non-FET Treaty claims in relation to Law 42 at 50%...
A. — Claimant’s Position
B. Respondent’s Position 7
C. Analysis of the Tribunal. 9
2. Whether the value of the Adjusted Sum and the Entitlement should account

for the E ion Contract 10
A. — Claimant’s Position 10
B. Respondent’s Position 11
C. Analysis of the Tribunal. 13
3. Whether the sale of Murphy Ecuador has a negative or a positive effect on

d 13
A, Respondent’s Position 13
B. — Claimant’s Position 19
C. Analysis of the Tribunal. 22
4, Whether the Tribunal should reconsider its decision in PO No. 4 regarding

post-award interest on costs .
A. — Claimant’s Position 23
B. Respondent’s Position 24
C. Analysis of the Tribunal. 24
5. Costs of arbitration 24

 

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL 26

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador

Final Award
Page ii of iii

LIST OF DEFINED TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

 

Adjusted Sum

The fair market value of Murphy Ecuador of USD 87.8 million
adjusted to account for the Claimant’s ongoing obligation to
make Law 42 payments at 50%, as called for in paragraph 504 of
the Partial Final Award

 

BIT (or Treaty)

Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic of
Ecuador concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investment, adopted 27 August 1993, entered into
force 11 May 1997

 

Claimant (or Murphy)

Murphy Exploration and Production Company — International

 

Claimant’s E-mail

Claimant’s e-mail of 16 August 2016

 

Claimant’s Post-Award
Submission

Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, dated 29 July 2016

 

Consortium

As of 28 July 1987: Overseas Petroleum and Investment
Corporation, Diamond Shamrock South America Petroleum
B.V., Nomeco Latin America Inc., and Murphy Ecuador

 

Ecuador (or Respondent)

Republic of Ecuador

 

Entitlement

The difference between the Adjusted Sum and the Repsol Sale
Price, as called for in paragraph 504 of the Tribunal’s Partial
Final Award

 

Extension Contract

Contract modifying the Participation Contract for Exploration
and Exploitation of Hydrocarbons for Block 16 of 12 March
2009 between the Consortium and PetroEcuador

 

 

 

 

 

FET Fair and equitable treatment

Law 42 Law passed by Ecuador on 25 April 2006 to amend the
Hydrocarbons Law

Murphy (or Claimant) Murphy Exploration and Production Company — International

Murphy Ecuador Murphy Ecuador Oil Company Limited, wholly-owned
subsidiary of the Claimant (formerly known as Lowland Marine
Ltd)

Partial Final Award Partial Final Award issued by the Tribunal on 6 May 2016

 

Participation Contract

Modification of the Service Contract into a Participation Contract
for the Exploration and Exploitation of Hydrocarbons (Crude
Oil) in Block 16 between Empressa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador) and the Consortium Comprising YPF Ecuador
Inc., Overseas Petroleum and Investment Corporation, Nomeco
Ecuador Oil LDC, Murphy Ecuador Oil Company, and Canam
Offshore Limited dated 27 December 1996

 

 

 

 

 

PCA Permanent Court of Arbitration

PONo.4 Procedural Order No. 4 issued by the Tribunal on | July 2016
Reply Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, dated 10 July 2014

Repsol Sale Price Purchase price in accordance with the Sale and Purchase

 

Agreement for the entire share capital in Murphy Ecuador signed

 

 

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador

Final Award
Page iii of iii

 

between Canam and Repsol on 12 March 2009 (USD 78.9
million)

 

Repsol Transaction

Sale and Purchase Agreement for the entire share capital in
Murphy Ecuador signed between Canam and Repsol on 12
March 2009

 

Repsol

Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A.

 

Respondent (or Ecuador)

Republic of Ecuador

 

Respondent’s E-mail

Respondent’s e-mail of 5 August 2016

 

Respondent’s Post-Award
Submission

Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, dated 29 July 2016

 

 

Third Fair Links Report Third Expert Report of Anton Mélard de Feuardent (Fair Links),
dated 28 July 2016, submitted by the Respondent with its Post-
Award Submission

Treaty (or BIT) Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic of

Ecuador concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investment, adopted 27 August 1993, entry into
force 11 May 1997

 

Umbrella Clause

Article II(3)(c) of the Treaty

 

 

UNCITRAL Rules

 

Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on.
International Trade Law, 1976

 

 

L

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page | of 27

THE PARTIES AND THEIR REPRESENTATIVES

Claimant is Murphy Exploration and Production Company — International, of 16290 Katy
Freeway, Suite 600, Houston, Texas 77094, U.S.A., a company duly incorporated and existing
under the laws of the State of Delaware, U.S.A. (“Claimant” or “Murphy”). Claimant is
represented by Messrs. Craig S. Miles, Roberto J. Aguirre Luzi, Esteban Leccese, Santiago
Maqueda, and Tim Kistner, and Mmes Anita Alvarez and Carol Tamez of King & Spalding LLP
in Houston; Mr. Kenneth Fleuriet and Ms. Sarah Z. Vasani of King & Spalding International LLP

in London; and Mr. Francisco Roldan of Pérez Bustamente & Ponce in Quito.

Respondent is the Republic of Ecuador (““Respondent” or “Ecuador”) with the address State’s
Attorney General, Robles 731 and Av. Amazonas, Quito, Ecuador. Respondent is represented by
Dr. Diego Garcia Carrién, Dra. Blanca Gomez de la Torre, and Dra. Giannina Osejo at the office
of the State’s Attorney General; Messrs. Mark A. Clodfelter, Alberto Wray, Constantinos
Salonidis, and Diego Cadena, and Mmes. Diana Tsutieva, Alexandra Kerr Meise, Anna D. Avilés-
Alfaro, Kathryn Kalinowski, and Kathern Schmidt of Foley Hoag LLP in Washington, D.C.; and
Messrs. Bruno Leurent, Thomas Bevilacqua, and Ivan Urzhumov, and Mmes. Angelynn Meya

and Hana Doumal of Foley Hoag LLP in Paris.

OVERVIEW OF THE DISPUTE

The present dispute arises out of a series of legislative measures taken by Ecuador relating to its
hydrocarbons industry, following increases in oil prices beginning in the first half of the 2000s. It
relates in particular to the operation of a Participation Contract entered into in 1996 by a
consortium of foreign investors (the “Consortium”) in which Murphy held an indirect interest
through its 100-percent-owned subsidiary, Murphy Ecuador Oil Limited (“Murphy Ecuador’),
and the predecessor of the state-owned entity Petroecuador. According to the Claimant, the
Participation Contract operated such that the Consortium would receive a share of the oil
production calculated on the basis of volume of production and without regard to oil prices. The
Claimant submits that the Respondent breached its obligations under the Treaty between the
United States of America and the Republic of Ecuador Concerning the Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investment, signed on 27 August 1993 (the “BIT” or “Treaty”) by
enacting legislation entitling the Respondent to participate in the Consortium’s profits where the
market value of oil exceeded certain reference prices (“Law 42”). That level of participation was
first set at a maximum of 50 percent and revised some months later to 99 percent (“Law 42 at

50%” or “Law 42 at 99%,” respectively).

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 2 of 27

4. On 6 May 2016, the Tribunal rendered a Partial Final Award (the “Partial Final Award”),
recognizing a violation of the Treaty by the Respondent through its implementation of Law 42 at

99%.

5. In paragraph 503 of the Partial Final Award, the Tribunal stated the following with respect to the

Respondent's liability under the Treaty:

The Tribunal has found that Law 42 at 50% was lawful, but that Law 42 at 99% was
unlawful. Accordingly, the Tribunal determines that Claimant should be compensated
for the fair market value of Murphy Ecuador assuming that the wrongful act—i.e., Law
42 at 99%—did not occur, meaning that Law 42 at 50% would still have been in place
at the valuation date of March 2009. For Claimant to be restored to a ‘but-for’ scenario,
the fair market value figure of USD 87.8 million must be adjusted to account for the
fact that Murphy Ecuador would have continued paying participation under Law 42
at 50% if Law 42 at 99% had never been introduced.’
The Tribunal noted that it was “not able to calculate that sum on the basis of the information
submitted by the Parties” and directed the Parties to attempt to agree, within three months of the
date of the award, on “the adjustment that should be made to the fair market value of Murphy
Ecuador of USD 87.8 million to account for an ongoing obligation on the part of Claimant to make
Law 42 payments at 50% (“Adjusted Sum”).”? The Tribunal added its finding that “Claimant is
entitled to any difference between the Adjusted Sum and the purchase price of USD 78.9 million
for Murphy Ecuador (“Entitlement’),”* and ordered the Parties to attempt to agree, also within
three months, on this amount, as well as on the “pre- and post-award interest sums referred to in

paragraphs 503-504” of the Partial Final Award.*

Til. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

6. The Partial Final Award recounts in detail the procedural history of this arbitration from its
commencement—when the Claimant filed its Notice of Arbitration dated 21 September 2011
under the UNCITRAL Rules pursuant to Article VI of the Treaty—until 6 May 2016, when it was

issued. The present section summarizes procedural developments since that date.

' Partial Final Award, para. 503.
2 Partial Final Award, para. 504.
3 Partial Final Award, para. 504.

4 Partial Final Award, paras. 504 and 548(v). The Tribunal specified that, failing an agreement of the Parties on
these outstanding calculations (Adjusted Sum, Entitlement and pre- and post-award interest sums), it would invite
each of them to submit “simultaneously and within a further month” a submission setting out its position.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 3 of 27

By letter dated 6 June 2016, the Claimant requested that the Tribunal “make an additional award
deciding Claimant’s claim for post-award interest on the costs of arbitration” pursuant to Article
37 of the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, 1976
(the “UNCITRAL Rules”). In the alternative, and “in case the Tribunal decided this issue but
failed to expressly reflect it” due to a clerical, typographic, or similar error, the Claimant sought a

correction to the Partial Final Award pursuant to Article 36 of the UNCITRAL Rules.

By letter dated 8 June 2016, the Tribunal acknowledged receipt of the Claimant’s request and

invited the Respondent to submit its comments by 17 June 2016.

By e-mail dated 10 June 2016, the Respondent advised that the Parties were “in the process of
conferring on the questions put by the Tribunal in the partial award, as well as on the possibility
of a truncated process for addressing them” and requested that the Tribunal “hold off for the time
being on depositing the partial award with the Netherlands courts and until one or both of the

parties requests otherwise.”

By letter dated 17 June 2016, the Respondent objected to the Claimant’s request of 6 June 2016,
arguing that “there is no ground for relief under either Article 36 or 37 of the UNCITRAL

Arbitration Rules.”

By e-mails dated 29 June 2016, the Parties, inter alia, indicated that they were “unable to agree
upon the calculation of the sums referred to in paragraphs 503-504 of the Partial Final Award”
and requested that, “with the Tribunal’s concurrence,” they file post-award submissions in
connection thereof by 29 July 2016—i.e., before the expiration of the three-months period
provided in the Partial Final Award for them to reach agreement. The Parties reiterated their
agreement that the Partial Final Award “not be deposited with the Netherlands courts until the

Tribunal decides the remaining issues.”

By letter dated 1 July 2016, the Tribunal accepted the Parties’ request to file post-award
submissions. On the same date, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 4 (“PO No. 4”), in
which it denied the Claimant’s request of 6 June 2016 on the basis of Articles 36 and 37 of the
UNCITRAL Rules. On the same date, the Tribunal requested a supplementary deposit from the
Parties to cover the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the Permanent Court of Arbitration

(“PCA”) in this additional phase of the proceedings.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 4 of 27

 

13. On 29 July 2016, the Parties submitted their post-award submissi (the “Resp 's Post-

Award Submission” and the “Claimant’s Post-Award Submission,” respectively), which the

PCA circulated for simultaneous transmission to the Tribunal and the other Party.

14. By e-mail dated 5 August 2016, the Respondent wrote in connection with the Claimant’s Post-
Award Submission, notably to request that the Tribunal reject the Claimant’s “entirely unrelated
request for the reconsideration of the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 4 regarding post-award
interest on costs,” and to submit that it “considers that no further submission on the issues defined

in paragraphs 503-504 is necessary” (the “Respondent’s E-mail”).

15. By e-mail dated 16 August 2016, after having been invited to do so by the Tribunal, the Claimant
provided its comments on the Respondent’s E-mail, and agreed that “absent a request from the
Tribunal ... no further briefing on paragraphs 503-504 of the Partial Final Award [was] necessary”

(the “Claimant’s E-mail’).

16. By e-mail dated 17 August 2016, the Presiding Arbitrator informed that the Tribunal “considers
that no further exchange is necessary” and that it “will deliberate on the outstanding issues after
the holiday period and will issue its award as soon as possible.”

Iv. REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

17. The Parties’ original requests for relief are detailed at paragraphs 121 to 122 of the Partial Final

Award. In their Post-Award Submissions, the Parties additionally request the following:

Claimant

1. A final determination of the Adjusted Sum, the Entitlement, and pre- and post-award
interest that Ecuador owes Murphy;

2. A reasoned determination of Murphy’s non-FET claims regarding Law 42 at 50%,
including a declaration that Ecuador breached the Treaty, and the award of all
additional damages that flow from such breach(es);

3. Rejection of Ecuador’s set-off claim;

4. Reconsideration of the Tribunal’s decision in Procedural Order No. 4 and a
concomitant award of post-award interest on costs; and

5. Any other relief that the Tribunal may deem appropriate or necessary.*

5 Claimant’ s Post-Award Submission, para. 35.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador

Respondent

Vv. SUMMA!

18. In their Post
proposals for

award interes'

19. The Claimant

follows’:

  

Final Award
Page 5 of 27

A declaration that Ecuador does not owe any compensation to Murphy Ecuador for
violation of the Treaty as determined in the Partial Final Award, including any pre-
or post-award interest or costs of arbitration, and that, in particular, as a result of the
Tribunal’s finding on total damages, Ecuador’s liability under paragraph 548(iii) of
the Partial Final Award ordering it to pay compensation to Claimant for damages
incurred for historical Law 42 payments in the amount of USD 19,971[,]309.00 and
related pre- and post-award interest in paragraphs 548(vi) and 548(viii) is fully
discharged; and

An award [of] costs of the proceeding, including Ecuador’s attorney’s fees and

expenses, in the amount that will fully reflect the relative success of the Parties in the
final analysis.®

RIES OF ARGUMENT AND ANALYSIS OF THE TRIBUNAL

-Award Submissions, the Claimant and the Respondent present their respective
the outstanding calculation of the Adjusted Sum, the Entitlement and pre- and post-

t referred to in paragraphs 503-504 of the Partial Final Award.

it provides four alternative scenarios for the calculation, which it summarizes as

   

     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Historical Warwi42) Payments 19,971,309 19,971,309 90,118,095 90,118,095
Corea 7317721 7317721 33,020,323 33,020,323
Payments
Historical Law 42
oan 27,289,031 27,289,031 123,138,418 123,138,418
Entitlement - 16,319,600 8,898,694 47,017,517
TnerestoniEntitlerent - 5,979,692 3,260,585 17,227,768
Entitlement with Interest 22,299,292 12,159,279 64,245,285
Scenario Total 27,289,031 49,588,323 135,297,697 187,383,703

6 Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 105.

7 Claimant’s Post-Aw:

ard Submission, para. 23.

 

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 6 of 27

20. The Respondent summarizes its proposed calculation as follows*:

 

 

Adjusted Sum Purchase price Entitlement Pre-Award Interest Total Entitlement value
Law 42 at 50% USD 78.9 million ‘as of 12 March 2009 ‘as of 6 May 2016 inctoding Pre-Awal
2 Interest)
fa) (b) (c) = (a) - (b) (d) fe) = (c) + (a)
57,580,092 78,908,000 (21,327,908) (7,627,705) (28,955,613)

 

 

 

 

 

 

21. Differences in the Parties’ respective calculations stem from their disagreement on a number of
issues, as discussed more fully in sub-sections 1-3 below. Sub-section 4 addresses the separate

issue of post-award interest on costs.

1. Whether the Tribunal should reconsider its position with respect to the Claimant’s non-
FET Treaty claims in relation to Law 42 at 50%

22. In its Partial Final Award, the Tribunal concluded that, as it had found that Ecuador breached the
fair and equitable treatment (“FET”) clause of the Treaty, it was “not necessary to determine
Murphy’s claims that Ecuador breached other provisions,” including (i) Article II(3)(c) (the
“Umbrella Clause”); (ii) Article II(3)(a) (full protection and security); (iii) Article II(3)(b) (non-
impairment through arbitrary measures); and (iv) Article III(1) (expropriation).? This
notwithstanding, the Claimant now requests the Tribunal to reconsider its position and to
determine its non-FET Treaty claims in relation to Law 42 at 50%—especially its claim under the
Umbrella Clause—and to declare that Ecuador violated the Treaty by enacting and enforcing Law
42 at both 99% and 50%.!° The Respondent opposes this request on the basis that it “proposes that
the Tribunal consider factors outside of the principles set forth in paragraphs 503-504”"'! of its

Partial Final Award.

A. Claimant’s Position

23. The Claimant submits that the Tribunal’s conclusion that a finding to the effect that Ecuador
breached one of the non-FET Treaty provisions would have no impact on damages remains valid
in relation to its claims regarding Law 42 at 99%; however, that conclusion does not hold with
respect to Law 42 at 50%. The Claimant argues instead that any finding of a breach of a non-FET

provision with respect to Law 42 at 50% would have a “substantial impact” on damages, including

® Respondent's Post-Award Submission, para. 18.
° Partial Final Award, para. 294.
© Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, paras. 11, 18.

4! Respondent's E-mail; Respondent's Post-Award Submission, para. 6.

 

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 7 of 27

v2

“on the calculation of the Adjusted Sum and Entitlement.”'* According to the Claimant, the

Tribunal retains jurisdiction to decide its non-FET claims until a full final award is rendered,

because it “chose not to decide those claims in the First Partial Award.”°

24. The Claimant further submits that the Partial Final Award is “consistent with Murphy’s position
that Law 42 (at both 50% and 99%) violated the Treaty’s Umbrella Clause.” It cites excerpts
from the award recognizing Murphy’s “right[s]” and “guarantee[s]” under the Participation
Contract—rights that “could not be modified unilaterally,” the Respondent’s attempt to introduce
“a unilateral change” by virtue of its Law 42 notwithstanding.'> It follows that, although the
Tribunal’s findings occurred in the context of its analysis of Murphy’s FET claim, such reasoning
would be consistent with additional findings that the Respondent independently breached the
Treaty’s Umbrella Clause. Accordingly, the Claimant submits, “Murphy deems it critical that the
Tribunal provide a reasoned decision on Murphy’s non-FET claims.”!¢

25. The Claimant notes that if the Tribunal were to uphold one of the non-FET claims in this way,
there would be “no need to adjust downward the fair market value of Murphy Ecuador” as of
12 March 2009 (i.e., USD 87.8 million), to account for the impact of Law 42 at 50% as called for
in the Partial Final Award (i.e., no Adjusted Sum).'’ Such a finding would also entitle the Claimant

to “additional damages” to compensate Murphy for payments it made under Law 42 at 50%.'*

B. Respondent’s Position

26. The Respondent opposes the Claimant’s request that the Tribunal examine its non-FET Treaty
claims in relation to Law 42 at 50%. In its view, any damages calculation incorporating an
assumption that Law 42 at 50% was wrongful in light of Ecuador’s obligations under the Treaty
would be “impermissible” in light of the Tribunal’s findings on liability in its Partial Final

Award." It argues that the Claimant’s pleadings in this regard amount to an “attempt[] to divert

2 Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, para. 9.

3 Claimant's Post-Award Submission, para. 10.

4 Claimant's Post-Award Submission, para. 12.

'5 Claimant's Post-Award Submission, para. 12, referring to Partial Final Award, paras. 190, 270-271, 273.
'6 Claimant's Post-Award Submission, para. 12.

"7 Claimant's Post-Award Submission, para. 19.

'8 Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, para. 19. The Claimant submits that such damages would be easily
calculable following the same methodology the Tribunal employed in setting damages for Law 42 at 99%.” Id.

'° Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, paras. 81, 98. The Respondent addressed the question of examining the
Claimant’s non-FET Treaty claims, in relation to Law 42 at 50%, in response to two of three sets of computations
that the Claimant presented to the Respondent during the Parties’ post-award consultations. According to the

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 8 of 27

the Tribunal’s attention” from the principles already set forth in the Partial Final Award with

regard to the calculation of damages.”

27. Inresponse to the Claimant’s suggestion that the Tribunal has not yet decided the Claimant’s non-
FET Treaty claims in relation to Law 42 at 50%, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal clearly
decided that:

the damages alleged by Claimant under the other heads of claim are the same as those
alleged under its claim for breach of the FET standard; thus finding a breach under
Article II(3)(a) of the Treaty as opposed to under any other provision invoked by
Claimant has no impact on the calculation of damages.”!
The Respondent further recalls the Tribunal’s finding to the effect that, because the Claimant
invoked the violation of multiple Treaty provisions as alternative grounds for finding the
Respondent liable under the BIT, “once the Tribunal has found that one of those alternatives is
well-founded, deciding on the other grounds is no longer part of the Tribunal’s mission.” In this
case, the Respondent notes, the Tribunal has already determined that Law 42 at 50% “was a
reasonable measure” in light of the circumstances,”> making it unnecessary to explicitly address
the Claimant’s non-FET claims in respect to the legislation. In any event, the Respondent notes,
the Tribunal did expressly reject some of the Claimant’s arguments relating to the Umbrella

Clause.”

28. Finally, the Respondent submits that the Claimant could have pursued a request for an additional
award under the UNCITRAL Rules if it seriously believed that the Tribunal failed to decide any

of its claims.”°

Respondent, those two sets of calculations rest on the assumption that Law 42 at 99% and at 50% are both
wrongful. See Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, paras. 78-79.

 

2 Respondent's Post-Award Submission, para. 6; Respondent’s E-mail.

2! Respondent’ s Post-Award Submission, para. 83 referring to Partial Final Award, para. 294 (emphasis added by
the Respondent).

2 Respondent’ s Post-Award Submission, para. 84 referring to Partial Final Award, para. 294 (emphasis added by
the Respondent).

23 Respondent’s Post-Award Submissi

  

> Respondent's Post-Award Submissi
25 Respondent’s Post-Award Subm

2 Respondent’s Post-Award Subm

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 9 of 27

C. Analysis of the Tribunal

29. The Tribunal decided in the Partial Final Award that Ecuador breached the FET standard contained
in Article II(3)(a) of the Treaty and that this was sufficient to dispose of all of the Claimant’s

claims under the Treaty:

As the Tribunal has found that Ecuador breached Article II(3)(a) of the Treaty, it is not

necessary to determine Claimant’s claims that Ecuador breached other provisions of

the Treaty such as Article II(3)(c) (the “umbrella” clause); (2) Article II(3)(a) (full

protection and security); (3) Article I[(3)(b) (non-impairment through arbitrary

measures); and (4) Article III(1) (expropriation). The Tribunal is satisfied that the

damages alleged by Claimant under the other heads of claim are the same as those

alleged under its claim for breach of the FET standard; thus finding a breach under

Article II(3)(a) of the Treaty as opposed to under any other provision invoked by
Claimant has no impact on the calculation of damages.””

30. The Claimant disagrees with the above, arguing instead that “a finding that Law 42 at 50% violated

any provision of the BIT (other than FET) would indeed have a substantial impact on damages,

9928

including on the calculation of the Adjusted Sum and the Entitlement.

31. The Respondent, however, rightly points out that the damages alleged by the Claimant under its
claim for breach of the FET standard and under the other heads of claim are the same. As such, in
finding a breach of the FET standard under Article II(3)(a), the Tribunal effectively addressed all
of the Claimant’s claims under the Treaty. The Claimant’s damages did not consist of “separate
and distinct question[s]” of liability as the Claimant now suggests. Further, the Respondent
correctly recalls the Tribunal’s observation in the Partial Final Award that “since Claimant has
relied on the violation of several of the Treaty’s provisions as alternative grounds for its claim for
compensation, once the Tribunal has found that one of those alternative grounds is well-founded,

deciding on the other grounds is no longer part of the Tribunal’s mission.” ®

32. The Tribunal therefore rejects the Claimant’s claim because it calls for the Tribunal to reconsider
what it already decided in the Partial Final Award. Contrary to the Claimant’s suggestion that the
Tribunal “chose not to decide” its non-FET claims,* the Tribunal considers that it already has
determined the extent of the Respondent’s liability in the Partial Final Award, under the aegis of

the Treaty’s FET standard. It would be an unnecessary and duplicative reexamination of the merits

7 Partial Final Award, para, 294 (emphasis added).
28 Claimant’ s Post-Award Submission, para. 9.
2° Partial Final Award, para, 294 (emphasis added).

% Claimant’ s Post-Award Submission, para. 10.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 10 of 27

if the Tribunal were to consider anew whether the Respondent breached the Treaty’s non-FET

provisions.

2. Whether the value of the Adjusted Sum and the Entitlement should account for the
Extension Contract

33. In its Partial Final Award, the Tribunal adopted Ecuador’s “future free cash flows of Murphy
Ecuador between March 2009 and January 2012” for the purpose of calculating the fair market
value of Murphy Ecuador as of 12 March 2009, discounting the effect of Law 42.*! According to
the Claimant, this calculation should be revised to take into account not only free cash flows
through the end of the original term of the Participation Contract, i.e., 2012, but also the extended
term to 2018 of the new contractual framework negotiated with Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A.
(“Repsol”) as part of the Claimant’s sale of Murphy Ecuador (the “Extension Contract”). The
Respondent, for its part, disagrees with any such revision (i.e., the incorporation of the Extension
Contract into the Tribunal’s calculation of its “but-for” scenario as described in paragraphs 501

and 502 of the Partial Final Award).

A. Claimant’s Position

34, The Claimant submits that a fair calculation of the Entitlement, as called for by the Tribunal in its
Partial Final Award,” must consider the value of the contractual extension from 2012 to 2018.**
The Claimant notes in this regard that the Tribunal’s assessment of Murphy Ecuador’ s fair market
value—at USD 87.8 million—currently excludes the Extension Contract’s value; in its view,
however, the Extension Contract conferred “valuable extension rights on the Consortium, which
Repsol realized at the time of the sale and undoubtedly factored into” the sale price it paid for its
rights under the Extension Contract (the “Repsol Sale Price”). Accordingly, the Claimant
submits, “the Adjusted Sum must also reflect the value of the contract extension that is included
in the Repsol Sale Price but not included in the fair market value of Murphy Ecuador as calculated

by Ecuador’s quantum experts and adopted by the Tribunal.”*> The Claimant considers that the

3! Partial Final Award, paras. 501-502.
® Partial Final Award, para. 504.

33 Claimant's Post-Award Submission, para. 21

 

Claimant's Post-Award Submission, paras. 20, 21.

 

35 Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, para. 21 (emphasis in original).

35.

36.

37.

38.

36 Claimant’s Post-Award Subm

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 11 of 27

hearing testimony of the Respondent’s quantum expert also supports the inclusion of the Extension

Contract in the calculation of Murphy’s Entitlement.**

The Claimant contends that the implicit value of the Extension Contract as factored into the Repsol
Sale Price amounts to approximately USD 38.1 million. Accordingly, it requests that this amount
be “added to Murphy Ecuador’s fair market value in all scenarios before the Repsol Sale Price is
deducted from the Adjusted Sum, with concomitant impact on the Entitlement.”*” Failure to make
such an adjustment would result in the Respondent receiving “credit for a Repsol Sale Price that
includes value based on an extension to 2018 as against an Adjusted Sum that only values cash
flows under the Participation Contract’s original term to January 2012” and “unfair

undercompensation” for the Claimant.**

B. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s assumption that the Extension Contract’s value is
“severable from the [Repsol Sale Price] and needs to be added to the Adjusted Sum before
calculating the Entitlement value.”* It argues that such an assumption (i) exceeds the parameters
set out in paragraphs 503 and 504 of the Partial Final Award, (ii) lacks any economic justification,
and (iii) contradicts Navigant’s first computation as well as the Claimant’s previously stated

position.

The Respondent describes Navigant’s—and, by extension, the Claimant’s—approach in the

following terms:

The Third Navigant Assumption calls, in effect, for the deduction of the “Extension
Value” from the [Repsol Sale Price] and its concomitant discarding from the calculation
of the Entitlement. The manner in which Navigant seeks to effectuate that is by adding
the so-called Extension Value to the Adjusted Sum before deducting the full [Repsol
Sale Price]. In that way, the impact of the “Extension Value” in the calculation of the
Entitlement is neutralized.“

It attacks this approach on the above-stated three grounds. First, with respect to the parameters set

out in paragraphs 503 and 504 of the Partial Final Award, the Respondent observes that “[t]he

   

sion, para. 21 referring to Hearing Tr. (Day 3), pp. 640:4-641:9; see also

Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, fn. 23.

57 Claimant’s Post-Award Submis

 

sion, para. 22.

38 Claimant’ s Post-Award Submission, para. 22.

» Respondent’s Post-Award Subm

“0 Respondent’s Post-Award Submi

 

39.

40.

41.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 12 of 27

only adjustment to Murphy Ecuador’s FMV called for by the Tribunal was to account for ‘an
ongoing obligation on the part of Claimant to make Law 42 payments at 50%.’””4' The Respondent
adds that the Tribunal envisaged deducting “the full amount of the SPA sale price in order to
calculate the Entitlement.’”*? The Respondent therefore argues that the Claimant’s suggestion that
only part of the Repsol Sale Price should be credited against Murphy Ecuador’s fair market value

(under Law 42 at 50%) is inconsistent with the Partial Final Award.**

Second, and in any event, the Respondent submits that the Claimant’s approach to calculating its
Entitlement “lacks any economic justification.”44 As noted in the Third Fair Links Report,
Navigant has provided no explanation as to why “the compensatory benefits from the Extension
Contract” received by the Claimant, by virtue of the USD 78.9 million it received as payment for
Murphy Ecuador, “should be eliminated from the actual compensation.”*

Finally, the Respondent contends that Navigant’s approach, as described above, is in “complete
contradiction” of its “consistent position in favor of the deduction of the full amount of the SPA
sale price from the overall damages claimed.”*° In this connection, the Respondent notes that
“neither the Claimant nor Navigant ever made such a claim either in the ICSID arbitration or in
the previous phase” of these proceedings.*” This, according to the Respondent, demonstrates the
Claimant’s adherence to “the principle of ful! deduction of the SPA sale price from Claimant’s

overall damages,” its present submission to the contrary notwithstanding.“

In any event, and out of an “abundance of caution,” the Respondent adds that Navigant’s
computation of the value of the Extension Contract benefit, considered on the merits and

independent of Navigant’s previous position, “appears to be seriously flawed.”” In this regard,

41 Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 90, referring to Partial Final Award, para 504.

*2 Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 90 (emphasis in original).

+3 Respondent's Post-Award Submi

ion, para. 90; Respondent's E-mail.

  

“4 Respondent's Post-Award Submission, para. 91.

+5 Respondent's Post-Award Submis

 

ra. 91, referring to Third Fair Links Expert Report, para. 100.

“6 Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 92.

47 Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 92. See also Respondent's Post-Award Submission, paras. 93-96.

+8 See Respondent's Post-Award Submission, paras. 92-95.

* Respondent's Post-Award Submission, fn. 159.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 13 of 27

the Respondent points to a series of what it considers to be methodological flaws with the

computations presented by the Claimant during the Parties’ post-award consultations.”

C. Analysis of the Tribunal

42. Inthe Partial Final Award, the Tribunal determined that “the fair market value of Murphy Ecuador
as of 12 March 2009 in the absence of Law 42 was USD 87.8 million.”*! Further, the Tribunal
considered that only one adjustment should be made to Murphy Ecuador’s fair market value. This
was the adjustment to account for the Claimant’s ongoing obligation to make Law 42 at 50%
payments. Applying the adjustment produces the Adjusted Sum, which in turn, allows for the
calculation of the Claimant’s Entitlement. This is fully described by the Tribunal at paragraphs
503 and 504 of the Partial Final Award.

43. The Claimant now seeks to include the Extension Contract’s value as an additional adjustment.
The Tribunal considers that any further adjustment to the fair market value of Murphy Ecuador of
USD 87.8 million (i.e., an adjustment other than to take into account the Claimant’s ongoing
obligation to make Law 42 at 50% payments), would be inconsistent with—and amount to a
reconsideration of—the Partial Final Award. It, therefore, agrees with the Respondent that the
argument raised by the Claimant exceeds the parameters set out in paragraphs 503 and 504 of the

Partial Final Award, and rejects the Claimant’s claim.

3. Whether the sale of Murphy Ecuador has a negative or a positive effect on damages

44. The Parties disagree on how to account for the difference between the Adjusted Sum and the
Repsol Sale Price paid by Repsol for Murphy Ecuador on 12 March 2009 (the “Repsol
Transaction”), as called for by the Tribunal in its Partial Final Award. The Respondent argues
that the difference is negative; it therefore submits that the Claimant’s damages should be
decreased, or “offset,” in order to avoid over-compensation. The Claimant, in turn, submits that
the Respondent’s economic analysis lacks merit and maintains that the Tribunal contemplated the

Entitlement as an “additional sum” to Murphy, rather than a credit favoring Ecuador.

A. Respondent’s Position

45. The Respondent submits that the difference between the Adjusted Sum and the Repsol Sale Price

is negative. Further, it considers that the Tribunal has both the power and the duty, as specified in

50 See Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, fn. 159 & paras. 99-103.
5! Partial Final Award, para. 502.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 14 of 27

paragraphs 503 and 504 of its Partial Final Award and guided by general principles of

compensation under international law, to “offset” this sum from the amount owed to Murphy.
i. The Repsol T: ion fully mitigated the Claimant’s damages

46. Asa preliminary matter, the Respondent considers that the Parties have agreed that the Adjusted
Sum amounts to USD 57.6 million.* In support of its claim, the Respondent refers to its Third
Fair Links Report and Navigant’s first computation presented by the Claimant during the

Parties’ post-award consultations which, it says, present this amount.**

47. The Respondent therefore submits that the difference between the Adjusted Sum—i.e., USD 57.6
million—and the Repsol Sale Price—i.e., USD 78.9 million—has a negative value of
approximately USD 21.3 million. In other words, the “Claimant was paid USD 21.3 million
more for Murphy Ecuador than its FMV under Law 42 at 50%.”**

48. The Respondent notes that the Tribunal “has not decided” the effect on the Claimant’s overall
damages of its sale of Murphy Ecuador arising from the Treaty breach, and submits that the
Repsol Transaction effectively and “fully mitigated” the Claimant’s damages under Law 42 above
50%, i.e., under Law 42 at 99%. It argues that this point is not in dispute. The Claimant’s expert,
for example, “consistently conceptualized Claimant’s total loss” as resulting from the breach
taking into account the Repsol Sale Price;*’ the Tribunal similarly recognized that the Repsol
Transaction had been undertaken by the Claimant to mitigate its losses in response to Law 42 at
99%.** In light of what the Respondent considers, therefore, to be uniform agreement among the
Parties, their experts and the Tribunal, it contends that the transaction’s value should be deducted

from the damages owed to Murphy.

52 Respondent's Post-Award Submission, paras. 14-15.

 

°3 The Respondent addresses the other two computations that the Claimant presented, both of which, in its words,

“radically depart” from the Tribunal’s ruling at *s Pos ission, sec. V. The *s
arguments regarding the assumptions underlying these other two computations are summarized in paras. 26-28
and 37-4 1above.

 

54 Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 16.
55 Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 16.

56 Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 20.

 

57 Respondent’s Post-Award Submi
Respondent's Post-Award Submi:

n, paras. 22-25, referring to Second Navigant Report, para. 133; see also

    
 

58 Respondent's Post-Award Submission, paras. 27-28, referring to Partial Final Award, para. 446,

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 15 of 27

49. The Respondent further contends that the fact that the Tribunal did not precisely anticipate the
mitigating value of the Repsol Transaction cannot prevent it from recognizing it as negative.
Indeed, the Tribunal stated that “any difference” must be taken into account, including, by
implication, a negative one.*’ The Respondent therefore rejects the Claimant’s assertion that the
fact that it already received payment in excess of Murphy Ecuador’s fair market value under Law
42 at 50% “can have no other effect than reducing the Entitlement amount to zero.”® In the
Respondent’s view, such a “simplistic” reading would be “contrary to international law.”*! In any
event, this constitutes an admission from the Claimant that it has “already been fully compensated”
for its losses. The Respondent additionally notes that Navigant itself previously “acknowledged
that the difference between the fair market value of Murphy Ecuador and the USD 78.9 million

purchase price paid by Repsol-YPF could yield a negative amount.”

50. According to the Respondent’s Third Fair Links Report, the “overall impact” of the Repsol
Transaction on the Claimant’s damages yields a negative value of USD 1.8 million as of 6 May
2017, or USD 1.3 million, excluding pre-award interest. It follows, in the Respondent’s view,
that the sale “more than compensated” the Claimant for its losses relating to Law 42 at 99%,
something which the Respondent suggests the Claimant itself recognized in an internal
memorandum. Accordingly, the Respondent submits that the Claimant had “no unsatisfied

losses” as of 12 March 2009 (the date of the Repsol Transaction).

51. Finally, the Respondent argues that, as a further result of the full mitigation, no pre- or post-award
interest is owed to the Claimant. The Third Fair Links Report states that both “pre-award and post-
award interest rate should apply to a zero value and lead to no overall pre-award and post-award

interest.” Applying these rates to a value of zero is appropriate in light of the fact that the

ra. 11.

5 Respondent’s Post-Award Submi

© Respondent's Post-Award Submi

 

©! Respondent’s Post-Award Submi

© Respondent's Post-Award Submission, para.

 

5.
ra. 5.
5.
. 3

© Respondent's Post-Award Submission, para.

© Respondent's Post-Award Submis

 

sion, para. 32, referring to Third Fair Links Report, para. 67 & p. 16, fig. 3.
33,

© Respondent's Post-Award Submission, para. 3

 

referring to Third Fair Links Report, para. 70.

 
 

© Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 34.

© Third Fair Links Report, para. 72.

52.

53.

54.

& Respondent's Post-Award Submi

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 16 of 27

USD 7.14 million pre-award interest as described in the Partial Final Award “is fully mitigated by

the USD (7.63) million negative Interest related to the Entitlement.”
ii. The Tribunal has the power and duty to “offset” negative amounts

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal has the power, and indeed the duty, to take the negative
Entitlement amount into account in its calculations of the Claimant’s losses, and, therefore, of the
damages owed to it by Ecuador. It argues that the Tribunal “expressly reserved the power to ‘make
the necessary findings’ in view of the calculation of the Adjusted Sum, the Entitlement and pre-
and post-award interest” in the Partial Final Award.“ Even without this “reservation of power,”
the Tribunal could, in any event, apply “those of its inherent powers ‘instrumental in the
adjudication of the main claim,’ which include the power to provide redress for the injury actually

suffered.”””

In the Respondent's view, the “necessary findings” the Tribunal reserved for this phase of the case

include an “offset” of the amounts partially awarded in the Partial Final Award:

A finding of such an adjustment is necessary in order to assure that these proceedings,
and the Tribunal’s legal and factual determinations, do not lead to overcompensation.
Otherwise, the outcome of these proceedings, which is still very much within the
Tribunal’s power to determine, will be contrary to all principles of compensation under
International Law as universally recognized, including by Murphy itself.”
The Respondent submits that the applicable “principle[] of compensation” under international law
is “full reparation of any loss.”’? Any such loss, however, must be defined by reference to
“concrete and actual damage incurred.””* Accordingly, full reparation requires the avoidance of

overcompensation and double recovery,” as demonstrated by the practice of investment

  

ion, para. 35, referring to Third Fair Links Report, para. 73 & tbl. 1.

© Respondent's Post-Award Submission, paras. 62, 69.

7 Respondent’ s Post-Award Submis

 

ion, para. 67.

7! Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 4.

% Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 36.

3 Respondent's Post-Award Submission, para. 36, referring to Partial Final Award, para. 425.

74 Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 36.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 17 of 27

tribunals,’> the Permanent Court of International Justice,” and the ILC Articles on State
Responsibility.”” A corollary to the avoidance of double recovery, the Respondent advances, is the
subtraction— or “offsetting”—of benefits against losses, at least where these derive from or share
a common factual nucleus.” It contends that “any difference” between the Adjusted Sum and the
Repsol Sale Price must be accounted for in order to accurately “restore[]” the Claimant to the
position in which it would have been but for the Treaty breach,” including “all compensatory
benefits” it received from the sale of Murphy Ecuador. The Respondent therefore argues that “to
properly assess Claimant’s total loss,” the negative Entitlement must offset the positive damages

value related to historical Law 42 payments.*°

55. The Respondent further notes that both elements of the Claimant’s damages result “from the same
breach of the Treaty” (i.e., the imposition of Law 42 at 99%); therefore the benefit which the
Claimant derived from the Repsol Transaction “is derived from the ‘same cause as the harm,’” as
recognized in paragraphs 466 to 467 of the Partial Final Award.*' Both elements—damages
flowing from the imposition of Law 42, and the benefit incurred through a sale of Murphy Ecuador
that was motivated by the same law—should be “assessed in totality.”*? In this regard, the

Respondent notes that

it is irrelevant that the Law 42 payments and Entitlement constitute two [separate]
elements of damages. Other tribunals have deducted from one head of damages the
gains that resulted from awarding compensation for another head of damages to avoid
double recovery.**

75 Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, paras. 36-40, referring to, among others, Victor Pey Casado &
Foundation “Presidente Allende” v. Republic of Chile, CSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on the Application
for Annulment of the Republic of Chile (18 December 2012); CME Czech Republic B.V. (The Netherlands) v. The
Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award (13 September 2001), para. 582 (CLA-32); Railroad Development
Corp. v. Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/23, Award (29 June 2012), para. 265 (RLA-436).

7 Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 49, referring to Factory at Chorzow (Claim for Indemnity)
(Merits), Judgement, p. 47 (RLA-252).

77 Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 38, referring to ILC Draft Articles on State Responsibility, Art. 36,
Commentary (RLA-284).

78 Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, paras. 41-43 (citing the UNIDROIT Principles of International
Commercial Contracts and other sources of international law), 44-48 (citing various instances of the principle in
municipal law).

 

79 Respondent's Post-Award Submission, paras. 19-20; see also Partial Final Award, para. 503.
*° Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 21.
8! Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 51, referring to Partial Final Award, paras. 466-467.

8? The Respondent considers the Claimant to share this view, at least in principle (if not in application). See
Respondent’ s Post-Award Submission, para. 52.

 

3 Respondent's Post-Award Submission, paras. 53-54, referring to Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB 04/1, Award (27 November 2013), para. 94 (RLA-480); Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 18 of 27

56. Further, the Respondent argues that the “Compensatory Benefit” embedded in the Repsol Sale
Price—i.e., the reason that the purchase price is higher than the Adjusted Sum—is attributable to
Ecuador. Citing the Third Fair Links Report, the Respondent notes that “[t]he reason for this higher
value” derives from “benefits extended by Ecuador to the Consortium members” under the
Extension Contract—providing, inter alia, a seven-year extension for the concession, a higher
reference price of USD 42.5 per barrel, and division of profits calculated from a more favourable
base price.** The Respondent notes that this—the fact that the sale price incorporated the “benefits

of the Extension Contract granted by Ecuador”—is not being disputed by the Claimant.**

57. Finally, the Respondent submits that the “offsetting” it seeks will not result in its unjust
enrichment. It notes that the Claimant “effectively admits that the deduction” would not lead to
such a result, and that, in any event, Ecuador would not “actually receiv[e] any sums” as a result
of a negative offset. Rather, any such offset would merely counterbalance the “significant

benefits” offered by Ecuador through the Extension Contract.**

iii. The Tribunal should make a further finding on costs as a result of the full mitigation
of the Claimant’s damages

58. The Respondent requests that the Tribunal order the Claimant to pay the Respondent a portion of
the Respondent's costs of arbitration and costs of legal representation and assistance, or order that
each Party shall bear its own costs.*’ In the Respondent’s view, such an order would be consistent
with the Tribunal’s guiding criterion for the allocation of costs, i.e., the Parties’ rate of success in
the arbitration.** The Respondent states that, in this case, the “full mitigation” of the Claimant’s
losses by virtue of the Repsol Transaction (on the understanding that Law 42 at 50% was lawful)
necessarily “entails that Claimant did not prevail on its damages claim;” this, in turn, necessitates
“a further finding by the Tribunal in its final fixing of the costs of arbitration.”*” The Respondent

argues that both paragraph 504 of the Partial Final Award and the Tribunal’s “inherent power over

S.A, & Vivendi Universal S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19 (9 April 2015), para. 104
(RLA-487).

* Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, paras. 55-56.

  

85 Respondent's Post-Award Submission, para. 57.
*© Respondent’s Post-Award Submissi

87 Respondent's Post-Award Submissi

 

88 Respondent’s Post-Award Subm ra. 72 referring to Partial Final Award, para. 546.

* Respondent’s Post-Award Subm 72.

59.

60.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 19 of 27

procedure,” as codified in Article 15 of the UNCITRAL Rules, empower it to make such a
finding.”

B. Claimant’s Position

The Claimant submits four alternative damage scenarios for the Tribunal’s consideration and

rejects the Respondent’s proposal that the Entitlement be “offset” as untimely and without merit.

i. The Claimant’s damage scenarios

The Claimant provides four alternative scenarios for the calculation of the Adjusted Sum, the
Entitlement, and pre- and post-award interest, ranging from approximately USD 27.3 million to
USD 187.3 million.*! Those scenarios, as recited in the Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, are

as follows:

e Scenario 1: Law 42 at 99% a breach with no consideration of extension value. Assumes
that only Law 42 at 99% is a breach and provides no value adjustment for contract
extension. Adjusted Sum is USD 57.1 million. Entitlement is USD 0. Historical payments
under Law 42 at 99% are USD 19.9 million (as found in the Partial Final Award). Total
damages, including pre-award interest to 6 May 2016, are USD 27.3 million.

e Scenario 2: Law 42 at 99% a breach with consideration of extension value. Assumes that
only Law 42 at 99% is a breach and provides value adjustment for contract extension.
Adjusted Sum is USD 95.2 million. Entitlement is USD 16.3 million. Historical payments
under Law 42 at 99% are USD 27.2 million (as found in the Partial Final Award). Total
damages, including pre-award interest to 6 May 2016, are USD 49.5 million.

e Scenario 3: Law 42 at 50% a breach without consideration of extension value. Assumes
that Law 42 at 50% is also a breach but provides no value adjustment for contract
extension. Adjusted Sum is USD 87.8 million. Entitlement is USD 8.9 million. Historical
payments under Law 42 at both 50% and 99% are USD 123.1 million. Total damages,
including pre-award interest to 6 May 2016, are USD 135.2 million.

e Scenario 4: Law 42 at 50% a breach with consideration of extension value. Assumes that

Law 42 at 50% is also a breach and provides value adjustment for contract extension.

°” Respondent’s Post-Award Submission, para. 73 referring to Partial Final Award, para. 504; UNCITRAL Rules,
Art. 15

°! Claimant’ s Post-Award Submission, para. 23.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 20 of 27

Adjusted Sum is USD 125.9 million. Entitlement is USD 47 million. Historical payments
under Law 42 at both 50% and 99% are USD 123.1 million. Total damages, including pre-
award interest to 6 May 2016, are USD 187.3 million.”

ii. The Respondent’s proposed “offset” is irrelevant, untimely, and invalid

61. The Claimant objects to the Respondent’s proposed “offset” of the benefits it alleges the Claimant
accrued in respect of the Repsol Transaction as against the amount of the Entitlement, as

“untenable and untimely.”°?

62. The Claimant describes the Respondent’s “eleventh-hour attempt to convert the [E]ntitlement into
acredit” to be applied against damages as misguided for four reasons.” First, the Claimant objects
to the Respondent’s proposition that the Claimant is “liable to Ecuador” for having sold its stake
in Murphy Ecuador for a price higher than the Respondent’s estimation of the company’s fair
market value at the time of the sale. The Claimant suggests that there is “no link” between the
historical Law 42 payments and the Entitlement that might otherwise justify an “offset” from one
category to the other; rather, the two categories of damages are “separate and distinct.”

63. Second, and to similar effect, the Claimant reiterates that the Respondent’s “set-off” theory
wrongly compares “‘apples to oranges’ by seeking to offset a Repsol Sale Price that includes
substantial value for the extension against an Adjusted Sum that includes none.” In this regard,
the Claimant notes its “disappoint[ment]” by what it considers to be the Respondent’s attempt to
“mislead” the Tribunal by suggesting that Murphy itself has consistently “deducted the Repsol
Sale Price from its full damages claim, including its claim for historical Law 42 payments.”*’ The
Claimant submits that this is “demonstrably false,” and refers the Tribunal to the following passage

from its Reply on the Merits (the “Reply”):

Ecuador alleges that Murphy’s sale of its interest in Block 16 to Repsol resulted in an
accounting gain, such that Murphy suffered no damages as a result of Law 42. This is
a non-sequitur for two reasons. First, the Repsol sale did not mitigate in any way the
US$118 million in additional participation that Murphy paid prior to the sale.**

°2 Claimant’ s Post-Award Submission, para. 23.
°3 Claimant’ s Post-Award Submission, para. 24.
°% Claimant’ s Post-Award Submission, paras. 24-29 (emphasis omitted).

°5 Claimant’ s Post-Award Submission, para. 26.

 

° Claimant's Post-Award Submission, para. 29.
°7 Claimant’s E-mail.

°8 Claimant’ s E-mail (emphasis omitted), referring to Reply, para. 26.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 21 of 27

The Claimant also recalls that the table of contents to its Reply describes its two pre-interest
damages heads as (i) “Historical Law 42 Payments Should Be Awarded Pre-Tax,” and (ii)
“Damages Post-March 2009 Should Be Measured as ‘But For’ Cash Flows to January 2012 Less
the Actual Proceeds of the Repsol Sale.” °? This, according to the Claimant, clearly establishes
that “the Repsol Sale Price acted as a mitigation of post-sale forward-looking damages but not of

pre-sale historical Law 42 payments.”!°

64. The third ground on which the Claimant objects to an “offset” from the Entitlement is derived
from the Partial Final Award itself, which, in the Claimant’s view, does not contemplate that the
Entitlement “could work to the detriment of the award of historical Law 42 payments to
Murphy.”'”! In this regard, the Claimant rejects the Respondent’s suggestion that the Tribunal
meant, knowingly or otherwise, to calculate the Entitlement as a credit “for any negative difference
between the adjusted fair market value of Murphy Ecuador and the Repsol Sale Price.” '°?
Similarly, it rejects the argument that the Tribunal only referred to the Entitlement as a “positive
potential outcome” in the Partial Final Award on the theory that it did not foresee that “application
of the 50% rate to Murphy Ecuador’s 2009-2012 cash flows might result in a reduction of the Fair
Links-calculated FMV of Murphy Ecuador by the only $9 million or so needed to bring the
Adjusted Value to less than the Repsol Sale Price.”'

65. The Claimant suggests that the Tribunal’s formulation “meant exactly what it said,” namely (in its
reading) that the Entitlement could “only lead to further damages to Murphy” and not to a credit
in Ecuador’s favour.'* According to the Claimant, the “very definition” of the Entitlement
connotes “something to be awarded as an additional sum,” rather than a credit to be subtracted
from the Claimant’s damages.'®° Had the Tribunal foreseen the possibility that the Adjusted Sum
could be less than the Repsol Sale Price—i.e., yielding a negative number— the Claimant

considers that it would have suggested as much in the Partial Final Award.!°°

% Claimant’ s E-mail.

100 Claimant’s E-mail.

101 Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, para. 27.
2 Claimant’s E-mail.

3 Claimant’s E-mail.

14 Claimant’s E-mail.

15 Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, para. 27.

106 Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, para. 27.

66.

67.

68.

69.

107 Claimant's

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 22 of 27

Finally and in any event, the Claimant submits that, as Ecuador never raised the possibility of an
“offset” at an earlier stage of the proceedings, the Respondent can no longer “raise it now.”!””
Accordingly, it submits that the Respondent’s set-off claim is without merit and procedurally

inadmissible.

C. Analysis of the Tribunal

As a preliminary matter, the Claimant admits that, if it is assumed that only Law 42 at 99% is a
breach of the Treaty and no adjustment is to be made to the fair market value of Murphy Ecuador
for the Extension Contract, the Adjusted Sum—taking into account the Claimant’s ongoing

108

obligation to make Law 42 at 50% payments—is USD 57.1 million,'®* which is less than the

USD 87.8 million value the Tribunal found at paragraph 502 of the Partial Final Award.

The difference between the Adjusted Sum (USD 57.1 million) and the Repsol Sale Price
(USD 78.9 million) is negative. According to the Claimant, its Entitlement is therefore zero.!
The Respondent, on the other hand, considers that the negative difference between the two
amounts should be taken into consideration by the Tribunal in its calculation of the Claimant’s
losses, arguing that, in selling Murphy Ecuador for USD 78.9 million, the Claimant fully mitigated
its damages under Law 42 above 50%.'!° The Respondent, therefore, introduces a new offset claim
and also requests that the Tribunal make a new finding on costs as the result of what they refer to
as the “full mitigation of the Claimant’s damages.”!'! The Claimant disputes this on the basis that
the Repsol Sale Price acts to mitigate post-sale forward-looking damages, but not pre-sale

historical Law 42 payments.!!?

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimant’s analysis. More precisely, as summarized above, the
Claimant invokes four grounds to object to the Respondent’s position.''? The Tribunal finds that
the first three grounds are well-founded. In particular, it agrees with the Claimant that the
Respondent’s set-off theory wrongly seeks to establish a “link between the historical Law 42

payments and the Entitlement” in order to justify an offset. As stated by the Claimant, the Repsol

 

st-Award Submission, para. 28.

 

108 Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, para. 23.

109 Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, para. 23.

410 Respondent's Post-Award Submission, paras. 22-25, referring to Second Navigant Report, para. 133; see also
Respondent's Post-Award Submission, para. 29.

111 Respondent's Post-Award Submission, para. 72.

12 Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, para. 26.

113 Paras. 62-66 above.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 23 of 27

Sale Price acts to mitigate post-sale forward-looking damages, and not pre-sale historical Law 42

payments. The two categories of damages are “separate and distinct.”

70. The Tribunal therefore rejects the Respondent’s submission that the negative difference between
the Adjusted Sum and the Repsol Sale Price can be “offset” from the Claimant’s damages for
historical Law 42 payments. Instead, it agrees with the Claimant that the Entitlement referred to
at paragraph 504 of the Partial Final Award is zero. As there is no “mitigation” of the Claimant’s
losses, the Respondent’s request for a “further finding by the Tribunal in its final fixing of the
costs of arbitration” ordering the Claimant to pay the Respondent a portion of the Respondent’s
costs of arbitration and costs of legal representation and assistance, or ordering that each Party

shall bear its own costs for the entirety of the proceedings, is also rejected.

4, Whether the Tribunal should reconsider its decision in PO No. 4 regarding post-award
interest on costs
71. The Parties continue to dispute whether the Tribunal should award post-award interest on costs.
The Claimant maintains that such interest should be awarded and accordingly requests a
“reconsideration of the Tribunal’s decision in Procedural Order No. 4 and a concomitant award of
post-award interest on costs.”''4 The Respondent contends that the Claimant’s application is

procedurally improper.

A. Claimant’s Position

72. The Claimant submits that the Tribunal should revisit its decision in PO No. 4 in order to award

post-award interest on costs.!!°

73. It suggests that, contrary to the finding in PO No.4 that no post-award interest had been
specifically requested in its prior pleadings, the Claimant had in fact raised the issue at an earlier
stage of the proceedings.!'* In particular, the Claimant notes that in its prayer for relief in its Reply,
it requested that the Tribunal award it “all of its costs of this proceeding, including its attorney’s
fees and expenses; and on the foregoing amounts compound interest, including... post-Award

interest until the date of Ecuador’ s final satisfaction of the Award.” It adds that “[t]here is simply

"4 Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, paras. 34-35.

  

415 Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, para. 34.

 

446 Claimant's Post-Award Submission, paras. 32-34, referring to Reply, para. 782; Claimant’ s First Post-Hearing
Brief, para. 149; Claimant’s Second Post-Hearing Brief, para. 61.

117 Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, para. 32, referring to Reply, para. 782.

74.

75.

76.

77.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 24 of 27

no reason to penalize Murphy based on a mistaken belief that no specific request for post-award

interest on costs was made, when plainly one was.”!!*

Further, the Claimant rejects the Respondent’s assertion that the Claimant’s request is beyond the

scope of the Tribunal’s inquiry.''?

Rather, the Claimant submits, it is the Respondent who has
gone beyond the scope of the Tribunal’s instructions by—in addition to seeking reconsideration
of the Tribunal’s award of historical Law 42 payment damages—requesting the Tribunal to

reconsider its award of pre-award interest on those damages, as well as its costs award.!7°

B. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent considers the Claimant’ s request for reconsideration of the Tribunal’s decision in

its PO No. 4 to be “extraneous,” “unrelated,” and “merely another effort to create an artificial
situation to counterbalance the implications of paragraph 503-504.”'?! In any event, it notes, the
Claimant has “offered no argument or legal authority to justify why reconsideration is available
or appropriate in these circumstances.”!” Instead, the Claimant’s request is based on the same

“prayer for relief language” already considered and decided upon previously. '?*

C. Analysis of the Tribunal

The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that allowing the Claimant’s claim would amount to a
reconsideration of the Partial Final Award and of the Tribunal’s order in PO No. 4. It therefore
rejects the Claimant’s claim and reiterates its position that “[t]he reason why the Tribunal has not
granted post-award interest on costs is that no specific claim in this respect was before the Tribunal

at the time of rendering its award.” !*4

5. Costs of arbitration

The Tribunal notes that it already awarded costs for these proceedings in the Partial Final Award

for costs incurred up to the date of its issuance. This decision concerns costs that have been

"8 Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, para. 34.

119 Claimant’s E-mail.

120 Claimant’s E-mail.

2! Respondent’s E-mail.

122

123

Respondent’s E-mail.

Respondent’s E-mail, referring to Claimant’s Letter dated 6 June 2016, fn. 1; Respondent's Letter dated

17 June 2016, fn. 12; Claimant’s Post-Award Submission, para. 32.

24 PO No. 4, Section IV.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 25 of 27

incurred since that time and calls for an evaluation under Article 40(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules

of who the successful Party is in respect of this additional phase of the proceedings.

While the Claimant has prevailed overall in securing an additional significant award of damages
in this new phase, this was the consequence of the Partial Final Award in its favour and the
Claimant prevailing against one of the Respondent’s arguments. However, the Tribunal has not

accepted the Claimant’s various other arguments that would have increased its overall damages.

The Tribunal therefore finds that there is no clearly successful Party in respect of this phase of the

proceedings and determines that the costs of arbitration shall be borne equally by the Parties.

Similarly, the Tribunal finds no reason to apportion the costs of legal representation and assistance
between the Parties, and decides that each Party shall bear its own legal costs in respect of this

phase of the proceedings.

The Parties deposited an additional EUR 150,000 (EUR 75,000 each) to cover the fees and
expenses of the Tribunal and the PCA in this phase of the proceedings.

The Tribunal has fixed the costs of the arbitration for this phase of the proceedings in the amount

of EUR 56,804.87, broken down as follows:

Arbitrator Fees

Professor Kaj Hobér EUR 15,000.00
Me Yves Derains EUR 2,850.00
Professor Bernard Hanotiau EUR 20,180.00
Expenses

(bank charges, office supplies,
courier, translation, etc.) EUR 4,607.36

Registry Fees

PCA EUR 14,167.51

TOTAL EUR 56,804.87

The remaining balance on deposit shall be reimbursed in equal shares to the Parties.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador

Final Award
Page 26 of 27

VI. DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL

84. The Tribunal hereby:

@

Gi)

(iii)

(iv)

(vy)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

DISMISSES the Claimant’s request for the Tribunal to provide a reasoned decision on

its non-FET Treaty claims.

DISMISSES the Claimant’s claim that the value of the Adjusted Sum and Entitlement

should account for the Extension Contract.

DISMISSES the Respondent’s proposition that the negative difference between the
Adjusted Sum and the Repsol Sale Price should be “offset” from the Claimant’s

damages for historical Law 42 payments.

DECLARES that the Adjusted Sum and the Entitlement referred at paragraph 504 of

the Partial Final Award amount to USD 57.1 million and zero, respectively.

DECLARES that, as a result of the Entitlement amounting to zero, there shall be no
pre-award or post-award interest on it and the Sum of Figure A and Figure B referred
to at paragraphs 522 and 548(viii) of the Partial Final Award shall amount to
USD 7,136,121.

DISMISSES the Claimant’s request that the Tribunal revisit its decision in PO No. 4

and award post-award interest on costs.

ORDERS each Party to bear 50% of the costs of arbitration and each Party to bear the
costs of its own legal representation and assistance for this additional phase of the

proceedings.

DISMISSES all other claims.

Murphy Exploration & Production Company — International v. The Republic of Ecuador
Final Award
Page 27 of 27

Done at The Hague, the Netherlands, on 10 February 2017:

 

We

Professor Kaj Hobér Me Yves Derains
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Professor Bernard Hanotiau
Presiding Arbitrator

