International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

 

MURPHY EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION COMPANY INTERNATIONAL

(CLAIMANT)

REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR

(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/4)

 

AWARD ON JURISDICTION

 

Rendered by an Arbitral Tribunal composed of:

Rodrigo Oreamuno Blanco, President
Dr. Horacio A. Grigera Na6n, Arbitrator
Dr. Radl E. Vinuesa, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Marco Tulio Montafiés-Rumayor

Date: December 15, 2010

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. Background of the Proceeding ...........cccccceceseee cesses escsesescecseneeeeteceneeeteneeeeeeee 3
Il. Factual Background of the Dispute ............. ccc cscs cece eeneeeeteeeneeeteneeeeetee 7
Il. Position of the Parties on Jurisdiction .........ccccc cece ee ee teense eeteeeeeneeeeeeee 9
IV. ANALYSIS ooo. cece es ceeseeesesenessceeecsceseseneesesesssessseesneneseseneeseseeenasecenaee 16

1. Ecuador's Lack of Consent pursuant to its Article 25(4) Notice... 16

2. Prior Consultation or Negotiation; "Cooling Off Period” (Third and Fourth

Objections of Ecuador to the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal) ..........ceeeeeeeeeeeeeee 23

 
  
 
 
 

A. The dispute
B. The Alleged Existence of Prior Consultation and Negotiation
C. The Alleged Futility of the Negotiations.......
D. The Nature of the Six-Month Waiting Period
3. Other Objections to Jurisdiction

Background of the Proceeding

On March 3, 2008, Murphy Exploration and Production Company
International (“Murphy International” or “Claimant”), filed a Request for
Arbitration (the "Request") with the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes ("ICSID" or the "Centre") against the Republic of

Ecuador (“Ecuador’” or “Respondent”).

On March 4, 2008, the Centre sent Ecuador a copy of the Request, in
accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of
Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings ("Institution Rules").

On April 15, 2008, ICSID's Acting Secretary-General registered the Request
in accordance with Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States ("ICSID
Convention" or "Convention"). On the same date, the Acting Secretary-
General dispatched the Notice of Registration to Murphy and Ecuador
(together, the "Parties") and invited them to proceed, as soon as possible, to
constitute an arbitral tribunal.

On May 12, 2008, the Parties agreed that the Tribunal would consist of three
arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each Party and the third arbitrator,
who would serve as president of the Tribunal, appointed by agreement of the
arbitrators.

The Parties subsequently appointed the members of the Arbitral Tribunal in
accordance with the agreed-upon procedure. On May 29, 2008, Claimant
appointed Dr. Horacio A. Grigera Naon, a national of Argentina. On July 9,
2008, Respondent appointed Dr. Raul E. Vinuesa, also a national of
Argentina.

On July 29, 2008, Claimant filed a Request for Provisional Measures, in
accordance with Article 49 of the Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules.

On August 5, 2008, the Acting Secretary-General fixed the time limits for the
parties to present observations on Claimant's Request in accordance with
Rule 39(5) of the Arbitration Rules.

On August 13, 2008, Messrs. Grigera Naon and Vinuesa informed the Centre
that an agreement could not be reached regarding the appointment of the
third arbitrator and President of the Tribunal.

On September 5, 2008, Claimant amended its Request for Arbitration to
include, among them, the following:

"First sentence of paragraph 36 should be amended to read: "The
dispute between the Claimant and the Government arose, at the
latest, in April of 2006, when the Government first took steps to
enact Law No. 2006-42, and when the Government enacted the
subsequent Regulatory Decrees."

On September 17, 2008, the Parties agreed that the President of the Arbitral
Tribunal would be designated by the Chairman of the Administrative Council
of ICSID, in accordance with Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 4 of
the Arbitration Rules. The Parties also agreed that such appointment would
be made within a term not to exceed 30 days to be counted from the date of
such agreement.

On October 16, 2008, the Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID
designated Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno, a national of Costa Rica, as President of
the Arbitral Tribunal.

On October 20, 2008, the Acting Secretary-General notified the parties that
the three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Arbitral

20.

21.

22.

23.

Tribunal shall be deemed constituted as from such date under Rule 6(1) of
the Arbitration Rules.

In the same letter of October 20, 2008, the Acting Secretary-General informed
the Parties that Mr. Marco Tulio Montafiés-Rumayor would serve as
Secretary of the Tribunal.

On November 5, 2008, Respondent submitted its Observations on the
Claimant's Request for Provisional Measures.

On December 1, 2008, Claimant filed a Reply on Provisional Measures.

On December 10, 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal held its first session in
Washington, D.C.

At the first session, the Parties confirmed that the Tribunal had been properly
constituted and that they had no objections to the appointment of any of its
members. In addition, several procedural issues of the session's agenda were
discussed and agreed by the Parties. Said agreements were recorded in the
minutes of the session, signed by the President and the Secretary of the
Tribunal and dispatched to the Parties on January 9, 2009.

On December 22, 2008, Respondent filed a Rejoinder on Provisional
Measures.

On January 9, 2009, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, suspending
the hearing on provisional measures at the request of the Parties.

On March 13, 2009, Claimant withdrew its Request for Provisional Measures.
On April 30, 2009, Claimant filed a Memorial on the Merits.
On August 15, 2009, Ecuador submitted Objections to Jurisdiction.

On October 16, 2009, Claimant filed a Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction. On
that same date, Ecuador filed a Counter-Memorial on the Merits.

24.

On January 30, 2010, Murphy filed a Reply on the Merits.

25. On April 5 and 6, 2010, the Arbitral Tribunal held a jurisdictional hearing in
Washington, D.C. In addition to the Members of the Arbitral Tribunal and the
Secretary, the following party representatives attended the hearing:

26.

27.

(i) On behalf of Murphy:
Mr. Roger W. Landes

Mr. Craig S. Miles

Mr. Roberto J. Aguirre-Luzi
Mrs. Amy Roebuck Frey
Mr. Esteban A. Leccese
Mr. Francisco Roldan Cobo

(ii) On behalf of Ecuador:

Mr. Alvaro Galindo C.

Mr. Juan Francisco Martinez
Castillo

Mr. Mark Clodfelter

Mr. Bruno Leurent

Mr. Ricardo Ugarte

Mrs. Sarah E. Saucedo

Mrs. Maria Kostytska

Mrs. Mary M. Webster

Mr. Tomas Leonard

Mrs. Clara Brillembourg

Mrs. Kathy E. Ames Valdivieso

Murphy Exploration & Production
Company International

King & Spalding LLP

King & Spalding LLP

King & Spalding LLP

King & Spalding LLP

Pérez Bustamante & Ponce

Director, Patrocinio Internacional
Procuraduria General del Estado
Republic of Ecuador

Direccién Nacional de Patrocinio
Internacional, Republic of Ecuador
Foley Hoag LLP

Winston & Strawn LLP

Winston & Strawn LLP

Winston & Strawn LLP

Winston & Strawn LLP

Winston & Strawn LLP

Winston & Strawn LLP

Foley Hoag LLP

Winston & Strawn LLP

At the hearing, Professors Pierre Lalive and Christoph Schreuer participated

as expert-witnesses via videoconference.

Mr. Alvaro Galindo Cardona, Mr. Mark Clodfeter and Mr. Bruno Leurent

presented oral arguments on behalf of Ecuador. Messrs. Craig Miles, Roberto

J. Aguirre-Luzi and Esteban A. Leccese presented oral arguments on behalf

of Murphy.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

The jurisdictional hearing was recorded and transcribed verbatim, and copies
of the sound recordings and the transcripts were subsequently delivered to
the Parties.

On June 7, 2010, Ecuador filed a Rejoinder on the Merits.

The Arbitral Tribunal has deliberated and carefully considered the arguments
presented by the Parties in their written and oral submissions of the
jurisdictional hearing. The Tribunal shall now proceed to summarize the
background of the dispute (Section II), the Parties’ positions on jurisdiction
(Section Ill), and to analyze the arguments supporting those positions
(Section IV); and finally, based on this analysis, to issue a decision on
jurisdiction (Section V).

. Factual Background of the Dispute

Several companies, led by Conoco Ecuador Limited (hereinafter "Conoco"),
entered into a Service Contract with the Republic for the Exploration and
Exploitation of Hydrocarbons in Block 16 of the Ecuadorian Amazon (the
"Contract") on January 27, 1986.'

On July 28, 1987, Conoco assigned 10% of its rights under the Contract to
“...Murphy Ecuador Oil Company Limited (‘Murphy Ecuador’) and Canam
Offshore Limited (‘Canam’), both of which were subsidiaries of Claimant.”

In 1993, before the seventh bidding round for new oil concessions in Ecuador,
the Government amended the Hydrocarbons Law.°

In 2001, Repsol YPF Ecuador SA (Repsol) acquired a 35% interest in the
Contract and assumed the role of Consortium operator.*

* Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction, 4] 17.

71d, 918.

3\d.,921.

35.

36.

37.

38.

On April 25, 2006, Ecuador passed Law 42-2006, which amended Article 55
of the Hydrocarbons Law to state as follows:

"State’s participation in the surplus of oil sale prices, which have not
been agreed upon or foreseen.—Contractor companies that have
current participation contracts with the State for hydrocarbon
exploration and exploitation, notwithstanding their crude oil
participation volumes, when the monthly average FOB Ecuadorian
crude oil sale price exceeds the monthly average FOB sale price
prevailing as of the date of execution of their contracts, stated at
constant prices as of the month of payment, shall grant the
Ecuadorian State a participation of at least 50% of the extraordinary
income arising from the price difference. For purposes of this Article,
extraordinary income shall be understood to mean the above
described price difference multiplied by the number of oil barrels
produced.”®

On October 18, 2007, the Decree 662 “increased the Law 42 participation to
99% of the difference between the market price of oil and the benchmark

contract price.” ®

On July 24, 2006, the Government of Ecuador, through PETROECUADOR,
sent an official communication to the Consortium requesting payment of sums
allegedly owed under Law 42.”

On February 25, 2009, Ecuador and Repsol reached an oral agreement to
amend the Contract. In order to execute such agreement, several
requirements had to be met for which Repsol needed Murphy International's
support.

 

“1d.,.9.23.

5 Memorial on the Merits, 4 163.

"id. 1.168.

"\d.,9.179.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

On March 12, 2009, Murphy International sold to Repsol its entire stock in
Murphy Ecuador belonging to Canam Offshore Limited, of which Murphy

International was the sole owner.®

On the same date, the Consortium and Ecuador signed the Modification
Agreement.?

Claimant alleged that Ecuador did not provide a fair and equitable treatment
to its investment and that by breaching the Contract, violated the BIT umbrella
clause. Claimant also argued that Ecuador did not afford full protection and
security to its investment; that Ecuador took arbitrary measures to the
detriment of Claimant’s investment and that Ecuador expropriated its
investment.

Position of the Parties on Jurisdiction

Respondent raised seven objections to jurisdiction, which are summarized in
the following paragraphs.

First: At the time Murphy International consented to ICSID arbitration, there
was no consent on the part of Ecuador to arbitrate Murphy International's
claims. Ecuador served notice to ICSID on December 4, 2007, indicating that
“...it would not consent to arbitrate the class of disputes within which Murphy

International's claims fall.""°

Ecuador's notification states:

"The Republic of Ecuador will not consent to submit to the
jurisdiction of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID) disputes that arise in matters concerning the

® id, 1210.

° Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction, 4] 36.

1d. 1.37.

treatment of an investment in economic activities related to the
exploitation of natural resources, such as oil, gas, minerals or others.
Any instrument containing the Republic of Ecuador's previously
expressed will to submit that class of disputes to the jurisdiction of
the Centre, which has not been perfected by the express and explicit
consent of the other party given prior to the date of submission of the
present notification, is hereby withdrawn by the Republic of Ecuador
with immediate effect as of this date.""'

45. According to Ecuador, “Murphy International did not give its consent to ICSID
arbitration until February 29, 2008, so no consent by the Republic on or
before that date was possible. Indeed, on that date, the Republic had already
limited the scope of its consent to ICSID, and ‘Murphy could obviously not
have modified, and especially broaden its scope by its own statement of
acceptance.”

46. Second: The Treaty between the Republic of Ecuador and the United States
of America on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments (BIT)
“provides jurisdiction over claims by investors for losses which they have
suffered. But Murphy International has not alleged losses suffered by it.
Instead, Murphy International alleges only harms and losses to Murphy
Ecuador, its former wholly-owned Bermudan subsidiary.”"? According to
Ecuador, Claimant, as a shareholder-investor in Murphy Ecuador, has utterly
failed to identify, much less quantify, the alleged injury Murphy International
suffered.'* On that same note, Respondent argued that Claimant's claims
raised the specter of double recovery because Murphy International has

** Notice of the Republic of Ecuador to ICSID, December 4, 2007, document submitted by Ecuador in the
Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction, CEX-78.

” Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction, 4] 63.
Bid. 967.

“id. 9.82.

47.

48.

already been compensated through the sale of Murphy Ecuador “...for the

value of Murphy Ecuador's right to recover for any losses to it.”

Third: “Murphy International has not complied with the requirement that
parties seek an amicable settlement of disputes through consultation and
negotiation before submitting them to arbitration. It is only when those efforts
have been attempted and actually failed that a tribunal established under the
BIT has jurisdiction.” Article VI(2) of the BIT conditions an investor's right to
invoke the BIT’s dispute resolution provisions on the impossibility of an
amicable settlement ascertained after efforts at consultation and negotiation
have failed.'” To Ecuador, Murphy International “...made no efforts to consult
or negotiate with the Republic concerning its BIT claims.”'® Claimant first
notified Ecuador of an investment dispute under the Ecuador-US BIT in a
letter on Friday, February 29, 2008, and filed its ICSID Request for Arbitration
the very next business day, Monday, March 3, 2008."° In the same memorial,
Ecuador further argued that: “Murphy International points to a letter submitted
to the Republic by Repsol on November 12, 2007, as evidence of its own
efforts to consult and negotiate ... the letter does not pertain to any claims by
Murphy International, but rather to claims of the Consortium, of which Murphy
Ecuador, and not Murphy International, was a member.””°

Fourth: Murphy International did not comply with “...the mandatory six-month
waiting period required by the BIT before claims may be submitted to
arbitration.”*' Ecuador added that: “[b]Jecause Murphy International has not

+ 1 83.
+ 1.85.
+ 1 86.
+ 1.95.
+ 1.96.
+ 1.98.

-» 1104.

49.

50.

51.

complied with the six-month waiting period, this Tribunal must dismiss the
claims for want of jurisdiction. Article VI(3) of the BIT provides a national or
company may invoke binding arbitration only ‘[p]rovided that ... six months
have elapsed.’ This provision is not optional, but is an express condition

precedent to arbitral jurisdiction.””

Fifth: Murphy International argues that it was affected by the measures
imposed by Law 42 and such Law “... is treated as a tax measure within the
meaning of the Treaty. The ‘participation in extraordinary income’ introduced
by Law 42 being a mandatory levy of a percentage of excess profits, its
characterization as a tax measure under the Treaty leads to the exclusion of
most of Murphy International’s claims relating to Law 42 from this Tribunal’s

jurisdiction...”

Sixth: Murphy International alleges the violation of the ‘umbrella clause’ set
forth in Article 1I(3)(c) of the BIT, but Murphy International failed to show that
Ecuador entered into any applicable obligation by the Participation Contract
nor does it demonstrates that Ecuador entered into any obligation with
respect to any investment within the meaning of the BIT because Murphy
Ecuador is not a protected investment by that Treaty inasmuch as it is not a
company legally constituted in Ecuador but rather in Bermuda.”*

Seventh: Murphy International alleges that the breach of the Participation
Contract amounts to a violation of an investment agreement under Article
VI(1) (a) of the BIT, but “... [w]hat Murphy International deliberately fails to
mention, however, is that the BIT refers to an investment agreement with a
national or company of a Party to the BIT ... Murphy International is not a
Party to the Participation Contract, ... And while Murphy Ecuador is a party to
the Participation Contract, it is not a ‘company of the other Party.' Murphy

. 1114.
1121.

-, 141 158 and 159.

52.

53.

54.

Ecuador is a company of Bermuda, and Bermuda has no BIT with the

Republic."”>

In its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, Claimant addressed these objections
and replied:

First: Ecuador's notification to ICSID does not preclude jurisdiction. In 1986
Ecuador signed and ratified the ICSID Convention and did not object with
respect to any aspect of the Convention. On August 27, 1993, Ecuador
signed the BIT which contains Ecuador's consent to investor-State arbitration
under the ICSID Convention.” Based on the opinions of professors Schreuer
and Broches, Claimant argues that “... notifications under Article 25(4) of the
ICSID Convention are for information purposes only and neither create new
consent nor detract from prior consent to arbitrate a dispute under the ICSID
Convention."”” Later in the same Memorial, Murphy International asserts that
to the extent that Ecuador might argue that its Article 25(4) notification directly
affects the scope of the consent offer in Article VI of the BIT, that jurisdictional
objection would still fail because a notification under the ICSID Convention
cannot unilaterally modify the scope of consent in a second treaty.”®

Second: Claimant considers that the BIT includes “shares of stock” as an
investment and the fact that the local operating company (in this case,
Murphy Ecuador), is not formally incorporated in the host State (Ecuador), but
rather is legally registered to do business there, has no bearing.” Based on
numerous ICSID tribunal decisions, Claimant argues that “... all affirmed the
ability of a shareholder like Murphy to claim in its own name for measures that

caused direct damage to the shareholder's local operating company and

*Id., 19 223 and 224.

*id., 19.18 and 19

?7 Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 23.

Bid. 4.45.

9 1d.,9170.

55.

56.

."°° In regard to the other

thereby damaged the shareholder's investment
argument raised by Ecuador under this same title, Murphy International
denies the existence of any risk of double-recovery and argues that "...when
Murphy sold its assets to Repsol, it 'retained all rights to continue to pursue its
claims in this arbitration with respect to the impact of Law 42 on Murphy's

investments in Ecuador.""*"

Third: Claimant asserts that it complied with the requirements of Article VI of
the BIT and that “[e]ven if it had not, further negotiation with Ecuador would
have been futile. (...) a provision prescribing a time period for consultation
and negotiation is procedural in nature and therefore constitutes no bar to this

Tribunal’s jurisdiction.”°2

Fourth: According to Murphy International, the waiting period runs from the
date on which the Republic of Ecuador became aware of the dispute, not from
the date on which Murphy formalized its claims.°° It also argues that Ecuador
was aware of the dispute through the United States Embassy in that country
when the embassy criticized Law 42.54 Besides “...Murphy, through its
subsidiary, Murphy Ecuador, and the Consortium Operator, Repsol, have
protested the enforcement of the measures while working with the
Government to negotiate an amicable resolution.”* Regarding the outcome of
these negotiations, it argues that “[e]ven had Murphy not complied with Article
VI of the BIT—which it did—it would have been excused from doing so due to
the futility of further negotiations with Ecuador.”*>

2 171.
2 1.86.
., 1100.
., 1104.
., 1110.
., 7111.

., 1117.

57.

58.

59.

Fifth: Claimant alleges that Article X of the BIT plays no role in this dispute
because the measures that prejudiced Murphy's investment in Ecuador are
not matters of taxation®” and, besides, any objection based on Article X is in
fact related to the merits of the claim, not the Tribunal's jurisdiction.*®
Claimant also argues that “...Ecuador is estopped from invoking the present
defense; and ... Ecuador's conduct in invoking this objection amounts to an
abuse of rights (abus de droit), revealing not only bad faith but a lack of

transparency towards Claimant.”°°

Sixth: To Murphy International, Ecuador ignores Article |(1)(a)(ii) of the BIT,
which clearly states that it does not require that a company be incorporated in

t.“° Likewise, the

the territory of a Party to the BIT to constitute an investmen
"Umbrella Clause" says nothing about the specific identity of the counter-party
to the host State's obligation; but only that such an obligation must have been
entered into with regard to investments.“ To Claimant “...Murphy Ecuador’s
incorporation in Bermuda in no way detracts from or erases the indisputable
fact that Murphy has made ‘investments' in Ecuador to which the Government

has agreed to observe obligations.”*

Seventh: Murphy International argues that "... the Umbrella Clause is not
limited to investment agreements’ but instead covers any type of obligation
entered into ‘with regard to investments.’ As a result, this Tribunal has

jurisdiction over disputes pertaining to Claimant's investments in Ecuador as

-, 1 206.
-» 1207.
-» 1207.
-» 1142.
-» 1142.

. 1144.

60.

61.

62.

63.

set forth in Section VI(A) above, including the Participation Contract, pursuant
to Article VI(1)(c) of the Treaty."*°

. Analysis

Ecuador’s Lack of Consent pursuant to its Article 25(4) Notice

The first objection raised by Ecuador refers to the Tribunal’s lack of
jurisdiction to hear Murphy International’s arbitration claim because, at the
time Murphy International consented to ICSID arbitration, there was no
consent on the part of Ecuador to ICSID arbitration.

By invoking Article 25(4) of the ICSID Convention, Ecuador argues that,
before Claimant consented to ICSID arbitration, on February 29, 2008,
Ecuador had submitted to ICSID, on December 4, 2007, a notice stating that
it would not consent to arbitrate the class of disputes in which Murphy
International's claims falls.‘* Ecuador further argues that the Tribunal must
respect the Republic's sovereign right under Article 25(4) of the Convention to
withhold its consent to arbitrate certain categories of claims.*°

On the other hand, Claimant argues that Ecuador's Article 25(4) notice of
December 4, 2007, does not preclude the jurisdiction of this Tribunal to hear
the present claim.

Murphy International considers that Respondent’s argument, contained in its
Objections to Jurisdiction in relation with the scope of Article 25(4) of the
Convention, ignores the nature and significance of notifications under Article

3 id.,4197.

“ Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction, 4] 37.

“1d.,941.

64.

65.

66.

67.

25(4) of the ICSID Convention and also ignores the inability of a State to alter
its commitments undertaken under a Treaty unilaterally.*®

In analyzing the Parties’ positions regarding this objection, the Tribunal must
evaluate the effects of Ecuador's notice dated December 4, 2007, in line with
Article 25(4) of ICSID Convention.

Article 25(4) states:

"Any Contracting State may, at the time of ratification, acceptance or
approval of this Convention or at any time thereafter, notify the Centre of the
class or classes of disputes which it would or would not consider submitting
to the jurisdiction of the Centre. The Secretary-General shall forthwith
transmit such notification to all Contracting States. Such notification shall
not constitute the consent required by paragraph (1)."

Claimant argues that notifications under Article 25(4) of the Convention are
for informational purposes only because said Article does not provide States
with the power to amend their obligations under the ICSID Convention or any
other treaty.*”

Ecuador considers that any interpretation of Article 25(4) restricting the
effects of such notifications to informational purposes only would deprive such
notifications of any practical purpose and would deny the State of the right to
limit or restrict at any time the scope of ICSID jurisdiction “...that it may have
already accepted in principle or would consider accepting.”*® In support of its
position, Ecuador cites CSOB v. The Slovak Republic? Fedax v.
Venezuela; CAA and CGE v. Argentina.*'

*© Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 20.

*7 Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 22.
“8 Expert opinion of Professor Pierre Lalive, 4] 43, RE 1, submitted by Ecuador in the Respondent's Objection
to Jurisdiction.

* Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction 4 44.

1d. 145.

68.

69.

70.

71.

As regard to the cases cited by Respondent in support of its position, Murphy
International argues that in none of these cases the tribunals actually interpret
the effect of a notification under Article 25(4).©? Thus, Claimant concludes that
Ecuador's cited case law does not offer any information on the true effects of
such notices.

In interpreting the scope of Article 25(4) of the Convention, the Tribunal will
limit itself to determine whether notices made pursuant to such text may
withdraw the consent previously given by the notifying State. In this context, it
is the Tribunal’s understanding that Respondent's legal authorities do not
expressly refer to the withdrawal of a prior consent and, therefore, do not
provide evidence of the existence of such an alleged right of withdrawal of a
prior consent.

Murphy International cites the Tza Yap Shum v. Peru decision on
jurisdiction to argue that Article 25(4) states that notifications made under this
provision do not restrict the scope of the parties’ consent to the ICSID
Convention. Claimant also refers to the decision on jurisdiction in PSEG v.
Turkey to argue that a notification under Article 25(4) could not withdraw the
consent previously given in a BIT. Claimant concludes that the Tribunal
rejected Turkey's argument that its notification under Article 25(4) could affect
the scope of its prior consent under either the ICSID Convention or the BIT.

Taking into account the general rule on the interpretation of treaties of Article
31(1) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969, the Tribunal
considers that the language of Article 25(4) is clear and unambiguous. It also
considers unnecessary to resort to supplementary means of interpretation, in

 

1 1d.,9.46.

* Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4] 30.

53 1d., footnote no. 45, 4 37.

* Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 39.

72.

73.

74.

accordance with Article 32 of the Vienna Convention, in order to interpret the
ICSID Convention in good faith, within its context and considering its purpose.

The Tribunal finds that Article 25(4) of the ICSID Convention allows the
Contracting States to notify the Centre of the class of disputes they would
submit to the jurisdiction of the Centre in the future. This notification may be
sent at any time by means of a unilateral declaration to the Centre and the
Secretary-General shall forthwith transmit such notification to all Contracting
States. However, the Tribunal finds that the effect of notifications under Article
25(4) is to inform the contracting parties of the class or classes of disputes
which the notifying State would or would not consider submitting to the
jurisdiction of the Centre in the future. The text itself clarifies that such
notification shall not constitute the consent required by paragraph (1) of
Article 25.

In the Tribunal’s view, an Article 25(4) notification may not unilaterally modify
the consent given in another treaty. The consent of the State in this case is
given in a treaty between two sovereign States (the BIT between Ecuador
and the United States of America) granting rights to the investors of both
States. The pacta sunt servanda principle requires good faith compliance with
all obligations under the BIT. In this sense, Article 26 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties, under title "Pacta sunt servanda" provides
that "[e]very treaty in force is binding upon the parties to it and must be
performed by them in good faith."

Ecuador also argues that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction if there is no consent
by both Parties. For Ecuador, consent is only perfected after it has been
accepted by both parties. Within this context, Ecuador affirms that any
consent which may not be unilaterally withdrawn results from a meeting of
minds between the State and the investor.°°

55 Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction, 111 59, 60.

*id., 56.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

According to Respondent, since it submitted the Article 25(4) notification to
the ICSID on December 4, 2007, it excluded the possibility of perfecting
mutual consent with regard to disputes as stated by Murphy International.
Therefore, Ecuador concludes that when the notification was sent, no
withdrawal of consent took place if, in fact, it has never been perfected.

Claimant argues Ecuador's consent to submit to ICSID jurisdiction was stated
in Article VI of the BIT and said consent may not be unilaterally withdrawn by
this State, which is part of the ICSID Convention and the BIT.

Article V1(4) of the BIT reads as follows:

“Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment
dispute for settlement by binding arbitration in accordance with the
choice specified in the written consent of the national or company under
paragraph 3. Such consent, together with the written consent of the
national or company when given under paragraph 3 shall satisfy the
requirement for:

(a) written consent of the parties to the dispute for Purposes
of Chapter Il of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the
Centre)..."

Ecuador believes the option of ICSID arbitration under the BIT is operational
only within the limits set forth in the ICSID Convention.°” Therefore, it argues
that, when agreeing to the terms of the BIT and including an option for ICSID
jurisdiction, both Parties retained their right to act under Article 25(4) to limit
the availability of their consent.®

Claimant alleges that Ecuador’s Article 25(4) notice has no impact on the
scope of the offer of consent of the Nation in the BIT. Claimant further adds

"1d.,951.

1d. 150.

20

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

that the sole offer of consent contained in the BIT is enough to submit to
ICSID jurisdiction.

In the Tribunal’s view, the offer of consent to ICSID jurisdiction by the
signatory States of bilateral investment treaties may not be withdrawn or
revoked other than by the mechanisms expressly agreed upon by the parties.
Article 25(4) notifications are useful to alter those mechanisms in the future
only and in absence of another legal instrument as the BIT which make them
mandatory.

After analyzing the scope of Article 25 (4), the Tribunal will now assess the
effects of Ecuador's notification to ICSID of December 4, 2007.

Ecuador's notification states:

"The Republic of Ecuador will not consent to submit to the
jurisdiction of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID) disputes that arise in matters concerning the
treatment of an investment in economic activities related to the
exploitation of natural resources, such as oil, gas, minerals or others.
Any instrument containing the Republic of Ecuador's previously
expressed will to submit that class of disputes to the jurisdiction of
the Centre, which has not been perfected by the express and explicit
consent of the other party given prior to the date of submission of the
present notification, is hereby withdrawn by the Republic of Ecuador
with immediate effect as of this date."

Claimant does not object to the first sentence of said notification. However, it
argues the second sentence tries to render invalid the offer of consent to
ICSID arbitration under the BIT.

The Tribunal finds that the first sentence of Ecuador's notification falls under
the general context of Article 25(4) of the Convention. As regards the content
of the second sentence, the Tribunal believes Respondent pretends to
achieve legal effects not falling under the scope of such Article.

21

85.

86.

87.

88.

Claimant argues that Ecuador's notification is not an adequate means to
validly terminate the BIT and the obligations acquired in it by Ecuador.®

The Tribunal finds that the withdrawal, termination or amendment of the BIT
must be governed by the provisions contained in that Treaty, and in a
suppletory manner, by general International Law, as codified in the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties. In this sense, Article 54 of the Vienna
Convention provides that "[t]he termination of a treaty or the withdrawal of a
party may take place: (a) in conformity with the provisions of the treaty; or (b)
at any time by consent of all the parties after consultation with the other
contracting States." As regards the amendment of a Treaty, Article 39 of the
Vienna Convention provides that "[a] treaty may be amended by agreement
between the parties...." On the other hand, Article XII (2) of the BIT states
that "[eJither Party may, by giving one year's written notice to the other Party,
terminate this Treaty at the end of the initial ten year period or at any time
thereafter."

The Tribunal agrees with Claimant® in that neither the ICSID Convention nor
the BIT allows parties to withdraw from its application with immediate effect.
Therefore, Ecuador is not authorized to unilaterally modify any of those
treaties with immediate effect. Moreover, the Tribunal believes that since
there is no agreement between the parties, it is not possible to extinguish the
obligations of a treaty by withdrawal, termination or unilateral modification of
such instrument.

The Tribunal concludes that Ecuador intends to disregard the scope and
future effect of the second sentence of its December 2007 notification, to
ignore the irrevocability of its consent to ICSID arbitration under the BIT and

*° Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 50 and Opinion of Professor Schreuer quoted in such
paragraph.

© Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 1 52.

22

to violate the rules applicable to withdrawal and modification of obligations
undertaken by the Nation, in both the BIT and the ICSID Convention.

89. For all the reasons stated above, the Tribunal rejects the objection on the lack
of jurisdiction alleged by Ecuador based on the notification of December 4,
2007, as regards its consent to ICSID arbitration.

2. Prior Consultation or Negotiation; "Cooling-Off Period” (Third and
Fourth Objections of Ecuador to the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal)

90. The Republic of Ecuador’s objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction contained
in paragraphs 85 to 119 of the Respondent's memorial of August 15, 2009,
may be summarized as follows:

a) Article VI(3) of the BIT requires that in the event of a dispute, the Parties
should initially seek a resolution through consultation and negotiation for
a period of six months before submitting a Request for Arbitration to
ICSID.

b) It is only when those efforts have been attempted and actually failed
during a six-month period that one of the parties may resort to
arbitration; Murphy International did not prove that such efforts had
failed.

2&

Negotiations by Repsol with officers of the Government of Ecuador do
not satisfy Murphy International's obligation to negotiate.

91. Claimant disagrees with the position of Ecuador, it argues that Murphy
International complied with the waiting period provided for in Article VI 3(a) of
the BIT, and claims, in sum, that:

a) The dispute arose in April 2006 when the Government of the Republic of
Ecuador enacted Law 42, and subsequently its related regulations.’

® Murphy's notification to the Government of Ecuador of February 29, 2008, CEX-10.

23

92.

93.

94.

b) Murphy International, through Repsol, the Consortium Operator,
attended a number of meetings with officers of the Government of
Ecuador to discuss the dispute arising from the passing of Law 42 and
related regulations.°2

Any further negotiation by Murphy International with Ecuador would have

2&

been futile.

d) A“... provision prescribing a time period for consultation and negotiation
is procedural in nature and therefore constitutes no bar to this Tribunal's
jurisdiction." *

The Tribunal will now proceed to review the Parties’ positions as regards the

origin of dispute; the existence of prior negotiations; the futility of negotiations

and the nature of the six-month waiting period.

A. The dispute

Ecuador argues that Murphy International notified the Republic of Ecuador,
through a letter dated February 29, 2008, of its claim against it arising out of
on an investment made pursuant to the BIT. From this date, Ecuador was on
notice of the existence of such dispute under the BIT. Therefore, because
Murphy International filed its Request for Arbitration with ICSID on March 3,
2008, it did not comply with the mandatory six-month waiting period
prescribed in Article VI of the BIT.

In turn, the Claimant argues that the dispute arose in April 2006, when the
Government passed Law No. 42 and therefore, the six-month waiting period

® Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 111.

id. 9117.

1d., 4100.

24

95.

96.

running from this date on was met in September 2006. According to Murphy

International, the waiting period runs from the date on which Ecuador became

aware of the dispute, not from the date on which Murphy formalized its

claims.

Article VI of the BIT between the Republic of Ecuador and the United States

of America provides in the relevant part:

“2. In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute
should initially seek a resolution through consultation and
negotiation. If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national or
company concerned may choose to submit the dispute, under one of

the following alternatives, for resolution:

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute-

settlement procedures”.

Paragraph 3(a) of the same Article further provides that:

“Provided that the national or company concerned has not submitted
the dispute for resolution under paragraph 2(a) or (b) and that six
months have elapsed from the date on which the dispute arose, the
national or company concerned may choose to consent in writing to
the submission of the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration:”

(i) to the International Centre for the Settlement
Investment Disputes ("Centre") established by
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States, done at
Washington, March 18, 1965 ("ICSID convention"), provided

that the Party is a party to such Convention....”

® Claimant’s Counter Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 103; Murphy International’s Notice to the Government of
Ecuador CEX-10.

° Claimant’s Counter Memorial on Jurisdiction, 41 104.

25

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

In the Tribunal’s view, the need for the six-month period to elapse before the
interested Party can resort to ICSID is intended to allow the Parties to seek
“through consultation and negotiation” a resolution, pursuant to the
aforementioned Article VI. Some authors have properly called this term a
“cooling- off period.” ©”

The Parties have discussed at length the meaning of the expression "the date
on which the dispute arose" in paragraph 3(a) of Article VI of the BIT.

The Tribunal considers that the six-month waiting period calculated “from the
date on which the dispute arose” under Article VI(3)(a) of the BIT comprises
every “investment dispute,” according to the definition set forth in Article VI(1)
of the BIT.

Article VI(1) of the BIT reads as follows:

“For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute
between a Party and a national or company of the other Party arising
out of or relating to: (a) an investment agreement between that Party
and such national or company; (b) an investment authorization
granted by that Party's foreign investment authority to such national
or company; or (c) an alleged breach of any right conferred or
created by this Treaty with respect to an investment.”

This Tribunal sides with the Burlington tribunal which, when referring to Article
VI(1)(c) of the same BIT applicable hereto, held in its decision on jurisdiction
that [the tribunal] “considers that the meaning of ‘dispute’ in Article VI(3)(a)
refers back to the definition of ‘investment dispute’ in Article VI(1)(c). Indeed,
Article VI(1) defines investment dispute ‘for purposes of this Article [VI],’ of
which paragraph 3 is no doubt a part.®”

°” See Lucy Reed, Jan Paulsson, Nigel Blackaby, among others, quoted by Defendant in the RLA-36 document.

°° Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5), Decision on Jurisdiction of
June 2, 2010, 91334.

26

102. Claimant based its Request for Arbitration on the breach of the BIT® and,
thereby, the dispute that the Tribunal must consider in order to establish if
there has been a non-compliance with the six-month waiting period as from
the date it arose, is the “investment dispute” arising out of or relating to an
alleged breach of any right conferred or created by the Treaty with respect to
an investment, in accordance with Article VI(1)(c) of the BIT.

103. The Tribunal finds that in order for a dispute to be submitted to ICSID
arbitration, in accordance with Article VI of the BIT, a claim on an alleged
breach of the BIT must previously exist. Disputes referred to in paragraph (1)
of that provision arise when a Treaty breach is alleged. Therefore, the six-
month waiting period shall run from the date of such allegation.

104. The Tribunal sides with Claimant in that Article VI does not impose a formal
notice requirement. However, without the prior allegation of a Treaty breach, it
is not possible for a dispute to arise which could then be submitted to
arbitration under Article VI of the BIT. In this sense, the Decision on
Jurisdiction in the Burlington case holds that “... as long as no allegation of
Treaty breach is made, no dispute will have arisen giving access to arbitration
under Article V1."”°

105. The Tribunal understands that it is necessary for the Respondent to have
been aware of the alleged Treaty breaches in order to resort to arbitration
under Article VI of the BIT. Under the Treaty, it would suffice for Claimant to
inform its counterpart of the alleged Treaty breach. In the Tribunal’s view,
Claimant did not offer evidence showing that Ecuador was aware of the
existence of a dispute with Murphy International based on the BIT prior to
February 28, 2008.

° Request for Arbitration, 4] 9, Section III.

”° Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5), Decision on Jurisdiction of
June 2, 2010, 41 335.

27

106. Claimant’s statement that a U.S. government representative warned Ecuador
of the possible breach of the BIT,”' in order to ascertain that said Nation was
informed of Murphy International's claim under the BIT, is irrelevant and
furthermore, undermines the content of Article 27 of the ICSID Convention.

107. The Tribunal finds that the six-month waiting period under Article VI(3)(a)
starts running once there is evidence that a BIT claim exists. It follows that in
order for the six-month term to effectively start running, the dispute based on
an alleged BIT breach must be known to Respondent.

108. Since the purpose of the six-month waiting period is to allow the interested
parties to seek to resolve their dispute through consultation and negotiation, it
is clear that for the negotiations to commence, it is essential that both parties
are aware of the existence of the dispute. As long as this does not take place,
negotiations cannot begin. As explained in the Lauder v. Czech Republic

award:

“However, the waiting period does not run from the date [on] which
the alleged breach occurred, but from the date [on] which the State
is advised that said breach has occurred. This results from the
purpose of the waiting period, which is to allow the parties to enter

into good-faith negotiations before initiating the arbitration."

109. It is evident in this case, because of the way in which Claimant proceeded to
file its Request for Arbitration with ICSID on March 3, 2008 (the first business
day after giving notice to Ecuador that it had a claim against that Nation),
there was no possibility that the Parties could have availed themselves of a
time frame in which they could have tried to resolve their disputes amicably.

”\Claimant’s Counter Memorial on Jurisdiction, ] 110. Hearing on Jurisdiction, Aguirre Luzi, p. 467; line 18 et
seq.

” Ronald S. Lauder v. The Czech Republic (UNCITRAL Case), Award of September 3, 2001, 1 185

28

B. The Alleged Existence of Prior Consultation and
Negotiation
110. The Tribunal will now examine Claimant’s position that the negotiations
between Repsol and Ecuador meet the requirement of prior consultations and
negotiations under Article VI(2) of the BIT.

111. Respondent argues that Claimant cannot rely on the negotiations entered into
by Repsol and Ecuador to assert that, in this case, Murphy International
complied with its obligations under Article VI(2) of the BIT. The letter Repsol
sent to Ecuador on November 12, 2007 does not amount to an attempt by
Murphy International to negotiate the dispute that Murphy International
submitted to ICSID on March 3, 2008. Such letter refers to claims raised by
Repsol and the Consortium, of which Murphy Ecuador, and not Murphy
International, was a member. Repsol’s letter to Ecuador is based on the BIT
between Spain and the Republic of Ecuador, and not on the US-Ecuador BIT,
on which Murphy International's claim is based.

112. Claimant alleges that Repsol, as the operator of the Consortium, had
negotiated with Ecuador on behalf of all the members of the Consortium,
including Murphy Ecuador. It further states that “Murphy, through its
subsidiary, Murphy Ecuador, and the Consortium Operator, Repsol, protested
the enforcement of the measures while working with the Government to
negotiate an amicable resolution.””°

113. Claimant makes reference to negotiations prior to April 2006, date when it
alleges that the dispute submitted to this arbitration arose, as well as to
negotiations after November 12, 2007, the date when Repsol sent the letter to
IcsID.“

114. In the aforementioned letter of November 12, 2007, Repsol notified Ecuador
of the existence of an investment dispute and requested “that a formal

”3 Claimant’s Counter Memorial on Jurisdiction, §| 111.

4 idem, footnote 164, 4] 111.

29

consultation period be entered into between Ecuador and REPSOL, for a
maximum period of six months, in order to try to reach, through an amicable
agreement, full satisfaction of the obligations which, directly or indirectly,
pertain to the Ecuadorian State under the Treaty....””°

115. It follows for the Tribunal that Repsol, as the Consortium Operator, officially
notified the existence of a dispute under the Spain-Ecuador BIT to the
Republic of Ecuador on the date of its claim, i.e. November 12, 2007.

116. Therefore, the Tribunal understands that the negotiations and consultations
entered into by Repsol, as Operator of the Consortium, on the one hand, and
Ecuador, on the other, prior to the existence of the dispute between Murphy
International and Ecuador, and under the Spain-Ecuador BIT, cannot be
identified as or likened to the negotiations required under Article VI(2) of the
US-Ecuador BIT.

117. Now, it is necessary to examine whether the negotiations that might have
been conducted as from November, 12, 2007, between Repsol and Ecuador
under the respective Treaty, can replace the negotiations required of Murphy
International and Ecuador under Article VI of the BIT, concerning the dispute
that Murphy International submitted to ICSID arbitration on March 3, 2008.

118. The Tribunal has no doubt whatsoever that the enactment of Law No. 42 and
the subsequent regulations caused the Republic of Ecuador to have conflicts
with foreign oil companies operating in its territory (Repsol, Petrobas, Andes
Petroleum, Perenco and Burlington). Some of those disputes were resolved
(or are being resolved), at least partially, through negotiation. In the case of
Murphy International, even when the Consortium in which Murphy Ecuador
was a member and to which Repsol was the operator, participated in
negotiations with representatives of the Government of Ecuador, it is true that
Murphy International’s particular claim against Ecuador, based on a BIT

different from the one on which Repsol based its claim, arose later.

* Claimant’s Exh. 3, 9) 3.

30

119.

120.

Bilateral investment treaties and the ICSID framework, in general, have the
purpose of providing investors with the guarantees that their investments will
be protected, hence, foreign investment is promoted in the host countries,
aiding in their development. In some cases, foreign investors choose to
incorporate companies or branches in the country where they invest
(sometimes in order to abide by the country's legislation). In such cases, it
could be discussed whether the investment belongs to the foreign company
or the company incorporated in the country where the investment was made.
Therefore, to avoid any doubt of the intention to protect such investments, the
different BITs establish that the shares of the business entities that belong to
foreign companies are considered investments protected by the BITs.
Evidently, this system, that has a defined purpose, cannot disregard the fact
that Murphy Ecuador and Murphy International are two independent legal
entities. Murphy Ecuador Oil Company Ltd. is a company incorporated in
Bermuda, that established a branch in Ecuador and its shares belonged to
another company called Canam Offshore Limited, incorporated under the
laws of the Bahamas and was wholly owned by Murphy Exploration and
Production Company International, incorporated under the laws of the State
of Delaware, United States of America. Regardless of the fact that for
purposes of the protections afforded by the BIT Murphy Ecuador's shares are
considered to be an investment of Murphy International, they are different
companies, incorporated under the laws of different countries.

As stated in the previous paragraph, it is clear that Murphy Ecuador, the
Bermudan company, and not Murphy International, the American company,
was part of the Consortium led by Repsol. As a result, any action by Repsol,
on behalf of the Consortium, before the Ecuadorian authorities, would have
been done on behalf of the legal persons composing the Consortium (i.e.,
Murphy Ecuador) and not on behalf of the owners of the shares of the
companies forming the Consortium (i.e., Canam and Murphy International.)

31

121. As previously mentioned, but now restate for purposes of further
development, Repsol wrote to the authorities of the Republic of Ecuador on
November 12, 2007. The Tribunal highlights the following from that
document:

a) In the first paragraph, Repsol states as follows: This notice is made
“pursuant to Article 11 of the Treaty between the Kingdom of Spain and
the Republic of Ecuador concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investment...” Throughout that letter, Repsol repeatedly
states that it bases its claim on the BIT between the Kingdom of Spain
and the Republic of Ecuador.

b) In the second paragraph of such section, it states that "...it must be
understood that REPSOL also acts here as Consortium Operator of
Block 16 and, therefore, it acts in the interest of the contracting members
of the consortium and with their consent."

In paragraph 3 of the letter, Repsol states the following in the relevant

2&

part:

“The purpose of this notice is to officially inform the Republic of
Ecuador, through its Government and its authorities, of the unfair
and arbitrary treatment that our investments in Ecuador are
receiving, as well as to request that a formal consultation period
be entered into, for a maximum period of six months, between
Ecuador and REPSOL, in order to try to reach, through an
amicable agreement, full satisfaction of the obligations which,
directly or indirectly, pertain to the Ecuadorian State under the
Treaty, with respect to REPSOL’s investments in such country.”

122. On November 12, 2007, Repsol also informed ICSID that “...it has on this
date given notice of an investment dispute to the Government of the Republic

”° Claimant's Exhibit 3.

32

of Ecuador. In this regard, REPSOL acts on its own name and, in the
pertinent parts, in its capacity as Operator of the Contractor." It further stated
that it based its claim on “the provisions of Article 11 of the Treaty between
the Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of Ecuador concerning the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment....”””

123. In the second paragraph of its letter to ICSID, Repsol stated that if “... such
disputes could not be resolved through an amicable agreement, REPSOL
shall submit such claims to arbitration under the jurisdiction of ICSID as
prescribed in Article 11.2 of the Treaty and/or Article 20.3 of the Participation
Contract.””®

124. On February 29, 2008, Murphy International also wrote to the respective
authorities of such Nation with the purpose of notifying “...the Government of
Ecuador (the “Government”) of Murphy’s written consent to submit to the
jurisdiction of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(‘ICSID”) ... the ongoing dispute between Murphy and the Government
arising from the violations of the Treaty between the United States of America
and Republic of Ecuador concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments, signed in Washington D.C. on August 27, 1993
(the “BIT”).””? It is worth highlighting the following points of the letter:

a) Murphy International bases its claim on the Treaty between the Republic
of Ecuador and the United States of America (“BIT”).

b) Murphy International expressly quotes Article VI(3) of the Ecuador-
United States BIT and acknowledges that “... the company concerned
may submit the dispute to ICSID if six months have elapsed from the
date on which it arose.” It added that “[c]onsidering that the protests and
the complaints to the acts and omissions of the Government in relation to

” Claimant's Exhibit 3.
” Claimant's Exhibit 3.

” Claimant's Exhibit 2.

33

the investments were made both by Murphy's subsidiary in Ecuador as
well as by its partners since 2001, and the failure in the resolution of
these disputes despite the continuous efforts to negotiate since then,
there is no doubt that more than six months have elapsed from the date
the dispute arose.”

125. On March 3, 2008, Murphy International filed its Request of Arbitration to
ICSID. Paragraph 3 of such submission provides that:

“Murphy is one of four investors in these projects, also including
Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A., Overseas Petroleum and Investment
Corporation, and CRS Resources Ecuador LDC (collectively, the
“Investors”). Pursuant to the Joint Operating Agreement of February
7, 1986...” “Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. is the “Operator” of Block 16,
and as such it operates Block 16 and on behalf of all the members of
the consortium.”®°

126. When comparing the documents submitted by Repsol and Murphy

International, the following becomes evident.

127. In the documents submitted to the Ecuadorian authorities and to ICSID,
Repsol states that it acts "...for whatever purposes as may be necessary, as
the Operator of the Consortium of Block 16 and, therefore, in the interest of
the contracting members of the consortium and with their consent." Murphy
International also acknowledges this fact as indicated above in paragraph
124.

128. On November 12, 2007, Repsol (in its capacity as the Operator of the
Consortium, which includes Murphy Ecuador) stated its claim before the
Republic of Ecuador and ICSID. Less than four months later, on February 29,
2008, Murphy International acted similarly before the Ecuadorian authorities
and, three days later, submitted its Request for Arbitration.

®° Request for Arbitration, {[ 3.

34

129.

130.

131.

132.

This leads to one of two conclusions: i) either the claim of Murphy
International (as an indirect owner of Murphy Ecuador) was covered by
Repsol’s claim, in which case Murphy International could not claim anything
thereafter, or ii) there were two different claims. If the second is accepted, we
must conclude that, before submitting its Request for Arbitration, Murphy
International should have sought consultations and negotiations with
Ecuador, and only after the six-month period computed from the beginning of
such negotiations had lapsed, could it resort to ICSID arbitration.

The Tribunal finds that the analysis of the preceding paragraphs shows,
without a doubt, that Murphy International as well as Repsol were fully aware
that they had to comply with the six-month period established in Article VI of
the US-Ecuador BIT and Article XI(2) of the Spain-Ecuador BIT, respectively.

This Tribunal holds that the negotiations and consultations entered into by
Repsol, as the Operator of the Consortium, with Ecuador, are not the
negotiations required by Article VI(2) of the BIT for this case. The negotiations
and consultations of Repsol were prior to the date the dispute between
Murphy International and Ecuador arose. Furthermore, it becomes evident
that the negotiations and consultations between Repsol and Ecuador,
pursuant to the Spain-Ecuador BIT differ, with regards to the parties and
applicable law, from the dispute between Murphy International and Ecuador,
which is governed by the US -Ecuador BIT.

Therefore, this Tribunal concludes that the six-month period established in
Article VI(3) of the BIT is a mandatory requirement, and that both Repsol and
Murphy International acknowledge this fact in their respective letters.
Furthermore, the Tribunal finds that the claims of Repsol and Murphy
International are different, and consequently, Repsol’s attempts to negotiate
since November 12, 2007 and thereafter, do not meet Murphy International's
obligation to comply with that BIT requirement before resorting to ICSID.

35

133. The Tribunal will now analyze Claimant's futility allegations concerning the
negotiations required under Article VI of the BIT, and based on the
supposedly failed negotiations of other companies.

Cc. The Alleged Futility of the Negotiations

134. Murphy International argues that it complied with the requirement established
in Article VI of the BIT of seeking to resolve the dispute with Ecuador through
consultation and negotiation, and adds that, even if it had not, “...it would
have been excused from doing so due to the futility of the negotiations with
Ecuador."*' In support of its argument, it cites to several awards and to

Professor Schreuer’s opinion.®

135. In the Tribunal’s opinion, the obligation to negotiate is an obligation of means,
not of results. There is no obligation to reach, but rather to try to reach, an
agreement. To determine whether negotiations would succeed or not, the
parties must first initiate them. The obligation to consult and negotiate falls on
both parties, and it is evident that there were none in this case because as
has been reiterated above, on Friday, February 29, 2008 Murphy International
sent a letter to Ecuador stating that it had a claim against the Republic based
on the BIT, and then on Monday, March 3, 2008, it submitted the Request for
Arbitration to ICSID. Murphy International’s conduct to decide, a priori and
unilaterally, that it would not even try to resolve its dispute with Ecuador
through negotiations constitutes a grave breach of Article VI of the BIT.

136. Moreover, what happened to other foreign oil companies does not support
Murphy International's position that the negotiations with Ecuador would have
been fruitless because of the impossibility to reach an agreement. On the
contrary, the facts contradict this statement: in August 2008, City Oriente
reached an agreement with the Republic of Ecuador and withdrew its ICSID

®1 Claimant’s Counter Memorial on Jurisdiction, §| 117.

® Christoph Schreuer, Travelling the BIT Route of Waiting Periods, Umbrella Clauses and Forks in the Road,
The Journal of World Investment & Trade, Vol. 5, No. 2, April 2004, (CLA-87).

36

claim; Petrobras and Andes Petroleum also negotiated their disputes with
Ecuador and signed with the Republic contracts different from the ones in
existence. Repsol itself, the operator of the Consortium of which Murphy
Ecuador was a member, reached a preliminary agreement with the Republic
of Ecuador on March 12, 2009, and, as stated by Ecuador in its Memorial on
Objections to Jurisdiction “...the Consortium and the Republic entered into
the previously-negotiated Modification Agreement on March 12, 2009, the
same day as the sale of Murphy Ecuador to Repsol.®*”

137. In support of its case, Claimant also cites the Burlington case (letter of April
30, 2010). According to Murphy International, that company did strictly comply
with the obligation to negotiate with Ecuador during six months prior to
submitting its request for arbitration, and was unsuccessful in its negotiations.
Based on that fact, it asserts that had it tried to negotiate during six months, it
would not have obtained a positive result either and concludes that, for this
reason it was exempted from engaging in such negotiations. In the Tribunal’s
opinion, such line of argument is unacceptable: the fact that in similar
circumstances (the Tribunal lacks information to determine if they are
identical), Burlington was not successful in its negotiations with the Republic
of Ecuador, does not necessarily mean that Murphy International would have
been unsuccessful as well. In any case, the alleged failure of Burlington's
negotiations does not authorize Murphy International to decide, by and for
itself, to ignore the requirement of seeking to negotiate during six months
prior to resorting to ICSID.

138. It is possible that Murphy International considers the agreements reached by
other oil companies with the Republic of Ecuador unacceptable; however,
such subjective consideration cannot support the general conclusion that the
negotiations would have been futile because there was no possibility of
reaching an agreement with Ecuador.

®3 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4] 36.

37

140.

141.

142.

143.

. For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal rejects Claimant's argument about

the futility of the negotiations required under Article VI of the BIT based on the
alleged failure of other negotiation attempts between investors and Ecuador.

Dz. The Nature of the Six-Month Waiting Period

Murphy international contends that “...the failure to comply with a waiting
period is not a bar to jurisdiction.” It further claims that “[t]he majority of
ICSID tribunals addressing this issue have taken the position that waiting

periods constitute procedural, rather than jurisdictional requirements.”®

Claimant seems to assert that the requirements prescribed in certain rules
(the “jurisdictional") are of a category such that its non-compliance leads to
the lack of competence of the tribunal hearing the dispute. Instead, the
“procedural requirements,” can be breached without having any consequence

whatsoever. The Tribunal does not share this view.

The Tribunal also does not accept the consequences Claimant seeks to
derive between “procedural” and “jurisdictional” requirements. According to
Murphy International, “procedural requirements” are of an inferior category
than the “jurisdictional requirements” and, consequently, its non-compliance
has no legal consequences. It is evident that in legal practice this does not
occur, and that non-compliance with a purely procedural requirement, such
as, for example, the time to appeal a judgment, can have serious
consequences for the defaulting party.

Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which contains
the general rules of interpretation, provides as follows in paragraph 1:

“A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the
ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose.”

®4 Claimant’s Counter Memorial on Jurisdiction, 1129.

5 id., 4130.

38

144. In accordance with that text, it is not possible to ignore the existence of the
norms contained in Article VI of the BIT, regarding the obligation of the parties
to attempt negotiations in order to resolve their disputes and the impossibility
to resort to ICSID before the six-month term has elapsed.

145. Claimant's interpretation of Article VI of the BIT simply ignores the existence
of provisions mandating the parties to have consultations and negotiations to
resolve their disputes (paragraph 2) and preventing them from resorting to
ICSID before six months have elapsed from the date on which the dispute
arose (paragraph 3).

146. The Tribunal’s interpretation of paragraph 3 of Article VI is that in order for the
investor (“the company or national concerned”) to request that its claim be
resolved by an ICSID arbitral tribunal, the following two circumstances shall
be present:

a) that it has not submitted the dispute to the courts or to any dispute
resolution proceeding; and

b) that “six months have elapsed from the date on which the dispute arose”,
during which the concerned party sought to resolve it through
consultation and negotiation.

147. The tribunal in the Lauder case concluded that the six-month waiting period
“\..is not a jurisdictional provision, i.e. a limit set to the authority of the Arbitral
Tribunal to decide on the merits of the dispute, but rather a procedural rule
that must be satisfied by the Claimant....”°° That Tribunal however, does not
decide what happens if claimant does not comply with such obligation. It is
contrary to the fundamental rules of interpretation to state that while it
constitutes a “procedural rule that must be satisfied by the claimant’, non-
compliance does not have any consequence whatsoever. Such a way of
interpreting the obligation simply ignores the “object and the purpose” of the

® Ronald S. Lauder v. The Czech Republic (UNCITRAL Case), Award of September 3, 2001, §] 187

39

148.

@

149.

rule, which is contrary to Article 31(1) of the aforementioned Vienna

Convention.

Similarly, the SGS v. Pakistan®’ tribunal held that “... Tribunals have generally
tended to treat consultation periods as directory and procedural rather than as
mandatory and jurisdictional in nature.” This Tribunal cannot agree with that
statement which implies that, even though there is an explicit treaty
requirement, the investor may decide whether or not to comply with it as it
deems fit.

This Tribunal finds the requirement that the parties should seek to resolve
their dispute through consultation and negotiation for a six-month period does

not constitute, as Claimant and some arbitral tribunals have stated, “a
procedural rule” or a “directory and procedural” rule which can or cannot be
satisfied by the concerned party. To the contrary, it constitutes a fundamental
requirement that Claimant must comply with, compulsorily, before submitting

a request for arbitration under the ICSID rules.

. This was recognized by the tribunal which resolved the jurisdictional issues in

the arbitration brought by Burlington Resources Inc., which held that:

“...by imposing upon investors an obligation to voice their
disagreement at least six months prior to the submission of an
investment dispute to arbitration, the Treaty effectively accords host
States the right to be informed about the dispute at least six months
before it is submitted to arbitration. The purpose of this right is to
grant the host State an opportunity to redress the problem before the
investor submits the dispute to arbitration. In this case, Claimant has

*” sGs Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/13),
Decision on Jurisdiction of August 6, 2003 at 4] 184.

40

deprived the host State of that opportunity. That suffices to defeat
88

jurisdiction.
151. With the goal to “...promote greater economic cooperation” and stimulate “the
flow of private capital and the economic development”, as stated in the
preamble of the BIT, as well as to create a harmonious relationship between
the investors and States, the Governments who signed that Treaty and those
signing similar ones, enshrined the six-month negotiation period requirement.
The purpose of such requirement is that during this "cooling-off period," the
parties should attempt to resolve their disputes amicably, without resorting to
arbitration or litigation, which generally makes future business relationships
difficult. It is not an inconsequential procedural requirement but rather a key
component of the legal framework established in the BIT and in many other
similar treaties, which aims for the parties to attempt to amicably settle the
disputes that might arise resulting of the investment made by a person or
company of the Contracting Party in the territory of the another State.

152. In its Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, Ecuador makes reference to the
Enron v. Argentina®® case in which, although the Tribunal found that the
waiting period provision in the US-Argentina BIT (which is practically identical
to the one contained in the US-Ecuador BIT) had been complied with, it held
that:

“...the Tribunal wishes to note in this matter, however, that the
conclusion reached is not because the six-month negotiation could
be a procedural and not a jurisdictional requirement as has been
argued by the Claimants and affirmed by other tribunals. Such
requirement is in the view of the Tribunal very much a jurisdictional

®8 Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5), Decision on Jurisdiction of 2
June 2010 9 315.

®° Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 9] 115.

at

one. A failure to comply with that requirement would result in a
90

determination of lack of jurisdiction.
153. Claimant minimizes the importance of the Enron tribunal’s findings and
considers it as obiter dicta. This Tribunal does not share that view and finds
that, contrary to Murphy International's opinion, the Enron tribunal wanted to
include that statement in its Decision precisely because of the importance it
attributed to the issue, even though the waiting period having been complied

with in that case, it was not essential to resolve the issue on jurisdiction.

154. The tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan held that “...it does not appear consistent with
the need for orderly and cost-effective procedure to halt this arbitration at this
juncture and require the Claimant first to consult with the Respondent before
re-submitting the Claimant's BIT claims to this Tribunal.”*' Claimant raises
this same argument in its letter dated April 30, 2010, which has already been
cited. This Tribunal finds that rationale totally unacceptable: it is not about a
mere formality, which allows for the submission of a request for arbitration
although the six-month waiting period requirement has not been met, and if
the other party objects to it, withdraws and resubmits it. It amounts to
something much more serious: an essential mechanism enshrined in many
bilateral investment treaties, which compels the parties to make a genuine
effort to engage in good faith negotiations before resorting to arbitration.

155. Of course, this Tribunal does not ignore the fact that if both parties cling
obstinately to their positions, the possibilities for having a successful
negotiation become null. However, there have been many cases in which
parties with seemingly irreconcilable points of view at first, manage to reach
amicable solutions. To find out if it is possible, they must first try it. Evidently,

°° Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. The Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3),
Decision on Jurisdiction of January 14, 2004, 9 88.

° SGs Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/13),
Decision on Jurisdiction of August 6, 2003, ] 184.

42

156.

157.

158.

160.

the way in which Murphy International proceeded in this case prevented
Ecuador and Murphy itself from even commencing the negotiations required
by the BIT.

For the above reasons, the Tribunal rejects Claimant’s argument that the six-
month waiting period required by Article VI(3)(a) does not constitute a

jurisdictional requirement.

Based on the statements above, the Tribunal concludes that Murphy
International did not comply with the requirements of Article VI of the Bilateral
Investment Treaties entered into by the Republic of Ecuador and the United
States of America; that such omission constitutes a grave noncompliance,
and that because of such noncompliance, this Tribunal lacks competence to
hear this case.

Other Objections to Jurisdiction

Although irrelevant in light of what has been resolved, the Tribunal states for
the record that, in its view, the remaining objections to its jurisdiction raised by
the Republic of Ecuador which have not been expressly addressed in this
award could not have been known at this stage because by their nature they
would have been resolved together with the merits of the case.

Costs

. The Tribunal recognizes that the circumstances surrounding this dispute,

which led to the resolution herein, were not clear at first; therefore, each Party
shall bear its own fees and costs incurred in instituting this matter. Each Party
shall also pay one half of the fees and expenses incurred by the Members of
the Arbitral Tribunal, and of the charges for the use of the facilities of the
Centre.

Section IV, paragraphs 1 and 3 of this award and the corresponding decisions
in paragraph 161, are adopted unanimously by the Members of the Tribunal.
Section IV, paragraphs 2 and 4, and the corresponding decisions in

43

161.

paragraph 161, are adopted by majority, with the dissent of Dr. Horacio A.
Grigera Naon.

. Decision

For the reasons stated above and pursuant to Rules 41 and 47 of the
Arbitration Rules of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes, Article 61(2) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of the other States, and Article VI of
the Bilateral Investment Treaty between the Republic of Ecuador and the
United States of America of August 27, 1993, the Arbitral Tribunal resolves as
follows:

a) Unanimously rejects the objection to ICSID jurisdiction raised by the
Republic of Ecuador based on its unilateral declaration under Article
25(4) of the ICSID Convention.

By majority sustains the objection to ICSID jurisdiction based on the

z=

Claimant's non-compliance with the six-month consultation and
negotiation period prescribed in Article VI of the Bilateral Investment
Treaty between the Republic of Ecuador and the United States of
America of August 27, 1993.

By majority declares that ICSID lacks jurisdiction over this proceeding

2&

and this Arbitral Tribunal lacks competence to resolve it.

2

By majority declares that each party shall pay one half of the fees
and expenses incurred by the Members of the Arbitral Tribunal, and
of the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre.

By majority declares that each party shall bear its legal fees and the

2

costs incurred in instituting this arbitration proceeding.

44

Subject to the dissenting
opinion attached hereto.

   
 

    

Naon

 
 

Dr. Hofacfo A. Gri
Abeer

4A Yn. , ]
Dr. Raul E. Vinuesa
hk, Arbitrator
7

AC
Jor, lev. 7. 2o/o

  

Rofirigo Oreamuno Blanc
President

Nov. 16 em, 20/0

Horacio A. Grigera Naén
Doctor en Derecho

Partial Dissenting Opinion
In the

Arbitration proceeding between
Murphy Exploration and Production Company International

“Murphy” or “Claimant”

The Republic of Ecuador
“Ecuador” or “Defendant”
(hereinafter, both parties shall be collectively called the “Parties”)

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/4
A. Introduction

1. | shall depart from the reasoning and the conclusions of the award issued on these proceedings (the
“Award") only and exclusively since the Arbitral Tribunal's jurisdiction is denied therein due to the fact
that the prior negotiation period or “cooling period” as provided in the Treaty between the United
States of America and the Republic of Ecuador concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection
of Investment, dated April 22, 1997 (the “BIT”) has not been completed.

2. It is undisputed that as from September 2005? and with the consent of the then President of Ecuador
some negotiations were entered into between oil companies transacting business in said country and
the state oil company Petroecuador, acting on behalf of Ecuador, due to Ecuador's intention to improve,
given the increase in the oil price, its economic participation in the existing oil contracts with
Petroecuador, structured as product sharing agreements (the “Oil Contracts”), that is to say, according
to the modality assigning to each of the parties to such contracts a certain participation in the extraction
of crude.

3. It is also undisputed that Repsol S.A. (“Repsol”) participated in such negotiations concerning Block 16

and the contract signed on September 27, 1996 between Petroecuador, on behalf of Ecuador, and the
undersigning contractors (the “Contract”),” that Murphy Ecuador Oil Company Ltd. (“Murphy Ecuador”)

* Ecuador Inmediato, September 21, 2005, CEX-48.

ey Comercio, November 22, 2005, Annex A-1 referred to in the Hearing held on April 6, 2010.

was included among the non-operating parties of the contractor, and that Repsol acted in its capacity as
operator of the area covered by the Contract.>

4. It is likewise undisputed that Ecuador, unsatisfied with what it considered the oi! companies’
resistance to negotiate given their adherence to existing Oil Contracts to which they were parties, put an
end to said negotiations and enacted Law No. 42 (“Law No. 42”), published on April 25, 2006, which
amended the Hydrocarbons Law, which unilaterally introduced Ecuador's 50% participation in the
surplus between the monthly average FOB sale price of Ecuadorian crude oil and the monthly average
sale price of such crude upon the celebration of the Oil Contracts.*

B. The Dispute under the BIT and its Manifestation

5. Murphy claims that the dispute between Ecuador and Murphy under the BIT arises in the moment
mentioned in the previous paragraph 4, moment as from which the period regarding negotiations
between the Parties provided for in the BIT starts running. Upon expiration thereof, the dispute may be
submitted for settlement by binding arbitration, pursuant to Article VI(3) of the BIT, that is to say, much
earlier than the commencement date of these arbitration proceedings instituted by Murphy on March 3,
2008 and the letter dated February 29, 2008 whereby Murphy communicates Ecuador its consent to
submit the existing dispute between Murphy and Ecuador to ICSID jurisdiction as established in the BIT,
pursuant to said letter (the “Letter”’.) Respondent claims that it was aware of the existence of Murphy’s
claims when it received the Letter and that the dispute between Murphy and Ecuador under the BIT
could not have originated before March 3, 2008; that is to say, before the commencement of these
arbitration proceedings instituted by Murphy.® The fact that the dispute between Murphy and Ecuador
has arisen only on the last date is implicit in Ecuador's claim.

6. It is generally admitted that the mere presence of a legal conflict of interests is sufficient to originate
a difference or a dispute. Therefore, the International Court of Justice, in line with its decisions on prior
cases, has decided that:

“According to the consistent jurisdiction of the Court and the Permanent Court of International Justice, a
dispute is a disagreement on a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal views or interests between parties
[several phrases omitted.] Moreover, for the purposes of verifying the existence of a legal dispute it falls
to the Court to determine whether “the claim of one party is positively opposed by the other.”

* The evidence, not contrasted by Ecuador, reveals that even before the passing of Law No. 42, there have been
negotiations with the other oil companies, including Repsol, in which it acted in its own and in the non-operating
parties’ best interest, and that upon the failure of such negotiations, Ecuador enacted such Law (journalistic
articles dated September 21, 2005 (Ecuador inmediato); November 21 and 22, 2005 {E/ Comercio), after Ecuador's
Minister of Economy, Mr. Diego Borja, put an end to the negotiations (E/ Comercio journalistic article, dated August
2, 2006) and announced that Ecuador was going to exercise its sovereign will to that respect.

* Official Registry, dated April 25, 2006, CEX-49.
* Ecuador's jurisdictional objections, dated August 15, 2009, No. 104, pages 47-48.

* Cl, “Case concerning certain property (Liechtenstein v. Germany)”, judgment of February 10, 2005, No. 24, page
16, (Preliminary Objections Judgment, ICJ Reports 2005, p. 6).

 

7. Undoubtedly, on the one hand, the resistance of the oil companies to accept changes regarding what
they understand as their rights under the Oil Contracts in force and, on the other hand, Ecuador's
decision to exercise its sovereign power to impose, through the enactment of Law No. 42, an economic
participation regime of the Ecuadorian Government in such companies which, according to the oil
companies, implies a violation of such rights, constitutes a conflict of interests with strong legal
connotations, in relation to which the involved parties maintain radically opposed views; and that,
therefore, from then on, on April 25, 2006, a dispute that may be characterized as a dispute under
international law arises or originates.

8. In its relevant parts, Article VI(2) and VI(3)(a) of the BIT recites as follows:
(.)

“2.Cuando surja una diferencia en materia de inversion, las partes en la diferencia procuraran
primero resolverla mediante consultas y negociaciones. Si la diferencia no se soluciona
amigablemente, la sociedad o el nacional interesado, para resolverla, podrd optar por someterla
a una de las siguientes vias, para su resolucion:

¢) Conforme a lo dispuesto en el parrafo 3 de este articulo.

3. a) Siempre y cuando la sociedad o el nacional interesado no haya sometido la diferencia,
para su solucién, segin lo previsto por el inciso a) o el inciso b) del parrafo 2, y hayan
transcurrido seis meses desde la fecha en que surgié la diferencia, la sociedad o el nacional
interesado podrd optar por consentir por escrito a someter la diferencia, para su solucién, al
arbitraje obligatorio:”

(.)

9, Article VI(2) and VI(3)(a) of the BIT, as opposed to other similar Treaties, such as the Treaty between
the Republic of Ecuador and the Kingdom of Spain concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investment, dated June 26, 1996, does not define when a dispute regarding investments
arises nor does it require or demand it to be alleged, raised in a written or any other way or claimed
under a specific modality to constitute it, become aware of it, formulate it, manifest it or to initiate or
continue the prior negotiations process; and it establishes, on the other hand, that the six-month period
shall start running as from the moment when the dispute arises.

10. Article Vi of the BIT makes reference to “investment disputes” exclusively. Clearly, contractual
disputes may simultaneously constitute disputes under investment protection agreements which are
relevant for the case;’ and according to the claims in these arbitration proceedings, Murphy alleges that
Law No. 42 constitutes a violation to the Contract and the BIT.® To jurisdictional effects (which are the

7 Principle recently ratified by the decision of the Ad hoc Committee on annulment in ICSID case No. ARB/01/3
“Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. Ponderosa Assets, L.P. and The Argentine Republic” no. 134, page 54 (Parties’
dispatch date: July 30, 2010.)

® Memorial on the Merits, dated April 30, 2009, No. 298.

only ones which shall be considered at this stage of the proceedings), as acknowledged by continuous
case law, it is only important to evaluate such prima facie allegations and to take them as true upon
presentation, as long as there is no reason, upon evaluation, to understand that such allegations are
improbable, frivolous or reckless.° It shall be concluded that, to such effects, the dispute under the
Contract and the BIT "arose" or “erupted” at the same time — that is to say April 25, 2006.

11. As already decided by the Ad-Hoc Committee in the case Vivendi when deciding a jurisdictional
question, “Read literally, the requirements for arbitral jurisdiction in [Article 8] do not necessitate that
the Claimant allege a breach of the BIT itself: it is sufficient that the dispute relate to an investment
made under the BIT.’”° The first and second paragraphs of Article 8 of the Argentina-France BIT referred
to in the Ad-Hoc Committee decision relate to the dispute as from which the six-month term shall start
running for the negotiated resolution thereof. This same construction corresponds to Article VI(2) and
VI(3) of the BIT, the text of which is clear, unambiguous and unequivocal as its literal meaning.

12. Undoubtedly, Law No. 42 and the subsequent decrees are related to Murphy’s investments and its
investor's rights with reference to the Contract and its investments in Ecuador in Block 16 within the
scope of the BIT. The fact that, for example, the written complaints issued by Repsol, in its capacity as
operator, related to the enactment or the application of such law" do not make specific reference to
the BIT does not prevent such complaints from reflecting and manifesting the existence of a pending
dispute previously raised under the BIT as from the enactment of Law No. 42, which had already
triggered the six-month term of prior negotiations.

13. Therefore: (a) on April 25, 2006, the dispute raised in relation to the enactment of Law No. 42 was
configured and established, at the same time, as a dispute under the Contract and as an international
law dispute covered by the provisions of international investment protection treaties eventually
applicable to investment cases such as , in the case of Murphy, the BIT, because it is, at the same time, a
foreign investment dispute; and (b) it is not necessary to notify that a dispute has been raised or to
configure it as a BIT violation or to allege it or to raise it as a claim under it, or, otherwise, for the period
established in its Article VI(3)(a) to start running.

14. Such conclusion is not shaken by the fact that Repsol has sent a note to Ecuador on November 12,
2007, (the "Note") with the consent and in the interest of the then members of the contractor, with the
aim to list the violations under the aforementioned Agreement between the Kingdom of Spain and the
Republic of Ecuador for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments (the “Agreement”) for
which, according to Repsol, Ecuador is responsible, and to open the negotiation period as a step prior to
Repsol’s instituting international arbitration proceedings under the ICSID system, pursuant to said
Agreement. Sending the Note or its content has nothing to do with Murphy’s satisfaction of BIT

° award on jurisdiction on “Amco Asia Corp. and others v. Indonesia”, dated September 25, 1983, 1 ICSID Reports
no. 38, pages 405 (1993). “Methanex Corp vs United States” (TLCAN), First Partial Award on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, August 7, 2002, no. 121, pages 54-55, CLA-160.

* ICSID Case ARB/97/3, no. 55, pages 115 (Annulment Decision).

* For example, Repsol’s note to the Chief of the Oil Contracts Administration Unit of Petroecuador, dated October
18, 2007, where it states for the record that Repsol made the payments in protest on behalf of the contracting
consortium as from April, 2006 of such sums of money claimed under the Law No. 42 and the regulatory decrees,
CEX-057.

requirements in respect of its claims as individually falling under any of its Articles, including, without
limitation, Article VI(2) and VI(3)(a), nor with its rights under the BIT.

15. The reference to the Note in Murphy’s request for arbitration, dated March 3, 2008, was solely
aimed at illustrating Murphy’s complaints through the operator, Repsol, in respect of the governmental
measures which are subject to the request and Ecuador's actions that, according to Murphy, would
violate the BIT — that is to say, as an illustration of the dispute on the basis of which Murphy raises its
claims under this treaty —? as confirmed in the Hearing by its legal representative.’ It is worth
mentioning that the Note also identifies the enactment of Law No. 42 as the source of and the moment
when the controversies or differences invoked under the Agreement arose, as Murphy does in this
arbitration in relation to the dispute it raised under the BIT.“ Ina way, Murphy states or suggests that
the Note — issued with respect to a different treaty — constitutes or intends to constitute the moment as
from which the six-month term under Article V1(3)(a) of the BIT has to start running or a manifestation
of the existence of the dispute under said treaty. This is perfectly detailed in the Letter whereby Murphy
submits to the jurisdiction of ICSID all its claims against Ecuador under the BIT, where no reference to
the Note is made, and where it is stated, on the contrary, that six months have elapsed since the dispute
arose upon the enactment of Law No. 42 without having been resolved by negotiation (hence, said six-
month period expired well before the date of the Note.)'® For that reason and due to the fact that the
dispute, as already indicated, also arose in relation to Murphy upon the enactment of Law No. 42, it is
incorrect to state that the negotiation and consultation conducted by Repsol as an operator occurred
before the outbreak of the dispute.

16. The Note seems to find its explanation in the text of Article XI(1) and (2) of the Agreement, which,
unlike Article VI(2) of the BIT, requires express notice of the dispute to declare and deem the period for
prior negotiation started, as provided for in the Agreement, to enable Repsol to resort to arbitration
under the Agreement. Murphy Ecuador's consent to the Note does not preclude Murphy’s right to

* Request for arbitration, dated March 3, 2008, No. 37, page 9: “Since the enactment of the Government's
measures adversely affecting its investment, Claimant, through its subsidiary and the Operator, has protested its
application while working with the Government to negotiate an amicable resolution. This and the details of the
Government’s other actions in violation of the Treaty are outlined in two letters, both dated November 12, 2007,
sent to the Government by the Block 16 Operator on behalf of the Claimant.”

* Hearing, transcription of April 5, 2010, pages 259-261.

* Note, No.13, page.S: “Estas medidas normativas, entre otras, constituyen una violacién de las obligaciones de
Ecuador bajo el Tratado...”.

* Note dated February 29, 2008 addressed to the President of Ecuador, among others, page 4: “Estas y otras
medidas crean una “disputa en materia de inversin” entre Murphy y el Gobierno segun el Articulo VI del TBI. El
Articulo Vi(3) prevé que una sociedad afectada puede someter Ia disputa ante el CIADI si han transcurrido seis
meses desde Ia fecha en que la misma surgid. Considerando que las objeciones y protestas a los actos y omisiones
del Gobierno relacionados a las inversiones fueron hechas tanto por la subsidiaria de Murphy en el Ecuador como
por los socios desde 2001, y el fracaso en Ia resolucion de esas diferencias, no obstante los continuos intentos para
negociarlas dede entonces, no queda duda que mas de seis meses han transcurrido desde que la disputa surgio”.

+ Official Gazette of Ecuador No. 8 dated April 10, 1998: “Articulo XI 1. Toda controversia relativa a las inversiones
que surja entre una de las Partes Contratantes y un inversionistas (Sic) de la otra Parte Contratante respect a
cuestiones reguladas por el presente Acuerdo sera notificada por escrito, incluyendo una informacién detallda, por
el inversionista a la Parte Contratante receptora de la inversion. En la medida de lo posible las partes trataran de

5

enforce its investor rights separately under a treaty other than the Agreement -the BIT- nor, in doing so,
to invoke a different moment triggering the cooling-off period set forth in the BIT. Whether Murphy’s
BIT claim in this arbitration is part of Repsol’s claim under the Agreement or not is a question regarding
the merits of this case which cannot be determined now, hence, such question cannot be the subject of
conjectures at this stage at which, as mentioned before, Claimant’s allegations as regards jurisdiction
are established prima facie.

17. Be that as it may, what happens is that this case features, specifically, the issue that the same set of
facts is the basis for two different claims under two different treaties. However, this does not exclude
the existence of conducts related to such facts which are common to both treaties; that is to say, not
susceptible of being viewed from the perspective of one treaty only. This common feature does not
either authorize to label such conducts as relating to one treaty only with the sole purpose of depriving
them of their effects or autonomous meaning under the terms of another treaty. For example, it is
incorrect to label the Note as having the sole effect of subsuming the negotiation, consultation, notes
and payments under protest of amounts required by Ecuador under Law No. 42 and later decrees
effected by Repsol -as Contractor’s operator- as conduct exclusively related to the Agreement or
exclusively relevant to such Agreement, and not also related to Murphy’s rights under the BIT and its
provisions. Moreover, it is not proper to assign to the Note the retroactive or future effect of
neutralizing the meaning under the BIT and from the perspective of Murphy’s rights thereunder to the
conduct of Repsol as operator, to determine Murphy’s position with regard to Law No. 42 and later
decrees or such consultations or negotiations and the futility or not of the negotiating efforts before or
after the Note during the cooling-off period under the BIT in the relation between Murphy and Ecuador.
It is important to highlight that the Parties do not distinguish between the period of negotiations before
and after the Note. Ecuador only marks a difference between the negotiations stage which led to the
execution of the contract modifying the Contract dated March 12, 2009 and the negotiations after such
date’ and does not distinguish between negotiations before and after the Note.

C. The Parties to the Dispute under the BIT

18. The fact that Repsol was the operator under the Contract acting in representation of the remaining
parties of the contractor (which is not disputed) and, besides, that Murphy Ecuador, controlled by
Murphy, is a party to such Contract, allows to conclude that said difference, which has arisen as from
the enactment of Law No. 42, emerged simultaneously with relation to Murphy Ecuador and Murphy
itself. However, the Award suggests that in the communications exchanged with Petroecuador or with
the Ecuadorian authorities, the scope of Repsol’s conduct did not cover the rights and interests of the
persons who have invested indirectly in Block 16 as per the Contract and, therefore, that the difference
did not arise as well in respect of Murphy, since Murphy Ecuador, a company incorporated under the
jaws of Bermuda and indirectly controlled by Murphy by way of the company of the Bahamas Canaam
Offshore Ltd., is not a party te the Contract. | do not agree with this position.

 

arreglar esas di ie dit un acuerdo ami: 2. Silac ia no pudiera ser resuelta de estas
forma en un plazo de seis meses a contar de Ja fecha de notificacién escrita mencionada en el pérrafo 1, sera
sometida a eleccidn del inversionista.... [there follows a list of arbitral instances to which the investor may resort].
*” Declaration of the representative of Ecuador in the Hearing of April 5, 2010, p. 273.

19. Murphy Ecuador —it is undisputed that during the stage relevant to the analysis, it was wholly and
indirectly controlled by Murphy”® — was also ran by Murphy and subject to the directions of said
company as regards the positions to be adopted vis-a-vis the requirements of Ecuador and Law No. 42,
the negotiations of the consortium with Ecuador in connection with the adoption of such Law, and
payment, or lack of payment, of the amounts required under Law No. 42 , which, actually, has been
acknowledged by Ecuador ‘s representative.’® Therefore, the conduct of the operator Repsol before
Ecuador both during the course of negotiations and when stating its position (such as payments under
protest) regarding the legitimacy of Law No. 42 reflects — while Murphy Ecuador remained under the
control of Murphy —Murphy’s position, although neither Murphy Ecuador nor Murphy have participated
directly in such negotiations or signed the letters evidencing payment under protest. In consequence,
the dispute, which arose upon the adoption of Law No. 42 in relation to the Contract and its parties, was
also automatically established in relation to Murphy, and not only Murphy Ecuador.

20. As pointed out in an ICSID case:”°

[11] “..in general, ICSID tribunals do not accept the view that their competence is limited by formalities,
and rather they rule on their competence based on a review of the circumstances surrounding the case,
and, in particular, the actual relationship among the companies involved. This jurisprudence reveals the
willingness of ICSID tribunals to refrain from making decisions on their competence based on formal
appearances, and to base their decisions on a realistic assessment of the situation before them.

[12] It is for this reason that ICSiD tribunals are more willing to work their way from subsidiary to the
parent company rather than the other way round...”

21. This reasoning, relevant to determine who are the parties involved or affected in the stage of
negotiations preceding the arbitration claim, has received recent confirmation in the Burlington case,
which also partially referred to similar differences as those of these arbitration proceedings, although
concerning different Blocks located in Ecuador. In such case, under similar circumstances, it was
recognized that, given that the conduct of the operator Perenco was attributable to a subsidiary of the
foreign investor, such conduct was not only attributable to such subsidiary but it must be deemed
carried out on behalf of the claimant investor, even when the subsidiary forming part of the contractor
party was controlled only by 50% by said investor.”2

D. The Futility of Negotiations

22. Evidence also reveals the futility of the negotiations with chances of success between the Parties
due to their strongly antagonistic positions after the enactment of Law No. 42, which were repeatedly
manifested through the request for payment of amounts calculated in accordance with Law No. 42 as

8 Hearing, transcription of April 5, 2010, p. 261.
*° Murphy international “..puso reparos [objections to the negotiations with the Ecuadorian authorities] e impidio

un pronto acuerdo con el objetivo de apalancar su capacidad de negociacién con Repsol...”, transcription, April 5,
2010, p. 61.

*° “Banro American Resources, Inc. and Société Aurifére du Kivu et du Maniema S.A.R.L v. Democratic Republic of
the Congo”,(ICSID Case No. ARB/98/7, Award, September 1, 2000), 17 FIL) 382 (2002).

4 ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5, “Burlington Resources Inc. vs. Republic of Ecuador”, Award, June 2, 2010, p. 68, nos.
326-329.

from July 6, 2006 and Repsol’s payments under protest with monies of the parties to the Contract. In the
letters where Repsol states such protests, it also notes that they are based on the fact that the requests
for payment as per Law No. 42 constitute a unilateral modification of the Oil Contracts, thus violating
Contractor's rights. This last concept includes Murphy Ecuador. As already shown, in formulating such
protests, Repsol was also representing the interests and position of Murphy, controlling company of
Murphy Ecuador at that time.

23. Law No. 42 was followed by regulatory decree No. 662 passed on October 18, 2000, which by
increasing Ecuador's participation under Law No. 42 from 50% to 99% stressed the already clear
differences between Ecuador's and Murphy's positions, since this measure caused a substantial increase
in the economic contribution in favor of Ecuador that originated the dispute.

24. Under the BIT (Article Vi(2)), both parties to the dispute — not only the investor - should initially seek
a resolution through consultation and negotiation. The BIT does not state who must initiate or promote
the negotiation, it is rather a requirement directed to both parties equally.

25. The only negotiating possibility offered by Ecuador after the adoption of said regulatory decree,
according to the declarations of its new President Rafael Correa,” was the transformation of the Oil
Contracts in contracts for services, i.e., in agreements inspired, as deduced from the allegations in this
case, in a legal and economic concept different from the regime evidenced by the Oil Contracts.
Moreover, President Correa has declared that the only possible alternative for negotiation was that of
this type of contract, and that, if not accepted, the participation of 99 % set forth in regulatory decree
No. 662 for the Ecuadorian State will be increased to 100 %.”?

26. The evidence in these proceedings shows that, before and after the issuance of the Note, and even
after the sale by Murphy of its participation in Murohy Ecuador, Ecuador, by way of declarations of
President Correa, kept its strong position that the only option for negotiation was the transformation of
the Oil Contracts into contracts for services.’ It is pertinent to point out that nothing in these
proceedings shows that such President Correa’s declarations or those cited above have been officially
denied. Neither has the Defendant questioned the truthfulness or authenticity of the evidence provided
by Murphy reflecting such declarations.

27. Murphy did not accept — and had no obligation to accept — said option, presented by Ecuador in such
unconditional and categorical terms, as the only option Ecuador was willing to consider as a negotiated
solution between the Parties, which eventually led to the fact that Murphy Ecuador did not sign the
contract modifying the already mentioned Contract (entered into by Repsol on March 12, 2009), by
means of which a transition regime is established while the negotiations carried on during a calendar
year (later extended under information provided by Ecuador during the Hearing”) in order to transform
the Contract into a contract for services.

2 Declarations which appeared in El Universo newspaper, dated October 23, 2007, CEX-108.
Declarations which appeared in El Comercio newspaper, October 6, 2007, CEX-133.
* Declarations which appeared in La Hora newspaper, April 23, 2009, CEX-77.

* Transcription of the Hearing of April 6, 2010, p. 370.

28. Clearly, positions so radically different conspire in a decisive manner against reaching a possible
agreement between Murphy and Ecuador leading to a useful negotiation. Such positions evidence the
futility of any negotiating effort during the six-month period provided for in Article V\(3)(a) of the BIT
and even after such period, without the need of determining, for reaching such conclusion, whether
such period is of procedural or jurisdictional nature. Given the circumstances, only if it were taken for
granted that Murphy had the obligation to accept the only negotiating option formulated by Ecuador
consisting of the transformation of the Contract into a contract for services, it may be concluded that
following the negotiating process would not be futile. In fact, such hypothesis must be ruled out, since it
is not compatible with the idea of a free negotiation without conditions set forth beforehand.

29. Article VI(2) of the BIT does not set forth any obligation to negotiate, it only requires the parties “ to
commit efforts” (“procurar”) to reach a negotiated solution. The BIT does not demand the parties to
reach a positive solution, nor does it set forth a minimum level of attempts or efforts to be applied to
such end or to reach a solution, nor prescribes any intensity in their application, nor imposes a minimum
period in which the will or effort to negotiate is to be maintained.

30. It is worth contrasting the soft character of the provisions of Article VI(2) of the BIT with the
categorical and peremptory character of the language of Article VI(3)(a), which automatically triggers
the right to resort to arbitration upon the expiration of a period of six months after the date on which
the dispute arose, without making any reference as to whether the negotiation efforts were
appropriately undertaken or fulfilled. In accordance to adequate criteria for drafting clauses for the
solution of disputes providing for, in a combined manner, a period of negotiation prior to an arbitral
instance, Article VI(3)(a) of the BIT sets a clear and precise dividing line between the negotiation stage
and the arbitral stage by fixing a time limit between both stages, surely with the purpose of avoiding
delays which may arise due to debates or opposing views about whether such negotiations were duly
attempted or effectively carried out, avoiding undue delays because of disputes over whether the
negotiation stage was fulfilled and minimize the possibility of interposing jurisdictional objections to the
detriment of the legitimate right of access to justice of the party seeking to resort to an arbitral
proceeding to enforce its rights. Even in case of doubt as to the futility of the negotiations between
Murphy and Ecuador, the presumption is that, in absence of a negotiated solution reached by the
Parties within the time limit set forth in Article VI(3)(a) of the BIT, the arbitral stage provided therein
becomes automatically available.

E. Conclusions

31. From the above it is to be understood that a clear difference between Murphy and the Ecuadorian
State under Article VI of the BIT arose as from the adoption of Law 42 by Ecuador, and that all the
conditions for triggering the six-month previous negotiations period in respect of Murphy’s claims in
accordance with said Article were fulfilled as from then. Taking into account the date of enactment of
Law No. 42 (April 25, 2006) and the submission of the Request for Arbitration by Murphy before ICSID
on March 3, 2008, this is, long after such date, the negotiations period under Article VI of the BIT has
already expired and, anyway, due to the circumstances of the case, such negotiations, negotiating
efforts or their permanence had already been proven futile by then.

32. In any case, it seems difficult not to notice, having regard to the framework of the particular
circumstances of this case, that forcing Murphy, after more than two years and a half in arbitration, to
envisage now a negotiating stage of uncertain future given the history of the relationship between the
Parties depicted here, but with the plausible ending of Murphy having to reinstate later the claim filed

9

herein in a new proceeding should Murphy desire to enforce what it considers to be its rights, does not
marry well with the concept of a reasonably fast and efficient access to the arbitral instances provided
for in the BIT and seriously impairs Murphy’s right to access arbitral justice under its Article VI(3).

33. Therefore, | reject the jurisdictional objection of Ecuador based upon the fact that the negotiation
period provided for in Article VI of the BIT has not elapsed, with costs and fees to be borne by
Defendant.

Washington D.C., 19 November 2010.

Horacio A. Grigera Naon

[The text above is a translation of the original text in Spanish’

10

