PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION

In the matter of an arbitration under the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
Between:

Mytilineos Holdings SA
(Claimant)

and

1. The State Union of Serbia & Montenegro
2. Republic of Serbia

(Respondents)

Arbitral Tribunal
Professor Dr. August Reinisch (Presiding Arbitrator)
Professor Dr. Stelios Koussoulis
Professor Dr. Dobrosav Mitrovié

 

 

Zurich, 8 September 2006

VI.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 2
8 September 2006

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
THE PARTIES 3
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 4
SUMMARY OF FACTS 7

 

 

GENERAL CLAIMS AND DEFENSES OF THE PARTIES ...

A. RESPONDENTS’ SUBMISSIONS IN SUPPORT OF THEIR PLEA CONTESTING
THE TRIBUNAL’S JURISDICTION...

 

 

B. — CLAIMANT’S SUBMISSIONS...

 

ANALYSIS OF ISSUES FOR DECISION

A. ARE CLAIMANT’S BUSINESS OPERATIONS PROTECTED BY THE BIT AS AN
“INVESTMENT”? 23

(a) Are the agreements an “investment” under international law as
defined in the jurisprudence of investment tribunals?..

 

(b) Is the broad asset-based definition of investments in the applicable
BIT limited by the requirement that these assets must be “invested”? .... 32
B. ‘WHAT IS THE JURISDICTIONAL RELEVANCE OF THE REQUIREMENT THAT

INVESTMENTS MUST BE MADE “IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LEGISLATION”
OF THE HOST STATE? .

 

 

Cc. JURISDICTION RATIONE PERSONAE .

(a) Are Respondents who are not parties to any of the “seven
agreements” the proper parties to this arbitration’

 

(b) Is Second Respondent who is not a party to the BIT a proper party to
this arbitration?..

 

D. DOES THE NEED FOR A PRIMA FACIE CASE CONSTITUTE AN OBSTACLE TO
THE JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBUNAL?...

 

E. IS THE PRINCIPLE OF THE EXHAUSTION OF LOCAL REMEDIES A BAR TO THE
JURISDICTION OF THIS TRIBUNAL?...

 

DECISION: 56

ANNEX I: LisT OF AGREEMENTS BETWEEN THE CLAIMANT AND RTB-BOR DATED

19 FEBRUARY 1998. 58

ANNEX IT: AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE HELLENIC REPUBLIC AND THE

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA ON THE

RECIPROCAL PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS... 59

 

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 3
8 September 2006

THE PARTIES
Claimant:

Mytilineos Holdings SA
5-7 Patroklou Street
15125 Marousi

Greece

hereinafter referred to as “Claimant” or “Mytilineos”.

Mytilineos has its place of business at the above-mentioned address in Marousi,
Greece, and is represented in this arbitration by its duly authorized attorneys,
Mr. Nicholas Moussas and Mr. Efstratios Voulgaridis of Moussas & Tsibris,
34 Asklipiou Street, Athens 10680, Greece.

Respondents:

State Union of Serbia & Montenegro
Bulevar Mihajla Pupina

11070 New Belgrade

Serbia and Montenegro

First Respondent
and
Republic of Serbia
Nemanjina 11

11000 Belgrade
Serbia and Montenegro

Second Respondent

hereinafter referred to as “Respondents” or “Serbia and Montenegro” and “Serbia”

and, with Claimant, the “Parties”.

Respondents are represented in this arbitration by its duly authorized attorneys Mr.
Radomir MiloSevié of Law Office MiloSevié, 9 Molerova Street, 11000 Belgrade,
Serbia and Montenegro, and Dr. Miroslav Paunovié of Law Office Paunovic,
30 Knez Mihailova Street, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro.

I.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 4
8 September 2006

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

These Proceedings concern a dispute that has arisen between Claimant and
Respondents relating to the rights and obligations of Claimant concerning a series of
seven contracts dated 19 February 1998 entered into between Claimant and RTB-
BOR, a company organized under the laws of the then Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (together, the “Agreements”; a list of the Agreements is set out in
Annex 1).

Claimant is a company incorporated under the laws of the Hellenic Republic and is
engaged in the metallurgy, energy and defense sectors, including metals trading. The
Agreements provided inter alia for general cooperation in the mineral extraction and
metallurgy business operated by RTB-BOR, the provision of capital for updating of
RTB-BOR industrial infrastructure, the supply of spare parts and for the sale and

purchase of copper, zinc and copper concentrates.

On 27 January 2004, Claimant sent notice to Respondents pursuant to Article 9 of the
1997 Agreement between the Government of the Hellenic Republic and the Federal
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments (hereinafter referred to as the “BIT” or “Treaty”; the text
of the BIT is set out in Annex 2). On 8 April 2005, Claimant served Respondents
with a Statement of Claim dated 30 March 2005 setting out its claims and submitting
the dispute to ad hoc arbitration under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (the “UNCITRAL Rules”) pursuant to
Article 9(3)(b) of the BIT (the “Statement of Claim”).

In its Statement of Claim, Claimant requests an award in the sum of
USS 31,327,530.38 together with c

breached certain provisions of the Treaty by its interference with, or failure to protect

 

and interest. Claimant alleges Respondents

Claimant’s commercial interests with RTB-BOR under the Agreements and in
respect of certain bank guarantees issued as security for the performance of RTB-
BOR’s obligations under those Agreements.

On 8 April 2005, Claimant appointed Professor Dr. Stelios Koussoulis as its
arbitrator under Article 7(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules. Professor Dr. Christoph
Schreuer was designated as an appointing authority by the Secretary-General of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration (the “PCA”) under Article 7(2)(b) of the
UNCITRAL Rules on 30 June 2005.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 5
8 September 2006

On 1 August 2005, Professor Dr. Schreuer appointed Professor Dr. Dobrosav
Mitrovié as second arbitrator on behalf of Respondents under Article 7(2)(b) of the
UNCITRAL Rules.

In accordance with the list-procedure provided for in Articles 7(3) and 6(3) of the
UNCITRAL Rules, during the process of which both parties expressed their
preference for the same candidate, the appointing authority appointed Professor Dr.
August Reinisch as presiding arbitrator on 20 September 2005 (together with
Professors Koussoulis and Mitrovié, the “Tribunal”).

Following consultation with the Parties, the Parties and the Tribunal signed Terms of

Appointment on 8 November 2005.

On 30 November 2005, the Parties and the Tribunal attended a preliminary meeting
convened in Zurich (the “Preliminary Meeting”) in order to establish certain
procedural and practical matters regarding the conduct of the arbitration.
Respondents indicated at the Preliminary Meeting that they would contest the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

Following consultations with the Parties by written correspondence and at the
Preliminary Meeting, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 on 2 December
2005 (“PO 1”) setting out a procedural calendar and certain practical matters
concerning the conduct of the arbitration. The procedural calendar set out in Section
2 of PO | provided for a preliminary phase in which the Tribunal would make a
determination in respect of its own jurisdiction. In addition, the Tribunal appointed
as Secretary Mr. Guillaume Tattevin, of the International Bureau of the PCA, who
was assisted during parts of the jurisdictional phase by Mr. Henry Warwick, also of
the International Bureau of the PCA.

On 21 December 2005, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 (“PO 2”) which
provided for the payment of a deposit sum by the Parties pursuant to Article 41(4) of
the UNCITRAL Rules. The Tribunal circulated a report of the Preliminary Meeting
in agreed form by letter of the same date.

On 20 January 2006, Respondents filed a Plea Contesting Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
pursuant to paragraph 2.2(a) of PO 1 (hereinafter referred to as “R-I (PCJ)”).
Following consultation with the Parties, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3
(“PO 3”) on 9 February 2006, amending the procedural calendar for submissions on

jurisdiction.

20.

21,

22.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 6
8 September 2006

On 17 February 2006, Claimant filed Claimant’s Answer to Plea Contesting
Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as “C-APCJ”).
Respondents filed their Replica on Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal on 7 March
2006 (hereinafter referred to as “R-II (ROJ)”) and Claimant its Duplica on
Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal on 22 March 2006 (hereinafter referred to as
“C-DOJ”’). A further document, entitled Respondents’ Further Submission on
Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal, was filed by Respondents on 31 March 2006
and a corrected version of this document was filed on 6 April 2006.

By letter dated 8 March 2006, the PCA informed the Parties of the Tribunal’s
decision, taken following consultation with the Parties, that a hearing on jurisdiction
would take place in Zurich on 8 and 9 May 2006 (the “Hearing”). By letter dated 28
March 2006, and following a request for clarification by Claimant, the Tribunal
established the procedural calendar for the Parties’ submissions and certain practical

matters concerning the Hearing.

An additional folder of supporting documents was filed by Claimant on 31 March
2006. On 6 April 2006, Claimant filed the Consolidated Bundle of Claimant’s
Documentary Evidence and Claimant’s list of Witnesses, comprising Dr. Radoje
Prica (expert) and Mr. Seraphim Abatzioglou (witness of fact). A Consolidated
Bundle in Joint Chronological Order was filed by Respondents on 7 April 2006.

On 28 April 2006, the Tribunal convened a Pre-Hearing telephone conference, with
representatives of both Parties, in accordance with paragraph 2.3(c) of PO 1 and 3(c)
of the Tribunal’s letter concerning procedural matters dated 28 March 2006. Minutes
of the teleconference were circulated on 2 May 2006 outlining agreed practical

matters concerning the conduct of the Hearing.

The Hearing took place before the Tribunal in Zurich on 8 and 9 May 2006 and was
attended by representatives for both Parties and all witnesses called by the Parties.
Both of Claimant’s witnesses were questioned on their written evidence by way of
direct, cross and re-direct examination and submissions were heard from both Parties

concerning the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Article 9 of the Treaty.

Following receipt of submissions from the Parties at the Hearing, the Tribunal issued
a Procedural Order No. 4 (“PO 4”) on 12 May 2006, concerning the filing of Post-
Hearing Briefs as contemplated under paragraph 8 of PO 1.

=

24,

25.

26.

27.

II.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 7
8 September 2006

Claimant and Respondents simultaneously submitted Post-Hearing Briefs on 7 June
2006 (hereinafter referred to as “R-IV (PHB)” and “C-PHB” respectively).

SUMMARY OF FACTS

Since its creation in 1990, Claimant has engaged extensively in the business of metal
trading within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), from
2003 until 2006 officially called the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro.

In February 1998, Claimant and RTB-BOR, a socially-owned company organized
and existing under the laws of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, concluded the
Agreements listed at Annex 1. In general, the Agreements provided for cooperation
in the mineral extraction and metallurgy business operated by RTB-BOR. These
contracts between private parties all contain choice-of-law clauses providing for
English law to govern and most of them include choice-of-forum clauses in favor of
English courts.

These Agreements were negotiated and concluded as a package as is confirmed by
the “General Cooperation Agreement” (Annex 1.1) of 19 February 1998. They were
all concluded for a period of seven years. According to the General Cooperation
Agreement, the parties had “agreed to form a strategic alliance” (Article 1) which
was intended to lead to an equity participation of Claimant in RTB-BOR in the event
RTB-BOR was privatized (Article 3).

The individual Agreements are as follows:

i) General Cooperation Agreement: Claimant was to invest in a modern smelter
plant which would increase RTB-BOR’s efficiency. In addition, the General

Cooperation Agreement provided that :

“(a If RTB BOR is privatised, Mytilinaios [sic] will be given priority, within
the possibilities offered by the Ownership Transformation Act.

(b) In case of privatisation Mytilineos shall have the right to convert any
outstanding claims against RTB BOR to shares, according to the Ownership
Transformation Act and the program of privatisation of RTB BOR.”

28.

29.

30.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 8
8 September 2006

ii) Working Capital Agreement: Claimant agreed to make available to RTB-BOR a
credit for an amount of US$ 10 million. This credit was to be secured by a bank

guarantee.

iii) Sale of Copper Agreement: RTB-BOR agreed to sell copper to the Claimant.

iv) Spare Parts Agreement: Claimant agreed to sell spare parts to RTB-BOR. In

addition, all amounts due to Claimant would be secured by a bank guarantee.

v) Sale of Zinc Agreement: Claimant agreed to sell Zinc to RTB-BOR.

vi) Copper Concentrates Agreement: RTB-BOR was to process Claimant’s copper

concentrates and deliver the resulting metal to Claimant.

(vii) A for the Modernization of the Metallurgical Capacities in RTB-BOR:
Claimant was to assist RTB-BOR in purchasing machinery to be used in Bor, at a
total cost of US$ 44 million. This amount was to be secured by bank guarantees. In
addition, Claimant was to retain ownership of the equipment until it had been repaid
by RTB-BOR.

As provided by the Agreements, the following bank guarantees were issued:

i. A bank guarantee for an amount of US$ 11 million (the “First Guarantee”)
was issued in favour of Claimant by Jugobanka. This guarantee pre-existed the
Agreements and was initially intended to cover prior relations between
Claimant, RTB-BOR and other parties. It was extended for the purpose of the

Agreements and was to expire on 30 September 2001.

ii, A bank guarantee for an amount of US$ 4.5 million (the “Second
Guarantee”) was issued by Jugobanka in favor of Claimant. It was to expire on
31 December 2004.

Performance of the Agreements did not proceed as planned. It is agreed by both
Parties that RTB-BOR was not able to fulfill all of its contractual obligations.

As a result, by letters dated 1 October 2001, 11 October 2001 and 1 November 2001,
Claimant requested that RTB-BOR extend the First Guarantee. RTB-BOR did not

extend the First Guarantee, which lapsed.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 9
8 September 2006

By letter dated 22 November 2001, RTB-BOR informed Claimant that “at the
moment, [RTB-BOR] is not able to return all debts including debt towards Messrs
Mytilineos S.A.” and suggested that continued cooperation between the Claimant and
RTB-BOR would allow RTB-BOR to “pay regular interest rates and in minimum

scopes reduce main debt”.

Claimant replied on 28 November 2001, stating that it was “ready to continue the
cooperation with RTB BOR, but this cooperation must be based on mutual respect

and fulfilment of contractual obligations, which are clear and simple”.

By letter dated 13 February 2002, Claimant informed RTB-BOR that it considered it
in “serious default” of its obligations under the Agreements, as a result of its failure
to extend the First Guarantee.

Jugobanka, then renamed Borska Banka a.d., which still held the Second Guarantee,

eventually went into bankruptcy.

By letter dated 28 May 2002, Respondents informed Claimant of “a few key
viewpoints which are of the general character but can also be related to your
Company”. These points were related to the status and privatization of RTB-BOR.
Claimant was invited to send a letter of intention to the Agency for Privatization of
the Republic of Serbia, if it was interested in the privatization of “a certain RTB

Company”.

By letter dated 17 July 2002, Respondents once again informed Claimant they would
like to “stress out several points of the general character which may be related to
your Company’. These points, as in the previous letter, were related to the status and
privatization of RTB-BOR.

On 20 January 2004, Claimant brought a request for temporary measures and a
motion for preliminary injunction before the Belgrade Commercial Court, requesting
the Court to order RTB-BOR not to alienate its shares of the Majdanpek Copper
Factory; and the Agency for Privatization of the Republic of Serbia not to hold an
auction on 27 January 2004 for the sale of those shares. Claimant also requested that,
should this auction be held, the Agency for Privatization of the Republic of Serbia
keep on its account the purchase price of RTB-BOR’s shares of the Majdanpek
Copper Factory.

38.

39.

40.

Iv.

A.

41.

42.

43.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 10,
8 September 2006

On 13 February 2004, the Belgrade Commercial Court denied Claimant’s requests.

On 2 April 2004, RTB-BOR informed Claimant that “[...] the directors of RTB BOR
will decide about continuation of our cooperation and you will be informed as soon

as possible”.

On 26 October 2004, the Agency for Privatization of the Republic of Serbia
announced the initiation of the restructuring and privatization procedure of
RTB-BOR, inviting creditors to declare their claims within 30 days.

GENERAL CLAIMS AND DEFENSES OF THE PARTIES

Respondents’ Submissions _in Support of their Plea Contesting the Tribunal’s

Jurisdiction

Respondents submit that jurisdiction only extends to breaches of obligations arising
under the BIT, and that investment disputes in general, or disputes arising out of
commercial activity or business transactions alone cannot amount to breaches of BIT
obligations.' Respondents submit that the claims advanced by Claimant relate to
commercial risks assumed under the Agreements, which are not the subject of

protections given under the BIT”

Respondents advance three principal arguments contesting jurisdiction: that Claimant
has not established a prima facie case that obligations owed under the BIT were
breached, that cooperation between Claimant and RTB-BOR under the Agreements
does not constitute an “investment” or “investments” for the purposes of the BIT and

 

that Claimant is required to exhaust contractual remedies under municipal law prior
to commencing arbitration under the BIT. Respondents also submit that no claim can

be brought against Second Respondent who is not a contracting party to the BIT.

Respondents’ first principal argument is that Claimant has not established a prima
facie case that there has been a breach of Articles 2 and 4 of the BIT as asserted by

Claimant.* Respondents submit that Claimant must show conduct that is contrary to

R-I (PCJ), paras. 14-20.
R-I (PCJ), paras. 18 — 20.
R-I (PCJ), paras. 21 — 22; R-II (ROJ), paras. 19 — 30; R-IV (PHB), paras. 13 - 14.

44,

45.

46.

47.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 11
8 September 2006

 

the relevant BIT standard and that “...if)
finding of breach of the BIT, part or all of the claim might be struck” .*

&

facts are plainly incapable of supporting a

Respondents argue that Claimant’s allegations that Respondents directed RTB-BOR
not to perform the Agreements, failed to exert pressure on RTB-BOR to honor its
obligations and deprived Claimant of the First and Second Bank Guarantees are not
substantiated by evidence.* Respondents also argue that the level of connection
Claimant asserts existed between Respondents and RTB-BOR cannot be sustained on
the facts.°

 

Respondents also argue that there can be no breach of the BIT by Respondents for
the non-performance by RTB-BOR of its contractual obligations.’ Respondents
submit that at all relevant times RTB-BOR was a socially-owned enterprise under the
Law on Enterprises of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia* and as such a commercial
enterprise independent of Respondents and that Claimant would have been aware of
this fact at the time of the conclusion of the Agreements.’

 

Respondents argue that of company management, such as appointment of the
RTB-BOR board of directors by Second Respondent and other measures taken by it,
cannot be regarded as sovereign acts and cannot give rise to breaches of BIT

obligations accordingly.”°

Respondents argue that privatization cannot be characterized as nationalization under
Article 4 of the BIT, which Claimant argues Respondents breached by privatizing
RTB-BOR, thereby expropriating aspects of Claimant’s investment.'' Respondents
submit that the key feature of nationalization, the taking of private property by a
State, is not present and that Claimant had no ownership in the entity being

privatized.

R-I (PCJ), para. 21.1, citing United Parcel Service of America Inc v. Government of Canada,
UNCITRAL Award on Jurisdiction, 22 November 2002, paras. 33 — 37.

R-I (PCJ), para. 22; regarding the Bank Guarantees, para. 28.
R-I(PCJ), para, 28; R-II (ROJ) para. 21; R-IV (PHB) para. 14.
R-I (PCJ), para, 23; R-II (ROJ) para. 31.

R-I (PCJ), para. 23.
R-I (PCJ), para. 24.
R-I (PCJ), para. 26.
R-I (PCJ), paras. 29-31.

a & 8

48.

49.

50.

51.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 12
8 September 2006

Respondents argue that any claim by Claimant that it suffered loss as a result of
privatization is premature as the applicable restructuring procedure remains ongoing
and Claimant’s claims against RTB-BOR were reported to the Agency for

Privatization as part of the process and could be compensated.'? Respondents submit

 

that there was no obligation on First Respondent to secure preferential treatment to
Claimant in this process under the BIT."

Respondents also dispute Claimant’s case that Respondents breached the BIT by
initiating bankruptcy proceedings in respect of a bank providing a guarantee to
Claimant can be sustained.'' They equally dispute Claimant’s allegation that
measures taken by Respondents in response to RTB-BOR’s financial difficulties
were taken in breach of the BIT can be sustained.'*

Respondents’ second principal argument is that Claimant’s commercial cooperation
with RTB-BOR, formalized in the Agreements, does not constitute an “investment”
within the scope of the definition in Article 1 of the BIT'’, which extends the
protections under the BIT to “every kind of asset invested by an investor of one
Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party, in accordance with
the latter’s legislation”."’ Respondents submit that this is a more restrictive definition
than definitions typically found in bilateral investment treaties'* as the action of
investing the assets referred to in Article 1 of the BIT must have taken place in order
for them to qualify as investments.

Respondents submit that the requirement for compliance with host State legislation is
broader than Claimant’s interpretation, which is that the investment need only be not
illegal for “in accordance with the latter’s legislation” to be satisfied.'? Respondents
argue the protections the BIT affords extend only to those investments that have
complied with host State legislation applicable to foreign investments, in this case

R-I (PCJ), paras. 29.2 — 31.2; R-II (ROS), para. 30.
R-I (PCJ), para. 32.

R-II (ROD), para. 26.

R-II (ROD), para. 28.

R-I (PCJ), paras. 34-35.

Excerpt from the full text of Article 1 of the BIT.
R-II (ROD), para. 4.2; R-IV (PHB), para. 3.

R-IV (PHB), para. 3.

52.

53.

54.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 13
8 September 2006

including the requirement for approval of the investment.” Respondents do not
accept that some forms of investment from overseas into domestic enterprises could
at that time have fallen outside of the applicable host State legislation.” Respondents
submit that, to fall within the BIT definition in Article 1, Claimant’s assets would

. . . . . 22
also need to be considered as investments according to international standards.

Respondents argue that Claimant’s assets were not invested in accordance with the
Yugoslav Law on Foreign Investments 1994 (as amended in 1996) (the “FIL”),
which they submit was the applicable domestic statute.”* Respondents submit that the
Agreements were in any event “regular commercial/trading contracts” rather than

investment contracts, which they argue is apparent from a range of features of the
4

 

 

Agreement:

 

Respondents submit that the Agreements did not comply with a number of
formalities found in Article 17 FIL, a requirement for registration in accordance with
Article 26 FIL and a special procedure for federal government approval of
investment contracts under Article 22 FIL. Respondents also refer to the treatment of
contracts not meeting these requirements as null and void under Article 28 FIL.°

Respondents also argue that the Claimant and Respondents never intended
transactions taking place under the Agreements to give rise to “investments”

benefiting from the protections set out under the BIT.” Respondents submit that the

 

Agreements cannot be characterized as investment contracts whether taken alone or
together’ and question whether Claimant’s involvement with RTB-BOR was

significant or beneficial for Serbia and Montenegro in any event.**

R-I (PCJ), para, 35; R-II (ROJ), paras. 5— 10.
R-IV (PHB), para. 4.

R-I (PCJ), para. 35.

R-I (PCJ), para, 37; R-II (RON), para. 6.3.

These are listed at R-I (PCJ), para. 41 et seg.

R-I (PCJ), paras. 37.8 and 38; as to the requirements of host State law generally, see R-IV (PHB), paras.

R-I (PCJ), para. 42; regarding correspondence between Claimant and Second Respondent, see R-II
(RON), para. 18.

R-I (PCI), paras. 41 and 42 — 49; R-II (ROS), paras, 12.1 — 12.4 and 17,
R-II (RON), para. 17.

55.

56.

57.

58.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 14,
8 September 2006

Respondents submit the contribution made by Claimant under the General
Cooperation Agreement was not considered by the parties to be Claimant’s
investment and that the Working Capital Agreement can be characterized as a “pure
commercial loan/credit agreement” on its terms.”” Respondents submit that the Sale
of Copper Agreement and the Sale of Zinc Agreement should be considered as sales
contracts, as should the Spare Parts Agreement, which also contains terms relating to
trade credit.” Respondents regard the Copper Concentrates Agreement as a contract
for the supply of services, which was also not intended as an investment contract.’

Respondents submit that no investment was made by Claimant under the Agreement
for the Modernization of Metallurgical Capacities in RTB-BOR, and Claimant
simply agreed to act as a seller, commission agent and creditor under that
Agreement.” Respondents also emphasize that the terms of the Agreement for the
Modernization of Metallurgical Capacities in RTB-BOR were never carried out,

39 33,

being “the core arrangement in the complex business operation”.

Respondents also argue that a loan provided under the Agreements cannot be
characterized as an investment, in view of international standards,* nor can the bank
guarantees given to Claimant as security.* It is also submitted that machinery
intended for supply under the Agreements cannot be characterized as an investment
as it was not delivered and title was retained. *°

Respondents argue that the transactions under the Agreements cannot be
characterized as investments under Article 1 of the BIT according to international
standards in any event. Respondents argue awards concerning the definition of
“investment” for the purposes of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention are not
authoritative in the interpretation of the BIT.’ They argue that providing loans or
credit is not sufficient to amount to an investment and that to constitute an

R-I (PCJ), para. 43.

R-I (PCJ), para. 46.

R-I (PCJ), para. 47.

R-I (PCJ), para. 48,

R-I (PCJ), paras. 48.3 and 49; R-II (ROJ), para. 12.4.

R-II (ROD), para. 13; distinguishing also certain ICSID awards, see R-II (ROJ), paras. 13.1 — 13.6.
R-II (RON), para. 15.

R-II (RO), para. 1

»

R-IV (PHB), para. 9, see also para. 16.

59.

60.

61.

62.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 15
8 September 2006

investment, a participation in the profit and loss of an enterprise, typically by way of
equity ownership, should be present.**

Respondents submit that the definition of “investment” in Article 1 of the BIT does
not extend to Claimant’s claims for money under the Agreements. It is submitted that
claims to money can only be investments under Article 1 of the BIT where they are
associated with an investment made in accordance with host State legislation.”
Respondents argue that any interpretation of Article 1 that includes all money claims
under a contract within its scope would require the host State to guarantee all
contractual claims under commercial contracts, which cannot have been the intention
of the contracting parties to the BIT.“°

Respondents’ third principal argument is that Claimant is obliged to exhaust its rights
under the A and under icipal law before ing arbitration under
the BIT and that the claim is inadmissible as Claimant has not done so.*!
Respondents refer to Claimant’s conduct in refraining from calling in the First and

Second Bank Guarantees or bringing its claims under the Agreements.”

Respondents submit that Claimant is estopped from bringing proceedings against
Respondents while proceedings Claimant and RTB-BOR are party to concerning the
insolvency of Borska Banka remain pending. It is submitted that there is a principle
of international law requiring claimants to exhaust remedies available locally before
referring claims to international tribunals and argued that the availability of recourse
to the courts in Serbia and Montenegro render the claim inadmissible accordingly."

Finally, Respondents submit that Second Respondent is not a proper respondent in
these proceedings as it is not a party to the agreement to arbitrate in Article 9 of the
BIT.“ Respondents submit that, as a general rule of international law, parties not
signing arbitration agreements cannot be party to arbitral proceedings under them.*

R-I (PCJ), paras. 50 — 54.

R-I (PCJ), paras. 55 — 56.

R-I (PCJ), para. 57; R-II (ROJ), paras. 7.1 — 7.3 and 14; on the interpretation of Article 1(1)(c) of the
BIT generally, see R-IV (PHB), para. 10.

R-I (PCJ), paras. 59 — 64; R-II (ROJ), para. 32.
R-I (PCJ), para. 61.

R-I (PCJ), paras. 62 — 64.

R-II (ROD), paras. 33 — 38.

R-I (PCJ), para. 66.

63.

64.

65.

66.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 16
8 September 2006

Respondents also submit that, notwithstanding Second Respondent’s constitutional
competences, First Respondent remains the party responsible for implementation of
the BIT as it retains competence for ratification and enforcement of international
treaties in this field.*°

Respondents refer to the availability of arbitration under the ICSID Convention” as
an alternative to ad hoc arbitration under Article 9 of the BIT and submit that Second
Respondent, which has not been designated a “constituent subdivision” under Article
25 of the ICSID Convention, cannot be subject to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal as
the parties to the Agreement would have intended both ICSID and ad hoc tribunals to
have jurisdiction of a similar scope.“* Respondents submit that recourse is available
against First Respondent in the courts of either of its federal parts and as such an
effective legal remedy is available to Claimant for breaches of obligations owed to it
under the BIT.”

The Tribunal is therefore requested by Respondents to decline jurisdiction over the

claims advanced by Claimant, in view of the foregoing.
Claimant’s Submissions

Claimant asserts that the Tribunal has jurisdiction under Article 9(3) of the BIT.
Claimant submits that it qualifies as an “investor” under Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT
and that its Agreements with RTB-BOR give rise to “investments” under Article 1 of
the BIT.”

First, Claimant argues that it has made an investment in the territory of Respondents
within the scope of the definition in Article 1 of the BIT. Claimant argues that the
term “investment” is given a broad definition in Article 1 of the BIT using wording
that is typical of many contemporary bilateral investment treaties.*'

R-II (RON), para. 35.

Washington Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States (ICSID Convention), 18 March 1965, 575 UNTS 159; 4 ILM 532 (1965).

R-I (PCJ), paras. 67 — 68.
R-II (ROD), para. 36.

C-APCJ, p. 3.
C-APCI, p. 5;

 

°-DOJ, pp. 2-3; C-PHB, p. 2.

67.

68.

69.

70.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 17,
8 September 2006

Claimant submits that the ordinary meaning of the phrase “every kind of asset” in
Article 1(1) of the BIT gives the definition an extensive scope, as does an
interpretation of Article 1 in the light of the object and purpose of the BIT, which,
Claimant argues, was to secure protection for the widest possible class of business
activities.” Claimant argues that the breadth of the definition is bolstered by the
inclusion of an indicative list of items in Article 1(a) — (e) of the BIT.

Claimant submits that Respondents’ interpretation of the requirement in Article | of
the BIT for investments to be made in accordance with host State legislation would
operate to exclude investments from protections under the BIT simply on the basis of
errors and administrative defects, which would be inconsistent with the object and
purpose of the BIT.*

Claimant cites the findings of arbitral tribunals constituted under the ICSID
Convention as a source of reference for its view that where such requirements appear
in investment treaties they should be interpreted so as to exclude only investments
that should not be protected as they would illegal under host State legislation.”
Claimant argues this remains the case in circumstances where host State legislation
requires registration and approval of foreign investments.** Claimant submits that the

Agreements were in compliance with host State legislation in any event.*°

Claimant submits that features of the “strategic alliance” embodied in the
Agreements have the nature of investments as the Agreements and associated First
and Second Bank Guarantees are contracts with “significant economic value”.
Claimant refers to its claims to money under the Agreements, which it submits fall

within the scope of Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT, and its retention of ownership of

C-APCI, p. 5.

C-APCJ, p. 6; C-DOJ, p. 3; C-PHB, pp. 3 and 21 — 24, Claimant assesses expert evidence regarding
requirements of host State law at pp. 24-26.

C-APCJ, p. 6; C-DOJ, pp. 3 — 9; Claimant cites, in particular, Salini Construttori S.p.A and Italstrade
Sp.A v. Kingdom of Morocco, Decision on Jurisdiction, Case No. ARB/00/4, 23 July 2001, Tokios
Tokeles v. Ukraine, Decision on Jurisdiction, Case No. ARB/02/18 29 April 2004, SGS Société
Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction, Case No. ARB/O1/13 6
August 2003, and SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, Decision
on Jurisdiction, Case No. ARB/02/6, 29 January 2004.

C-DOJ, p. 8.
C-DOJ, pp. 9-10.
C-APCJ, p. 7.

 

 

  

71.

72.

73.

74,

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 18,
8 September 2006

machinery supplied to RTB-BOR, which it submits constitutes a right in rem over
movables under Article 1(1)(a) of the BIT.**

Claimant also argues that a number of other features distinguish the Agreements
from general commercial trading agreements, such as a greater level of assumed risk,
the duration of the Agreements and significance to Respondents’ economy.”

Claimant submits that its involvement with RTB-BOR under the Agreements also
constitutes an investment according to international standards. Claimant argues that
certain awards rendered under the ICSID Convention and under the North Atlantic
Free Trade Agreement, 1992 (“NAFTA”), in which the meaning of “investment” has
been considered, offer guidance as to the types of asset considered investments
according to international standards.

Claimant refers to a series of ICSID and NAFTA awards and refers to the following
forms of participation that have been found to constitute investments: financial
instruments such as promissory notes, service-related investments, contracts for the
provision of construction works and trade-related investments.*' Claimant refers in
particular to certain criteria cited as features of investments in the award in Salini v.

Morocco” under the ICSID Convention.

Claimant argues that the arrangements made under the Agreements and the features
of the economic cooperation between Claimant and RTB-BOR would constitute
investments according to international standards,” and submits that these cases offer
guidance. Claimant also submits that claims in respect of those of the Agreements
that were not fully realized including claims, in certain circumstances, for project
expenses are also recoverable.

C-APCJ, p. 7.
C-APCJ, pp. 7-8.

C-APCI, p. 8.

C-APCJ, pp. 9 - 13.

C-APCIJ, p. 12, citing Salini v. Morocco.
C-DOJ, pp. 10-15.

C-APCJ, p. 13.

75.

76.

77.

78.

6s

o

68

Co)

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 19
8 September 2006

Claimant submits that Respondents have acknowledged Claimant’s participation

°° Claimant reviews

under the Agreements as an investment in any event.
correspondence between Respondents and Claimant and argues the position of
Respondents in communications assumed, and in some instances expressly
acknowledged, Claimant’s involvement to be an investment. Claimant also refers to
correspondence to argue the existence of close management involvement by
Respondents in RTB-BOR.” Claimant also argues that its involvement with RTB-
BOR under the Agreements played a significant economic and political role in
Respondents’ territory.”

In any event, Claimant submits it is entitled, under Article 3 of the BIT, to treatment
that is no less favorable than that afforded to investors from third States by
Respondents. Claimant submits that a BIT between The Netherlands and First
Respondent contains a more favorable definition of “investment”, which is not
qualified by a requirement for investments to be made in accordance with host State
legislation. Claimant submits that Article 3 of the BIT entitles it to benefit from
protections afforded to the broader category of investments applicable in respect of
Dutch investors.

Secondly, Claimant argues that the dispute concerns Respondents’ own violations of
obligations owed to Claimant under the BIT and that it has adequately established a
prima facie case as to the breaches alleged. Claimant submits that the applicable
test for determining whether a prima facie case has been made is “whether the
factual allegations of Claimant are capable of constituting violation [sic] of

Respondents’ obligations under the BIT.””

Claimant argues that Respondents control RTB-BOR and have admitted this fact in
writing,” that as a socially owned enterprise RTB-BOR is controlled by the State,”

C-APCJ, p. 14; C-DOJ, pp. 14-15.
C-APCJ, pp. 15-17.

C-APCJ, p. 16; as to the characteristics of Claimant’s cooperation with RTB-BOR and its significance
for Respondents, see C-PHB, pp. 3-5.

C-DOJ, pp. 27 - 28. C-PHB, p. 6.
C-APCJ, pp. 17-24.
C-APCIJ, p. 17; for further submission on the applicable standard see C-DOJ, pp. 15 — 17.

C-APCJ, p. 18, at para. (a); regarding the degree of connection alleged between RTB-BOR and
Respondents generally, see also C-DOJ, pp. 19-21.

79.

80.

81.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 20.
8 September 2006

that Respondents fund and ultimately own the assets used by RTB-BOR,” that the
acts of RTB-BOR’s management are acts of the Respondents” and that Respondents
were therefore responsible for the intentional non-extension of the First Bank
Guarantee and the collapse of Jugobanka Bor, causing forfeiture of the Second Bank
Guarantee.” Claimant also argues that the restructuring and privatization of RTB-
BOR amounted to expropriation” and that these acts and omissions by the

Respondents amounted to breaches of obligations owed to Claimant under the BIT.”

Claimant argues that the process of privatization amounted to the taking of property
and as such to expropriation under the BIT. Claimant submits that the Agency for
Privatization, a State entity, is responsible for the process of privatization in view of
its role in the process” and that the State is in control of the process of privatization
and therefore in effect the subject of privatization proceedings.” Claimant submits
that enforcement measures are not effectively available against the subject of a
privatization process in Respondents’ jurisdiction, leaving limited prospects for debt

recovery.*°

Claimant also submits that, by initiating bankruptcy proceedings in respect of
Jugobanka Bor, Respondents prevented Claimant from realizing its security.“
Claimant submits that these allegations are sufficient grounds on a prima facie basis

for the Tribunal to accept jurisdiction over the dispute.”

Thirdly, Claimant argues that it is under no further obligation to exhaust rights and
remedies under the Agreements or under host State municipal law prior to bringing

 

C-APCIJ, p. 18, at para. (b); as to the influence of Respondents on socially-owned enterprises generally,
see C-PHB, pp. 14-17.

C-APCJ, p. 18, at para. (c).
C-APCJ, p. 18, at para. (d).

C-APCJ, pp. 18 — 19, at para. (e); C-DOJ, p. 18.
C-APCJ, p. 19, at para. (f).

C-APCJ, p. 19, at para. (g).

C-APCJ, pp. 20-21.

C-PHB, pp. 18-21.

C-APCJ, pp. 21 — 22; C-DOJ, p. 19.

C-APCJ, p. 23; C-DOJ, p. 18.

C-APCJ, p. 23.

82.

83.

89

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 21
8 September 2006

its claims under the BIT.’ Claimant asserts that it has met all requirements of Article
9 of the BIT, having served notice under that Article and having subsequently
attempted to reach amicable settlement. Claimant argues that Article 9 of the BIT
does not provide any other condition for submission of a dispute to arbitration

according to its terms.

Claimant argues that, absent an express requirement to do so, local remedies need not
be exhausted prior to commencement of investment arbitration. Claimants refer to a
number of ICSID awards where this position has been successfully argued.“ In
addition, Claimant denies that it is estopped from bringing a claim under the BIT on
account of the fact that proceedings remain pending in Serbia against RTB-BOR, as

those proceedings, it submits, are in respect of breaches of obligations under the

 

Agreements and not claims for breaches of BIT obligations as advanced in the
present proceedings.** Claimant also argues that Respondents are themselves
estopped from raising this ground of objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on the
basis of representations Claimant alleges demonstrate Respondents’ recognition of
the availability of recourse under the BIT.“ Claimant also invokes Article 3 of the
BIT to avail itself of what it argues is more favorable treatment with respect to any
such requirement under the Austria-Serbia and Montenegro bilateral investment

treaty, which expressly excludes any requirement to exhaust domestic remedies.”

Finally, Claimant argues that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over claims brought

 

against Second Respondent, which it submits proper party to these proceedings
by reason of its statu:

the BIT.“ Claimant submits that Second Respondent h:

 

a subdivision of First Respondent who was a signatory to

 

international legal
personality for purposes that include, in certain circumstances, the conclusion of
international agreements” and capacity to be party to international proceedings.

Claimant submits that at the time of its signature and ratification, the BIT became an

C-APCJ, pp. 24 — 26; C-DOJ, pp. 21 — 26.
C-APCIJ, p. 25; C-DOJ, pp. 23 - 24; C-PHB, pp. 6-7.
C-APCIJ, p. 25.

C-DOJ, pp. 25-26.

C-PHB, p. 7.

C-APCJ, pp. 26 — 32; for the basis on which Claimant submits Second Respondent is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal generally, see also C-DOJ, pp. 26 — 27; see also the submissions made in C-
PHB, pp. 7-14.

As set out under the Constitutional Charter of Serbia and Montenegro, see C-APCJ, p. 27.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 22
8 September 2006

integral part of a domestic legal system of both First and Second Respondent; this
includes Article 9(3) of the BIT, the agreement to arbitrate disputes arising out of it.”

Claimant submits that Second Respondent is liable for effective implementation of
the BIT on its territory and for the financial cost of implementation, that its laws
regulate foreign investment on its territory and that it can be liable for breaches of the

°' Claimant submits there would be no effective means of

BIT accordingly.
enforcement against Second Respondent without recourse to arbitration under the
BIT in view of the scope of the jurisdiction of the courts of Second Respondent in
the constitutional law of Serbia and Montenegro and that Second Respondent cannot
be bound by provisions of the BIT selectively and must therefore be bound by

Article 9.°°

Claimant also argues in its Post-Hearing Brief, dated 7 June 2006, that Second
Respondent was then due to become legal successor to First Respondent with full
international legal personality following the public referendum under Article 60 of
the Constitutional Charter of First Respondent that had then recently taken place.”*

Accordingly, Claimant asserts that this Tribunal has jurisdiction over this dispute.
ANALYSIS OF ISSUES FOR DECISION

The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is challenged on a number of grounds. A detailed

summary of the Parties’ submissions as to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is set out

above in Part IV of this award. For the purposes of further consideration the Parties’

arguments may be grouped in five major categories.

Firstly, the question arises whether the activities of Claimant do or do not constitute

  

in “investment” under the BIT and therefore fall within or outside the material scope
of application of the BIT. It must also be considered whether these activities
constitute an “investment” in the usual practice of investment arbitration to be within

the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

C-PHB, pp. 7—9 and 11 — 12.
C-APCIJ, p. 27; C-PHB, pp. 9 and 12-13.
C-APCJ, pp. 29 — 32.
C-PHB, pp. 13-14.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 23
8 September 2006

Secondly, the issue must be addressed whether an activity that may qualify as an
investment but which was not approved by the host State’s authorities, contrary to its
legislation, was covered by the BIT and could give rise to investment arbitration
under it.

Thirdly, the ratione personae jurisdiction of the Tribunal has to be verified. The fact
that neither of the two Respondents was a party to the agreements entered into by
Claimant and RTB-BOR, a private entity existing under the laws of the host State,
has be assessed in this context. Equally, the fact that the Second Respondent, Serbia,
has never ratified or acceded to the BIT must be analyzed with regard to the question
whether it can be made a party to arbitration proceedings provided for under this
Treaty.

Fourthly, Respondents’ argument that Claimant failed to establish a prima facie case
of its allegations must be addressed.

Finally, Respondents’ assertion that the claims should be considered inadmissible

 

because local remedies have not been exhausted will be analyzed.

In the following, the Tribunal will address each of these questions concerning its

jurisdiction in turn.

 

The seven agreements concluded with RTB-BOR in 1998 set out the core of
Claimant’s business activities in Serbia and Montenegro. It is this set of contracts
between private parties that Claimant considers to constitute its “investment” for the
purposes of the BIT, while Respondents assert that the Contracts are merely
commercial contracts between private parties that are not to be regarded as
“investments” for the purposes of the BIT.

The Parties exchanged views on the fact that not one of the seven agreements is
expressly referred to as “investment” agreement. Respondents argued that this
demonstrated prima facie that the contracts were never intended to be considered
investments, while Claimant was of the view that the titles of the seven agreements
were irrelevant and that in fact some of the agreements did contain express language

referring to “investments”.

96.

97.

98.

99.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 24
8 September 2006

In the view of the Tribunal, the definitions contained in various investment treaties as
well as decisions in recent investment arbitrations amply demonstrate that the
description of transactions and activities by private parties as investments is an
important criterion but not a conclusive one for the purposes of their characterization
as “investments” in the sense of the applicable investment treaty.” The provisions of

‘ion as an

 

these treaties, and the BIT in the present case, are decisive for the qualifi
“investment.” The express characterization of certain business activities as
“investments” by the parties may be an indication of their intentions but cannot
absolve the Tribunal from scrutinizing whether such activities are covered by the

definition of “investment” under the BIT.

The Tribunal notes that in the case of direct contractual relations between a private
investor and a host State the characterization of a transaction as an “investment”
carries particular weight for the purpose of establishing whether an “investment”
took place. However, the situation where consent to arbitration is based on a contract
is markedly different from treaty-based “arbitration without privity” as in the present
situation. In the latter case of treaty arbitration, a host State has no direct control over
what kind of disputes may be submitted to arbitration. In treaty-based investment
arbitration the consent to jurisdiction, including ratione materiae, can only be found

in the applicable treaty.

For the purpose of interpreting the BIT, the Tribunal will be guided by the customary
rules of treaty interpretation as codified”’ in the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties.° According to Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention “/a] treaty shall
be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to
the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.”
Additionally, Article 31(2) thereof provides that, for the purpose of the interpretation
of a treaty, the context shall comprise, among others, its preamble and annexes.
Thus, a treaty must be interpreted autonomously, i.e. each notion used by the treaty

must be given the content that better serves its purposes and implementation.

According to its Preamble, the BIT purports “to intensify th[e] economic cooperation

to the mutual benefit of both countries on a long term basis”. Both Countries

Cf. Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2001), p. 125.

Cf. Libya v. Chad, ICJ Reports 4 (1994), at p. 19, para. 41; Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade
S.p.A. v. Jordan, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction, 9 November 2004, para. 75.

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1155 UNTS 331, 8 ILM 679 (1969); ratified by Greece on
30 October 1974, and by Serbia and Montenegro on 12 March 2001.

 

100.

101.

102.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 25
8 September 2006

indicated “as their objective to create favourable conditions for investments by
investors of either Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party”.
It was also expressly r ized that “the promotion and protection of i

on the basis of this Agreement, will stimulate the initiative in this field and thereby
significantly contribute to the development of economic relations between the
Contracting Parties”.

While examining identical preamble wording in the Philippines-Switzerland BIT, the
Tribunal in SGS v. Philippines stated that “/i]t is legitimate to resolve uncertainties
in its interpretation so as to favour the protection of covered investments.”*’ The
Tribunal in Tokios v. Ukraine similarly found the same wording in the Preamble of
the Ukraine-Lithuania BIT “as indicative of the treaty’s broad scope of investment

protection.””*

Despite sometimes tautological definitions of “investment” in some BITs (according
to which “investment” is defined as “every kind of investment’), investments are
very frequently defined as “assets” for which specific demonstrative examples are
usually provided.’ In arbitral practice shares, contracts, concessions, loans, and so
on, have been qualified as investments regardless of whether they had been
specifically designated as investments.

The BIT contains a broad definition of investment. Article 1 of the BIT defines
“investment” as “every kind of asset invested by an investor of one Contracting Party
in the territory of the other Contracting Party.” In its non-exhaustive list of
examples, it includes “claims to money or any other claim under contract having an

economic value.”'°!

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, ARB/02/6, Decision on

Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004; 8 ICSID Rep. 518 (2005), para. 116.

Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004, 20
ICSID Review—Foreign Investment Law Journal 205 (2005), para. 31.

Cf. Article I (d) Treaty Between the Government of the United States of America and the Government
of the Republic of Panama Concerning the Treatment and Protection of Investments, 27 October 1982,
available at http://www.unctad.org/sections/dite/iia/docs/bits/us_panama_1982.pdf.

Dolzer/Stevens, Bilateral Investment Treaties (1995), p. 27.

Article 1 (1)(c) BIT.

103.

104.

105.

106.

102

103

104

os

106

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 26
8 September 2006

Such a definition, usually referred to as a “broad asset-based definition of

investment,”!

follows a well-established pattern pursued by many other BITs.'® It
combines a broad definition (“every kind of asset”) with an illustrative list of assets

categories that fall within the definition of investment.

 

This type of definition clearly distinguishes the present BIT from other more narrow

approaches, containing either an “exhaustive list” of covered activities/assets or a list

 

of activities/assets that are not included in the definition of “investment” or even a
combination of both. Article 1139 NAFTA'™ is an example of such a combined
approach. It first lists a number of activities under the heading “investment means”
and then states what “investment does not mean”, including, claims to money arising
from purely commercial sales and services contracts or from short term loan

agreements.

In the most recent BITs to which the US is a party, which generally include a “broad
asset-based definition of investment,” the notion of investment is limited by means of
explanatory notes which specify that any covered asset must be accompanied by a
certain entrepreneurial commitment of capital, profit seeking and risk assumption in
'5 The 2005 US-Uruguay BIT further clarified that
the definition of “investment” shall not include claims to payment that are

order to qualify as an investment.
immediately due and result from the sale of goods or services.'°

The fact that some investment treaties narrow the notion of what constitutes an
investment reinforces the impression that a broad investment definition such as the

one contained in Article 1 of the Greece-Serbia and Montenegro BIT may cover

UNCTAD Series on issues in international investment agreements, Scope and Definition (1999), p. 18.
See also Noah Rubins, The Notion of “Investment” in International Investment Arbitration, in Horn
(ed.), Arbitrating Foreign Investment Disputes (2004), p. 283, at p. 291.

Cf. UNCTAD, International Investment Agreements: Key Issues, vol. 1, p. 119 (2004); Dolzer/Stevens,
Bilateral Investment Treaties (1995), p. 229.

North American Free Trade Agreement between the Government of Canada, the Government of the
United Mexican States, and the Government of the United States of America, 17 December 1992, 32
ILM 289 (1993).

Article 15.113 United —States-Singapore Free ~Trade Agreement, available at
http://www mti.gov ic/PDF/CMT/FTA_USSFTA_Agreement Exchange Letter_CIL.pdf,
provides: “Where an asset lacks the characteristics of an investment, that asset is not an investment
regardless of the form it may take. The characteristics of an investment include the commitment of
capital, the expectation of gain or profit, or the assumption of risk.”

Section A, Article 1, footnote 2, Treaty between the United States of America and the Oriental Republic
of Uruguay the and Protection of , 4 November 2005,
available at http://www.unctad. i tei: its/US_Uruguay.pdf.

107.

108.

109.

110.

107

108

109

ho

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 27
8 September 2006

assets and activities that go beyond what is traditionally included in the notion of
foreign direct and indirect investment. According to a recent UNCTAD study a BIT
stating that “investment includes ‘every kind of asset’ suggest[s] that the term

embraces everything of economic value, virtually without limitation.”'”

In Bayindir v. Pakistan the tribunal found that a definition of investment
corresponding to the one in Article 1(1) of the present BIT “is very broad” and cited
a doctrinal thesis according to which “the reference to ‘every kind of asset’ is
‘[p]ossibly the broadest’ among similar general definitions contained in BIT’s.”'*
Equally, the Tribunal in Fedax v. Venezuela found that the identical definition of
investment in the Netherlands-Venezuela BIT “evidences that the Contracting
Parties to the Agreement intended a very broad meaning for the term
‘investment’.”'” The Tribunal also observed that this broad approach of investment
is not at all an exceptional situation; it rather reflects “the standard policy of major

economic groupings such as the European Commutnities.”'"°

It results that the definition of “investment” in the Treaty was deliberately very broad
so as to cover the widest possible economic activities and to encourage economic

cooperation between the two countries, as expressly stated in the BIT’s Preamble.

Indeed, it has been pointed out that language including “claims to money or any

that
Mm

other claim under contract having an economic/a financial value” sugges

 

“investment” may embrace contractual rights for the performance of services.
Read literally there is also no reason why claims arising from pure commercial
activities, such as sales contracts, should be excluded from such a broad definition of
investment.

Respondents claim, however, that it would be contrary to the object and purpose of
investment law in general and of BITs in particular if investment dispute settlement
were to be used to arbitrate purely commercial disputes. They refer to an underlying
notion that investment disputes should be settled by investment arbitration which

UNCTAD, International Investment Agreements: Key Issues, vol. | (2004), p. 119.

Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Case No. ARB/03/29,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005, para. 113.

Fedax N.V. v. Republic of Venezuela, Case No. ARB/96/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 11 July 1997, 5
ICSID Rep. 186 (2002), para. 32.

Ibid., para. 34.
UNCTAD, International Investment Agreements: Key Issues, vol. | (2004), p. 120.

111.

112.

113.

2

13

is

us

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 28,
8 September 2006

should not be open to disputes that do not concern investments. To support this
argument they put forward a number of interrelated considerations, the two most

important of which may be summarized as follows:

a) The notion of investment disputes as developed by ICSID tribunals
demonstrates that not all disputes are investment disputes.

b) The applicable BIT though including a broad asset-based definition of
investments still requires that these assets must be “invested.”

(a) Are the agreements an “investment” under international law as defined
in the jurisprudence of investment tribunals?

Respondents dispute that the claims put forward by Claimant can be characterized as
“investments”. In this context, Respondents repeatedly refer to the more restrictive

notion of “investment” found in various cases arising under the ICSID Convention.''*

It is the established practice of ICSID tribunals to assess whether a specific
transaction qualifies as an “investment” under the ICSID Convention, independently
of the definition of investment in a BIT or other applicable investment instrument, in
order to fulfill the ratione materiae prerequisite of Article 25 of the Convention.'?
This requirement is set out in Article 25(1) of the Convention which confines the
jurisdiction of ICSID arbitration tribunals to “/egal dispute[s] arising directly out of

an investment” without defining “investment.”

It is indeed not very easy to precisely define the concept of “investment” which is
seen as an objective jurisdictional requirement under the ICSID Convention, and
separate and additional to the consent of the parties to arbitrate.''* ICSID tribunals
have in fact accepted a broad range of economic activities under the notion of

. 5
investment.''°

R-II (ROD, paras. 13 et seq.

Cf. Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, a.s. v. The Slovak Republic, (CSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision
on Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999, 14 ICSID Review—Foreign Investment Law Journal 251 (1999), para.
68: “A two-fold test must therefore be applied in determining whether this Tribunal has the competence
to consider the merits of the claim: whether the dispute arises out of an investment within the meaning
of the Convention and, if so, whether the dispute relates to an investment as defined in the Parties’
consent to ICSID arbitration, in their reference to the BIT and the pertinent definitions contained in
Article 1 of the BIT.”

See in general Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2001), pp. 138 ff.

 

According to Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2001), p. 138: “They include the
building and operation of hotels, the production of fibres and textiles, the mining of minerals, the

114.

115.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 29
8 September 2006

ICSID tribunals have to satisfy themselves that a Claimant has made an “investment”
under both the applicable BIT (or other instrument containing consent) and the
ICSID Convention.'" This double jurisdictional requirement for ICSID cases was
confirmed in Salini v. Morocco, where the tribunal held that

“its jurisdiction depends upon the existence of an investment within the
meaning of the bilateral Treaty as well as that of the Convention.”"”

The Salini tribunal first found that a construction agreement clearly fell within the
scope of the applicable BIT which included “rights to any contractual benefit having
an economic value” in its definition of investment. Then, with more difficulty, it had
to determine whether such an agreement also constituted an investment for the
purposes of ICSID jurisdiction.''* For this, it relied on various criteria such as, a

contribution, a certain duration, participation in the risks of the operation, and that

 

16

7

ls

construction of a hospital ward, the exploration, exploitation and distribution of petroleum products, the
manufacture of plastic bottles, the construction and operation of a fertilizer factory, the construction of
housing units, the operation of a cotton mill, aluminium smelter, forestry, the conversion, equipping and
operation of fishing vessels, the production of weapons, tourism resort projects, maritime transport of
minerals, a synthetic fuels project, shrimp farming, banking, agricultural activities, the construction of a
cable TV system and the provision of loans.” Among the so-called non-traditional forms of investment
have been included “profit-sharing, service and management contracts, contracts for the sale and
erection of industrial plants, turn-key contracts, international leasing, arrangements and agreements for
the transfer of know-how and technology.” Lopina, The International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes 4 Ohio State Journal on Dispute Resolution (1988) 107, 115 ff. Examples from
early ICSID practice include the construction of a chemical plant on a turn-key basis coupled with a
management contract providing technical assistance for the operation of the plant as in Kléckner
Industrie Anlagen GmbH v. Cameroon and Societe Camerounaise des Engrais (SOCAME), Case
ARB/81/2, a management contract for the operation of a cotton mill as in SEDITEX v. Madagascar,
Case CONC/82/1, a contract for the conversion of vessels into fishing vessels and the training of crews
as in Atlantic Triton Company Lid v. Guinea, Case ARB/84/1, or technical and licensing agreements for
the manufacturing of weapons as in Colt Industries Operating Corp, Firearms Div v. Republic of
Korea, Case ARB/84/2. More recently financial instruments (Fedax N.V. v. Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB/96/3, Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, a.s. v. The Slovak Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/97/4),
road constructions (Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Jordan, \CSID Case No.
ARB/02/13; Salini Construtorri S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4)
and pre-shipment inspection arrangements (SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic
Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/13; SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v.
Republic of the Philippines, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/6) have been regarded as investments under
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

 

The UNCTAD Course on Dispute Settlement speaks of “two distinct requirements ratione materiae”:
“the transaction out of which the dispute arises must be an investment under the ICSID Convention. In
addition, it must be an investment as defined by the applicable investment treaty.” UNCTAD, Dispute
Settlement, ICSID 2.5 Requirements ratione materiae, 16 (2003) UNCTAD/EDM/Misc.232/Add.4.

Salini Construtorri S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Morocco, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision on
Jurisdiction 2001, 42 ILM 609 (2003), para. 44.

Ibid., paras. 50 ff.

 

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

9

120

122

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 30,
8 September 2006

the operation should contribute to the development of the host State, criteria which

had been developed by legal commentators.'"”

This ratione materiae test was aptly summarized by the ICSID tribunal in Joy
Mining v. Egypt:

“[...] the project in question should have a certain duration, a regularity of
profit and return, an element of risk, a substantial commitment and that it
should constitute a significant contribution to the host State’s development.””””

 

However, this latter ratione materiae test for the existence of an investment in the
sense of Article of the 25 ICSID Convention is one specific to the ICSID Convention
and does not apply in the context of ad hoc arbitration provided for in BITs

alternative to ICSID.""!

 

an

In the present ad hoc arbitration under the UNCITRAL Rules one would therefore
have to conclude that the only requirements that have to be fulfilled in order to

confer ratione materiae jurisdiction on this Tribunal are those under the BIT.

Interestingly, none of the Parties — not even Claimant — had argued that this would be
the correct approach. Instead, even Claimant tried to persuade the Tribunal that the
Agreements constituted an investment in accordance with the jurisprudence on
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.'” Thus, the Tribunal feels compelled to make
some remarks on its jurisdiction ratione materiae if such jurisdiction would be based
not solely on the definition of investment under the applicable BIT.

Even if one doubted whether the Agreements looked at in isolation would constitute
investments by themselves, is seems clear that the combined effect of these

agreements amounts to an investment.

Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2001), p. 140; Emmanuel Gaillard,
C.LR.D.I. — Chronique des sentences arbitrales, JDI (1999) pp. 273, at p. 278.

Joy Mining Machinery Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 6 August 2004, 44 ILM 73 (2005), para. 53.

See also Noah Rubins, The Notion of “Investment” in International Investment Arbitration, in Horn
(ed.), Arbitrating Foreign Investment Disputes (2004), pp. 283, at p. 290.

C-DOJ, pp. 12 et seq.

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.

123

124

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 31
8 September 2006

As the ICSID tribunal in CSOB v. Slovakia succinctly stated:

“A dispute that is brought before the Centre must be deemed to arise directly
out of an investment even when it is based on a transaction which, standing
alone, would not qualify as an investment under the Convention, provided that
the particular transaction forms an integral part of an overall operation that
qualifies as an investment.”!*

Similarly, the ICSID tribunal in Joy Mining held that “a given element of a complex
operation should not be examined in isolation because what matters is to assess the

operation globally or as a whole [...]”'™

A holistic view of Claimant’s business activities in Serbia and Montenegro is also
called for in view of Article 1 of the Framework Agreement which expressly states
that the strategic alliance intended by Claimant and RTB-BOR “is being put in
practice by entering into the present agreement” together with the other six of the
Agreements “which were negotiated as a package and are interconnected.”

Taken together the Agreements not only provided for sales, services and loans
transactions between two commercial partners but they also provided for the
establishment of a long-term business relationship which included the provision of
credit, spare parts and machinery to the local partner of Mytilineos in Serbia and
Montenegro, RTB-BOR, for the purpose of modernizing the latter’s production
facility. The planned modernization would have entailed a significant contribution to
Serbia and Montenegro’s development. During the intended seven year duration of
all of the Agreements Claimant expected various returns and profits. This
engagement, which was made with a view to eventual equity participation after
privatization, was substantial in monetary terms and also not without risks.

Therefore, the combined effect of the Agreements is clearly more than an ordinary
commercial transaction. As a result, the Tribunal finds, by a majority, that the

business engagement of Claimant in RTB-BOR constituted an investment.

Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, A.S. v. The Slovak Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999,
14 ICSID Review—Foreign Investment Law Journal 251 (1999).

Joy Mining Machinery Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 6 August 2004, 44 ILM 73 (2005), para. 54.

126.

127.

128.

129.

12s

126

127

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 32
8 September 2006

(b) Is the broad asset-based definition of investments in the applicable BIT
limited by the requirement that these assets must be “invested”?

Article 1(1) of the BIT defines “investment” as “every kind of asset invested by an
investor” (emphasis added). It has been suggested by Respondents that the broad
range of potential assets (listed in a demonstrative fashion) that potentially qualify as
investments is limited by the additional requirement that any such asset must be
“invested” in order to constitute an investment covered by the BIT.'*

Indeed, the fact that some BITs do not contain such additional language, but merely
state that “investment” means “every kind of asset”'”° could be interpreted as
implying a limitation to the otherwise broad definition in Article 1(1) of the BIT. It
also seems to be the Respondents’ argument that such language adds the requirement
that any assets covered by Article 1(1) of the BIT have to be invested in the sense of

an activity, of entering the economy of the host State or contributing to its economy.

According to Respondents any assets specifically mentioned in Article 1(1)(a) — (e)
of the BIT do not constitute investments in themselves, but must be “invested” in
order to qualify as “investments”. In their view, the Contracting Parties of the BIT
must be considered as having “intended to protect only claims to money and other

claims under contract which are related to or associated with an investment.”!””

In the view of the Tribunal, Respondents’ interpretation would, however, unduly
restrict and unpredictably limit the meaning of an otherwise clear and straightforward
investment definition. The Tribunal finds that the core of the definition lies in the
characterization of “every kind of asset” as an “investment.” The examples of assets
added in an illustrative fashion to this definition in Article 1(1)(a) — (e) of the BIT
and the verb “invested” do not add to it. Rather, the verb “invested” appears
necessary for the further qualification that the investments must be made “in

accordance with the [host State’s] legislation.”

R-I (PCJ), para. 56.3.

Noah Rubins, The Notion of “Investment” in International Investment Arbitration, in Horn (ed.),
Arbitrating Foreign Investment Disputes (2004), pp. 283, at p. 292.

R-I (PCJ), para. 57.

130.

131.

132.

128

19

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 33
8 September 2006

In this respect, the Tribunal shares the view of the ad hoc tribunal in the Saluka
case,’ which also operated under the UNCITRAL Rules. It found that the verb
“invested” did not add any further substantive conditions to an investment definition
contained in the Netherlands-Czech Republic BIT which is almost identical to the
one in the case at hand.'” The Saluka tribunal rejected Respondent’s argument that a
mere share purchase without any “economic process” could constitute an investment.
The tribunal found that its

... jurisdiction is governed by Article 1 of the Treaty, and nothing in that
Article has the effect of importing into the definition of “investment” the
meaning which that term might bear as an economic process, in the sense of
making a substantial contribution to the local economy or to the wellbeing of a
company operating within it. Although the chapeau of Article 2 refers to
“every kind of asset invested”, the use of that term in that place does not
require, in addition to the very broad terms in which “investments” are defined
in the Article, the satisfaction of a requirement based on the meaning of
“investing” as an economic process: the chapeau needs to contain a verb which
is apt for the various specific kinds of investments which are listed, and since
all of them are being defined as various kinds of investment it is in the context
appropriate to use the verb “invested” without thereby adding further
substantive conditions.”

The Tribunal finds that in a similar way Article 1(1) of the BIT requires the verb “to
invest” in order to add a subject who is making the investment and the territorial
requirement of where the investment has to be made (“invested by an investor of one
Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party”) in a
grammatically satisfactory way. Apart from that, the verb “invest” does not add to or
diminish in any way the definition of “investment” as “any kind of asset.”

Respondents’ interpretation of Article 1(1) of the BIT as requiring that any assets

 

mentioned therein must be additionally “invested” in order to qualify as an
“investment” is also not convincing from a systematic point of view. Respondents
argue that claims to money as such do not qualify as investments. Rather, claims to
money should become “investments” only if they were “invested”, for instance by
being transformed into shares, being invested into the capital of a company or

Saluka Investments BV (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Tribunal administered
by the PCA, Partial Award of 17 March 2006, available at _ http://www.pca-
cpa.org/ENGLISH/RPC/SAL-CZ%20Partial%20A ward%20170306.pdf.

The introductory part (“chapeau”) of Article 1(a) Netherlands-Czech Republic BIT provides: “The term
“investments” shall comprise every kind of asset invested either directly or through an investor of a
third State and more particularly, though not exclusively:”

Saluka v. Czech Republic, para. 211.

133.

134.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 34
8 September 2006

through debt-to-equity swaps.'! From the point of view of the syntax of this
provision, such a requirement for assets to be “invested” cannot be limited to Article
1(1)(c) of the BIT relating to “claims to money.” Instead, such a requirement must
equally relate to Article 1(1)(a)-(b) and (d)-(e) of the BIT. This would mean that
“movable and immovable property” or “shares in and stock of a company” would
also not qualify as investments as such, but have to be “invested.” According to
Respondents’ argument, shares in a company acquired by a foreign investor would
thus become an investment only if “invested”, for example transferred into other
shares. Thus, any initial acquisition of shares, property, rights under concessions, etc.
would not qualify as an “investment” under the BIT. Such an interpretation cannot be
accepted by the Tribunal. It would significantly change the meaning of Article 1(1)
of the BIT by shifting the definition from a fairly clear demonstrative list of assets to
a non-defined and tautological requirement for assets to be “invested” that would
remove even well-established forms of investment from the scope of the BIT term
“investment.”

Even if, for the sake of the argument, one would accept Respondents’ assertion that
assets have to be “invested” in order to constitute an “investment” under the BIT, one
may doubt whether this requirement would add a truly restrictive meaning to the
broad investment definition of the BIT. As has been held in the Tokios Tokelés case
“[t]he ordinary meaning of ‘invest’ is to ‘expend (money, effort) in something from

29132

which a return or profit is expected’ [...] With regard to a corresponding
investment definition in the applicable Ukraine-Lithuania BIT, according to which
“every kind of asset invested by an investor of one Contracting Party in the territory
of the other Contracting Party in accordance with the laws and regulations of the
latter” constituted an “investment”, the Tokios Tokelés tribunal found that “an
investment under the BIT is read in ordinary meaning as ‘every kind of asset’ for
which ‘an investor of one Contracting Party’ caused money or effort to be expended
and from which a return or profit is expected in the territory of the other Contracting

99133

Party.

The Tribunal’s finding is further supported by comparison with other BITs which
make it quite clear that monetary or financial claims as such do not qualify as

investments but need to be associated with or related to an investment in order to be

R-I (PCJ), para. 56.3.

Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, April 29, 2004; 20
ICSID Review—Foreign Investment Law Journal 205 (2005), para. 75.

Ibid.

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 35
8 September 2006

covered by the applicable investment definition. Examples can be found in
investment definitions which include “a claim to money or a claim to performance
having economic value, and associated with an investment” (emphasis added).'* In
these cases, it is clear that loans or payment claims arising from sales contracts as
such do not qualify as “investments”. Where such restrictive language is absent, as in
the Greece-Serbia and Montenegro BIT, it would be improper for the Tribunal to
read it into the text of the BIT.

Therefore, the Tribunal concludes, by a majority, that Article 1(1) of the BIT defines
“investment” as “every kind of asset” being illustrated by a demonstrative list of

potential assets. These

 

ets constituting investments are not further limited by a
requirement to be “invested.”

Thus, Claimant’s contractual rights, qualifying as assets, constitute an investment
under the BIT.

 

 

What is the jurisdictional relevance of the requi that investments must_be
made “in accordance with the leg: n” of the host State?

Respondents argue that the BIT requires investments to be made in accordance with
the host State’s legislation, which includes approval. Since such approval was not
procured by Mytilineos its “investment” is not protected under the BIT and does not
give rise to treaty arbitration.'**

Article 1(1) of the BIT provides:

“ ‘Investment’ means every kind of asset invested by an investor of one
Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party, in accordance
with the latter’s legislation and in particular, though not exclusively, includes
[...]” (emphasis added).

 

Article 12 of the BIT provides:

“This agreement shall apply to investments made by investors of either
Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party consistent with

Article 1(4)(iii) Treaty Between the United States and the Kingdom of Morocco Concerning the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, 22 July 1985, available at
http://www.unctad.org/sections/dite/iia/docs/bits/us_marocco.pdf.

R-I (PCJ), para. 35; R-II (RON), paras. 5 — 10.

140.

141.

142.

143.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 36
8 September 2006

the latter’s legislation, prior to as well as after the date of its entry into force”
(emphasis added).

Thus, the BIT itself does not require registration of investments; rather, it covers
investments made “in accordance with/consistent with the legislation of the host
State.”

According to Respondents, the laws of Serbia and Montenegro required registration
of investments. Since Claimant’s “investment” had not been registered it was not
protected under the BIT: “The transaction itself has to be screened as investment and
registered as such in order to qualify as investment protected by the Treaty, because
this is the requirement of Yugoslav law, which the Contracting Parties have

expressly incorporated into their Treaty.”°°

Respondent relies on Yaung Chi Oo Trading Pte Ltd v Government of the Union of
Myanmar" where an ad hoc tribunal applying the ICSID Additional Facility
Arbitration Rules found that it had no jurisdiction because it held that the investment
in question had not been timely approved by the host State and was thus not
protected under the applicable investment agreement.'**

However, the Yaung Chi Oo case can be distinguished from the present case. It was
decided on the basis of the ASEAN Investment Agreement which contained an

explicit approval requirement. Its Article II provides:

“This Agreement shall apply only to investments brought into, derived from or
directly connected with investments brought into the territory of any
Contracting Party by nationals or companies of any other Contracting Party
and which are specifically approved in writing and registered by the host
country and upon such conditions as it deems fit for the purposes of this
Agreement.”"”

R-II (ROD, para. 6.1.
Yaung Chi Oo Trading Pte Ltd v Government of the Union of Myanmar, ASEAN Case No ARB/O1/1
31 March 2003, 42 ILM 540 (2003).
Yaung Chi Oo v. Myanmar, para. 62.

Article II of the Agreement among the Government of Brunei Darussalam, the Republic of Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Republic of the Philippines, the Republic of Singapore and the Kingdom of Thailand for
the Promotion and Protection of Investments Manila, 15 December 1987, available at
http://www.aseansec.org/12816.htm.

144.

145.

146.

140

142

43

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 37
8 September 2006

The ASEAN ad hoc tribunal in Yaung Chi Oo found that under this provision there

was an

“express requirement of approval in writing and registration of a foreign
investment if it is to be covered by the Agreement. Such a requirement is not
universal in investment protection agreements. [...] In this respect Article II
goes beyond the general rule that for a foreign investment to enjoy treaty
protection it must be lawful under the law of the host State.”!"°

A similar approval requirement was applicable in the Gruslin case'*' where an ICSID
tribunal found that it had no jurisdiction over a BIT claim brought by a Belgian
national who had indirectly (through a Luxembourg mutual fund) invested in
Malaysian securities listed on the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange. The denial of
jurisdiction resulted from the tribunal’s finding that the portfolio investment —
covered by the applicable BIT’s broad definition of investments including “shares
and other types of holdings” — was not approved in accordance with the approval
proviso in the applicable Belgo/Luxembourg Economic Union-Malaysia BIT. The
BIT qualified its investment definition in the following terms: “provided that such
assets when invested: - (i) in Malaysia, are invested in a project classified as
‘approved project’ by the appropriate Ministry in Malaysia, in accordance with the
legislation and administrative practice, based thereon.”'” The Gruslin tribunal
rejected Claimant’s contention that his securities acquisitions were lawful and in
compliance with the law of Malaysia and should thus be regarded as approved
activity. Instead, it held that “[w]hat is required is something constituting regulatory
approval of a ‘project’, as such, and not merely the approval at some time of the
general business activities of a corporation.”"*

It is important, however, that the specific approval requirements in the Yaung Chi Oo
case and in the Gruslin case are different from the broader “in accordance with
legislation” standard found in many other BITs including the one applicable to the
present dispute. The present BIT does not require any approval on the part of host
States. Thus, the two above-cited cases must be distinguished and cannot be relied
upon by Respondent to demand registration or approval in order for the Claimant’s

investment to be protected under the BIT.

Yaung Chi Oo v. Myanmar, para. 58.
Gruslin v. Malaysia, (CSID Case No. ARB/99/3, Award of 27 November 2000.

Article 1 (3)(i) Belgo/Luxembourg Economic Union-Malaysia BIT, cited in Gruslin v. Malaysia, para.
9.2.

Gruslin v. Malaysia, para. 25.5.

147.

148.

149.

150.

145

146

147

lag

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 38,
8 September 2006

Two other ICSID cases, also relied upon in the Parties’ pleadings, are more pertinent
in the present context because they relate to BIT provisions corresponding to Article
1(1) of the Greece-Serbia and M BIT. In the jurisdictional decisions of
both the Salini v. Morocco and the Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine cases, ICSID tribunals

 

had to address investment definitions in BITs which covered assets invested “in

accordance with the laws and regulations” of the host State.

The purpose of such provisions, as explained by the Tribunal in Salini v. Morocco, is

the following:

“This provision refers to the validity of the investment and not to its definition.
More specifically it seeks to prevent the Bilateral Treaty from protecting
investments that should not be protected, particularly because they would be
illegal.”

The Salini tribunal thus rejected the argument of Morocco that the reference in the
BIT to national law and regulations implied that its law should define the notion of
investment, and that under Moroccan law the transaction in question was to be
considered a contract for services and not an investment protected under the BIT.
The tribunal, however, found that the service contract for the construction of a
highway constituted a “contractual benefit having an economic value” as well as a
“right of an economic nature conferred [...] by contract” which did not infringe the
laws and regulations of the host State.'** Thus, the tribunal found that the contract in

question was an investment within the meaning of the applicable BIT.

This interpretation was also followed in the Tokios Tokelés case.'*° In that case the
applicable BIT contained an investment definition that was almost identical to the
one in the present case.” The tribunal found that the BIT requirement “that
investments be made in compliance with the laws and regulations of the host State is

@ common requirement in modern BITs.”"* It further explicitly endorsed the Salini

Salini Costruttori S.p.A and Italstrade S.p.A v. Kingdom of Morocco, Decision on Jurisdiction, Case
No. ARB/00/4, 23 July 2001, 42 ILM 609 (2003), para. 46. This interpretation has recently been
endorsed by the tribunal in Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of
Pakistan, Case No. ARB/03/29, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005, para. 109.

Salini v. Morocco, para. 46.

Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004, 20
ICSID Review—Foreign Investment Law Journal 205 (2005).

Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, para. 74: “Article 1(1) of the BIT defines “investment” as “every kind of
asset invested by an investor of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party in
accordance with the laws and regulations of the latter ....”

Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, para. 84.

151.

152.

153.

154.

155.

149

150

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 39
8 September 2006

tribunal’s interpretation that the purpose of such provisions was “to prevent the
Bilateral Treaty from protecting investments that should not be protected,

particularly because they would be illegal.”'”

In the Tokios Tokelés case, the Respondent State had argued that the registered name
under which Claimant had conducted its business as well as some documents relating
to the business registration, had been irregular under Ukrainian law. The tribunal
rejected this claim and found that Claimant’s activity was covered by the definition
of investment under the BIT since those investment activities in the publishing
business were not illegal under the law of the host State. The tribunal further
suggested that minor registration irregularities are harmless errors as long as the

investment was not “illegal per se.”'°

The Tribunal considers the Salini test to constitute the proper jurisdictional yardstick
for determining whether an investment has been made “in accordance with the law”
of a host State. It will thus be guided in its assessment by scrutinizing whether the

investment had been vitiated by an illegality.

It has not been argued by Respondents, nor is there any indication that any of the
business transactions of Mytilineos, in particular concerning any of the Agreements,
contravened the legal rules in force in Serbia and Montenegro or were illegal.

In the present case, even Respondents did not contend that Claimant’s activities were
illegal. In fact they expressly stated that “Respondents do not contend that the
Agreements were not in compliance with the laws either — they only say that the
Agreements were not registered as investment agreements, most certainly because
the parties did not consider them as framing investments at all, but only as regulating

long-term commercial transactions.”"*!

Nevertheless, Respondents argue that “some aspects of the Agreements, and
especially of the General Cooperation Agreement (preferential treatment of
Mytilineos in eventual privatization of RTB-BOR, debt-to-equity swap), were at the

Ibid.

Ibid., para. 86: “Even if we were able to confirm the Respondent's allegations, which would require a
searching examination of minute details of administrative procedures in Ukrainian law, to exclude an
investment on the basis of such minor errors would be inconsistent with the object and purpose of the
Treaty.”

R-IV (PHB), para. 8.1.

156.

157.

158.

159.

152

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 40,
8 September 2006

time of conclusion of the Agreements, as of today, directly contrary to

Serbian/Yugoslav legislation.”'*

This view, however, is not supported by Article 3 of the General Cooperation
Agreement providing that, in case of Privatization of RTB-BOR Mytilineos (i) will
be given priority within the possibilities offered by the Ownership Transformation
Act and (ii) shall have the right to convert outstanding claims against BOR to shares
according to the Ownership Transformation Act and the program of privatization.

The Tribunal thus concludes, by a majority, that for the purposes of the BIT the
investment has been made in accordance with the laws of Serbia and Montenegro
and is thus protected under the BIT.

Jurisdiction ratione personae

The Tribunal has taken note that in June 2006, well after the filing of Claimant’s
Statement of Claim in April 2005, Montenegro, a constituent unit of the State Union
of Serbia and Montenegro, declared its independence. While the Tribunal has not
been requested to rule on any ensuing State succession issues, it takes note that it
appears uncontroversial that the Republic of Serbia will continue the legal identity of
the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro on the international level.

For purposes of jurisdiction, however, the Tribunal will follow the well-established
principle that jurisdiction is to be determined in light of the situation as it exists on
the date the judicial proceedings are instituted. This principle has been recently
confirmed by the ICJ in the Arrest Warrant case in which the Court held

“The Court recalls that, according to its settled jurisprudence, its jurisdiction
must be determined at the time that the act instituting proceedings was filed.
Thus, if the Court has jurisdiction on the date the case is referred to it, it
continues to do so regardless of subsequent events. Such events might lead to a
finding that an application has subsequently become moot and to a decision not
to proceed to judgment on the merits, but they cannot deprive the Court of
jurisdiction.”'**

 
 
 

R-IV (PHB), para. 8.2.

Case Concerning the Arrest Warrant of 11 April 2000 (Democratic Republic of Congo v. Belgium), 14
February 2002, ICJ Reports (2002), p. 1, para. 26.

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

154

155

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 41
8 September 2006

The principle has also been followed in investment arbitration. A number of tribunals
have held that the decisive date for the participation in the Convention of the host
State and of the investor’s State of nationality was the date of the institution of
arbitration proceedings.'**

With particular regard to the nationality requirement under Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention the Vivendi IJ tribunal confirmed the rule expressed in the Arrest
Warrant case and held that

“(t]he consequence of this rule is that, once established, jurisdiction cannot be
defeated. It simply is not affected by subsequent events. Events occurring after
the institution of proceedings (other than, in a case like this, an ad hoc
Committee’s Decision to annul the prior jurisdictional finding) cannot
withdraw the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the dispute.”"*°

The Tribunal finds that the same rule also applies with regard to possible changes in
the personality of respondents in investment cases. Though changes in the “identity”
of States occur less frequently than changes of the nationality of natural or legal

persons, there is no reason why the two should not be treated in the same way.

The Tribunal will therefore determine its jurisdiction ratione personae over the two
Respondents on the basis of their existence on the date the arbitration proceedings
were instituted on 8 April 2005.

(a) Are Respondents who are not parties to any of the “seven agreements”
the proper parties to this arbitration?

While Respondents do not contest that Claimant is a national of a Contracting Party
of the BIT, they contest Claimant’s assumption that this Tribunal has jurisdiction
over the latter’s claims. Rather, they consider these claims to be merely contractual
disputes between private parties in Serbia and Montenegro. According to their Plea
Contesting Jurisdiction, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction “is limited only to claims alleging
a violation of the Treaty itself, and does not extend to investment disputes in general,

or even less to disputes arising out [of] or in connection with any commercial activity

See Holiday Inns v. Morocco, Lalive, The First ‘World Bank’ Arbitration (Holiday Inns v. Morocco) -
Some Legal Problems, 51 British Year Book of International Law (1980), 142-146; Amco v. Indonesia,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 25 September 1983, | ICSID Reports 403; LETCO v. Liberia, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 24 October 1984, 2 ICSID Reports 351.

Compaiiié de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Universal v, Argentine Republic (Vivendi Il), Decision on
Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005, para. 63.

165.

166.

167.

168.

156

137

158

159

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 42
8 September 2006

or business transaction of persons of one Contracting Party’s nationality in the
territory of the other Contracting Party.”'** According to Respondents, the claims
brought before this Tribunal are essentially claims for contractual defaults by RTB-
BOR which is an entity distinct from both the First and the Second Respondent.

Claimant, on the other hand, alleges that acts by RTB-BOR may be attributed to
Respondents on the basis of their control and funding of the company. Claimant
further contends that Respondents’ laws leading to the restructuring and privatization
of RTB-BOR constituted an indirect expropriation, and that various other acts to its
detriment constituted violations of other BIT obligations.'*’ In Claimant’s view “[t]he

 

social program which resulted in the admission of Respondents’ strategy not to have
RTB BOT [sic] settle its debts to Claimant, the ongoing privatization of RTB BOR

along with the machinery owned by Claimant are indicia of ‘property taking’.”'*

With regard to the expropriation claim concerning the lapse of the bank guarantees,
Claimant alleges: “Respondents deprived Claimant of the bank guarantees by
causing their lapse. This occurred by (a) the deliberate failure of Respondents, acting
through RTB BOR, to extend the term of validity of the first bank guarantees, despite
Claimant’s repeated requests the bankruptcy, and (b) the bankruptcy of Jugobanka

which caused the lapse of the Second Guarantee.”'”

It is clear that this Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over mere contract claims
between Mytilineos and RTB-BOR, such as the latter’s default on payment
obligations. The jurisdiction of this Tribunal is limited to treaty claims. Mytilineos

does, however, allege BIT violations on the part of Respondents.

While acknowledging that RTB-BOR and Respondents are different parties,
Claimant asserts that the acts of RTB-BOR may be attributable to Respondents.
Claimant argues, inter alia, that RTB-BOR as a socially-owned entity may not be
State-owned, but that the State might be the ultimate owner; that there is a de facto
influence over or control of RTB-BOR; that Serbia appoints members of the RTB-
BOR board of directors, and so on.

R-I (PCJ), para. 14.
C-APCJ, pp. 18 — 19.
C-APCJ, p. 19.
C-DOJ, p. 18.

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

160

let

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 43
8 September 2006

While actual attribution to Serbia and Montenegro still has to be proven, it is clear
that Serbia and Montenegro, as the treaty partner of Greece, is the correct respondent
with regard to alleged BIT violations. The Tribunal thus unanimously finds that it
has jurisdiction ratione personae over the First Respondent, Serbia and Montenegro.

(b) Is Second Respondent who is not a party to the BIT a proper party to
this arbitration?

According to Respondents’ brief, the Second Respondent, Serbia, is not a party to the
BIT.'® In their view, any consent to arbitration contained in this treaty does not
cover Serbia. The consent only binds the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and

Montenegro). Thus, Serbia cannot be a party to the arbitration.

Claimant contends that Serbia, as a constituent subdivision of Serbia and
Montenegro, is bound by treaties entered into by the State Union which, according to
the federal constitution, even take precedence over the law of Serbia. Because Serbia
is bound by the BIT in its entirety, Claimant argues, it is also bound by the
arbitration clause of Article 9.'"!

In the Tribunal’s view the jurisdictional provisions are fairly clear with regard to the
issue of who may be a party to arbitration. While Article 8 of the BIT provides for
inter-State arbitration in cases of “disputes between the Contracting Parties”, Article
9 provides for, as indicated in its title, “Settlement of Disputes between an investor
and a Contracting Party.” Possible parties to such mixed arbitration are, on the one
hand, investors of one Contracting Party and, on the other hand, “the other
Contracting Party.” The “Contracting Parties” of the BIT are the Hellenic Republic
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as is evidenced by the agreement’s title and
also by the signatures of the two government officials who clearly signed “for the
Government of the Hellenic Republic” and “for the Governement [sic] of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.” Since by the treaty’s plain wording Serbia, as a constituent
part of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), is not a
Contracting Party, it cannot be made the subject of arbitration proceedings under the
BIT.

This finding is confirmed by the practice of international investment arbitration.

Claims against sub-State entities or constituent parts of a State party to an investment

R-I (PCJ), paras. 65 et seq.
C-APCJ, p. 31.

174.

175.

176.

162

163

164

16s

166

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 44,
8 September 2006

agreement are only exceptionally permissible. One such possibility is provided for in
the ICSID Convention which contemplates claims against “constituent subdivisions
or agencies of a Contracting State” under the condition that such entities are
“designated to the Centre by that State.”'’ Such a possibility is not, however,
provided for in the applicable BIT. Since the present arbitration is brought under the
UNCITRAL Rules and not under the ICSID Convention, the latter’s exceptional

ility of instituting proceedings directly against designated constituent

 

possi
subdivisions or agencies is not available.

As a result, the Tribunal unanimously finds that it does not have jurisdiction over

claims brought against Serbia.

This finding is without prejudice to the fact that Serbia and Montenegro may be held
internationally responsible for acts of its constituent unit Serbia. According to
general principles of the law of State responsibility, acts of Serbia may be attributed
to Serbia and Montenegro. Article 4(1) of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility’®

provides:

“The conduct of any State organ shall be considered an act of that State under
international law, whether the organ exercises legislative, executive, judicial or
any other functions, whatever position it holds in the organization of the State,
and whatever its character as an organ of the central government or of a
territorial unit of the State.”

In its commentary to this provision the ILC clarifies that the “principle in article 4
applies equally to organs of the central government and to those of regional or local
units.”'* According to the ILC this principle of attribution of acts of constituent parts
of a State to the State is a principle of customary international law applied in

international arbitral practice'®* as well as by the ICJ.'

Article 25(1) and Article 25(3) of the ICSID Convention.

Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, in: Report of the
International Law Commission on the Work of lis Fifiy-third Session, UN GAOR, 56th Sess., Supp. No.
10, 43, UN Doc. A/56/10 (2001).

Commentaries to the draft articles on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, adopted
by the International Law Commission at its fifty-third session (2001), Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-sixth session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), chp.IV.E.2, p. 88.

Pellat Case, France/Mexico Claims Commission, UNRIAA, vol. V, p. 534 (1929), at p. 536.

LaGrand (Germany v. United States of America), Provisional Measures, ICJ Reports 1999, p. 9, at
p. 16, para. 28. See also the judgment of 27 June 2001, para. 81.

177.

178.

179.

180.

181.

167

168

169

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 45
8 September 2006

Also investment tribunals have applied this rule. In Metalclad Mexico was held to be
internationally responsible for acts of its States.'®’ Similarly, in Vivendi an ICSID
tribunal held:

“[(uJnder international law, and for purposes of jurisdiction of this Tribunal, it
is well established that actions of a political subdivision of federal state, such
the Province of Tucuman in the federal state of the Argentine Republic, are
attributable to the central government.”

  

Since these rules of attribution can only lead to the international responsibility of the
First Respondent, Serbia and Montenegro, they cannot be relied upon in order to

establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the Second Respondent, Serbia.

Does the need for a prima facie case constitute an obstacle to the jurisdiction of the

 

Tribunal?

For jurisdictional purposes in a BIT investment arbitration, treaty claims have to be

 

alleged by the claimant and the allegations, if proven to be true must be capable of
constituting violations of the BIT. This jurisdictional requirement can be found in the
general jurisprudence of international courts and tribunals. It has particular relevance
in the context of investment arbitration where treaty claims have to be separated from

contract claims.

Since Respondents argued that Claimant failed to state valid prima facie claims in its

Statement of Claim,'®

the Tribunal has to address this jurisdictional challenge.
Before doing so it will describe the jurisdictional test it will apply in accordance with

international practice.
In Amco Asia v. Indonesia an ICSID tribunal held that:

“[...] it must look firstly and only at the claim itself as presented to ICSID and
the Tribunal in the Claimants’ Request for Arbitration. [...] the Tribunal must
not attempt at this stage to examine the claim itself in any detail, but the
Tribunal must only be satisfied that prima facie the claim, as stated by the

Metalclad Corp. v. United Mexican States, ARB (AF)/97/1, Award, 30 August 2000, 16 /CSID
Review—Foreign Investment Law Journal 168, 195 (2001), para. 73.

Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija, S.A. and Compagnie Générale des Eaux v. Argentine Republic,
Case No. ARB/97/3, Award of 21 November 2000, para. 49.

R-I (PCJ), paras. 21 — 22; R-II (ROJ), paras. 19 — 30; R-IV (PHB), paras. 13 - 14.

182.

183.

184.

170

In

173

174

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 46,
8 September 2006

Claimants when initiating this arbitration, is within the jurisdictional mandate
of ICSID arbitration, and consequently of this Tribunal.”"

This so-called prima facie test has been used by various international tribunals
including investment tribunals. Recently, it has been forcefully restated in Salini v.

Jordan:

“[...] in considering issues of jurisdiction, courts and tribunals do not go into
the merits of the case without sufficient prior debate. In conformity with this
jurisprudence, the Tribunal will accordingly seek to determine whether the
facts alleged by the Claimant in this case, if established, are capable of coming
within those provisions of the BIT which have been invoked.”"”

The need for a prima facie case alleging BIT violations has also been reaffirmed in

 

the Plama case in which the tribunal held that for jurisdictional purposes “the

claimant must show that the alleged facts on which it relied were capable of falling

within the provisions of the treaty.”'”

Thus, it follows that if the facts as pleaded are plainly incapable of supporting a
finding of breach of treaty, all or part or the claim might fall outside of the
jurisdiction of the tribunal.'* The United Parcel Service tribunal relied on the Oil

Platforms case in which the ICJ adopted the following jurisdictional test:

“(The Court] must ascertain whether the violations of the Treaty [...] pleaded
by Iran do or do not fall within the provisions of the Treaty and whether, as a
consequence, the dispute is one the Court has jurisdiction ratione materiae to
entertain [...]”'"

Amco v. Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Jurisdiction, 25 September 1983, 1 ICSID
Reports 377, para. 38.

Salini Costruttori S.p.A and Italstrade S.p.A v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction, 19 November 2004, 44 ILM 569 (2005), para. 151; See also Joy
Mining Machinery Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, (CSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 6 August 2004, 44 ILM 73 (2005), para. 29; similarly Impregilio S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic
of Pakistan, ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 22 April 2005, para. 254.

Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 8 February 2005, 44 ILM 721 (2005), para. 119.

United Parcel Service of America Inc v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL Award on Jurisdiction,
22 November 2002, at paras. 33-37.

Case concerning Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), IC} Reports
(1996), 803, para. 16.

185.

186.

187.

188.

189.

175

176

7

178

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 47,
8 September 2006

Based on this precedent, the United Parcel Service tribunal considered the following
two questions crucial for a jurisdictional prima facie test:

“Do the facts alleged by [Claimant] fall within those provisions [conferring
jurisdiction]; are the facts capable, once proved, of constituting breaches of the
obligations they state?”"”*

In the recent Bayindir decision on jurisdiction, the test set forth in Salini and
Impregilo was followed and the tribunal considered that it “should be satisfied that, if
the facts or the contentions alleged by Bayindir are ultimately proven true, they

would be capable of constituting a violation of the BIT.”'"®

On this basis, the Tribunal will not ascertain whether the facts alleged by Claimant
are true. This is a task reserved for determination of the merits of the case. Instead, it
must satisfy itself that the alleged facts, if true, could constitute violations of the BIT.
In other words, the Tribunal “must not make findings on the merits of those claims,
which have yet to be argued, but rather must satisfy itself that it has jurisdiction over

the dispute, as presented by the Claimant.”'”

In its Statement of Claim Claimant alleged violations of Articles 2 (“Promotion and
Protection of Investments”) and 4 (“Expropriation”) of the BIT. According to
Claimant “Respondent breached its Treaty obligations by directing RTB BOR not to
perform the Agreements with the Claimant.”'”* Claimant further argues that RTB-
BOR should be considered an “instrumentality” or “alter ego” of Respondents, so
that its non-performance of contractual obligations should be attributed to
Respondents. It is further argued that this behavior constituted a breach of the fair
and equitable treatment requirement as well as the full protection and security
standard, and amounted to unjustifiable and discriminatory measures prohibited by
Article 2(2) of the BIT.

Additionally, Claimant asserts that Respondents breached their BIT obligations
under Article 2 and 4 “by depriving Claimant of the bank guarantees issued by

United Parcel Service of America Inc v Government of Canada, para. 37.

Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Decision on
Jurisdiction, Case No. ARB/03/29, 14 November 2005, para. 194.

Impregilio S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, April 22, 2005,
para, 237.

C-Statement of Claim, p. 7.

190.

191,

192.

193.

194.

179

180

182

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 48,
8 September 2006

Jugobanka.”"” This deprivation allegedly occurred as a result of the failure by
Respondent, acting through RTB-BOR, to extend the First Guarantee in 2001 and as
a consequence of the lapse of the Second Guarantee in 2004 resulting from the
“[government-Jordered and orchestrated bankruptcy of Jugobanka by virtue of an

official decree.”'”

Respondents allege that the true nature of the dispute is one about the non-fulfillment
of contractual obligations between Claimant and a private party in Serbia and

Montenegro.'*!

Claimant does not appear to dispute that RTB-BOR is an entity under the laws of
Serbia and Montenegro and is legally distinct from both Respondents and that its
claims against RTB-BOR are contractual ones. However, Claimant has chosen to
pursue treaty claims arising under the BIT for which it must show that there was a
violation of the BIT attributable to Respondents. For that purpose, it is irrelevant
whether there was (also) a breach of contractual obligations owed to Claimant or not.

According to well established rules of State responsibility, acts of private parties may
under certain circumstances be attributed to States and may ultimately trigger their
international responsibility. Direction and control, as alleged by Claimant, may lead
to such attribution and it will be for the merits phase of the arbitration proceedings to

decide whether there is sufficient ground to prove this.

Further, if such an attribution can be established, it is not automatically excluded that
the behavior complained of may infringe the fair and equitable treatment obligation
as well as the other treatment standards under Article 2 of the BIT and the
expropriation prohibition under Article 4 of the BIT.

The Tribunal is of the opinion that the dispute does not merely concern the existence
of contractual relations between Claimant and RTB-BOR and the determination of
the outstanding contractual liability. Such allegation might indeed fail to state a
prima facie BIT claim.'* In the present case, however, Claimant has alleged treaty

C-Statement of Claim, p. 8.
C-Statement of Claim, p. 9.
R-I(PCJ), p. 10.

Cf. SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, ARB/02/6, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004; 8 ICSID Rep. 518 (2005), para. 159.

195.

196.

197.

198.

199.

183

184

185

186

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 49
8 September 2006

violations which, if ultimately proven correct, may lead to Respondents’
international responsibility.

Though the Tribunal notes that Claimant’s submissions concerning alleged BIT
violations on the part of Respondents are not in all respects clear, it does not believe
that it must rule out that the alleged facts, if established, may constitute breaches of
the BIT from the outset.'*

The Tribunal thus, by majority, holds that Claimant has not failed to state a prima

facie case.

Is the principle of the exhaustion of local remedies a bar to the jurisdiction of this
Tribunal?

As a further jurisdictional objection, Respondents argue that, before referring the
case to an international arbitral tribunal, local remedies should be exhausted first. In
their plea contesting jurisdiction Respondents invoked the “principle in international
law that local remedies should be exhausted first (the “exhaustion of local remedies

rule”), before referring the case to international courts or tribunals.”'™

Respondents refer to the 1989 judgment of the International Court of Justice in the
Elettronica Sicula S.p.A case (“ELST case)'** which confirmed that the customary
international law principle of exhaustion of local remedies could not be considered
dispensed with unless such “dispensation” had been made explicitly. According to
Respondents this “non-dispensation” rule found in the ELS case with regard to the
Friendship, Commerce and Navigation Treaty between Italy and the United States

(the “FCN Treaty”) would also apply with regard to the present BIT.'*°

Claimant asserts that by international standards as evidenced in recent ICSID cases

this “ELSI presumption” has effectively been reversed. According to Claimant,

Cf. Salini Costruttori S.p.A and Italstrade S.p.A v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, I\CSID Case No.
ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction, 19 November 2004, 44 ILM 569 (2005), para. 166.

R-I (PCJ), para, 62.
Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States of America v. Italy), ICJ Report (1989) p.15.
R-II (ROD), para. 32.1.

200.

201.

202.

203.

204.

205.

187

188

189

190

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 50.
8 September 2006

tribunals have held that unless the exhaustion of local remedies was specifically
required it was in effect tacitly dispensed with.'*’

The Tribunal considers that the so-called “non-dispensation” rule found in the ELST
case is indeed relevant for purposes of dispute settlement in international economic
law in general'** as well as investment law in particular. This relevance manifests
itself in the discussion of the rule’s meaning and its impact on investment arbitration

in a number of awards and decisions.
In the ELST case, the International Court of Justice stated that it was unable to

“[...] accept that an important principle of customary international law should
be held to have been tacitly dispensed with, in the absence of any words
making clear an intention to do so.”"”

At issue in the ELSI case was whether the United States could exercise diplomatic
protection by instituting proceedings before the ICJ without the prior exhaustion of
local remedies by the company on behalf of which the United States was willing to
intervene. The ICJ denied this possibility. In particular, the Court found that the FCN
Treaty between Italy and the United States did not dispense with the exhaustion of
local remedies requirement. However, the Court found that the local remedies rule

had in fact been complied with.'””

Although the ICJ’s holding expressly relates to the FCN Treaty, ICSID and other
investment tribunals have also considered its impact on modern BITs which, in many

respects, can be regarded as successor agreements to the older FCN treaties.

Indeed, in a number of recent ICSID awards tribunals have held that their jurisdiction
does not depend upon the exhaustion of local remedies unless expressly required as a
condition of the consent to jurisdiction under Article 26 of the ICSID Convention.

This view was clearly expressed in Lanco International Inc. v. Argentina, where the
tribunal held that:

C-APCIJ, p. 25.

RS.J. Martha, World Trade Disputes and the Exhaustion of Local Remedies Rule, 30 Journal of World
Trade 107 (1996).

ELSI Case, ICJ Report (1989) p. 15, at p. 31, para. 50.
ELSI Case, ICJ Report (1989) p. 15, at p. 36, para. 63.

206.

207.

208.

192

193

194

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 51
8 September 2006

“[a] State may require the exhaustion of domestic remedies as a prior condition
for its consent to ICSID arbitration. This demand may be made (i) in a bilateral
investment treaty that offers submission to ICSID arbitration, (ii) in domestic
legislation, or (iii) in a direct investment agreement that contains an ICSID
clause.”"*!

 

 

The Lanco approach was specifically cited and endorsed in the Generation Ukraine
case.” However, this reversal of the ELS/ presumption is a specific result of the

wording of the ICSID Convention. Article 26 provides:

“Consent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention shall, unless
otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to the exclusion of any
other remedy. A Contracting State may require the exhaustion of local
administrative or judicial remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration
under this Convention.”

This was made very explicit by the tribunal in the AES award which stated:

“Under Article 26 of the Convention, for entering into play, exhaustion of local
remedies shall be expressly required as a condition of the consent of one party
to arbitration under the Convention. Absent this requirement, exhaustion of
local remedies cannot be a precondition for an ICSID Tribunal to have
jurisdiction.”""

The tribunal in Generation Ukraine also emphasized the role of Article 26 of the
ICSID Convention in this context:

“The first sentence of Article 26 secures the exclusivity of a reference to
ICSID arbitration vis-a-vis any other remedy. A logical consequence of this
exclusivity is the waiver by Contracting States to the ICSID Convention of the
local remedies rule, so that the investor is not compelled to pursue remedies in
the respondent State’s domestic courts or tribunals before the institution of
ICSID proceedings. This waiver is implicit in the second sentence of Article
26, which nevertheless allows Contracting States to reserve its right to insist
upon the prior exhaustion of local remedies as a condition of its consent.”!*

 

 

Lanco International Inc. v Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/6, Award on Jurisdiction, 8 December
1998; 40 ILM 457 (2001), para. 39.

Generation Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine, ARB/00/9, Award, 16 September 2003; 44 ILM 404 (2005), para.
13.5: “The United States and Ukraine have elected to omit any requirement that an investor must first
exhaust local remedies before submitting a dispute to ICSID arbitration in the BIT.”

AES Corporation v. The Argentine Republic, ARB/02/17, Decision on Jurisdiction, April 26, 2005,
para, 69.

Generation Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine, ARB/00/9, Award, 16 September 2003; 44 ILM 404 (2005), para.
13.4.

209.

210.

211.

212.

195

196

197

198

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 52
8 September 2006

It is less clear, however, whether the dispensation with the exhaustion of the local
remedies rule can be equally taken for granted outside the context of the ICSID

Convention.

Tribunals in BIT arbitrations operating outside the ICSID framework, such as ad hoc
tribunals under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, have not yet expressed
themselves on this matter as clearly and explicitly as ICSID tribunals. Nevertheless,
their views are generally interpreted as permitting direct arbitration without any prior

exhaustion of local remedies.'**

There was some discussion of the local remedies rule in the NAFTA case of Loewen
v. United States.'** In its decision on jurisdiction the tribunal, operating on the basis
of the ICSID Additional Facility rather than the ICSID Convention, was faced with
the jurisdictional challenge of a non-exhaustion of local remedies. It found that the
“procedural” local remedies rule and a substantive rule of finality, according to
which a State would not incur responsibility for lower court judgments, were “no
different” because both intended to “ensure that the State where the violation
occurred should have an opportunity to redress it by its own means, within the
framework of its own domestic legal system.”"*" It decided to refer back to this issue
in its decision on the merits.

In the final award the Loewen tribunal did not entertain any jurisdictional challenge
to the claim brought against the United States. Rather, it found that there was a
substantive obligation incumbent upon claimants to challenge lower court judgments
in order to invoke the international responsibility of the forum State for a denial of
justice. According to the tribunal “[...] @ court decision which can be challenged
through the judicial process does not amount to a denial of justice at the

international level [...].”'8

Schreuer, Calvos’ Grandchildren: The Retum of Local Remedies in Investment Arbitration, 4 The Law
and Practice of International Courts and Tribunals (2005), pp. 1, at p. 2, relying on Loewen and Yaung
Chi Oo. See also Rubins/Kinsella, International Investment, Political Risk and Dispute Resolution
(2005), p. 272, who consider that “[i]t is generally accepted that modern investment treaties have
largely done away with the local remedies requirement of customary international law.”

The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v USA, Case No ARB(AF)/98/3, ICSID Additional
Facility Decision on Jurisdiction, 5 January 2001, 7 ICSID Rep. 421 (2005).

Loewen, Decision on Jurisdiction 2001, para. 71.

Loewen Group, Inc and Raymond L. Loewen v USA, Case No ARB(AF)/98/3, ICSID Additional
Facility Award, 26 June 2003, 42 ILM 811 (2003), para. 153.

213.

214.

215.

216.

19

200

201

202

203,

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 53
8 September 2006

Neither the decision on jurisdiction nor the award explicitly addressed the procedural
issue whether a NAFTA claim may be brought without the prior exhaustion of local
remedies. The fact that the tribunal addressed it as a substantive rule on the merits
indicates, however, that the exhaustion of local remedies was not considered to be a
jurisdictional requirement.

Since the Loewen tribunal expressly endorsed the ELS/ presumption'”

its rulings
must have relied, at least implicitly, on a waiver of the exhaustion of local remedies
requirement. This could be seen in Article 1121 NAFTA which provides that a claim

may only be brought if:

“[...] the investor and the enterprise waive their right to initiate or continue
before any administrative tribunal or court under the law of any Party, or
other dispute settlement procedures, any proceedings with respect to the
measure of the disputing Party that is alleged to be a breach referred to in
Article 1116 [...]”°°

 

This reading of NAFTA provisions as dispensing with the local remedies rule is
confirmed by another NAFTA award. In Waste Management the tribunal held that
“(i]t is true that in a general sense the exhaustion of local remedies is a procedural
prerequisite for the bringing of an international claim, one which is dispensed with
by NAFTA Chapter 11," Referring in particular to Article 1121, the tribunal found
that “Chapter 11 of NAFTA does not require that a party should exhaust local
remedies before bringing an international claim: rather it requires a waiver of

99202

remaining remedies.

Though it was not explicitly asked to decide on the validity of the local remedies rule
in the light of ELSY, the tribunal in Yawng Chi Oo v. Myanmar effectively abandoned
the ELSI requirement that a dispensation of the local remedies rule must be express.
The applicable investment treaty, the 1987 ASEAN Investment Agreement,” did not

expressly address the requirement of exhausting local remedies. Rather, it provided

Loewen, Decision on Jurisdiction 2001, para. 73; Loewen, Award 2003, para. 160.

Article 1121(1)(b) NAFTA.

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States (No. 2), ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, 30
April 2004, 43 ILM 967 (2004), para. 116.

Waste Management, Award 2004, para. 133.

Agreement among the Government of Brunei Darussalam, the Republic of Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Republic of the Philippines, the Republic of Singapore and the Kingdom of Thailand for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments (the ASEAN Investment Agreement), Manila, 15 December 1987,
available at http://www.aseansec.org/12816.htm.

217.

218.

219.

220.

204

205

206

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 54
8 September 2006

in its Article X for a choice between various international arbitration proceedings
after a six-month waiting period.”

In the section of its award dealing with jurisdictional issues the Yaung Chi Oo
tribunal held:

“The 1987 [ASEAN] Agreement nowhere provides that a Claimant must
exhaust domestic remedies, whether against the host State or any specific
entity within the host State, before proceedings are commenced under Article
X. Conceivably the existence of a local remedy in Myanmar might be relevant
to the question whether there had been a breach of Article IV of the 1987
Agreement. But that is a matter going to the substance of the claim and not the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction.””*

Thus, in Yaung Chi Oo an investment agreement providing private investors with

direct access to arbitration against a host State has been interpreted to tacitly dispense
with the requirement to exhaust local remedies.

In the CME, Final Award the local remedies rule was also considered inapplicable
even though it had not been expressly dispensed with in the applicable BIT. This
case is particularly relevant because it was an ad hoc arbitration under the
UNCITRAL Rules on the basis of a BIT which was silent on the question of
exhaustion of local remedies. Without explicitly addressing the ELS/ presumption,
the tribunal rejected an “injection” into the applicable BIT of a requirement to
exhaust local remedies.” In effect, the tribunal exercised its jurisdiction without

requiring the exhaustion of local remedies.

 

In the opinion of the Tribunal, this interpretation must also be adopted with regard to

the Greece-Serbia and Montenegro BIT. In fact, this result is reinforced by the

Article X ASEAN Investment Agreement provides: “1. Any legal dispute arising directly out of an
investment between any Contracting Party and a national or company of any of the other Contracting
Parties shall, as far as possible, be settled amicably between the parties to the dispute.

2. If such a dispute cannot thus be settled within six months of its being raised, then either party can
elect to submit the dispute for conciliation or arbitration and such election shall be binding on the other
party. The dispute may be brought before the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID), the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), the
Regional Centre for Arbitration at Kuala Lumpur or any other regional centre for arbitration in ASEAN,
whichever body the parties to the dispute mutually agree to appoint for the purposes of conducting the
arbitration.”

Yaung Chi Oo v. Myanmar, 2003, para. 40.
CME Czech Republic B.V. v. Czech Republic, Final Award, 14 March 2003, para. 412.

221.

222.

223.

207

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 55
8 September 2006

specific wording of the BIT, which contains a fork-in-the-road clause in Article 9(2)
providing that:

“if such disputes [i.e. disputes between an investor of a Contracting Party and
the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under this
Agreement, in relation to an investment of the former] cannot be settled within
six months from the date either party requested amicable settlement, the
investor concerned may submit the dispute either to the competent courts of
the Contracting Party in the territory of which the investment has been made or
to international arbitration.”

To assume that the BIT had not tacitly dispensed with the requirement to exhaust
local remedies would imply that an investor, before making his or her choice
between domestic courts and international arbitration, would have to exhaust
domestic remedies. This would in effect render the “domestic courts” alternative of
the fork-in-the-road clause meaningless and thus such an assumption cannot be
made. On the contrary, a fork-in-the-road clause obliges an investor to choose
whether to pursue remedies before domestic or international fora. Once the choice is
made in favor of domestic remedies, international arbitration is no longer available.
Thus, one cannot require the exhaustion of local remedies as a precondition for
access to international arbitration. Instead, the initiation of local proceedings forfeits

access to international arbitration.

The result that BITs granting private investors direct access to international
arbitration do not require local remedies to be exhausted is also confirmed by
underlying policy reasons. A requirement for the exhaustion of local remedies as a
general precondition to mixed investment arbitration would seriously undermine the
effectiveness of this form of dispute settlement.

This consideration is also reflected in the 1989 resolution of the Institut de droit

international on “Arbitration Between States, State Enterprises, or State Entities, and

 

Foreign Enterprises”. It found that:

“(t]he requirement of exhaustion of local remedies as a condition of
implementation of an obligation to arbitrate is not admissible unless the
arbitration agreement provides otherwise.”””

Article 8 Institut de droit international Resolution on “Arbitration Between States, State Enterprises, or
State Entities, and Foreign Enterprises” Santiago de Compostela — 1989, 63 AnnIDI (1990), p. 324, at
p. 330.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 56
8 September 2006

224. This result is in line with a fundamental difference between the type of treaty at issue

in the ELSI case, giving rise to the above-cited presumption in favor of requiring the

exhaustion of local remedies, and modern BITs. While treaties of friendship,

commerce and navigation provide for inter-State dispute settlement as means of last

resort dependant on the espousal of private party claims by the home State, BITs

provide for direct access to dispute settlement.

225. The Tribunal decides unanimously that the BIT does not require previous exhaustion

of local remedies. Thus, any alleged non-exhaustion cannot deprive the Tribunal of

its jurisdiction over the present dispute.

VI. DECISIONS

226. FOR THE FOREGOING REASONS, the Tribunal, after having met for deliberations in

Zurich, renders the following decisions:

The Arbitral Tribunal:

(1) DETERMINES, by a majority, that the business activities of Claimant constitute
an investment under the BIT;

(2) FURTHER DETERMINES, by a majority, that the broad “investment” definition of
Article 1(1) of the BIT referring to “every kind of asset” is not limited by an
additional requirement that such assets be “invested”;

(3) FURTHER DETERMINES, by a majority, that for the purposes of the BIT
Claimant’s investment has been made in accordance with the law of Serbia and
Montenegro and is thus protected under the BIT;

(4) FURTHER DETERMINES unanimously that it has jurisdiction ratione personae
over the First Respondent;

(5) FURTHER DETERMINES unanimously that it does not have jurisdiction ratione
personae over claims brought against the Second Respondent;

(6) FURTHER DETERMINES, by a majority, that Claimant has not failed to state a
prima facie case;

(7) FURTHER DETERMINES unanimously that the BIT does not require the

exhaustion of local remedies before the institution of arbitral proceedings under
Article 9 of the BIT. Thus, any alleged non-exhaustion cannot deprive the
Tribunal of its jurisdiction over the present dispute;

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia

The Arbitral Tribunal therefore:

PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 57
8 September 2006

(1) DectDes that the dispute between Claimant and First Respondent is within its

jurisdiction;

(2) FuRTHER DECIDES that any claim for arbitration costs, legal fees and other
expenses in connection with the issue of jurisdiction shall be addressed in the

Award on the Merits.

Done in Zurich, Switzerland, being the place of arbitration, on 8 September 2006.

 

Presiding Arbitrator

ZA

Professor Dr. Stelios Koussoulis
Arbitrator

 

Professor Dr. Dobrosav Mitrovi¢
Arbitrator

Reason for absence of signature (Article
32(4) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules):

In a letter to the Presiding Arbitrator
dated 6 September 2006, Professor
Mitrovié indicated that he would not sign
this Partial Award as he did not agree
with the majority on the jurisdiction of
the Arbitral Tribunal. Professor Mitrovi¢
participated in all aspects of the
deliberation process.

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 58,
8 September 2006

ANNEX I

List of Agreements between the Claimant and RTB-BOR dated 19 February 1998

1. General Cooperation Agreement
2. Working Capital Agreement

3. Sale of Copper Agreement

4. Spare Parts Agreement

5. Sale of Zinc Agreement

6. Copper Concentrates Agreement

7. Agreement for the Modernisation of the Metallurgical Capacities in RTB-BOR

UNCITRAL Arbitration Mytilineos v. (1) State Union of Serbia and Montenegro (2) Republic of Serbia
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION - PAGE 59
8 September 2006

ANNEX II

Agreement between the Government of the Hellenic Republic and the Federal
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments

 

 

APOFO 13
eon ve icxu - Acerera - ANEN

1. H mapcuca Iuupuwa TiWerct Oe loXU ThdvtTc
neéoeg aro TV juScOUrvia xcTa TY oNcia Ta Zup-
BoAAcyeva Mepn aviAAcgav éyypapes avaxawwceis,
We Tg ONOlEg MANPOwepCUY ET OAGKANPAGNKaY Ot AVTI-

TCIXES CUVTAYHATIKES ToUg Sadwacies,

2H nepotca Tugawic cuvanterat yia pia neploso
Sexa stiv Kal, €V GUVEXEIG, CVAVEMVETC! AUTOpaTa yia
Sexazteig SiadoxKes meptodcug, extog eav to éva ano
Ta ZupRadAcueva Mepn avaxaivm@cet eyypapwg oto
adic EuuSadAoueve Mépoc, touAayictow Sudexa prves

fea MS. Ty andgach

 

Rew amo my qHepeunvia xetayyediag Tm> Magoucac
Zuu@aviag, Ta necnveusve aptea sEaxohouseby va
LequouY ye ula Nesertese epeumvic

 

 

EQOHMEPI£ THE KYBEPNHZEOE (TEYXOE MPOTO)

“Eywve eig G&imAauv. amv AGAYa My 25n lcuviou 1997
OMY EAATIVIKT, CEPBUT} Kat AYYAIKA yAwooa Kal dda Ta
eieva sive: efigou aveevnd.

Ee nepintwon spunveutKay Sagopa, unepioxuer To
GYYAKG Keiuevo.

PIA THN KYBEPNHZH
THE EAAHNIKHE

FIA THN OMOZMONAIAKH
KYBEPNHEH THE

QHMOKPATIAE OMCEMONAIAKHE
AHMCKPATIAZ
THE TIGYTKOZAABIAL
{unevecor) (umeypacn)

Xenateg Nextag
Youttcupye¢
Eovunig Cuxeveuiag

Bozidar Gaziveda
Quoanovéiaxdg Ysusyes
Oxovepmav

AGREEMENT

BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE HELLENIC REPUBLIC AND THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA
ON THE RECIPROCAL PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS

The Gevernment of the Hellenic Republic and the Federal Gcvermment ot the Feceral

Republic at Yugesiavia,

Hereinafter referred tc as the “Contracting Parties",

OESIRING to iritensity their econcmic ccaperation to the mutual benefit of teth countries on

a long term basis,

HAVING as their cbjective tc create favourable conditicns for investments by investers cf
either Contracting Farty in the territory cf the ather Contracting Party,

RECOGNIZING that the promcticn and pretection of investments, cn the basis of this
Agreement, will stimutate the initiative in this field and thereby significantly contribute tc the
development of eccrnemic relations between the Contracting Parties,

HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:

 

 

EOHMEPIZ THE KYBEPNHEEQS (TEYXOZ MPQTO)

ARTICLE 1

; ‘Definitions
For the purposes of this Agreement:

1, ‘Investment’ means every xinc of asset invested by an invester of cne Camracting Pary
in the territory cf the other Contracting Rarty, in accordance with the latter's legisiaticn anc
in particular, though not exctusively, includes:

a) mavabie and immovable propery and any rights in rem such as servituces,
ususfructus, Mortgages, liens ar piecges:

b} shares in and stcck of a company, debentures as weil as sther kincs cf secur:ties
of a company and any cther ferm at participation in a company;

¢) claims to money or any other cam under contract having an econemic value:

¢) inteilectua! and industrial property rights, patents. ‘rade marks, technical srocesses.
knew-hew, goodwill and any ather similar rights;

e) concessions conferred by law or under contract, including concessicrs to search
fer, cultivate, extract or exploit natural ressour:

  

A possible change in the ‘orm in which the investments have been mace dees nct atfect their
character as investments.

2. “Returns” means the amounts yielced by an investment and in particular, theugn “ct
exclusively, inciudes profit, interest, capital gains. dividends. royatties, tees, inci
and licence fees.

 

   
 

3. “Investar* means:

   

fonality ai one Contracting Pany in accordance wiv.
1 the territory cf the cther >

a) a natural perscn having the 12!
its law and making investments 1

   

b) a legal entity incorporate, constituted cr atherwise duly crgarised in accercancs
with the legisiaticn of one Cantracting Farty, having its headquarters or its effecti
economic activity in the territory of that same Contracting Party and making
investments in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

 

4. "Territory" means in respect of either Contracting Party, the territcry under fis scvereicnty
inclucing the territcrial sea, as Weil as meérine and submarine areas over which that
Contracting Party exercises, in conformity with internaticnal law. scversign hts or
jurisdiction, <

 

  

ARTICLE 2
Promotion and Protection of investments

1. Bach Contracting Party shall encourage and create favourable conditions fer investcrs of
the other Contracting Party ta make investments in its teritery and shall admit such
investments in accordance with its legisiaticn.

2. Investments by investors of a Contracting Party shail, at ail times, be accorded fair anc
equitable treatment anc shail enjoy full protection and security in the territory of the other
Contracting Party. Each Contracting Party shall ensure that the management, maintainance,
use, enjoyment cr dispcsal, in its territory, of investments by investcrs of the cther

 

 

736 EOHMEPIZ THE KYBEPNHEEQS (TEYXOZ MPOQTO)
Contracting Party, is net in ary way impaired ty unjustmacie or discriminatcry measures.
“FZ. Returns from the investments and, in cases ct reinvestment, the income ensuing therefrom,
enjoy the same protecticn as the initial investments.
4. Each Contracting 7 shall, in its territory, rescec:, in gccc faith, ail seligaticns
conceming 2 sariicuier invester cf the cther Contracting Farty. undertaxen within its leqat
framewerk.

 

     
   

ARTICLE 3
National Treatment and Most - Favoured - Nation Treatment

1, Each Contraccing Party shall acccrd ‘o investments, made in its territery by investors cf the
other Contracting Pany, treatment nct less tavcurable than that whien it accords tc
investments of its own investors cr ‘to investments of invesicrs of any third State, wnichever
is more favcuracie.
2. Each Contacting Pary shall accerd ic investers cf the ather Contracting Party. as ‘scarcs
” the management, maintainence, use. enjcyment or disccsal cf their investments in its
tertitcry, treatment net !ess favcuratle than that which it accords te its cwn invesicrs or tc
investors ¢f ary third State, whichever is more faveurabie.

 

 

3. The srcvisions cf paragrachs 1 anc 2 of this Anicle shall nct be consiuec so as :c oblige
one Contracting Zarty tc extend to the investcrs of the cther Contracting Farry the benefit cf
any treatment, preference or privilege ‘esulting from:
a) ‘ts participation in any existing or future free trade zone, custems union, econcmi¢
urien, regienal economic intecration agreement or similar intematicnal agreement,

cr

 

b) any internatienal agreement or arrangement relating whelly cr mainly tc taxation.
ARTICLE 4
Expropriation

1. Investments Sy investers of either Contracting Party in the ‘ervitery of the cther Contracting
Party, shall nct se expropriatec, naticnalized or subiected to any cther measure having
. equivalent effect tc expropriation cr naticnalization. (hereinaiter referred c as “exprccriaticn’),
except in the putiic interest, under due process cf law, on a aon discriminatory basis and
against payment of prompt, acequate and effective compensation. Such cempensaticn shail
amcunt to the market value of the investment affected immediately befere the actual measure
was takerrer became public knowledge, whichever is the earlier, it shall inctuce interest from
the date cf exprceriaticn until the cate of payment at a nermal commercial rate ane shall be
freely transfetatle in a freely canvertibi “currency.
2. The investor affected shall have the right, under the legislation of the Contracting Party
making the expropriation, to a promt review, by a jucicial or cther indecencant authenty cf
that Contracting Party, of his or its case and af the valuation of his or its invesimert in
acardance with the principles set out in this Article.

ARTICLE 5
Compensation for Losses

 

4, Investers of tne Contracting Pary whese investments in the territory of the cther
Contracting Party suifer Icsses owing te war cr other armed conflict, a state of naticnal
emergency, revelt, insurrection, riot cr civil disturbance in the territory of ‘he other Contracting
Party shall be accorded by the latter Contracting Party treatment, as regards restituticr,

@EK 36 EOHMEPIE THE KYBEPNHEEOE (TEYXOE NPOTO) 757
indemnification, compensation or other settlement, no Jess favcurable than that which the
latter Contracting Party accords to its cwn investors or to investors of any third State,

. whichever is mere favourabie. Resulting payrrents shail be made without delay and shail be
freely transferable.
2. Withcut prejudice to paragraph 1 of this Articte, inves‘ors of one Contracting Party whe,
in any of the situations reterred to in that paragraph sutfer losses in the territory of the other
Contracting Party resutting from:
a) requisiticning of their investment cr part therecf by the latter's authcrities or
executive forces, or

b) destruction of their investment cr part thereof by the latter's authcrities or executive
forces, which was nct caused in combat action or required by the necessity of the
‘ situation,
shall be accerded restituticn cr compensation which in either case shall be prempt, adequate
and etiective. Resulting caymerts shall be made withceut Celay and shall te freeiy
. transterabie.

ARTICLE 6
e Transfers
1. Zach Contracting Party shall guarantee, in respect of investments of investors of the other
Contracting Party, the unresiricted transfer ct the investment anc its returns, after fulfilment
ef any financial obiigaticn penaining to the investment. ‘

The ‘ransters shall te affected without delay, in a freely convertible currency, at the prevailirg
rate of exchange cn the date of transfer.

2. Such transfers shall include in particujar, theugh nat exclusively:
a) capital and adciticral amounts to maintain or increase the investment;
6) returns;
c} funcs in repayment of loans;
¢) proceeds cf sale cr liquidaticn cf the whcle or any part of the investment;
e e) campensaticn uncer Articles 4 and 5.

ARTICLE 7
Subrogation
1. If ane Contracting Party cr its designated Agency makes a payment tc its own investers
under a guarantee given in respect of an investment in the territory of the other Contracting
Party, the other Contracting Party shall recognise:
a} the assignerent to the first Contracting Party ar its designated Agency by law or
by legal transactian, of any rights and claims of the idemnified investor, and
b} that the first Contracting Party is entitled to exercise such rights and enforce such
. claims by virtue of sutregaticn and shail assume the same obligations pertaining to
. the investment.

2. The rights or claims so sutrcgated shall not exceed the ariginal rights or claims of the
invester.

 

 

 

 

758 E@HMEPIZ THE KYBEPNHZEQX (TEYXOZ MPOTO)

 

3. Subrogation cf the rights anc abligations of the idemnified investor shail also apply ta the
transters effectec in accordance with Article 6 of this Agreement.

ARTICLE @
Settlement ¢} Disputes between the Contracting Parties

1. Any dispute between the C sntracting Parties concerning the interpretation er apclicaticn
of this Agreement shalt, if pcssivie, be settled by negotiations, through dipicmatic cnanne:s.

2. ff the dispute cannct thus be settled within six months frem the tecinning of the
negotiaticns, it shall, upon request of either Contracting Party te submitted tc an arsitritratian
Aribunal.

   

3. The arbitraticn tribunal shall be constituted ad hec as ‘cllows: Each Contacting
appoint one arbitrator and these two artitrators shall agree upcn a naticral of a thi
as chairman. The arbitrators shall be appointéd within three months, the <> airman within,
manths from the date on which either Contracting Party has informed ‘he cther Cor:
Party that it intends to submit the dispute to an arbitration tribunal.

 

 

4. It within the periods specified in paragraph 3 of this Article the Necessary apecinimer
have net been mace, either Contracting Party may, in the atsence of any other acreemert,
invite the Presicent of the international Court of Justice te make the necessary agecintmeris.
tf the President of the Court is a national of either Contracting Party cr if ne is cth
Prevented from discharging the said function, the Vice-President or if ne tec is 4 nation,
either Contracting Party or is otherwise prevented from discharging the said funciicn,
Memter of the Court next in senicrity, wha is not a naticnal of either Contracting Party. shail
be invited to make the necessary appointments.

 

   

 

 

5. The arbitraticn tribunal shall decide on the basis of respect of the law, inchcing carticular’
this Agreement and other relevant agreements between the Contracting Parties. as wall 2s
the generally acknowledged ruies and princicles of internaticnal law.

6. Unless the Contracting Parties decide otherwise, the titunal shail determine its ower
“procedure.

The tribunal shail reach its decisicn by a majcrity of votes. Such decisicn shail 5¢ final and
binding on the Contracting Parties.

7. Each Contracting Party shail bear the cost of the arbitrator acpcinted by itself and cf its
representation. The cast of the Chairman shail be born in equal parts by the Contracuas
Parties.

 

ARTICLE 9

Settlement of Disputes between an Investor and a Contracting Party
+. Disautes between an investor of a Contracting Party and the other Contrac:: Party
cerceming an cbtigation or the latter under this Agreement, in relation tc an investment cf
the former, shall. { possitle. be settled by the disputing parties in an amicable way.

 

2. If such disputes cannot be settied within six menths from the date either party requested
amicable settlement, the investor concemed may submit the dispute either tc the competent
¢curts of the Centracting Party in the territory of which the investment has been made or to
intematicnal artitraticn.

   

EOHMEPIE THE KYBEPNHZEQE (TEYXOE NPQTO)

Each Contracting Farty hereby consents to the submissicn ef such dispute to intemational
artitraticn,

3. Where the dissuxe is referred ‘c intematicnal aibitraticn the sivester concemed inay suomi
the dispute either to:
a) the Internaticnai Centre for the Settlement of investment Disputes, establisnec
under the Conventicn on the Settlerient of Investment Disoutes between States anc
Nationais ct Other States, opened for signature at Washingtcn D.C. on 18 March
1965, fer arbitration or canciliatian, or

b) an ad hoc arbitral tribunal to ce established under the arbitration nuies of the Unitec
Nations Commission cn international Trade Law (U.N.C.1LT.AAL).

4. The arbitral tribunal shail decide the dispute in accordance with the previsicns cf this
Agreement and the apclicable rules and principles of imernaticnal law. The awarcs ct
arbitration shall be Sina! and binding cn Scth parties to the dispute. Eacn Contracting Pary
shall carry cut without delay any such award and such award shall te anterces in accarcance
with domestic law-
ARTICLE-10
Application of other Ruies

If the provisicns of law of either Contracting Party ot obligaticns
existing at present cr established hereafter between the Contracting Parves in addition te this
Agreement, contain a cule, whether general cr specific, entitling investm by investers of
the other Contracting Pary to a treatnent mere favcuratle thar is provided fer by this
Agreement, such 2 rule shall, te the extent that it is mere faveurabie. orevail cver this
Agreement.

der intematicnal aw

 

   

 

ARTICLE 11
Consultations

Fecresentatives of ihe Contracting Parties shall, whenever necessanz"efc consultations cr.
any matter affecting the implementaticn of this Agreement. These consutaticns shall Se heic
on the sropesal cf cre cf the Contracting Parties at a place and at a time tc be agreed upcn

 

- threugh diplcmatic channels.

ARTICLE 12
Application of the Agreement

This Agreement shai apply tc investments mace by investcrs of either Contracting Party in
the te.titory of the cther Contracting Party consistent with the latter's legisiation, pricr to as
well as after the date of its entry into force. However, the provisions of this Agreement shail
be agplicable from the date of its entry into force.
ARTICLE 13
Entry into Force - Duration - Termination
1. This Agreement shall enter into force thirty days after the date on which the Cantracting
Parties have exchanged written notifications informing each cther that their respective
constitutional procedures have been completed.
2. This Agreement is concluded for a period of ten years and shall thereatter be automatically
extended for successive periods of ten years, unless either Contracting Party netifies in
writing, at least twelve months prior to its date of expiry, tc the other Contracting Party, its
decision to terminate this Agreement.

 
   
   
 
   
   
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
 
   
    

760 E@HMEPIEZ THE KYBEPNHEEOX (TEYXOZ MPOTO)

 

3. In respect of investments made prior to the date of termination of this Agreement, the
foregoing Articles shail continue to be effective for a further pericd of ten years from that date.

Done in duplicate at oe) on Ad fin - 19942

in the Greek, Serbian and English languages, all texts being equally authentic.

in case of divergence the Engfish text shail prevail.

  

 

 

FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF FOR THE FEDERAL GOVERNEMENT OF
NIC REPUBLIC THE ERAL REPUBUC OF YUGOSLAVIA
> A
Christos Pahtas Eozidar Gazivoda
Deruty Minister Federal Mi
e@ for Naticnal gconcay— for

‘Apépo detitepo

H ioxuig tou Magévtog voyicu apxiZel ano 7] Snpocieu-
or tou omy Eynuepiéa tg KuBepvacews Kat THC
Zupowviag nou kupavetat ané Ty MARPwOT Tey npod-
rofécew Tou ap6pou 13 nap. 1 auTrc.

NepayyéAoue Th Snuocieuon tou napévros amy Eqn-
pepida m¢ Ku8epviigews Kal Thy extédeor] TOU ws vOLOU
Tou Kodrouc.

Abrva, 18 PeBpauapiou 1998

OMPOEAPOE THE GHMOKPATIAE

KONETANTINOE ZTE@ANOMOYAOL
‘cryneverat
ESQTEPIKON EAN, SIKONOMIAEKAIGIKONOMIKGN
@EOA MAPKAAOE MAN. FANANTONI
ANANTTYSHE
BAL. MANANAPEOY

SewprjOne xar TEENKE N MeyGAn Zpayisa Tou Kadtous.
Ara, 18 DeBpovariou 1998

OEM THE AIKAIOLYNHE MOVPTOE
EYAP. MANNONOYAOZ

 

AMO TO EONIKO TYMOTPAGEIO

 

