IN THE MATTER OF AN UNCITRAL ARBITRATION

between

NATIONAL GRID pic
(Claimant)

and

THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
(Respondent)

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal

Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President
E. Whitney Debevoise, Esq., Arbitrator
Professor Alejandro Garro, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mrs. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent

Mr. Nigel Blackaby Dr. Osvaldo Cesar Guglielmino

Mr. Lluis Paradell Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ms. Andrea Saldarriaga Argentina

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer

Paris, France

Dr. Uriel O'Farrell
Estudio O'Farrell
Buenos Aires, Argentina

Washington, D.C., June 20, 2006

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

The Investment Project.

The Facts Giving Rise to the Dispute «00.0.0... cceeeeeeeeeeereeeeeneeee 9
Notification of the Dispute and Claim. .........0ccceee eee 10
CONSENT TO ARBITRATION ....00... occ ccc tence eet neneeeeneneeee 11
APPLICABLE LAW... cece cece eee cece eens cece eens tease eeteneeeeeneneeeea 11

OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

First Objection: The Most-Favored Nation (“MFN’) Clause
Does Not Apply to Provide the Investor with a More
Favorable Dispute Resolution M@Chanism uu.....cceccceteteeeteeeseee 12
a) Positions of the Parties
i) Position of the Respondent.......0..ccccccceesseeeee ee eeeeeee 13
ii) Position of the Claimant... eee eens eeee nese

 

b) Considerations of the Tribunal

 

Second Objection: The Claimant Is Not an “Investor
a) Positions of the Parties
i) Position of the Respondent.......0..ccccccceesseeeee ee eeeeeee 30

 

ii) Position of the Claimant

 

b) Considerations of the Tribunal .
Third Objection: The Dispute Is Not a “Dispute with Regard
TO AN INVEStIMENE” oe. csescceste cece csesesesesesescsceeeseeecececsssesessesessesaeaesiees 4
a) Positions of the Parties

i) Position of the Respondent.

   

ii) Position of the Claimant..
b) Considerations of the Tribunal .
Fourth Objection: The Dispute Is Not a “Legal Dispute”................ 50
a) Positions of the Parties

i) Position of the Respondent.......0..ccccccceesseeeee ee eeeeeee 50

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

ii) Position of the Claimant... ceee ee teeeeeeneees 54

b) Considerations of the Tribunal .......... cc eeeeeeeeeeeeneeseeeeeeneeeeee 57

5. Fifth Objection: Letters of Understanding .......ccccccceeteieteeeeeee 58

a) Positions of the Parties
i) Position of the Respondent.
ii) Position of the Claimant
b) Considerations of the Tribunal .......... cc eeeeeeeeeeeeneeseeeeeeneeeeee 60
6. Sixth Objection: Exclusive Jurisdiction of the Federal Courts

 
 

Of BUCNOS AICS ....ccccscccccccseececscecsescsesescscsessieecscecsesescssscesiesaeeeeeaees 60
a) Positions of the Parties

i) Position of the Respondent..........cccccceeee es ceeeeeeeee 61
ii) Position of the Claimant... ceee ee teeeeeeneees 61
b) Considerations of the Tribunal .........0 ccc scenester 62

VI. DECISION... cc cccecsceceseseeeenesescsseesessecasenesesneesesseeeseneseaneessaseeenenss 63

National Grid plc v. Argentine Republic

Decision on Jurisdiction

I PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. By notice dated April 25, 2003, National Grid Transco plc’
(hereinafter “National Grid” or the “Claimant”) requested the institution of an
arbitration proceeding against the Argentine Republic (hereinafter “Argentina” or
the “Respondent”) under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law (hereinafter the “UNCITRAL Rules”) pursuant to the
Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the Government of the Argentine Republic for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments, which was signed on December 11,
1990, and entered into force on February 19, 1993 (the “Treaty”).

2. The Claimant and the Respondent appointed as arbitrators Mr. Eli
Whitney Debevoise and Professor Alejandro Garro, respectively. In accordance
with Article 7(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the party-appointed arbitrators selected
Mr. Andrés Rigo Sureda as the third arbitrator and president of the Tribunal.

3. On March 29, 2004, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural
Order No. 1 recording that it had been constituted in accordance with the
UNCITRAL Rules and proposing a date for a preparatory meeting with the
parties.

4. Messrs. Nigel Blackaby, Lluis Paradell and Uriel O’Farrell, and Ms.
Andrea Saldarriaga represent the Claimant. Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino,
Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, represents the Respondent. Dr.
Juan José Galeano and Professor Beatriz Pallarés, acting on instruction from the
Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, represented the Respondent at

' By its letter of August 19, 2005, the Claimant informed the Tribunal of its change of name from
National Grid Transco plc to National Grid plc.

the preparatory meeting.

5. During the preparatory meeting of June 25, 2004, in Washington,
D.C., U.S.A., the parties confirmed that the Tribunal had been properly
constituted in accordance with the UNCITRAL Rules without raising any
objections to the appointment of any member of the Tribunal.

6. The parties also agreed on several other procedural matters which
were later recorded in the written minutes signed by the President of the
Tribunal. In the course of the meeting, Washington, D.C. was agreed as the seat
of the arbitration. It was also agreed that the parties would request the
Secretariat of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(hereinafter “ICSID’) to provide administrative services for the arbitration
proceedings.

7. By letters of June 28 and July 1, 2004, the parties requested such
services of the ICSID Secretariat. By letter of July 9, 2004, the Acting Secretary-
General of ICSID informed the parties and the members of the Tribunal that the
Centre would provide administrative services for the arbitration proceedings, as
requested. On August 11, 2004, Mr. Francisco Ceballos, ICSID Counsel, was
appointed as Secretary of the Tribunal.

8. On July 12, 2004, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 2
concerning the presentation of the parties’ pleadings. The Tribunal requested
the Claimant to file the statement of claim within four months of its receipt of
Procedural Order No. 2. In the event that no jurisdictional plea was entered, the
Respondent was directed to file its statement of defense within four months from
its receipt of the statement of claim; the Claimant, its reply two months from its
receipt of the statement of defense; and the Respondent, its rejoinder two
months from its receipt of the reply. In the event that the Respondent entered a
plea on jurisdiction, it should do so within two months from its receipt of the
statement of claim; the Claimant would then have two months to present its
counter-memorial on jurisdiction; and the Tribunal would decide on the need for a

further exchange of submissions or hearings concerning its jurisdiction. The
Tribunal further decided that in case it upheld its jurisdiction, the Respondent
should file a statement of defense within four months of its receipt of the decision
of the Tribunal less the time elapsed between the date of submission of the
statement of claim and the date of submission of the plea on jurisdiction.

9. On November 16, 2004, the Claimant filed its Statement of Claim in
English, and on December 1, 2004, filed the respective Spanish translation.

10. On December 14, 2004, the Tribunal informed the parties that in
accordance with its Procedural Order No. 2, in the event that a plea on
jurisdiction was entered by the Respondent, such plea was to be filed no later
than February 10, 2005. In the event no plea was raised, the Respondent was to
file its statement of defense no later than April 11, 2005.

11. On December 15, 2004, the Respondent challenged the President
of the Tribunal.

12. On December 23, 2004, the Claimant expressed its opposition to
the challenge and reserved its right to present further arguments.

13. On January 7, 2005, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3
establishing a schedule for submissions by the parties and the President in
observance of the challenge procedures of the UNCITRAL Rules. The Tribunal
also reaffirmed the deadlines established in Procedural Order No. 2. In
accordance with the agreement of the parties, reflected in the minutes of the
preparatory meeting of June 25, 2004, that a majority of the members of the
Tribunal will constitute the quorum necessary to make decisions, Procedural
Order No. 3 was subscribed by the two arbitrators not subject to the
Respondent's challenge.

14. Following exchanges of submissions by the parties on the
Respondent's challenge, on February 28, 2005, the President confirmed his
intention not to resign.

15. On March 11, 2005, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4
granting the parties a term of 10 days to agree on an appointing authority for
purposes of the procedure provided for in Article 12(1)(c) of the UNCITRAL
Rules. Absent agreement, Procedural Order No. 4 authorized either Party to
proceed, pursuant to Article 6 of the UNCITRAL Rules, to request the Secretary-
General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague (“PCA Secretary-
General”) to designate the appointing authority. The Tribunal also reserved for
the award the fixing of fees and expenses of the appointing authority and of the
PCA Secretary-General, as provided for in Article 38(f) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

16. In early September 2005, the Respondent completed the formalities
necessary to request the PCA Secretary-General to designate the appointing
authority.

17. On September 8, 2005, the PCA Secretary-General designated the
International Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce in
Paris as appointing authority.

18. Following submissions by the Parties, on December 16, 2005, the
International Court of Arbitration rejected the Respondent’s challenge of the
President of the Tribunal.

19. On February 10, 2005, the Respondent filed its plea on jurisdiction
in Spanish. The English translation followed on February 25, 2005.

20. On March 11, 2005, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 4
confirming the deadlines established in its Procedural Order No. 2, as ratified in
its Procedural Order No. 3.

21. On March 18, 2005, Mr. Francisco Ceballos was replaced by Mrs.
Claudia Frutos-Peterson as Secretary of the Tribunal. In turn, on May 10, 2005,
Mrs. Frutos-Peterson was replaced by Mr. José Antonio Rivas as Secretary of
the Tribunal.

22. On April 29, 2005, the Claimant filed its response to the plea on
jurisdiction. The Spanish translation followed on May 10, 2005.

23. On May 3, 2005, the Claimant sent the Tribunal a letter proposing
that the jurisdictional debate proceed to oral hearing without need for further
written submissions.

24. On May 27, 2005, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 5
deciding that no further exchange of pleadings on jurisdiction was required. The
Tribunal further decided to hold a jurisdictional hearing on a date to be
established in consultation with the parties.

25. On June 17, 2005, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 6
related to the Respondent's disqualification request.

26. On August 5, 2005, after consultations with the parties on their
availability, the Tribunal confirmed that the hearing on jurisdiction would take
place on November 7, 2005.

27. On August 10, 2005, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 7
related to the Respondent's disqualification request and confirming the deadlines
set forth in its Procedural Order No. 2, as ratified in its Procedural Order No. 3.

28. On August 30 and September 27, 2005, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 8 and Procedural Order No. 9, respectively, related to the
Respondent's disqualification request and ratifying that the hearing on jurisdiction
would take place on November 7, 2005.

29. The hearing on jurisdiction took place on November 7, 2005 in
Washington, D.C. The Claimant was represented at the hearing by Messrs.
Nigel Blackaby, Lluis Paradell and Uriel O'Farrell, and Ms. Andrea Saldarriaga.
Messrs. Blackaby, Paradell and O'Farrell addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the
Claimant. The Respondent was represented by Messrs. Martin Moncayo von
Hase, Ariel Martins Mogo and Florencio Travieso from the Procuracién del

Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, who addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the
Respondent.

30. By letter of November 9, 2005, the Tribunal reaffirmed the invitation
made to the Respondent during the course of the hearing on jurisdiction to
furnish information to the Tribunal on the status of the renegotiations of certain
foreign investment contracts in Argentina. By letter of November 24, 2005, the
Respondent informed the Tribunal. By letter of December 15, 2005, the Claimant
provided its comments on the information furnished by the Respondent.

31. On December 23, 2005, the Acting Director of ICSID informed the
Tribunal that Mrs. Mercedes Kurowski had been appointed to replace Mr. José
Antonio Rivas as Secretary of the Tribunal.

I. FACTS
A. The Investment Project

32. The dispute arises in the context of the privatization program
carried out by the Respondent in the early 1990s, the guarantees offered to
investors who bought assets in the electricity sector, and the measures taken by
the Respondent to stem the Argentine economic crisis in 2001-2002.

33. Before privatization, the electricity assets of the Respondent were
operated by Agua y Energia Sociedad del Estado (“A y E”), Servicios Eléctricos
del Gran Buenos Aires S.A. (“SEGBA”) and Hidroeléctrica Nordpatagonica S.A.
(“Hidronor’).

34. These three companies were restructured for purposes of
privatization pursuant to Decree 634/91 of April 12, 1991,? and Law 24,065 of
January 16, 1992° (the “Electricity Law”). According to this legal framework, the
electricity generation, transmission and distribution assets belonging to those

? Claimant's Exhibit 11. Claimant's exhibits are referred to hereafter with the letter “C” followed
by the exhibit number.
° Exhibit C-13.

three state companies were divided into individual business units. Thus, the
electricity transmission assets held by A y E, SEGBA and Hidronor were
transferred to one national high-voltage electricity transmission company —
Companhia de Transporte de Energia Eléctrica en Alta Tension S.A. (“Transener”)
— and six regional companies.

35. In December 1992, the Respondent offered, through an
international bidding process, 65% of Transener’s shares, in accordance with the
terms and conditions set forth in the bidding rules.‘ In parallel, the Respondent
approved the terms of a 95-year concession agreement granting Transener the
right to provide high-voltage electricity transmission service in Argentina (the
“Concession’).°

36. In turn, the Argentine provinces privatized the electricity assets
under their jurisdiction. Thus, in 1997, the Province of Buenos Aires (the
“Province”) launched an international public tender for the sale of 90% of the
shares in Empresa de Transporte de Energia Eléctrica por Distribucién Troncal
de la Provincia de Buenos Aires S.A. (“Transba”), pursuant to the terms and
conditions approved by Decree 107/97 of January 10, 1997 of the Province
(‘Transba Bidding Rules”).° In July 1997, the Province approved the terms of a
95-year concession granting Transba the right to provide high-voltage electricity
transmission service within the Province (the “Transba Concession”).”

37. In 1993, National Grid Finance B.V., a wholly owned subsidiary of
National Grid, together with two US companies — Duke Transener Inc. (“Duke”)
and Entergy Corp (“Entergy”) — and two Argentine companies — SADE Ingenieria
y Construcciones S.A. (“SADE”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Perez Companc
(‘Perez Companc’”), and Eléctrica del Plata S.A., a subsidiary of Sociedad
* See “Pliego de Bases y Condiciones de Concurso Publico Internacional para la Venta de 65%

de las Acciones de la Compafiia de Transporte de Energia Eléctrica en Alta Tensién Transener
S.A.” (‘Transener Bidding Rules”), Exhibit C-20.

5 Exhibit C-26.
° Exhibit C-40.
” Exhibit C-50.

Comercial del Plata S.A. (“SCP”) — formed a consortium to participate in the
international tender of shares in Transener (the “Consortium”).® The Consortium
incorporated an Argentine company — Compafia Inversora en Transmisién
Eléctrica Citelec S.A. (“Citelec”) — as a vehicle for its investment in Transener.°
National Grid initially acquired a 15% share of Citelec for US$18.5 million.

38.  Citelec successfully bid for the 65% stake in Transener for
US$234.1 million, the assumption of US$54.2 million of debts transferred to
Transener and a mandatory investment commitment of US$37 million. On
June 30, 1993, Transener signed the Concession Contract with the Government
of the Argentine Republic (the “Concession Contract’).'° Transener took over
operation of the high voltage electricity system on July 17, 1993. Subsequently,
National Grid purchased an additional 26.25% stake in Citelec for US$48.8
million, approved Transener’s acquisition of a 90% stake in Transba for
US$220.2 million and the assumption of a debt of US$10 million owed to the
Government of the Province. Transener subsequently made investments in the
upgrading of the electricity transmission system and in expansion projects. In
1997, 1999 and 2001, Transener was awarded three contracts to construct,
operate and maintain transmission lines in return for periodic payments from the
beneficiaries of the lines. These payments, or canones, were to be calculated in
US dollars and adjusted periodically in accordance with the US Consumer Price
Index (“CPI”) and the US Producer Price Index (“PPI”).

39. In December 1999, National Grid acquired a further 1.243% interest
in Citelec by way of a capitalization of contributions made by National Grid in
October 1999 for an amount of US$32 million.

® Exhibit C-22.

° Exhibit C-24.

‘© The Concession Contract and the contract related to the Transba Concession are collectively
referred to as the “Contracts”. Transener and Transba are referred to collectively as the
“Concessionaires.” See Exhibit C-26 for the Concession Contract and Exhibit C-50 for the
Transba Concession.

B. The Facts Giving Rise to the Dispute

40. On January 6, 2002, Law 25,561 — the Public Emergency and
Exchange Rate Reform Law — (the “Reform Law”)'' abolished the currency board
set up by the Convertibility Law in 1991.'? Law 25,561 also terminated by
operation of law the right to calculate public utility tariffs in US dollars and the
right to adjust those tariffs on the basis of international price indices. Under the
terms of Law 25,561, public service tariffs were converted into Argentine pesos
(“pesos”) at the rate of one peso to one dollar and were frozen at that rate (the
so-called “pesification”). All other dollar-denominated payment obligations and
their adjustment by international indices suffered the same fate. As of April 2003,
the Argentine peso had fallen to 2.90 pesos to one US dollar.

41. The Reform Law forbade electricity transmission and public utility
companies from suspending or modifying compliance with their obligations under
their concessions and licenses. It also provided for the renegotiation of public
utility contracts. At the time of filing the Statement of Claim, National Grid
affirmed that the renegotiation process had achieved nothing. Respondent
disputes such affirmation and objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the
basis, inter alia, that there is an ongoing negotiation process touching upon the
subject matter of this dispute.'?

42. The Claimant alleges that the impact of the Reform Law and
subsequent adverse regulations adopted by the Respondent (the “Measures”)
destroyed the value of its investment in Transener, and estimates that its losses
range from US$100 million to US$130 million."*

43. In March 2004, National Grid agreed to sell its shares in Citelec to
Dolphin Management S.A. (“Dolphin”) for US$14 million. The Claimant alleges
that this sale was undertaken to mitigate its losses and was made expressly
" Exhibit C-69.

* Law 23,928 of March 27, 1991, Exhibit C-10.

‘3 Respondent's Plea on Jurisdiction, paras. 174-182; Respondent's Exhibit 6.
‘4 Statement of Claim, paras. 23-24, Exhibit C-67.

without prejudice to its rights in this arbitration.'®

Cc. Notification of the Dispute and Claim

44. Following adoption of the Measures, on April 10, 2002, the
Claimant notified the Respondent of the existence of an investment dispute and
sought the commencement of negotiations and consultations for its amicable
settlement as provided in Article 8 of the Treaty.'© The notification expressly
invoked Article 3, the most-favored nation article of the Treaty, and claimed the
benefit of Article 7(2) of the Treaty Between the United States of America and the
Argentine Republic Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of

Investment (the “US-Argentina Treaty”),'”

which provides for international
arbitration after a six-month period of negotiations without prior referral to the

Argentine courts.

45. On August 28, 2002, the Claimant sent a follow-up letter to the
Respondent reiterating the request for amicable settlement.'®

46. On September 27, 2002, the Procurador del Tesoro de la Naci6n,
Rubén Miguel Citara, responded and proposed to suspend by mutual agreement
the negotiations period until such date as the process of renegotiation of public
service contracts had taken place. The Claimant replied on October 17, 2002,
distinguishing between the renegotiation of the concessions involving Transener
and Transba and negotiations with the Claimant concerning its Treaty claims.'®
The Claimant declined the proposal to suspend or extend the time period for
amicable negotiations, although it did express a willingness to meet with the
authorities to conduct negotiations.

'S Statement of Claim, para. 24.

*6 Exhibit C-77.

” Treaty Between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic concerning the
Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment, dated November 14, 1991, available at
http://www.unctad.org/sections/dite/iia/docs/bits/argentina_us.pdf.

*® Exhibit C-87.
*® Exhibit C-94.

-10-

47. On February 20, 2003, the Claimant wrote to the Respondent again
expressing a willingness to meet to explore ways to resolve the dispute,
notwithstanding the expiration of the six-month negotiations period.”

48. On April 25, 2003, the Claimant submitted its Notice of Arbitration.

Il = CONSENT TO ARBITRATION

49. Except as addressed below, the parties to the dispute have
consented to arbitration and their consent is not in doubt or dispute. The
Respondent consented to arbitration by offering under the terms of the Treaty the
option to settle eventual disputes that may arise with investors who are nationals
of the other State party. Claimant consented to arbitration by filing its Notice of
Arbitration. Under Article 3.2 of the UNCITRAL Rules, the arbitration proceedings
commenced on the date that the Notice of Arbitration was received by the
Respondent.”

IV. APPLICABLE LAW

50. The applicable law for purposes of determining the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal has not been a matter of contention between the parties, and it has
only been indirectly addressed by them in their submissions.

51. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is governed by the terms of the
instruments expressing the parties’ intent to submit to arbitration the dispute
identified in the Notice of Arbitration. Article 21.1 of the UNCITRAL Rules
empowers the Tribunal to rule on objections that it has no jurisdiction. It follows
that the primary task of the Tribunal is to assess whether the dispute submitted in

°° Exhibit C-109.

2! There is no requirement under the UNCITRAL Rules that consent must be given in the same
instrument by both parties to the proceedings. In the case of arbitration under the terms of a
bilateral investment treaty, arbitral tribunals have consistently held that consent to arbitration has
been given by the State party through the treaty concerned and by the investor through the
instrument initiating the arbitration proceedings. See American Manufacturing & Trading, Inc. v.
Republic of Zaire (Award), 36 ILM.(1997) p. 1531 at para. 5.23, and Lanco International Inc. v.
Argentine Republic (Preliminary Decision on Jurisdiction), 40 ILM (2001) p. 454 at paras. 42-44.
®2 See, e.g., Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction at para. 62.

-11-

the Notice of Arbitration falls within the terms of Article 8 of the Treaty and
whether the Tribunal has the authority to decide on the objections raised by the
Respondent. To the extent that this assessment requires the interpretation of the
Treaty, the Tribunal shall apply the treaty interpretation rules enshrined in Articles
31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (‘the Vienna

Convention”),”°

which reflect customary international law. Furthermore, the
Tribunal observes that the Vienna Convention is binding on both State parties to

the Treaty.”4

Vv. OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

52. The Respondent has raised six objections to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal. The Tribunal will now address them in the order that they have been
raised.

1. First Objection: The Most-Favored Nation (“MFN”) Clause Does
Not Apply to Provide the Investor with a More Favorable Dispute
Resolution Mechanism

53. The Claimant has submitted its claim to arbitration without first
submitting it to the Argentine courts as required by Article 8(1) and Article 8(2)(a)
of the Treaty. Article 8(2)(a) permits a claimant to institute arbitration proceedings
only if the Respondent's courts have not given a final decision within eighteen
months after the dispute was submitted to them. The Claimant has considered it
unnecessary to file a claim before Argentine courts on the basis that the dispute
resolution clause in the US-Argentina Treaty®> does not require such step.
According to the Claimant, under Article 3(2) of the Treaty an investor who is a
national of the United Kingdom is entitled to rely on the more favorable
procedural regime contained in the US-Argentina Treaty. The Claimant has also

?8 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (23 May 1969), 1155 UN Treaty Series 331.

4 The Argentine Republic signed the Vienna Convention on May 23, 1969, and ratified it on
December 5, 1972; the United Kingdom signed the Convention on April 20, 1970 and ratified it on
June 25, 1971.

25 US-Argentina Treaty, supra note 17.

argued that the requirement to submit its claim to the local courts first is a
procedural step leading to inefficiency and inequity in the settlement of disputes,
thus defeating the object and purpose of the Treaty. We will consider first the
arguments advanced by the parties in connection with the application of the MFN
clause, followed by the considerations and conclusion reached by the Tribunal.

(a) Positions of the Parties
(i) Position of the Respondent

54. The Respondent takes exception to the application of the MFN
clause in this case. According to the Respondent, this clause is governed by the
ejusdem generis principle expressed by the International Law Commission
(“ILC”) in the following terms: “The beneficiary State may not invoke, by reason of
the most-favored nation clause, rights other than those relative to the object of
the clause and those included within the scope of the same.” This principle was
applied by the Arbitration Commission that decided the Ambatielos case: “the
Commission holds that the most-favored nation clause can only attract matters
belonging to the same category of subject as that to which the clause itself
relates.”””

55. | The Respondent argues further that the interpretation given by the
Claimant to the MFN clause in the Treaty would render superfluous the clause
requiring that a dispute be brought first before the local courts. The United
Kingdom so argued in the Anglo-lranian Oil Co. case:

“It [the UK] asserts that a legal text should be interpreted in such a way
that a reason and meaning can be attributed to every word in the text. It
may be said that this principle should in general be applied when

28 Article 7 of the Draft International Law Commission Report on the Most-Favored-Nation Clause,
contained in Volume II of the International Law Commission Annual Report for 1973, U.N. Doc.
ACN. 4/266.

27 Ambatielos (Greece v. United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Award (6 March
1956), XII R.LA.A. 91, 107.

interpreting the text of a treaty...”

56. Asa third argument, the Respondent alleges that it is evident from
the text of the Treaty itself that the parties had no intention to include the
settlement of disputes within the scope of the MFN clause. Article 3(2) reads as

follows:

“Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investors of the other
Contracting Party, as regards their management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment or disposal of their investments, to treatment less favorable
than that which it accords to its own investors or to investors of a third
State.”

57. The Respondent notes that the text of Article 3(2) of the Treaty is
different from the MFN clause in the BIT concluded between Spain and
Argentina, which the arbitral tribunal in Maffezini °° interpreted to include matters
related to dispute settlement and on which the Claimant bases its argument.
Contrary to what is alleged by the Claimant, the Respondent affirms that the text
of the MFN clause in the Treaty is not as clear as the terms of the MFN clauses
that were subject to interpretation in Ambatielos and Maffezini. In these cases,
the clause being interpreted referred to “all matters relating to commerce and

navigation”*! 32

and “todas las materias regidas por el presente Acuerdo’
respectively. The Arbitration Commission in Ambatielos and the arbitral tribunal
in Maffezini observed that the agreement concerned did not expressly refer to
dispute settlement in the MFN clause and hence it was necessary to determine
the intention of the parties. The Respondent further notes that, in Maffezini, the
arbitral tribunal made sure that, if it accepted the investor's position, the

28 Anglo-lranian Oil Co. (United Kingdom v. Iran), Preliminary Objection (22 July 1952), [1952] /CU
Reports 93, 105.

2° Treaty, Art. 3(2) (as it appears in the Respondent's Plea on Jurisdiction at para. 39). (Emphasis
added by the Tribunal.)

%° Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision of the
Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (25 January 2000), 16 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 212 (2001).

5 Respondent's Plea on Jurisdiction, para. 44 (citing Ambatielos, supra note 27).

% Id. (citing Maffezini, supra note 30).

-14-

interpretation of such MFN clause by the arbitral tribunal in that particular case
would not necessarily open the floodgates to expansive interpretations of other
MEN clauses in future arbitrations.

58. The Respondent finds its interpretation of the clause and analysis
of Maffezini confirmed by the decision on jurisdiction in the case of Salini
Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
(“Salin’’)*. In that decision, the tribunal observed that:

“...[T]he circumstances of this case are different. Indeed, Article 3 of the
BIT between Italy and Jordan does not include any provision extending its
scope of application to dispute settlement. It does not envisage ‘all rights
covered by the agreement’. Furthermore, the Claimants have submitted
nothing from which it might be established that the common intention of
the Parties was to have the most-favored-nation clause apply to dispute

settlement.”

59. The Respondent finds that the Tribunal in this case faces the same
situation as the arbitral tribunal in Salini. If the text of the MFN clause in the
Treaty is completely different from the text of the MFN clauses on which
Ambatielos and Maffezini based their decisions, as well as different from other
MEN clauses in other bilateral investment treaties signed by the United Kingdom
(such as the bilateral treaty signed by the UK with Albania, where settlement of
disputes is expressly included in the scope of the MFN clause), then the strategy
of the Claimant is to confound the Tribunal. The Respondent has no doubt that
matters related to the administration of justice are excluded from and cannot be
imported into the Treaty via the MFN clause as proposed by the Claimant.

60. The Respondent concludes by drawing the attention of the Tribunal
(A) to the real objectives of Article 8 of the Treaty, namely, to afford Argentine

%8 Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, ICSID
Case No. ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction (29 November 2004), 20 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 148
(2005).

% Id., para. 118.

courts the opportunity to apply and vindicate international law, and (B) to its view
that it would be an affront to international law for an international tribunal to apply
a rule of interpretation to reach a result that differed from the intent of the parties
to the Treaty.

61. During the hearings, Argentina placed special emphasis on the
importance of the parties’ intent in the interpretation of the MFN clause.
According to the Respondent, the parties to the Treaty had no intention to apply
the MFN clause to dispute resolution matters, as is evident if the text of the MFN
clause in the Treaty is compared with the one included in the bilateral investment
treaty between the United Kingdom and Albania.°° The Respondent referred to
two decisions on jurisdiction — Salin®® and Plama v. Bulgaria®’- this latter
decision having been rendered since the Respondent had filed its plea on
jurisdiction. The Respondent pointed out that, in Salini, the arbitral tribunal, after
comparing the Spain-Argentina BIT with the Italy-Jordan BIT, concluded that the
circumstances of that case were different:

“Indeed, Article 3 of the BIT between Italy and Jordan does not include
any provision extending its scope of application to dispute settlement. It
does not envisage ‘all rights or all matters covered by the agreement.’
Furthermore, the claimants have submitted nothing from which it might be
established that the common intention of the parties was to have the most-
favored-nation clause applied to dispute settlement.”®°

62. The Respondent also drew the attention of the Tribunal to the
holdings of the tribunal in Plama as regards the undue emphasis on the object
and purpose of a treaty, the need for the parties to express the intention to
35 Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern

Ireland and the Government of the Republic of Albania for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments, dated 30 March 1994, Exhibit C-157.
%8 Salini, supra note 33.

37 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on
Jurisdiction (8 February 2005), 20 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 262 (2005).

°° Transcript from the Hearing on Jurisdiction, English version, pp. 18-19 (quoting Salini, supra
note 33, para. 118). All references to the Transcript hereafter shall refer to the English version.

-16-

incorporate dispute settlement provisions clearly and unambiguously, the
autonomy of dispute settlement clauses, and the difficulty in applying provisions
of one bilateral investment treaty to another negotiated in a different context.
The Respondent reminded the Tribunal of the extensive criticism of Maffezini by
the Plama tribunal, in particular in respect of the statement made in Maffezini on

the harmonization of dispute resolution regimes through MFN clauses:

“The present Tribunal fails to see how this harmonization of dispute
settlement provisions can be achieved by reliance on the MFN provision.
Rather, the ‘basket of treatment’ and ‘self-adaptation of the MFN provision’
in relation to dispute settlement provisions (as alleged by the Claimant)
has as effect that the investor has the option to pick and choose
provisions from the various BITs. If that were true, a host State which has
not specifically agreed thereto can be confronted with a large number of
permutations of dispute settlement provisions from the various BITs which
it has concluded. Such a chaotic situation — actually counterproductive to
harmonization — cannot be presumed to be the intent of the contracting

parties.°

63. | The Respondent further noted the criticism of Plama in connection
with the decision on jurisdiction in Siemens*' as evidence of the dangers of
Maffezinis approach: “The principle is retained in the form of string citation of
principle, and the exceptions are relegated to a brief examination prone to falling
soon into oblivion.”

64. The Respondent concluded by requesting the Tribunal to respect
the intent of the parties to the Treaty.

39 id., pp. 20-21.
4° id., pp. 23-24 (paraphrasing from Plama, supra note 37, para. 219).

4“! Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/08, Decision on Jurisdiction
(3 August 2004), available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/awards.htm#award42.

“ Transcript, English version, p. 25 (quoting Plama, supra note 37, para. 226, which refers to
Siemens, supra note 41, paras. 105, 109 and 120).

-17-

(ii) Position of the Claimant

65. The Claimant argues that the text of a treaty is assumed to be the
authentic expression of the parties’ mutual intent. The MFN clause is very broad;
it applies to “investments”, “investors” and “management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment or disposal” of investments. The Claimant observes that the term
“maintenance” covers preservation, protection, safeguard and continuation of
investments; and that recourse to dispute settlement is a normal feature of the
management and enjoyment of an investment.

66. The Claimant points to the addition of the following paragraph to
the regular MFN clause in BITs concluded by the UK after 1993:

“For the avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that** the treatment provided in
paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the provisions of Articles 1 to

11% of this Agreement.”*°

67. According to the Claimant this addition, by using terms such as “for
the avoidance of doubt” and “it is confirmed”, demonstrates that the intention in
paragraph 1 and 2 was to incorporate into the MFN clause all matters aimed at
protecting an investment, including matters relating to the settlement of disputes.
The resulting paragraph, by its terms, does not purport to extend the scope of
paragraphs (1) and (2) but to confirm their existing scope.

68. The Claimant argues that when the parties to the Treaty wished to
limit the scope of the Treaty, they did so expressly and unequivocally. Thus,
Article 7 excludes expressly from the operation of the MFN clause the benefit of
any treatment, preference or privilege resulting from customs unions, regional
economic integration or similar agreements, specifically listing bilateral

43 Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 176 (referring to the UK-Honduras BIT, UK-
Albania BIT and UK-Venezuela BIT). See Exhibits C-157 to C-159.

“+ Emphasis added by the Claimant.

48 Articles 1 to 11 cover the entire Treaty except the final clauses and include the dispute
resolution clauses.

“© id. (citing Art. 3(3) of the BITs listed supra in note 43).

-18-

agreements providing for concessional financing, and domestic legislation or
international agreements or arrangements relating wholly or mainly to taxation.
Claimant concludes that the MFN clause was intended to apply to the whole
Treaty and, by the very application of the ejusdem generis principle, the MFN
clause applies to matters related to the method for settling disputes arising under
the Treaty.

69. The Claimant replies to an argument hinted at by Argentina in the
sense that an MFN clause is a clause of an exceptional nature because it limits
the application of the principle res inter alios acta. In response, Claimant points
out that the MFN clause itself is not res inter alios acta and that there is no
special rule of interpretation for MFN clauses. An MFN clause should be
interpreted as any other clause in the Treaty, that is, “in the light of its object and
purpose” as required by the Vienna Convention.*” The object and purpose of the
Treaty is to promote and protect investments. As clearly stated by the tribunal in
SGS v. Philippines: “It is legitimate to resolve uncertainties in its [the BIT’s]
interpretation so as to favor the protection of covered investments.”*° According
to the Claimant, the object of the Treaty would be defeated by an interpretation
that excluded the application of the MFN clause to dispute resolution.

70. The Claimant relies on case law in support of its contention that
dispute settlement provisions are related to the treatment afforded to a foreign
investor. Thus, in Ambatielos, the commission of arbitration held that: “Protection
of the rights of traders naturally finds a place among the matters dealt with by
treaties of commerce and navigation.”° Also in Maffezini the arbitral tribunal
concluded that dispute resolution matters in BITs are “inextricably related to the
protection of foreign investors, as they are also related to the protection of rights

*’ Vienna Convention, supra note 23, Art. 31(1).

“© Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. (SGS) v. Republic of the Philippines, \CSID Case No.
ARB/02/6, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (29 January 2004), 8 ICSID Rep.
518 (2005), para. 116.

“8 Ambatielos, supra note 27.

-19-

of traders under treaties of commerce”.©° The same arbitral tribunal considered
that international arbitration and other dispute settlement arrangements are
“closely linked to the material aspects of the treatment accorded.”*' The arbitral
tribunal in Siemens reached a similar conclusion, recalling that the International
Court of Justice (“ICU”) had also held, in Rights of US Nationals in Morocco,
that MFN clauses may extend to provisions related to jurisdictional matters.

71. The Claimant contests the relevance of Salini to this case. First, the
arbitral tribunal in Salini did not identify the concerns it claimed to share nor who
had raised those concerns when it stated that “it shares the concerns that have
been expressed in numerous quarters with regard to the solution adopted in the
Maffezini case."®° Second, the arbitral tribunal in Salini stated that the
circumstances in that case were different from those in Maffezini and that its
decision was based on the particular wording of the MFN clause of the Italy-
Jordan BIT. Third, the tribunal in Salini was addressing the question whether the
MEN clause could be used to create jurisdiction over contractual disputes when
the applicable BIT expressly excluded those disputes from arbitration and did not
consider their application to a general procedural requirement for the submission
of disputes to arbitration. In fact, always according to the Claimant, in Salini
“there was no need for the tribunal to interpret the scope of the MFN clause
because there had been an express exclusion of the right sought by the claimant
through most favored nation treatment."** The Claimant concludes that the
decision in Salini “cannot be invoked as a general proposition that MFN clauses

do not apply to dispute resolution matters.”°>

72. The Claimant then addresses the issue of whether the Argentine
Republic’s public policy requires submission of the dispute to local courts for a

5° Maffezini, supra note 30, para. 54.
5" Id., para. 55.

®2 Rights of Nationals of the United States of America in Morocco, Judgment (27 August 1952),
(1952) ICJ Reports, 176, 192.

53 Salini, supra note 33, para. 115.
54 Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 207.
5 id., para. 208.

-20-

period of time prior to submission to arbitration. According to the Claimant, out of
57 BITs signed by the Argentine Republic, only 10 include the requirement of
prior submission to local courts; out of 41 BITs signed by the Argentine Republic
since October 1992, only one has this requirement; and none of the 21 BITs
signed by the Argentine Republic since September 1994 includes such a
requirement. The Claimant concludes that, as noted in Maffezini, the Argentine
Republic has abandoned its policy to require prior submission to local courts.
The Claimant also recalls the observation of the arbitral tribunal in Siemens,
which noted the lack of consistency among the BITs entered into by the
Respondent leading to the conclusion that the requirement of instituting
proceedings before the local courts could not be considered a sensitive issue of
economic or foreign policy conditioning the Argentine Republic’s consent to
submit to arbitration.©°

73. The Claimant concludes that the MFN clause in Article 3 of the
Treaty extends to the dispute resolution provisions of the Treaty, allowing
Claimant to rely on the more favorable procedural regime established in the US-
Argentina Treaty. According to the Claimant: “The contrary result would give rise
to a clear discrimination between UK claimants and other foreign claimants
against Argentina in the Argentina arbitrations and would destroy the very
purpose of MFN clauses which is to avoid such discrimination.”°”

74. The Claimant further argues that the eighteen-month requirement is
merely a procedural matter which would lead to inefficiency and inequity, thus
defeating the object and purpose of the Treaty. The Claimant points out that the
submission to the Argentine Republic’s courts would be futile in that the dispute
would not be resolved in eighteen months, and costly for National Grid in terms
of court taxes, scheduled counsel fees and the Argentine Republic’s costs if
National Grid withdrew its court case in order to pursue arbitration, which defeats
the purpose of the Treaty to create favorable conditions for greater investment.

5° Id, paras. 211-212.
5 Id., para. 213.

-21-

The Claimant draws the attention of the Tribunal to arbitral practice that has
found strict application of investment treaty procedural requirements
unnecessary where to do so would be futile or formalistic and lead to inefficiency
and inequity. Claimant concludes that a different approach would lead “to
inefficiency and inequity, as the Claimant would simply be entitled to resubmit the
very same issues to an UNCITRAL tribunal after waiting in vain for the Argentine

courts to rule on the issues in dispute for eighteen months.”

75. During the hearing, the Claimant pointed out that the Argentine
Republic failed to refer to Gas Natural v. Argentine Republic, decided
subsequently to Plama, in which the Tribunal held that:

“Unless it appears clearly that the state parties to a BIT or the parties toa
particular investment agreement settled on a different method for
resolution of disputes that may arise, most-favored-nation provisions in

BITs should be understood to be applicable to dispute resolution.”©°

76. According to Claimant, the real change brought about by the BITs
is not the protection of the substantive rights of the investor, which have been
widely recognized under international law, but rather direct access to an
independent tribunal at the behest of the individual investor. According to
Claimant: “it is a critical part of what protection is granted, and to seek to divorce
the protection of access to an independent Tribunal from the substantive rights

that that Tribunal seeks to protect is [...] a false distinction.”*"

77. Claimant takes issue with the relevance of Salini and Plama to this
case. In Salini, the claimant attempted to submit a contractual claim by way of an
umbrella clause in another bilateral treaty, when the treaty between Italy and

58 id. paras. 220-222.

5° Id., para. 223.

°° Transcript, p. 132 (citing para. 49 of Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case
No. ARB/03/10, Decision of the Tribunal on Preliminary Questions on Jurisdiction (17 June 2005),
available at http:/www.asil.org/pdfs/GasNat.v.Argentina.pdf).

§" Id, p. 141.

-22-

Jordan specifically required that such claims be submitted to the procedure
foreseen in the investment agreement. In Plama, the tribunal was dealing with
an old BIT, under which the only matter that could be brought to arbitration under
UNCITRAL Rules was the adequacy of compensation in case of expropriation.
The claimant in that case tried through an umbrella clause ‘to extend the material
scope of what is submitted to arbitration to cover everything, and [...] access
ICSID arbitration into the bargain.” Furthermore, in Plama there had been
negotiations between the State parties to the treaty concerning the possibility of
amending it, and the negotiations were unsuccessful. The arbitral tribunal
concluded that since the contracting parties had looked into the matter and
rejected it, they had no intention to extend the relevant clauses.

78. The Claimant concluded at oral argument that in the instant case
there is no question of seeking access to ICSID without a separate consent; the
consent to arbitration had already been given, and the dispute resolution clause
already covers all disputes.

(b) Considerations of the Tribunal

79. The arguments and counter-arguments of the parties raise the
following issues: rules for interpretation of the MFN clause, interpretation of the
clause to ascertain the will of the parties from the text of the clause, differences
in the terms of the MFN clause in this case and the MFN clause in Maffezini, and
the meaning of “treatment” of foreign investors referred to in the MFN clause in
the Treaty. The Tribunal will now consider these issues in this sequence.

80. As already stated above, the Tribunal will interpret the Treaty as
required by the Vienna Convention. Article 31 of the Convention requires an
international treaty to “be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in light of its

® Id. p. 149.
8 id. p. 150.
* Ia.

-23-

object and purpose.”© As regards the intention of the parties, the approach of the
Vienna Convention and of the ICJ is that “what matters is the intention of the
parties as expressed in the text, which is the best guide to the more recent
common intention of the parties."°° The Convention does not establish a different
rule of interpretation for different clauses. The same rule of interpretation applies
to all provisions of a treaty, be they dispute resolution clauses or MFN clauses.

81. Article 3 of the Treaty reads thus:

“National Treatment and Most-favored Nation Provisions

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investments or
returns of investors or companies of the other Contracting Party to
treatment less favorable than that which it accords to investments or
returns of its own investors or companies or to investments or returns of
nationals or companies of any third State.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investors or
companies of the other Contracting Party, as regards their management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of their investments, to
treatment less favorable than that which it accords to its own investors or
to investors of any third State.”

82. The Tribunal observes that the MFN clause does not expressly
refer to dispute resolution or for that matter to any other standard of treatment
provided for specifically in the Treaty. On the other hand, dispute resolution is not
included among the exceptions to the application of the clause. As a matter of
interpretation, specific mention of an item excludes others: expressio unius est
exclusio alterius.©”

°° Vienna Convention, supra note 23, Art. 31(1).

68 |. BROWNLIE, PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW (6" ed. 2003), p. 602.

°7 This interpretation is confirmed by the following statement on the general rules of application of
the MFN clause in the Encyclopedia of Public International Law: “By its nature, the unconditional
clause, unless otherwise agreed, attracts all favors extended on whatever grounds by the

-24-

83. The Tribunal observes further that, as pointed out by the
Respondent, the MFN clause in the Treaty does not refer to “todas las materias
regidas por el presente Acuerdo” as is the case of the MFN clause in the
investment treaty between Spain and the Argentine Republic. The review of the
MEN clauses included in the investment treaties concluded by Spain, which was
carried out by the tribunal in Maffezini, found that the MFN clauses in all the other
treaties omit reference to “...all matters subject to this Agreement’?
provide that “this treatment” shall be subject to the clause. Without further

and merely

elaboration, the arbitral tribunal held such formulation to be more restrictive. In
Ambatielos, the commission had to ascertain whether administration of justice in
the local courts was covered by the MFN clause. The commission found that it

was, considering the Contracting Parties’ “intention that the trade and navigation

of each country shall be placed, in all respects, by the other on the footing of the

most favored nation.”©°

84. The decision in Salini also considered relevant that the MFN clause
in the investment treaty between Italy and Jordan did not include a reference to
“all rights or matters covered in this agreement” to reach the conclusion that that
clause did not apply to dispute settlement clauses.”” The issue for the Tribunal is
whether reference only to most-favorable “treatment,” absent a reference to all
matters covered by the Treaty, excludes a procedural prerequisite to dispute
resolution from the scope of application of the MFN clause. To answer this
question, the Tribunal will consider the subsequent practice of the parties to the
Treaty and the substantive content of treatment in the context of the protection
afforded to investors under the BITs.

85. Since 1991, the MFN clause in the UK model investment treaty has
included a third paragraph stating that: “For the avoidance of doubt’, the MFN

 

granting State to the third State.” R. Bernhardt (ed.), 8 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL.
Law 411, 415 (1985).

°8 Maffezini, supra note 30, para. 60.
°° Ambatielos, supra note 27. (Emphasis in the original.)
7° Salini, supra note 33, paras. 117-119.

-25-

clause extends to Articles 1 to 11 of the treaty and, hence, to dispute resolution
matters. The implication in the wording of this additional paragraph is that, all
along, this was the UK’s understanding of the meaning of the MFN clause in
previously concluded investment treaties.’ On the other hand, after the decision
on jurisdiction in Siemens, the Argentine Republic and Panama exchanged
diplomatic notes with an “interpretative declaration” of the MFN clause in their
1996 investment treaty to the effect that, the MFN clause does not extend to
dispute resolution clauses, and that this has always been their intention.’”?. The
Tribunal has not been furnished with any evidence that at any point in time an
interpretation of such nature was considered by either party to the Treaty. Neither
has the Tribunal received any evidence that the Argentine Republic adopted
similar interpretations of the MFN clause incorporated in the more than 50
bilateral investment treaties concluded with other States parties. While it is
possible to conclude from the UK investment treaty practice contemporaneous
with the conclusion of the Treaty that the UK understood the MFN clause to
extend to dispute resolution, no definite conclusion can be reached regarding the
Argentine Republic’s position at that time. Therefore, the review of the treaty
practice of the State parties to the Treaty with regard to their common intent is
inconclusive. The Tribunal will now turn to whether “treatment” may be

understood to extend to mechanisms of dispute resolution.

86. The Tribunal recalls that in considering whether the application of
national laws concerning the administration of justice, namely local remedies,
should be available to foreign traders, the arbitral commission in Ambatielos
stated:

“It is true that ‘the administration of justice’, when viewed in isolation, is a
subject-matter other than ‘commerce and navigation’, but this is not
necessarily so when it is viewed in connection with the protection of the
” The practice of the UK of including the expression “For the avoidance of doubt” in paragraph 3
of the MFN clause does not seem to have been consistent. The investment treaty with Honduras

includes it, but the investment treaty with Venezuela does not. See Exhibits C-157 and C-159.
” Transcript, pp. 136-137.

-26-

rights of traders. Protection of the rights of traders naturally finds a place
among the matters dealt with by Treaties of commerce and navigation.

Therefore, it cannot be said that the administration of justice, in so far as it
is concerned with the protection of these rights, must necessarily be
excluded from the field of application of the most-favored-nation clause,
when the latter includes ‘all matters relating to commerce and navigation’.
The question can only be determined in accordance with the intention of
the Contracting Parties as deduced from a reasonable interpretation of the
Treaty.””°

87. | When the ICJ considered the case of the Rights of US Nationals in
Morocco, it concluded that under the MFN clause in the US-Morocco treaty of
1836, the US was entitled to invoke the provisions of other treaties relating to the
capitulatory regime.”*

88. In Maffezini, the tribunal also considered that the MFN clause in the
Spain—-Argentina BIT allowed the Argentine investor to benefit from the
mechanisms for the settlement of disputes incorporated into other treaties
concluded by Spain to the extent that those mechanisms were more favorable to
the protection of the investor's rights. The Tribunal stated :

“...[T]here are good reasons to conclude that today dispute settlement
arrangements are inextricably related to the protection of foreign investors,
as they are also related to the protection of rights of traders under treaties
of commerce. (...)

International arbitration and other dispute settlement arrangements....are
essential, however, to the protection of the rights envisaged under the
pertinent treaties; they are also closely linked to the material aspects of
the treatment accorded. (...)

”3 Ambatielos, supra note 27, p. 107.
”* Rights of Nationals, supra note 52, p. 190.

-27-

From the above considerations it can be concluded that if a third party
treaty contains provisions for the settlement of disputes that are more
favorable to the protection of the investor’s rights and interests than those
in the basic treaty, such provisions may be extended to the beneficiary of
the most favored nation clause as they are fully compatible with the
ejusdem generis principle.””°

89. The Ambatielos arbitration commission, the ICJ, and the arbitral
tribunal in Maffezini all concurred that the element of dispute settlement at issue
was part of the protection — treatment — of investors. The most recent decision

concerning the same matter put it in these terms:

“provision for international investor-state arbitration in bilateral investment
treaties is a significant incentive and protection for foreign investors;
further, that access to such arbitration only after resort to national courts
and an eighteenth-month waiting period is a less favorable degree of
protection than access to arbitration immediately upon expiration of the
negotiating period.””°

90. During the hearing, the parties discussed extensively the decisions
in Salini and Plama, which came to light after the submission of Claimant's
Statement of Claim and had reached different conclusions from Maffezini and
Siemens on the application of the MFN clause to particular matters related to
dispute settlement.

91. Both tribunals considered extensions of the MFN clause to
situations widely different from the situation considered here or, for that matter, in
Maffezini, Siemens, and Gas Natural. The claimant in Salini sought to include an
umbrella clause where the basic treaty had none. In Plama, there was no ICSID
clause in the basic treaty. In the present case, the parties had agreed to
arbitration under UNCITRAL Rules and the issue is the avoidance, by virtue of an

’8 Maffezini, supra note 30, paras. 54-56.
’8 Gas Natural, supra note 60, para. 31.

-28-

MFN clause, of a procedural requirement that the Argentine Republic has
dispensed with in its investment treaties concluded since 1994.

92. The Tribunal concurs with Maffezin’s balanced considerations in
its interpretation of the MFN clause and with its concern that MFN clauses not be
extended inappropriately. It is evident that some claimants may have tried to
extend an MFN clause beyond appropriate limits. For example, the situation in
Plama involving an attempt to create consent to ICSID arbitration when none
existed was foreseen in the possible exceptions to the operation of the MFN
clause in Maffezini.’’ But cases like Plama do not justify depriving the MFN
clause of its legitimate meaning or purpose in a particular case. The MFN clause
is an important element to ensure that foreign investors are treated on a basis of
parity with other foreign investors and with national investors when they invest
abroad.

93. To conclude, the Tribunal considers that, in the context in which the
Respondent has consented to arbitration for the resolution of the type of disputes
raised by the Claimant, “treatment” under the MFN clause of the Treaty makes it
possible for UK investors in Argentina to resort to arbitration without first resorting
to Argentine courts, as is permitted under the US-Argentina Treaty. Therefore,
the Tribunal rejects this objection to its jurisdiction.

94. Having reached this conclusion, the Tribunal does not deem it
relevant to consider the Claimant's contention that the requirement to submit the
claim first to local courts is merely a procedural matter that would lead to
inefficiency in the proceeding and inequity among the parties, thus defeating the
object and purpose of the Treaty.

2. Second Objection: The Claimant Is Not an “Investor”

(a) Positions of the Parties

7? Maffezini, supra note 30, para. 63.

- 29 -

(i) Position of the Respondent

95. The Respondent argues that the legal link between the Claimant
and the investment protected by the Treaty ceased to exist once the shares of
National Grid in Citelec were transferred to Dolphin on August 18, 2004. As of
that date, according to the Respondent, National Grid ceased to have the quality
of “investor” required to be party to this arbitration under Article 8 of the Treaty. It
is the position of the Respondent that customary international law requires
Claimant to maintain its status as an “investor” throughout the arbitral
proceedings and not only at the time of submission of its claim.”® The
Respondent argues that the rationale of Loewen applies in this case. Loewen,
the Canadian claimant, was found by the tribunal not to be a party in interest at
the time its operations were reorganized in a U.S. company:

“Raymond Loewen argues that his claim under NAFTA survived the
reorganization. Respondent originally objected to Raymond Loewen’s
claim on the ground that he no longer had control over his stock at the
commencement of the proceeding. The Tribunal allowed Raymond
Loewen to continue in the proceeding to determine whether he in fact
continued any stock holding in the company. No evidence was adduced to
establish his interest and he certainly was not a party in interest at the
time of the reorganization of TLGI."”°

96. The Respondent points out that the Claimant justifies the sale of its
shares in Citelec as a means to mitigate the losses caused by the Measures. The
Argentine Republic disagrees with this position, arguing that the sale was a free
business decision and that the Treaty does not protect an investor from the
effects of its voluntary decision to sell its shares of a company undergoing a
contract renegotiation. If National Grid did not obtain a better price for its shares,
this can only be attributed to the moment chosen by the Claimant to sell them.

78 Respondent’s Plea on Jurisdiction, paras. 77-79.

7° Id., para. 74 (quoting The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States, ICSID
Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, Award (26 June 2003), 7 ICSID Rep. 442 (2005), para. 239).

-30-

According to Respondent, National Grid’s decision to sell had no causal link to
Respondent's actions, remaining a unilateral decision by National Grid.®°

97. The Respondent takes issue with the arguments of the Claimant
regarding the arbitrability of public policy decisions of States. According to the
Respondent, such decisions are not subject to the jurisdiction of any international
arbitral tribunal, because they are sovereign acts as was recognized by the
arbitral tribunal in CMS in the following terms:

“[...] questions of general economic policy not directly related to the
investment, as opposed to measures specifically addressed to the
operation of the business concerned, will normally fall outside the
jurisdiction of the Centre. A direct relationship can, however, be
established if those general measures are adopted in violation of specific
commitments given to the investor in treaties, legislation or contracts.
What is brought under the jurisdiction of the Centre is not the general
measures in themselves but the extent to which they may violate those
specific commitments.”*'

98. It is also the position of Respondent that if there had been an
expropriation as argued by the Claimant, it would be the new investor and not
National Grid that would be entitled to compensation under the general principle
that rights are transferred as owned by the seller.®?

99. Finally, the Respondent draws the attention of the Tribunal to the
fact that the Concession and the Transba Concession are meant to last 95 years.
Paying heed to Claimant's demands would amount to treating the investments
protections under the Treaty as an insurance policy against all conceivable risks,
making it impossible for governments to adapt long-term contracts to new

® id., paras. 92-93.

®" Id., para. 88 (quoting para. 27 of CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Republic of
Argentina, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (17
July 2003), 42 ILM 788 (2003).

® id., para. 89.

-31-

circumstances when the public interest so requires.®°
100. At the hearing, the Respondent emphasized the following points:

(A) The voluntary disposition of the shares of National Grid in Citelec,
questioning the relevance of the cases adduced by the Claimant in its Counter-
Memorial: Mondev® was deprived of a permit for urban development by the
municipality of Boston, Senegal rescinded a contract of SOABI® for the
construction of housing complexes, and at no time did CSOB*® let go of its assets
voluntarily;°”

(B) National Grid’s opportunistic behavior of instituting arbitration
proceedings while it had been considering and preparing the sale of its shares for
months;

(C) Transener’s shares doubled in value between 2002 and 2005; and

(D) The sale of shares by National Grid was conducted in an environment
of uncertainty, and it is not the purpose of BITs to protect investors against

uncertainty or to neutralize international corporate risk.*®
(ii) Position of the Claimant

101. The Claimant argues that, under the Treaty, the critical date for
determining the Claimant's standing with regard to ownership of the investment is
the date on which the dispute arose, that under well established case law the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal must be determined at the time proceedings are
instituted, and that Claimant's standing to bring this claim finds support in

83 Id., para. 97.

®4 Mondev International Ltd. v. United States, CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award (11 October
2002), 6 ICSID Rep. 192 (2004).

® Société Ouest Africaine des Bétons Industriels (SOABI) v. Senegal, \CSID Case No. ARB/82/1,
Award (25 February 1988), 6 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 125 (1991).

®© Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s. (CSOB) v. Slovak Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/4,
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction (24 May 1999), 14 ICSID Rev.-FILJ 251 (1999).

®” Transcript, pp. 34-36.

88 id., pp. 39-45.

-32-

fundamental principles of equity and justice, as articulated by international case

law.

102. The Claimant contends that the text of the Treaty is “the best guide
to the more recent common intention of the parties”, pointing to what Claimant
perceives as a fair reading of Article 8(1):

“...[T]he jurisdiction to arbitrate a claim under the Treaty depends on a
dispute having arisen with regard to an investment within the terms of the
Treaty between an investor of one Contracting Party and the other
Contracting Party. The requirements are, therefore, that a treaty dispute
arose with regard to an ‘investment’ at that time, and that it arose with
regard to an ‘investor’ also at that time. The date on which the dispute
arose is the same date on which the investor and the investment must
have existed.”

103. The Claimant finds confirmation of this reasoning by a further
analysis of paragraph 1 of Article 8. This paragraph refers to submission of
disputes “at the request of one of the Parties to the dispute."® Similarly, Article
8(2) refers to submission to arbitration “if one of the Parties so requests” and if
“the Parties are still in dispute.”®' Article 8(3) refers to “the investor and the
Contracting Party concerned in the dispute” in the context of agreement on the
modality of arbitration proceedings, Article 8(3) also refers twice to the “Parties to
the dispute”.°? The Claimant concludes this textual analysis by affirming that “the
dispute” is the key element of reference:

“Standing to pursue dispute resolution proceedings is acquired by being a
party to the dispute; the status of being a disputing party crystallizes at the

®° Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 99.
80 /d., para. 100. (Emphasis added by the Claimant.)

* id.

* Id.

- 33 -

moment the dispute arises.”°°

104. The Claimant further contends that the same result is reached from
the perspective of the object and purpose of the Treaty. The Treaty’s purpose is
to provide protection to investors against detrimental action by the State. The
protections stipulated in the Treaty may apply in cases where, because of the
State’s adverse measures, the investment does not subsist, has been destroyed
or is in such precarious state that its maintenance is impossible or commercially
unreasonable. According to the Claimant:

“If a State were to expropriate title to an asset and the former owner of
that asset were to claim for expropriation, it would be nonsense for the
State to argue non-justiciability of the dispute because the claimant no
longer owns the asset! Yet this is what Argentina’s argument amounts
to."4

105. The Claimant then relies on Mondev, which was decided under
Chapter 11 of the NAFTA, where the US objected to the jurisdiction of the arbitral
tribunal on the ground that the foreclosure on a mortgage related to the project
extinguished the rights and interests of the claimant. The US had argued that
before the arbitration proceeding was instituted, and even before some of the
acts complained took place, no investment owned or controlled by the claimant
subsisted. The tribunal dismissed this jurisdictional objection in the following
terms:

“the Tribunal would [...] observe that [NAFTA] Article 1105, and even
more so Article 1110, will frequently have to be applied after the
investment in question has failed. In most cases, the dispute submitted to
arbitration will concern precisely the question of responsibility for that
failure. To require the Claimant to maintain a continuing status as an
investor under the law of the host State at the time the arbitration is

8 ig
°4 id., para. 102.

- 34-

commenced would tend to frustrate the very purpose of Chapter 11, which
is to provide protection to investors against wrongful conduct including
uncompensated expropriation of their investment and to do so throughout
the lifetime of an investment up to the moment of its ‘sale or other
disposition’ [...] On that basis, the Tribunal concludes that NAFTA should
be interpreted broadly to cover any legal claims arising out of the
treatment of an investment as defined in Article 1139, whether or not the
investment subsists as such at the time of the treatment which is
complained of.”

106. As regards the argument made by the Respondent based on
Loewen, the Claimant observes that in Loewen the Canadian claimant had
ceased to exist and its operations were reorganized in a US company. The issue
there was one of the continuous foreign nationality of the claimant and not the
continuity of ownership or control of the investment. In this respect, the decision
in Loewen upholds the finding of the tribunal in Mondev to the effect that:

“...the Tribunal [in Mondev] appropriately found that the loss of the
investment through foreclosure of the mortgage could not be the basis for
denying Mondev’s right to pursue its remedies under NAFTA. It pointed
out that such set of events could occur quite often to indenters and that
the whole purpose of NAFTA’s protection would be frustrated if such
disputes could not be pursued.”

107. The Claimant points out that, under international law, jurisdiction is
determined, at the latest, on the date of a submission of a dispute to an
international judicial forum. According to the Claimant, this is confirmed by cases
arbitrated under the ICSID Convention in relation to issues of ownership of the
investment. Thus, in CSOB, the claimant assigned all its rights in the subject
matter of the dispute to its majority owner, the Czech Republic. In support of the

°° id, para. 103 (quoting para. 91 of Mondev, supra note 84).
°6 id., para. 105 (quoting para. 227 of Loewen, supra note 79).

-35-

standing of the transferee, the arbitral tribunal upheld its jurisdiction with the

following reasoning:

“...[I]t is generally recognized that the determination whether a party has
standing in an international judicial forum for the purposes of jurisdiction to
institute proceedings is made by reference to the date on which such
proceedings are deemed to have been instituted. Since the Claimant
instituted these proceedings prior to the time when the two assignments
were concluded, it follows that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear this
case regardless of the legal effect, if any, the assignments may have had
on Claimant's standing had they preceded the filing of the case.”®”

108. According to the Claimant, the date of institution of a proceeding
has been held by ICSID tribunals to be the critical date to determine foreign

(28

control® and the juridical status of a person.°? Similarly, the ICU has held that:

“The Court recalls that according to its settled jurisprudence, its jurisdiction
must be determined at the time that the act instituting proceedings was
filed. Thus, if the Court has jurisdiction on the date the case is referred to
it, it continues to do so regardless of subsequent events.

Le]

Under settled jurisprudence, the critical date for determining the

admissibility of an application is the date on which it is filed.”'°°

109. The Claimant argues further that equity and justice prevent a party
from taking advantage of its own wrong:

87 Id., para. 109 (quoting para. 31 of CSOB, supra note 86).

8 Amco Asia Corporation and Others v. The Republic of Indonesia, \CSID Case No. ARB/81/1,
Award on Jurisdiction (25 September 1983), 1 ICSID Rep. 389 (1993), para. 14, and Liberian
Eastern Timber Corp. (LETCO) v. Republic of Liberia, \CSID Case No. ARB/83/2, Award (31
March 1986), 2 ICSID Rep. 346 (1994), p. 351.

°° SOABI, supra note 85, paras. 29 and 41.

100 Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 114 (quoting paras. 24, 26 and 40 of the
Arrest Warrant of 11 April 2000 (Democratic Republic of Congo v. Belgium), Judgment (14
February 2002), [2002] /CU Reports 3).

- 36 -

“If a State cannot allege lack of jurisdiction where it has directly
expropriated an asset on the basis that the investor had no qualifying
investment, it should not be able to do so in the event of indirect
expropriation when its acts have emptied the asset of substantially its

entire value.”""'

110. The Claimant alleges that it disposed of its investment as a result of
Respondent's dismantlement of the regulatory framework that had attracted the
investment. The alternative for the Claimant was to continue pumping money into
a ruinous enterprise, a reckless approach that no one could be reasonably
expected to adopt. Claimant sought to mitigate the losses caused by the
Measures relinquishing 90% of the value of the investment. Under those
circumstances, this sale could hardly be described as a free or voluntary
transaction. '©

111. During the hearing, the Claimant pointed out that the concept of the
voluntary nature of the disposition of assets, considered a key point by the
Respondent, finds no mention in the relevant case law.'® According to the
Claimant, Transener was a failed investment which had defaulted on its debts
and “...It only managed to keep going because of other laws in Argentina which
required it to keep going.”'™ In this regard, Claimant underlined the holding in
Mondev,

“To require the claimant to maintain a continuing status as an investor
under the law of the host state at the time of the arbitration is commenced,
would tend to frustrate the very purpose of Chapter XI, which is to provide
protection to investors against wrongful conduct, — including
uncompensated expropriation of their investment and to do so throughout

10" id., para. 116.

102 id., paras. 117, et seq.
‘3 Transcript, p. 107.

104 id., p. 109.

-37-

the lifetime of that investment up to the moment of its sale or
disposition.”

112. The Claimant denied that National Grid had acted in bad faith when
it sold its shares in Citelec. According to the Claimant, it was clear under the
terms of the documentation that the seller did not transfer any of its rights vis-a-
vis Argentina. Moreover, Claimant recalled that "Argentina did not require in any
sense that this claim be abandoned or suspended or any other such condition
when its various regulatory consents were granted to that transfer.'°°

113. The Claimant reaffirmed at the hearing that:

(A) in all cases discussed and in Soabi v. Senegal'” and LETCO v.

Liberia,‘

the critical date adopted consistently by arbitral tribunals has been the
date of consent, and the ICJ in the Arrest Warrant case considered settled
jurisprudence that, for jurisdictional purposes, its jurisdiction must be determined

at the time that the act instituting the proceeding was filed;'°? and

(B) National Grid gave up hope that any satisfactory solution could be
achieved after two-and-a-half years of a process of renegotiation, which was
initially meant to last 120 days and, as a commercial company, had an obligation

to its shareholders to limit its losses.'"°

(b) Considerations of the Tribunal

114. For the purpose of ascertaining the limits to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal, the key issue to decide is whether the sale of Claimant’s shares in
Citelec, subsequent to the initiation of this proceeding, has deprived the Claimant
of its standing as an “investor” under the terms of the Treaty.

15 fd., p. 112 (quoting Mondev, supra note 84, para. 91).
108 id, p. 118.

‘07 SOABI, supra note 85.

108 / ETCO, supra note 98.

‘8 Transcript, pp. 118-120.

"0 id., pp. 120-125.

- 38 -

115. The textual analysis of Article 8 of the Treaty developed by the
Claimant is helpful but does not fully dispose of the issue. The Tribunal agrees
that the meaning of Article 8 is that the dispute must exist at the time the
arbitration proceeding is instituted and it is at that point in time when the parties
to the proceeding must be parties to the dispute. From this it may be implied, as
does the Claimant, that events beyond the date of instituting the proceeding are
irrelevant for purposes of the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. However, it suffices to
review the views expressed by the Respondent to realize that Article 8 is not as
clear and self-evident as Claimant suggests. Indeed, in order to dispose of the
issue of standing, it is necessary to reach beyond the Treaty and, as the parties
have already done, to examine the practice of the ICJ and other tribunals.

116. Before doing so, the Tribunal recalls that in the instant case the
issue of standing does not concern a change in the Claimant's nationality -
National Grid continues to be a British company - but rather the investor's
continuity in the ownership of the investment. The quotation on continuity of
ownership from Professor Brownlie’s Principles of Public International Law, which
the Respondent brought to the attention of this Tribunal,''’ refers to continuity of
nationality for purposes of diplomatic protection; it does not concern the
continuity of ownership by a claimant who has not changed its nationality. Even
with regard to continuity of nationality to retain standing, Professor’s Brownlie
himself noted that “there is a respectable body of opinion which would reject the

112

principle altogether.” To this respectable body of opinion one may add the

conclusion reached by the Rapporteur on Diplomatic Protection of the ILC,
Professor Dugard, to the effect that there is no established rule at all on that

matter.''

117. As pointed out by the Claimant, the ICJ held in the Arrest Warrant

‘1 | BROWNLIE, PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW (5™ ed. 1998), p. 483, cited in
Respondent's Plea on Jurisdiction, para. 79.

112 Ig,

"'3 Referred to by J. Paulsson, “Continuous Nationality in Loewen,” 20 Arbitration International
(2004), 213-215.

-39-

case that it was its settled jurisprudence that: “its jurisdiction must be determined
at the time the act instituting the proceedings was filed. Thus, if the Court has
jurisdiction on the date the case is referred to it, it continues to do regardless of
subsequent events.”''* However, the Court went on to say: “Such events might
lead to a finding that an application has subsequently become moot and to a
decision not to proceed to judgment on the merits, but they cannot deprive the
Court of jurisdiction.”''®

118. As ageneral matter, all the arbitral tribunals in the cases discussed
by the parties - Amco, SOABI, CSOB, LETCO, and Mondev - held that the critical
date to meet the jurisdiction requirements is the date when the proceedings are
instituted. Loewen also supports this position, as pointed out by the Claimant and
as becomes evident when reviewing the previously quoted statement relied on by
the Respondent.''®

119. The Argentine Republic has contended that in none of these cases
were assets transferred voluntarily. However, the voluntary or involuntary nature
of the transfer does not seem to have been part of the considerations of the
tribunals in reaching their respective decisions. In CSOB the tribunal held:

“Since the Claimant instituted these proceedings prior to the time when
the two assignments were concluded, it follows that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction to hear this case regardless of the legal effect, if any, the

assignments might have had on Claimant’s standing had they preceded

the filing of this case.”""”

120. In Mondev, the tribunal went further and dissociated the investment

"4 Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 114 (citing Arrest Warrant, supra note 100,
para. 26).

"5 Arrest Warrant, supra note 100, para. 26. This sentence follows after the quotation adduced
by the Claimant in its argument.

"6 “Raymond Loewen argues that his claim under NAFTA survived the reorganization.
Respondent originally objected to Raymond Loewen’s claim on the ground that he no longer had
control over his stock at the commencement of the proceeding [...]” (Emphasis added by the
Tribunal). Loewen, supra note 79, para. 239.

"” CSOB, supra note 86, para. 31.

-40-

and the arbitration proceeding, dispensing with the requirement that an investor
maintain its ownership interest in the investment at the time the arbitration was
commenced:

“To require the claimant to maintain a continuing status as an investor
under the law of the host State at the time the arbitration is commenced
would tend to frustrate the very purpose of Chapter 11, which is to provide
protection to investors against wrongful conduct including uncompensated
expropriation of their investment and to do so throughout the lifetime of an
investment up to the moment of its ‘sale or other disposition’ (Article
1102(2))."""8

According to Mondev, the key factor is to have been an investor and to have
suffered a wrong before the sale or disposition of its assets, without the need to
remain an investor for purposes of the arbitration proceedings.

121. The Respondent has also argued that, if a right to pursue the
claims under the dispute would be recognized, then such right would have been
transferred to the purchaser of the shares. The Tribunal observes that such right
was retained by the Claimant as part of the terms of the sale of shares and that
such terms were approved by the competent authorities of the Argentine

Republic.'"°

122. For the above stated reasons, the Tribunal finds this objection
without merit.

3. Third Objection: The Dispute Is Not a “Dispute with Regard to an
Investment”

(a) Positions of the Parties

"8 Mondev, supra note 84, para. 91.
"° Exhibit C-132.

-41-

(i) Position of the Respondent

123. The Respondent repeats here in part the argument made
previously that, for an investor to request the protection provided for in the
Treaty, the allegedly prejudicial measures taken by the Argentine Republic
should have been specifically directed to the investment. According to the
Respondent, general measures taken by a government destined to have an
impact on the economic life of the nation are not matters for the consideration of
this Tribunal. The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to decide on matters of
public policy, but rather to settle legal issues arising under or connected with the
investment dispute submitted to its consideration. It does not suffice for the
investor to be affected by a measure in order for the Tribunal to assume
jurisdiction; it is necessary to show a legal link between the measure and the
investment. In this respect, the Respondent refers to the already quoted
statement of the tribunal in CMS, to the effect that matters of general economic
policy are not in principle within the jurisdiction of ICSID and ICSID tribunals; it is
necessary to establish a breach of specific contractual commitments made to the

investor.'2°

124. The Respondent argues that it is not sufficient that the Argentine
Republic had assumed general commitments in “treaties, laws or contracts”, but
rather that the Claimant must show which specific commitments assumed by the
Argentine Republic were breached by the devaluation of the peso, the
establishment of a new parity, the temporary “pesification” of tariffs and
obligations, and the adoption of a fiscal policy in consonance with these
Measures. 7"

125. The Respondent draws a parallel between the jurisdictional issue at
stake in Methanex and the qualification of Claimant’s dispute as an investment
dispute under the Treaty. In Methanex, as explained by the Respondent, the
NAFTA tribunal dealt with the question whether the measures taken by a State

‘20 Respondent's Plea on Jurisdiction, paras. 100-101.
"21 id., para. 102.

-42-

party to NAFTA were “relating to” the investment or the investor. Methanex had
claimed that it was sufficient that a measure affected the investor or the
investment to give rise to a claim under international law. The State parties to
NAFTA disagreed with that interpretation. The Tribunal found that a textual
interpretation of “relating to” was of scant help and considered the context, object
and purpose of the Article 1101(1) of NAFTA, concluding thus:

“If the threshold provided by Article 1101(1) were merely one ‘affecting’, as
Methanex contends, it would be satisfied wherever any economic impact
was felt by an investor or an investment. For example, in this case, the
test could be met by suppliers to Methanex who suffered as a result of
Methanex’s alleged losses, suppliers to those suppliers and so on,
towards infinity. As such, Article 1101(1) would provide no significant
threshold to NAFTA arbitration. A threshold which could be surmounted by
an indeterminate class of investors making a claim alleging loss is no
threshold at all; and the attractive simplicity of Methanex’s interpretation
derives from the fact that it imposes no practical limit. It may be true, to
adapt Pascal’s statement, that the history of the world would have been
much affected if Cleopatra’s nose had been different, but by itself cannot
mean that we are related to the royal nose. The chaos theory provides no
guide to the interpretation of this important phrase; and a strong dose of
practical common-sense is required.”'72

126. The Respondent finds in Methanex a correct statement about the
causal link of a legal nature that is needed to connect the alleged facts to the
investor:

“In a legal instrument such as NAFTA, Methanex’s interpretation would
produce a surprising, if not an absurd, result. The possible consequences
of human conduct are infinite, especially when comprising acts of

122 Id, para. 107 (quoting para. 137 of Methanex Corporation v. United States, First Partial Award
(7 August 2002), available at http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/12613.pdf).

-43-

governmental agencies; but common sense does not require that line to
run unbroken towards an endless horizon. In a traditional legal context,
somewhere the line is broken; and whether as a matter of logic, social
policy or other value judgment, a limit is necessarily imposed restricting

the consequences for which that conduct is to be held accountable [...]”"*°

127. The Respondent has also argued that the facts underlying the link
between the Measures and the Claimant must be proven in this phase of the
proceedings and not together with the merits of the case. At least, the Claimant
must show that it has a legitimate prima facie claim based on international law
and not a mere contractual conflict or a mere conflict of interests with the
Respondent.'4

128. The Respondent concludes by affirming that the Claimant has not
shown a direct, proximate and immediate connection between the Measures and
its “alleged investment”, and that it would be impossible for the Claimant to do so
because the Measures were not addressed specifically against the investment
nor were they related to the investment.’

(ii) Position of the Claimant

129. The Claimant affirms that its claim is not related to the Argentine
Republic's general measures but to specific commitments made by the
Respondent and upon which the Respondent reneged in violation of the Treaty.
The direct connection between the Measures and the investment is based on the
fact that the Measures directly affected the Claimant’s rights associated with its
investment and protected under international law.

130. The Claimant finds support for its position in CMS, quoting a
passage cited by the Respondent and by the Tribunal at paragraph 97'*° above

"23 id, para. 109 (quoting Methanex, supra note 122, para. 138).
124 Iq. para. 103.

"25 id, para. 110.

"8 See para. 97, above.

-44-

and in the following additional language, which the Claimant quotes in full:

“On the basis of the above considerations the Tribunal concludes on this
point that it does not have jurisdiction over measures of general economic
policy adopted by the Republic of Argentina and cannot pass judgment on
whether they are right or wrong. The Tribunal also concludes, however.
that it has jurisdiction to examine whether specific measures affecting the
Claimant's investment or measures of general economic policy having a
direct_bearing on such investment have been adopted in violation of
legally binding commitments made to the investor in treaties, legislation or
contracts.”'?”

 

131. The Claimant observes that the question whether certain measures

affected rights and caused injury to the Claimant is a matter linked to the merits

of the dispute. According to the Claimant, the Tribunal must only be satisfied that

there is prima facie a sufficiently direct connection between the Measures and

the investment concerned. The Claimant again refers to CMS:

“While conceptually the line between one and the other matter is clear, in
practice whether a given claim falls under one or the other heading can
only be established in light of the evidence which the parties will produce
and address in connection with the merits of the case. (...) This means in
fact that the issue of what falls within or outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
will be subsumed in the determination of whether a given claim is or is not
directly connected with specific measures affecting the investment.

For the time being, the fact that the Claimant has demonstrated prima
facie that it has been adversely affected by measures adopted by the
Republic of Argentina is sufficient for the Tribunal to consider that the
claim, as far as this matter is concerned, is admissible and that it has

"27 CMS, supra note 81, para. 35 (quoted in the Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction,
para. 45). (Emphasis added by the Claimant.)

-45-

jurisdiction to examine it on the merits.

132.

128

The Claimant notes that this position of the tribunal in CMS is

consistent with “the traditional restraint that tribunals have exercised in reviewing
the nature of the disputes submitted to ICSID arbitration.”'2? The Claimant also

observes that the threshold requirement is that of Article 8 of the Treaty and not
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention: “disputes with regard to an investment” as

opposed to “any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment.

133.
Statement of

#130

The Claimant restates the summary of claims included in the
Claim, which reads as follows:

“Argentina breached its obligations to National Grid under the Treaty by
the Measures adopted since January 2002, described in Section III above,

which

run openly and directly against specific and critical provisions

contained in the Regulatory Framework of the investment, and in
particular by:

(i)

(iii)

(iv)

failing to respect the promise that Transener’s and Transba’s tariff-
based remuneration would be ‘fair and reasonable’ and sufficient to
cover reasonable operating costs, taxes, amortizations and provide
a ‘reasonable rate of return’;

abolishing Transener’s and Transba’s right to calculate all their
remuneration in US dollars and express it in pesos at the exchange
rate applicable at the time of billing;

abolishing Transener’s and Transba’s right to adjust their
remuneration every six months in accordance with US PPI and US
CPI indices;

converting all of Transener’s and Transba’s remuneration into

"28 fd. para. 34-35 (quoted in the Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 46).
"28 Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 47.

180 id., para. 48.

- 46 -

(vii)

pesos at the artificial rate of one peso to one dollar, in spite of the
fact that the dollar-peso parity established under the Convertibility
Law was also abolished, allowing the peso to float freely, thus
rapidly falling in value, and eventually stabilizing at about three
pesos to one dollar;

freezing Transener’s and Transba’s tariff-based remuneration for
the electricity transmission service completely as of January 2002,
at one third of its approved 2001 level in dollar terms;

failing to conduct the Five Year Review of Transener’s (due 2003)
and Transba’s (due 2002) tariff-based remuneration in order to
ensure the tariffs’ continued compliance with the guarantees
provided by the Regulatory Framework, particularly that of
providing a ‘fair and reasonable’ tariff sufficient to satisfy
reasonable operating costs, taxes, amortizations and a ‘reasonable

rate of return’; and

failing to adjust Transener’s and _ Transba’s _ tariff-based
remuneration on the basis of ‘objective and justified’ circumstances,
and/or on the basis that remuneration had become ‘unjust,
unreasonable, unduly discriminatory or preferential’, as a result of
the January 2002 Law.

Argentina’s Measures, with their consequential losses to National Grid and

its investment, constitute breaches of the Treaty, in particular:

‘1 id., para. 49.

an expropriation of National Grid's investment without
compensation, in violation of Article 5(1) of the Treaty [...]

Le]

mistreatment of National Grid’s investment in violation of the
standards of treatment provided by Article 2(2) of the Treaty [...]’"°"

-47-

The Claimant concludes that those claims refer to specific measures having a
direct effect on the investment. The claims do not question general measures per
se, such as the devaluation or the establishment of a different exchange rate
parity, but rather “the very specific and concrete repudiation” by the Respondent

of commitments in the Regulatory Framework.'22

134. As regards Methanex, the Claimant observes that NAFTA
establishes in Article 1101(1) a higher threshold than Article 8(1) of the Treaty.
Article 1101(1) refers to measures “relating to” the investor or the investment,
Article 8(1) refers to a dispute “with regard to an investment.”'*? The Claimant
argues that Article 8(1) does not require a direct connection between the
measures giving rise to the dispute and the investment, as opposed to the
Methanex tribunal’s interpretation of Article 1101(1), calling for a “legally
significant connection” between the measure and the investment or the
investor.'°* The Claimant affirms that this understanding of Article 1101(1) must
be read together with the holding in Pope & Talbot rejecting “Canada’s
submissions that a measure can only relate to an investment if it is primarily
directed at that investment and that a measure aimed at trade in goods ipso facto
cannot be addressed as well under Chapter 11.”'°° Thus, there must be a “legally
significant connection” between the measures in question and the claimant and
its investments, but this connection does not need to be “primarily directed” at the
investments.'*° The Claimant affirms that its claim meets the “legally significant

connection,” although such connection is not required under the Treaty.'°”

(b) Considerations of the Tribunal

135. This jurisdictional objection submitted by the Argentine Republic

182 id., para. 52.
"83 Iq., paras. 54-55.
'84 id, (stating standard of “relating to” enunciated in Methanex, supra note 122, para. 147).

*85 id, para. 55 (quoting Preliminary Motion by the Government of Canada to dismiss the claim
because it falls outside the scope and coverage of NAFTA).

186 id., para. 56
187 ig.

- 48 -

raises the issue whether the Tribunal is competent to pass judgment on matters
of public policy and whether the Measures were taken with regard to the
“investment”, as required by Article 8 of the Treaty.

136. The Tribunal has no difficulty in recognizing the Argentine
Republic’s sovereign prerogative to adopt the policies it sees fit. The Tribunal
readily subscribes to the holding of CMS in this respect, namely:

“On the basis of the above considerations the Tribunal concludes on this
point that it does not have jurisdiction over measures of general economic
policy adopted by the Republic of Argentina and cannot pass judgment on
whether they are right or wrong.”"®

137. However, the CMS tribunal did not stop here as submitted by the
Respondent. It added:

“The Tribunal also concludes, however, that it has jurisdiction to examine
whether specific measures affecting the Claimant's investment or
measures of general economic policy having a direct bearing on such
investment have been adopted in violation of legally binding commitments

made to the investor in treaties, legislation or contracts.”'°°

138. Thus the issue is not passing judgment on policy measures of a
State or considering measures that simply affect an investment, but whether the
Measures had a direct bearing on the investment and violated binding obligations
between Argentina and the Claimant.

139. The parties have discussed the meaning of “related to” and “with
regard to” an investment. The Tribunal does not find the difference between
these two expressions significant in the instant case; both refer to a connection, a

‘88 CMS, supra note 81, para. 33.
139 ig.

-49-

relation to the word that follows them.'*° There has to be a connection between
the Measures and the investment. The connection does not need to be exclusive.
There may be other investments to which the Measures are related. As stated in
CMS, the measures adopted need to contravene “legally binding commitments

made to the investor in treaties, legislation or contracts.”"*"

140. The Argentine Republic has requested that the Claimant prove the
connection between the Measures and the Argentine Republic’s commitments at
this stage of the proceedings. There is no doubt that National Grid made an
investment in Argentina and, were it not for its sale of the shares in Citelec, the
Argentine Republic would have accepted that the Claimant would be an investor
under the Treaty. There is no doubt either that the Argentine Republic solicited
the investment and that the execution of the Treaty had as its purpose to attract
such investment. There is no denial that certain laws were passed by the
Argentine Republic to ensure that such legislative framework would encourage
investments. The dispute, as it has been framed and presented by the Claimant,
is about the changes introduced to this legislative framework and the effect those
changes had on the investment and the contractual obligations under related
agreements. To the Tribunal, this is sufficient to establish the existence, prima
facie, of a dispute with regard to the investment. The Tribunal does not need to
be satisfied any further for purposes of deciding on its jurisdiction under the
Treaty.

141. Therefore, the Tribunal rejects this objection to its jurisdiction.

4. Fourth Objection: The Dispute Is Not a “Legal Dispute”

(a) Position of the Parties

(i) Position of the Respondent

142. First, the Respondent argues that under the Treaty the dispute

‘40 The UK has used both expressions indistinctly in its treaty practice. In fact, the two model
investment agreements submitted during these proceedings use “in relation to.”
‘*" CMS, supra note 81, para. 33.

-50-

must be related to the violation of legal rights and not a mere conflict of interest
and that the dispute must be susceptible of settlement by the application of the
law. According to the Respondent, the disagreement between the parties on a
point of fact or of law must be directed to the international obligations of the
State, as stated by the tribunal in Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine.'** However, the
Respondent argues that, in the instant case, the alleged violations refer to
specific contractual violations. Accordingly, Respondent claims that the tribunals
competent to decide on the alleged violations are the Argentine courts, as “freely

agreed between the parties to the dispute.”"°

143. The Respondent adds that:

(A) this Tribunal should not assume the role of the national administrative
courts. The claim is clearly a claim for adjustment due to “increased costs”
(mayores costos) for which there is a specific administrative procedure to restore

the equilibrium of the contract;'**

(B) simple affirmations of supposed violations of the Treaty by the
Argentine Republic are not sufficient to turn allegations of a failed administrative
mechanism of tariff adjustment based on criteria of public policy and equity into

a “dispute about an investment” under the Treaty;'*° and

(C) “whether there exists an international dispute is a matter for objective
determination”, as stated by the ICJ in Interpretation of Peace Treaties.'*°

144. Second, the Respondent argues that if the claim were of a legal
nature, then it would be a contractual claim. All the facts presented by the
Claimant refer to violations of contractual obligations, while the remedies
requested to solve the contractual problem are remedies directed at obtaining

‘2 Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/9, Award (16 September 2003),
44 ILM 404 (2005), para. 18.4.

‘3 Respondent's Plea on Jurisdiction, paras. 112-116.
"4 id, para. 119.
"48 Id. para. 123.

“46 id, para. 124 (citing Interpretation of Peace Treaties with Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania, 1st
Phase, Advisory Opinion (30 March 1950), [1950] /CU Reports, 65, 74).

-51-

restitution of the investment. The Respondent refers to the principle of the
“essential basis of a claim” introduced by the Annulment Committee in Vivendi
11.'47 According to Vivendi Il, when the essential basis of a claim submitted to an
international tribunal is a breach of contract, the tribunal shall respect any valid
clause of forum selection clause in the contract. In this case, the Respondent
affirms that the basis of the claim is a nearly completed renegotiation of
concession contracts and not the dismantling of an investment or a breach of

international standards under the Treaty.'®

145. Under this line of argument, the Respondent alleges that the
Tribunal has the authority to determine the admissibility of the claim at this
jurisdictional phase of the proceeding. For this purpose, the Tribunal requires
only a careful reading of the Statement of Claim. The Respondent relies further
on the authority of SGS v. Philippines,'“° where the tribunal remanded the case
to the local courts in its decision on jurisdiction. Respondent also relies on the
decision of the ICJ in the Nuclear Tests case, stating the advantage of tribunals
limiting the scope of their specific jurisdiction, as well as the importance of doing

so at the earliest available opportunity.

146. Third, the Respondent argues that, this being a contractual claim,
the Claimant has no ius standi to submit this claim to arbitration. The affected
legal rights are those belonging to the concessionaire companies and not those
of the Claimant.'®' Derivative claims are not admissible under Argentine law or
international law. The Respondent conducts a comparative review of the
treatment of derivative claims under NAFTA, the US-Chile Free Trade
Agreement, and US law, for the purpose of showing the exceptional nature of

4” Compafia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment (3 July 2002), 19 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 89 (2004).

“48 Respondent's Plea on Jurisdiction, paras. 128, 132 and 135.

“8 SGS v. Philippines, supra note 48.

‘80 Respondent's Plea on Jurisdiction, paras. 137-139 (citing Nuclear Tests (Australia v. France),
Judgment (20 December 1974), [1974] /CU Reports 253).

'S1 id, paras. 140-141.

-52-

those claims. "©?

147. The Respondent further argues that, in principle, there does not
exist any right to a particular value of a share and that, under Argentine law, the
only patrimonial right of a shareholder, strictu sensu, is the right to share in the
liquidation value of the company. The Respondent then distinguishes between
direct and derivative claims according to the different claims recognized by a
shareholder who suffered a specific injury, as opposed to the injuries suffered by
all shareholders. The Respondent also discusses the underlying policies or
interests sought to be protected by both types of claims, namely, the integrity of
the corporation on the one hand and the rights of creditors on the other. Failing to
take this distinction into account, argues the Respondent, would amount to a
preference for the interest of a shareholder who decides to file a claim over the
needs of the company and of interested third parties taken as a whole.'®? The
Respondent also points out that, in the case of a claim for special damages and
injuries, the decision of the court is based on the facts presented in the claim and
not in the allegation of the claimant or on how the claimant qualifies its claim.'™*
For all these reasons, contends the Respondent, the Tribunal should not proceed
to the merits. If the Tribunal were to do otherwise, and were to decide the case
in favor of the shareholders, given the commitments made by Transener to the
Respondent in the letter of understanding, the amount awarded by the Tribunal
to the shareholders would not be paid into the corporate treasury and would lead
to the liquidation of the company. Thus, the Tribunal would be destroying the
capital needed for the company to recover from the alleged expropriation. In fact,
the Tribunal would be expropriating a public services company to favor a few
shareholders, thus assuming implicit powers to liquidate the company, which
powers the Tribunal is not entitled to assume."

182 id, paras. 151-158.
183 fq. paras. 159-170.
'84 id., para. 163.
*85 id, para. 173.

-53-

(ii) Position of the Claimant

148. First, the Claimant observes that Respondent's arguments refer to
principles of Argentine corporate law and domestic rules relating to the doctrine
of legal personality of companies, which are not relevant to this arbitration. The
Claimant reaffirms that its claims are based on the Treaty and not the domestic
law of the Argentine Republic or any other domestic legal system. With respect to
jurisdiction, the applicable law is found in the jurisdictional provisions of the
Treaty as stated in CMS and Siemens.‘

149. Second, the Claimant recalls that it has filed its Statement of Claim
as a UK investor in Argentina; its claim arises directly from its rights under the
Treaty and the breach by the Respondent of its obligations under the Treaty:
“There is nothing indirect or derivative about these claims,” states the
Claimant.'°”

150. The Claimant notes that the Argentine Republic’s argument ignores
that the commitments made to the concessionaires in their respective contracts
were made to the foreign investors as part of the efforts made by the Argentine
Republic to attract bidders in the privatization of its public utilities. These
commitments were “part of the entire Regulatory Framework for the privatization
of the electricity industry, established by Argentina in laws, decrees, and

resolutions as well as in the Contracts themselves.”1°

151. The Claimant refers to the considerations that led the tribunal in
Enron v. Argentina to find that the Claimant had ius standi:

“...[T]he Information Memorandum issued in 1992 and other instruments
related to the privatization of the gas industry had specifically invited
foreign investors to participate in this process. A road show followed in key

‘86 Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 135-138 (citing CMS, supra note 81,
para. 42 and Siemens, supra note 41, para. 31).

'87 id., para. 140.

*88 id, para. 142.

-54-

cities around the world [...]

The conclusion that follows is that participation of the Claimant was
specifically sought [...] The Claimant cannot be considered to be only
remotely connected to the legal arrangements governing the privatization,
they are beyond any doubt the owners of the investment made and their
rights are protected under the Treaty as clearly established treaty-rights
and not merely contractual rights related to some intermediary. The fact
that the investment was made through CIESA and related companies
does not in any way alter this conclusion."

152. The Claimant notes that the same considerations apply to the
process of privatization of Transener described in the Statement of Claim.’
There cannot be any doubt that the addressees of the commitments made by the
Respondent were the investors, in particular the foreign investors. Transener and
subsequently Transba were “simply the local entities through which the foreign
investment was funneled.”'®' The Claimant adds that BITs were part of these
commitments. As noted in Enron (Ancillary Claim): “That the Treaty was made
with the specific purpose of guaranteeing the rights of the foreign investors and
encouraging their participation in the privatization process, is beyond doubt.”"©

153. The Claimant concludes its second argument by affirming that it is
a directly interested party and is independently entitled to submit its claim to the
Tribunal, irrespective of whether the alleged breach of the Treaty may also

involve a breach of the Contracts.'®

'89 Id., para. 143 (quoting paras. 55-56 of Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. The
Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/3, Decision on Jurisdiction (14 January 2004),
available at http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Enron-Jurisdiction.pdf).

1©9 Id., para. 144 (citing the Statement of Claim, paras. 78-83).

181 fd. para. 145.

162 Id, para. 146 (quoting para. 32 of Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. The
Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/3, Decision on Jurisdiction (Ancillary Claim) (2
August 2004), available at http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Enron-DecisiononJurisdiction-FINAL-
English.pdf).

163 id., paras. 147-149.

-55-

154. Third, the Claimant argues that the wording of the Treaty does not
support Respondent's position. The Treaty defines broadly the term “investment”
and includes “shares, [...] and any other form of participation [...] in a
company.”'™ This provision covers the Claimant's participation in Transener and
Transba and the Claimant is entitled to bring a claim in respect of these
investments. If they are damaged as a result of a breach of the Treaty, the
Claimant is entitled to be compensated for it."

155. Fourth, the Claimant refers to the numerous arbitration cases in
which a similar ius standi objection has been rejected, i.e. CMS, Enron, Azurix,
Siemens and Maffezini. The Tribunal will limit the reference to a few of the
findings of these tribunals quoted by the Claimant.

156. Thus, in CMS, the tribunal found:

“"..no bar in current international law to the concept of allowing claims by
shareholders independently from those of the corporation concerned, not
even if those shareholders are minority or non-controlling shareholders
[...] [this] can now be considered the general rule, certainly in respect of
foreign investments and international claims and increasingly in respect of
other matters.”"

157. The tribunal in Enron held:

“Whether the locally incorporated company may further claim for the
violation of its rights under contracts, licenses or other instruments, does
not affect the direct right of action of foreign shareholders under the
Bilateral Investment Treaty for protecting their interests in the qualifying

164 fq. para. 150 (citing Treaty, Art. I(a)(ii)).
"65 id., para. 150.
'66 CMS, supra note 81, para. 48.

-56-

investment.”""”
158. The Claimant also points out that shareholder claims were allowed
in Goetz, AAPL, Genin, and CME, and concludes by saying that all these cases

show that such claims are well recognized in international law.'©

(b) Considerations of the Tribunal

159. The Respondent questions whether a legal dispute exits and, if it
exists, then the Respondent contends that it is a contractual dispute that should
be submitted to the federal courts of the City of Buenos Aires, as agreed in the
Contracts. This objection and its reasoning overlap in part with the Sixth
Objection. To avoid repetition, the Tribunal will address the second part of the
issue of the forum selection in the Contracts when considering that objection.

160. In addressing Respondent’s objections, the Tribunal finds useful
the definition of “legal dispute” found in the Report of the Executive Directors of
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development to the Board of
Governors accompanying the draft ICSID Convention: “The dispute must
concern the existence or scope of a legal right or obligation, or the nature or
extent of the reparation to be made for breach of a legal obligation.”"® Although
this Report does not apply to the interpretation of the Treaty, we find the
foregoing language illustrative of the appropriate approach in this case. The
arguments advanced by the parties and the facts alleged by them show that a

‘87 Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 154 (citing Enron, Decision on Jurisdiction,
supra note 159, para. 49).

188 Id, paras. 161-162 (citing Antoine Goetz et consorts v. République du Burundi, \CSID Case
No. ARB/95/3, Award (10 February 1999), 6 ICSID Rep. 5 (2004), paras. 6, 87 and 89; Asian
Agricultural Products Ltd (AAPL) v. Republic of Sri Lanka, \CSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Final
Award (27 June 1990), 6 ICSID Rev. —FILJ 526 (1991), para. 95; Alex Genin, Eastern Credit
Limited, Inc. and AS Baltoil v. The Republic of Estonia, \CSID Case No. ARB/99/2, Award (25
June 2001), 17 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 395 (2002), paras. 323-325; and CME Czech Republic BV v.
The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Case, Partial Award (13 September 2001), para. 392, available
at http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/CME-2001 PartialAward.pdf).

‘68 Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (18 March 1965), adopted by Resolution
No. 214 of the Board of Governors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
on 10 September 1964, 1 ICSID Rep. 23, 28 (1993).

-57-

dispute exists between them as to whether the protection due to the investor
under the Treaty has been violated and as to whether commitments were made
to the investor under the laws of the Argentine Republic that would give rise to a
claim under the Treaty. These claims extend beyond claims for breach of
contract as contemplated in Vivendi Il. Therefore, the Tribunal is satisfied that a
dispute exists between the parties concerning an obligation of the Respondent
with regard to an investment of the Claimant, as required under Article 8 of the
Treaty, and rejects this objection to the extent that it concerns the absence of a
legal dispute.

5. Fifth Objection: Letters of Understanding

(a) Positions of the Parties
(i) Position of the Respondent

161. The Respondent brings to the attention of the Tribunal letters of
understanding signed by Transener and Transba on February 2, 2005 in the
context of the renegotiation of the Contracts. In the case of Transener, Transener
and its shareholders committed themselves to suspend, and desist from, any
claim or recourse filed before any administrative, judicial or arbitral body in
Argentina or elsewhere based on facts or measures taken in respect of the
Concession Contract as a result of the emergency situation established by Law
No. 25,561. Furthermore, in case the shareholders or former shareholders of
Transener were to obtain an award or judgment in their favor, Transener would
be responsible for payment of any compensation awarded, including fees and
costs, and would hold Respondent harmless even in case of contract termination.
It was also agreed that any such compensation, fees and costs, would not be
recoverable through increased charges to the users of Transener’s services. The
parties to the letter of understanding confirm that the letter is the result of the
renegotiation process provided for in Law No. 25,561 and ancillary statutes, and
that the renegotiation’s objective was to re-establish the conditions to provide the
Public Service of Transport of High-Voltage Electric Power. A similar commitment

- 58 -

was made by Transba.'”°

162. It is the Respondent's position that, since it has reached a clear
understanding with Transener and Transba, which are the Concessionaires
entitled to the rights claimed in these arbitration proceedings, the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction to continue with the arbitration proceedings. Since neither Transener,
nor Transba nor their shareholders could file claims against the Argentine
Republic for measures taken since December 2001, neither could National Grid
do so, having sold its shares at its own risk. National Grid suffered no harm and,
as stated by the ICJ in Nuclear Tests, he who does not suffer any harm is not

entitled under international law to request the protection of a tribunal.'”'

(ii) Position of the Claimant

163. The Claimant contends that the letters of understanding executed
by Transener and Transba after National Grid’s disposal of its investment are
irrelevant for the purpose of determining the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over this
dispute. National Grid has never participated nor is it participating in the
renegotiation and its Treaty claims are independent of the renegotiation. The
Claimant draws the attention of the Tribunal to the statement made by the
tribunal in CMS, responding to a similar jurisdictional objection:

“It is not for the Tribunal to rule on the perspectives of the renegotiation
process or on what TGN might do in respect of its shareholders, as these
are matters between Argentina and TGN or between TGN and its
shareholders.”

164. The Claimant observes that it was the Respondent that imposed
the renegotiation process upon the Concessionaires and alleges that a process
in which the Claimant plays and can play no part cannot block its Treaty

© Respondent's Plea on Jurisdiction, paras. 174, et seq.
‘7 Id., paras. 181-182 (citing Nuclear Tests, supra note 150, para. 53).

‘72 CMS, supra note 81, para. 86 (quoted in the Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction,
para. 165).

-59-

claims.'7°

(b) Considerations of the Tribunal

165. The Respondent’s argument is based on the contention that the
shareholders hold no direct rights to claim protection under the Treaty and that,
since the Measures are unassailable by Transener and Transba, those Measures
are also unassailable by Transener’s and Transba’s shareholders. This argument
advanced by the Respondent ignores the possibility of direct claims by National
Grid based on obligations undertaken by the Argentine Republic in the Treaty.
The Tribunal has already accepted prima facie the allegation that certain
commitments were made by the Argentine Republic to the shareholders of
Transener in order to attract their investment. The Tribunal has also upheld its
jurisdiction to decide whether the Measures breached any treaty obligations. The
Tribunal notes that neither Transener nor Transba had any rights to pursue
claims under the Treaty and hence lacked legal capacity to negotiate them away
with the Respondent. The fact that as part of this negotiation the Respondent
obtained assurances of compensation by the Concessionaires in the event the
Tribunal should award compensation to the Claimant, and the intimation by the
Argentine Republic that such an eventual award might bankrupt a public utility
should have no effect on the jurisdiction of this Tribunal to settle this dispute, for
those are matters negotiated with third parties to these proceedings. The holding
of the tribunal in CMS quoted above applies equally here.

166. For these reasons, the Tribunal rejects this objection to its
jurisdiction.

6. Sixth Objection: Exclusive Jurisdiction of the Federal Courts of
Buenos Aires

(a) Position of the Parties

"8 Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 166.

-60-

(i) Position of the Respondent

167. The Respondent observes that Article 38 in both Contracts
provides for jurisdiction of the federal courts of Argentina’s federal capital. The
Respondent invites the Tribunal to read carefully the decisions in the Woodruff
Case’ and North American Dredging Company’”® recognizing the primacy of
the specific jurisdiction agreed in a contract over the jurisdiction established
under an international agreement. Respondent contends that this case is no
different. If National Grid accepted the jurisdiction in the Contract when the
remedies under the Treaty were already known, National Grid now is precluded
by its own acts from resorting to such remedies.'”© The Respondent observes
that this criterion has been confirmed by the tribunals in the SGS cases, quoting
the following statement from SGS v. Philippines:

“[...] the question is whether a party should be allowed to rely on a
contract as the basis of its claim when the contract itself refers that claim
exclusively to another forum. In the Tribunal’s view the answer is that it
should not be allowed to do so, unless there are good reasons, such as
force majeure, preventing the claimant from complying with its contract.
This impediment, based as it is on the principle that a party to a contract
cannot claim on that contract without itself complying with it, is more

naturally considered as a matter of admissibility than jurisdiction.”"””

(ii) Position of the Claimant

168. The Claimant refers to a long line of cases - CMS, Enron, Azurix,
Compania de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Compagnie Générale des Eaux,
Vivendi II, Lanco, Salini, and CME — to the effect that it is “well established in
international case law that claims alleging a cause of action under a BIT are not

4 Woodruff, United States-Venezuela Mixed Commission, IX R.I.A.A. 213.

"® North American Dredging Company of Texas, United States-Mexico General Claims
Commission, IV R.1.A.A. 26.

© Respondent's Plea on Jurisdiction, paras. 184-190.
‘77 id, para. 192 (quoting SGS v. Philippines, supra note 48, para. 154).

-61-

subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the local courts pursuant to an underlying

contract.”"”°

(b) Considerations of the Tribunal

169. The Tribunal recalls the simple fact that National Grid is not a party
to the Concession Contracts, in which the Concessionaires agreed to the
exclusive jurisdiction of the federal courts in Argentina’s federal capital. This
should distinguish this case from some of the others adduced by the parties and
facilitate the Tribunal’s task. The Tribunal finds it somewhat contradictory that the
Respondent would base its jurisdictional objection on preserving the integrity of
the corporate personality of the Concessionaires while at the same time
contending that the Claimant is bound by a commitment that it has not made.
The Tribunal realizes that the Respondent's defense relies on rejecting the
possibility that Claimant may bring claims under the treaty separately from claims
arising under the Contracts. However, this is a matter to be proven by the
Claimant at the time of discussing the merits of its claims. As characterized by
the Claimant, the claims brought before this Tribunal fall prima facie under the
Treaty. As held in SGS v. Pakistan: “...[I]f the facts asserted by the Claimant are
capable of being regarded as alleged breaches of the BIT, consistently with the
practice of ICSID tribunals, the Claimant should be able to have them considered

on their merits.""°

170. Therefore, the Tribunal rejects the sixth objection to its jurisdiction
and the fourth objection to the extent that it relates to the same matter.

178 Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 79-87.

8 $§GS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Case No.
ARB/01/13, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (6 August 2003), para. 145.

-62-

DECISION

1. Having considered the parties’ arguments in their written and oral
pleadings and for the reasons above stated, the Tribunal unanimously decides
that:

1. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider the claims of National Grid set
forth in its Notice of Arbitration and its Statement of Claim.

2. National Grid has ius standi to present such claims.

The Tribunal has, accordingly, made the necessary order, in accordance
with Procedural Order No. 2, to establish the dates for the parties to submit their
Counter-Memorial, Reply and Rejoinder on the merits.

Each party has requested that the costs of the jurisdictional phase of the
proceedings, including its own costs, be borne by the other. The Tribunal further
decides to consider and decide this matter together with the merits of the dispute.

Done in English and Spanish, both versions being equally authoritative, in
Washington, D.C. on June 20 _, 2006.

    

fi K

Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda
President

E. Vinitney oes Esq.

Professor Alejandro M. Garro
Arbitrator Arbitrator

-63-

 

