INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the Arbitration Proceedings between:

 

NATIONAL GAS S.A.E.
Claimant
- and -
ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
Respondent
ICSID Case No. ARB/11/7
AWARD

 

The Tribunal:
Mr. V. V. Veeder QC, President

The Honourable L. Yves Fortier CC, OQ, QC
Professor Brigitte Stern

The Tribunal’s Secretary
Mr. Paul-Jean Le Cannu

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 3 April 2014

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing National Gas S.A.E.:

c/o Dr. Khaled El Shalakany
Mr. Adam Khaled El Shalakany
Mr. Sherif Morsy

Shalakany Law Office

12, El Maraashly St.

Zamalek 11211

Cairo, Egypt

Representing Arab Republic of Egypt:

c/o Mr. Ezzat Ouda, President
Mr. Mahmoud Elkhrashy, Counselor
Mr. Amr Arafa, Counselor
Ms. Fatma Khalifa, Counselor
Ms. Rime Hendy, Counselor
Ms. Lela Kassem, Counselor
Egyptian State Lawsuits Authority (ESLA)
10th Floor, Mogamaa Building
Tahrir Square
Cairo, Egypt

and
Mr. Louis-Christophe Delanoy
Mr. Raéd Fathallah
Ms. Liliane Djahangir
Bredin Prat
130, rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré
75008 Paris, France

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PART I: THE ARBITRATION

 

PART II: EXTRACTS FROM RELEVANT TEXTS

PART III: JURISDICTION RATIONE PERSONAE .........c.ccccscssessesessesteseeseseeseseesesesseseeneseeneseenes

PART IV: JURISDICTION RATIONE TEMPORISG.........c.ccccsccscssessssesseseeeseeeseeeseeseseeseseeneseenes

PART V: COSTS

 

PART VI: THE OPERATIVE PART

 

54

56

GLOSSARY

Arbitration Rules ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings
Treaty Treaty between the Government of the Arab

Republic of Egypt and the Government of the
United Arab Emirates on the Encouragement,
Protection and Guarantee of Investments
signed on 11 May 1997

ICSID Convention Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18 March 1965

ICSID or the Centre International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

Claimant or National Gas National Gas S.A.E.
Respondent or Egypt Arab Republic of Egypt
T. [page:line] Transcript of the hearing on bifurcated

jurisdictional issues on 27 June 2013

iii

List OF LEGAL MATERIALS

AAPL

ADC v. Hungary

Aguas del Tunari

Amco

Autopista

Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Yugoslavia

Burimi

Award dated 27 June 1990 in Asian
Agricultural Products Limited v. Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (ICSID Case
No. ARB/87/3) (Tribunal: Ahmed Sadek El-
Kosheri, Samuel K.B. Asante, Berthold
Goldman).

Award dated 2 October 2006 in ADC Affiliate
Limited & others v. Hungary (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/16) (Tribunal: Neil Kaplan, Charles
Brower, Albert Jan van den Berg).

Decision on Respondent’s Objections to
Jurisdiction dated 21 October 2005 in Aguas
del Tunari, S.A. v. Republic of Bolivia ICSID
Case No. ARB/02/3) (Tribunal: David Caron,
José Luis Alberro-Semerena, Henri C.
Alvarez).

Decision on Jurisdiction dated 25 September
1983 in Amco Asia Corporation and others v.
Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No.
ARB/81/1) (Tribunal: Berthold Goldman, Isi
Foighel, Edward W. Rubin).

Decision on Jurisdiction dated 27 September
2001 in Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela,
C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/00/5) (Tribunal:
Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Karl-Heinz
Béckstiegel, Bernardo M. Cremades).

Case Concerning Application of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro)) (Provisional Measures, Order of
13 September 1993), 1993 ICJ Rep. at 325.

Award dated 29 May 2013 in Burimi & Eagle
Games v Albania (ICSID Case No ARB/11/18)
(Tribunal: Daniel M. Price, Bernardo M.
Cremades, Ibrahim Fadlallah).

Fireman’s Fund

2006 ILC Articles

LETCO

Loewen

Manciaux

MHS

Rompetrol

Schreuer

SOABI

Decision on the Preliminary Question dated

17 July 2003 in Fireman’s Fund Insurance
Company v. United Mexican States (ICSID
Case No. ARB(AF)/02/1) (Tribunal: Albert Jan
van den Berg, Andreas F. Lowenfeld, Alberto
Guillermo Saavedra Olavarrieta).

International Law Commission’s Articles on
Diplomatic Protection, adopted by the
International Law Commission at its fifty-
eighth session, in 2006, and submitted to the
General Assembly as a part of the
Commission’s report covering the work of that
session (A/61/10).

Decision on Jurisdiction dated 24 October
1984 in Liberian Eastern Timber Corporation
v. Republic of Liberia (ICSID Case No.
ARB/83/2) (Tribunal: Bernardo M. Cremades,
Jorge Gongalves Pereira, D.A. Redfern).

Award dated 26 June 2003 in The Loewen
Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United
States of America (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/98/3) (Tribunal: Anthony Mason,
Abner J. Mikva, Michael Mustill).

Sébastien Manciaux, Investissements étrangers
et arbitrage entre Etats et ressortissants d’ autres
Etats (2004) 179.

Decision on the Application for Annulment
dated 16 April 2009 in Malaysian Historic
Salvors SDN BHD v Government of Malaysia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/ /05/10) (Ad Hoc
Committee: Judge Schwebel, Judge
Shahabuddeen and Judge Tomka).

Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections on Jurisdiction and Admissibility
dated 18 April 2008 in The Rompetrol Group
N.V. v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3)
(Tribunal: Franklin Berman, Donald Donovan,
Marc Lalonde).

Christoph Schreuer et al, The ICSID
Convention: A Commentary (CUP, 2nd ed).

Award dated 25 February 1988 in Société
Ouest Africaine des Bétons Industriels v.
Senegal (ICSID Case No. ARB/82/1)

Tokios Tokelés

TSA Spectrum

TSA Spectrum Gaillard commentary

Vacuum Salt

Vacuum Salt Gaillard commentary

VCLT

Wena

(Tribunal: Aron Broches, Kéba Mbaye, J.C.
Schultsz).

Decision on Jurisdiction dated 29 April 2004 in
Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/18) (Tribunal: Prosper Weil, Daniel
M. Price, Piero Bernardini).

Award dated 19 December 2008 in TSA
Spectrum de Argentina, S.A. v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/5)
(Tribunal: Hans Danelius, Georges Abi-Saab,
Grant D. Aldonas).

Emmanuel Gaillard, “Chronique des sentences
arbitrales”, Journal du droit international
(Clunet) n° 1, January 2009, p. 368.

Award dated 16 February 1994 in Vacuum Salt
Products Ltd. v. Republic of Ghana (ICSID
Case No. ARB/92/1) (Tribunal: Robert Y.
Jennings, Charles N. Brower, Kamal Hossain).

Emmanuel Gaillard, “Chronique des sentences
arbitrales”, Journal du droit international
(Clunet) n° 1, January-March 1995, p. 181.

The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
155 UNTS 331, 8 ILM 679 (1969), in force
from 27 January 1980.

Decision on Jurisdiction dated 29 June 1999 in
Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of
Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4) (Tribunal:
Monroe Leigh, Ibrahim Fadlallah, Don
Wallace, Jr.).

vi

PART I: THE ARBITRATION

The Parties’ Dispute: This arbitration concerns a claim submitted by the Claimant to the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on
the basis of (i) the Treaty between the Arab Republic of Egypt and the United Arab
Emirates (“the UAE”) on the Encouragement, Protection and Guarantee of Investments
signed on 11 May 1997 (the “Treaty”), which entered into force on 11 January 1999, and
(ii) the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals

of Other States (the “ICSID Convention”), which entered into force on 14 October 1966.

The claim relates to the alleged expropriation “through denial of justice and abuse of
process”! of (i) the Claimant’s right to arbitrate and (ii) the award rendered under the
auspices of the Cairo Regional Centre for International Commercial Arbitration
(*CRCICA”) in relation to a contractual dispute between the Claimant and the Egyptian
General Petroleum Corporation (“EGPC”) arising out of the Concession Agreement

entered into by the Claimant and EGPC on 6 January 1999.

The Parties: The Claimant is National Gas S.A.E. (“National Gas” or the “Claimant’).
National Gas is a private joint stock company incorporated under the laws of the Arab

Republic of Egypt.”
The Respondent is the Arab Republic of Egypt (“Egypt” or the “Respondent”).

The Claimant’s and the Respondent’s respective representatives and their addresses are

listed above.

Both Egypt and the United Arab Emirates (“UAE”) are Contracting States to the ICSID
Convention, the former since 1972 and the latter since 1982. The UAE is not a party to this

arbitration.

' Claimant's Request for Arbitration dated 9 February 2011, Section V.1; see also Claimant’s Memorial on the
Merits dated 31 May 2012, para. 23.

? See Claimant’s Request for Arbitration dated 9 February 2011, para. 21; Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits dated
31 May 2012, para. 27.

CTIP Oil & Gas International Limited (“CTIP”) is a juridical person incorporated under
the laws of the UAE in the Jebel Ali free zone of Dubai, UAE. From 2006 onwards, CTIP
has owned 90% of the shares in the Claimant. CTIP was and remains wholly owned by
another juridical person incorporated under the laws of the UAE in the Jebel Ali free zone
of Dubai, UAE, known in this arbitration as “REGI”. REGI was and remains wholly

owned by Mr. Reda Ginena. CTIP, REGI and Mr. Ginena are not parties to this arbitration.

Procedure: On 14 February 2011, ICSID received a request for arbitration dated
9 February 2011, from National Gas as the Claimant against Egypt as the Respondent (the
“Request’”).

On 22 March 2011, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request, as
supplemented by the Claimant’s letter of 20 March 2011, in accordance with Article 36(3)
of the ICSID Convention and notified the Parties of the registration. In the Notice of
Registration, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute a Tribunal
as soon as possible in accordance with Rule 7(d) of the Centre’s Rules of Procedure for the

Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings.

Following an extensive exchange of correspondence between the Parties and the Centre,*
the Parties’ agreement on the method of constituting the Tribunal was confirmed on
14 November 2011 in the following terms, in accordance with Article 37(2)(a) of the
ICSID Convention: “The Tribunal shall consist of three arbitrators, one appointed by each
Party and the third, who shall be President of the Tribunal, appointed by agreement of the
Parties by November 30, 201 vi

* See letter from the Respondent dated 6 April 2011; letter from the Respondent dated 24 May 2011; letter from the

Centre dated 24 May 2011; letter from the Claimant dated 12 June 2011; letter from the Respondent dated
13 June 2011; letter from the Centre dated 13 June 2011; letter from the Claimant dated 22 September 2011; letter
from the Centre dated 22 September 2011; letter from the Respondent dated 26 September 2011; letter from the
Centre dated 26 September 2011; letter from the Claimant dated 4 October 2011; letter from the Centre dated
4 October 2011; letter from the Respondent dated 25 October 2011; letter from the Claimant dated 9 November
2011; letter from the Centre dated 9 November 2011; letter from the Respondent dated 10 November 2011; and
letter from the Claimant dated 13 November 2011.

* Letter from the Centre dated 14 November 2013.

11. By letter of 18 November 2011, the Centre informed the Parties that Professor Brigitte
Stern, a national of France, had accepted her appointment by the Respondent as an

arbitrator.>

12. By letter of 21 November 2011, the Centre informed the Parties that Mr. L. Yves Fortier
CC, OQ, QC, a national of Canada, had accepted his appointment by the Claimant as an

arbitrator.°

13. By letter of 27 November 2011, the Respondent proposed that Mr. V.V. Veeder QC, a
national of the United Kingdom, be appointed President of the Tribunal and invited the
Claimant to accept this proposal. The Respondent further proposed that in the event that
the Claimant were not to accept the proposed appointment, the Parties agree to extend the

deadline for them to agree on the appointment of the President until 14 December 2011.

14. By letters of 12 December 2011, the Claimant informed the Respondent and the Centre that
it accepted the appointment of Mr. Veeder as President of the Tribunal and confirmed that
“both Parties [were] now in agreement regarding the appointment of the President of the

Tribunal”.

15. Mr. Veeder accepted his appointment on 15 December 2011. On the same date, the
Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”) notified the Parties that all three
arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to
have been constituted on that date. Mr. Paul-Jean Le Cannu, ICSID Legal Counsel, was

designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

16. On 27 February 2012, the Tribunal held a first session with the Parties by telephone. The
Parties confirmed that the Tribunal had been properly constituted and that they had no
current objection to the appointment of any Member of the Tribunal. It was agreed inter
alia that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be those in effect from 10 April 2006, that

the procedural language would be English and that the place of the proceeding would be

* The Respondent informed the Centre that it appointed Professor Stern by letter of 26 September 2011.
© The Claimant appointed Mr. Fortier CC, OQ, QC in its Request for Arbitration (see RFA, para. 87).

3

Paris, France. The agreement of the Parties was embodied in the Minutes of the First
Session signed by the President and the Secretary of the Tribunal and subsequently issued

to the Parties.”

17. The items upon which the Parties failed to agree at the first session were addressed by the
Tribunal in Procedural Order No. 1 dated 12 March 2012, which provided in relevant part

(by reference to the first session’s agenda items) that:

1.3. The items on which the Tribunal was required to decide
were as follows:

(1) Schedule for Submission of Pleadings (Paragraph 13
of the Minutes of the First Session);

(2) Document Production (Paragraph 14); and
(3) Hearings (Paragraph 16).
[..]

21. Having heard the respective positions of the Parties and
deliberated, the Tribunal decides as follows:

(Items I & 3) Schedule for Submission of Pleadings and
Hearings

2.1.1. The schedule for written submissions shall be as follows:

— The Claimant shall file a Memorial on Jurisdiction and
the Merits by no later than 31 May 2012. The Claimant
shall limit its submissions on the merits to issues of
liability, with issues of quantum to be addressed (if
relevant) in a subsequent phase of the proceedings;

— The Respondent shall file a Memorial containing all its
Objections to Jurisdiction and Request for Bifurcation as
soon as possible thereafter but in any event no later than
11 September 2012;

— The Claimant shall file its Response to the Respondent’s
Request for Bifurcation as soon as possible thereafter but
in any event no later than 18 September 2012.

’ Further to the instructions of the Tribunal, the Centre circulated draft minutes for the Parties’ comment on
12 March 2012 and final signed minutes on 6 April 2012.

4

20.

21.

2.1.2. The Tribunal shall hold an in-person hearing on
bifurcation and related procedures and time-table in Paris
beginning at 14.30 hours on 20 September 2012.

(Item 2) Document Production

2.1.3. These issues will be re-addressed at the hearing in Paris
on 20 September 2012 in further consultation with the
Parties, with the Tribunal making no order for the time
being regarding any document production but retaining in
full all its powers to do so.

By letter of 13 March 2012, the Claimant informed the Tribunal that it understood
paragraph 2.1.1. of Procedural Order No. 1 to mean that “the Respondent shall file a
Memorial on Jurisdiction and the Merits (submissions on the merits to be limited to issues
of liability) containing all its objections on jurisdiction and request for bifurcation as soon

as possible thereafter but in any event no later than 11 September 2012”.
By letter of the Centre dated 14 March 2012, the Tribunal confirmed that:

[...] the Respondent shall file a Memorial containing all its
Objections to Jurisdiction and Request for Bifurcation as soon as
possible after the filing of the Claimant’s Memorial on Jurisdiction
and the Merits but in any event no later than I] September 2012.
The Respondent is not expected to include submissions on the
merits in this Memorial.

By email of 19 March 2012, the Claimant requested that it be granted at least three weeks
to prepare its Response to the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation. It also requested that
the Tribunal clarify when and how the Claimant would have to respond to the
Respondent’s jurisdictional objections if the Tribunal were to decide not to bifurcate the

proceedings.

By letter of 22 March 2012, the Claimant stated that while it had initially objected to
bifurcation, it had reconsidered its position in light of Procedural Order No. 1 and now
accepted the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation. The Claimant further proposed “that

the Hearing scheduled in Paris for next September [2012] now be dedicated to

Respondent’s intended jurisdictional challenge and that the coming months be used for

exchanges of written memorials on jurisdiction”.

By letter of 25 March 2012, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that while it “agrees on
the Claimant’s acceptance of bifurcation, it does not approve any change to the schedule of
submissions, already set by the Tribunal’s procedural Order [...]”. The Respondent also

proposed a further schedule for written submissions on jurisdiction.

By letter of 5 April 2012, the Claimant suggested that the deadlines proposed by the

Respondent for written submissions on jurisdiction should be shorter.

On 6 April 2012, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, in which the following

decisions were recorded:

(i) | The Tribunal decides, for the time being, not to confirm
the Parties’ joint proposal for bifurcation, albeit subject
to different conditions. That joint proposal, if maintained
by both Parties, shall be reviewed at the Paris meeting in
further consultation with the Parties;

(ii) The Tribunal decides to maintain unchanged the
timetable for the Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits and
the Respondent’s Jurisdiction Memorial, as established in
Procedural Order No.1;

(iti) The Tribunal decides that, on 18 September 2012, the
Claimant may but is not required to submit a brief, initial
written response to the Respondent’s Jurisdiction
Memorial, limited to the issue of bifurcation and/or future
procedural timetable; and

(iv) The agenda for the Paris meeting shall be limited to
deciding only procedural matters (including bifurcation)
and shall not include any issue of substance, whether
relating to merits or jurisdiction.

1

N

Given the several decisions above, in addition to limiting
expressly the Paris meeting’s agenda as indicated above for
the purpose of clarifying Paragraphs 2.1.2 & 2.1.3 of
Procedural Order No. I, the Tribunal amends Paragraph
2.1.1 to provide as follows:

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

“2.1.1. The schedule for written submissions shall be as
follows:

The Claimant shall file a Memorial on Jurisdiction
and the Merits by no later than 31 May 2012. The
Claimant shall limit its submissions on the merits
to issues of liability, with issues of quantum to be
addressed (if relevant) in a subsequent phase of the
proceedings;

The Respondent shall file a Memorial containing
all its Objections to Jurisdiction and Request for
Bifurcation as soon as possible thereafter but in
any event no later than 11 September 2012;

The Claimant may (but shall not be required) file a
brief, initial written response to the Respondent’s
Jurisdiction Memorial, limited to the issue of
bifurcation and/or future procedural timetable on
18 September 2012.”

By letter of 10 April 2012, the Claimant thanked the Tribunal for clarifying certain aspects
of Procedural Order No. 1 and for introducing the minor procedural amendment provided

by Procedural Order No. 2.

On 31 May 2012, the Claimant filed its Memorial on the Merits.

By letter of 27 July 2012, the Respondent informed the Tribunal and the Claimant that it
would now be jointly represented by the Egyptian State Lawsuits Authority, Foreign
Disputes Department (“ESLA”) and Messrs. Louis-Christophe Delanoy, Tim Portwood
and Raéd Fathallah of Bredin Pratt, Paris, France.

By letter of 30 July 2012, the Respondent offered to file a memorial on jurisdiction and the
merits provided that it be granted a three-month extension of the deadline to submit its
memorial (i.e. until Monday 10 December 2012). It also confirmed its availability to attend

an in-person meeting on procedural issues in Paris on 20 September 2012.

By letter of 5 August 2012, the Claimant informed the Tribunal that it would have no
objection to a three-month extension for the Respondent to submit a memorial on
jurisdiction and the merits. The Claimant further submitted that “in view of the

7

30.

31.

32.

Respondent’s failure to present any submission on the jurisdictional challenge, despite the
ample opportunity provided in the time schedule (which the Claimant strictly adhered to),
[...] the request for bifurcation [should] be denied, and that issue[s] of jurisdiction and
liability [should] be addressed together in a first phase of this Arbitration”. The Claimant
finally indicated that a procedural hearing in Paris on 20 September 2012 “would be

extremely useful”.

By letter of the Centre dated 6 September 2012, the Tribunal informed the Parties that the
Respondent was not obliged to submit its Memorial containing all its Objections on
Jurisdiction and Request for Bifurcation on 11 September 2012 and that its application for
more time would be an item on the agenda and addressed at the procedural meeting of

20 September 2012 in Paris.

The procedural meeting was held on 20 September 2012 at the World Bank’s offices in
Paris, France.* In addition to the Tribunal and its Secretary, the following were present at

the meeting:

For the Claimant: Dr. Khaled El Shalakany, Shalakany Law Office; Mr. Adam Khaled El
Shalakany, Shalakany Law Office; Ms. Sara Ezzat, Shalakany Law Office; Mr. Sherif
Morsy, Shalakany Law Office; and Mr. Reda Ginena, National Gas; and

For the Respondent: Mr. Mahmoud Mohamed Abdel Wahab Elkhrashy, Counselor,
Egyptian State Lawsuits Authority, Foreign Disputes Department (ESLA); Mr. Mohamed
Mahmoud Khalaf Nasr, Counselor, ESLA; Mr. Louis-Christophe Delanoy, Bredin Prat;
Mr. Raéd Fathallah, Bredin Prat; Mr. Suhaib Al-Ali, Bredin Prat; and Ms. Liliane
Djahangir, Bredin Prat.

At this meeting, the Tribunal also established the following two-track procedural time-

table following consultation with the Parties:

2.1. The Respondent shall file a Counter-Memorial on the
Merits (limited to issues of liability) as well as all its

* The Minutes of the Procedural Meeting of 20 September 2012 were circulated to the Parties in draft form for
comment on | October 2012. The Parties having submitted no comment, the final signed version of the Minutes was
issued on 20 December 2012.

2.2.

2.3.

2.4.

2.5.

Objections to Jurisdiction and its Request for Bifurcation of
the proceeding into jurisdiction and merits phases by 10
December 2012.

Should the Respondent file Objections to Jurisdiction and a
Request for Bifurcation, the Claimant shall reply to the
Request for Bifurcation by 31 January 2013.

The Tribunal shall hold a hearing on the issue of
bifurcation with the Parties by telephone on II February
2013 at 4:00 pm CET; the Tribunal shall render its
decision on the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation then
or shortly thereafter.

If the Tribunal decides to bifurcate (“Track I”), the
schedule shall be as follows:

2.4.1. The Claimant shall file a Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction by 18 March 2013;

2.4.2. The Respondent shall file a Reply on Jurisdiction by
29 April 2013; and

2.4.3. The Claimant shall file a Rejoinder on Jurisdiction
by 27 May 2013; and

2.4.4. The Tribunal shall hold an organisational pre-
hearing conference by telephone at a date to be
determined; and

2.4.5. The Hearing on Jurisdiction shall be held in Paris
either on 27 June or 3 July 2013.

If the Tribunal decides not to bifurcate and to join the
objections to jurisdiction to the merits (“Track 2”), the
schedule shall be as follows:

2.5.1. The Claimant shall make its requests for production
of documents (if any) in the form of a Redfern
Schedule by 31 January 2012 [sic: 2013];

2.5.2. The Respondent shall produce the requested
documentation or, if not, state its objections to any
request for production by 11 March 2013;

2.5.3. The Claimant shall respond to these objections by
25 March 2013;

2.5.4. The Tribunal shall make its best efforts to rule on
these objections shortly thereafter;

2.5.5. The Claimant shall file a Reply on the Merits
(limited to issues of liability) and Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction by 27 May 2013;

2.5.6. The Respondent shall file a Rejoinder on the Merits
(limited to issues of liability) and Reply on
Jurisdiction by 19 August 2013;

2.5.7. The Claimant shall file a Rejoinder on Jurisdiction
by 19 September 2013;

2.5.8. The Tribunal shall hold an organisational pre-
hearing conference by telephone at a date to be
determined; and

2.5.9. The Hearing on Jurisdiction and the Merits (limited
to issues of liability) shall be held in Paris from 14
to 18 October 2013.”

33. On 10 December 2012, the Respondent filed a Counter-Memorial on the Merits, its
Objections to Jurisdiction, and its Request for Bifurcation. It also submitted a power of

attorney dated 21 November 2012 (as agreed at the meeting of 20 September 2012).

34. On 31 January 2013, the Claimant filed its Reply to the Respondent’s Request for
Bifurcation. The Claimant submitted that “Track 2” should be adopted and that, if the
deadline for the submission of its requests for production of documents was confirmed to
be 31 January 2013 (and not 2012 as inadvertently indicated in Procedural Order No. 2), it
requested a three-week extension of that deadline to 21 February 2013, with a
corresponding adjustment of the subsequent deadlines of the document production phase.
The deadline for the filing of the Claimant’s Reply on the Merits (limited to issues of

liability) and Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction under “Track 2” would remain unchanged.
35. By letter of 1 February 2013, the Tribunal informed the Parties as follows:

The Tribunal hereby confirms that the date set for the filing of the
Claimant’s document production requests was 31 January 2013

° Minutes of the Procedural Meeting of 20 September 2012, paras. 2.1-2.5.

10

36.

37.

(See audio recording of the Procedural Meeting, 2nd audio file,
14’ to 16’10”). However, in light of the circumstances and in
particular the limited impact of the requested extension on the
procedural time-table as a whole, the Tribunal hereby extends the
deadline for the Claimant to file its document production requests
to 21 February 2013, pursuant to article 26(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules and paragraph 6 of the Minutes of the First
Session. Similarly, the deadline for the Respondent to produce the
requested documentation or, if not, state its objections to any
request for production is extended to 1 April 2013. The deadline
for the Claimant to respond to these objections is extended to
15 April 2013.

In addition, the Tribunal confirmed that in the event that the proceedings were to be
bifurcated in accordance with “Track 1” of the procedural time-table, the Hearing on

Jurisdiction would be held in Paris on 27 June 2013.

On 11 February 2013, the Tribunal held a meeting on the Respondent’s Request for
Bifurcation by telephone. In addition to the Members of the Tribunal and its Secretary, the

following took part in this meeting:

For the Claimant: Dr. Khaled El Shalakany, Shalakany Law Office; Mr. Adam Khaled El
Shalakany, Shalakany Law Office; Ms. Marie-Louise Morcos, Shalakany Law Office;
Ms. Sara Ezzat, Shalakany Law Office; Mr. Sherif Morsy, Shalakany Law Office; and
Mr. Khaled Sherif, Shalakany Law Office.

For the Respondent: Mr. Mahmoud Mohamed Abdel Wahab Elkhrashy, Counselor,
Egyptian State Lawsuits Authority, Foreign Disputes Department (ESLA); Mr. Mohamed
Mahmoud Khalaf Nasr, Counselor, ESLA; Mr. Amr Arafa, Counselor, ESLA; Ms. Fatma
Khalifa, Counselor, ESLA; Ms. Reem Hendy, Counselor, ESLA; Mr. Louis-Christophe
Delanoy, Bredin Prat; Mr. Raéd Fathallah, Bredin Prat; Mr. Suhaib Al-Ali, Bredin Prat;
and Ms. Liliane Djahangir, Bredin Prat.

38. On 18 February 2013, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 recording its decision on
the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation, disputed by the Claimant, in regard to the four

objections to jurisdiction made by the Respondent, namely:

(1) “Nationality/Control”: The Respondent submits that the
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae under Article
25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and Article 10(4) of the
Treaty: see paragraphs 9i) and 154 to 217 of the
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial (pp 5 & 42-63);

(2) “Timing of the Measures and of the Dispute”: The
Respondent submits that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction
ratione temporis under the Treaty: see paragraphs 9(iii) and
218-226 of the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial (pp 5 & 63-
65);

(3) “Exhaustion of Local Remedies”: The Respondent submits
that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae under
Article 26 of the ICSID Convention and Article 10(3) of the
Treaty or alternatively that the Claimant’s claims are
inadmissible: see paragraphs 9(ii)(i) and 227-237 of the
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial (pp 5 & 65-67); and

(4) “Umbrella Clause and Sovereign Powers”: The Respondent
submits that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because the
Respondent has not undertaken any commitment to the
Claimant under the Treaty’s umbrella clause and further, in
any event, the contractual breaches alleged by the Claimant
do not involve the exercise of the Respondent’s sovereign
powers: see paragraphs 9ii)(ii) and 238 to 257 of the
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial (pp 5 & 67-74). 10

39. For the reasons set out in Procedural Order No. 3, the Tribunal decided to bifurcate the
Respondent’s first and second objections, for which “Track 1” would apply."! As regards
the Respondent’s third and fourth objections, the Tribunal decided that there would be no
bifurcation; and it joined these two objections to the merits, deciding that “Track 2” would
apply without any suspension, '~ subject to the following matters: (i) given the risk that the

costs might be wasted (should the Tribunal find that it had no jurisdiction), the Tribunal

'© See Procedural Order No. 3, para. 10.
' See Procedural Order No. 3, para. 17.
!? See Procedural Order No. 3, para. 18.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

confirmed that it would be minded to apply in this case the ‘loser pays’ principle in
allocating costs to reflect that event under Article 61 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rule 47;!3 and (ii) because the time-table under “Track 2” allowed for little
slippage time, the Tribunal suggested that it might be safer to re-fix the October 2013

hearing to later dates.

By letter of 28 February 2013, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that while it
appreciated “the Tribunal’s suggestion of applying the ‘loser pays’ principle to the instant
proceedings [...]”, it was “also mindful that the parallel schedule would undermine the
other underlying principles of a bifurcation such as saving time and efficiency”. The
Respondent thus suggested not to proceed simultaneously with “Track 1” and “Track 2”
and to amend “Track 2” by postponing by two months the deadline for the filing of the
Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction and the Claimant’s
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, and holding the hearing three weeks after the filing of the

Claimant’s Rejoinder.

By letter of 4 March 2013, the Claimant recalled that it had accepted to work under the
pressure of a dual track time-table for the purpose of preserving the dates set aside for the
October hearing. In the event that the Tribunal were inclined to amend “Track 2” as
requested by the Respondent, the Claimant proposed alternative changes to both “Track 1”

and “Track 2”.
By letter of 15 March 2013, the Respondent made further proposals for both Tracks.

By letter of 17 March 2013, the Claimant informed the Tribunal that it accepted the

Respondent’s proposal of 15 March 2013.

'3 See Procedural Order No. 3, para. 21.

44. On 27 March 2013, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4,\4 which fixed the

following amended time-table:

A. The Amended Schedule for “Track 1” shall now be as
follows:

(i) The Claimant to file its Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction (on bifurcated jurisdictional issues) by
2 April 2013 (instead of 18 March 2013);

(ii) The Respondent to file its Reply on Jurisdiction (on
bifurcated jurisdictional issues) by 14 May 2013
(instead of 29 April 2013);

(iii) | The Claimant to file its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction
(on bifurcated jurisdictional issues) by 12 June
2013 (instead of 27 May 2013); and

(iv) The one-day Jurisdictional Hearing in Paris (on
bifurcated jurisdictional issues) is maintained for
27 June 2013.

B. The Amended Schedule for “Track 2” is now as follows:

(i) The Claimant to file its Reply on the Merits (limited
to issues of liability, not quantum) and its Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction (on non-bifurcated
jurisdictional issues) by 1 September 2013 (instead
of 27 May 2013);

(ii) The Respondent to file its Rejoinder on the Merits
(limited to issues of liability, not quantum) and its
Reply on Jurisdiction (on — non-bifurcated
jurisdictional issues) by 8 November 2013 (instead
of 19 August 2013);

(iii) | The Claimant to file its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction
(on non-bifurcated jurisdictional issues) by 10
January 2014 (instead of 19 September 2013); and

(iv) — An oral hearing on Jurisdiction (on non-bifurcated
jurisdictional issues) and the Merits (limited to
issues of liability, not quantum) shall be held at
dates still to be fixed by the Tribunal from

'* 4 draft Procedural Order No. 4 was circulated to the Parties for comment on 19 March 2013.

14

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

January/February 2014 onwards, depending on the
availability of the Tribunal and of the Parties.

On 2 April 2013, the Claimant filed its Defence on Bifurcated Jurisdictional Issues.
On 14 May 2013, the Respondent filed its Reply on Bifurcated Jurisdictional Issues.
On 12 June 2013, the Claimant filed its Rejoinder on Bifurcated Jurisdictional Issues.

On 27 June 2013, the Tribunal held an oral hearing on the two bifurcated jurisdictional
issues at the World Bank’s offices, 66 avenue d’Iéna, Paris 75116, France. In addition to
the Tribunal and its Secretary (with the assistants to Mr. Fortier’? and Professor Stern'®),

the following were present at this hearing:

For the Claimant: Dr. Khaled El Shalakany, Shalakany Law Office; Mr. Adam Khaled El
Shalakany, Shalakany Law Office; and Mr. Sherif Morsy, Shalakany Law Office.

For the Respondent: Mr. Mahmoud Mohamed Abdel Wahab Elkhrashy, Counselor,
Egyptian State Lawsuits Authority, Foreign Disputes Department (ESLA); Ms. Fatma
Khalifa, Counselor, ESLA; Ms. Reem Hendy, Counselor, ESLA; Mr. Louis-Christophe
Delanoy, Bredin Prat; Mr. Raéd Fathallah, Bredin Prat; Ms. Liliane Djahangir, Bredin Prat;
and Ms. Alia El Sadda, Bredin Prat.

During this hearing, the Parties respectively made oral submissions on the two bifurcated
jurisdictional issues, as recorded in the verbatim transcript: Mr. Delanoy for the
Respondent; and Dr. El Shalakany for the Claimant. Neither Party adduced any oral

evidence at the hearing.

At the end of the hearing, the Tribunal re-stated the amended schedule for “Track 2”,
which the Parties confirmed.'’ The Tribunal also informed the Parties of the dates on
which it would be available to hold an oral hearing on the non-bifurcated jurisdictional

issues and the merits in the event that none of the bifurcated jurisdictional issues were

'5 Ms. Annie Lespérance.
‘© Mr. Fabian Hincker.
" See T. 177-178.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

upheld.'* The Tribunal invited the Parties to revert to that matter once they had had an

opportunity to consider its proposal. 19

By letter of 1 July 2013, the Tribunal invited the Claimant to make an additional written
submission to clarify an argument made at the hearing with regard to Mr. Ginena’s
Canadian nationality, with the Respondent being afforded an opportunity to respond in
writing to this further submission. The Tribunal was also “conscious that the timing of its
decision may affect the current twin-track procedural timetable” and was mindful of
“possible difficulties for the Parties over the proposed conditional hearing on the bifurcated
jurisdictional issues and merits, all of which it [was] minded to address separately in the

near future”.

On 15 July 2013, the Claimant filed its Clarification of a Jurisdictional Issue. On 29 July

2013, the Respondent submitted its Response to Claimant’s Clarification.

On 31 July 2013, the Claimant applied for permission to file a brief reply to the
Respondent’s submission of 29 July 2013 by close of business the next day. On 1 August
2013, the Tribunal informed the Parties that permission to file a brief reply was granted by

the Tribunal de bene esse.

On 2 August 2013, the Claimant filed its Reply on the Clarification. On 3 August 2013, the
Respondent sought permission to file a short Rejoinder to the Claimant’s Reply of
2 August 2013. On 4 August 2013, the Tribunal informed the Parties that permission to file

a brief rejoinder was granted by the Tribunal de bene esse.
On 5 August 2013, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder on Claimant’s Clarification.

By letter of 6 August 2013, the Tribunal informed the Parties that the Claimant’s Reply on
the Clarification and Respondent’s Rejoinder on Claimant’s Clarification, initially
admitted into the file de bene esse, were now both admitted unconditionally. The Tribunal
also confirmed that, for the time being, no further written submissions from either Party

were required by the Tribunal.

'S See T. 178.

"Td.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

By letter of 4 September 2013, the Claimant applied for a six-week extension to file its
Reply on the Merits (limited to issues of liability, not quantum) and its Counter-Memorial
on Jurisdiction (on non-bifurcated jurisdictional issues), which it was unable to submit by

1 September 2013 owing to the political and social situation in Egypt.

By email of 13 September 2013, the Claimant inquired as to whether there had been a
response to its request of 4 September 2013. By email of the same date, the Tribunal
invited the Respondent to submit its comments on the Claimant’s letter of 4 September

2013 as soon as practicable and in any event by 19 September 2013.

By letter of 16 September 2013, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that it was
“unfortunately not in a position to comment on the Claimant’s request before the Tribunal
has ruled on the bifurcated objections to its jurisdiction”. The Respondent “reserve[d] the

right to return to this issue upon the ruling of the Tribunal on its jurisdiction”.

By letter dated 13 October 2013, the Claimant submitted its Reply Memorial (also called
“Memorial in Rejoinder”). The Claimant also requested a modification to “Track 2” to

allow for further document production by the Respondent.

On 16 October 2013, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5, in which the following

decision was recorded:

In the current circumstances and considering that the Tribunal is
still deliberating and actively determining the bifurcated
jurisdictional issues, the Tribunal hereby issues this order
suspending these arbitration proceedings until such determination
or further procedural order.

The Tribunal will of course revert to the Parties in due course to
inform them as to when it completes its determination of the
bifurcated jurisdictional issues.

Relief: As to the formal relief on the two bifurcated jurisdictional objections, the

Respondent requests the Tribunal to:

(i) DECLARE that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the
Claimant’s claims;

(ii) DISMISS by way of an award on jurisdiction all claims
brought by the Claimant against the Respondent; and

(iti) | ORDER the Claimant to pay all of the costs and expenses
(with interest) of this arbitration, including the fees and
expenses of the Tribunal, the fees and expenses of any
experts appointed by the Tribunal or Respondent, and the
fees and expenses of Respondent’s legal representation in
respect of this arbitration. 20

63. As to such formal relief, the Claimant requests “that the Tribunal issue an Award
dismissing Respondent’s ratione personae and ratione temporis jurisdictional challenges,
and award Claimant the costs that it has incurred in resisting these challenges (including

legal fees), with interest from the date of Award until payment in full”.!

64. The proceeding was formally closed on the date of this Award’s dispatch to the Parties

pursuant to Rule 38(1) of the Arbitration Rules.

?° Respondent's Reply on Bifurcated Jurisdictional Issues dated 14 May 2013, para. 73.

>| Claimant’s Rejoinder on Bifurcated Jurisdictional Issues dated 12 June 2013, para. 75. See also Claimant's
Defence on Bifurcated Jurisdictional Issues, para. 71.

18

PART II: EXTRACTS FROM RELEVANT TEXTS

The Treaty (in English translation from Arabic)

65. Article 1(3) of the Treaty defines the term “investor” as: “[...] any of its natural or juristic

persons that are investing in the territory of the other Contracting State”.
66. Article 10(3) of the Treaty provides:

In the event that it becomes difficult to reach a satisfactory
resolution through local courts, each Contracting State agrees to
the submission of the dispute which arises between it and an
investor from the other Contracting State to the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (referred to
hereinafter as the “Centre”) to be settled through conciliation or
arbitration by virtue of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States
which was presented in Washington on 18 March 1965 to be
signed (referred to hereinafter as the “Convention” ), with respect
to the following [.. 2

67. Article 10(4) of the Treaty provides:

In case of the existence of a juridical person that has been
registered or established in accordance with the law in force in a
region [territory] [“iglim” in Arabic, meaning a province or like
territory] following a Contracting State [“tabai” in Arabic,
meaning linked to or subject to a Contracting State], and an
investor from the other Contracting State owns the majority of the
shares of that juridical person before the dispute arises, then such
a juridical person shall, for the purposes of the Convention, be
treated as an investor of the other Contracting State, in
accordance with Article 25(2)(B) of the Convention.

» Claimant’s English translation of the Treaty between the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt and the
Government of the United Arab Emirates on the Encouragement, Protection and Guarantee of Investments signed on
May 11, 1997 (the “Treaty”), Exhibit C1 to the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration.

3 Id.

19

68. The Tribunal experienced difficulties with the original English translation of Article 10(4)
submitted by the Claimant. At the hearing, these difficulties were resolved jointly by the

Parties with the addition of the square-bracketed wording inserted above.”

The ICSID Convention (English version)
69. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention provides (in the English version) as follows:

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting
State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a
national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the
dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the
parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its
consent unilaterally.

(2) “National of another Contracting State” means:

(a) any natural person who had the nationality of a
Contracting State other than the State party to the
dispute on the date on which the parties consented to
submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration as well
as on the date on which the request was registered
pursuant to paragraph (3) of Article 28 or paragraph (3)
of Article 36, but does not include any person who on
either date also had the nationality of the Contracting
State party to the dispute; and

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a
Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute
on the date on which the parties consented to submit such
dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any juridical
person which had the nationality of the Contracting State
party to the dispute on that date and which, because of
foreign control, the parties have agreed should be treated
as a national of another Contracting State for the
purposes of this Convention.

(3) Consent by a constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State shall require the approval of that State

*4 See T. 103:4 — 108:5; T. 150:8-13.

20

70.

71.

unless that State notifies the Centre that no such approval is
required.

(4) Any Contracting State may, at the time of ratification,
acceptance or approval of this Convention or at any time
thereafter, notify the Centre of the class or classes of disputes
which it would or would not consider submitting to the
jurisdiction of the Centre. The Secretary- General shall
forthwith transmit such notification to all Contracting States.
Such notification shall not constitute the consent required by
paragraph (1).

In the French version of the ICSID Convention, the sequence of the words is different in
the second part of Article 25(2)(b). It provides for ICSID arbitration if “les parties sont
convenues, aux fins de la présente Convention, de considérer [une personne morale qui
posséde la nationalité de |’Etat contractant partie au différend] comme ressortissant d’un
autre Etat contractant en raison du contréle exercé sur elle par des intéréts étrangers”. In
the Spanish version, the same passage ends with the words: “por estar sometidas a control

extranjero”.

The Tribunal notes that the English, French and Spanish language versions of the ICSID
Convention are equally authentic by reason of the ICSID Convention’s last paragraph.
However, despite the different wording and word order between the English version and
the French and Spanish versions of the second part of Article 25(2)(b), the Tribunal
considers such differences to be immaterial for present purposes, applying Article 33(2)
and 33(4) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. (The Tribunal has also noted
the scholarly commentary to such effect by Sébastien Manciaux, /nvestissements étrangers

et arbitrage entre Etats et ressortissants d'autres Etats (2004) 179, cited by the Parties.)

21

723.

74.

75.

76.

PART III: JURISDICTION RATIONE PERSONAE

Introduction

It is appropriate to address separately the two bifurcated jurisdictional objections made by
the Respondent and disputed by the Claimant, beginning with the first objection ratione

personae.

The Tribunal begins by summarising the Parties’ principal submissions on_ this
jurisdictional objection ratione personae. It has taken into account all their written and oral
submissions on this objection, including the written pleadings submitted before the hearing
(namely, the Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction of 10 December 2012, the Claimant’s
Defence on Bifurcated Jurisdictional Issues of 2 April 2013, the Respondent’s Reply of 14
May 2013 and the Claimant’s Rejoinder of 12 June 2013), the oral submissions made at the
hearing of 27 June 2013 and the subsequent written submissions of 15 July, 29 July, 2
August and 5 August 2013. The Tribunal emphasises that what follows are only brief

summaries of the Parties’ principal arguments.

The Respondent’s Case

In summary, the Respondent submits that the Claimant (National Gas) is an Egyptian
company under Egyptian (not foreign) control; and that the Claimant cannot therefore
commence an ICSID arbitration against the Respondent under the Treaty and the ICSID

Convention.

Legal Principles: The Respondent refers to Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention,
whereby the jurisdiction of the Centre (ICSID) shall extend “to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State [...] and a national of another
Contracting State [...]”. The Respondent contends that there can be no jurisdiction over a
dispute between a Contracting State and a national of that same Contracting State under the
ICSID Convention. Moreover, so the Respondent emphasises, even dual nationals cannot
establish jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention for a claim against one of the States of
which they have nationality.

22

77.

78.

79.

80.

The Respondent submits that such ineligibility is absolute under Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention; and it cannot be cured by any consent of the parties, including consent by the
Contracting State responding to the claim. The Respondent refers to the Report of the
Executive Directors: “This ineligibility is absolute and cannot be cured even if the State
party to the dispute had given its consent”.”°

The Respondent refers to the award rendered in Burimi, where a tribunal decided under the
ICSID Convention that an Albanian company controlled by a dual national of Albania and
Italy could not establish jurisdiction against Albania on the ground that such a dual
national could not claim against Albania either directly or indirectly through the Albanian
company.”° Accordingly, the Respondent submits that a dual Egyptian-Canadian national,
such as Mr. Ginena (being the owner and manager of National Gas) cannot establish
jurisdiction against the Respondent even if Egypt had consented to such jurisdiction under

the ICSID Convention (which is denied by the Respondent in any event).

The Respondent acknowledges the exception provided by Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention, concerning “any juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting
State other than the State party to the dispute [...] and which, because of foreign control,
the parties have agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting State for the
purposes of this Convention”. In the Respondent’s submission, this limited exception
applies only if two conditions are both met by a claimant. The first condition is objective:
the juridical person (the local company) must be under “foreign control”. The second
condition is subjective: because of this pre-existing foreign control, the parties must have
agreed to treat the local company as a national of the Contracting State. Here, the parties’
agreement to submit the dispute to arbitration under the ICSID Convention is necessary,

but it cannot be effective unless the local company is under “foreign control”.

The Respondent submits that the Claimant’s argument to the contrary effectively re-writes

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, requiring several words of the ICSID Convention to

°5 Report of the Executive Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development on the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the “Report of
the Executive Directors”), para. 29

© Burimi & Eagle Games v. Albania, ICSID Case No ARB/11/18, Award dated 29 May 2013 (“Burimi”). See T.
8:14-9:9,

23

be deleted. According to the Respondent, this was not the drafters’ intention; it is an
impermissible interpretation; and the Claimant’s argument violates the cardinal principle of
“effectiveness”, as decided long ago by the ICSID award of 27 June 1990 in AAPL.” The
Respondent further submits that for the past twenty years, many ICSID tribunals and
scholars have confirmed that the parties’ consent is worthless without also satisfying the
objective requirement of “foreign control” under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID

Convention.

81. In 1994, according to the Respondent, the tribunal in Vacuum Salt expressed this

requirement as follows:

[T]he parties’ agreement to treat Claimant as a foreign national
‘because of foreign control’ does not ipso jure confer jurisdiction.
The reference in Article 25(2)(b) to ‘foreign control’ necessarily
sets an objective Convention limit beyond which ICSID jurisdiction
cannot exist and parties therefore lack power to invoke same no
matter how devoutly they may have desired to do so. 3s

82. Professor Emmanuel Gaillard expressed scholarly approval of this award:

La solution retenue par le Tribunal arbitral dans l’affaire Vacuum
Salt doit étre approuvée. A tort ou a raison, les rédacteurs de la
Convention de Washington ont estimé que, pour justifier le recours
a cette forme supranationale d’arbitrage qui puise sa source dans
une convention internationale, le consentement des parties n’était
pas une condition suffisante. Les tribunaux arbitraux constitués

sous l’égide du Centre ne pouvaient que respecter cette volonté
29
[LH

83. In 2008, according to the Respondent, the tribunal in TSA Spectrum adopted the same
approach to Article 25(2)(b):

>" Asian Agricultural Products Limited v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, ICSID Case No. ARB/87/3,
Award dated 27 June 1990 (“AAPL”), para. 40, Rule (E).

°8 Vacuum Salt Products Ltd. v. Republic of Ghana, \CSID Case No. ARB/92/1, Award dated 16 February 1994
(“Vacuum Salt”), para. 36.

°° Emmanuel Gaillard, “Chronique des sentences arbitrales”, Journal du droit international (Clunet) n° 1, January-
March 1995, p. 181 (the “Vacuum Salt Gaillard commentary”), Exhibit RL-75.

24

The ratio legis of this exception is the wording “because of foreign
control”. Foreign control is thus the objective factor on which
turns the applicability of this provision [...] The provisions of the
BIT cannot provide ICSID jurisdiction unless the conditions of
Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention are satisfied.”

84. Professor Gaillard similarly approved this decision:

[Ill résulte du texte méme de la convention de Washington que
c’est le critére du contréle qu’il y a lieu de mettre en ceuvre. Ce
controle doit donc étre réellement exercé par des ressortissants
étrangers et il ne suffirait pas de démontrer que la société de droit
local est détenue par une société constituée dans un autre Etat
contractant pour bénéficier de ce texte, si cette société est elle-
méme contrélée par des ressortissants de l’Etat d’accueil. [...] On
ne peut donc qu’approuver le Tribunal ayant statué dans l’affaire
TSA d’avoir décliné sa compétence pour connaitre d’une demande
formée contre lVArgentine par une société de droit local
formellement contrélée par une société néerlandaise mais
indirectement et ultimement contrdlée par un ressortissant
argentin.*!

85. The Respondent also cites Schreuer’s Commentary on the ICSID Convention, which
confirms that the words “because of foreign control” indicate a causal connection between
control and the agreement and suggest that “control” is an objective requirement that
cannot be replaced by an agreement between the disputing parties.*? The Respondent cites
further scholarly writings to similar effect: it is unnecessary to list them here, being recited

in the Respondent’s Reply of 14 May 2013, at paragraphs 10ff.

86. The Respondent notes that a contrary approach may be indicated in the decision in
Autopista v. Venezuela.** The ICSID tribunal there decided that a US company (Icatech)

controlled a Venezuelan company (Aucoven) as long as Icatech owned a majority of

°° TSA Spectrum de Argentina, S.A. v. Argentine Republic, SID Case No. ARB/05/5, Award dated 19 December
2008 (“TSA Spectrum”), paras. 139, 156, Exhibit RL-14.

3! Emmanuel Gaillard, “Chronique des sentences arbitrales”, Journal du droit international (Clunet) n° 1, January
2009, p. 368 (the “TSA Spectrum Gaillard commentary”), Exhibit RL-17.

*» Christoph Schreuer et al, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (CUP, 2nd ed.) (“Schreuer”), p 312, Exhibit
RL-15.

3 Autopista Co de V la, C.A. v. Boli Republic of zuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/5,
Decision on Jurisdiction dated 27 September 2001 (“Autopista”), Exhibit RL-27.

25

 

87.

88.

Aucoven’s shares — despite the fact that Icatech was wholly-owned and managed by a
Mexican company (ICA Holding). Under the relevant contract, the parties had
characterised “control” as the ownership of a majority of Aucoven’s shares. For the
purpose of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, the tribunal decided that this agreement

was effective as regards “control”.

The Respondent submits that this ‘subjectivist’ approach is erroneous because the reality of
Mexican control was ignored by the tribunal in order to favour the claimant investor with
ICSID jurisdiction. The Respondent also submits that this approach is not consistent with
the letter and spirit of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention; and that the ICSID
Convention, in providing for an exception to the general limitation that ICSID will not
entertain claims between a national of a State and that same State, requires a real foreign
control by nationals of another Contracting State. Accordingly, so the Respondent submits,
this Tribunal should not follow the approach in Autopista because it is wrongly decided,
inconsistent with long established and more recent awards and has been subjected to

scholarly criticism.

In any event, the Respondent submits that the Autopista tribunal observed, significantly,
that the USA was not considered “a tax or regulatory heaven [sic: haven]”.** According to
the Respondent, this factor distinguishes Autopista from the present case. It submits that
the involvement of CTIP in the UAE was a matter of mere fiscal convenience: (i) CTIP
was established in 2004, well after the conclusion of the Concession Agreement (on 6
January 1999); (ii) CTIP acquired its shares in National Gas (the Claimant) in full
knowledge of the absence of compensation to the Claimant; (iii) REGI was established in
2010, two months after the Claimant served the Respondent with its notice of intention to
refer the present dispute to ICSID and eight months before the Claimant filed its Request
for Arbitration; (iv) neither REGI nor CTIP have any employees or any substantial
activities in the UAE; and (v) offshore companies in the Jebel Ali free zone are not subject

to taxation on profits or income.** The Respondent submits, accordingly, that both CTIP

* Autopista, para. 123; Respondent's Reply on Bifurcated Jurisdictional Issues dated 14 May 2013, para. 34.

* See, especially, the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial dated 10 December 2012, para. 196.

26

89.

90.

91.

and REGI operate as “companies of mere convenience”;*° and that Autopista is, therefore,

immaterial to the present case.

The Respondent next submits that, unsurprisingly, there is no definition of the term
“control” in Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. Whereas terms such as ‘nationality’
or ‘citizenship’ raise legal issues, the notion of “control” is much more a factual issue
which is not easily reduced to a standard definition. As Schreuer comments: “foreign
control is a complex question requiring the examination of several factors such as equity
participation, voting rights and management. In order to obtain a reliable picture, all these
aspects must be looked at in conjunction. There is no simple mathematical formula based

on shareholding or votes alone”.*”

The Respondent submits that controlling a company certainly implies the possibility to
decide freely (subject to external constraints such as applicable laws and regulations, the
economic environment, etc.) how this company should conduct its business, what strategy
it should pursue, in other words the possibility to “steer the fortunes” of such company.*®
This control may be achieved with much less than the majority of the shares. For example,
when equity is scattered among a great number of unrelated shareholders, the owner of
20% of the shares might well determine the company’s policy, i.e. “control” it. Conversely,
this may not be achieved with 100% of the shares if the direct shareholder has no
autonomous will and is merely following the instructions of a third party, such as its own

shareholder.

The Respondent also submits that it is acceptable to pierce the corporate veil of the local
company’s direct shareholder to locate this company’s controller: this is what the tribunal
decided in TSA Spectrum,” declining jurisdiction because the local company was

controlled not by its direct shareholder, but by an Argentinean national. This is also what

*° Respondent’s Counter-Memorial dated 10 December 2012, para. 198.

” Schreuer, supra footnote 32, p. 327, Exhibit RL-18; Respondent's Counter-Memorial dated 10 December 2012,

para. 170.

8 Vacuum Salt, supra footnote 28, para. 53.

* TSA Spectrum, see supra footnote 30.

27

92.

93.

the tribunal decided in SOABI, retaining jurisdiction.” In any event, the tribunal must
locate the controller, i.e. it must find the person who is in a position freely to decide how
the company should conduct its business and then to retain or decline jurisdiction on the
basis of the nationality of that controller. There is no reason to pierce the corporate veil
when it can confer jurisdiction upon ICSID but to refuse to do so when it can lead to the

opposite result.

As regards Article 10(4) of the Treaty invoked by the Claimant, the Respondent first submits
that no consent between the parties could be effective under the ICSID Convention as
regards “foreign control”; and, second, that Article 10(4) does not provide for the consent
invoked by the Claimant. The agreement of the parties to the Treaty concerning the
treatment of local companies is expressly stated to be “in accordance” with
Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention; and therefore it does not and could not modify

Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

As to the facts, the Respondent submits that the evidence establishes that the Claimant is
an Egyptian juridical person controlled by Mr. Reda Ginena, who is an Egyptian national;
that Mr. Ginena was a co-founder of the Claimant; that Mr. Ginena is the Claimant’s
manager; and that Mr. Ginena owns and controls both CTIP and REGI and thus the
Claimant also, as shown by the following charts (the first taken from the Respondent’s
Counter-Memorial, paragraph 159 and the second from its opening submissions at the

hearing):

*° Société Quest Africaine des Bétons Industriels v. Sénégal, CSID Case No. ARB/82/1, Award dated 25 February
1988 (“SOABT’).

28

94.

95.

96.

Mr. Ginena (Egypt)

100%

REGI (UAE)

100%

Mr. Rasikh CTIP (UAE) Mr. Ginena
(Egypt) 00% (Egypt)
5% 5%

I National Gas (Egypt) ]

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Respondent submits that there would be no material difference (apart from possible

adverse tax consequences) if the chart were simplified as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mr. Rasikh Mr. Ginena
(Egypt) (Egypt)
5% 95%

I Nati Gas (Egypt) J

 

Accordingly, the Respondent contends that CTIP and REGI add nothing: they have no
influence or will of their own; they are transparent; and they cannot hide Mr. Ginena.
Moreover, according to the Respondent, CTIP and REGI have no activity in the UAE, no
personnel and no office; and they are registered only at the address of the law firm of
Bayat & Motei. The Respondent submits that both companies were incorporated for purely
fiscal reasons and do not in fact control or manage the Claimant (National Gas)

independently from Mr. Ginena.

As a result, so the Respondent submits, National Gas is controlled by Mr. Ginena, an
Egyptian national. Mr. Ginena himself could bring no claim against the Respondent under
the ICSID Convention. There is therefore no “foreign control” within the meaning of
Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and, therefore, no jurisdiction ratione personae

for the Claimant’s claims.

29

97.

98.

99.

100.

S

Finally, the Respondent dismisses as baseless the alternative argument that the Claimant
raised at the hearing and subsequently developed in its post-hearing submissions.
According to the Respondent, the Claimant cannot rely on the geographical origin of the
assets invested (rather than the nationality of the claimant investor) in order to fall within
the scope of the Treaty and the ICSID Convention. In addition, the Respondent submits
that the Claimant’s belated reliance on the Canada—Egypt BIT is misplaced, because
Mr. Ginena is a dual national (Egyptian and Canadian) and Canada was not a party to the

ICSID Convention.

In conclusion, the Respondent submits that, on the facts of this case, the correct application
of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention (with the Treaty) can only lead to a decision

rejecting jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claim.

The Claimant’s Case

In summary, the Claimant submits that the element of “foreign control” in Article 25(2)(b)
of the ICSID Convention is not left hanging in the air as an abstract concept because it is
inexorably linked with the parties’ consent under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention
and, here, Articles 1(3) and 10(4) of the Treaty. Accordingly, the element of “foreign
control” under Article 25(2)(b) is primarily to be determined under the overriding
umbrella of the parties’ agreement as to what is “foreign control” and not by some

independent non-consensual concept.

Article 1(3) of the Treaty defines an “investor” as including any juridical (or “juristic’”’)
persons that are investing in the territory of the other Contracting State; and
Article 10(4) of the Treaty provides that where an investor from the other Contracting
State owns the majority of the shares in such juridical person, before the dispute arises,
that juridical person “shall, for the purposes of the Convention, be treated as an investor of
the other Contracting State in accordance with Article 25(2)(B) of the Convention”.
Accordingly, the Claimant submits that the test is two-fold: (i) the nationality of the

“investor” and (ii) “majority share ownership”; and that once these two elements are met,

30

the reference in the Treaty to Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention establishes

“foreign control” exhaustively, without any further requirement under Article 25(2)(b).

101.

The Claimant stresses that Article 1(3) of the Treaty refers to “any” juristic person. There
is no reference to an additional factor relating to the person or persons who control that
juristic person that is a national of the other Contracting State. Thus, according to the
Claimant, once it is established that the Claimant is an “investor” protected under the terms
of the Treaty, there is no need to add any further test to determine ICSID jurisdiction.
Given the Treaty’s express and comprehensive wording, both Egypt and the UAE have
agreed that the element of nationality under Article 25(1), including foreign control in
Article 25(2)(b), is satisfied once the twofold test in Article 10(4) of the BIT is met. The
Claimant contends that any other interpretation would be erroneous, because it would
contradict the express will, consent and intention of these two Contracting States to the

Treaty, to which the Claimant subscribed with its Request for Arbitration.

102. The Claimant contends that the overwhelming and prevailing jurisprudence confirms that
the agreement of Contracting States should be given effect; and that where there is no
restrictive or exclusionary provision agreed otherwise, the nationality of the foreign person
owning the majority of the shares is sufficient in itself to establish the relevant element of
nationality (inclusive of foreign control) for the purposes of Articles 25(1) and 25(2)(b) of
the ICSID Convention. The Claimant further contends that there is no need to pierce the

corporate veil and determine who in turn owns or controls that foreign person.

103. The Claimant refers to the decision in Tokios Tokelés where the majority of the tribunal
decided in favour of jurisdiction. *! In accepting the parties’ consent in the
Ukraine-Lithuania BIT as the ruling factor, the tribunal noted the need for
predictability in international investment. Accordingly, the tribunal excluded the control
test and adopted the classical approach for determining the foreign nationality of the

claimant.

*! Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction dated 29 April 2004 (“Tokios
Tokelés”).

31

104.

105.

106.

107.

The Claimant also refers to the subsequent decision in Rompetrol where ICSID jurisdiction
was based on the Netherlands-Romania BIT. Similarly to the present case, according to
the Claimant, there was there a two-level foreign ownership structure, whereby 84.6% of
Rompetrol S.A. shares were held by a Dutch company (TRG N.V.) which was in turn
owned 100% by a Swiss company (Rompetrol) which in turn was held 100% by two
nationals of Romania. The tribunal rejected Romania’s jurisdictional objections, again
applying the principle of the parties’ consent for determining the nationality of the

claimant.

The Claimant next refers to the award issued in ADC v. Hungary under the
Cyprus—Hungary BIT.*? The Claimant submits that this award reconfirms the nationality
principles adopted by international investment tribunals, where Cypriot companies fully
owned and controlled by Canadians could properly be considered as Cypriot investors for

the purposes of the BIT.

Conversely, the Claimant rejects the Respondent’s reliance on the decision in TSA
Spectrum Argentina on the ground that it is clearly distinguishable.“ According to the
Claimant, the Netherlands—Argentina BIT contained a definition of “investor” different
from the definition in the Treaty in the present case: Article 1(b) of that BIT expressly
included concepts of effective management and ultimate control. The Claimant also refers
to Mr. Aldonas’s dissenting opinion where he expressed the view that Article 25(2)(b)
makes the determination of which juridical persons may gain access to ICSID jurisdiction
by virtue of their “foreign control” expressly dependent on an agreement between “the

parties”, and not some putative “objective” test.

The Claimant also rejects the Respondent’s reliance on the decision in SOABI.* It submits

that this decision has been overtaken by more recent decisions relied upon by Claimant

* The Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3, Decision on Respondent's Preliminary
Objections on Jurisdiction and Admissibility dated 18 April 2008 (“Rompetrol”).

8 ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited v. Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16, Award
dated 2 October 2006 (“ADC v. Hungary”).

+ TSA Spectrum, see supra footnote 30.
4 TSA Spectrum, Dissenting Opinion of Mr. Grant D. Aldonas of 19 December 2008, para. 8, Exhibit C-64.
46 SOABI, see supra footnote 40.

32

108.

109.

(including Tokios Tokelés, Rompetrol and ADC), and that it is also distinguishable because
there was no BIT between Belgium and Senegal: the tribunal there confirmed its
jurisdiction under an arbitration clause in the agreement concluded between SOABI and

the Government of Senegal.

The Claimant likewise disputes the Respondent’s reliance on the decisions in Vacuum Salt
Products Limited vy. Ghana*’ and Liberian Eastern Timber Company (LETCO) v.
Liberia.*® In Vacuum Salt, there was no BIT; and there was also no BIT in LETCO.
According to the Claimant, the Respondent’s reliance on Aguas del Tunari® and
Autopista”® is equally misplaced. The Claimant argues that Aguas should be distinguished
because the Bolivia—Netherlands BIT clearly refers to control as a condition for the

State’s consent.

The Claimant also distinguishes Autopista on the basis that the relevant instrument of
consent, a concession agreement, contained an express requirement of “foreign control”
that limited Venezuela’s consent to ICSID arbitration. The Claimant further emphasizes
that the Autopista tribunal ruled that the parties in that case had defined foreign control on
the basis of a reasonable criterion, namely direct majority shareholding by a national of
another Contracting State. The Claimant concludes that Aufopista supports its position
that a State has “the right to include within its consent under Article 25(1) the elements of
foreign control that it deems appropriate to satisfy Article 25(2)(b)”.*! According to the
Claimant, “direct shareholding by a company with the nationality of a foreign country”
would be “a reasonable condition”*”

the ICSID Convention.

that would satisfy the test under Article 25(2)(b) of

* Vacuum Salt, see supra footnote 28.

*8 Liberian Eastern Timber Corporation v. Republic of Liberia, CSID Case No. ARB/83/2, Decision on Jurisdiction
dated 24 October 1984 (“LETCO”), Exhibit RL-20.

* Aguas del Tunari, S.A. v. Republic of Bolivia, CSID Case No. ARB/02/3, Decision on Respondent’s Objections
to Jurisdiction dated 21 October 2005 (“Aguas del Tunari”), Exhibit RL-78.

* Autopista, see supra footnote 33.

5! Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Bifurcated Jurisdictional Issues dated 12 June 2013, para. 49.17.

° Id,

33

110. In Autopista, the ICSID tribunal decided that it had jurisdiction over the parties’ dispute.
In its reasons, according to the Claimant, this tribunal carefully analysed the two
requirements of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. Albeit somewhat lengthy,
given the critical significance which the Claimant attaches to such reasoning (as does,
later, this Tribunal below), it is appropriate to set out verbatim much of that reasoning
here in its full context, as follows (where the tribunal refers to these two requirements also

as “prongs”):

94. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention requires the Parties’
consent to submit a dispute to ICSID Jurisdiction. No proceedings
can take place under the Centre’s auspices unless the parties to the
dispute have given their consent in writing. More specifically, the
system of the Convention is premised on two levels of consent. At
the first level, one finds the consent expressed by the Contracting
States which agreed to be bound by the Convention. At the second
level, one finds the consent given by the host State and the investor
by means of an agreement to ICSID arbitration {citation here
omitted].

95. According to ICSID Tribunals and the commentaries on the
ICSID Convention, great weight must be placed on the fact that the
parties consented to ICSID’s jurisdiction, consent often being
described as the cornerstone of the jurisdiction of the Centre
[citation and quote here omitted].

96. However essential, consent in and of itself is not sufficient to
ensure access to the Centre. Indeed, Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention provides for additional objective requirements which
must be met in addition to consent. These objective requirements of
the following:

e The dispute between the parties must be a “legal dispute” ;

e The dispute must arise directly out of an “investment”; and,

e In the event that the investor is a corporation registered under
the laws of the host State, the parties must agree to treat the
locally incorporated company, because of “foreign control”, as

a “national” of another Contracting State for the purposes of
the Convention.

% See Autopista, supra footnote 33, para. 144a.

34

97. The Convention does not contain any definition of these
objective requirements. The drafters of the Convention deliberately
chose not to define the terms “legal dispute”, “investment”,
“nationality” and “foreign control”. In reliance on the consensual
nature of the Convention, they preferred giving the parties the
greatest latitude to define these terms themselves, provided that the
criteria agreed upon by the parties are reasonable and not totally
inconsistent with the purposes of the Convention.

L..]

 

99. As a result, to determine whether these objective requirements
are met in a given case, one needs to refer to the parties’ own
understanding or definition. As long as the criteria chosen by the
parties to define these requirements are reasonable, i.e. as long as
the requirements are not deprived of their objective significance,
there is no reason to discard the parties’ choice.

[J

102. Article 25(2)(b) creates an exception to the rule that a
national cannot initiate ICSID proceedings against its own State.
This exception is justified by the fact that host states may require
foreign investors to operate by way of a locally incorporated
company, without intending to prevent such investor from acceding
to ICSID arbitration.

103. Article 25(2)(b) (second prong) defines “national of another
Contracting State” as any juridical person which had the
nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute, and which
because of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be
treated as a national of another contracting state for the purposes
of this Convention.

104. Hence, locally incorporated companies may agree to ICSID
arbitration subject to two requirements:

The parties have agreed to treat the said company as a national
of another Contracting State for the purposes of this
Convention; and

The said company is subject to foreign control.
[..]

105. The Convention does not require any specific form for the
agreement to treat a juridical person incorporated in the host state

35

as a national of another Contracting State because of foreign
control.

106. Further, Article 25(2)(b) does not define nationality. As
reflected in the Travaux préparatoires, the drafters intentionally
gave up inserting into the ICSID Convention a definition of
nationality [citation here omitted].

107. According to international law and practice, there are
different possible criteria to determine a juridical person’s
nationality. The most widely used is the place of incorporation or
registered office. Alternatively the place of the central
administration or effective seat may also be taken into
consideration [citations and quotations from SOABI and Amco here
omitted].

L

 

109. However, as stated by Aron Broches, the purpose of Article
25(2)(b) being to indicate “the outer limits within which disputes
may be submitted to conciliation or arbitration under the auspices
of the Centre”, the parties should be given “the widest possible
latitude” to agree on the meaning of nationality. Any definition of
nationality based on “a reasonable criterion” should be accepted
[citation to Dr. Broches’ Hague lectures here omitted].

L

 

110. Like the other objective requirements of Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention, foreign control is not defined. Article 25(2)(b)
does not specify the nature, direct, indirect, ultimate or effective
[sic: effect], of the foreign control.

111. In different decisions on jurisdiction, arbitral tribunals have
discussed how far a tribunal should go in searching for foreign
control. In Amco the tribunal considered that it should go one step
behind the nationality of the host State; in SOABI the tribunal
searched for real control and went one step further to second-tier
control, i.e. to the majority shareholders of the company holding
the share of the locally incorporated entity.

112. According to Venezuela [i.e. the respondent], foreign control
in the meaning of Article 25(2)(b) means effective control.
However, this interpretation lacks convincing support. Indeed, the
term “effective control” is not found in the ICSID Convention. In
addition, there is no indication in the Travaux préparatoires and in
the commentaries on Article 25(2)(b) that “effective control”
should be viewed as a threshold that has to be reached before the

36

parties may agree to treat a local corporation as a foreign
national in the meaning of Article 25(2)(b).

113. The review of the Travaux préparatoires shows that, given the
criticism drawn by attempts to define foreign control, the drafters
considered that the enterprise of defining foreign control (like
nationality, investment or legal dispute) was impracticable.
Moreover definitions of these terms will be difficult to apply in
practice and would often lead to protracted investigation of the
ownership of shares, nominees, trusts, voting arrangements, etc.
Hence, the drafters decided to give the parties wide discretion to
determine under what circumstances a company could be treated
as a national of another Contracting State because of foreign
control. The concept of foreign control being flexible and broad,
different criteria may be taken into consideration, such as
shareholding, voting rights, etc. [citation to Dr. Broches’ Hague
lectures here omitted].

114, Given the autonomy granted to the parties by the ICSID
Convention, an Arbitral Tribunal may not adopt a more
restrictive definition of foreign control, unless the parties have
exercised their discretion in a way inconsistent with the purposes
of the convention [citations here omitted; emphasis added].

115. Some commentators even consider that an Arbitral Tribunal
should be less stringent in assessing the level of control and the
reasonableness of the criterion or criteria chosen by the parties
when there is an express agreement in this respect [citations here
omitted].

 

116. On the basis of the foregoing developments, it is the task of
the Tribunal to determine whether the parties have exercised
their autonomy within the limits of the ICSID Convention, i.e.
whether they have defined foreign control on the basis of
reasonable criteria. For this purpose, the Tribunal has to review
the concrete circumstances of the case without being limited by
formalities. However, as long as the definition of foreign control
chosen by the parties is reasonable and the purposes of the
Convention have not been abused (for example in cases of fraud
or misrepresentation), the Arbitral Tribunal must enforce the
parties’ choice. [emphasis added]

111. Accordingly, the Claimant submits that the provisions of the Treaty between Egypt and the
UAE, with their agreement to grant protection to Egyptian companies whose majority

shares are owned by UAE companies, is reasonable and should be given effect, thus

37

granting jurisdiction to the Tribunal under the express, clear and comprehensive wording
of the Treaty and the prevailing jurisprudence of ICSID arbitration tribunals. Under that
jurisprudence, a classical approach in determining nationality for the purposes of
protection (based on the place of incorporation) is preferred, thus enhancing predictability
in international investment; and moreover Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention is
intended to expand jurisdiction and not to restrict it unreasonably — all of which supports
the Claimant’s case on jurisdiction ratione personae. In addition to Autopista and other
legal materials, the Claimant also cites the Decision on Jurisdiction in Wena in support of

that general proposition.

112. In conclusion, as to the facts, the Claimant submits that CTIP is a juristic person of the
UAE; that CTIP owns 90% of the Claimant’s shares, as acknowledged by the Respondent
in paragraph 159 of its Counter-Memorial (as reproduced above, in paragraph 93 of the

Award); and that CTIP controls the Claimant.

113. During and after the hearing, the Claimant presented an alternative argument: in the event
that the Tribunal should decide for any reason to apply an ‘ultimate’ ‘indirect’ and/or
‘effective’ control test under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal
should find that: “[...] economic investments in Claimant represent both UAE and
Canadian foreign investment interests under the [ICSID] Convention because Egypt in its
domestic laws recognizes CTIP as a UAE investor and thus its investments in Egypt are
‘foreign’ investments and also recognizes Mr. Reda Ginena as a Canadian investor and
thus his investments in Egypt are ‘foreign’ investments, the Canada—Egypt BIT being part

of Egyptian law”.

114. Accordingly, so the Claimant submits, the Claimant is an “investor” protected under the
Treaty; the requirements of Articles 25(1) and 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention are
satisfied; and this Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide the Claimant’s claim in this

arbitration.

“ Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Jurisdiction dated
29 June 1999 (“Wena”), Exhibit C-65.

*5 Claimant's Clarification of a Jurisdictional Issue dated 15 July 2013, para. 3.

38

The Tribunal’s Analyses and Decisions

115. Introduction: It is necessary at the outset to describe the Tribunal’s general approach to this
bifurcated jurisdictional issue under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. The

Tribunal does not understand such approach to be materially disputed between the Parties.

116. Under the Treaty and the ICSID Convention, the Respondent offered to consent, on
conditional terms, to arbitral jurisdiction for claims by non-States against the Respondent.
A claimant seeking to accept that offer must meet the requirements imposed by such terms;
and a failure to do so must necessarily mean that no arbitral jurisdiction exists, because

there would be no consent by the Respondent to arbitral jurisdiction.

117. Consent always is the essential condition precedent to arbitration and, indeed, to any form
of consensual adjudication. As was decided by the International Court of Justice in Bosnia-
Herzegovina v Yugoslavia,”° there must be an “‘unequivocal indication’ of a ‘voluntary
and indisputable’ acceptance” of consent; and, as was also decided by a NAFTA
arbitration tribunal, in the case Fireman’s Fund v. Mexico, 57 4 claimant “is not entitled to
the benefit of the doubt with respect to the existence and scope of an arbitration

agreement”.

118. For present purposes, this approach means that the burden of establishing jurisdiction,
including consent, lies primarily upon the Claimant. Although it is the Respondent which
has here raised specific jurisdictional objections, it is not for the Respondent to disprove
this Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Under international law, as a matter of legal logic and the
application of the principle traditionally expressed by the Latin maxim “actori incumbit
probatio”, it is for the Claimant to discharge the burden of proving all essential facts
required to establish jurisdiction for its claims. Such jurisdictional facts are not here subject

to any “prima facie” evidential test; and, in any event, that test would be inapplicable at

 

© Case Ci Application of the C ion on the Prevention and Puni of the Crime of Genocide
(Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Yugoslavia (Serbia and Me )) (Provisi sures, Order of 13

1993), 1993 ICJ Rep. at 325, 342.

*7 Fireman’s Fund Insurance Company v United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No ARB(AF) 02/01, Decision on the
Preliminary Question dated 17 July 2003 (““Fireman’s Fund”), para. 64.

 

39

119.

120.

this stage of the arbitration proceedings where the Claimant (as with the Respondent) had
sufficient opportunity to adduce evidence in support of its case on the bifurcated
jurisdictional issues and for the Tribunal to make final decisions on all relevant disputed

facts.°*

Conversely, the Tribunal does not here apply a restrictive interpretation of consent in
favour of the Respondent. As was decided in Amco, the consent of a sovereign to
investment arbitration should not be construed restrictively as being a limitation of its

sovereignty. The tribunal there decided:

[...] [L]ike any other conventions, a convention to arbitrate is not
to be construed restrictively, nor, as a matter of fact, broadly or
liberally. It is to be construed in a way which leads to find out and
to respect the common will of the parties: such a method of
interpretation is but the application of the fundamental principle
pacta sunt servanda, a principle common, indeed, to all systems of
internal law and international law.

Moreover — and this is again a general principle of law — any
convention, including conventions to arbitrate, should be
construed in good faith, that is to say by taking into account the
consequences of their commitments the parties may be considered
as having reasonably and legitimately envisaged. 8

However, from the text of the ICSID Convention, it is clear that the parties’ consent, even
if otherwise established, may not suffice to establish jurisdiction before an ICSID tribunal.
As was noted by the Report of the Executive Directors: “While consent of the parties is an
essential prerequisite for the jurisdiction of the Centre, consent alone will not suffice to
bring a dispute within its jurisdiction. In keeping with the purpose of the Convention, the
jurisdiction of the Centre is further limited by reference to the nature of the dispute and the

parties to it”.

°8 Accordingly, the well-known dictum in the opinion of Judge Higgins in the Oil Platforms Case is here doubly
irrelevant.

* Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia, (CSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Jurisdiction
dated 25 September 1983, para. 14(i), Exhibit RL-25 (emphasis in the original).

© Report of the Executive Directors, para. 25.

40

121.

122.

123.

As to limitations by reference to the nature of the dispute, Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention extends jurisdiction only to legal disputes “arising directly out of an
investment”. The recurring controversies before ICSID tribunals as to the meaning of
“investment” demonstrate that consent as to the existence of an investment in another
instrument may not suffice. As stated by Schreuer: “[...] if a BIT’s definition of investment
goes beyond the requirements of the ICSID Convention there will be no jurisdiction”.°!
The Tribunal also notes the unresolved consequences, amongst arbitrators, legal
practitioners and scholars, of the Decision on the Application for Annulment of 16 April
2009 made by the Ad Hoc Committee in MHS,” including the Dissenting Opinion of Judge
Mohammed Shahabuddeen. Fortunately, these difficulties do not require the decision of

the Tribunal in this arbitration; and, for present purposes, their resolution can be set aside.

As to limitations by reference to the parties, Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention
contains another general limitation on consent. Its text limits jurisdiction to a qualifying
dispute between a Contracting State and “a national of another Contracting State”. The
latter term is defined in Article 25(2)(b) as including “any juridical person which had the
nationality of a Contracting State other than the State Party to the dispute [...]”. Subject to
the further wording (considered below), the plain meaning of this text precludes any
consent by parties to ICSID jurisdiction where the claimant party has the nationality of the

respondent Contracting State.

The effect of this wording in Article 25(2)(b) replicates the general limitation regarding
natural persons in Article 25(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention. As already indicated above,
this general limitation is interpreted to apply not only to nationals of the respondent
Contracting State, but also to dual nationals of the respondent Contracting State and of
another State. Moreover, these same limitations have long been established for diplomatic
protection under international law: Article 4 of the 1930 Hague Convention on Certain

Questions Relating to the Conflict of Nationality Laws declared: “A State may not afford

°! Schreuer, supra footnote 32, p. 124.

° Malaysian Historic Salvors SDN BHD v Government of Malaysia, ICSID Case No. ARB/ /05/10, Decision on the
Application for Annulment dated 16 April 2009 (“MHS”).

° Malaysian Historic Salvors SDN BHD v Government of Malaysia, ICSID Case No. ARB/ /05/10, Dissenting
Opinion of Judge Shahabuddeen dated 16 April 2009.

4l

diplomatic protection to one of its nationals against a State whose nationality such person
also possesses”; and see now Articles 5-7 of the 2006 ILC Articles on Diplomatic
Protection. Accordingly, the ILC’s Commentary on Article 5 approved the result of the
Loewen award rejecting jurisdiction over the corporate claimant’s claim against the USA
under NAFTA, on the ground that, with its newly acquired US nationality, that claimant’s

claim could require the USA to pay compensation to its own national.

124. In the present case, the crucial difference between the Claimant and the Respondent turns,
however, on the further wording in Article 25(2)(b), operating as an exception to the
general limitation: “[...] and any juridical person which had the nationality of the
Contracting State party to the dispute [...] and which, because of foreign control, the parties
have agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting State for the purposes of
this Convention”. The Parties have both assumed in the present case that such an
agreement can be made in a treaty between Contracting States (to which a claimant would
not be a party) and not only an agreement between the disputing parties (including a

claimant). In the circumstances, the Tribunal is content to proceed on that assumption.

125. In the Request for Arbitration dated 9 February 2011, the Claimant rightly acknowledged
that both the Respondent and the UAE were Contracting States to the ICSID Convention
and that the Claimant was a juridical person of Egyptian nationality. Under Article 25(1)
and the first part of Article 25(2)(b), it would follow that, thus far, there could be no ICSID
jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claim. The basis on which the Claimant asserted
jurisdiction under the exception contained in the second part of Article 25(2)(b), as

required by Rule 2(1)(d)(iii) of the ICSID Institution Rules, merits reciting verbatim:

The Claimant is 90% owned by the UAE company CTIP Oil and
Gas International Limited (“CTIP”) and, under Article 10(4) of
the BIT is to be treated as a national of the UAE for the purposes
of the Convention. [Article 10(4) is here quoted]. Since CTIP
acquired 90% of the shares in the Claimant in 2006, the Claimant
shall, for_the purposes of the Convention, be treated as an
investor of the UAE in accordance with Clause (b) of Article 25(2)
of the Convention.

 Claimant’s Request for Arbitration dated 9 February 2011, para. 28 (emphasis in the original).

42

126.

127.

128.

129.

The Tribunal notes the identification of the UAE as the other Contracting State under the

second part of Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention, together with the Treaty.

In the Tribunal’s view, two principal questions arise in this case under this second part of
Article 25(2)(b): (i) what is the meaning and effect of the phrase “[...] which, because of
foreign control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a national of another
Contracting State”; and (ii) has that requirement been satisfied, with or without
Article 10(4) of the Treaty? The meaning of Article 25 is of course subject to the legal
rules of interpretation codified in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (as is also,
of course, the Treaty); but it is appropriate first to consider two arbitral decisions on Article

25(2)(b), applying those rules.

These decisions are Vacuum Salt Products Limited v. Government of the Republic of
Ghana, with the award of 16 February 1994 (ICSID Case No. ARB/92/1); and Autopista
Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, with the decision
on jurisdiction of 27 September 2001 (ICSID Case No. ARB/O0/5). It is necessary to
consider these two decisions in some detail. In the Tribunal’s view, these highly significant

decisions are materially consistent with each other.

In Vacuum Salt, the tribunal (Robert Jennings, Charles Brower and Kamal Hossain),

decided upon jurisdiction as follows:

36. [...] [T]he parties’ agreement to treat Claimant as a foreign
national “because of foreign control” does not ipso jure confer
jurisdiction. The reference in Article 25(2)(b) to “foreign control”
necessarily sets an objective Convention limit beyond which ICSID
jurisdiction cannot exist and parties therefore lack power to invoke
same no matter how devoutly they may have desired to do so
[citations omitted]. In addressing the present claim of jurisdiction
grounded on the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) it is the task of
the Tribunal thus to determine whether or not the Convention limit
has been exceeded.

37. [...] As the consent of the parties is in broad principle the
“cornerstone of the jurisdiction of the Centre” [citation omitted], it
is accorded considerable respect and is not lightly to be found to
have been ineffective. Thus the acknowledged authority on the

43

Convention states in specific regard to Article 25 (2)(b) that “any
stipulation... based on a reasonable criterion should be accepted”
and that jurisdiction should be declined “only if... to do so would
permit parties to use the Convention for purposes for which it was
clearly not intended” [citation to Broches omitted]. In like vein it
has been stated that the agreement of the parties “on a foreign
nationality based on foreign control would raise a_ strong
presumption that there was adequate foreign control on which to
predicate a foreign nationality.” [citation to Amerasinghe omitted]
Then it is “only... where such foreign control cannot be postulated
on the facts on the basis of the application of any reasonable
criterion that a tribunal... would not [accept jurisdiction], because
in such a case the parties would purport to use the Convention for
purposes it was not intended.” [citation to Amerasinghe omitted]

38. Nevertheless the words “because of foreign control” have to
be given some meaning and effect. These words are clearly
intended to qualify an agreement to arbitrate and the parties are
not at liberty to agree to treat any company of the host State as a
foreign national: They may only do so “because of foreign
control.” The Tribunal concludes that the existence of consent to
an arbitration clause [...] in circumstances such that jurisdiction
could be premised only on the second clause of Article 25 (2)(b)
raises a rebuttable presumption that the “foreign control”
criterion of the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) has been satisfied
on the date of consent. 6s

130. In Autopista, as recited more fully above, the tribunal (Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Karl-

Heinz Béckstiegel and Bernardo Cremades), approached the jurisdictional issue as follows:

103. Article 25(2)(b) (second prong) defines “national of another
Contracting State” as any juridical person which had the
nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute, and which
because of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be
treated as a national of another Contracting State for the purposes
of the Convention.

104. Hence, locally incorporated companies may agree to ICSID
arbitration subject to two requirements:

Vacuum Salt, supra footnote 28, paras. 36-38.

44

The parties have agreed to treat the said company as a national
of another Contracting State for the purposes of this
Convention; and

The said company is subject to foreign control. °6

The Tribunal notes here this same formulation of two separate “requirements”.

131.

Accordingly, despite its text as one uninterrupted sentence, Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention separately establishes a subjective test and an objective test. That is clear from
the ordinary meaning of the wording of Article 25(2)(b), as well as the reasoning in the
decisions in both Vacuum Salt, Autopista and in scholarly commentaries. Both tests must
be met by the Claimant to establish jurisdiction in the present case. Albeit differing in its
application, this approach is common ground between the Parties. As the Claimant rightly
acknowledged at the hearing: “consent is not enough and consent is not the only
thing [...]”.”

132. The subjective test is raised by the words “the parties have agreed should be treated as a
national of another Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention”. In the
Tribunal’s view, this subjective test is met by Article 10(4) of the Treaty by treating the
Claimant as a national of the UAE, the latter being a Contracting State to the ICSID
Convention. Article 10(4) refers expressly to Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention; the
Claimant is a juridical person registered or established in accordance with the laws of

Egypt; and CTIP owns a majority of the Claimant’s shares.

133. The objective test is raised by the words “because of foreign control’; and it is not met
simply by meeting the subjective test: these two tests are not the same. As was decided in
Vacuum Salt, “[...] the parties’ agreement to treat Claimant as a foreign national ‘because
of foreign control’ does not ipso jure confer jurisdiction. The reference in Article 25(2)(b)
to ‘foreign control’ necessarily sets an objective Convention limit beyond which ICSID

jurisdiction cannot exist and parties therefore lack power to invoke same no matter how

° Autopista, supra footnote 33, paras. 103-104.
'T. 64:14-15.

45

134.

135.

devoutly they may have desired to do so [...]”.°8 As was likewise decided in Autopista:
“[...] locally incorporated companies may agree to ICSID arbitration subject to two
requirements: “[t]he parties have agreed to treat the said company as a national of another
Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention; and [t]he said company is subject to
foreign control”. Accordingly, the Tribunal decides that this objective test is not satisfied
by mere agreement of the Parties in this case: “foreign control” must be established

objectively.

The Tribunal acknowledges that, even as an objective test, the requirement of
Article 25(2)(b) as to foreign control may take into account the express agreement of both
the disputing parties and the Contracting Parties to the ICSID Convention. In the words of

Vacuum Salt, such agreement may operate as “a rebuttable presumption”;”° and, as

expressed in Autopista, agreement based on “reasonable criteria”,”! without formalities,
would ordinarily suffice. Yet both approaches impose limitations to such agreements. In
Vacuum Salt, citing Dr. Broches, an agreement could not permit parties to use the ICSID
Convention “for purposes for which it was clearly not intended”.” In Autopista, again
citing Dr. Broches, an agreement must keep within “the outer limits within which disputes

may be submitted to [...] arbitration under the auspices of the Centre”;” and also “the

purposes of the Convention have not been abused”.”*

As to the application of this objective test, Professor Schreuer and his editorial colleagues
suggest that “the better approach would appear to be a realistic look at the true controllers
thereby blocking access to the Centre for juridical persons that are controlled directly or
indirectly by nationals of non-Contracting States or nationals of the host State”.”° Professor
Gaillard, in the commentary cited by the Respondent, suggests that “control” must actually

be exercised by foreign nationals; and that it would not suffice to show that the local

8 Vacuum Salt, supra footnote 28, para. 36.

© Autopista, supra footnote 33, para. 104 (emphasis added).

™ Vacuum Salt, supra footnote 28, para. 38.

™ Autopista, supra footnote 33, para. 116.

® Vacuum Salt, supra footnote 28, para. 37.

™ Autopista, supra footnote 33, para. 109.

™ Td., para. 116; see also para. 114.

™ Schreuer, supra footnote 32, p. 323.

46

company is owned by another company incorporated in another Contracting State to

benefit from this test, if that company is itself controlled by nationals of the host State.”

136. In the Tribunal’s view, there is a significant difference under Article 25(2)(b) between
(i) control exercised by a national of the Contracting State against which the Claimant
asserts its claim and (ii) control by a national of another Contracting State. The latter
situation violates no principle of international law and is consistent with the text of the
ICSID Convention. On the other hand, the former situation violates the general limitation
in Article 25(1) and the first part of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention in regard to
both Contracting States and nationals (including dual nationals). In other words, the latter
is consistent with the object and purpose of the ICSID Convention; but the former is
inconsistent: it would permit the use of the ICSID Convention for a purpose for which it
was clearly not intended and it would breach its outer limits. As already noted above,
Article 25(2)(b) operates only as a qualified exception to the general limitation to ICSID

jurisdiction in Article 25: a sardine cannot swallow a whale.

137. Hence, it is not surprising to see tribunals (and scholarly commentators) apply the control
test favouring jurisdiction in the latter case. Conversely, it is not surprising to see its
application rejecting jurisdiction in the former case. In TSA Spectrum, the tribunal decided
against a “strict literal interpretation that may go against common sense in some
circumstances, especially when the formal nationality covers a corporate entity controlled
directly or indirectly by persons of the same nationality as the host State.” As also
suggested by Schreuer: “If the immediate controller is a national of a Contracting State
which is, in turn, controlled by nationals of non-Contracting States or even by nationals of
the host State? Realism would militate against jurisdiction in such a case”.”* The Tribunal
therefore concludes that it has no jurisdiction over the Claimant, as the latter is not under
foreign control, but under Egyptian control. This conclusion is not modified by the

allegation that Mr. Ginena is a dual national, being Egyptian and Canadian.

7 See TSA Spectrum Gaillard commentary, supra footnote 31.
TSA Spectrum, supra footnote 30, para. 145.
*8 Schreuer, supra footnote 32, p. 321.

47

138. In Burimi & Eagle Games v. Albania (ICSID Case No ARB/11/18), the tribunal (Daniel
Price, Bernardo Cremades and Ibrahim Fadlallah) decided in its award of 29 May 2013

rejecting jurisdiction under Article 25(2)(b), as follows:

118. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that Mr. Iir Burimi, a dual
national of Italy and Albania, is the majority shareholder of Eagle
Games [an Albanian company] and therefore the relevant party for
determining whether Eagle Games can be treated as a national of
a Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute
because it is under “foreign control.”

119. While Claimants did not make this argument in its written
submissions, the conclusion that Mr. Ilir Burimi — a dual national
of Italy and Albania — is the majority shareholder of Eagle Games
raises an important question about whether a dual national may
rely on his “foreign” nationality — that is, the nationality other
than the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute —
for the purposes of establishing “foreign control” over a company
bringing a claim before ICSID.

120. The ICSID Convention makes it very clear that a dual
national may not invoke one of his two nationalities to establish
jurisdiction over a claim brought in his own name under
Article 25(2)(a). [citation here omitted] Indeed, it is for this very
reason that Mr. Ilir Burimi was required to withdraw as a
Requesting Party from the Request for Arbitration dated June 16,
2011.

121. While neither the ICSID Convention nor relevant precedents
address the potential for a dual national invoking one of his two
nationalities to establish jurisdiction over a claim brought in the
name of a juridical person under the second clause of Article
25(2)(b), it strikes the Tribunal as anomalous that the principle
against use of dual nationality in [Article] 25(2)(a) would not
transfer to the potential use of dual nationality in
[Article] 25(2)(b). Otherwise, any dual national who is a national
of the Contracting State to a dispute could circumvent the bar on
claims in Article 25(2)(a) by establishing a company in that state
and asserting foreign control of that company by virtue of his
second (foreign) nationality. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that
for the purposes of considering whether Eagle Games could be
treated as a national of another Contracting State (i.e., Italy)
because of “foreign control,” Mr. Ilir Burimi cannot invoke his

48

Italian nationality to establish “foreign control” of Eagle
Games.”

139. The Tribunal notes that Italy was and remains a Contracting State to the ICSID
Convention, whereas in the present case Canada was not a Contracting State at the time of
the Claimant’s Request. Further, the Tribunal does not read the tribunal’s phrase
“circumvent the bar’ quoted in paragraph 121 above as necessarily indicating a
requirement for forum shopping, but rather as a way of illustrating (as an example) the
consequence of mis-matching the second part of Article 25(2)(b) with the remainder of
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. In Autopista, the tribunal had likewise cited cases of
fraud and misrepresentation as “examples”: see the passage quoted from paragraph 116 of

the decision above, in paragraph 110 of the Award.

140. The Tribunal accepts these analyses in Vacuum Salt, Autopista and Burimi: they are based
on established principles with a clear dividing-line, making for legal predictability and
certainty. Albeit eventually resulting in different jurisdictional decisions, the Tribunal
considers that these three decisions are consistent as a matter of principle. In Autopista, the
tribunal found there was a controller who was not a dual national but was a national of
another Contracting State; and accordingly there could be no violation of international law
or Article 25’s general limitation. If the facts were the same in the present case, this
Tribunal would arrive at the same result as the tribunal in Autopista and assume
jurisdiction. Conversely, this Tribunal would understand the Autopista tribunal to reject

jurisdiction if the facts in this case had been present in that case.

141.

The Tribunal distinguishes the several other cases invoked by the Claimant where the
named claimant is not a national of the respondent Contracting State (as in the present
case). These included the decisions and awards in Tokios Tokelés,®° ADC v. Hungary,

Rompetrol™ and Wena.* None of these cases, given the particular claimant’s foreign

. 118-121.

® For Tokios Tokelés, see supra footnote 41.

 

” Burimi, supra footnote 26, par:

8! For ADC v Hungary, see supra footnote 43.
© For Rompetrol, see supra footnote 42.
3 For Wena, see supra footnote 54.

49

142.

143.

144.

nationality, arose under the second part of Article 25(2)(b). The issue was there directed at
the nationality of the named foreign claimant and not at the “foreign control” of a local
claimant. In the Tribunal’s view, the present case, with the Claimant being an Egyptian
national, is materially different. There is no issue over the Claimant’s nationality in the

present case: it is an Egyptian company.

In his witness statement, as to the facts, Mr. Ginena testified as to the origins of the

Claimant’s shareholding:

19. In 2006, the shareholders of National Gas were Mr. Mohamed
Magdy Hussien Rasikh, holding 30000 of the shares [5%],
Mr. Reda Ahmed Ginena, Egyptian holding 30000 of the shares
[5%] and CTIP Oil & Gas International Limited, free zone Jebel
Ali - United Arab Emirates (hereinafter referred to as “CTIP
UAE”), holding 540000 of the shares [90%].

20. CTIP UAE was incorporated on 2004 [sic] under the Off-shore
Companies Regulations of Jebel Ali free zone of 2003.

21. Since 2006, our shareholders have not changed. CTIP UAE
still owns 90% of the Shares in National Gas. 4

The Tribunal accepts Mr. Ginena’s evidence. The Tribunal was also informed by the
Claimant that, prior to 2006, the majority of the Claimant’s shares (55%) were held by
Oil & Gas Limited, a British company, which could have benefited of the jurisdiction of an
ICSID tribunal, as a covered investor under the United Kingdom—Egypt BIT of 1975 and
the ICSID Convention, without any like jurisdictional issues raised by the Respondent in

this case.

The Tribunal decides that the factual evidence shows unequivocally that CTIP is a shell
company of UAE nationality wholly owned by REGI, which is also a shell company of
UAE nationality wholly owned by Mr. Reda Ginena, an Egyptian national (who is also a
Canadian national). Share ownership is not, of course, conclusive proof of control; but, in
this case, it is clear that in fact the controller of both CTIP and REGI is Mr. Ginena, with

these two UAE companies acting as holding companies for Mr. Ginena’s 90% indirect

* Witness Statement of Mr. Reda Ginena, paras. 19-21.

50

interest in the Claimant, which have to be added to the 5% direct interest of Mr. Ginena,
which were not held through these companies. Indeed, the Claimant agrees that Mr. Ginena
controls CTIP and that CTIP controls the Claimant, as was confirmed at the hearing.
Each of these two UAE companies exists independently from Mr. Ginena in juridical
theory, but not in practice. Indeed, REGI is clearly named after Mr. Reda Ginena. In

commercial reality, as a fact, Mr. Ginena controls the Claimant.

145. Moreover, it matters littke whether Mr. Ginena exercises sole control over the Claimant
(with his direct and indirect 95% interest) or if he shares such control with Mr. Rasikh
(with his 5% direct interest) because Mr. Rasikh is also an Egyptian national. There is no
cogent evidence of any other control over the Claimant. Hence, the Claimant is ‘controlled’
by Mr. Ginena within the meaning of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention; or, in the
French version of the ICSID Convention, Mr. Ginena is at least the principal ‘interest’
controlling the Claimant. If Mr. Ginena (with or without Mr. Rasikh) is not the Claimant’s

controller, it would mean that no-one is.

146. These factual findings imply no criticism of Mr. Ginena: the Tribunal recognises that his
choice of corporate structure was made in good faith for legitimate fiscal reasons; it was
not designed as an exercise in forum shopping under the Treaty; and whilst CTIP and

REG are both shell companies, neither are sham entities.

147. The Tribunal has noted the Claimant’s submission that Mr. Ginena is said to be “deemed”
a Canadian investor under the Egypt-Canada BIT and not an Egyptian national,
particularly as advanced in the Claimant’s two written submissions made after the hearing.
This factor, not pleaded in the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration formally invoking

ICSID’s jurisdiction, cannot change the Tribunal’s decision.

148. At the relevant time, when the Claimant submitted its Request for Arbitration to ICSID,
Canada was not a Contracting State to the ICSID Convention; and Mr. Ginena was and is
not a party to this arbitration. Moreover, a bilateral treaty between two States, even if that

treaty is incorporated into their national laws, cannot modify the text of a multilateral

*S See T. 156:6 — 157:12; T. 166.

51

149.

treaty, such as the ICSID Convention. Hence, Mr. Ginena’s deemed Canadian nationality
cannot be a factor under Article 25(2)(b) the ICSID Convention; and for that purpose, he
was and remains a dual national of Egypt and Canada. In any event, Mr. Ginena is not the
Claimant (nor Mr. Rasikh); the Claimant advances its claim under the Treaty between
Egypt and the UAE (not the Egypt-Canada BIT); and the Tribunal cannot therefore derive
any part of its jurisdiction in the present case from the Egypt—Canada BIT. However, the
Tribunal refrains from expressing any view as to whether Mr. Ginena could advance any

claim against Egypt under the Egypt—Canada BIT.

For these reasons, the Tribunal decides that the Claimant has not satisfied the objective test
in the second part of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention; and, accordingly, the

Tribunal decides that it has no jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claim in this arbitration.

52

PART IV: JURISDICTION RATIONE TEMPORIS

Introduction

150. It is common ground between the Parties and confirmed by the Tribunal that, in the event
that the Respondent’s first objection ratione personae were upheld by the Tribunal, the
Tribunal could have no jurisdiction to decide the Claimant’s claim in this arbitration,
whatever its decisions might or might not be in regard to the Claimant’s second objection

ratione temporis (or, indeed, any of the non-bifurcated jurisdictional objections).

151.

Accordingly, the first objection, ratione personae, raises a threshold issue for the
Claimant’s claim. This is not so as regards this second objection, ratione temporis. As the
Respondent confirmed at the hearing, this objection relates only to the Claimant’s claim

regarding the “Egyptian pound floatation dispute”.*°

The Tribunal’s Analysis

152. In circumstances where the Tribunal has upheld the Respondent’s objection ratione
personae by its decision in Part III above, with the result that this Tribunal has no
jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claim, it is both unnecessary and inappropriate for the
Tribunal now to decide the Claimant’s objection ratione temporis. Accordingly, the

Tribunal does not decide this second objection here, one way or the other.

*-T. 5:21-24; see also T. 40:20-25 — 41:1-7.

53

PART V: COSTS

153. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 47(1)(j) of the Arbitration Rules govern
the issue of costs in these proceedings, i.e. both (i) the expenses incurred by the Parties and
(ii) the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the charges of the Centre. Given the wording
of these provisions, ICSID tribunals exercise a large measure of discretion on deciding

how and by which party such costs shall be paid.

154. In this case, it is clear that the Claimant is the unsuccessful party and the Respondent is the
successful party. The first jurisdictional issue raised by the Respondent, being a threshold
issue, means that the Claimant’s claim cannot move to the merits. Accordingly, applying
the ‘loser pays principle’, the Tribunal considers that the Claimant should bear in full,
without any recourse to the Respondent, the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the

charges of the Centre, namely those costs identified under (ii) above.

155. As regard the expenses incurred by the Parties, namely those costs identified under (i)
above, the Tribunal takes into account other factors. First, this first jurisdictional issue was
a relatively novel point; and both sides conducted their respective cases with great
professional courtesy and efficiency notwithstanding grave difficulties in Egypt. Second,
the Parties generously co-operated with each other procedurally, particularly over the
question of bifurcating and not bifurcating the Respondent’s jurisdictional issues under the
twin-track time-table described above. Under that time-table (as later amended) and
previous time-tables as regards the merits, the Claimant filed a Memorial, the Respondent
filed a Counter-Memorial and, after the jurisdictional hearing, the Claimant filed a Reply
Memorial on 13 October 2013. With this Award, this Tribunal can of course never address

the merits of the Parties’ dispute.

156. In the circumstances, the Tribunal considers that it would be appropriate in this case for the
Parties to bear their own expenses, without recourse to the other. The Tribunal, of course,
has borne in mind the terms of its Procedural Order No 3 of 18 February 2013.57 It

nonetheless considers that its tentative indication is sufficiently met by its decision on the

§? See supra paras. 38-39.

54

costs identified under (ii) above and, further, that the Claimant was put to unequal
expenses as regards pleading the merits, particularly with its Reply Memorial. As the
overall unsuccessful party, the Claimant must of course bear those costs without recourse
to the Respondent. However, just as it may on occasion be right for a tribunal to penalise a
recalcitrant party as to costs, the Tribunal considers it here appropriate to do the opposite
given that the Claimant’s co-operation was made in good faith to ensure, overall, a more
efficient procedure for this arbitration beneficial to both Parties. Accordingly, the Tribunal

does not think right to order the Claimant to pay for the Respondent’s own expenses.

157. In conclusion, for these reasons, the Tribunal decides that the Claimant and the Respondent
shall bear their own expenses; and that the Claimant shall bear all the fees and expenses of

the Tribunal and the charges of the Centre.**

88 The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed financial statement of the case account as soon as
the account has been finalised.

55

PART VI: THE OPERATIVE PART

158. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides and awards:

@

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

To uphold the jurisdictional objection ratione personae made by the Respondent;

Not to determine, one way or the other, the jurisdictional objection ratione

temporis made by the Respondent;

To declare that both the Centre (ICSID) and the Tribunal have no jurisdiction
over the Claimant’s claim in this arbitration by virtue of Articles 25(1) and

25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention;

That the Claimant shall bear all the costs of these proceedings comprising the fees
and expenses of the Members of the Tribunal and the expenses and charges of the
Secretariat, the exact amount of which shall be subsequently notified by the

Centre; and

That each Party shall bear its own expenses.

56

“Bnivle Stem.
Professor Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator

Date: 2 q Sank 20 14% Date: 3\ Har ch Lol¥

 

Mr. V. V. Veeder OC
President

Date: a2, Gie. ZO hf

57

