 

 

London Court of International Arbitration
Case No. UN 7949

Decision on the Challenge to Mr Judd L. Kessler

in the Arbitration

NATIONAL GRID PLC
— Claimant —
vs/
THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA
— Respondent —

of the Division of the LCIA Court composed of

Dr Klaus Sachs
Dr Hassan Ali Radhi
Mr Paul B. Hannon

 

 

Table of Contents

INTRODUCTION

THE PARTIES AND THEIR COUNSEL

THE UNDERLYING ARBITRATION

THE CHALLENGE

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE LCIA DIVISION AND SUMMARY OF THE
PROCEEDINGS

EVENTS LEADING TO THE CHALLENGE

SUMMARY OF PARTIES' POSITIONS

POSITION OF ARGENTINA
Grounds for the Challenge
Legal Standards
Request for Relief

POSITION OF NATIONAL GRID
Grounds for the Challenge
Legal Standards
Request for Relief

ANALYSIS AND DECISION

TIMELINESS OF THE CHALLENGE
THE DIVISION'S JURISDICTION
THE APPLICABLE STANDARD
ANALYSIS OF THE CHALLENGE
DECISION

Mw wi ow

oC wm ND

I. INTRODUCTION

A.

The Parties and Their Counsel

Claimant is National Grid plc ("National Grid"), 1-3 Strand, London WC2N SEH,
UK. National Grid is the Defendant in the Challenge (as hereinafter defined)
proceedings. National Grid is represented in these proceedings by Mr Nigel
Blackaby, Ms Sylvia Noury, Mr Greg Fullelove and Ms Philippa Chatterton,
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, 65 Fleet Street, London EC4Y 1HS, UK and
Estudio O'Farell, Av. De Mayo 645/51 — 1° Piso, C1084AAB — Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Respondent is the Republic of Argentina ("Argentina"). Argentina is the Applicant
in the Challenge proceedings and is represented by Mr Gabriel Bottini and Mr
Adolfo Gustavo Scrinzi, Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién, Posadas 1641 -
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The Underlying Arbitration

On the basis of the Parties’ written and oral submissions, the Division sets forth the
following summary of the factual background in this case. The arbitration giving
rise to the present Challenge arises from a number of alleged breaches by Argentina
of the bilateral agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of Argentina for the promotion
and protection of investments, signed on 11 December 1990 and in force as of 19
February 1993 (the "Treaty").

In December 1992, the Republic of Argentina started a privatization process of its
energy sector. At that time, there were three state-owned companies which operated
the country's national electricity assets. The transmission assets of these three
companies were transferred to one high-voltage electricity transmission company,
Compania de Transporte de Energia an Alta Tension S.A. ("Transener") and six
regional electricity transmission companies. In December 1992, Argentina launched
an international bidding process to sell 65 % of the shares of Transener. At the same
time, Argentina and Transener signed a 95-year concession contract granting
Transener the right to provide high-voltage electricity transmission services in
Argentina (the "Concession").

In 1993, National Grid (through its Dutch subsidiary National Grid Finance BV),
together with two US companies and two Argentine companies, formed a
consortium to participate in the tender of the shares of Transener. The consortium
incorporated an Argentine company, Compania Inversora en Transmission Elétrica
Citelec S.A. ("Citelec") of which National Grid acquired an initial stake of 15 %.
Citelec successfully bid for the 65% stake in Transener. The Concession was signed
on 30 June 1993, and Transener commenced operations on 17 July 1993. National
Grid increased its stake in Citelec by a further 26.25 % at the end of 1996,
according to Argentina, or in June 1997, according to National Grid, and a further
1.243 % in December 1999 following an increase of Citelec's capital.

In July 1997, Transener won a tender for the shares in Empresa de transporte de
Energia Eléctrica por Distribucién Troncal de la Provincia de Buenos Aires S.A.
("Transba"). Furthermore, Transener was awarded contracts to construct, operate
and maintain electricity transmission lines of which the most important one was for
the construction of a fourth electricity transmission line (the "Fourth Line").

The regulatory framework for these agreements provided for certain assurances in
relation to, inter alia, the remuneration of the electricity transmission company,
such as fair and reasonable tariffs, adjustment of remuneration every six months and
review of tariffs every five years.

Following an economic depression beginning in mid 1998, Argentina implemented
a series of measures from the end of 2001 to the beginning of 2002. Inter alia,
Argentina passed the Public Emergency and Exchange Rate Reform Law which
resulted in all contracts with some linkage to foreign currencies being converted
into Argentine pesos. Furthermore, the newly-enacted law prohibited electricity
transmission and public utility companies from suspending or modifying
performance of their obligations under their concessions and licenses. However, the
law did provide for renegotiation of public utility contracts. Since the renegotiations
in relation to both Transener and Transba were not successful by the beginning of
2004, National Grid sold its stake in Transener to Dolphin Fund Management, an
Argentine investor, in March 2004.

National Grid's allegations in the underlying arbitration proceedings are that
Argentina failed to respect the provisions of the regulatory framework relating to
Transener, Transba and the Fourth Line and, thus, destroyed the value of these
investments. According to National Grid, Argentina has (i) expropriated National
Grid's investments without compensation, (ii) treated National Grid's investments
unfairly and inequitably and (iii) breached other standards of treatment under the

Treaty (full protection and security, standard of no discrimination, umbrella clause,
etc.).

Argentina rejects National Grid's allegations and asserts that National Grid's
legitimate investment expectations have been respected. According to Argentina,
National Grid could not assume that the tariff agreements would not be adapted in
the event of major crisis. Furthermore, Argentina submits that the measures taken
were a reasonable, appropriate and proportional exercise of its police powers and
that National Grid has suffered no damage since, without the measures, the value of
Transener would have been even less. Finally and in the alternative, Argentina
submits that it was and is in a state of emergency in accordance with customary
international law and, thus, its measures can in any event not be deemed to be
wrongful.

The Challenge

The Challenge was triggered by an intervention of the arbitrator Mr Judd L. Kessler
during the hearing on the merits in the underlying arbitration, which was held
between 9 July and 20 July 2007 in Washington, D.C. (see Section 31 below).

On 27 July 2007, Argentina filed a "Request for challenge to Mr Judd L. Kessler"
(the "Challenge") to the Secretary of the UNCITRAL Tribunal pursuant to Articles
9, 10 and 11 of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Rules
of Arbitration (the "UNCITRAL Rules") on the grounds that there had arisen
justifiable doubts as to Mr Kessler's impartiality and independence.

By a letter to the Secretary of the UNCITRAL Tribunal dated 31 July 2007,
National Grid rejected Argentina's Challenge. National Grid reserved its right to
make further representations to the Arbitration Court of the International Chamber
of Commerce (the "ICC Court") as appointing authority in accordance with Article
12 of the UNCITRAL Rules in the event that Argentina pursued its Challenge.

By letter dated 8 August 2007 to his co-arbitrators and the Parties, Mr Kessler
explained the context of his intervention and his understanding of the underlying
situation.

Further, by letter dated 24 August 2007 to his co-arbitrators, Mr Kessler proposed to
include certain corrections in the transcript of the hearing on the merits in the
underlying arbitration.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

Per letter dated 14 August 2007 to the Secretary and the Members of the
UNCITRAL Tribunal, counsel for Argentina elaborated on the reasons for the
Challenge.

By letter dated 7 September 2007, National Grid informed the President of the
UNCITRAL Tribunal that pursuant to Procedural Order No. 19 the Parties had
reached an agreement that Argentina shall submit its Challenge against Mr Kessler
for decision to the London Court of International Arbitration (the "LCIA") rather
than to the ICC Court, which was the duly designated appointing authority in the

case.

In accordance with this agreement, by an e-mail to the LCIA dated 10 September
2007, Argentina's Counsel requested that the LCIA act as the appointing authority.

On 26 September 2007, Argentina served the Challenge on the LCIA and National
Grid.

National Grid responded to Argentina's Challenge on 2 October 2007 and requested
that the Challenge be dismissed.

The Constitution of the LCIA Division and Summary of the Proceedings

Upon request of Argentina dated 10 September 2007, on 26 September 2007 the
LCIA appointed a Division of the Court to determine the Challenge brought by the
Republic of Argentina. The Division consisted of Mr L Yves Fortier CC QC as the
Chairman of the Division, Dr Klaus Sachs and Dr Hassan Ali Radhi.

In an e-mail dated 2 October 2007, Argentina objected to the appointment of Mr
Fortier, as a result of which Mr Fortier, whilst confirming his impartiality and
independence, withdrew from his appointment. The LCIA accepted the resignation
and, on 8 October 2007, appointed Mr Paul B. Hannon as replacement member to
the Division, with Dr Klaus Sachs as Chairman.

Consequently, the revised Division consists of Dr Sachs, acting as the Chairman of
the Division, Dr Radhi and Mr Hannon.

In October 2007, the Division received from the LCIA (i) a copy of an e-mail from
Respondent's counsel to the LCIA dated 10 September 2007 requesting that the
LCIA act as appointing authority; (ii) a copy of a letter from the Claimant's counsel

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

to the Secretary to the UNCITRAL Tribunal dated 7 September 2007 confirming
the Parties' agreement that the LCIA act as appointing authority and setting out the
basis upon which that agreement was reached, (iii) a copy of an indemnity obtained
from the Parties, (iv) copies of the Respondent's challenge submission served on the
Claimant and the LCIA on 26 September 2007 (the "Challenge"), together with
related documents and (v) copies of Claimant's response to Respondent's Challenge
submission served on Respondent and the LCIA on 2 October 2007 (the
"Response"), together with related documents.

On 16 November 2007, the Division received summaries of the Parties setting out
the background of the underlying arbitration.

On 19 November 2007, the Parties submitted to the Division and the LCIA a joint
timetable for the oral hearing on the Challenge.

Also on 19 November 2007, the Parties submitted to the Division and the LCIA
further legal authorities.’

On 22 November 2007, the Division held an oral hearing with the Parties in
London.

Events Leading to the Challenge

On 3 April 2007, Mr Whitney Debevoise, who was the arbitrator appointed by
National Grid, submitted his resignation from the position of arbitrator following his
appointment by the US Senate as US Executive Director to the World Bank. On 12
April 2007, National Grid appointed Mr Kessler as an arbitrator.

Following his appointment, Mr Kessler received a copy of all the written pleadings
and evidence submitted by both Parties in the arbitration, witness statements, expert
reports and other documents and legal authorities.

Argentina submitted the following legal authorities: Arbitration Act 1996; ASM Shipping Ltd of
India v. TTMI Ltd of England; Lawal (Appellant) v. Northern Spirit Limited; Locabail (U.K.) Ltd. v.
Bayfield Properties Ltd. and Another Locabail (U.K.) Ltd. and Another v. Waldorf Investment
Corporation and Others Timmins v. Gormley Williams v. H.M. Inspector of Taxes and Others Regina
v. Bristol Betting and Gaming Licensing Committee, Ex parte O'Callogham; Explanatory Note by
the UNCITRAL Secretariat on the 1985 Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration as
amended in 2006; Magill v Porter; Enron Corporation Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v Argentine Republic
(English and Spanish version); MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v Republic of Chile;
Sempra Energy International v Argentine Republic (English and Spanish version). National Grid
submitted Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and InterAguas Servicios Integrales
del Agua S.A. vs The Argentine Republic as further legal authority.

31. In the underlying case, a hearing on the merits was held between 9 and 20 July 2007
at the World Bank in Washington, D.C. The events on which the Challenge is based
occurred on 12 July 2007, during the cross-examination of Dr Juan Carlos
Cassagne, an expert witness on Argentine law presented by National Grid, by Mr
Oswaldo Guglielmino, the Argentine Attorney General and Counsel for Argentina.
During the cross-examination of the expert for National Grid, Dr Cassagne, Mr
Kessler made an intervention in Spanish which gave rise to Argentina's allegations
regarding Mr Kessler's impartiality and independence as an arbitrator.

32. Mr Kessler's statement expressed in Spanish to which Argentina refers in the
present Challenge was as follows:

"Para tratar de avanzar, ya queda claro que hay ciertos hechos que el
testigo no conoce. Pero supongo que la base de su testimonio tiene que ver
con la situation hipotética, y no es hipotética porque todos los que estamos
aqui sabemos los hechos en general, de que hubo un dajio importante o hubo
un cambio muy importante en las expectativas de la inversion".

In English translation:

"It's now clear that there are certain facts that the witness is not familiar
with, but I suppose that the basis of his testimony has to do with the
hypothetical situation and it's not hypothetical because we are all here. We
know the facts generally speaking that there was major harm or major
change in the expectations of the investment".

33. Asa result, Argentina initiated the present Challenge proceedings.

Il. SUMMARY OF PARTIES' POSITIONS

34. In the following, the Division gives a summary of the Parties’ positions as set out in
their filings and the oral hearing. The purpose of this summary is, therefore, not to
reproduce the Parties' positions in full, which the Division has considered carefully
in order to render its decision on the Challenge.

2 Cross-examination of Dr Cassagne, Transcript (Spanish), Day 4, P941, L11-17 NG 4.
3 Cross-examination of Dr Cassagne, Transcript (English), Day 4, P889-890, L19-3 NG 3.

 

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

Position of Argentina
Grounds for the Challenge

Argentina submits that the statement in question made by Mr Kessler during the
cross-examination of the legal expert Dr Cassagne by Argentina's counsel is
inconsistent with the impartiality and independence that each arbitrator must
guarantee throughout the entire course of the arbitration proceedings.

In particular, it is Argentina's view that Mr Kessler by stating that "there was harm
or major change in the expectations of the investment" prejudges the final result of
the arbitration, considering that the question whether there was "major harm" to the
investor was at the heart of the Parties’ dispute.

In Argentina's view, such prejudgment was even aggravated because Mr Kessler
stated not only that there was "harm", but also that the harm was "major". This is all
the more relevant, according to Argentina, because Mr Kessler made such statement
only three months after being named as arbitrator by National Grid and before the
Parties finished presenting their evidence.*

Further, Argentina submits that Mr Kessler referred to "major change in the
expectations of the investment". According to Argentina, some tribunals have held
that a change in the legitimate expectations of an investor implies a violation of the
standard of fair and equitable treatment.’ Since one of the main issues in dispute
between the Parties was whether the investor's expectations had changed
significantly, Argentina perceives that this statement of Mr Kessler is another direct
prejudgment.

In Argentina's view, Mr Kessler's statements in question are "completely identified
with the Claimant's allegations", showing that Mr Kessler clearly lacks

impartiality.

Challenge, paragraph 22.

Argentina in particular refers to Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal v.
Republic of Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3); Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican
States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1); Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. United
Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2); LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp.,
LG&E International Inc. v. the Republic of Argentina (\CSID Case No. ARB/02/1); CMS Gas
Transmission Company y. the Republic of Argentina (ICSID case No. ARB/O1/8.); Rex v. Sussex
Justices, ex parte McCarthy ([1924] K.B. 256).

Challenge, paragraph 29.

 

  

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

-10-

Legal Standards

Argentina submits that the present Challenge has to be judged under Articles 9, 10
and 11 of the UNCITRAL Rules and further international rules providing for
standards with respect to the challenge of arbitrators.

Article 10 of the UNCITRAL Rules sets forth the conditions to be met in order to
challenge arbitrators:

"Article 10

J. Any arbitrator may be challenged if circumstances exist that give rise to
justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator's impartiality and independence.

2. A party may challenge the arbitrator appointed by him only for reasons of
which he becomes aware after the appointment has been made".

According to Argentina, the arbitrator's impartiality and independence should
necessarily be maintained throughout the entire arbitral proceedings and not be
limited to the moment of the arbitrator's designation. Furthermore, Argentina
submits that impartiality, independence and neutrality of the arbitrator are affected
not only where the proceeding is likely to be biased, but where there is an
appearance of bias. This is fulfilled, according to Argentina, when a reasonable
person has justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator's impartiality or independence.

In addition to the UNCITRAL Rules, Argentina refers to other international rules
also setting forth standards on the impartiality and independence of arbitrators, such
as Standard (2)(b) of the General Standards regarding Impartiality, Independence
and Disclosure of the International Bar Association Guidelines of Interest in
International Arbitration ("IBA Guidelines"), according to which an arbitrator shall
decline to accept an appointment or refuse to continue to act as an arbitrator "if facts
or circumstances exist, or have arisen since the appointment, that, from a
reasonable third person's point of view having knowledge of the relevant facts, give
rise to justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator's impartiality or independence, unless
the parties have accepted the arbitrator in accordance with the requirements set out
in General Standard (4)".

Further, Argentina refers to the "Orange List" contained in Part II of the IBA
Guidelines which sets forth the practical application of the General Standards set
out in Part I. In particular, Argentina, refers to point 3.5.2. of the Orange List, which
deals with situations in which the arbitrator "has publicly advocated a specific
position regarding the case that is being arbitrated, whether in a published paper or
speech or otherwise".

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

-1ll-

Argentina further cites Rule 3 of the International Bar Association Rules of Ethics
for International Arbitrators (the "IBA Rules of Ethics"). According to Rule 3.1,
partiality arises where the arbitrator "is prejudiced in relation to the subject-matter
of the dispute". Rule 3.2 provides that appearance of bias is created by facts which
might lead a reasonable person, not knowing the arbitrator's true state of mind, to
consider that he is dependent on a party or if an arbitrator has already taken a
position in relation to the dispute.

According to Argentina, the statements in question show that Mr Kessler prejudged
the final result of the dispute without having based his statements exclusively on the
evidence, arguments and applicable law in the case at hand, in particular, since the
hearing was still in progress and both Parties still had evidence and arguments to
deliver.

In addition, Argentina refers to a report of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development entitled "Dispute Settlement International Commercial
Arbitration 5.3 Arbitral Tribunal" (the "UNCTAD Report") that expressly addresses
the situation of an arbitrator in the event of prejudice. According to Argentina, it
follows from the UNCTAD Report that any statement made during the arbitration
where the parties are still in the process of delivering evidence or arguments which
is not exclusively based on "the evidence, arguments, and applicable law in the case
at hand", must be regarded as prejudging.

Argentina cites a number of cases in support of its Challenge.” Argentina refers in
particular to the decision of the US Supreme Court in the case Commonwealth
Coatings Corp v. Continental Casualty Co. 8 according to which the Tribunal must
not only be unbiased, but also avoid even the appearance of bias.

In conclusion, Argentina asserts that Mr Kessler's statements which are the subject
of this Challenge raise justifiable doubts as to his impartiality or independence.
Argentina alleges that Mr Kessler manifestly failed to show impartiality or
independence of judgment with regard to the claim brought by National Grid in the
underlying arbitration.

Sarquis de Navarro, Maria Cecilia c/ Santiago del estero, Provincia de s/ accién declarativa, CSIN,
October 30, 2003, S. 1257.XXXIX; Rex v. Sussex Justices, Ex parte Mc Carthy [1924] K.B. 256,
259.

393 U.S. 145 (1968).

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

-12-

Request for Relief

Argentina therefore respectfully requests "that Mr JUDD KESSLER be disqualified
from these arbitration proceedings and his replacement be ordered pursuant to
Articles 9, 10 and 11 of the UNCITRAL Rules"?

Position of National Grid
Grounds for the Challenge

National Grid submits that the contested intervention of Mr Kessler was made to
advance the cross-examination because Argentina's counsel had sought concessions
from Dr Cassagne on questions of fact which gave rise to a series of objections on
the part of National Grid's counsel. This required frequent intervention of the
Tribunal preventing progress in the questioning. Shortly before the intervention of
Mr Kessler — which is the subject of this case — took place, both President Rigo and
the other co-arbitrator, Mr Garro, had intervened in an attempt to facilitate the cross-
examination and ensure appropriate questioning.

According to National Grid, Mr Kessler, in order to assist Argentina's counsel, and
after the second intervention by Mr Garro, intervened in Spanish, his native
language being English. Mr Kessler proposed to Argentina's counsel that he
formulate questions based on assumed or hypothetical facts so that Dr Casagne's
position on the Argentine law treatment of such facts could be "tested", rather than
be the subject of continual interruptions.

National Grid objects to Argentina's quoting only part of Mr Kessler's intervention,
since in its second part Mr Kessler made it clear that his suggestion was for
questions to be formulated based on an assumption of harm:

"No sé si podemos proceder. Si quiere hacerle preguntas, si hubiera un danio
importante, entonces, {qué seria el resultado bajo el derecho argentino?
Hay protecci6n o no hay protecion. La ley aplica o no aplica. Es solamente
una sugerencia". 10

In English translation:

"Now, I don't know if we could proceed. If you want to ask him questions. If
there were major harm, what would the result be under Argentine law? Is

 

Challenge, paragraph 50.
Cross-examination of Dr Cassagne, Transcript (Spanish), Day 4, P941, L18-22

-13-

there protection? Is there not protection? Does the law apply? Does it not
apply? I state this merely as a suggestion"."'

54. Since Argentina's counsel sought immediate clarification whether Mr Kessler had

55.

56.

stated that at that stage it was already known that there had been harm, Mr Kessler,
according to National Grid, again stressed the concrete, non-abstract nature of the
dispute before the Tribunal, and noted that there was an allegation of harm by
National Grid as a result of the alleged "change in the contract". Further, Mr
Kessler explained that he was only "trying to help":

"Solamente digo que estamos aqui porque hay alegato de dao, de un
cambio en el contrato que resulté en problemas por el investor. Es que,

como deciamos antes, no estamos hablando en el aire. No sé, estoy tratando
de ayudar, pero a lo mejor no resulta de ayuda". B

In English translation:

"I merely say that we are here because there is an allegation of harm of a
change in the contract that caused problems to the investor. As we were
saying before, we are not speaking in abstract. I don't know. I'm trying to
help, but perhaps what I have had to say isn't all that helpful". 8

National Grid further submits that Argentina's counsel did not make any further
comments concerning the intervention and appeared to accept Mr Kessler's
explanations. National Grid points out that after the incident, Mr Kessler recognised
that his spoken command of Spanish might lead to confusion, as a result of which
he agreed to ask any further questions in English. Finally, National Grid submits
that later in the proceedings Mr Kessler even made a self-deprecating joke about his
language skills by stating: "Nobody can mistake me for Garcia Marquez. Maybe I
will ask you in English".

Legal Standards

National Grid submits that the Challenge should be restricted to the question of Mr
Kessler's impartiality and not his independence. The latter arises out of the
relationship between an arbitrator and one of the parties, whereas Argentina at no
stage alleged that Mr Kessler's intervention had been the result of any relationship
between Mr Kessler and National Grid.

Cross-examination of Dr Cassagne, Transcript (English), Day 4, P890, L4-9.

  
 

 

agne, Transcript (English), Day 4, P890, L12-18.
Cross-examination of Ms. Caballero, Transcript (English) Day 7 P1711, L18-20.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

-14-

National Grid agrees with Argentina that the test set out in Article 10.1 UNCITRAL
Rules for whether "circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts" is an
objective one. National Grid refers to commentaries on the UNCITRAL Rules’ and
relevant case law to support its position that although a party's subjective concerns
about an arbitrator's bias may prompt a challenge, it is the objective reasonableness
of these concerns that is decisive for a decision on the challenge.

National Grid also refers to the IBA Guidelines to show that they incorporate the
objective test. It cites Standard 2(c) of the IBA Guidelines to clarify that the
objectivity standard is further defined as the conclusion reached by a reasonable and
informed third party that there was likelihood that the arbitrator might be influenced
by factors other than the merits of the case.

National Grid objects to Argentina's allegation that Mr Kessler's intervention
constitutes evidence that he has prejudged questions of liability and damages in the

case and that this "prejudgment shows a clear lack of impartiality in accordance
with Article 10 of the UNCITRAL Rules", as alleged by Argentina.

According to National Grid, Argentina failed in its Challenge to provide any
authority in support of its arguments of prejudgment. National Grid agrees that the
UNCTAD report cited by Argentina provides that arbitrator's conclusions shall be
based exclusively on the "evidence, arguments and applicable law in the case at
hand". Such test, according to National Grid, is the same as that provided by
Standard 2(c) of the IBA Guidelines providing that arbitrators shall not be
"influenced by factors other than the merits of the case as presented by the parties
in reaching his or her decision".

With respect to Part II of the IBA Guidelines, National Grid notes that Argentina
was able to point to only one situation from the Orange List that might tangentially
cover the issue at dispute in this Challenge, i.e., Point 3.5.2 of the Orange List. In
National Grid's opinion, this does not fit the facts of the case because Mr Kessler
did not publicly “advocate a specific position regarding the case".

Further, it is National Grid's position that interventions which aim at facilitation of
the proceedings, like the intervention made by Mr Kessler during the cross-
examination, are a key function of the arbitrator and should not be unduly limited
by the parties.

Redfern & Huntei
Caplan & Pellonj

  
 

w and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration, 4" ed. 2004; Caron,
The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, 1* ed.

63.

64.

65.

66.

-15-

According to National Grid, case law demonstrates that "any judge, though he ought
to have an impartial stance, is required as a matter of judicial duty eventually and

on the basis of the presented arguments to become partial"®

, since this is the only
way a decision in the case can be reached. As long as the views are based on the
parties’ conduct and evidence, National Grid submits that they cannot be claimed to

amount to bias, even if they regard the merits of a dispute early in the proceedings.

Furthermore, National Grid maintains that a judge cannot be dependant on the
parties' counsel and be precluded from asking questions with the aim of speeding
the proceeding and eliminating irrelevancies and refers in particular to Fairchild &
Co., Inc v. Richmond:

"[A]rbitrator's legitimate efforts to move the proceedings along
expeditiously may be viewed as abrasive or disruptive to a disappointed
party [...] such displeasure does not constitute grounds for vacating an
arbitration award.[...] [E]vident partiality is not demonstrated where an
arbitrator consistently relies upon the evidence and reaches the conclusions
favourable to one party. [...] The mere fact that arbitrators are persuaded
by one party's arguments and choose to agree with them is not of itself
sufficient to raise a question as to the evident partiality of the arbitrators".!”

  

According to National Grid, Argentina's conclusion that whereas any statements
with respect to points at issue before the filing of a dispute do not necessarily give
rise to a challenge, any statements made during the proceedings where the parties
are still in the process of delivering evidence must be regarded as prejudging has
therefore no basis.

National Grid further submits that Mr Kessler's intervention was made in Spanish,
which is not Mr Kessler's native language, with the consequence that Mr Kessler
expressed himself infelicitously. However, National Grid points out that Mr
Kessler, as soon as he realized the confusion which resulted from his intervention in
Spanish, immediately clarified his position. Like the remaining arbitrators, he

See Response, paragraph 51, citation from Decision of the Appointing Authority, Sir Robert
Jennings, on the challenge of Judge Bengt Broms (7 May 2001) submitted as NGLA 5. National Grid
further refers to the Challenge Decision of 11 January 1995, reprinted in (1997) XXII YCA 227, 234,
submitted as NGLA 3; Spector v. Torenberg, 825 F. Supp. 201, 209 (S.D.N.Y. 1994), submitted as
NGLA 6; Ballantine Books, Inc. v. Capital Distributing Company 302 F. 2d 17, 12 (2" Cir. 1962),
submitted as NGLA 7; Hayne, Miller & Farni, Inc. v. Flume 888 F. Supp. 949 (E.D. Wis. 1995),
submitted as NGLA 8; Health Service Mgt. Corp. v. Hughes 975 F.2d 1253 (7" Cir. 1992), submitted
as NGLA 9.

Fairchild & Co., Inc v. Richmond F. & P.R. Co., 516 F. Supp. 1305, 1313 (D.D.C. 1981), submitted
as NGLA 10.

67.

68.

69.

-16-

merely sought to facilitate the conduct of the cross-examination and to move along
the proceedings.

Even if Mr Kessler had formed any prejudgment, National Grid submits that he
would have done so solely on "the evidence, arguments, and applicable law in the
case at hand" which, as the UNCTAD Paper makes clear, would have been within
his rights. In particular, National Grid points out that Argentina could not
demonstrate on what basis Mr Kessler might have formed a view other than on the
"evidence, arguments and applicable law in the case at hand". National Grid
stresses that 2,166 pages of pleadings and witness evidence and 66 volumes of
documentary evidence and legal authorities submitted by the Parties had been
handed over to Mr Kessler following his appointment. Having considered the
written motions and having heard four days of oral submissions, together with
examination of witnesses and experts, he had already had ample time to consider the
issues in the case and to form tentative conclusions.

Finally, National Grid submits that the Division should not consider the Challenge,
which would otherwise constitute a precedent that would enable any party fearful of
losing the case to analyse every statement of the arbitrators in hope that it proves
their impartiality and, hence, provides a basis for frustrating the arbitration
proceedings. It would in consequence discourage arbitrators from fulfilling their full
judicial function.

Request for Relief

In view of the foregoing, National Grid requests that the Division:

(i) Dismiss the Challenge;

(ii) Order that Argentina pay the LCIA's and the Division's costs in deciding on
the Challenge, as agreed by the parties, pending any decision on costs by the
LCIA or the UNCITRAL Tribunal; and

(iii)Reserve any decision on the parties' legal and other costs incurred in
connection with the Challenge for the UNCITRAL Tribunal.!*

Response, paragraph 78.

Til.

20

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

-17-

ANALYSIS AND DECISION
Timeliness of the Challenge

The UNCITRAL Rules are the applicable rules in the underlying proceedings. The
provisions relating to the challenge of arbitrators are Articles 9 to 12 of the
UNCITRAL Rules.

According to Article 11.1 of the UNCITRAL Rules, a party who intends to
challenge an arbitrator "shall send notice of his challenge within fifteen days after
the appointment of the challenged arbitrator has been notified to the challenging
party" or (if later) after becoming aware of the circumstances giving rise to the
challenge.

It is clear from the record that the circumstances giving rise to Argentina's
Challenge took place on 12 July 2007 and that Argentina filed its initial Challenge
to the Secretary of the UNCITRAL Tribunal on 27 July 2007, i.e., within fifteen
days after the contested intervention. Hence, the time limit of Article 11.1 of the
UNCITRAL Rules has been respected, and National Grid has not contested this.

The Division's Jurisdiction

According to Procedural Order No. 19 in the underlying arbitration, the Parties
agreed that Argentina shall submit the Challenge for decision to the LCIA rather
than to the ICC Court, subject to certain procedural conditions." Accordingly, the
LCIA, and this Division of the LCIA Court, is the competent authority to rule on the
Challenge.

At the end of the oral hearing, the Parties confirmed that there were no objections
against the way the Challenge proceedings were handled by the LCIA as the agreed
authority or by the Division.”

These conditions are set forth in National Grid's letter to the secretary to the UNCITRAL Tribunal
dated 7 August 2007. Upon request by the Division, Argentina confirmed by letter of 22 October
2007 the respective agreement of the Parties to submit the Challenge to the LCIA for decision.
Transcript of 22 November 2007, P109 L17 et seq.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

-18-

The Applicable Standard

The central provision in relation to the Challenge is Article 10.1 of the UNCITRAL
Rules which provides that:

"Any arbitrator may be challenged if circumstances exist that give rise to
justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator's impartiality or independence".

The proceedings made clear that the present Challenge is restricted to Mr Kessler's
impartiality and not his independence. The concepts of independence and
impartiality are often seen as distinct, although the borderline between the two
concepts is not always easy to find.

According to Redfern & Hunter:

[i]t is generally considered that 'dependence' is concerned exclusively with
questions arising out of the relationship between an arbitrator and one of
the parties, whether financial or otherwise. This is considered to be
susceptible to an objective test, because it has nothing to do with an
arbitrator's (or prospective arbitrator's) mind. [...] By contrast the concept
of ‘impartiality’ is considered to be connected with actual or apparent bias
of an arbitrator — either in favour of one of the parties or in relation to the
issues in dispute. Impartiality is thus a subjective and more abstract concept
than independence, in that it involves primarily a state of mind".

In the present case, Argentina made clear that it does not assert that Mr Kessler's
intervention was the result of any relationship or connection between Mr Kessler
and National Grid:

"We are not suggesting that his [Mr Kessler's] prejudgment comes from an
improper connection with claimant".?

Consequently, the Division will restrict its determination to the question whether Mr
Kessler acted impartially.

The Parties basically agree — and the Division concurs — that the test for whether
"circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts" is an objective one,
pursuant to which it has to be determined whether a reasonable, fair-minded and
informed person has justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator's impartiality.”

Redfern & Hunter, Law and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration, 4" ed. 2004,
paragraph 4-55.

Transcript of 22 November 2007, P27 L6-15.

Response, paragraph 37, Challenge, paragraph 10.

81.

82.

83.

84.

-19-

The objective standard for impartiality and independence is, e.g., confirmed by the
commentary of Caron, Caplan & Pellonpdd on the UNCITRAL Rules where it is
stated:

"The inclusion of the word ‘justifiable’ in Article 10(1) to define the kind of
doubt required to sustain a challenge reflects UNCITRAL's clear intention
of establishing an objective standard for impartiality and independence.
While a party's subjective concerns about an arbitrator's bias may prompt a
challenge, it is the objective reasonableness of these concerns that is
ultimately determinative". 4

Also, Standard 2 (b) and (c) of the IBA Guidelines, to which both Parties refer,
provides for an objective test:

"(b) The same principle applies, if facts or circumstances exist, or have
arisen since the appointment, that, from a reasonable third person's point of
view having knowledge of the relevant facts, give rise to justifiable doubts as
to the arbitrator's impartiality or independence, [...].

(c) Doubts are justifiable if a reasonable and informed third party would
reach the conclusion that there was a likelihood that the arbitrator may be
influenced by factors other than the merits of the case as presented by the
parties in reaching his or her decision".

In its explanation to Standard 2 of the IBA Guidelines, the Working Group
expressly states that:

"In order for standards to be applied as consistently as possible, the
Working Group believes that the test for disqualification should be an
objective one. The Working Group uses the wording ‘impartiality or
independence' derived from the broadly adopted Article 12 of the
UNCITRAL Model Law, and the use of an appearance test, based on
justifiable doubts as to the impartiality or independence of the arbitrator, as
provided in Article 12(2) of the UNCITRAL Model Law, to be applied
objectively (a 'reasonable third person test')".

Further support for the objective test can be found in the Challenge Decision of 11
January 1995, to which both Parties refer, and which was rendered under the
UNCITRAL Rules.”

 

Caron, Caplan & Pellonpiii, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, I“ ed, p. 210. See also Challenge
Decision of 11 January 1995, paragraph 23.
Submitted by National Grid as NGLA 3.

  

85.

86.

87.

88.

- 20 -

The Challenge Decision of 11 January 1995 sets forth the following standards: "...]
the premise of arbitration was that the tribunal must not only be unbiased and also
avoid even the appearance of bias. [...]"° It is further held that each case has to be
treated sui generis and that "because it cannot normally be demonstrated that an
arbitrator has actual bias, an objective standard has to be applied [...] "27 It
continues:

"[...] One might say that under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules doubts are
justifiable or serious if they give rise to an apprehension of bias that is, to
the objective observer, reasonable. Actual bias or partiality need not be
established [...] In sum the test to be applied is that the doubts existing on
the part of the claimant here must be ‘justifiable’ on some objective basis.
Are they reasonable doubts as tested by the standard of a fair minded,
rational, objective observer? Could that observer say, on the basis of the
facts as we know them, that the claimant has a reasonable apprehension of
partiality on the part of the respondents’ arbitrator?'"8

Finally, also Argentina submitted in the hearing that the test for impartiality is based
on "reasonable apprehension":

"[iJn relation to UNCITRAL Rules, the rules that you [the Division] have to
apply, actual bias is not necessary, but reasonable apprehension 029

Consequently, the Division will apply an objective, i.e., a reasonable third person
test to decide whether Mr Kessler's intervention in the cross-examination of Dr
Cassagne creates justifiable doubts as to his impartiality, within the meaning of
Article 10.1 of the UNCITRAL Rules.

Analysis of the Challenge

In order to analyse the Challenge, it is important to quote Mr Kessler's intervention
in full:

"ARBITRO KESSLER: Doctor Guglielmino: hay una norma en el
contrainterrogatorio de un experto en cuanto a poner una _ situacién
hipotética. Para tratar de avanzar, ya queda claro que hay ciertos hechos
que el testigo no conoce. Pero supongo que la base de su testimonio tiene
que ver con la situation hipotética, y no es hipotética porque todos los que

Challenge Decision of 11 January 1995, paragraph 16.
Challenge Decision of 11 January 1995, paragraph 17.
Challenge Decision of 11 January 1995, paragraphs 24, 30.
Transcript of 22 November 2007, P33 L 16-19.

89.

90.

-21-

estamos aqui sabemos los hechos en general, de que hubo un dajio
importante 0 hubo un cambio muy importante en las expectativas de la
inversion.

No sé si podemos proceder. Si quiere hacerle preguntas, si hubiera un dafio
importante, entonces, {qué seria el resultado bajo el derecho argentino?
Hay protecci6n o no hay protecion. La ley aplica o no aplica. Es solamente
una sugerencia.

SENOR GUGLIELMINO: ¢Usted dice que a esta altura del proceso ya
sabemos que hubo dato?

ARBITRO KESSLER: Solamente digo que estamos aqui porque hay alegato
de dafio, de un cambio en el contrato que result6é en problemas por el
investor. Es que, como deciamos antes, no estamos hablando en el aire. No

sé, estoy tratando de ayudar, pero a lo mejor no resulta de ayuda". 0

In English translation:

"ARBITRATOR KESSLER: Mr Guglielmino, there is a norm in conducting
cross-examination of an expert that one pose a hypothetical to try to go
forward. It is now clear that there are certain facts that the witness is
familiar with, but I suppose that the basis of his testimony has to do with
the hypothetical situation, and it is not hypothetical because we are all
here. We know the facts generally speaking that there was major harm or
major change in the expectations of the investment.

Now, I don't know if we could proceed. If you want to ask him questions. If
there were major harm, what would the result be under Argentine law? Is
there protection? Is there not protection? Does the law apply? Does it not
apply? I state this merely as a suggestion.

MR GUGLIELMINO: You state that at this stage we already know that there
was harm?

ARBITRATOR KESSLER: I merely say that we are here because there is an
allegation of harm of a change in the contract that caused problems to the
investor. As we were saying before, we are not speaking in abstract. I don't
know. I'm trying to help, but perhaps what I have had to say isn't all that
helpful"!

In its Challenge, Argentina has merely quoted that part of Mr Kessler's intervention
which is printed in bold.

During the hearing on the Challenge, Argentina's counsel submitted a slightly
different English translation of the first part of Mr Kessler's intervention which,
according to Argentina, better reflects the content of what Mr Kessler said in
Spanish. Such version reads as follows:

Cross-examination of Dr Cassagne, Transcript (Spanish), Day 4, P941, L11-P942 L9.
Cross-examination of Dr Cassagne, Transcript (English), Day 4, P889 L16 — P890 L18.

 

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

-22-

"Mr Guglielmino, there is a norm in conducting cross-examination of an
expert that one pose a hypothetical to try to go forward. It is now clear that
there are certain facts that the witness is familiar with, but I suppose that the
basis of his testimony has to do with the hypothetical situation, and it is not
hypothetical because everyone present here knows the facts in general, that
there has been an important damage or a very important change in the
expectations of the investment".

Counsel for National Grid agreed that this translation is an accurate one and
"probably may give a better view than the formal translation that was used".** The
Division shares this view.

Taking the statement quoted by Argentina in its Challenge in isolation, i-e., in
particular that "/...] and it is not hypothetical because everyone present here knows
the facts in general, that there has been an important damage or a very important
change in the expectations of the investment", the Division admits that a reasonable
third person might indeed gain the impression that Mr Kessler had already taken a
firm view on issues which are key to the final result of the arbitration.

However, the Division is of the opinion that it would be inappropriate under a
reasonable third person test to determine Mr Kessler's impartiality by looking at the
challenged statement in isolation without considering Mr Kessler's intervention as a
whole and the context of the intervention.

The transcript shows that Mr Kessler started his intervention by suggesting, in
Spanish, to Mr Guglielmino that he pose to the expert witness hypothetical
questions. The preceding pages of the transcript show that this suggestion was
triggered by a discussion between counsel and the Tribunal as to whether certain
questions were factual and thus improper to be put to a legal expert.**

It is true that this suggestion by Mr Kessler was followed by the challenged
statement that "/...] and it is not hypothetical because everyone present here knows
the facts in general, that there has been an important damage or a very important
change in the expectations of the investment". However, immediately after this
statement, and before being asked by Mr. Guglielmino for clarification, Mr Kessler
went on to explain his suggestion by formulating examples for hypothetical
questions to be posed to the expert.

Transcript of 22 November 2007, P19 L24 - P20 L3. See also Argentina's counsel letter dated 27
November 2007 enclosing such modified translation.

Transcript of 22 November 2007, P101 L1-7.

Cross-examination of Dr Cassagne, Transcript (English), Day 4, P884 L14— P886 L9.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

-23-

"If you want to ask him questions. If there were major harm, what would the
result be under Argentine law? Is there protection? Is there not protection?
Does the law apply? Does it not apply? I state this merely as a
suggestion".*°

From a reasonable point of view, by formulating such questions, any appearance of
bias which may have been created by the challenged sentence was eliminated. Even
if one were to admit remaining doubts, they were then clearly eliminated by Mr
Kessler's clarification in response to Mr. Guglielmino's question.

Following Mr Kessler's intervention, Argentina's counsel Mr Guglielmino sought
immediate clarification and asked:

"You state that at this stage we already know that there was harm?'?°

Mr Kessler responded:

"I merely say that we are here because there is an allegation of harm of a
change in the contract that caused problems to the investor. As we were

saying before, we are not speaking in abstract. I don't know. I'm trying to

help, but perhaps what I have had to say isn't all that helpful 37

Thus, by stating that the subject of the arbitration was "an allegation of harm of a
change in the contract that caused problems to the investor", Mr Kessler made clear
beyond any reasonable doubt that he was not prejudiced.

Argentina has argued that this clarification "does not qualify or modify in any way
[Mr Kessler's] previous statement as to fact", i.e., "[...] that there has been an
important damage or a very important change in the expectations of the

investment".*®

The Division disagrees: Mr Kessler used in his clarification the words “allegation of

harm of a change in the contract" which, reasonably interpreted, are incompatible
with the assertion that he was prejudiced.

As a final remark, the Division wishes to state that Mr Kessler's challenged
statement may have been unfortunate and could have been the result of linguistic

agne, Transcript (English), Day 4, P890 L4-9.

gne, Transcript (English), Day 4, P890, L10-11.

gne, Transcript (English), Day 4, P890, L12-18 NG 3.
Transcript of 22 November 2007, P82 L25 — P83 L1.

 

-24-

infelicity because Spanish is not Mr Kessler's native language. The Division admits
that this sentence is a sentence that could create concerns on Argentina's side, but
looking at Mr Kessler's intervention as a whole and in context, such concerns cannot
be reasonably entertained.

E. Decision

1. Disposition of the Challenge

103. In conclusion, the Division decides that the Challenge brought by Argentina against
Mr Judd L. Kessler must be dismissed.

2. Costs and Expenses

104. The Division declares that the costs and expenses generated by this Challenge, as
well as any legal fees related thereto, shall be determined as part of the final arbitral
award in the underlying arbitration.

Date:

THE DIVISION

Paul B. Hannon Dr Hassan Ali Radhi

Dr Klaus Sachs

Chairman

