Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 2 of 33

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

NEXTERA ENERGY GLOBAL HOLDINGS B.V. AND
NEXTERA ENERGY SPAIN HOLDINGS B.V.

Claimants

and

KINGDOM OF SPAIN

Applicant

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11)
Annulment Proceeding

 

DECISION ON STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Prof. Joongi Kim, President of the ad hoc Committee
Prof. Lawrence Boo, Member of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Humberto Sdéenz-Marinero, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Natali Sequeira

 

6 April 2020

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 3 of 33

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

Il.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND. 2
THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES 4
A. The Standard for granting a stay of enforcement... 5
a. Applicant’s position 5

b. Claimants’ position 7

B. The Circumstances for the continuance of the Stay..........cccsessssesesssecssseeesseecssnessesess 10
(1) The nature and basis of the Annulment Application ...........0.scccssesecseecsseeseseeeeeee 10

a. Applicant’s position 10

b. Claimants’ position BT

(2) The prejudice to Applicant if the stay is not continued... cee LL

a. Applicant’s position ll

b. Claimants’ position B

(3) Claimants will not be harmed if the stay is continued ...........ccescesseeceeeeeeseeeeee 14

a. Applicant’s position 14

b. Claimants’ position 15

C. Whether a guarantee should be ordered ..........c:cccsseessessseesseesessesessenesseeneesseeecsee 18.
a. Applicant’s position 18

b. Claimants’ position 19

THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS 21
A. Applicable Legal standards 21
B. Decision on Stay 24
(1) Merits of the Annulment Application ..........cecsecsssseesiessssesseseeeesmsesseeesseseseieesee 24

(2) Prejudice to Spain 25

(3) Prejudice to the NextEra Entities 27

(4) Balance of considerations 28
COSTS 30
DECISION AND ORDERS 30

 

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 4 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

I. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1. This Decision addresses the Kingdom of Spain’s (the “Applicant” or “Spain”) application
for the continuation of the stay of enforcement of the ICSID award rendered on 31 May
2019 (the “Award”) by the arbitral tribunal (the “Tribunal’”) in NextEra Energy Global
Holdings B.V. and NextEra Energy Spain Holdings B.V. v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case
No. ARB/14/11 (the “Arbitration”).

2. On 26 September 2019, Spain submitted its Application for Annulment of the Award (the
“Annulment Application”). In the Annulment Application, Spain requested (i) a
provisional stay of enforcement of the Award in accordance with Article 52(5) of the
ICSID Convention and Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, which provide that the
Secretary-General shall grant an automatic provisional stay until the ad hoc Committee
rules on such request, and (ii) the continuation of the stay of enforcement until the decision

in this annulment proceeding is rendered by the ad hoc Committee (the “Committee”).

3. On 2 October 2019, the acting Secretary-General registered the Annulment Application

and notified the Parties of the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award.

4. On 16 January 2020, Spain filed a request to continue the stay of enforcement of the Award

(the “Submission”).

5. On 26 January 2020, NextEra Energy Global Holdings B.V. (the “First Claimant”) and
NextEra Energy Spain Holdings B.V. (the “Second Claimant”) (collectively the
“Claimants” or “NextEra Entities”) filed an opposition to Spain’s request to continue the

stay of enforcement of the award (the “Opposition”).

6. On30 January 2020, Spain filed a reply on the request to continue the stay of enforcement
of the Award (the “Reply”).

7. On 5 February 2020, Claimants filed a rejoinder on the request to continue the stay of

enforcement of the Award (the “Rejoinder”).

8. The Committee held a hearing by telephone conference on 11 February 2020 before the

First Session in which the Parties’ representatives explained their arguments in favour and

2

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 5 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

12.

against of the continuance of the stay of enforcement, and discussed and agreed to the

applicable rules for the annulment proceeding.

On 17 February 2020, Claimants submitted a letter that sought to clarify whether they could
execute an undertaking to protect against attachment of any funds by third parties and to
offer proof as to the corporate relationship between the First Claimant, NextEra Energy
Canada Holdings B.V., and the nine wind farm projects in Canada identified in their

Opposition.

On 19 February 2020, the Committee circulated the final draft of the Committee’s
Procedural Order No. 1 (“PO1”) reflecting the Parties’ agreements and the Committee’s
decisions on the matters in which the Parties were unable to reach an agreement during the
First Session. The Committee invited both Parties to submit final comments on the draft

POI by 28 February 2020.

On 25 February 2020, the President of the Committee conveyed the following message to

the Parties:

The ad hoc Committee requests that the Parties consider conferring
regarding the proposed undertaking described below. The Committee
stresses that the language used in the proposed undertaking is for illustrative
purposes. The Parties should seek to reach an agreement on the exact terms
within the next two weeks or such extended period as deemed appropriate
by the Committee. If the Committee determines that the parties cannot reach
an agreement it will render a decision on the application for a continuation
of the stay of enforcement.

In the event, or to the extent, that annulment is not granted, Spain agrees
and undertakes that (1) it will in accordance with its obligations under the
ICSID Convention recognize the award rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal
as final and binding and will abide by and comply with the terms of the
award; and (2) it will unconditionally and irrevocably pay the pecuniary
obligations imposed by the award to the NextEra entities within <such
period as the Parties may agree, or if not agreed as fixed by the Committee>
days of the Committee’s decision such that the NextEra entities would be
fully compensated and would not need to engage in any action to recognize,
enforce or execute the award under Article 54 of the ICSID Convention.

On 28 February 2020, Claimants filed comments on the draft PO1 circulated. On the same

date, Spain indicated that it did not have further comments on the draft. In a separate letter

3

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 6 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

submitted by email of 29 February 2020, Spain objected to the submission of Claimant’s
17 February 2020 letter. Spain argued that the letter was unsolicited by the Committee, not

in accordance with the procedural calendar, and should be discarded.

By email of 11 March 2020, Claimants informed the Committee that: “... the parties have
not reached agreement on the draft undertaking set out in the Committee's communication
of 25 February 2020”, and attached the Parties’ correspondence on this issue. The Parties
indicated that they remained at the Committee’s disposal for any further information

required. On the same date, Spain confirmed the Parties’ agreement in this regard.

On 4 March 2020, the Centre circulated the Committee’s Procedural Order No. 1 dated 3
March 2020.

II. THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES

15.

Applicant has asked the Committee for the continuation of the provisional stay of the
enforcement of the Award rendered in the Arbitration. It is its understanding that the
prevailing practice for ICSID ad hoc committees is to stay enforcement of an award during
the pendency of annulment proceedings.' Such stays have been considered the norm, with
an exception applying only in case of frivolous annulment applications or other improper

purposes, which are not present in the Annulment Application.

Spain argues that it has filed its Annulment Application in good faith in accordance with
Article 52 (1) of the ICSID Convention, while raising serious grounds that go to the very
core of the validity of the Award and the integrity of the arbitral proceedings, including
manifest excess of powers, failure to state reasons, and serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure.

Claimants object to Applicant’s Annulment Application and seek a lifting of the stay. They

argue recent practice reflects a predominant trend that does not support the presumption in

' Submission, fj 4-5.

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 7 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

favour of granting a stay. They stress that Spain has the burden to prove the circumstances
that “require” enforcement to be stayed and the standard of proof is a demanding one.

Claimants argue that the merits should not be considered in reviewing the stay application.

18. According to Claimants, rather than “abide by and comply with” ICSID awards, as
Article 53(1) requires, Spain is seeking to annul every ICSID award rendered against it and
is employing a strategy to “buy time”.?

19. Claimants assert that a denial of the stay would not unduly harm Spain whereas Spain has

failed to prove that a continued stay would not harm Claimants.

A. THE STANDARD FOR GRANTING A STAY OF ENFORCEMENT.
a. Applicant’s position

20. Applicant indicates that, pursuant to Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention, the Committee
may continue the stay of enforcement of the Award “if it considers that the circumstances
so require”, as reflected in Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. It argues that the
prevailing ICSID practice of granting stays of enforcement was recognized by the ad hoc
committee in Occidental v. Ecuador, which stated that “/t/he prevailing practice in prior

p73

annulment cases has been to grant the stay of enforcement”’, and the similar statement of

the ad hoc committee in Victor Pey Casado v. Chile that “absent unusual circumstances,

the granting of a stay of enforcement pending the outcome of the annulment proceedings
has now become almost automatic.” *+ Applicant argues that “/a/bsent exceptional
circumstances that require a departure from this standard practice” the stay should be

granted.° No such circumstances are present in this case that would warrant a departure

2 Opposition, 44] 53-54.

3 Submission, 4] 7; Reply, § 5; Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production
Company v. Republic of Ecuador, (CSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award,
30 September 2013 (“Occidental v. Ecuador”), Annex-029, {| 50.

4 Submission, § 8; Victor Pey Casado and “Presidente Allende Foundation y. Republic of Chile, \CSID Case No.
ARB/98/2, Decision on the Republic of Chile’s Application for a Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 5 May 2010
(“Victor Pey Casado v. Chile”), Annex-030.

5 Submission, 4.

 

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 8 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

21.

22.

23.

© Submis:

from this standard practice, having filed the Annulment Application in good faith and there

being no harm caused to the NextEra Entities as a result of the stay.

Applicant also indicates that ad hoc committees have found that a request for continuation
of a stay should be granted unless it is obvious that the application is “without any basis
under the Convention” and is “dilatory” in nature, as stated by the ad hoc committee in

MTD v. Chile.®

In addition, Applicant states that Claimants’ main argument to oppose the continuance of
the stay seems to be that the standard for obtaining a stay is very high and that some kind
of unique “compelling” circumstances are required. Nevertheless, neither Article 52(5) of
the ICSID Convention nor ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2) refer to “exceptional”
circumstances. Thus, Claimants cannot write in the word “exceptional” where it is not
found in the text of the rule, nor “unusual” as Claimants repeatedly claim.’ Applicant
argues that “the entire discussion of whether ‘unusual’ or ‘exceptional’ circumstances exist
in the current case to justify continuation of the stay of enforcement is a ruse created by
Nextera [sic] to mislead and confuse, unreasonably heightening the burden on Spain by

misrepresenting the applicable legal standard.”*

Applicant submits that stays have been requested in around 55 ICSID annulment cases,
where it has been granted in 39 cases (75% success rate).°? Therefore, it is a prevailing
practice to provide stays of enforcement during annulment proceedings. '? The whole
argument of “exceptional circumstances” has been manufactured by Claimants. At best,
the decisions that Claimants quoted in which stays were denied seem to assert simply that
stays are not automatic. In addition, Applicant states that it has not sought to impose the
“primary burden” on Claimants to prove why the stay should not be granted. It has fully

undertaken to indicate the circumstances justifying the stay and has amply done so by

  

n, {| 9; MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. & MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile, CSID Case No. ARB/01/7, Decision

 

on the Respondent’s Request for a Continued Stay of Execution, | June 2005 (“MTD v. Chile”), Annex-033.
7 Reply, ff 12-13.
* Reply, 426.

° The Co
° Reply,

mmittee notes that 39 out of 55 cases is 70.9%.
qs.

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 9 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

meeting its burden of proof.''! Certain matters, however, are logically for Claimants to

demonstrate such as whether they would suffer any prejudice by the stay.”

24. Applicant contends that the stay of enforcement is also the criteria that U.S. courts are
following respecting the principle of prudence and respect to sovereigns. As an example,
Applicant cites the recent Order of the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia in
the enforcement of the Novenergia II — Energy & Environment (SCA) v. The Kingdom of
Spain award that ordered the stay of enforcement until the end of the annulment

proceedings. '*

b. Claimants’ position

25. Claimants argue that according to Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention, the Award is
final and binding on both Spain and the NextEra Entities. Hence, citing Border Timbers v.
Zimbabwe, Spain must prove that the circumstances in this case are “sufficiently
compelling so as to ‘require’ a stay”.'* The term “require” imposes a high standard.
Therefore, contrary to Applicant’s arguments unconditional stays are not the “prevailing
practice” nor does the burden of proof fall on Claimants to demonstrate “exceptional

circumstances” that require the provisional stay to be lifted.'°

26. On this matter, Claimants stated that Articles 52 and 53 of the ICSID Convention should
be weighed up jointly, arguing that the general rule is for the stay of enforcement to be
lifted. It points that Article 52(5) prescribes a two-step inquiry. First, it requires an
applicant to show that the circumstances “require” a stay of enforcement. Then, “if /the

Committee] considers that the circumstances so require’, then it “may” stay enforcement

4 Reply, 435.

2 Reply, 435.

3 Reply, {| 28, Order of the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia. Civil Action No. 18-cv-01148 (TSC),
Novenergia — II Energy & Environment (SCA) v. The Kingdom of Spain, 27 January 2020, Annex-053; Novenergia —
II Energy & Environment (SCA) v The Kingdom of Spain, SCC Arbitration (2015/063), 15 February 2018
(“Novenergia v. Spain”).

4 Opposition, {| 2 and 45, citing Border Timbers Limited, Timber Products International (Private) Limited, and
Hangani Development Co. (Private) Limited v. Republic of Zimbabwe, \CSID Case No. ARB/10/25, Decision on Stay
of Enforcement of the Award, 24 April 2017 (“Border Timbers v. Zimbabwe”), Annex-043 / CL-198, 78.

'S Opposition, § 5, quoting Border Timbers v. Zimbabwe, 4 80; Eiser Infrastructure Limited and Energia Solar
Luxembourg S.a.r.lv. Kingdom of Spain, (CSID Case No. ARB/13/36, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award,
23 March 2018 (“Eiser v. Spain”), CL-9, | 54.

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 10 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

of the award, at its discretion.'® It cites in support the Standard Chartered v. Tanzania ad
hoc committee’s decision on the continuance of the stay of enforcement that “/t/he
obligation that each State assumed on ratification of the Convention, under Article 53, to
comply with awards against it is particularly important. This obligation is as important as
the right to pursue annulment under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. These two articles
are linked together.”

27. Claimants argues that recent ad hoc committees have already ruled on the same arguments
that Applicant raised in such cases as Antin v. Spain and Eiser v. Spain.'* Citing said ad
hoc committees, they stated that “the Committee fails to see any textual support in the
ICSID Convention or Arbitration Rules for the notion that there is a presumption in favour
of granting a stay” (in Eiser v. Spain) and “there is no presumption in favour of granting a
request for a stay” (in Antin v. Spain). Claimants stress that Antin v. Spain quoted Eiser v.
Spain, which stated that “the language of Article 52(5) makes it clear that a stay should be

continued only if there are circumstances requiring such a stay.”'°

28. According to Claimants, the text of Articles 52 and 53 of the ICSID Convention, read

alongside ICSID Arbitration Rule 54, lead to four conclusions.”°

29. First, an ICSID Award is binding and payable, irrespective of whether or not the debtor

seeks annulment.

30. Second, the continuation of an interim stay of enforcement is neither routine nor automatic.

There is no presumption in favour of a stay.

6 Opposition, 4] 16.

"7 Opposition, §] 21; Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited y. Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited,
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20, Decision on Applicant’s Request for a Continued Stay on Enforcement of the Award,
12 April 2017 (“Standard Chartered v. Tanzania”), Annex-044 / CL-206.

'8 Opposition, § 40; Eiser v. Spain, 4 48, and Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.a.r.l. and Energia Termosolar
BV. (formerly Antin Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.a.r.l. and Antin Energia Termosolar B.V.) v. Kingdom of
Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/31, Decision on the Continuation of the Provisional Stay of Enforcement of the
Award, 21 October 2019 (“Antin v. Spain”), CL-200, {| 67.

© Opposition, 4] 47.

2 Opposition, 22.

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 11 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

Third, Applicant carries the burden of establishing circumstances that “require”
enforcement of the Award to be stayed. If Applicant fails to carry that burden, the interim

stay shall be terminated.

Fourth, even if Applicant establishes circumstances “requiring” a stay, the Committee

retains discretion to grant, refuse or condition any stay.

Claimants further indicate that from the text of ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(4), the burden
of proof is placed on the party requesting a stay of enforcement to demonstrate the
circumstances that require the stay. In support of this, Claimants cite the SGS v. Paraguay
ad hoc committee’s decision for the continued stay that stated “/bJased on the plain
language of Rule 54(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, it is also clear to the Committee
that the party interested in the continued stay bears the burden of proof to demonstrate the
existence of circumstances that warrant said continuation” .”!

Claimants cite the decisions in those previous ad hoc committees, which stated that “/t/his
Committee also attaches importance to the specific use of the verb ‘require’ in its
imperative form as opposed to other ‘less categorical verbs’ such as ‘recommend’,

‘deserve’ or ‘justify”’.??

Finally, Claimants add that Spain has a further treaty obligation to honour the Award under
Article 26(8) of the Energy Charter Treaty (“ECT”) that reads, “/t/he awards of arbitration,
which may include an award of interest, shall be final and binding upon the parties to the
dispute... Each Contracting Party shall carry out without delay any such award and shall

make provision for the effective enforcement in its Area of such awards.”

21 Opposition, §f] 18,42-44, SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of Paraguay, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/29, Decision on Paraguay’s Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 22 March 2013
(“SGS v. Paraguay") CL-209, § 89.

2 Opposition, 4 46.

3CL-1.

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 12 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

B. THE CIRCUMSTANCES FOR THE CONTINUANCE OF THE STAY

36.

37.

38.

39.

(1) The nature and basis of the Annulment Application
a. Applicant’s position

Applicant states that the Annulment Application has been filed in good faith, is not dilatory,

and is based on serious grounds.

Applicant claims that the Tribunal went beyond its jurisdiction by failing to apply the
proper law with regard to the intra-European Union (“EU”) objection and wrongly
interpreting Article 26 of the ECT. In addition, the Tribunal ignored the application of
Article 17 of the ECT and the fact that there was no investor in accordance with the
applicable law. This failure to apply the proper law by the Tribunal determined that the
Award infringed the most basic principles contained in the European Commission’s State
Aid Decision on the Spanish renewable energy support scheme.** Applicant cited the
decisions of the BayWa, Stadtwerke, and RWE ad hoc committees as a basis for how well-

founded its Annulment Application is and unfounded the Award is.

The Award involved serious departures from fundamental rules of procedure and thus
prevented Applicant from having a fair trial. Among other things, Applicant indicates that
the wrong translation of a key document denounced before the Tribunal, the concealment
of documents by Claimants, the flip in the burden of proof made by the Tribunal, and the
lack of attention by the Tribunal of the hearing discussion, transcripts, and post hearing are

a sufficient basis to consider the Annulment Application.7°

The Award provided contradictory findings in relation to stabilization commitments and
the application of EU law, did not specify the date of the investment, voluntarily omitted

to decide on a potential fraud allegation that would show that the NextEra Entities did not

24 Submission, { 12.

25 Reply, {| 49-52; BayWa r.e. renewable energy GmbH and BayWa r.e. Asset Holding GmbH v. Kingdom of Spain,
ICSID Case No. ARB/15/16, Decision on Jurisdiction, Liability and Directions on Quantum, 2 December 2019,
Annex-054; Stadtwerke Miinchen GmbH, RWE Innogy GmbH, and others v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No.
ARB/15/1, Award, 2 December 2019, Annex-056; RE Innogy GmbH and RWE Innogy GmbH and RWE Innogy
Aersa S.A.U. v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No. ARB/14/34, Decision on Jurisdiction, Liability and Certain Issues

of Quantum, 30 December 2019, Annex-058.
26 Submission, 4] 11-13.

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 13 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

bring the ICSID claim with clean hands, and committed gross errors in the damages

calculations.?”

b. Claimants’ position

40. On this matter, Claimants argue that Applicant is drawing the Committee into a pre-trial of
Spain’s annulment case. They state that ICSID jurisprudence is unanimous in holding that
ad hoc committees do not speculate as to the likely outcome of an annulment application
when deciding whether to grant a stay of enforcement. Claimants indicate that Applicant
knows that the merits of its case are irrelevant at this stage, but nevertheless has sought to
repeat its strategy of asserting that its annulment claims are well-founded.”* In accordance
to this position, Claimants will not respond to Applicant’s arguments on the merits of the

annulment, unless the Committee requires otherwise.

(2) The prejudice to Applicant if the stay is not continued
a. Applicant’s position

41. In the event that the stay is not continued and Claimants enforce the Award executing its
payment during the annulment proceeding, Applicant argues that it would face the risk of
non-recoupment of the amounts unduly paid if the Award is later annulled. Applicant
further argues that it would be put in the difficult position of having to recover the amount
prematurely and inappropriately paid, aggravated by the circumstance of Claimants’
investment being channelled through a “/ong chain of instrumental companies with no
actual assets” that can be “dissolved at any moment”.”? Applicant adds that it “faces the
risk that it will not recover the amounts obtained by Nextera [sic], and may have to pursue
its own enforcement actions in multiple national courts if the money is not voluntarily
returned.”* Applicant claims that it is not known “if the money would be readily available
to recover from Nextera [sic], or whether [NextEra] would have distributed the proceeds

to the respective stakeholders”.*! Applicant also asserts “that NextEra is apparently trying

27 Submission, | 14.

28 Opposition, f] 57-59.

2 Submission, 4 16~7; Reply, 64.
» Reply, 46. d).

5! Reply, 477.

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 14 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

to sell its Award rights to a third party” and it “would be impossible that the Kingdom of

Spain gets the reimbursement when it will win the annulment”.?

42. Applicant states that even if the amount could ultimately be recouped, further resources
and efforts would be needed for its recoupment, which would imply additional burden,
particularly considering that those additional resources and efforts would be financed with
taxpayers’ money. That additional burden could be avoided by maintaining the stay until
the conclusion of the annulment proceeding. Applicant adds that the risk of non-
recoupment of funds could not be remedied by means of escrowing funds because it would

“trigger additional burden and prejudice” on Applicant and other parties.*>

43. In addition, Applicant submits that Spain (and third parties) face a real prejudice if the
Award is enforced now and later annulled. It explains that under EU obligations, it is
required to submit the Award to the European Commission for a determination as to
whether it constitutes incompatible State aid — that is, whether the prospective payment by
Spain to Claimants has the potential to distort competition in the EU internal market and
affect trade between member states. According to Applicant, if Claimants were able to
enforce the Award in its current form and obtain payment, and the European Commission
then determines that the Award is incompatible State aid, this could require Spain to
commence recovery proceedings against Claimants as part of its obligations under EU
law.** If Spain fails to recover the amounts paid and to implement the EC’s decision, it

could be liable for monetary penalties.*°

44. Finally, Applicant argue that it is not attempting to avoid or block compliance with the
ICSID Convention by invoking the binding international obligations of the EU, but simply
explaining all the relevant circumstances that are presented in this case and that should be
taken into consideration by the Committee when determining whether to continue a stay of

enforcement of the Award. Applicant offers its commitment that “if the Award is not

» Reply, {ff 6.a) and 38.
3 Reply, 4 80.

4 Reply, $f] 81-82.

35 Reply, 107.

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 15 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

4S.

46.

47.

annulled in this proceeding, it will seek the authorization of the EC to proceed with

payment and will promptly pay it upon receiving such authorization.”*°

b. Claimants’ position

Claimants reject the arguments of Applicant on this matter, arguing that Applicant is just
repeating speculative arguments that were raised before in Antin v. Spain and Eiser v. Spain
without success. They state that the alleged “harm” is no more than the routine
consequence of the losing party having to comply with its obligations under an ICSID
award. They add that the alleged “harm” could never be enough to justify a stay, otherwise

stays would become almost automatic.°”

Additionally, Claimants argue that the mere risk for Applicant of having to recoup funds
from Claimants does not justify a stay of enforcement and it is actually the natural
consequence of a party having arbitrated a dispute under the ICSID Convention and lost.
In support of this argument, Claimants cite the decision in Eiser v. Spain stating that “the
Committee agrees with the committee in SGS v. Paraguay that payment of an award is ‘the
natural consequence of the enforcement regime created by the ICSID Convention’. Thus
the burden of exchange of funds going back and forth cannot be a valid basis to support a
request for stay on enforcement.”*® The ad hoc committee in Antin v. Spain held the same
stating that “the burdens and risks raised by [Spain] are common to virtually all annulment
applications. They are, as Claimants put it, a natural consequence of the annulment

proceedings. Such circumstances cannot ... be sufficient to require a stay.”*”

Under Applicant’s hypothetical scenario of a potential non-recoupment, Claimants argue
merely pleading that assertion without deeper analysis is not enough. Unpacking Spain’s
argument, Spain’s claim would depend on series of cumulative conditions all occurring in
the way Spain predicts. First, Claimants would have to obtain payment of the Award, which,

to Claimants’ knowledge, has not occurred in previous cases. Second, that payment would

% Reply, 4 6.1).

57 Opposition, § 61-62.

38 Opposition, § 64, citing Eiser v. Spain, CL-199, 4 63.

» Opposition, 65, citing Antin v. Spain, CL-200, fj 72-73.

13

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 16 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

need to occur before the Committee issues its decision on annulment. Third, Spain would
have to succeed in its Annulment Application, which is not for the Committee to analyse
at this stage. Fourth, Claimants would have to refuse to pay voluntarily any sums obtained
by executing the Award. And, fifth, Spain would have to fail in its litigation to recover
amounts obtained pursuant to the Award, which Applicant cannot prove without showing
that Claimants are in some kind of financial distress that would reduce its assets below the

value of the Award.*°

48. Finally, Claimants indicate that Applicant admitted being one of the wealthiest nations in
the world and that the Award only represents only a small fraction of the savings that Spain
has achieved through the remuneration cuts that it introduced in 2013. Therefore, the
“taxpayers’ money” is not a valid argument for an interim stay of enforcement. Backing
this argument, Claimants cite the Burlington v. Ecuador ad hoc committee, which stated
that “/t/he argument that the termination of the stay would mean reallocation of funds
within the budget is inherent to the need to satisfy any financial obligation by a State. It is

a general argument that any State could make, which has been rejected in the past and

 

which the C ittee does not ider to blish the minimal gravity required to justify

continuation of the stay.”*!

(3) Claimants will not be harmed if the stay is continued
a. Applicant’s position
49. According to Applicant, Claimants must prove the harm it would suffer if the stay is

continued based on “unmistakable proof’.*? Claimants must prove, for instance, that its

viability depends on the payment of the Award.**

50. Applicant argues that in the hypothetical event that the Annulment Application was denied,

the delay in payment of the Award would be remedied by the payment of interest

4 Opposition, $f] 66-71.

+! Opposition, f] 74-76, citing Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/5,
Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 31 August 2017 (“Burlington v Ecuador”), Annex-039 / CL-207, 4
83.

* Reply, {| 55-56.
8 Reply, 4 55.

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 17 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

compounded monthly at rates higher than the capital markets. Therefore, granting the stay
would not prejudice Claimants at all. In support of this argument, Applicant cites the
decision in Azurix v. Argentina, where the ad hoc committee stated that “/o]ther than by
being put to the effort and expense of defending an annulment request and by the receipt
of funds being delayed ( ing the l lication to be ful), the
Committee does not accept that Azurix suffers any prejudice of a kind warranting the

provision of security. The provision for interest compensates the delay.”**

51. Furthermore, Applicant considers there is no risk of non-compliance with the Award if it
is not annulled. It is the fifth-largest economy in the EU, and it is ranked 13" among all
countries in the world in terms of gross domestic product. Thus, no danger exists that
Applicant would not have the financial resources to pay the Award in this case.
Additionally, Applicant has no history of non-compliance. Spain takes its international
commitments seriously, and it intends to honour them, including the obligation under
Article 53 of the ICSID Convention to abide by and comply with the terms of the Award

in this case.*5

52. Applicant stresses that it “voluntarily, on its own initiative, confirmed its commitment to
pay the Award if it is not annulled in this proceeding, specifically, by seeking authorization
from the European Commission consistent with its obligations under EU law and

regulations, and then to pay promptly upon receiving such authorization.”*®

b. Claimants’ position

53. In response, Claimants state that numerous ad hoc committees have affirmed that the award
of interests is not a valid factor to take into account when addressing arguments for a stay
of enforcement. They cite Eiser v. Spain’s view that “/t/he Committee considers that the
arguments put forward by Spain in this regard are not a valid circumstance to substantiate

a stay of enforcement of the Award. Post-award interests only compensate for the

4 Submission, f] 20-22, citing Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Decision on the
Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 28 December 2007, Annex-031.
440.

45 Submission, 4 23-25.

4 Reply, 72.

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 18 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

deprivation of the principal until payment of the award, but they are not directly related to

the issue of enforcement of the award.”*”

54. In addition, Claimants argue that even if the Committee regarded post-award interest as a
circumstance that might affect the granting of a stay, the interest on the Award is accruing
at a low rate consisting of “an annual rate of just 0.234% pre-tax (compounded monthly)”.*®

As a consequence, the real value of the Award is eroding with each passing month, when

compared against typical costs of capital or even against the current rate of Eurozone

inflation. This compares to rates of 2.5% in Eiser v. Spain and 2.07% in Antin v. Spain

(“rates which are roughly 10 times the rate in the Award’“?). This lower rate provides an

incentive for Spain to pay its other ICSID awards before it pays the Award in this case.*°

55. Claimants also indicate that Applicant has chosen its words carefully when stating that it
“will abide by its international obligations”. They argue that according to Applicant, these
obligations include the ones under the State aid rules of the Treaty of the Functioning of
the European Union (“TFEU”). Nevertheless, in Claimants’ pending litigation to recognise
and enforce the Award in the United States, Applicant has averred that “it is prohibited
from paying the Award”, citing “the EC [European Commission], as the enforcement arm
of [a] foreign state, has rendered a legally binding Decision that prohibits Spain from
paying the award because doing so would violate the EU Treaties. European Commission

Decision 2017/7384 §] 165."°!

56. Furthermore, Claimants submit that after their Opposition, Applicant added in its Reply a
whole new argument based on the EU law “prohibition”, claiming that EU law provides
“a real prejudice that could be caused to Spain (and third parties) if the Award is enforced

now and later annulled”. Claimants argue that the apparent intention behind this statement

47 Opposition, {| 77-78, citing Eiser v. Spain, § 60.

48 Opposition, 4] 80, citing the Award, Annex-001 to the Application for Annulment, § 37(6). The Committee notes
the actual text in the award on interest provides “at the rate of 0.234%, compounded monthly”.

4° Opposition, § 80.

5° Opposition, 80-81.

5! Opposition, 4] 85-87, citing NextEra Energy Global Holdings B.V., et al. v. Kingdom of Spain, Case 1:19-cv-
01618-TSC (U.S. Dist. Ct., D.C.), Motion to Dismiss or Stay, NextEra’s Petition to Enforce Arbitral Award, 11
October 2019 (“Motion to Dismiss or Stay”), CL-221, at p. 41.

16

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 19 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

— and the omission of any reference to EU State aid law — was to leave the Committee
with the impression that Spain is a State that can and would pay the Award without
conditions if its Annulment Application fails, but to later state that “Spain is forbidden from
making any payment” of the Award unless and until it obtains clearance from the European

Commission.‘

57. Claimants add that the governing treaty text is clear and that the ICSID Convention does
not include an exemption for EU State aid clearance, or other forms of internal or regional

payment approvals. *

58. Claimants argue that a stay would inevitably impact on their enforcement efforts. As things
stand, Spain is facing more than 40 ECT claims, of which at least 12 have resulted in
damages awards. Claimants contend that there are at least eight pending proceedings in the
United States alone to recognise and enforce ECT awards rendered against Spain
(including the recognition proceedings that Claimants filed). All of those creditors are
competing for the same limited pool of commercial assets that can be attached in
satisfaction of their awards. Granting a stay of enforcement would put Claimants in a
disadvantageous position compared to other claimants that may enforce their awards before,
including the growing list of renewable energy investors holding non-ICSID awards
against Applicant that are being enforced under the New York Convention (such as

Novenergia v. Spain and Foresight Luxembourg S.A.R.L. v. Kingdom of Spain).**

59. Finally, Claimants submit that Applicant has been raising defence arguments before United
States’ courts that are in substance, issues of ICSID jurisdiction that were within the sole
competence of the Tribunal (and which the Tribunal already decided), such as the question
of whether the ECT applies to intra-EU disputes.** This issue illustrates the prejudice and
delay that those proceedings will face if the stay is continued but the Award is later upheld.

In addition, Claimants argue that Applicant’s posture under the U.S. courts unmask the

%2 Rejoinder, {f 64-66, citing Reply, 4 99.

53 Rejoinder, { 68.

54 Opposition, 4] 91; Foresight Luxembourg S.A.R.L. v. Kingdom of Spain, Case No. 1:19-cv-03171-ER (S.D.N.Y.,
originally commenced 4 December 2018).

55 Opposition, §] 93, citing Motion to Dismiss or Stay, pp. 41-43.

17

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 20 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

tensions between Applicant’s competing arguments in two forums. Before the Committee,
Applicant seeks a discretionary remedy under Article 52(5) while professing respect for its
ICSID obligations under Articles 53 and 54. Before the U.S. District Court, Applicant seeks
to deny Article 54’s plain terms and contends that national courts may not enforce an ICSID
award unless and until Applicant is given the opportunity to relitigate its jurisdictional

challenges.*°

C. WHETHER A GUARANTEE SHOULD BE ORDERED
a. Applicant’s position
60. Applicant submits that no guarantee should be required as a condition for the continuance
of the stay of enforcement, since this would place the Award creditor in a better position
that it would have been if an annulment proceeding had not been commenced, and it

requires a high burden of proving that the Award creditor would suffer prejudice if the stay

were continued.°”

61. Finally, Applicant submits that Claimants have failed to meet the burden of proving that
the stay should be conditioned on security, indicating that the same factors that support the

grant of the stay also support the grant of that stay unconditionally and make the proposed

conditions by Claimants unacceptable.**

56 Opposition, {ff 95-96.

57 Submission, § 26, citing Victor Pey Casado v. Chile, | 29 (“Claimants bear the burden of proving that security
should be ordered and that, if it is not ordered, they will suffer a prejudice.”), Annex-030; Quiborax S.A. and Non-
Metallic Minerals S.A. v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on the Application to
Terminate the Provisional Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 21 February 2017 (“Quiborax v. Bolivia”), 4 43 (“{I]t
is Claimants’ duty to prove the necessity of granting a guarantee if the Committee decides to continue the stay.”);
Annex-032; Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3, Decision on Claimants’ Second Request to Lift Provisional Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, 20 May 2009 (“Enron v. Argentina”), Annex-036, § 45 (“Another consideration is that
a condition of security will often place the award creditor in a better position than it would have been in if annulment
proceedings had not been brought, since the award creditor would not otherwise have had the benefit of such
security.”).

58 Reply, § 124.

  
 

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 21 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

b. Claimants’ position

62. Claimants submit that Applicant’s examples of past ad hoc committees that ordered a stay
of enforcement without security even when there was a risk of the State’s non-compliance

with an ICSID award are distinguishable:

a. The Continental Casualty v. Argentina ad hoc committee considered that the
fact that both parties had applied for annulment of the award was “a factor to
which the Committee gives particular weight in deciding whether it is
necessary or appropriate to impose a condition of security for any continuation
of the stay”....That ad hoc committee also had regard to the fact that the award
amount was very small (USD 2.8 million)... Neither circumstance applies in

this case”.*?

b. The Enron v. Argentina ad hoc committee’s decision not to order security was
predicated on the “exceptional” circumstances of that case, including the fact
that the case was already at an advanced stage where a decision on annulment

was expected within six months.

63. Claimants disagree with Applicant’s position, stating that unconditional stays are rare and
only granted where (i) the circumstances require a stay, and (ii) an annulment applicant
proves that it will honour the award if its annulment application fails; neither factor applies

to this case.°!

64. In addition, Claimants state that posting security would not “improve” Claimants’ position
under the Award, since it would merely hold Applicant to its existing ICSID obligations.
In support of this, Claimants cite the Standard Chartered v. Tanzania decision, which
stated that “/t/he Committee rejects the argument that security constitutes betterment. The
lifting of the provisional stay or imposition of a guarantee are not punishments: the parties

have a procedural right guaranteed by the ICSID Convention that allows them to request

© Opposition, | 120, citing Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9,
Decision on Argentina’s Application for a Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 23 October 2009, Annex-037, | 14.

© Opposition, {| 120, citing Enron v. Argentina, 4f{ 41 and 45.
©! Opposition, § 110.

19

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 22 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

annulment of an award, but this right cannot operate against the presumption of validity

of awards rendered under the ICSID Convention.”

65. Likewise, the Sempra v. Argentina ad hoc committee stated that “[7/he appropriate
comparison is not with a scenario where the award debtor would not comply with its
obligation under Article 53 (where a guarantee would obviously be “better”), but with one
where the debtor would comply. In such case the guarantee would not place the award
creditor in a better situation ... if there is a risk that the award debtor — whether a State
party or a foreign investor — would not comply with its obligations under Article 53, the

safeguard inherent in provision of a guarantee would be fully warranted.”

66. Claimants assert that doubts over Spain’s compliance with the Award require security as a

condition for any stay.

67. Claimants conclude that the Committee should formally terminate the provisional stay of
enforcement in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 54 or, alternatively, the
Committee should condition the stay on real and effective security in the form of either a
bank guarantee, a standby letter of credit, or a capitalised escrow account pledged in favour
of Claimants, for the full value of the Award including post-award interest, in each case
provided through the branch of a recognised international bank located outside of the EU.
In addition, Claimants request that should Applicant not provide acceptable security within

30 days of the Committee’s decision, the stay should terminate automatically.

68. Finally, Claimants also request that the Committee order Applicant to pay their costs
incurred in defending its application for a continued stay, including attorney’s fees and

disbursements, as well as all associated costs of ICSID and the Committee.

© Opposition, § 114, citing Standard Chartered v. Tanzania, § 87.

© Opposition, | 115, citing Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/16,
Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 5 March 2009
(“Sempra v, Argentina”), Annex-041/ CL-208, {f] 95-96.

& Opposition, $f] 124-125.

20

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 23 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

Ill. THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

A. APPLICABLE LEGAL STANDARDS

69. The ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules stipulate the basis for the

applicable legal standard to be applied in a stay of enforcement.

70. Asan initial matter, Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention provides as follows regarding

the status of an award rendered under the Convention:

“The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to any
appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for in this Convention.
Each party shall abide by and comply with the terms of the award except to
the extent that enforcement shall have been stayed pursuant to the relevant
provisions of this Convention.”

71. After an award is rendered, pursuant to Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention, “/e/ither
party may request annulment of the award by an application in writing addressed to the

Secretary-General [...]”.

72. A party seeking annulment may also request a stay of enforcement under Article 52(5) of

the ICSID Convention, which states as follows:

“Tf the applicant requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his
application, enforcement shall be stayed provisionally until the Committee
tules on such request.”

73. Under the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the relevant parts on stay of enforcement provide in

Rule 54 as follows:

“(2) If an application for the...annulment of an award contains a request for
a stay of its enforcement, the Secretary-General shall, together with the
notice of registration, inform both parties of the provisional stay of the
award. As soon as the...Committee is constituted it shall, if either party
requests, rule within 30 days on whether such stay should be continued;

6 Notably, Article 26(8) of the Energy Charter Treaty, under which the Award that Applicant challenges was rendered,
provides that “/tJhe awards of arbitration, which may include an award of interest, shall be final and binding upon
the parties to the dispute... Each Contracting Party shall carry out without delay any such award and shall make
provision for the effective enforcement in its Area of such awards”. CL-1.

21

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 24 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

unless it decides to continue the stay, it shall automatically be
terminated.[...]

(4) A request. ..[for a stay]...shall specify the circumstances that require the
stay.[...]”
74. In determining whether to continue a stay, Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention provides
that “/t/he Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so require, stay

enforcement of the award pending its decision.”

75. Although the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (“Vienna Convention”) as such
is not applicable to the ICSID Convention, its provisions on treaty interpretation are widely
regarded as declaratory of customary international law. Both Spain and the Netherlands are
also contracting parties to the Vienna Convention. The Committee considers it appropriate
to be guided by the General Rule of Interpretation in Article 31 of the Vienna Convention
such that interpretation of relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention will conducted “in
good faith and in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the

treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.”

76. The Parties have extensively cited in support of their respective positions earlier ad hoc
committee decisions that elaborated grounds to be considered when examining a request
for stay of enforcement. The Committee finds that no jurisprudence constante can be
discerned and prior decisions of other ad hoc committees are non-binding on this
Committee. The Committee nevertheless believes that, subject to the specific facts of the
relevant case, due consideration should be given to earlier cases where they are indicative
of a certain line of jurisprudential consistency. The Committee’s decision remains one

based on the set of particular factual circumstances of the case at hand.

77. Asan initial matter, the Committee finds that the word “may” in Article 52(5) of the ICSID
Convention grants wide discretion to decide whether to stay enforcement. General

agreement exists among ad hoc committees in this regard.°’ The Committee holds that it

© Applicant’s Annex-061, p. 12; CL-7.

® Occidental v. Ecuador, § 47; Victor Pey Casado v. Chile, § 25; Standard Chartered v. Tanzania, § 50; Border
Timbers v. Zimbabwe, 477; Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/8,
Decision on Applicant’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 7 May 2012 (“Libananco v.
Turkey”), 441, 43; Eiser v. Spain, § 46; the widely-referenced commentary on the ICSID Convention also explains

22

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 25 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

will exercise its wide discretion depending upon the circumstances of the case and its

determination will be a case-specific, fact-specific inquiry.

78. The Committee finds that the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules do not
provide guidance on the factors that an ad hoc committee should consider in determining
whether to continue a stay of enforcement. It is only stipulated that either party may request
the continuation of the stay, and the requesting party must establish “circumstances that
require” such continuation.** The language of Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention or
Article 54(4) of ICSID Arbitration Rules does not specify the “circumstances” to be taken
into account in determining whether the circumstances “require” a stay. What constitutes

“require” is also undefined.

79. From the text and context, the Committee could find no presumption in favour or against
the continuation of stay of enforcement. In particular, the Committee could not extrapolate
from the current ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules that there is a presumption of

“automatic” continuation of provisional stay without the need for substantiation.”

80. The Committee holds the view that the general principle that the party seeking continuation
of the stay must bear the burden to establish that circumstances exist that require such

continuation.” It follows that the counterparty does not have to show circumstances that

that: “[A] decision by the ad hoc committee on a request is discretionary. The Convention's wording (‘the Committee
may,..., stay enforcement’) is clear in this respect....The ad hoc committee's discretion extends to whether it stays
enforcement of part or all of the award and to the modification or termination of the stay.” The ICSID Convention: A
Commentary, Schreuer, C. H., Malintoppi, L., Reinisch, A. and Sinclair, A., Cambridge University Press, 2009
(“Schreuer”), CL-203, 4 593.

°8 Schreuer states that in conferring discretion to stay enforcement the “criteria for the exercise of this discretion are
the circumstances that may require the stay of enforcement.” Schreuer, §, 594.

© A range of ad hoc committees have reached this conclusion. MTD v. Chile, | 26; CMS Gas Transmission Company
v. Argentine Republic, I\CSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Decision on the Argentine Republic's Request for a Continued
Stay of Enforcement of the Award, | September 2006 (“CMS v. Argentina”), Annex-034, | 35; Sempra v. Argentina,
| 27; Ioannis Kardassopoulos and Ron Fuchs v. Georgia, CSID Case Nos. ARB/05/18 and ARB/07/15, Decision of
the ad hoc Committee on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 12 November 2010 (“Fuchs v Georgia”), Annex-
038, 26; Libananco v. Turkey, § 43; SGS v. Paraguay, § 82; Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/04/01, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 4 December 2014 (“Total v. Argentina”), CL-205, § 76;
Joan Micula, Viorel Micula and others v. Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/20, Decision on Annulment, CL-188,
433; OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, (ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25), Decision on Stay
of Enforcement of the Award, 4 April 2016 (“OI European v. Venezuela”), Annex-046, § 89; Border Timbers v.
Zimbabwe, § 80.

7 Other ad hoc committees that have held this as well include Burlington v. Ecuador, §§ 74-75: Bernhard von Pezold
and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of Award, 24

23

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 26 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

81.

82.

require the lifting of the stay.”! It cannot be said that absent “exceptional” circumstances a
stay should be continued, nor do exceptional circumstances have to be shown for a stay to
be maintained.’”” The Committee needs to be satisfied of the existence of circumstances in

the particular case based upon the submissions of the Parties.

DECISION ON STAY
In reaching its decision, the Committee considers the following issues as raised in the
Parties’ submissions:7>

(1) Whether the merits of the Annulment Application need to be considered;

(2) Prejudice to Spain;

(3) Prejudice to the NextEra Entities; and

(4) Balance of considerations.

(dd) Merits of the Annulment Application

Spain asserts that its Annulment Application was brought in good faith, not dilatory, and
well-grounded and should be considered when determining the continuation of the stay.
The NextEra Entities on the other hand assert that ad hoc committees should not assess the
merits of an annulment application when considering a continuation of the stay of
enforcement application. The Committee agrees that save in such instances as when it

could be said that the application for annulment is manifestly frivolous or obviously

April 2017, CL-214, | 80; SGS v. Paraguay, § 86; OI European v. Venezuela, § 94; Fuchs v. Georgia, §, 26; and

Sempra v. Argentina, § 27.

1 Fuchs v. Georgia, 46; Border Timbers v. Zimbabwe, § 80.

® Submission, {| 4; With regard to the term “exceptional”, both Parties acknowledge that it does not appear in the
ICSID Convention or the Arbitration Rules.” Reply, 21; Opposition, fn. 5.

7 Other ad hoc committees have taken into account such factors as “the risk of non-recovery of sums due under the
award if the award is annulled, non-compliance with the award if the award is not annulled, any history of non-
compliance with other awards or failure to pay advances to cover the costs of arbitration proceedings, adverse
economic consequences on either party and the balance of both parties’ interests”. Annex-009, Updated Background
Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, 5 May 2016, 4 56.

24

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 27 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

unmeritorious, * the merits of the annulment proceedings is not something an ad hoc
committee should be concerned with when determining a continuation of the provisional
stay.’> The Committee therefore makes no observation on the merits of Spain’s Annulment

Application in reaching the decision on the stay application.

83. In any event, the Committee notes that Claimants have not suggested that Applicant’s

request to continue the stay was dilatory or not brought in good faith.

(2) Prejudice to Spain

84. Applicant is not taking the position that it is unable to pay or that payment of the Award
would cause financial hardship to the State or its people. Instead, it relies primarily on the
following two grounds of potential prejudice should a stay be lifted and Applicant

subsequently succeed in the annulment proceeding:

(1) that it would face difficulty or uncertainty in recoupment of any amounts
paid to Claimants; and

(2) that it would be exposed to liability and possible sanctions by EU
regulators for breaching EU law and regulations.

85. On the question of the possible inability or difficulty of recoupment should the award be
subsequently annulled, Applicant has described Claimants as a “/ong chain of instrumental
companies with no actual assets” that can be “dissolved at any moment’. If enforcement

action is necessary to obtain recoupment, Applicant would incur further costs as a result.

86. At the hearing, Claimants’ counsel accepted that the NextEra Energy Spain Holdings B.V.

(Second Claimant) may not be a substantial company but pointed out that NextEra Energy

7 Rejoinder, 4 32 citing Caratube International Oil Company LLP and Devincci Salah Hourani v. Republic of
Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/13, Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 12 December 2019
(“Caratube v. Kazakhstan”), §,75, Annex-060; Opposition, 58. Numerous ad hoc committees have reached the same
conclusion. Fuchs v. Georgia, 4 26; Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, \CSID Case No. ARB/99/7,
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 30 November 2004 (“Mitchell v. DRC’),, § 26; Sempra v.
Argentina, §| 25; Burlington v. Ecuador, § 71; Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v.
Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay
of Enforcement of the Award rendered on 20 August 2007, 4 November 2008 (“Vivendi v. Argentina”), CL-218, 4
39.

5 The ad hoc committees that have followed this reasoning include Mitchell v. DRC, § 26; MTD v. Chile, | 28; CMS
v. Argentina, 4 37; Total v. Argentina, § 83; Ol European y. Venezuela, 4115; Standard Chartered Bank v. Tanzania,
4 60; Eiser v. Spain, § 57; Antin v. Spain, 4 83.

 

25

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 28 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

Global Holdings B.V. (First Claimant) is a substantial company that owns a portfolio of
nine large wind projects across Canada, which it has been developing and operating since
2006. The First Claimant is in turn asserted to be owned by NextEra Energy Inc., a
publicly-listed company on the New York Stock Exchange. It is said to be the world’s
largest generator of renewable energy from the wind and sun with a market capitalisation

of approximately USD 125 billion.

87. A check on the website address given by Claimants in their submission
(http://www.nexteraenergycanada.com), however, shows that the Canadian company
owning the wind-farm projects is NextEra Energy Canada, LP, described as “an indirect,
wholly-owned subsidiary” of “NextEra Energy Resources, LLC”, and not the First
Claimant. Equally confusing, Claimants’ letter of 17 February 2020, which Applicant
objected to, includes a diagram to explain Claimants’ corporate structure but provides that
a Dutch entity called “NextEra Canada” is the 100% owner of NextEra Energy Canada, LP

and does not mention “NextEra Energy Resources, LLC”.

88. The Committee accepts that risk of recoupment is a relevant factor when considering the
continuation of a stay of enforcement. The fact that the ultimate owner of Claimants, at the
top of a complex corporate chain, may be a large public-listed entity on the New York
Stock Exchange, while offering some level of comfort, does not sufficiently offset the risk
of recoupment that Spain may face. To address any such risk, Claimants have offered to
undertake “to promptly repay Spain any and all amounts received in satisfaction of the
Award to the extent that the annulment application is successful and not to disburse or
transfer any amounts received in satisfaction of the Award while the annulment proceeding
is ongoing’. Such an undertaking would not dispel the risk of recoupment and its value

remains uncertain given the questions raised by Claimants’ corporate ownership structure.

89. Spain’s second submission is that it has conflicting obligations between complying with
EU law and the ICSID Convention. Its position is that unless the EU gives permission to
make payment under the Award, it would be exposed to penalties imposed by the EU. If
the stay is lifted and Spain made to pay the Award but the Award is subsequently annulled,

7 Opposition, §| 73.

26

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 29 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

Spain would have to seek recoupment of the amount paid under the Award and pay

penalties to the EU.

90. While the Committee recognizes the conflicting predicament Spain faces, the Committee
is equally conscious that the award creditor’s right to be paid are final and binding under
the ICSID Convention. In the Committee’s view, while it is true that ending the stay could
possibly expose Spain to the EU sanction, it does not remove the potential exposure or
resolve the conflict between Spain’s obligations under the ICSID Convention and its
obligations to the EU. This possible exposure to penalty is at best a neutral factor and could

not itself support Spain’s case for a continuation of the stay of enforcement.

(3) Prejudice to the NextEra Entities

91. The Committee notes that while Spain has the financial ability to pay the Award and
expresses its commitment to honour its legal obligations, it has not yet made payment on
any of the awards where stays of enforcement have been lifted. In the Eiser v. Spain case,
for example, it appears payment has not occurred even though the stay was lifted more than
two years ago. This casts plausible “doubts [that] shroud” the prospects of whether Spain
will pay the Award in a timely manner.”’ To the extent that the NextEra Entities have to

bear the risk of this uncertainty of payment, they would in fact suffer some prejudice.

92. The key source of Spain’s risk of non-payment is derived from the obligations it asserts it
has under EU law. Spain’s belief that it is conflicted by its obligations under EU law poses
an objectively plausible risk of non-payment or, at a minimum, delayed payment. Spain in
essence only offers to “pay promptly upon receiving [EC] authorization” if the Award is

not annulled.”*

93. Spain suggests that such prejudice occasioned by any delay in payment “would be remedied”
by the payment of interest as ordered in the Award should annulment be denied. While
Spain has a procedural right to request annulment, which it has exercised, an award must

be presumed to be valid until and unless it is annulled. An award creditor therefore has a

7 Opposition, 4] 84.
* Reply, §f] 6.4), 72.

27

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 30 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

right to enforce it and receive the remedies as ordered as soon as it had been rendered.
Absent annulment proceedings, this right should not be infringed. Depriving the award
creditor of their rightful remedy denies them the opportunity to allocate the benefits of such
remedy as they see fit. The Committee notes that the level of interest rate offered under the
Award of 0.234 % is compounded on a monthly basis and amounts to 2.84% on an annual
basis, which, contrary to Claimant’s assertion, exceeds the 2.5% in Eiser v. Spain and 2.07%
in Antin v. Spain. Even then, while post-award interest may provide some relief, it may not
adequately compensate for the uncertainty, delay, and deprivation suffered by the award

creditor.

94. Claimants have also argued that they would be prejudiced by a stay of enforcement as it
could “push [them] to the back of the ever-lengthening queue of creditors”.” While this
may theoretically be possible, the reality is that Spain has not only held back from payment
to Claimants but to all other creditors as well. If in fact Spain has the financial ability to
meet its obligations, it could not reasonably be suggested that Claimants would not be
eventually paid, wherever Claimants may find themselves in the queue. The Committee
therefore finds that such a possibility of being behind the queue of other creditors is not a

significant risk factor that would be sufficient to support the lifting of the stay.

(4) Balance of Considerations

95. The Committee considers that it should balance the overall interests and circumstances
such as the potential prejudice that each party would suffer if the stay is maintained or
terminated. The Committee believes that a balance could be achieved by giving weight to
Spain’s concern for recoupment in the event the Award is annulled, while also taking into
consideration the NextEra Entities’ potential delay in receiving the fruits of the Award
without immediate enforcement. The Committee proposes to do so by ordering a
continuation of stay upon the condition that Spain provides an undertaking that, should the
Award not be annulled, it will unconditionally and promptly pay the amount owed under

the Award. If Spain fails to furnish such an undertaking within the time so prescribed (or

” Opposition, | 92.

28

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 31 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

96.

97.

98.

99.

such extended time as the Parties so agree or the Committee so permits), the Committee’s

order for a conditional stay will thereafter be terminated.

The Committee believes that such an undertaking from Spain would provide the NextEra
Entities the assurance of prompt compliance should the Award be upheld and also would
provide comfort to Spain by postponing any enforcement actions during the pendency of
these proceedings, obviating the need for it to provide a security or guarantee, and
minimizing its potential conflicting obligations. By continuing the stay subject to this
undertaking, the Committee believes it appropriately balances the interests and any

hardship asserted by or upon the Parties.

The Parties do not dispute that the Committee has the discretionary power to condition the
stay such as by means of a security. Given that the practice of ad hoc committees has been
varied, particularly in recent years, statistics by themselves are of limited value in this case.
Recent trends do suggest that more stays, if not denied, are being granted conditionally but

this can hardly be considered jurisprudence constante.

By letter of 25 February 2020, the Committee had previously given the Parties an
opportunity to mutually-agree upon the terms of a similar undertaking, but, by email of 12
March 2020, the Parties informed the Committee that they were unable to reach an

agreement. The Committee therefore settles the text of the undertaking as follows:

“In the event, or to the extent, that annulment is not granted, the Kingdom of
Spain agrees and undertakes that (1) it will in accordance with its obligations
under the ICSID Convention recognize the Award rendered by the Tribunal
as final and binding and will abide by and comply with the terms of the award;
and (2) it will unconditionally and irrevocably pay the pecuniary obligations
imposed by the Award to the NextEra Entities within ninety (90) days
following the notification by the ICSID Secretariat of the Committee’s
Decision on annulment such that the NextEra Entities would be fully
compensated, including interest, and would not need to engage in any action
to recognize, enforce, or execute the Award under Article 54 of the ICSID
Convention in any ICSID Contracting State.”

The Committee rules that if Spain does not or cannot provide the undertaking ordered

herein within twenty (20) calendar days (or such time as the Parties agree or that the

29

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 32 of 33
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

Committee may extend) following the notification of this Decision, the stay on

enforcement will thereafter be terminated.

IV. COSTS

10

S

. Article 61(2) and Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 47(1), and Rule 53 of

the ICSID Arbitration Rules grant the Committee discretion to allocate costs.

101. The Committee does not find it necessary to make a decision on costs at this preliminary
stage of the proceedings. The Committee does note the Parties’ respective positions on
costs, and will take them into consideration when rendering its final decision in the
annulment proceedings. The Committee requests that the Parties should maintain a separate

account of their costs incurred during this phase of the proceedings.

V. DECISION AND ORDERS

102. For the foregoing reasons, the Committee hereby:

a. DECIDES that stay of enforcement of the Award continues on a provisional basis

under the condition that Applicant provides the following undertaking:

“Tn the event, or to the extent, that annulment is not granted, the Kingdom
of Spain agrees and undertakes that (1) it will in accordance with its
obligations under the ICSID Convention recognize the Award rendered by
the Tribunal as final and binding and will abide by and comply with the
terms of the award; and (2) it will unconditionally and irrevocably pay the
pecuniary obligations imposed by the Award to the NextEra Entities within
ninety (90) days following the notification by the ICSID Secretariat of the
Committee’s Decision on annulment such that the NextEra Entities would
be fully compensated, including interest, and would not need to engage in
any action to recognize, enforce, or execute the Award under Article 54 of
the ICSID Convention in any ICSID Contracting State.”

b. ORDERS that Applicant will within twenty (20) days following the notification
by the ICSID Secretariat of this Decision provide the Committee and Claimants

30

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 28-1 Filed 04/08/20 Page 33 of 33

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) — Annulment Proceeding

 

the undertaking in Paragraph 102.a. above, executed by a duly-authorised
signatory with the full power to bind Applicant, such as the Minister of Finance,

and counter-signed by the Attorney General;

RESERVES its right to revisit at any time its decision and order, at the request of
either party or by own its motion, to modify or terminate the stay, or vary or amend

its decision regarding the undertaking;

ORDERS that should Applicant not furnish the Undertaking in the terms as set out
above in Paragraphs 102.a. and 102.b. above within the time so stipulated (or such
mutually agreed upon time or time extended by the Committee), the stay so
ordered will forthwith be terminated and Claimants shall thereafter be at liberty to

take such action to enforce the Award as they deem fit; and

RESERVES its decision on costs for a subsequent stage of the proceedings and

dismisses all other requests.

| Ke

Prof. Joongi Kim
President
On behalf of the Committee

Date: 6 April 2020

31

