Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 32-1 Filed 05/29/20 Page 2 of 7

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

NEXTERA ENERGY GLOBAL HOLDINGS B.V. AND
NEXTERA ENERGY SPAIN HOLDINGS B.V.

Claimants

and

KINGDOM OF SPAIN

Applicant

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11)
Annulment Proceeding

 

DECISION TERMINATING THE STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Prof. Joongi Kim, President of the ad hoc Committee
Prof. Lawrence Boo, Member of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Humberto Séenz-Marinero, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Natali Sequeira

 

28 May 2020

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 32-1 Filed 05/29/20 Page 3 of 7
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) - A i Pr di

 

I. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1. The Committee issued a Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award on 6 April
2020 in English (the “Decision”) in which it decided and directed in paragraph 102

inter alia that:

“102. ...

a. DECIDES that stay of enforcement of the Award continues on a provisional
basis under the condition that Applicant provides the following undertaking:

“In the event, or to the extent, that annulment is not granted, the Kingdom of
Spain agrees and undertakes that (1) it will in accordance with its obligations
under the ICSID Convention recognize the Award rendered by the Tribunal as
final and binding and will abide by and comply with the terms of the award;
and (2) it will unconditionally and irrevocably pay the pecuniary obligations
imposed by the Award to the NextEra Entities within ninety (90) days following
the notification by the ICSID Secretariat of the Committee’s Decision on
annulment such that the NextEra Entities would be fully compensated,
including interest, and would not need to engage in any action to recognize,
enforce, or execute the Award under Article 54 of the ICSID Convention in any
ICSID Contracting State.”

ORDERS that Applicant will within twenty (20) days following the notification
by the ICSID Secretariat of this Decision provide the Committee and Claimants
Case the undertaking in Paragraph 102.a. above, executed by a duly-
authorised signatory with the full power to bind Applicant, such as the Minister
of Finance, and counter-signed by the Attorney General;

>

c. RESERVES its right to revisit at any time its decision and order, at the request
of either party or by own its motion, to modify or terminate the stay, or vary or
amend its decision regarding the undertaking;

x

ORDERS that should Applicant not furnish the Undertaking in the terms as set
out above in Paragraphs 102.a. and 102.b. above within the time so stipulated
(or such mutually agreed upon time or time extended by the Committee), the
stay so ordered will forthwith be terminated and Claimants shall thereafter be
at liberty to take such action to enforce the Award as they deem fit;...”

2. On 22 April 2020, the Kingdom of Spain (the “Applicant” or “Spain”) requested the
Committee to provide a Spanish translation of the Decision “before any other steps in
this matter’. Spain further stated that the Committee’s Decision had “no effect until the

Spanish version has been properly dispatched”.

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 32-1 Filed 05/29/20 Page 4 of 7
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) - A i Pr di

 

On 24 April 2020, NextEra Energy Global Holdings B.V. and NextEra Energy Spain
Holdings B.V. (collectively the “Claimants” or the “NextEra Entities”) submitted
observations stating that Spain “is seeking to take the benefits of the Decision while
simultaneously avoiding the burdens that the same Decision imposes. In particular,
Spain seeks to contend that enforcement has been stayed provisionally from the date
the Decision was rendered in English (on 6 April 2020), but Spain’s obligation to
provide the undertaking should effectively run from a different date (when the Decision

is translated into Spanish).”
On 30 April 2020, the Committee circulated a Spanish translation of its Decision.

By letter of 30 April 2020, the Committee reaffirmed that its Decision was valid from
the date it was issued, i.e. 6 April 2020. The Committee also reminded the Parties that
pursuant to Section 11.12 of Procedural Order No. | “/t]the Committee may initially
make any order or decision in English and subsequently issue that order or decision in
Spanish, if either Party requests. Both language versions shall be equally authentic”.
Thus, the Committee noted that the Decision was valid from the date it was issued and
was not subject to a subsequent translation. The Committee also noted that Spain waited
more than two weeks after the receipt of the English version of the Decision to request

a Spanish translation.

Nevertheless, pursuant to paragraph 102.c. of the Decision, the Committee decided to
grant an extension until 18 May 2020 for Spain to provide the Undertaking referred to
in paragraph 102.a. of the Decision. The Committee reiterated that a failure to furnish
the Undertaking by the new, extended deadline would lead to a termination of the stay

of enforcement of the Award.

On 15 May 2020, the Parties agreed to a one-week extension for the submission of

Spain’s Undertaking, by 25 May 2020.

On 18 May 2020, the Committee confirmed the extension agreed by the Parties. The
Committee noted that Spain ““committed to not ask for any other extension and do its
best efforts to have its final decision before the ne (sic) May 25, deadline” and that

Respondents wished to record “their concern at Spain's delay” and “their expectation

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 32-1 Filed 05/29/20 Page 5 of 7
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) - A i Pr di

that Spain should not try to obfuscate the text or the legal effect of the undertaking,

when it eventually responds to the Committee”.

9. On21 May 2020, the Applicant submitted a letter that was electronically signed by Mr.
Gonzalez Suela, Undersecretary at the Ministry for Ecological Transition and

Demographic Challenge (“Letter”), in Spanish, that provided the following:

“In view of the ICSID Annulment Committee Decision in Case No.
ARB/14/11, the tenor of the agreement that the Committee proposes is not
acceptable, in any way, for any sovereign nation such as the Kingdom of
Spain. Nevertheless, it is manifest that the Kingdom of Spain has complied
and will comply with its international obligations, as it has been doing
habitually, as much of those derive from the ICSID Convention as from
norms of the European Union or the rest of the applicable international
norms.” [Tribunal’s translation]

10. The Claimants wrote on the same day with its observation that Spain had failed to
provide the Undertaking in terms set out in Paragraphs 102.a. and 102.b. of the Decision
and requested that the Committee terminate provisional stay of enforcement in

accordance with Paragraph 102.d. of the Decision.

II. DECISION OF THE COMMITTEE

11. The Committee ordered a continuation of the stay of enforcement of the Award subject
to the conditions established in the Decision. The Committee had sought to “balance
the overall interests and circumstances such as the potential prejudice that each party
would suffer if the stay is maintained or terminated” and believed it could be best
achieved by requiring an appropriate undertaking’ in the terms specified in Paragraphs
102.a. and 102.b. of the Decision. The Committee stipulated these specific terms of the

Undertaking, after the parties failed to reach an agreement.

12. Regrettably, the Committee finds that Applicant’s Letter did not include the two
commitments required in the Undertaking as ordered under Paragraph 102.a. of the
Decision. First, it did not stipulate that Spain “will in accordance with its obligations

under the ICSID Convention recognize the Award rendered by the Tribunal as final

2 Decision, para. 95.

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 32-1 Filed 05/29/20 Page 6 of 7
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) - A i Pr di

 

and binding and will abide by and comply with the terms of the award’. Nothing is
mentioned about the recognition of the Award, its final and binding nature, and a
commitment to comply with its terms. Second, it did not confirm that Spain “will
unconditionally and irrevocably pay the pecuniary obligations imposed by the Award
to the NextEra Entities within ninety (90) days following the notification by the ICSID
Secretariat of the Committee’s Decision on annulment such that the NextEra Entities
would be fully compensated, including interest, and would not need to engage in any
action to recognize, enforce, or execute the Award under Article 54 of the ICSID
Convention in any ICSID Contracting State”. In fact, no mention is made at all in this

regard.

The Committee also finds the Letter was not provided by a “duly-authorised signatory
with the full power to bind Applicant, such as the Minister of Finance, and was not
counter-signed by the Attorney General” as directed in Paragraph 102.b. of the Decision.
Instead it was provided by the Mr. Gonzalez Suela, Undersecretary at the Ministry for
the Ecological Transition and the Demographic Challenge. There is no evidence or
assertion made that Mr. Suela was delegated with “full power to bind Applicant”, and
that the Letter was “counter-signed by the Attorney General’, both factors that the

Committee had specifically required in its Decision.

The Committee holds that Applicant’s Letter does not meet the terms and conditions of
the Undertaking both in substance and form as stipulated under Paragraphs 102.a. and
102.b. of the Decision.

Therefore, as provided in Paragraph 102.d. of the Decision, the Committee orders that
since Applicant did not furnish the Undertaking as stipulated, the stay of enforcement

of the Award must be terminated.

Case 1:19-cv-01618-TSC Document 32-1 Filed 05/29/20 Page 7 of 7
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11) - A i Pr di

 

II]. DECISION
16. For the foregoing reasons, according to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(3), the Committee

hereby,

a. DECIDES that the stay of enforcement of the Award will be terminated as of

the date of notification of this Decision;

b. RESERVES its right to revisit at any time its decision and order, at the request

of either party or by own its motion, to vary or amend its decision; and,

c. RESERVES its decision on costs for a subsequent stage of the proceedings.

Prof. Joongi Kim
President
On behalf of the Committee

Date: 28 May 2020

