INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceedings between

NIKO RESOURCES (BANGLADESH) LTD.
(Claimant)

and
BANGLADESH PETROLEUM EXPLORATION & PRODUCTION COMPANY LIMITED
(“BAPEX”)

(Second Respondent)

BANGLADESH OIL GAS AND MINERAL CORPORATION (“PETROBANGLA”)
(Third Respondent)

(jointly referred to as Respondents)
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/11

and
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/18

 

DECISION PERTAINING TO THE EXCLUSIVITY OF
THE TRIBUNALS’ JURISDICTION

 

Members of the Tribunals
Mr Michael E. Schneider, President
Professor Campbell McLachlan QC
Professor Jan Paulsson

Secretary of the Tribunals
Ms Frauke Nitschke

Date of Decision: 19 July 2016

GLOSSARY
2005 Injunction

2016 Injunction

BAPEX

Centre or ICSID

Corruption Claim

GPSA

Government of
Bangladesh

JVA

Money Suit

Niko
Payment Claim

Petrobangla

Injunction issued on 12 September 2005 by
the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, High Court
Division, further to Writ Petition No. 6911 by
BELA against ten respondents, including
BAPEX and Niko

Order issued on 12 May 2016 by the Supreme
Court of Bangladesh, High Court Division,
further to Writ Petition No. 5673 of 2016 by
Professor M. Shamsul Alam against the
Government of Bangladesh, Petrobangla,
BAPEX, Niko and Niko, Canada

Bangladesh Petroleum Exploration &
Production Company Limited, the Second
Respondent

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

Respondents’ claim for the Tribunals to declare
that the JVA and the GSPA have been
procured through corruption

Gas Purchase and Sale Agreement, 27
December 2006

The Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, the First Respondent until the
Decision on Jurisdiction

Joint Venture Agreement between BAPEX and
Niko, dated 16 October 2003

Proceedings brought by Bangladesh and
Petrobangla in the Court of the District Judge
in Dhaka against Niko and others (see Decision
on Jurisdiction, paragraph 102)

Niko Resources (Bangladesh) Ltd., the
Claimant

Claims to payment under the GPSA for gas
delivered (subject matter of ARB/ 10/18)

Bangladesh Oil Gas and Mineral Corporation,
the Third Respondent

Request Niko’s Request for Provisional Measures of 19
May 2016 as amended on 1 June 2016

Tribunals Collectively, the two Arbitral Tribunals
constituted in ICSID Case No. ARB/10/11 and
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/18

The present decision is issued in the course of proceedings initiated
in 2010 and pending before the Tribunals in ICSID Cases Nos.
ARB/10/11 and ARB/10/18. The Tribunals are requested to decide
claims with respect to (i) payments to be made by Petrobangla to Niko
under the Gas Purchase and Sale Agreement of 27 December 2006
between Petrobangla and the Joint Venture Partners BAPEX and Niko
(the GPSA), (ii) the liability of Niko for two blow-outs of wells in the
Chattak field in 2005 and, if Niko is found to be liable, the quantum
of the damage for which Niko is liable, and (iii) the avoidance of the
Joint Venture Agreement between BAPEX and Niko, dated 16 October
2003 (the JVA), and the GPSA on the grounds of corruption.

In several earlier decisions, the Tribunals have described the factual
context of the disputes and have addressed a number of issues, in
particular

I. The Decision on Jurisdiction of 19 August 2013;

Il. The First Decision on the Payment Claim of 11 September
2014;

Ill. The Second Decision on the Payment Claim of 15 September
2015; and

IV. The Third Decision on the Payment Claim of 26 May 2016.

The Tribunals refer to these decisions for the factual and legal context
and limit themselves in the present decision to a brief description of
the circumstances specific to the issues to be decided now:

Following the blow-outs in 2005 the High Court Division of the
Supreme Court of Bangladesh issued an injunction in 2005 which
eventually was confirmed by an order of 17 November 2009,
restraining Petrobangla from making any payment to Niko (the 2005
Injunction). In the meantime, on 27 May 2008, the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh and Petrobangla initiated proceedings in the Court of
the District Judge in Dhaka against several parties, including Niko,
claiming compensation for the damage resulting from the blow-outs
(the Money Suit). On 12 May 2016 the High Court Division of the
Supreme Court of Bangladesh issued another injunction, directing
the Respondents and the Government of Bangladesh “not to give any
kind of benefit’ and “not to make any kind of payment’ to Niko and its
mother company (the 2016 Injunction).

The Tribunals found in their Decision on Jurisdiction that they had
jurisdiction both with respect to the payments due by Petrobangla

1

under the GPSA and with respect to the question whether Niko is
liable for the two blow-outs under the JVA. This jurisdiction extends
to the question whether the GPSA and the JVA are avoided on
grounds of corruption.

The Tribunals determined in their First Decision on the Payment
Claim the amounts due to Niko by Petrobangla for the gas delivered
to it and the interest on these payments. In that Decision the
Tribunals provided for the Parties to agree terms for the payment of
these amounts into an Escrow Account, pending the outcome of the
other claims outstanding in the proceedings. In view of Respondent’s
failure to subscribe to the Escrow Agreement at the agreed terms and
make payment into the Escrow Account provided by it, in the Third
Decision on the Payment Claim, the Tribunals ordered immediate
payment of the outstanding amounts.

The Tribunals also had proceeded to examine the issues concerning
the liability for the blow-outs and heard evidence and argument on
these issues in November 2015 and in February 2016. Before the
Tribunals had issued their decision on liability and while the Parties
were producing their submissions on the quantum of the resulting
damage, BAPEX and Petrobangla served their requests concerning
the avoidance of the JVA and the GPSA on grounds of corruption (the
Corruption Claim). The Tribunals then decided to assign first priority
to this claim and suspended the proceedings on liability. The
Tribunals gave directions for the proceedings on the Corruption
Claim. They nevertheless decided in the Third Decision on the
Payment Claim that, in the circumstances, Petrobangla’s obligation
to make payment for the gas delivered in the amounts previously
determined, as it had been determined in the First Decision of 11
September 2014, continued to exist, and ordered immediate payment
thereof. The decision was in the following terms:

1. Petrobangla shall pay to Niko forthwith and free of any
restrictions USD 25,312,747 and BDT 139,988,337, plus
interest (a) in the amounts of USD 5,932,833 and BDT
49,849,961 and (b) as from 12 September 2014 at the rate of
six month LIBOR +2% for the U.S. Dollar amounts and at 5% for
the amounts in BDT, compounded annually;

2. This payment must be made immediately and is not subject to
any contrary orders from the Courts in Bangladesh;

3. In view of the difficulties which have occurred in the past with
respect to the payment of the amount owed to the Claimant, the

10.

Tribunals remain seized of the matter until final settlement of
this payment.

Niko thereafter addressed a request for provisional measures to the
Tribunals on 19 May 2016 and amended on 1 June 2016 (the
Request). In its amended version, the Request seeks the following
relief:

(a) Declaring that these Tribunals have exclusive jurisdiction over
the questions of: (i) the validity of the JVA and GPSA as
concerns Niko, BAPEX and Petrobangla, and their successors,
predecessors, assignors and assignees; (ii) whether Niko is
liable to BAPEX or any of its successors, predecessors,
assignors and assignees and if so, what compensation is due;
and (iii) any requests for interim or provisional measures
concerning any matter within the exclusive jurisdiction of
these Tribunals, including any injunction, stay of payment,
attachment or other relief.

(b) Ordering BAPEX and Petrobangla to consent to the removal of
the interim injunction in Writ Petition No. 5673 before the
Supreme Court of Bangladesh, High Court Division, and to
take all measures to request and support the removal or
discontinuance of such interim injunction and dismissal of the
Writ Petition.

The Respondents were invited to comment on the Request in its
original and amended version and did so on 1 June 2016 and 15 June
2016, respectively. Further submissions were made by the
Respondents on 7 and 12 July 2016 and the Claimant on 11 and 13
July 2016. By instructions of 14 July 2016 the Tribunals closed the
proceedings relating to the Request.

It follows from the Parties’ submissions that, in order to respond to
the Request, the Tribunals have to examine the following issues:

(i) The scope of the Tribunals’ jurisdiction with respect to the
requests;

(ii) The question whether the relief sought by Niko can be granted
in the form of provisional measures and, if not,

(iii) Whether it can be granted_in the form of another decision;
and

(iv) | Whether the Request is justified on its merits.

11.

12.

13.

Concerning the scope of jurisdiction, the Tribunals have taken
throughout these proceedings the following consistent position:

In the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunals have described the
process by which the Government of Bangladesh had delegated to
Petrobangla and to BAPEX the exercise of its rights and powers in the
field of the JVA and the GPSA, as recorded in the Preamble of the JVA
and referred to in the GPSA.! The Tribunals concluded that they did
not have jurisdiction ratione personae over the Government. They do,
however, have exclusive jurisdiction over the subject matter of these
two agreements, including provisional measures. On the basis of the
ICSID Convention, this exclusive jurisdiction ratione materiae binds
the People’s Republic of Bangladesh and all its organs, including the
courts.? The Tribunals have stated expressly that

the Tribunals’ exclusive jurisdiction also extends to
provisional measures.

It follows from this decision that the Tribunals have exclusive
jurisdiction to determine the issues that are validly brought before
them.

This finding does not affect the personal jurisdiction of the courts in
Bangladesh in other respects. These courts may well receive and
determine claims by persons over which the Tribunals do not have
jurisdiction and adjudicate such claims. In making their decision
involving other parties, the courts of Bangladesh, however, are bound
to conform to and implement the decisions rendered by these
Tribunals that are within the competence of these Tribunals. This
means, for instance, that it is for these Tribunals, and the Tribunals
alone, to decide whether the JVA and the GPSA were procured by
corruption, whether the blow-outs were caused by Niko’s breach of
the standards it had to observe under the JVA and the amount of the
damage caused by such a breach. When seized by a claim of a party
not subject to the jurisdiction of the Tribunals, a court in Bangladesh
may entertain that claim but it must conform in its decision to those
of the Tribunals.

If it were otherwise, the international commitments of the State of
Bangladesh, bound by its adherence to the ICSID Convention and its
decision to delegate the Chattak and Feni investments to Petrobangla

' See in particular Section 3 of the Decision on Jurisdiction and paragraph 251 of that decision.

2 First Decision on the Payment Claim, in particular paragraphs 285 to 287; and the Third Decision on the Payment
Claim, in particular paragraph 77, 78.

3 Third Decision on the Payment Claim, paragraph 286.

14.

15.

16.

17.

and BAPEX, could be rendered ineffective by the simple expedient of
any third parties claiming to be affected in their rights by the actions
and occurrences over which the Tribunals have jurisdiction, bringing
claims before the courts of Bangladesh and having these courts
render decisions which conflict materially with the decisions of the
Tribunals operating under the ICSID Convention and thereby also
conflicting with Bangladesh’s obligations as a party to that
Convention. This is particularly striking in a case in which the
plaintiff does not seek to vindicate his own rights, but acts by way of
a derivative action invoking rights of public bodies which the plaintiff,
in his vision of the public interest, prefers to be pursued in national
courts rather than before the international tribunal whose
jurisdiction have been accepted by those public bodies, including
delegation of the State as a signatory to the ICSID Convention.

Such a conflicting position is indeed now taken by the Respondents
when they argue that a court in Bangladesh may order measures in
conflict with the decisions of the Tribunals, simply because the
application is made by a person not party to the Convention and the
Arbitrations. On the basis of this position the Respondents argue
that, for instance a payment ordered by these Tribunals under the
ICSID Convention could be prevented by the order of a court in
Bangladesh simply because the order is made at the request of a
person not party to these proceeding.

Accepting this position would subvert the international obligations
assumed by Bangladesh by virtue of its decision to become a party to
the ICSID Convention. The Tribunals are not prepared to give effect
to such a position.

The Tribunals have considered Niko’s requests from the perspective
of the type of decision that is sought by Niko. They have examined in
particular the question whether the relief requested can be granted in
the form of provisional measures. They have concluded that the relief
granted is not provisional but requires a final determination of the
issues raised. Therefore, the Tribunals are of the view that the
requested relief, while justified in substance, cannot take the form of
provisional measures.

The Tribunals observe, however, that the Respondents’ submissions
show a fundamental misunderstanding of the scope and implication
of the Tribunals’ jurisdiction. In particular, they note the
Respondents’ statements such as that denying “the exclusive subject
matter jurisdiction posited by the Claimant that would preclude

proceedings instituted by a non-party to the ICSID proceedings”.* The
position so expressed fails to distinguish between the two aspects of
jurisdiction. Exclusive subject matter jurisdiction does not prevent a
court in Bangladesh to be seized by a party not party to the ICSID
proceedings; it does, however, bind the court in Bangladesh, when
deciding the claim of such a party, to conform its decision to that of
the ICSID Tribunals in all those matters for which the ICSID
Tribunals have exclusive jurisdiction.

18. It follows from the Respondents’ submissions, including the one just
quoted, that a further clarification of the jurisdictional issues is
required. Given the actions that the Respondents have taken before
the courts in Bangladesh and those which they have failed to take
before these courts, the Tribunals conclude that the clarification of
these matters is a matter of urgency. The urgency results from the
conduct of the Respondents and is irrespective of the question
whether the injunctions cause immediate financial difficulties to
Niko, as asserted by the Claimant in its recent submissions and
denied by the Respondents.

19. For these reasons the Tribunals find it necessary and justified to
render the present decision in the form of a Declaratory Decision
concerning the jurisdictional issues and an order to the Respondents
indicating the action the latter are required to take.

20. For the reasons set out above the Tribunals now grant in substance
the relief requested but do so in the form not of a provisional measure
but in the following decision. The Tribunals:

1. Declare that the Tribunals have sole and exclusive subject
matter jurisdiction with respect to all matters which have
validly been brought before it, notably

(a) The validity of the JVA and the GSPA, including all
questions relating to the avoidance of these agreements on
grounds of corruption;

(b) The liability of Niko under the JVA for the blow-outs that
occurred in the course of its activity in the Chattak field
and the quantum of the damage for which it may be
responsible in case such liability were found to exist;

(c) The payment obligations of Petrobangla towards Niko
under the GSPA for gas delivered, the jurisdiction for

4 Respondents’ Observations of 15 June 2016, paragraph 4.

injunctions seeking to prevent such payments and to
retract such injunctions;

2. Order BAPEX and Petrobangla

(a) to intervene with all courts and other authorities in
Bangladesh that are or may be concerned with issues
identified above under (1) to bring to their attention the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Tribunals in respect of these
issues and the international obligations of the State of
Bangladesh resulting therefrom under the ICSID
Convention; and

(b) to take all steps necessary to terminate any proceedings
and orders by the courts in Bangladesh which are in
conflict with this order.

[Signed] [Signed]
Professor. Campbell McLachlan QC Professor. Jan Paulsson
Arbitrator Arbitrator
[Signed]
Mr Michael E. Schneider
President

