INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceedings between

NIKO RESOURCES (BANGLADESH) LTD.
(Claimant)

and
BANGLADESH PETROLEUM EXPLORATION & PRODUCTION COMPANY LIMITED
(“BAPEX”)

(Second Respondent)

BANGLADESH OIL GAS AND MINERAL CORPORATION (“PETROBANGLA”)
(Third Respondent)

(jointly referred to as Respondents)
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/11

and
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/18

 

THIRD DECISION ON THE PAYMENT CLAIM

 

Members of the Tribunals
Mr Michael E. Schneider, President
Professor Campbell McLachlan QC
Professor Jan Paulsson

Secretary of the Tribunals
Ms Frauke Nitschke

Date of Decision: 26 May 2016

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

GLOSSARY
INTRODUCTION 5
THE PARTIES AND THEIR REPRESENTATIVES. ............ccccccceceeeeeeees 8
2.1 The Claimant 8
2.2. The Respondents 9
PROCEDURAL HISTORY.........:sssssssssssscccceccccececeesessssssessssssaaaaeaeees 11
3.1 Summary of the Procedure leading up to the Second Decision on the Payment
Claim 11

 

3.2 Procedure following the Second Decision on the Payment Claim
THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS .........ccccsssessssessssssssssnncanacccceeeceeeeeseeeees
THE REQUEST FOR A NEW DECISION. ..........csssssssssssceecceceeeeeeeeeees

5.1 The difficulties invoked by the Claimant

 

   

5.2 The Respondents’ defence: the 2005 Injunction..........

 

5.3 The new decision 26
THE CORRUPTION CLAIM...........ccccssseesssssssssssssnnnacanccceeececeseeeeeeeees 28
THE 2016 INJUNCTION.. 31

 
 

THE TRIBUNALS’ DECISION

GLOSSARY
2005 Injunction

2016 Injunction

BAPEX

BDT
BELA

Centre or ICSID

Compensation
Claims

Compensation
Declaration

First Decision on the
Payment Claim

GPSA

Government of
Bangladesh

JVA

Money Suit

Injunction issued on 12 September 2005 by
the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, High Court
Division, further to Writ Petition no 6911 by
BELA against ten respondents, including
BAPEX and Niko

Order issued on 12 May 2016 by the Supreme
Court of Bangladesh, High Court Division,
further to Writ Petition N. 5673 of 2016 by
Professor M. Shamsul Alam against the
Government of Bangladesh, Petrobangla,
BAPEX, Niko and Niko, Canada

Bangladesh Petroleum Exploration &
Production Company Limited, the Second
Respondent

Bangladeshi taka

The Bangladesh Environmental Lawyers
Association

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

Claims for compensation brought by the First
and Third Respondents in the Court of District
Judge, Dhaka, against the Claimant and
others for damages alleged to arise from the
blowout of two wells in the Chattak field
(subject matter of ICSID Case No. ARB/ 10/11)

The declaration requested by the Claimant
concerning the Compensation Claims

The Tribunals’ Decision of 11 September 2014
concerning the Claimant’s Payment Claim

Gas Purchase and Sale Agreement, 27
December 2006

The Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, the First Respondent until the
Decision on Jurisdiction

Joint Venture Agreement between BAPEX and
Niko, dated 16 October 2003

Proceedings brought by Bangladesh and
Petrobangla in the Court of the District Judge
in Dhaka against Niko and others (see Decision
on Jurisdiction, paragraph 102)

Niko
Payment Claim

Petrobangla

Second Decision on
the Payment Claim

Tribunals

Niko Resources (Bangladesh) Ltd., the
Claimant

Claims to payment under the GPSA for gas
delivered (subject matter of ARB/ 10/18)

Bangladesh Oil Gas and Mineral Corporation,
the Third Respondent

Decision on the Implementation of the Decision
on the Payment Claim, 14 December 2015

Collectively, the two Arbitral Tribunals
constituted in ICSID Case No. ARB/10/11 and
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/18

INTRODUCTION

This Third Decision on the Payment Claim relates to the Gas
Purchase and Sale Agreement of 27 December 2006 (GPSA)
concluded between Bangladesh Oil Gas and Mineral Corporation
(Petrobangla) and the Joint Venture between Niko Resources
(Bangladesh) Limited (Niko) and Bangladesh Petroleum
Exploration & Production Company Limited (BAPEX). The decision
concerns the payment for Niko’s share in the price for the gas
delivered to Petrobangla pursuant to the GPSA (the Payment
Claim).

In the First Decision on the Payment Claim of 11 September 2014,
the Tribunals determined that Petrobangla owed Niko USD
25,312,747 plus BDT 139,988,337 as per Niko’s invoices for gas
delivered from the Feni Field between November 2004 and April
2010, plus interest. During the proceedings a number of issues
had been raised by the Parties concerning an injunction before the
Courts of Bangladesh, the liability for two blow-outs in the Chattak
Field, and possible set-offs. The Tribunals had noted indications
that the Parties might be able to resolve these differences amicably,
including the placement of the funds in an escrow account and
interim arrangement concerning the use of the funds in
Bangladesh. Rather than simply ordering payment of the funds,
the Tribunals gave to the Parties an opportunity of determining the
most effective use of the funds by agreement among themselves.
In the First Payment Decision, the Tribunals therefore invited the
Parties to seek an amicable settlement with respect to the
modalities for implementing the decision.

Subsequent to this First Decision, the Parties did indeed report to
the Tribunals several times indicating that they had conferred with
a view to finding such a solution; but no agreement was reached.
The Claimant then requested a decision from the Tribunals
regarding the implementation of the First Decision on the Payment
Claim, proposing several alternatives on which the Respondents
were invited to comment, including payment into an escrow
account. Despite several extensions of the deadline for such
comments, the Respondents did not take any position.

On 6 August 2015 the newly appointed counsel of the Respondents
wrote to the Tribunal, making no proposal concerning the use of
the funds or the implementation of the Tribunals’ First Payment
Claim Decision but requested that a decision on the outstanding
funds be made “only after all issues regarding Niko’s liability are
resolved’. The Tribunals concluded that there were no longer any
real chances for an agreement between the Parties about the
implementation of the First Decision.

10.

The Tribunals therefore issued on 14 September 2015 a decision,
entitled Decision on the Implementation of the Decision on the
Payment Claim and now referred to as the Second Decision on the
Payment Claim. They ordered that the funds owing to Niko be paid
into an escrow account and indicated the modalities for this
account. The decision concluded by providing the following:

(v) If any difficulties occur which prevent the operation of the
Escrow Account as intended by the present decision, any Party
may address the Tribunals for a ruling as required.

The Claimant prepared the documentation for the Escrow Account,
consulted the Respondents about the terms of this account, made
the modifications in the documentation to take account of the
Respondents’ observations and signed the documentation. The
Tribunals approved the documentation. The Respondents
confirmed that they were willing to implement the Escrow
Agreement but stated that, before they could do so, they had to
obtain a modification of the injunction which had been issued in
2005 by the Supreme Court of Bangladesh (the 2005 Injunction).

Thereupon the Claimant requested on 15 December 2015 that the
Tribunals issue an award ordering payment by Petrobangla of the
amount which the Tribunals had found to be due to Niko.

In response, the Respondents explained that on 6 January 2016
they had applied for the modification of the 2005 Injunction and
that it would take some three months for the court to decide.

At the expiration of this period, no information about the status of
the 2005 Injunction and the related proceedings was provided.
Instead, the Respondents submitted on 25 March 2016
documentation on which they rely to demonstrate that the Joint
Venture Agreement between BAPEX and Niko (the JVA) and the
GPSA were procured by corruption and are void or voidable and
declared that they avoided these agreements. In response to the
Tribunals’ invitation the Parties provided explanations on 29 April
2016. The Respondents argued that Petrobangla did not owe
anything under the GPSA; if Niko made a claim for unjust
enrichment, they would have to compensate for the value of the
gas; but this value could not be more than the price agreed under
the GPSA.

On 12 May 2016 the Respondents submitted to the Tribunals an
injunction of the same date by the High Court Division of the
Supreme Court directing the Respondents and the Government of
Bangladesh “not to give any kind of benefit’ and “not to make any
kind of payment’ to the Claimant and its mother company (the

11.

12.

2016 Injunction). On 19 May 2016 the Claimant requested
Provisional Measures in relation to this injunction.

The Payment Claim is part of two arbitration proceedings,
introduced on 1 April and 16 June 2010, registered on 27 May and
28 July 2010 as ICSID Case Nos. ARB/10/11 and ARB/10/18,
respectively against the Respondents and the Government of
People’s Republic of Bangladesh. The Tribunals in these two cases,
constituted on 20 December 2010, are composed of Professor Jan
Paulsson, Professor Campbell McLachlan and Mr Michael E.
Schneider. In the First Session of these two arbitrations, the
Parties agreed inter alia that the two cases were to proceed in a
concurrent manner, that the Tribunals may issue a single
instrument in relation to both cases and that they may deal with
the two cases jointly except where circumstances distinct to one
case necessitate a separate treatment.

In the Decision on Jurisdiction of 19 August 2013, the Tribunals
determined that they did not have jurisdiction over Bangladesh but
accepted jurisdiction over the remaining two Respondents. The
Tribunals then proceeded to the examination of the Payment Claim
and, after having issued the First Decision on this claim, are
examining another claim by which Niko seeks a declaration that it
is not liable for the damage caused by two blow-outs that occurred
in 2005 in the Chattak Field and, contrary to the claims made
against it in the courts of Bangladesh, owes no compensation for
the blow-outs (the Compensation Declaration). This latter phase
of the proceedings is still pending.

2.

14.

15.

THE PARTIES AND THEIR REPRESENTATIVES
2.1 The Claimant

The Claimant in both cases is Niko Resources (Bangladesh) Ltd. It
is a company incorporated under the laws of Barbados. The
Claimant and its nationality were discussed in Section 5 of the
Decision on Jurisdiction.

Since August 2013, the Claimant is represented in this arbitration
by

Mr Barton Legum, Ms Anne-Sophie Dufétre, and
Ms Brittany Gordon

SALANS FMC SNR DENTON EUROPE LLP

5, boulevard Malesherbes

75008 Paris, France

and

Mr Frank Alexander and Mr Anthony Cole
DENTONS CANADA LLP

850 — 2-4 Street SW

15t Floor, Bankers Court

Calgary, Alberta

Canada T2P OR8

and

Mr Rokanuddin Mahmud and Mr Mustafizur Rahman Khan
Delta Dahlia (level 8)

36, Kamal Ataturk Avenue

Banani, Dhaka 1213

People’s Republic of Bangladesh.

During the initial phase of the proceedings up to the
Decision on Jurisdiction, the Claimant was
represented by

Mr Kenneth J. Warren QC, Mr James T. Eamon QC,
Mr John R. Cusano and Ms Erin Runnalls

Gowlings

1400,700 - 2"4 Street S.W.

Calgary, Alberta

Canada T2P 4V5

and

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

Mr Ajmalul Hossain QC

A. Hossain & Associates

3B Outer Circular Road
Maghbazar, Dhaka 1217
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

2.2 The Respondents
The Respondents remaining in these arbitrations are

(a) Bangladesh Petroleum Exploration & Production Company
Limited (“BAPEX”), the Second Respondent
and

(b) Bangladesh Oil Gas and Mineral Corporation
(“Petrobangla”), the Third Respondent.!

Petrobangla is a statutory corporation created by the Bangladesh
Oil, Gas and Mineral Corporation Ordinance 1985.?

BAPEX is a wholly owned subsidiary of Petrobangla incorporated
under the Bangladesh Companies Act 1994.3 By Notification
issued on 8 June 2003 the Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral
Resources granted to BAPEX “complete administrative and
financial freedom by the Government’.*

The legal status of these two corporations and their relationship
with the Government of Bangladesh was discussed in Sections 6
and 7 of the Decision on Jurisdiction.

The Respondents are represented in these arbitrations by

Mr Syed Ashfaquzzaman
Secretary, Petrobangla
Petrocentre

3 Kawran Bazar C/A

Dhaka 1215, GPO Box 849
People’s Republic of Bangladesh

and

' The sequence in which the three Respondents are presented is that adopted by the Claimant in the
First Request, even though a different sequence was adopted in the Second Request.

> RA IL, Attachment G.

3 HT Day 1, p. 42.

4 Exhibit 2, Appendix B to R-CMJ.1.

21.

22.

23.

Mr Md. Atiquzzaman

Managing Director, Bapex
Level-6, BAPEX Bhabon

4 Kawran Bazar C/A

Dhaka 1215

People’s Republic of Bangladesh

and

Mr Paul S. Reichler and Mr Derek C. Smith
Foley Hoag LLP

1717 K Street NW

Washington, DC 20036

United States of America

Between June and July 2015, the Respondents were represented
in these proceedings by

Mr Kay Kian Tan

Watson Farley & Williams (Thailand) Limited
Unit 902, 9th Floor

GPF Witthayu Tower B

93/1 Wireless Road

Patumwan,

10330 Bangkok

Thailand

Between 2011 and June 2015, the Respondents were represented
in these proceedings by

Mr Luis Gonzalez Garcia and Ms Alison Macdonald
Matrix Chambers, Griffin Building, Gray's Inn
London WC1R SLN

United Kingdom

Between 2011 and December 2014, the Respondents were also
represented in these proceedings by

Mr Tawfique Nawaz, Senior Advocate,

and Mr Mohammad Imtiaz Farooq, Juris Counsel
59/C, Road #4

Banani, Dhaka 12 13

People’s Republic of Bangladesh

10

3. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
3.1 Prior Decisions on the Payment Claim

24. Adetailed account of the procedural history in the two arbitrations
until the Tribunals’ Second Decision on the Payment Claim was
set forth in the First and Second Decisions on that claim, issued
on 11 September 2014 and 14 September 2015, respectively.

25. In the First Decision on the Payment Claim, the Tribunals held
that:

(1) Petrobangla owes Niko USD 25’312’747 plus BDT
139°988’337 as per Niko’s invoices for gas delivered from
November 2004 to April 2010;

(2) | Petrobangla must pay simple interest on Niko’s invoices at
the rate of six month LIBOR +2% for the US Dollar amounts
and at 5% for the amounts in BDT; interest is due on the
amount of each invoice as from 45 days after delivery of the
invoice but not before 14 May 2007 and until it is placed at
Niko’s unrestricted disposition;

(3) The claim for compound interest on the amount awarded
under above item (1) and (2) is reserved;

(4) The entitlement of BAPEX to payments under the GPSA is
not affected by the present decision;

(5) The Parties are invited to seek an amicable settlement with
respect to the modalities for implementing the [11 September
2014] decision and to report by no later than 30 September
2014;

(6) Failing amicable settlement, any Party may seize the
Tribunals for recommendations on provisional measures or
a final decision concerning the outstanding amounts;

(7) | The decision on costs of the proceedings concerning the
Payment Claim is reserved.

26. As explained above, the Parties reported that they did indeed
confer further to the Tribunals’ invitation but they did not reach

agreement. Upon the Claimant’s request, the Tribunals then

11

issued on 14 September 2015 the Second Decision on the Payment
Claim.

27. In the Second Decision on the Payment Claim the Tribunals held:

7]

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Petrobangla shall pay into an escrow account USD 25’312’747
and BDT 139°988’337, plus interest (a) in the amounts of USD
5’932’833 and BDT 49’849°961 and (b) as from 12 September
2014 at the rate of six month LIBOR +2% for the U.S. Dollar
amounts and at 5% for the amounts in BDT, compounded
annually;

The escrow account shall be opened by the Claimant at a
reputable, internationally operating bank according to standard
conditions in international banking practice and providing that
funds in the escrow account shall be released only (a) as
instructed by the present Arbitral Tribunals or (b) by joint
instructions of Niko and Petrobangla;

Petrobangla shall ensure that the USD amounts paid into the
Escrow Account are freely available to Niko without any
restrictions if and when payment to Niko is ordered by the
present Arbitral Tribunals;

Until the amounts due as par above (i) have been fully paid to
Niko at its free disposition or otherwise released from the
Escrow Account, Petrobangla shall continue to pay interest on
these amounts at the rate of six month LIBOR + 2% for the U.S.
Dollar amounts and at 5% for the amounts in BDT, compounded
annually. At the end of each year, the Bank shall inform
Petrobangla about any interest earned on the Escrow Account
during the course of the year. Petrobangla may deduct the
interest so earned from its interest payments for the
corresponding period. If the interest earned on the amounts in
the Escrow Account during a year exceeds the interest due by
Petrobangla, the exceeding amount shall remain in the account
without any credit to Petrobangla;

If any difficulties occur which prevent the operation of the
Escrow Account as intended by the present decision, any Party
may address itself the Tribunals for a ruling as required.

28. In the reasons for their Second Decision on the Payment Claim of
14 September 2015, the Tribunals concluded “that there is no

12

29.

30.

31.

32.

justification for Petrobangla to further withhold the funds owed to
Niko”. They considered the different proposals which the Claimant
had made, receptive to considerations of preserving “the funds for
possible payments in the event Niko were liable for damage caused
by the blow-outs.”

In light of these considerations, the Tribunals granted the
Claimant’s request, adopting from among the proposals included
in its request for relief the one that provided for payment into an
Escrow Account. They considered, however, the possibility that
“difficulties occur which prevent the operation of the Escrow Account
as intended by the present decision” and, for that eventuality,
reserved the possibility for any Party to “address itself [to] the
Tribunals for a ruling as required.”

3.2 Procedure following the Second Decision on the
Payment Claim

Upon receipt of the Second Decision on the Payment Claim,
Petrobangla confirmed to the Tribunals on 23 September 2015 that
it “intends to comply with the Tribunals’ decision as expeditiously
as possible.”

By the same letter, Petrobangla expressed concerns with respect
to the injunction that the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, High
Court Division, had issued on 1 September 2005, and confirmed
by order of 17 November 2009 (the 2005 Injunction‘), in the
context of the proceedings instituted by the Bangladesh
Environmental Lawyers Association (BELA) against the
Government of Bangladesh, Petrobangla, APEX, Niko.
Petrobangla stated that this injunction remained in force.

Specifically, Petrobangla expressed concern that a payment by
Petrobangla pursuant to the Tribunals’ First Decision on the
Payment Claim would be considered “a violation of the injunction”,
and that “any official who authorizes a payment into the escrow
account without seeking a modification of the order would be
subjected to contempt of court proceedings and be exposed to a risk
of penal sanctions”. Petrobangla informed the Tribunals that “in
order to comply with the Tribunals’ decision, Petrobangla will seek
a modification of the injunction order to permit the payment into the
escrow account as directed by the Tribunal/sj.” It announced that
“Petrobangla will file its request on 30 October 2015 and inform the
Tribunal as soon as it has been filed”.

5 The history of this injunction has been discussed by the Tribunals in their First Decision on the
Payment Claim, pp. 53 to 57.

13

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

By letter of 28 September 2015, the Claimant objected to
Petrobangla’s understanding that payment made into an escrow
account would constitute a violation of the November 2009 order,
submitting that “Petrobangla’s suggested application to a
Bangladesh national court can be viewed only as a delaying tactic
to avoid payment of the money it has owed for a decade.”

By the same letter, the Claimant requested “that the Tribunals rule
that Petrobangla is indeed obligated to make the payment ordered
by that Decision immediately upon establishment of the escrow
account.” The Claimant went further on to say that

Payment to the account of an independent third party who
under no circumstances can take instructions from Niko can in
no way be seen as ‘making any payment to [Niko]’ within the
meaning of the BELA injunction. Nor can the ultimate
disposition of the escrow funds as contemplated by the [Second
Decision on the Payment Claim Decision] be seen to
contravene the BELA injunction. The Decision orders two
alternative conditions to the release of the funds: (a) as
instructed by the present Arbitral Tribunals or (b) by joint
instructions of Niko and Petrobangla’.

The Tribunals responded on 10 October 2015, informing the
parties that they “consider that the matter is sufficiently clear given
their rulings in paragraph 167 of the [Second Decision on the
Payment Claim] and confirm that payment is to be made by
Petrobangla immediately upon establishment of the Escrow
Account”.

By that time, the Claimant had filed on 8 October 2015 a Draft
Escrow Agreement and accompanying documentation, requesting
that the Tribunals “confirm that the draft escrow agreement secured
by Niko meets the requirements” of the Second Decision on the
Payment Claim. The Tribunals invited the Respondents by their
correspondence of 10 October 2015 to file by 16 October 2015 any
observations they might have had in regard to the proposed escrow
agreement.

The Respondents did indeed file observations in their letter of 16
October 2015, requesting changes in the draft agreement. The
Claimant commented on these observations and submitted on 23
October 2015 a revised version of the escrow agreement in which
the changes requested by the Respondent had been made. It
“reiterated its request that the Tribunals decide whether these
escrow arrangements accord with the Decision on Implementation”.

14

38. The Tribunals invited on 23 October 2015 “the Respondents’ views
as to the Claimant’s calculations” of the amount to be deposited in
the escrow account by no later than 27 October 2015. No further
comments were received from the Respondents by that date nor
thereafter, despite a reminder from the Claimant dated 28 October
2015.

39. At the opening of the 2 - 7 November 2015 hearing, the Claimant
recalled its request for the Tribunals’ confirmation that the draft
escrow agreement met the requirements of the Second Decision on
the Payment Claim. As recorded in the Summary Minutes of the
November 2015 hearing, the Tribunals noted the absence of
further comments from the Respondents and “that therefore there
were no objections to the Tribunals now approving the arrangements
as amended by the Claimant following the Respondents’ initial
observations. These arrangements were thus accepted for
implementation” .©

40. On 1 December 2015, the Claimant informed the Tribunals about
the events following this approval as follows:

On 13 November [2015], Petrobangla and BAPEX
communicated to Niko the details (contact information etc.)
required for the completion of the Escrow Agreement. On 16
November, Niko circulated a new draft of the USD Escrow
Agreement, including the details (contact information, etc.)
communicated by Petrobangla and BAPEX. On 18 November
[2015], Respondents indicated that they had one editorial
change they wished to make to the new draft of the USD Escrow
Agreement. Niko consented to the proposed change on 19
November.

On 23 November, Niko emailed to Petrobangla and BAPEX a
PDF of the counterpart of the USD Escrow Agreement executed
by Niko which Niko had delivered to Madison Pacific by courier.

41. In its communication of 1 December 2015 the Claimant requested
from the Tribunals an order in the following terms:

(1) each of Respondents Petrobangla and BAPEX to execute a
counterpart of the USD Escrow Agreement that the Tribunals
approved at the hearing in early November 2015, to provide
Niko with a PDF of such executed document by email, and
to transmit the original of such document to Madison Pacific
by courier;

© Summary Minutes of the Hearing of 2 to 7 November 2015, section 7.

15

42.

43.

44,

45.

(2) each of Respondents Petrobangla and BAPEX to provide to
Madison Pacific by email the information pertinent to
Petrobangla and BAPEX that is required by Madison
Pacific’s KYC Certification Protocol and by the FATCA Entity
Certification; and

(3) Petrobangla to proceed to pay the amounts ordered by the
Decision on Implementation of the Payment Claim Decision
forthwith after the USD Escrow Account is opened.

The Respondents requested an opportunity to file observations.
The request was granted by the Tribunals. On 10 December 2015,
they presented these observations, explaining that

execution of the Escrow Agreement may be determined by
the Supreme Court of Bangladesh to be a violation of its
injunction order in Writ Petition No. 6911 of 2005
(Bangladesh Environmental Lawyers Association (BELA) v.
Bangladesh and others) against payments in favor of Niko
referred to in paragraph 277 of the Tribunals’ Decision on
the Payment Claim. Respondents’ officials would therefore
risk contempt of court and criminal proceedings against
them in Bangladesh if they execute the Escrow Agreement.

Referring to their letter of 23 September 2015, the Respondents
further explained that Petrobangla had presented a petition to the
Supreme Court to review the judgement imposing the 2005
Injunction so as to permit Petrobangla to make the payment
ordered by the Tribunal. The petition was attached to the letter. It
was dated 10 December 2015.

Thereupon the Claimant noted that “Petrobangla and BAPEX
refuse to sign the Escrow Agreement and, as a result, the Escrow
Account cannot be opened, much less operated or funds paid”. It
concluded that a “difficulty has occurred that prevents the operation
of the Escrow Account as intended’. Relying on item (v) of
paragraph 167 of the Second Decision on the Payment Claim, the
Claimant requested on 15 December 2015:

an award in the Payment Claim ordering Petrobangla
unconditionally to make payment to Niko of the amounts the
Tribunals found to be due and owed.

In its 15 December 2015 application the Claimant also requested
that

the Tribunals fix a prompt schedule for costs submissions in
order to place the Tribunals in a position to render a final

16

46.

47.

48.

and unconditional award in the Payment Claim as soon as
possible.

In support of the application, the Claimant submitted that
Petrobangla had not in fact filed a petition for a modification of the
November 2009 order, but had filed an “application for review of
the judgment and order’ which in the Claimant’s estimate would
take “a minimum of two years, if not more” to be decided upon. The
Claimant further reiterated its view that “the Respondents are not
prepared to comply with the Decision” and that Petrobangla was
“attempting to delay indefinitely the date when it makes the
payment to Niko”. The letter concluded the explanations on the
escrow arrangements as follows:

Finally, it bears noting that the link between the
Compensation Declaration and the Payment Claim implied
by the escrow arrangements ordered by the Tribunals is one
that benefits the Respondents only. The Payment Claim debt
is independent from Niko’s potential liability in the
Compensation Declaration. Connecting one to another
provides additional security for the Respondents in the event
that the Tribunals were to find some liability in the
Compensation Declaration. Petrobangla and BAPEX have
expressed their disinterest in putting into place the security
contemplated. Given that that is the case, there is no reason
to wait further before the issuance of a final award in Niko’s
favour in the Payment Claim.

Following an invitation by the Tribunals, Petrobangla responded to
the Claimant’s 15 December 2015 application on 6 January 2016,
requesting the Tribunals to reject the same. The Respondents
confirmed that in their view “/t/here is no difficulty preventing
operation of the Escrow Account”, adding that “/t]/he Respondents
have not refused to sign the Escrow Agreement. They simply seek
the opportunity to do so in conditions that do not create a risk of their
officials being held in contempt of court.”

In the 6 January 2016 observations, the Respondents confirmed
Petrobangla’s undertaking that it “has committed to making
payment into the escrow account as soon as the injunction is
modified or lifted.” With regard to the type of application filed with
the Supreme Court, Petrobangla indicated that it “chose the
procedural mechanism its lawyers recommended as the most
effective means of achieving its goal of being able to comply with the
Tribunals’ order without being subject to contempt of court
proceedings in Bangladesh’, and that “based upon Petrobangla’s
Bangladeshi Supreme Court litigation counsel’s extensive
experience with the Bangladeshi judicial system, Petrobangla
anticipates that the petition for revision of the injunction should be

17

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

resolved in approximately three months.” Petrobangla added that
“[aJs they have previously committed, upon lifting or modification of
the injunction, Respondents will sign the escrow agreement and
Petrobangla will pay the amount owed into the escrow account.”

The Respondents joined to their observations a letter from their
counsel in the court proceedings dated 5 January 2016 which
contained the following passage:

Based on my experience as a practising Barrister before the
Supreme Court of Bangladesh, I anticipate that this petition
will be resolved within the next 3 (three) months.

The matter was discussed with the parties during the 28 January
2016 pre-hearing telephone conference, during which the
Respondents confirmed that they would provide the Tribunals with
a status update regarding their application before the Supreme
Court.

By letter of 17 February 2016, the Respondents stated that their
petition for a modification of the 2005 Injunction was before the
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court awaiting allocation of the
bench that will hear that petition.

No further information was provided to the Tribunals about the
Respondents’ petition concerning the 2005 Injunction.

On 25 March 2016 the Respondents submitted, as part of the
proceedings on the Compensation Declaration, “BAPEX Memorial
on Damages”. In this Memorial, BAPEX requests a declaration that
(i) Niko procured the JVA through corruption, (i) that Niko is not
entitled to “use the international arbitration system to pursue claims
related to the JVA’, (iii) that the JVA is voidable and BAPEX avoided
it. In support of these requests the Respondents produced
documentation to demonstrate that JVA and the GPSA were
procured by corruption.

On the same day, the Respondents wrote to the Tribunals and,
relying on BAPEX’s Memorial on Damages and the documentation
produced, sought declarations with respect to the GPSA as BAPEX
had requested for the JVA and requested that the Tribunals vacate
the First and Second Decisions on the Payment Claim.

On 18 April 2016 the Tribunals invited the Claimant to comment

on the new requests from the Respondents and the Respondents
to comment

18

56.

57.

58.

on the consequences of the avoidance of the JVA and the
GPSA with respect to, in particular, past performance,
addressing:

@) with respect to the GPSA the question of payments
which Petrobangla may owe, in case of a rescission,
for the gas received (explaining whether Petrobangla
considers owing no payment at all or payment valued
for instance at the price agreed in the GPSA or at its
commercial value, taking into account the price at
which Petrobangla purchases gas from other
suppliers);

(ii) with respect to the JVA, whether any credit must be
given to investments made by Niko in performance of
the agreement and how such credit is to be valued.

On 29 April 2016 the Claimant made submissions with respect to
both the JVA and GSPA. The Claimant argued that the documents
produced with BAPEX’s Memorial did not contain any new
evidence and that the earlier charges had been considered by
Tribunals and rejected. Any avoidance of a contract for corruption
had to be made “unequivocally and timeously”. The Claimant
argued that “Petrobangla offers neither argument nor authority to
suggest that the Tribunals’ Decision was incorrect — even if that
Decision could be reopened, which it cannot.” It declared
Petrobangla’s application as frivolous and that it “should
summarily be rejected”.

The Respondents submitted on 29 April 2016 Revised Conclusions
of BAPEX and Submissions for the Memorial on Damages and, in
a separate document, replies to the Tribunals’ questions. They
argued that Niko was barred from seeking any remedy from the
Tribunals and that the JVA and the GPSA were null and void;
alternatively, they confirmed that “BAPEX and Petrobangla exercise
their rights to rescind the JVA and the GPSA respectively’. They
argued that Petrobangla did not owe anything under the GPSA; if
Niko made a claim for unjust enrichment, they would have to
compensate for the value of the gas; but the compensation could
not be more than the price agreed under the GPSA.

On 12 May 2016 the Respondents submitted to the Tribunals an
injunction of the same date by the High Court Division of the
Supreme Court, directing the Respondents and the Government of
Bangladesh “not to give any kind of benefit’ and “not to make any
kind of payment’ to the Claimant and its mother company (as
indicated above, this is referred to as the 2016 Injunction).

19

59.

60.

On 19 May 2016 the Claimant requested Provisional Measures in
relation to this injunction

In the present decision the Tribunals will address the Claimant’s
request of 15 December 2015, concerning an award on the
Payment Claim and those aspects of subsequent applications
which have a bearing on the requested decision. Other pending
issues will be addressed by Procedural Order No 13, which the
Tribunals intend to issue immediately following the present
decision.

20

4.

THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS

The Claimant’s requests

6l.

62.

63.

In its application of 15 December 2015, the Claimant requested
“that the Tribunals issue an award in the Payment Claim ordering
Petrobangla unconditionally to make payment to Niko of the
amounts the Tribunals found to be due and owed”’.” It also
requested that “the Tribunals fix a prompt schedule for costs
submissions in order to place the Tribunals in a position to render a
final and unconditional award the Payment Claim as soon as
possible” .8

With respect to the Respondents’ applications of 25 March 2016
the Claimant concluded that “Petrobangla’s application is frivolous
and should be summarily be rejected’.

In its application of 19 May 2016 the Claimant requested the
Tribunals to order provisional measures:

(a) Declaring that these Tribunals have exclusive jurisdiction
over the questions of: (i) the validity of the JVA and GPSA as
concerns Niko, BAPEX and Petrobangla, and _ their
successors, predecessors, assignors and assignees; (ii)
whether Petrobangla must pay Niko for gas delivered under
the GPSA; and (iii) whether Niko is liable to BAPEX or any of
its successors, predecessors, assignors and assignees and
if so, what compensation is due;

(b) Ordering BAPEX and Petrobangla to consent to the
removal of the interim injunction in Writ Petition No. 5673
before the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, High Court
Division, and to take all measures to request and support
the removal or discontinuance of such interim injunction and
dismissal of the Writ Petition.

The Respondents’ requests

64.

Concerning the Claimant’s application of 15 December 2015, the
Respondents requested on 6 January 2016 that “the Tribunals
reject Claimant’s application and maintain the [Second Decision] on
the Payment Claim in place while the petition for review of the

7 Application of 15 December 2015, p. 1.
* Ibid. p. 4.

21

65.

66.

67.

injunction from the Supreme Court of Bangladesh is under
consideration’.

In their application of 25 March 2016 the Respondents requested
on behalf of Petrobangla that

the Tribunal/s] find that the GPSA was procured by
corruption and is thus voidable. It further informs the
Tribunal of its decision to rescind the GPSA.

[-.-]

the Tribunal/s] vacate [their] Decision on the Payment Claim
of 11 September 2014 as well as [their] Decision on
Implementation of that prior decision, and enter an award
dismissing Niko’s claims. Petrobangla further requests that
the Tribunal order Niko to bear all the costs of these
proceedings and reimburse Petrobangla for all its legal fees
and expenses.

 

In their submission of 29 April 2016 the Respondents submitted

Niko is not entitled to any payment or credit for past
performance. As a result of Niko’s corruption, the Tribunal
should reject all of Niko’s claims and any attempt by Niko to
have the Tribunal[s] give it a benefit for its corrupt acts. In
addition, in accordance with the above, the Respondents
wold like to modify their requests to the Tribunal/sj.
Respondents first ask that the Tribunal/s] recognise that the
JVA and GPSA are void under Bangladesh law and without
legal effect. In the alternative, Respondents maintain their
request to void the agreements.

In its communication of 12 May 2016, transmitting the 2016
Injunction, the Respondents provided information about the
injunction but did not make any requests.

22

5.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

THE CLAIMANT’S REQUEST FOR AN AWARD CONCERNING
THE PAYMENT CLAIM

The Claimant relies on item (v) of the Second Decision on the
Payment Claim and argues that difficulties have occurred which
prevent the operation of the Escrow Account as intended by that
decision and now requires an award ordering Petrobangla
unconditionally to make payment to Niko of the amounts the
Tribunals found to be due and owed.

5.1 The difficulties invoked by the Claimant

The difficulties on which the Claimant relies consist in the refusal
of Petrobangla and BAPEX to sign the Escrow Agreement thus
preventing the Escrow Account from being opened.?

The arrangements for the Escrow Account have been prepared and
the required documents have been executed by the Claimant. The
Respondents examined these documents and made some
observations. These observations were taken into account in the
finalisation of the documentation. No further objections were
raised by the Respondents.

The Tribunals therefore have approved the documentation at the
November 2015 Hearing.

The Respondents explained that, following this approval, they
“provided all of the information necessary to complete the Escrow
Agreement’.!°. On the basis of this information the Escrow
Agreement was completed and signed by the Claimant.

The Tribunals conclude that, given the Parties’ complete
agreement on its text, the Escrow Agreement could have been
executed by both Parties, thus enabling the opening of the Escrow
Account and Petrobangla’s payment into the account.

By 15 December 2015 the Escrow Agreement had not been
executed by the Respondents and there is no information that,
since then, over five months later, any change occurred in this
situation.

The Tribunals conclude that, indeed, difficulties did occur,
preventing the Escrow Account to operate. The Claimant,

° Application of 15 December 2015, p. 2.
° Letter of 10 December 2015.

23

76.

77.

78.

79.

therefore, is justified in addressing the Tribunals, as envisaged in
the Second Decision on the Payment Claim.

5.2 The Respondents’ defence: the 2005 Injunction

In their letter of 10 December 2015, the Respondents explained
that they were advised by their Bangladesh counsel “that execution
of the Escrow Agreement may be determined by the Supreme Court
to be a violation” of the 2005 Injunction. They stated that
Petrobangla sought a modification of the Injunction by a petition,
dated 10 December 2015. The application was attached.

In the First Decision on the Payment Claim, the Tribunals
considered the history of the 2005 Injunction and its relevance for
the present ICSID arbitration. They stated in particular;

... Petrobangla and BAPEX, exercising rights and powers of
the Government as described in the Preamble of the JVA and
referred to in the GPSA, have agreed in the GPSA to submit
all disputes with Niko to ICSID arbitration. |...]

286 The jurisdiction of the present Tribunal [recte:
Tribunals] is exclusive with respect to the merits of the
disputes validly brought before it. Since the Parties have not
availed themselves of the possibility afforded under Rule 39
(6) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules to request provisional
measures from judicial or other authorities, the Tribunal’s
exclusive jurisdiction also extends to provisional measures.

287. By virtue of its ratification, the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh and all of its organs, including the courts, are
bound by the ICSID Convention and must give effect to
awards rendered in ICSID arbitration.

It follows from the exclusive jurisdiction of these Tribunals, as
recalled in the First Decision on the Payment Claim, that an
injunction by a court in Bangladesh may not be invoked as
justification for a failure to comply with a decision from these
Tribunals.

When the issue of the 2005 Injunction was raised by the
Respondents on 23 September 2015 and the Claimant requested
a ruling from the Tribunals holding that the Petrobangla was
obligated to make payment into the Escrow Account, the Tribunals
confirmed by their letter of 10 October 2015 that “payment is to be
made by Petrobangla immediately upon establishment of the
Escrow Account’.

24

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

The Tribunals conclude that there is no justification for the
Respondents’ failure to execute the Escrow Agreement and for
Petrobangla to make payment into the Escrow Account.

The Tribunals note in passing that throughout the period following
the First Decision on the Payment Claim of 11 September 2014
until 10 December 2015 the Respondents do not seem to have
taken any steps that would have allowed the courts in Bangladesh
to comply with the international obligations of the State.

In the First Decision the Tribunals also had noted that the 2005
Injunction had been issued before the commencement of these
ICSID arbitrations and that, with the commencement of these
proceedings, a new situation had arisen with respect to the
disputes now subject to ICSID arbitration. They added that they
had no reason to believe that the courts of Bangladesh, including
the High Court Division having issued the 2005 Injunction, would
disregard the international obligations assumed by Bangladesh
when adhering to the ICSID Convention.

The First Decision on the Payment Claim was issued on 11
September 2014. It would therefore have been in the interest of the
Respondents to bring this decision to the attention of the Court in
Bangladesh. The Respondents failed, however, to bring the
decision to the attention to the court having issued the 2005
Injunction for over a year until, by the petition of 10 December
2015, Petrobangla informed the court of the ICSID proceedings and
sought a modification. As the Respondents explained later, a
*petition for revision of the injunction should be resolved in
approximately three months” .1!

Eventually, the Respondents addressed the court in Bangladesh
on 10 December 2015, making an application for a modification of
the 2005 Injunction; but by now, more than five months have
elapsed without any indication whether any modification of the
2005 Injunction will be issued.

For the avoidance of doubt the Tribunals add that the
Respondents’ failure to apply in timely fashion to the court in
Bangladesh and the absence of a modification of the 2015
Injunction are not decisive matters with regard to whether the
Respondents have complied with the decisions of the present
Tribunals. As stated above, the Respondents have, without
justification, failed to execute the Escrow Agreement and make
payment into the Escrow Account. They are responsible for the

'! Respondents’ letter of 6 January 2016, confirmed by a letter from the Respondents’ counsel in the
court proceedings of the same date.

25

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

difficulties which arose, preventing the operation of the Escrow
Account as intended.

5.3 The new decision

In the circumstances, the Tribunals now must make, further to
item (v) of the operative part of the Second Decision on the Payment
Claim, “a ruling as required”.

When determining the ruling that now must be made, the
Tribunals start from their First Decisions on the Payment Claim in
which they determined the amounts owed by Petrobangla to Niko
and the Second Decision on the Payment Claim in which they
concluded “that there is no justification for Petrobangla to further
withhold the funds owed to Niko”. !2

When making the Second Decision, the Tribunals considered a
proposal by the Claimant “to use the funds owed by Petrobangla for
operations in the territory of Bangladesh at large, rather than for
operations limited to Chattak and Feni’.!3 They also considered
arrangements which “preserve the funds owed to Niko for possible
payments in the event Niko were found liable for damage caused by
the blow-outs and the quantum was determined”. 14

In view of these considerations the Tribunals decided in the Second
Decision on the Payment Claim that payment by Petrobangla be
made into an escrow account. Thereby they provided for a
modality for the payment by Petrobangla by which the right of Niko
to receive the payment was restricted by the conditions of the
Escrow Account. As Niko pointed out in its request of 15 December
2016, the escrow arrangement “benefits the Respondents alone”.

These escrow arrangements have been frustrated by the
Respondents and by no fault of the Claimant. The objectives
considered by the Tribunals when they ordered payment into an
Escrow Account cannot be achieved in the manner contemplated.
No other arrangement has been proposed which would satisfy
these objectives.

The ruling which is now required must give effect to the principles
of the First and Second Decision and adapt the modalities to the
situation that has now arisen. Since the Parties were unable to
agree on these modalities and since the creation of an Escrow

2 Paragraph 79.
3 Paragraph 80.
4 Paragraph 81.

26

92.

Account has been frustrated by the Respondents, the Tribunals
see no other manner of implementing these decisions but by
requiring Petrobangla to make direct payment to Niko. It is thus
neither possible nor justified to maintain the restriction imposed
on the use of the funds by Niko. Unrestricted payment to Niko
must thus be ordered.

At the present state this decision cannot be made in the form of an
award since the proceedings in the two arbitrations have not been
completed. The Tribunals point out, however, that their decisions,
whether in the form of an award or otherwise, must be complied
with in good faith by the Parties.

27

6.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

THE RESPONDENTS’ CORRUPTION CLAIM

The Tribunals were about to issue the Third Decision on the
Payment Claim as just described, when they received the
Respondents’ submissions of 25 March 2016. In these
submissions, as modified in the submissions of 29 April 2016, the
Respondents not only seek avoidance of the JVA and the GPSA but
also request that the Tribunals vacate the two decisions on the
Payment Claim (the Corruption Claim). The Claimant requests
that these applications be rejected.

Given the gravity of the accusations made by the Respondents, the
Tribunals have decided to examine, by their own initiative, the
allegations of corruption and to give priority to this examination.
In Procedural Order No 13 that will be issued today, the Tribunals
give initial directions concerning this examination.

Neither party has requested that, pending this examination, the
Respondents’ payment obligation be suspended. Since they will
direct in Procedural Order No 13 that the proceedings on the
Compensation Declaration be suspended, the Tribunals have
examined whether a similar effect should be granted with respect
to the Payment Claim.

In the Decision on Jurisdiction the Tribunals found that there is
no illegality in the content of the Agreements or in their
performance. The Respondents do not allege now that the content
or performance of the GPSA were illegal. There is no indication in
the material presented now which would suggest any such
illegality.

There is, therefore, no risk that, by requiring Petrobangla to make
immediate payment as set out in this decision, the Respondents
would be required to perform any illegal act.

Rather the question to be considered here is whether the possibility
of a finding by the Tribunals that corruption did occur and that
the Respondents’ claims are justified requires the Tribunals to
suspend the Respondents’ payment obligation and the present
Third Decision on the Payment Claim until the Corruption Claim
has been decided.

On the one hand, the gas for which the Claimant seeks payment
has been delivered during the period from November 2004 to
December 2006 and still has not been paid for. The Tribunals have
decided that the amounts claimed for these deliveries are owed by
Petrobangla and that there is no justification for Petrobangla to
further withhold the payment. From this perspective there is no

28

99.

100.

101.

'S Submis:

justification for now suspending the performance of this payment
obligation.

On the other hand the acts of corruption concern the conclusion
of the JVA and the GPSA in 2003 and 2006, respectively. The
Tribunals dealt with those aspects which had been raised in the
initial phase of the arbitration proceedings in their Decision on
Jurisdiction of 19 August 2013. It is difficult to understand why
the Respondents raise their claim only now. The Claimant argues
that the facts now relied on by the Respondents “were either
presented to the Tribunals at the jurisdictional phase or could have
been so presented if the Respondents had deemed it desirable.” !5

As to the merits of the Corruption Claim and the consequences of
the alleged corruption, it is part of the Respondents’ claim that, as
a consequence of its acts of corruption and the avoidance of the
Agreements, the Claimant may not benefit from the agreements
and has no contractual claims. They accept, however, that the
Claimant may be entitled to payment on other grounds. In their
submission of 29 April 2016 the Respondents explained:

If, as Respondents maintain, the agreements are void, any
claim for payment for gas delivered under the GPSA or credit
for investment made under the JVA would be limited to
restitution for ‘unjust enrichment’. The limitation to unjust
enrichment is the result under the Bangladesh Contract Act
as well as long-standing English jurisprudence. It is
axiomatic that a party to a void contract can make no claims
pursuant to that contract, and Niko is entitled to no relief
under the GPSA or the JVA. Niko can only make a claim for
the limited relief of restitution under sections 64 and 65 of
the Bangladeshi" Contract Act.!©

When discussing how to establish the value by which Petrobangla’s
enrichment is determined, the Respondents refer to the price
which Petrobangla agreed to pay under the GPSA, as compared to
the prices paid by Petrobangla to other suppliers. The
Respondents produced an expert valuation in support of their
claim for the loss of gas due to the blow-outs. This valuation
determined that during the period from 2004 and 2015
Petrobangla paid to other suppliers of gas between USD 2.31 USD
2.92 per Mcf; the average price over this period is USD 2.69 per
Mcf;!7 the price agreed under the GPSA was USD 1.75 per Mcf.

 

sion of 29 April 2016, p. 2.

'6 Submission of 29 April 2016, p. 9.
"7 Report of Dr Paul R. Carpenter, Brattle Group (24 March 2016) Table 9 at p. 22.

29

102. The Respondents argue that their enrichment should be
determined not by reference to the price which they agreed to pay
to other suppliers but to the price agreed under the GPSA. They
explain:

The best indication of what ‘a reasonable person in
[Petrobangla’s] position would have paid for’ Feni gas is the
price negotiated between Petrobangla and the Feni joint
venture partners. Where parties have agreed in an arm’s
length transaction on a price, that is the best measure of the
market price for the good, particularly where, as here, none
of the conditions of the sale would change between the
negotiated price and the hypothetical price.!®

103.The Tribunals are aware that, as the Respondents rightly point
out,!9 at this stage the Claimant has not made any claim for
enrichment; no decision in this respect is required of the Tribunals
at this stage. The Tribunals conclude, however, from the
Respondents’ explanations about possible claims for enrichment
that the Respondents will suffer no loss if they now make payment
for the gas on the basis of the agreed contract price and later
prevail with their Corruption Claim. As they themselves have
explained, they will then have to compensate Niko for their
enrichment, valued on the basis of the contract price.

104. Finally, the Tribunals observe that they had previously sought to
put in place, by their First Decision on the Payment Claim, an
interim arrangement. The parties failed to agree on the modalities.
The interim arrangements ordered by the Tribunals in the Second
Decision on the Payment Claim was frustrated by the
Respondents. There is no indication that further attempts in
setting up an interim arrangement will be more successful.

105. The Tribunals conclude that there is no justification for deferring
their Third Decision on the Payment Claim or to suspend its effect
until the Corruption Claim has been decided. Petrobangla must
pay the outstanding amounts forthwith.

'8 Submission of 29 April 2016, p. 12.
© Submission of 29 April 2016, p. 1.

 

30

7.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111

THE 2016 INJUNCTION

On 12 May 2016 the Respondents informed the Tribunals of
another injunction issued by a court in Bangladesh concerning,
inter alia, payments to be made under the GPSA (as indicated
above, this is referred to as the 2016 Injunction).

The Tribunals have explained above that they have exclusive
jurisdiction concerning the claims for payment under the GPSA,
including interim measures. The injunction is therefore of no effect
on the Respondents’ payment obligation, as confirmed in the
present decision. The State of Bangladesh, including its courts, is
bound by its commitment under the ICSID Convention.

If the Respondents believe that this new injunction causes
difficulties, it is for them to overcome these difficulties.

Concerning the Claimant’s request for interim measures, the
Tribunals have made it clear and confirm, once again, that their
jurisdiction is exclusive and that the courts of Bangladesh must
respect this exclusive jurisdiction. It is for the Respondents to deal
with possible obstacles to their performance under the GPSA.

The Claimant’s request therefore would seem to be moot: there is
no need for the Tribunals to order the Respondents to take any
steps to remove or discontinue an injunction which is of no effect
on their obligation to comply with decisions of these Tribunals.

.In the forthcoming Procedural Order the Tribunals, nevertheless,

will invite comments from the Respondents and request specific
information from them and they will invite the Claimant to examine
whether it wishes to amend its Request in light of this Decision
and the Procedural Order.

31

8. THE TRIBUNALS’ DECISION

110. Based on the arguments and evidence before it and in view of the
considerations set out above, the Arbitral Tribunals now make the
following decision:

(1) Petrobangla shall pay to Niko forthwith and free of any
restrictions USD 25,312,747 and BDT 139,988,337, plus
interest (a) in the amounts of USD 5,932,833 and BDT
49,849,961 and (b) as from 12 September 2014 at the rate
of six month LIBOR +2% for the U.S. Dollar amounts and
at 5% for the amounts in BDT, compounded annually;

(2) This payment must be made immediately and is not subject
to any contrary orders from the Courts in Bangladesh;

(3) In view of the difficulties which have occurred in the past
with respect to the payment of the amount owed to the
Claimant, the Tribunals remain seized of the matter until
final settlement of this payment.

[Signed] [Signed]
Professor Campbell McLachlan QC Professor Jan Paulsson
Arbitrator Arbitrator
[Signed]

Mr Michael E. Schneider
President

32

