Revised Version

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceedings between

NIKO RESOURCES (BANGLADESH) LTD.
(Claimant)

and
BANGLADESH PETROLEUM EXPLORATION & PRODUCTION COMPANY LIMITED
(“BAPEX”)

(Second Respondent)

BANGLADESH OIL GAS AND MINERAL CORPORATION (“PETROBANGLA”)
(Third Respondent)

(jointly referred to as Respondents)
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/11

and
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/18

 

DECISION ON IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
DECISION ON THE PAYMENT CLAIM

 

Members of the Tribunal
Mr Michael E. Schneider, President
Professor Campbell McLachlan QC
Professor Jan Paulsson

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms Frauke Nitschke

Date of Decision: September 14, 2015

8.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

GLOSSARY
INTRODUCTION 5
THE PROCEDURAL HISTORY .....

2.1 The Tribunals’ Decision on the Payment Claim

 

 

 

2.2 Developments since the Tribunals’ Decision on the Payment Claim
THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS AND THE ISSUES TO BE DECIDED....
THE PAYMENT MODALITIES. 20

 

 

4.1 The measures requested by the Claimant.

 

 

4.2 The Respondents’ Observations and Request........ 22
43 The admissibility of the measures requested by the Claimant + 23
44 The content of the measures implementing the September 2014 Decision ......... 25

 

QUANTIFICATION OF PRE-DECISION INTEREST.
THE POST-DECISION INTEREST RATE FOR THE U.S. DOLLAR DEBT
AND THE REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION .....
COMPOUNDING 35

7A Admissibility of compound interest in ICSID arbitration...

 

 

 

7.2 The circumstances justifying compound interest in the present case

 

 

73 The interval or rest 47
COSTS 51
DECISION. 52

 

GLOSSARY

Bangladesh Bank
BAPEX

BDT
BELA Proceedings

Centre or ICSID

Chattak field

Claimant’s
Clarification

Claimant’s Request

Compensation
Claims

Compensation
Declaration

Convention or ICSID
Convention

Crore

Decision or Decision
on the Payment
Claim

Feni field

Central Bank of Bangladesh

Bangladesh Petroleum Exploration &
Production Company Limited, the Second
Respondent

Bangladeshi taka

Proceedings brought by the Bangladesh
Environmental Lawyers Association (BELA)
and others in the Supreme Court of
Bangladesh, High Court Division against the
Government of Bangladesh, Petrobangla,
BAPEX, Niko and others

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

One of the gas fields to which the JVA relates

Submission of 5 December 2014, responding
to the Tribunals’ invitation in Procedural Order
No 9.

Request of 25 November 2014 for Provisional
Measures concerning the Decision on the
Payment Claim

Claims for compensation brought by the First
and Third Respondents in the Court of District
Judge, Dhaka, against the Claimant and
others for damages alleged to arise from the
blowout of 2 wells in the Chattak field (subject
matter of ICSID Case No. ARB/ 10/11)

The declaration requested by the Claimant
concerning the Compensation Claims

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States

10 million in the South Asian numbering
glossary

The Tribunals’ Decision of 11 September 2014
concerning the Claimant’s Payment Claim

One of the gas fields to which the JVA relates

GOB or Government

GPSA

Joint Venture
Partners

JVA
Ministry

Money Suit

Niko Canada

Niko, Niko Bangla-
desh or NRBL

Payment Claim

Petrobangla

Respondents’
Observations

Respondents’
Request

Revised Submission
Tk
Tribunals

The Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, the First Respondent until the
Decision on Jurisdiction

Gas Purchase and Sale Agreement of
27 December 2006 between Petrobangla and
the Joint Venture Partners BAPEX and Niko

BAPEX and Niko

Joint Venture Agreement between BAPEX and
Niko, dated 16 October 2003

Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral
Resources, unless otherwise specified
Proceedings brought by Bangladesh and
Petrobangla in the Court of the District Judge
in Dhaka against Niko and others (see Decision
on Jurisdiction, paragraph 102)

Niko Resources Ltd., the Canadian parent
company of the Claimant

Niko Resources (Bangladesh) Ltd., the
Claimant

Claims to payment under the GPSA for gas
delivered (subject matter of ARB/ 10/18)

Bangladesh Oil Gas and Mineral Corporation,
the Third Respondent

Submission of 25 June 2015

Submission of 6 August 2015 concerning the
Implementation of the Decision on the
Payment Claim

The Claimant’s submission of 29 April 2014
Bangladeshi taka (also BDT)

Collectively, the two Arbitral Tribunals
constituted in ICSID Case No. ARB/10/11 and
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/18

INTRODUCTION

These two arbitrations concern an investment project that
successfully commenced the development of a marginal and
previously abandoned gas field (the Feni Field), leading to the
production and sale of important quantities of gas. It then ran
into two difficulties: during attempts to develop another field, the
Chattak Field, two blow-outs occurred, causing damage to the
well and the environment as to the responsibility for which there
is a dispute (which has given rise in these arbitrations to the
Claim for a so-called Compensation Declaration by which in
effect the Claimant seeks to establish its non-liability); and
Petrobangla, the buyer of the gas from the Feni Field, failed to
make payment under the Gas Purchase and Sales Agreement
(GPSA).

In these arbitrations, the Claimant seeks, in addition to the
Compensation Declaration, payment of the sums due under the
GPSA (the Payment Claim). In a decision of 11 September 2014
the Tribunals confirmed Petrobangla’s payment obligation (the
Decision or the Decision on the Payment Claim).

However, the Tribunals had noted that, despite the difficulties
that had arisen in the Parties’ relations, neither the Joint Venture
Agreement between the Claimant and BAPEX (the JVA) nor the
GPSA between the Claimant and Petrobangla were terminated. In
a 2009 letter, Niko had stated that the funds owed to it under the
GPSA would be reinvested into the Joint Venture “for drilling of
more wells at Feni Gas Field and the development of a commercial
gas reserve at Chattak Gas Field”.! At the 2014 hearing on the
Payment Claim, the Claimant proposed to use the funds owed by
Petrobangla in the territory of Bangladesh? and confirmed this
position as one of the alternatives in its submissions of 29 April
2014 (Revised Submissions). Moreover, the Claimant made the
commitment not to remove assets from Bangladesh.

' Exhibit R-24, Letter of Niko to State Minister, Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources, at

1, paragraph 1, (10 February 2009); referred to in WS II Amit Goyal (paragraph 27) and Request
paragraph 9.
? Confirmed by the Claimant in the Request, paragraph 10, with references to the Transcript.

3 Decision, paragraph 283(c).

4. Noting the possibility of using the funds owed by Petrobangla in
a manner that would have assisted the Parties in resuming their
cooperation and the need for gas in Bangladesh emphasised by
both sides, the Tribunals were of the view that the Parties should
be afforded an opportunity of determining the most effective use
of the funds by agreement among themselves.

5. In these circumstances, the Tribunals, rather than simply
ordering payment of the funds, found it desirable to afford to the
Parties the opportunity of employing the funds for the purposes
of the project or otherwise in Bangladesh. They invited the Parties
to seek an amicable settlement with respect to the modalities for
implementing the Tribunal’s decision on the Payment Claim.

6. In order to assist the Parties in their attempts to reach such an
amicable settlement, the Tribunals identified “possible elements
of interim arrangements which the Parties may agree or, in the
absence of such agreement, the Tribunals may order’.*

7. The Parties informed the Tribunals that subsequent to the
Decision they had indeed conferred with a view to finding such a
solution. Regrettably, however, their efforts were not ultimately
successful. The letter dated 6 August 2015, which the Tribunals
now received from the Respondents, leaves little hope for an
agreement between the Parties as to the use of the funds:
Petrobangla states that it wishes to conserve the funds it owes to
the Claimant, giving no sign of an intention to seek an agreement
with the Claimant as to the employment of these funds.

8. The Tribunals therefore must now decide on the modalities for
implementing their Decision by directing how payment is to be
made and by addressing certain open issues with respect to
interest on the amounts owed by Petrobangla.

4 Decision, paragraph 283.

10.

11.

THE PROCEDURAL HISTORY

2.1

The Tribunals’ Decision on the Payment Claim

A detailed account of the procedural history in these two
arbitrations until the Tribunals’ Decision on the Payment Claim
was set forth in that decision, issued on 11 September 2014.

In the Decision on the Payment Claim, the Tribunals held that:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Petrobangla owes Niko USD 25°312’747 plus BDT
139°988’337 as per Niko’s invoices for gas delivered from
November 2004 to April 2010;

Petrobangla must pay simple interest on Niko’s invoices at
the rate of six month LIBOR +2% for the US Dollar amounts
and at 5% for the amounts in BDT; interest is due on the
amount of each invoice as from 45 days after delivery of the
invoice but not before 14 May 2007 and until it is placed at
Niko’s unrestricted disposition;

The claim for compound interest on the amount awarded
under above item (1) and (2) is reserved;

The entitlement of BAPEX to payments under the GPSA is
not affected by the present decision;

The Parties are invited to seek an amicable settlement with
respect to the modalities for implementing the [11 September
2014] decision and to report by no later than 30 September
2014;

Failing amicable settlement, any Party may seize the
Tribunals for recommendations on provisional measures or
a final decision concerning the outstanding amounts;

The decision on costs of the proceedings concerning the
Payment Claim is reserved.

What follows summarises the procedural steps in relation to the
Payment Claim which occurred following the Decision.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

2.2 Developments since the Tribunals’ Decision on the
Payment Claim

On 30 September 2014, Petrobangla wrote to the Tribunals to
report that the Parties were in ongoing discussions regarding the
modalities for implementing the Decision on the Payment Claim,
and that the Parties planned to meet in October 2014 for further
discussions on this subject.

On 30 October 2014, the Tribunals invited the Parties to provide
an update on the status of their discussions regarding the
modalities for implementing the Decision on the Payment Claim.
By email of 4 November 2014, the Claimant indicated that the
Parties had not yet reached an agreement, but that they
continued to explore possible amicable means for resolving the
dispute. The Claimant also indicated its agreement that the
Parties would provide an update to the Tribunal by 9 November
2014.

On 12 November 2014, Petrobangla wrote to the Tribunals and
confirmed that the Parties’ discussions had not resulted in an
agreement.

On 25 November 2014, the Claimant filed a Request for
Provisional Measures concerning the Decision on the Payment
Claim (Claimant’s Request). The Claimant requested that “the
Tribunals order provisional measures that provisionally give
effect to the Decision on the Payment Claim pending the
Tribunals’ decision in the Compensation Declaration.”
(Claimant’s Request, 724.) Together with the Request, the
Claimant enclosed a calculation of interest through the date of
the Decision on the Payment Claim, 11 September 2014,
pursuant to paragraph 275 of the Decision. At the same time, the
Claimant inquired how the Tribunals wished the Parties to
address the question of costs and post-award interest.
(Claimant’s Request, 22.)

On 1 December 2014, the Tribunals issued Procedural Order No
9, which invited the Claimant to submit, by 5 December 2014,
clarifications to its Request for Provisional Measures and to
specify its request for post-award interest. The Tribunals invited
Petrobangla to provide a response to the Claimant’s Request,
including matters addressed in the 5S December 2014

8

submission, by 18 December 2014. In particular the Tribunal
invited Petrobangla to address the following issues:

(a) the question whether the Request should be granted as
a matter of principle;

(b) the specific measures requested by the Claimant; and, if
Petrobangla does not agree with the measures requested
by the Claimant,

(c) identify any other measures which Petrobangla would
find appropriate, reserving, if it wishes to do so, any
objections in principle;

(d) the interest calculation attached to the Request; if it sees
the need for any corrections, Petrobangla must provide a
corrected calculation by the same date; and

(e) present its position on the Claimant’s request for post-
award compound interest.

17. In accordance with Procedural Order No 9, on 5 December 2014
the Claimant submitted clarifications to its request of 25
November 2014 (Claimant’s Clarification). The Claimant
confirmed that “the relief sought concerns the Tribunal’s decision
on the merits of the dispute in the Payment Claim”.5 The Claimant
also specified its request for post-award interest compounded
monthly at the rate of 5 per cent per year.

18. On 11 December 2014, Petrobangla notified the Tribunals that
Mr David Branson of Washington, D.C. had joined the team of
legal representatives for the Respondents.

19. On 17 December 2014, the Respondents informed the Tribunals
that Messrs Tawfique Nawaz, Imtiaz Farooq, and David Branson
were no longer part of the legal team representing the
Respondents, and that Mr Luis Gonzalez Garcia and Ms Alison
Macdonald would continue to represent the Respondents in these
arbitrations.

5 Claimant’s Clarification, paragraph 2.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

By letter of 19 December 2014, Petrobangla advised the Tribunals
that the Parties were in discussions regarding a possible
extension of the deadline for Petrobangla’s response to the
Claimant’s Request, which was originally due by 18 December
2014. On the same day, the Claimant confirmed the Parties’
agreement to discuss an extension. The Tribunals subsequently
confirmed that they had no objections to the approach proposed.
by the Parties.

On 26 December 2014, Petrobangla notified the Tribunals of the
Parties’ agreement to extend the deadline for Petrobangla’s
response until 5 February 2015. The Claimant confirmed this
agreement by email of the same date.

On 2 February 2015, Petrobangla informed the Tribunals of an
agreement reached by the Parties to further extend the deadline
for Petrobangla’s response until 5 May 2015. On 3 February
2015, the Claimant confirmed the Parties’ agreement.

Petrobangla did not file its submission by the extended deadline
of 5 May 2015. On 6 May 2015, Petrobangla informed the
Tribunal that the Parties were in active negotiation for a fourth
extension of the deadline for Petrobangla’s response to the
Claimant’s Request and that it would update the Tribunals
regarding the outcome of the Parties’ discussions. On the same
day, the Claimant confirmed the status of the Parties’ discussions
as described by Petrobangla. The Tribunals informed the Parties
that they had no objection to the extension of the deadline for
Petrobangla’s response until a date to be specified by the Parties
at a later time.

On 13 May 2015, Petrobangla notified the Tribunals of the
Parties’ agreement to extend the deadline for Petrobangla’s
response to the Claimant’s Request until 19 May 2015. On the
same day, the Claimant confirmed the Parties’ agreement
regarding the extended deadline.

Petrobangla failed to submit its response to the Claimant’s
Request by the extended deadline of 19 May 2015. On 27 May
2015, the Claimant, noting that the deadline of 19 May 2015 for
Petrobangla to submit its response had passed, requested that
the Tribunals decide on the Claimant’s Request in accordance
with ICSID Arbitration Rule 26.

10

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

On 28 May 2015, Petrobangla and BAPEX informed the Tribunals
that Mr Luis Gonzalez Garcia and Ms Alison Macdonald no longer
represented the Respondents and that they would inform the
Tribunals of their new legal representatives in due course.

Having considered the circumstances of the Respondents’ change
in legal representatives, on 30 May 2015, the Tribunals issued
Procedural Order No 10, granting Petrobangla a final extension
to submit its response to the Claimant’s Request, as reiterated on
27 May 2015, by 11 June 2015. The Tribunals noted that they
would rule on the Claimant’s Request, including the Claimant’s
Clarification of 5 December 2014, even in the absence of a
response from Petrobangla.

On 8 June 2015, Petrobangla, writing on behalf of both
Respondents, advised the Tribunals that Petrobangla and BAPEX
were in the process of appointing Watson Farley & Williams
(Thailand), to serve as the Respondents’ legal representatives in
these proceedings. On 10 June 2015, the Secretary of
Petrobangla confirmed that Watson Farley & Williams (Thailand)
would serve as the Respondents’ legal representatives for the 11
June 2015 filing.

On 11 June 2015, Petrobangla notified the Tribunals that due to
its recent appointment of new legal representatives, Petrobangla
was in ongoing discussions with the Claimant regarding a further
extension of the deadline to submit its response to the Claimant’s
Request and that it would write to the Tribunals by 15 June 2015.

On 15 June 2015, Petrobangla informed the Tribunals that the
Parties were unable to agree on an extension and requested an
extension from the Tribunals.

On 16 June 2015, writing on behalf of both Respondents,
Petrobangla informed the Tribunals of appointment of Watson
Farley & Williams (Thailand) as counsel for the Respondents in
these proceedings.

Further to an invitation by the Tribunals, the Claimant provided
comments to Petrobangla’s 15 June 2015 request for a further
extension by letter of 19 June 2015. The Claimant requested that
the Tribunals deny Petrobangla’s request.

11

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

On 23 June 2015, the Tribunals informed the Parties of their
decision to deny Petrobangla’s request for a further extension of
the deadline to file its response to the Claimant’s Request. The
Tribunals noted that Petrobangla had had more than six months
to respond to the Claimant’s Request before the resignation of its
previous legal representatives, and given the Tribunals’
responsibility to conduct the proceedings in a manner that is fair
to both sides and proceed with reasonable dispatch, the
Tribunals concluded that there was no justification for a further
extension.

On 25 June 2015, the Respondents filed an unsolicited letter with
the Tribunals containing observations on the question whether
the Claimant’s “Request should be granted as a matter of
principle” and on the request for “post-award compound interest”
(Respondents’ Observations).

Petrobangla wrote on 9 July 2015 informing the Tribunals that
Foley Hoag LLP had been appointed to represent both
Petrobangla and BAPEX in the arbitrations and that partners
Paul S. Reichler and Derek C. Smith were authorised to
communicate on their behalf with ICISID; all previous
authorisations for other external counsel were withdrawn. In the
letter Petrobangla provided details about the representation
about by its previous legal counsel, explaining that it had not
been properly informed by its previous counsel about details of
the proceedings. It stated in particular: “We were not initially
aware that essentially no case had been presented to the
Tribunals on our behalf regarding the Compensation Declaration
Claim.”

The newly appointed counsel wrote on the same day announcing
the appointment of new experts and requesting an extension of
time for the submission concerning the Compensation
Declaration. After further correspondence, the matter was dealt
with by the Tribunals in Procedural Order No 11 of 19 August
2015.

On 6 August 2015 the Respondents requested that the Tribunals
decide that the amounts outstanding under the Decision on the
Payment Claim be payable only after “all issues regarding Niko’s
liability are resolved” (Respondents’ Request).

12

38. The Tribunals deliberated about all issues concerning the
Claimant’s Request as well as the Respondents’ Request. They
reached unanimously the present decision.

13

39.

40.

THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS AND THE ISSUES TO BE
DECIDED

In its Request of 25 November 2014 and its Observations of 5
December 2014, the Claimant

(i) sought measures to give effect to the Tribunals’ Decision by
referring to different alternative conclusions which had
been made in its Revised Submission of 29 April 2014; in
these conclusions the Claimant had set out several
alternatives for the manner in which the amounts owed by
Petrobangla should be paid.

The alternatives proposed by the Claimant were as follows:

In the alternative, Niko respectfully submits that the
Tribunals should issue an award in its favor and against
Petrobangla and BAPEX:

Alternative A
a) Declaring that Niko is entitled to bring and capable of
bringing a claim to that portion of the Invoices owed to Niko

on its own;

b

=

Finding that Petrobangla and Niko have agreed that
Petrobangla owes to Niko and should pay to Niko the total
amount owing to Niko under the Invoices, being
25,312,747.00 USD plus 139,988,337.00 BDT:

CG

2

Finding that this agreement reflects an amicable settlement
within the meaning of the BELA injunction of 17 November
2009;

d) Ordering Petrobangla to pay to Niko the total amount stated
above;

e

2

Ordering Petrobangla to pay interest on any payment
awarded under paragraph b above at a simple annual rate
of 5 percent through the date of the award;

f) Ordering post-award interest at an annual rate of 5 percent
compounded monthly until the award is paid in full;

Q

Awarding Niko costs in accordance with Article 61 of the
ICSID Convention; and

g

14

h) Awarding such other and further relief as the Tribunals
deem appropriate.

Alternative B

a) Declaring that Niko is entitled to bring and capable of
bringing a claim to that portion of the Invoices owed to Niko
on its own;

b) Declaring that Petrobangla owes to Niko the total amount
due under the Invoices, being 25,312,747.00 USD plus
139,988,337.00 BDT:

C

2

Declaring that Petrobangla shall pay interest on the amount
under paragraph b above at a simple annual rate of 5
percent through the date of the award;

d) Declaring that Petrobangla shall pay post-award interest at
an annual rate of 5 percent compounded monthly until the
amount in full is paid in accordance with paragraph e
below;

e

Ordering Petrobangla to pay the amounts stated under
paragraphs b, c and d to a bank designated by Niko, which
bank shall act as account holder and independent escrow
agent with respect to such funds pursuant to a standard
escrow account agreement of such bank with the following
characteristics:

i= Petrobangla and Niko shall appoint the bank as
escrow agent;

ii. The funds on account shall bear interest;

iii. The funds shall remain owned by Petrobangla until
disbursed;

iv. The funds shall be disbursed only to parties
unrelated to Niko and upon presentation by Niko of
(a) bank details for such a party; and (b) a
certification that the payee is not affiliated with Niko
by common ownership or control and that the
payment concerns operations or activities in the
territory of Bangladesh;

f) Ordering that, in the event that Petrobangla fails to make
the payment specified in paragraph e within 120 days of

15

g)

h)

the award, Petrobangla shall make payment to Niko
directly;

Awarding Niko costs in accordance with the Article 61 of the
ICSID Convention; and

Awarding such other and further relief as the Tribunals
deem appropriate.

Alternative C

a)

>)

CG

2

qd

e

2

Declaring that Niko is entitled to bring and capable of
bringing a claim to that portion of the Invoices owed to Niko
on its own;

Declaring that Petrobangla owes to Niko the total amount
due under the Invoices, being 25,312,747.00 USD plus
139,988,337.00 BDT:

Declaring that Petrobangla shall pay interest on the amount
under paragraph b above at a simple annual rate of 5
percent through the date of the award;

Declaring that Petrobangla shall pay post-award interest at
an annual rate of 5 percent compounded monthly until the
amount in full is paid in accordance with paragraph e
below;

Ordering Petrobangla to pay the amounts stated under
paragraphs b, c and d to the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes, which shall hold such
sums in an interest-bearing account pending the Tribunals’
award in the Compensation Declaration and disbursed by
the Centre in accordance with the directions of the
Tribunals, it being understood that such sums shall be paid
to Niko only if the Tribunals in the Compensation
Declaration find that Niko is not liable for the blowouts at
issue or only to the extent that Nikos’ liability is less than
the amount paid by Petrobangla pursuant to paragraphs b,
cand d above, and also understood that any moneys not
paid to Niko further to the preceding phrase shall be paid at
the direction of Petrobangla or BAPEX;

Ordering that, in the event that Petrobangla fails to make
the payment specified in paragraph e within 120 days of
the award, Petrobangla shall make payment to Niko
directly;

16

g) Awarding Niko costs in accordance with Article 61 of the
ICSID Convention; and

h) Awarding such other and further relief as the Tribunals
deem appropriate.

Alternative D

a) Declaring that Niko is entitled to bring and capable of
bringing a claim to that portion of the Invoices owed to Niko

on its own;

b) Finding that Petrobangla and Niko have agreed that
Petrobangla owes to Niko and should pay to Niko the total
amount owing to Niko under the Invoices, being
25,312,747.00 USD plus 139,988,337.00 BDT;

c) Finding that Petrobangla and Niko have expressed in the

GPSA their mutual agreement to arrive at an extrajudicial
settlement in the present circumstances and have appointed
these Tribunals to arrive at, and formally record, the Parties’
amicable settlement;

d) Ordering Petrobangla to pay to Niko the total amount stated
above;

e

2

Ordering Petrobangla to pay interest on any payment
awarded under paragraph b above at a simple annual rate
of 5 percent through the date of the award;

f) Ordering post-award interest at an annual rate of 5 percent
compounded monthly until the award is paid in full;

Q

Awarding Niko costs in accordance with Article 61 of the
ICSID Convention; and

g

hy

<

Awarding such other and further relief as the Tribunals
deem appropriate.

41. In addition to this request concerning the payment modalities, the
Claimant

(ii) quantified the interest that, by the time the Decision was

notified, had accumulated on the amount owed by
Petrobangla;

17

42.

43.

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

requested that, for the period after the notification of the
Decision, the outstanding amounts bear interest at 5% per
annum;

requested that interest be payable after the notification of
the Decision be compounded monthly; and

requested that the costs of the proceedings be assessed at
this point of the proceedings and that these costs be added
to the principal, bearing compound interest as part of the
total principal.®

The Respondents did not take any position on the Claimant’s
Request within the procedural time limits set by the Tribunals.
As stated above, the Respondents nevertheless submitted
Observations on 25 June 2015, concluding that

()

(ii)

(iii)

“«

. it is not appropriate to grant the provisional measure
requested by Niko. The most effective way to preserve the
status quo, which has existed since the commencement of
both ICSID arbitrations, is to refuse to grant Niko’s Request
and to reserve a final decision concerning the outstanding
amounts in the Payment Decision pending resolution of the
Compensation Declaration”;

the “post-award annual rate should match the pre-award
rates”; and

only simple interest should be awarded and, if compound
interest were admitted, compounding should not be
monthly but annually.

In their Request of 6 August 2015 the Respondents requested

(iv)

“...that the Tribunals decide that the outstanding amounts
under the Payment Claim Decision will be payable (to the
extent they remain outstanding) only after all issues
regarding Niko’s liability are resolved.”

6 Claimant's Clarification, paragraph 23.

18

44.

45.

46.

With regard to the Respondents’ Request, the Tribunals first
need to examine whether, in view of the timing of this submission,
the Respondents’ Request should be admitted.

On the substance to be addressed by the present Decision, the
Tribunals then need to examine the following issues:

(i) whether the relief requested by the Claimant concerning
the payment modalities is admissible;

(ii) whether in the circumstances it is appropriate to order any
of the measures requested by the Claimant or the
Respondents;

(iii) the interest rate applicable during the period after the
notification of the Decision;

(iv) whether compound interest is admissible as a matter of
principle and, if so, whether in the circumstances of the
Payment Claim it should be awarded and, if so, at what
interval;

(v) whether costs of the proceedings as claimed in the
Claimant’s Clarification should be assessed at this stage
and, if so, should be added to the principle, bearing
interest.

In the sections below, the Tribunals will set out in further detail
the positions of the Parties and the relief requested by them.

19

47.

48.

49.

50.

THE PAYMENT MODALITIES
4.1 The measures requested by the Claimant

In the Decision on the Payment Claim the Tribunals had
determined the amount which Petrobangla owed to Niko under
the GPSA and the related interest rate. During the hearing in
April 2014, preceding the September 2014 decision, the Parties
considered the relationship between the amount due by
Petrobangla to Niko and the Compensation Declaration sought by
Niko. In this context, the Tribunals noted a commitment by Niko
“that, at least for the time being, it will not remove assets from
Bangladesh” and an agreement by Niko that the amounts due
from Petrobangla “would be used by the Joint Venture to fund
further work as prescribed by the JVA”.’7 Niko’s Revised
Submissions of 29 April 2014, in some of the alternatives,
reflected aspects of this commitment and agreement.

In these circumstances, the Tribunals invited the Parties

to seek an amicable settlement with respect to the
modalities for implementing the present decision and to
report by no later than 30 September 2014;

Failing amicable settlement, any Party may seize the
Tribunal for recommendations on provisional measures or a
final decision concerning the outstanding amounts.®

In its Request the Claimant explained that, further to this
invitation by the Tribunals,

the Parties have attempted to reach an amicable
settlement with respect to the modalities for implementing
the Decision on the Payment Claim. °

The Claimant then announced to the Tribunals its conclusion
that

7 Decision, paragraph 283 (c).
* Decision, paragraph 292 (5) and (5).
° See Claimant’s Request, paragraph 5 and FN 3.

20

. the Parties have failed to reach an amicable settlement
with respect to the modalities for implementing the Decision
on the Payment Claim.1'°

51. In its Request the Claimant referred to the relief set out in its
revised submission of 29 April 2014, as they have been
reproduced above, and requested

... that the Tribunals adopt provisional measures ordering
Petrobangla to pay the outstanding amounts stated in
paragraph 292 (1) and (2) of the Decision on the Payment
Claim (amounts in principal and pre-award interest) along
the lines suggested in Alternatives A to D of Niko’s Revised
Submissions of 29 April 2014, and as the Tribunals deem

fit.
52. The Claimant added

... that, in deciding on provisional measures, the Tribunals
take into account the position that Niko has taken in this
arbitration on the use of funds in the period between the
issuance of provisional measures and the decision in the
Compensation Declaration.12

53. The Claimant recalled the following positions it had taken with
respect to the use of funds:

... to use the funds owed by Petrobangla for operations in
the territory of Bangladesh at large, rather than for
operations limited to Chattak and Feni;

. that Petrobangla shall be ordered to pay the amounts
owing to Niko into an escrow account and that the funds
shall be disbursed to parties unrelated to Niko for
‘operations or activities in the territory of Bangladesh’.!3

10 Claimant’s Request, paragraph 6.
'! Claimant’s Request, paragraph 8.
!? Claimant’s Request, paragraph 9.
13 Claimant’s Request, paragraphs 10 and 11.

21

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

With respect to the payment mechanism which it requested to be
put in place, the Claimant specified its objective as

... ensuring that Niko will be paid the outstanding amounts
due to it by Petrobangla once the Tribunals issue an award
in the Compensation Declaration. If the outstanding
amounts in the Payment Claim are paid into an escrow
account or a similar vehicle, these amounts can be used to
satisfy any liability of Niko found in the Compensation
Declaration (although Niko’s position is that it is not liable
for the blowouts). The balance of the funds held in escrow,
after satisfaction of Niko’s liability — if any - to BAPEX
pursuant to the Compensation Declaration, would then be
paid to Niko.!4

In the Clarification the Claimant explained, in response to the
question in the Tribunals’ Procedural Order No 9, that the “relief
sought concerns the Tribunals’ decision on the merits of the dispute
in the Payment Claim”.'5

4.2 The Respondents’ Observations and Request

In their Observations of 25 June 2015 the Respondents’ counsel
stated:

... our Client is not in a position to offer instructions on the
substantive issues raised in the Request.!©

The Respondents’ Observations continued nevertheless by
arguing that the requirements under the ICSID Convention for
ordering provisional measures are not met so that it is “not
appropriate to grant the provisional measures requested by
Niko” 17

These Observations were made after the time allowed for their
submission had expired. The Tribunals nevertheless considered
the Observations since they were made at a time when the
Tribunals had not completed their deliberations and no delay was
caused by their late submission. Since no reply to the

'4 Claimant’s Request, paragraph 19.

15 Claimant’s Clarification, paragraph 2.

16 Respondents’ Observations, paragraph 2.
17 Respondents’ Observations, paragraph 10.

22

59.

60.

6l.

62.

63.

Respondents’ submission had been foreseen, the late production
of the Observations caused no disadvantage to the Claimant.

The Respondents’ Request of 6 August 2015 relied on a passage
of the Decision quoted above, according to which in the absence
of an amicable settlement with respect to implementing the
Decision

... any Party may seize the Tribunal for recommendations on
provisional measures or a final decision concerning the
outstanding amounts.

The Respondents continued by noting that the

. negotiations to reach an amicable settlement effectively
came to an end in May 2015. In light of the lack of an
amicable settlement and mindful of the Claimant’s Request
for Provisional Measures, Respondents respectfully seize the
Tribunals to request a decision that the outstanding
amounts under the Payment Claim will be payable (to the
extent they remain outstanding) only after the Tribunals
reach a final decision regarding Niko’s requests for relief in
the Compensation Declaration phase.

The Respondents’ Request is presented as an application
provided by the Tribunals’ Decision for which the Tribunals had
not fixed a time limit. In substance, however, this request
amounts to refuting the Request of the Claimant in all its
alternatives and to denying that any effect be given to the
Payment Decision prior to the decision on the Compensation
Declaration.

The Tribunals therefore take the Respondents’ Request of 6
August 2015 as a response to the Claimant’s Request which
requires no further argument and can be decided as part of the
decision on the Claimant’s Request.

4.3 The admissibility of the measures requested by the
Claimant

In its Request the Claimant sought “provisional measures that
provisionally give effect to the Decision on the Payment Claim
pending the Tribunals’ decision in the Compensation

23

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

'8 Claimant’s Reques

Declaration”.18 The Claimant also explained that the measures
requested were intended to replace the failure of the Parties to
reach agreement “with respect to the modalities for implementing
the Decision on the Payment Claim” .19

Following Procedural Order No 9, the Claimant clarified the
nature of the requested measures, stating that “the relief sought
concerns the Tribunals’ decision on the merits of the dispute in the
Payment Claim’.2° The Claimant also explained that, with the
exception of Alternative C, the measures were not tied to any
future relief and requested final relief. Alternative C could be
deemed “interim” in the sense “that the final relief depends upon
the outcome of the Compensation Declaration” .?!

In their Observations the Respondents contested the
admissibility of the measures requested by reference to criteria
for the admissibility of provisional measures. They identify the
requirements for the granting of such measures, examine
whether the relevant criteria are met and conclude that this was
not the case.22 On this basis the Respondents declared that it was
not appropriate to grant the measures requested by the Claimant.

In their letter of 6 August 2015 the Respondents no longer
contested the admissibility of the measures but denied the
justification of any such measures before the decision on the
Compensation Declaration.

The Respondents’ reasoning for denying admissibility of the
Claimant’s Request presumes that the measures requested are
indeed “provisional measures”. The ICSID Convention provides in
its Article 47 for “provisional measures which should be taken to
preserve the respective rights of either party”. Similarly, ICSID
Arbitration Rule 39 concerns measures which a party requests
“for the preservation of its rights”.

More generally, as defined by KAUFMANN-KOHLER and
ANTONIETTI,

 

paragraph 2.

 

2° Claimant’s Clarification, paragraph 2.
2! Claimant’s Clarification, paragraph 4.
2 Respondents’ Observations, paragraph 4.

24

69.

70.

70.

71.

Interim measures are temporary in nature and are
traditionally intended to ‘preserve the respective rights of the
Parties pending the decision’ of a tribunal.?3

In the present case, the right which the Claimant’s Request seeks
to protect is that of payment for the invoiced amounts. This right
has been confirmed in the September 2014 Decision. The
measures which the Claimant seeks by its Request concern the
modalities of implementing this right: when and how the
Claimant receives the amounts which are due to it. This is
obviously the case with respect to Alternatives A and D, by which
the Claimant seeks an order that “Petrobangla pay to Niko the
total amount’ due. This request plainly seeks enforcement of the
right, not provisional protection until the existence of the right
has been accepted by the Tribunals.

The situation is no different with respect to those alternatives by
which the Claimant accepts that it be paid only at some future
time and subject to a condition. Here, too, the right to payment
is already established but its implementation is uncertain; the
measures are intended to regulate modalities of this
implementation, not the right in principle.

In conclusion, the measures sought by the Claimant’s Request
are intended to give effect to the Claimant’s rights themselves and
are not measures intended to protect these rights subject to a
future decision by the Tribunals. By their nature, they are not
provisional measures in the sense of Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. The
question whether the requirements for the admissibility of such
provisional measures are met therefore does not arise.

4.4 The content of the measures implementing the
September 2014 Decision

The Tribunals now therefore proceed to examine the relief sought
by the Claimant on the basis that it is to be treated not as a
provisional measure but rather as the implementation of its
September 2014 Decision. Such implementation is plainly within

?3 Gabrielle KAUFMANN-KOHLER and Aurélia ANTONIETTI, Interim Relief in International
Investment Agreements, in Katia YANNACA-SMALL, Arbitration under International Investment
Agreements, 2010, 307 at 314, quoting from the ICJ decision on Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. (United
Kingdom v. Iran) of 5 July 1951, ICJ Reports 1951, p. 91.

25

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

the Tribunals’ jurisdiction and foreseen by that Decision in the
event that the Parties were not otherwise able to reach agreement
on implementation.

The measures requested by the Claimant require that the
amounts owed by Petrobangla be actually paid, directly to the
Claimant or into some form of escrow arrangement. Petrobangla
takes the position that, for the time being and until the Tribunals
have made their decision on the Compensation Declaration, it
should not be required to make any payment.

The Tribunals have considered the Parties’ positions against the
following background: Pursuant to the Joint Venture Agreement
of 2003, the Claimant invested significant funds to develop the
Feni and the Chattak fields and, starting with November 2004,
delivered gas to Petrobangla. The GPSA between Petrobangla and
the Joint Venture, which regulates these deliveries and payment
for them, was concluded in 2006. On the basis of this agreement,
Petrobangla owes some USD 25 million and some BDT 140
million to Niko, plus interest, as confirmed by the Tribunals in
their Decision on the Payment Claim.

Until today, some eleven years after the start of deliveries,
Petrobangla has not made any payment for the gas it received,
apart from two initial interim payments of altogether USD 4
million. The Respondents’ Request of 6 August 2015 seeking a
decision allowing Petrobangla to continue withholding the
amounts which it owes must be seen in this context.

In this request the Respondents argue that it was Niko that
created the link between the Payment Claim and the
determination of Niko’s liability for compensation for damage
resulting from the blow-outs. Relying on observations in one of
the expert reports, Petrobangla further argues that Niko’s design
of the wells was deficient and that for that reason the Tribunals
may find Niko liable for the damage caused.

Petrobangla concludes that
it would unnecessarily prejudice Respondents, and the
sovereign State of Bangladesh, to have to pay or set aside a

substantial sum for Claimant that may not be owed at all.
Even payment into an escrow account, entailing the

26

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

corresponding loss of access to a very substantial sum of
money, would be an unfair burden on Petrobangla when the
amount owed depends on the resolution of all of the issues
Niko brought before the Tribunals.

The Tribunals do not accept this reasoning. The “substantial sum
of money” is owed by Petrobangla to Niko and is long overdue. It
is Niko that is prejudiced by the “loss of access” to this sum, due
to Petrobangla’s withholding it.

While the debt of Petrobangla is established, the question
whether Niko is liable for the damage resulting from the blow-
outs remains to be determined. If any liability of Niko were
established, it is not certain that it would require payment
specifically to Petrobangla rather than to BAPEX or some other
entity. Indeed, Petrobangla decided not to bring any claims in
these arbitrations and the liability which Niko seeks to have the
Tribunals consider seems to involve alleged entitlements of
BAPEX.

The Tribunals conclude that there is no justification for
Petrobangla to further withhold the funds owed to Niko.

The Tribunals also have taken note of the Claimant’s proposal at
the 2014 hearing, later confirmed in the Claimant’s Request, “to
use the funds owed by Petrobangla for operations in the territory
of Bangladesh at large, rather than for operations limited to
Chattak and Feni’.24 It insisted that this and other positions
underlying the alternatives in the Revised Submissions of 29
April 2014 “be duly taken into account by the Tribunals’ when
considering Niko’s present request for provisional measures” .?5

The Tribunals are receptive to these considerations, in particular
since they preserve the funds owed to Niko for possible payments
in the event Niko were found liable for damage caused by the
blow-outs and the quantum was determined. This was indeed
one of the points indicated by the Tribunals in the context of the
interim arrangements to which it referred in the Decision on the
Payment Claim.?©

> Claimant’s Request, paragraph 10.
°5 Claimant’s Request, paragraph 12.
26 Paragraph 283 (b) and (c).

27

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

When discussing in their Decision possible elements of interim
arrangements which the Parties may agree or (in the absence of
such agreement) the Tribunals may order, the Tribunals
considered the possibility of the Parties’ agreeing to put the funds
to productive use in Bangladesh. Some of the alternatives in the
Claimant’s Revised Submissions identified such objectives.

Since then the Parties have informed the Tribunals that their
discussions in this direction did not lead to any result. The
Tribunals have taken note of this situation. They also have taken
note that Petrobangla wishes to withhold payment and has not
made any proposals for an interim arrangement.

In these circumstances and unless the Parties requested them to
do otherwise, the Tribunals do not see any merit in ordering
interim arrangements ordering any specific use of the funds, as
envisioned by paragraph (e) iv in Alternative B in the Claimant’s
Revised Submissions or any variation thereof.

The Tribunals therefore conclude that any order made by the
Tribunals relating to the implementation of the Decision on the
Payment Claim must provide for an escrow account into which
Petrobangla pays forthwith the amounts owed to Niko. The funds
in this account shall be used, in case the Tribunals find Niko
liable for all or part of the damage resulting from the blow-outs,
to satisfy any compensation obligations found, and the directions
given, by the Tribunals in this respect. The escrow arrangement
must ensure now that funds not used for such compensation will
at that point be made freely available to Niko, as indicated in the
Tribunals’ Decision.

These considerations lead the Tribunal to exclude Alternatives A
and D and provide for the payment into an escrow account. This
possibility is foreseen by Claimant’s Alternative B, which the
Tribunal adjusts as follows.

Petrobangla shall pay the sums owed to Niko into an escrow
account opened by the Claimant. The sums shall be released as
instructed by the Tribunals or agreed by the Parties. The U.S.
Dollar part of the amounts shall be available free of any currency
control in Bangladesh. Petrobangla’s interest obligations, as
specified in the Decision on the Payment Claim and in the present
decision, shall continue to apply until the funds are paid to Niko

28

at its free disposition. Interest earned on the escrow account
during a given period may be deducted by Petrobangla from the
interest due for the corresponding period.

29

5.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

QUANTIFICATION OF PRE-DECISION INTEREST

As explained above, the Decision contained an order for payment
of interest in the following terms

Petrobangla must pay simple interest on Niko’s invoices at
the rate of six month LIBOR +2% for the US Dollar amounts
and at 5% for the amounts in BDT; interest is due on the
amount of each invoice as from 45 days after delivery of the
invoice but not before 14 May 2007 and until it is placed at
Niko’s unrestricted disposition;

The Claimant joined to its Request a spreadsheet setting out the

... calculation of interest through the date of the notification
of the Decision on the Payment Claim (11 September 2014)
(Exhibit C-22 quarter). Interest is calculated on the amount
of each invoice as from 45 days after delivery of the invoice
but not before 14 May 2007 and until the date when the
Decision on the Payment Claim was dispatched to the
Parties (11 September 2014). The calculation establishes
that, as of 11 September 2014, the total amount of interest
accrued in US dollars using the methodology ordered in the
Decision was USD 5’932’833 and the total amount in taka
was BDT 49’849’961. For the Tribunals’ information that
taka amount is equal to USD 643’682 at the exchange rate
of 11 September 2014.27

The Claimant clarified that the “pre-award interest? was so
calculated to be treated as part of the “total amount awarded to
Niko” to which “post-award interest” be applied.28

The Tribunals take these submissions as a request for giving
effect to the Decision by ordering the payment of the interest
amount as quantified by the Claimant.

In Procedural Order No 9 the Tribunals invited Petrobangla to
provide a response both to the Request and the Clarification,
including “the interest calculation attached to the Request; if it

27 Claimant’s Request, paragraph 21.
°8 Claimant’s Request, paragraph 23.

30

93.

94.

95.

96.

sees the need for any corrections, Petrobangla must provide a
corrected calculation by the same date”.

Petrobangla did not respond on 18 December 2014, the date that

had been fixed in Procedural Order No 9, nor during any of the
subsequently granted extensions; BAPEX did not provide any
response either. In their unsolicited submission of 25 June 2015
and in the Respondents’ Request of 6 August 2015 the interest
calculation as submitted by the Claimant is not addressed.

The Tribunals conclude that the Claimant’s calculation of the
interest due by Petrobangla until 11 September 2014 remains
uncontested.

The Tribunals have nevertheless examined the elements of the
Claimant’s calculation. They note that, according to the
indications in the spreadsheet, interest was calculated only as
from 14 May 2007 and, with respect to invoices issued
subsequently, 45 days after the invoice date. The rates applied
in the Claimant’s spreadsheet are 5% with respect to amounts in
BDT and 2% above the rate of six month LIBOR for U.S. Dollar
amounts. The calculation is made by applying simple interest.

The Tribunals conclude that the calculation was made in line
with the Tribunals’ Decision of 11 September 2014. The
Tribunals award USD 5’932’833 and BDT 49’849°961 for
interest due until 11 September 2014.

31

97.

98.

99.

100.

THE POST-DECISION INTEREST RATE FOR THE U.S.
DOLLAR DEBT AND THE REQUEST FOR
RECONSIDERATION

The Decision determines that Petrobangla must pay simple
interest on Niko’s invoices at the rate of six month LIBOR +2% for
the U.S. Dollar amounts and at 5% for the amounts in BDT until
the outstanding amounts are “placed at Niko’s unrestricted
disposition”; no distinction is made with respect to the interest
rate before and that after the Decision. The reservation of the
“claim for compound interest’ concerned the principle of
compounding and not the rate.

In its Request the Claimant asked the Tribunals to indicate how
they wished the Parties to address “post-award interest’. In the
Clarification, the Claimant requested that post-Decision interest
be awarded at the rate of 5%, irrespective of the currency in which
it was to be calculated.2? This amounts to a change in the post-
Decision interest rates for the U.S. Dollar debt. Petrobangla
argued that “the rate should not change post-award” .3°

In order to grant the Claimant’s request concerning the post-
Decision interest, the Tribunals would have to reconsider their
ruling on the interest rate for the U.S. Dollar debt. The Tribunals
have heard the Parties on the issue of the interest rates and
closed the issue by their Decision. The Claimant does not provide
any reason why this ruling should be reconsidered and the
Tribunals do not see any.

In any event, even if reconsideration of this aspect of the
September 2014 Decision would be admissible, the Tribunals see
no justification for applying a different rate for the post-Decision
interest. When they fixed the interest rate in the Decision, the
Tribunals were “guided by the objective that the successful party
should be compensated for having been kept out of its money to
which it was entitled”.31 The Claimant has not shown any
evidence nor even argued that the loss which it suffered by reason
of Petrobangla’s failure to pay would have changed on the date

2° Claimant’s Clarification, p. 7 et seq. and p. 10, paragraph 30.
8 Respondents’ Observations, paragraph 22.
3! Decision, paragraph 257.

32

when the Tribunals issued their Decision.2? As stated by the
ICSID Tribunal in Micula v. Romania:

... the Tribunal does not see why the cost of the deprivation
of money (which interest compensates) should be different
before and after the award ...3%

101. While one does find in the practice of ICSID tribunals cases where
a difference was made between pre- and post-award interest, “[i]n
most cases, tribunals have not considered post-award interest
separately from pre-award interest, and have simply granted it
until the date of full payment of the award” 34

102. The Claimant seeks to justify its claim for a different interest rate
for post-Decision interest by arguing that “post-award interest”
has a purpose different from “pre-award interest’.

103. In support of this argument the Claimant relies on an award in
ICSID proceedings and the opinion of a legal writer. The award in
Gold Reserve Inc. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela contains the
following passage, quoted by the Claimant:

... As requested by the Claimant, the Tribunal may also
determine a different interest rate to apply to post-Award
interest than that applied to pre-Award interest. This is
because the purpose of post-Award interest is arguably
different - damages become due as at the date of the Award,
and from this time, Respondent is essentially in default of
payment. As such, the Tribunal considers that continuing to
apply a risk-free interest rate would be inappropriate.*5

104. The Claimant also quotes Professor MARBOE’s study in the
following terms:

* The Tribunals are aware that in some legal systems a difference is made between pre-judgment and
post-judgment interest and that this distinction has been applied in some awards, including awards by
tribunals in ICSID arbitrations. The Tribunals see no justification to apply the distinction in the present
case.

3 Joan Micula, Viorel Micula and others v. Romania, ICSID Case No ARB/0S/20, Award of 11
December 2013 (Laurent LEVY (President), Stanimir A. ALEXANDROV and Georges ABI-SAAB),
paragraph 1269.

* Sergey RIPINSKY, Kevin WILLIAMS, Damages in International Law, BIICL, London, 2008, 387.
35 Gold Reserve Inc. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/09/1, Award of
22 September 2014 (Piero BERNARDINI (President), Pierre-Marie DUPUY and David
A.R.WILLIAMS), paragraph 856, quoted after the Claimant’s Clarification, paragraph 13.

33

105.

106.

107.

From the moment a legally binding ruling has been rendered,
the amount and time of the payment obligation is defined.
The respondent is in default if it does not fulfil the payment
obligation. This type of default may be penalized by a much
higher interest rate which is no longer limited to the concrete
damage actually incurred by the party.°©

In the present case, the Tribunals decided that Petrobangla was
in default of its payment obligations at various dates, prior to the
Decision and that from these dates onward interest was due to
compensate the Claimant’s loss. The considerations of the
tribunal in the Gold Reserve case, which seemed to have fixed the
rate for pre-award interest at a rate inappropriate for a case of
default, do not apply here.

As to the considerations of Professor MARBOE, the Tribunals are
mindful of the fact that they have been appointed by the Parties
to resolve a specific dispute arising out of their contracts. The
Tribunals do not exclude that the parties to a contract provide,
in one form or another, that an arbitral tribunal may “penalise” a
party failing to comply with its award by sanctions in the form of
“astreinte” or increased interest rates, with the objective of
promoting compliance with its decisions. However, this does not
mean that the ICSID Convention empowers or entitles
arbitrators, on grounds independently of the parties’ agreement,
to impose sanctions on a party for non-compliance with a
tribunal’s decision.3”

For these reasons the Tribunals reject the Claimant’s request for
reconsideration and confirm the decision concerning the interest
rate for the U.S. Dollar debt.

36 Irmgard MARBOE, Calculation of Compensation and Damages in International Investment Law,
Oxford UP, 2009, paragraph 6.245.

*7 The matter will be considered further below in Section 7.3 in the context of the choice of the interval

for compound interest.

34

7. COMPOUNDING

108. The Claimant further seeks an order that post-Decision interest
be compounded monthly.

109. During the proceedings leading to the September 2014 Decision
the Claimant had sought simple interest on the outstanding
payments for the period up to the Decision. Only for the period
thereafter it sought interest at “an annual rate of 5 percent
compounded monthly until the award is paid in full’. After the
proceedings on the Payment Claim had been closed and before
they issued the Decision, the Tribunals authorised submissions
on the narrow question of the interest rate in Bangladesh for U.S.
Dollar debts. In its submission on that issue the Claimant
confirmed the claim for simple pre-award interest at the annual
rate of 5%, but added “if a commercial rate such as [LIBOR +2%]
is applied the commercial practice of compounding of interest
should also be applied’.

110. The Tribunals decided that this new alternative claim for pre-
award compound interest was late and therefore not admissible.
They awarded only simple interest, but left open the question of
whether for the period after the notification of the Decision
interest should be compounded.?®

111. After the Decision had been notified and the Parties’ attempts to
settle amicably the remaining issues relating to the Payment
Claim had failed, the Claimant filed its Request of 25 November
2014 which also addressed the question of compounding. In its
Clarification the Claimant argued that post-Decision interest
should be compounded and the compounding should be effected
monthly.39

112. The Respondents argued that in ICSID cases, compound interest
could only be awarded for expropriation cases but not for contract
claims; since the present claim is based on delay in payment
under a contract, only simple interest would be admissible. If
interest would be compounded, this should be calculated only
annually.4°

38 See paragraphs 267 to 273 of the Decision and above section 5.
3° Claimant’s Clarification, pp. 6 et seq.
4° Respondents’ Observations, pp. 6 et seq.

35

113.

114.

115.

116.

The Tribunals considered the argument of the Parties and the
authorities to which they refer. They note from the outset that
the issue of compound interest is particularly controversial. The
Tribunals therefore will examine (i) whether ICSID tribunals may
award compound interest in a case as the present one and, if they
may, (ii) under what conditions they should award compounding
and (iii) at what intervals.

The ICSID Convention does not regulate the question whether
tribunals proceeding under the Convention and its Arbitration
Rules may award compound interest. The question therefore
must be decided under the applicable law, in the present case
international law governing the Convention and the arbitral
process as defined therein and the law of Bangladesh chosen by
the Parties otherwise governing the GPSA.

While the question of the interest rate was argued and decided
on the basis of Bangladesh law,*! neither Party relied on the law
of Bangladesh with respect to the compounding issue. In
particular, neither Party argued that, under the law of
Bangladesh, compounding was prohibited. The Tribunals, too,
are not aware of such a prohibition. The Tribunals consider
therefore the admissibility of compound interest and its
applicability in the present case by reference to general principles
applicable in international arbitration, and in particular to ICSID
proceedings.

7.1 Admissibility of compound interest in ICSID
arbitration

The Claimant argues that awards of compound interest have
become the norm in ICSID cases.*2 The Respondents rely on an
ICSID award from which they conclude, as mentioned above, that
“compound interest may be awarded for expropriation but not for
contract claims”;*3 they point out that the present case is “a
simple breach of contract claim” .++

+! Decision, p. 73 et seq.
® Claimant’ s Clarification, paragraph 9.

8 The Respondents

refer to Duke Energy Electroquil Partners and Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of

 

Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/19. The case and this reference shall be discussed in further detail

below.

4 Observations, paragraph 12, relying on Duke Energy Elecrtoquil Partners and Electroquil SA v
Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/19, Award of 18 August 2008 (Gabrielle

36

117. The Tribunals are aware that, historically, many legal systems
have taken a restrictive position toward compounding interest.45
The traditional position in international adjudication has been
expressed in a much quoted passage by WHITEMAN in 1943:

There are few rules within the scope of the subject of
damages in international law that are better settled than the
one that compound interest is not allowable. Although in rare
cases compound interest, or its equivalent, has been
granted, tribunals have been almost unanimous in
disapproval of its allowance.*©

118. In an article of 1988, Dr F.A. MANN examined the law and
practice with respect to compound interest in international law.
Starting with the passage from WHITEMAN and a similar
statement by ROUSSEAU in 1983,47 he commented on
international decisions and legal writers dealing with the subject:

Numerous decisions, mainly arbitral awards, support both
these statements. At the same time, however, it should be
recognized that, as an item of damage, the problem of
compound interest apparently has never been fully
analysed. Most learned writers ignore it or fail to give any
reason for their conclusion that compound interest is or is not
payable.

119. The only exception, which MANN recognised, is Jean-Luc
SUBILIA who dealt with the problem “a little more carefully” and
who concluded in his study of 1972:

As far as compound interest is concerned, it seems that one
cannot go further than to state that such recovery generally

KAUFMANN-KOHLER (President), Enrique GOMEZ-PINZON and Albert Jan VAN DEN BERG),
paragraph 838 and cases cited.

45 For some examples see F.A. MANN, Compound Interest as an Item of Damage in International Law,
U.C. Davis Law Review, 21 (Festschrift in Honour of Edgar Bodenheimer), 1988, 577-86; reproduced
in Further Studies in International Law (New York: Oxford UP) 1966, 377 at 381.

46 Majorie M. WHITEMAN, Damages in International Law, vol. 3 (Washington DC) 1943 at 1997;
quoted from BROWER and SHARP, Awards of Compound Interest in International Arbitration: The
Aminoil Non-Precedent, in Global Reflections on International Law, Commerce and Dispute
Resolution, Liber Amicorum for Robert Briner, Paris (ICC) 2005, 155 at 157; the passage is also
quoted by MANN, 377 (the passage “is not allowable” there is reproduced as “is now allowable” — an
obvious error).

47 Charles ROUSSEAU, Droit international public, V (1983), paragraph 242.

  
  

 

 
 

 

37

is not granted by international tribunals. Beyond that, the
few precedents favourable to compound interest, which have
been mentioned in Chapter VI, do not support the existence
of a case law rule which would preclude them as a matter of
international law.*®

120. The reservations against compound interest nevertheless
persisted. The Iran-United States Claims Tribunal, for instance,
consistently awarded only simple interest. Relying on the above
quoted study of WHITEMAN, one chamber of that tribunal
assumed in 1986 an “international rule” according to which, in
the absence of a clear contrary agreement, compound interest
was excluded.‘9

121. Shortly thereafter, in 1986, another chamber sounded more
flexible:

Most awards allocate only simple interest, but occasionally
compound interest has been awarded ...5°

122. The occasional exception to which this decision makes reference
and which is often relied on is the Aminoil award, which ordered
7.5% interest and 10% “level of inflation”, both compounded
annually.5! Nevertheless, the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal,
as just mentioned, persisted in awarding only simple interest.

123. The view of WHITEMAN and the assumption of a rule in
international law excluding compound interest had been
contradicted forty years ago already by SUBILIA:

In our view, in the absence of a well-established case law
on the subject, one may not exclude a priori the award of
compound interest. Therefore, one must examine, in the light

48 Jean-Luc SUBILIA, L’allocation d’intéréts dans la jurisprudence internationale, Lausanne 1972, 124;
the translation is by MANN.

4° R.J- Reynolds Tobacco Co. v. Iran, Award No 145-33-3 of 31 July 1984 (Mangard presiding), 7
Iran-US CTR. 181, 192.

°° McCollough & Co, Inc. v. Ministry of Post, Award No 225-89-3 of 22 April 1996 (VIRALLY
presiding), 11 Iran-US CTR p. 28 paragraph 96. In a subsequent decision the same chamber interpreted
a contractual clause restrictively and excluded compound interest: Anaconda Iran Inc. v. Iran, Award
No ITL. 65-167-3 (VIRALLY presiding), 13 Iran-US CTR, 199, 234-235.

5! American Independent Oil Co. (Aminoil) v. Government of the State of Kuwait, Award of 24 March
1982 (Paul REUTER (President), Hamed SULTAN and Gerald FITZMAURICE) in 21 ILM (1982),
976. The relevance of this award as an example for compound interest has been questioned by
BROWER and SHARPE, in Liber Amicorum Briner), Paris 2005, 155, 160.

 

38

of the circumstances of each case and in view of the
requirement of the principle of full reparation, whether
interest must be capitalised.”52

124. Since then, this view has gained increasing strength. In the Iran-
US Claims Tribunal itself, the majority view was criticised even
by some of its members. Judge BROWER, for instance, wrote:

Compound interest has a rightful place in international
arbitration, especially in the context of international
commercial arbitration.®?

125. In particular, Judge HOLTZMAN, in a concurring opinion to a
subsequent case in 1987, examined the circumstances of the
case, considering the facts that the claimant was borrowing
money on a compound basis and that the claimant’s expert
applied compound interest in the damage valuation, and referring
to a legal opinion of Dr F.A. MANN. He concluded:

Modern economic reality, as well as equity, demand the
injured parties who have themselves suffered actual
compound interest charges be compensated on a compound
basis in order to be made whole. International tribunals and
respected commentators have come to recognize this
principle: it is unfortunate that the Final Award does not.5+

126. The view expressed by Judge HOLTZMANN has gained ground.
In the above quoted article of 1988, Dr MANN developed the views
expressed in the legal opinion on which Judge HOLTZMANN
relied and concluded:

. it is submitted that, on the basis of compelling evidence,
compound interest may be and, in the absence of special
circumstance, should be awarded to the claimant as
damages by international tribunals.5>

*° SUBILIA, op. cit. 163-164 ; the original text stated: “A notre avis, l’absence d’une jurisprudence
ferme sur ce point interdit d’exclure a priori l’allocation d’intéréts composés. Il y a donc lieu
d’examiner a la lumiére des circonstances de chaque cas si une capitalisation des intéréts s’impose au
regard des exigences du principe de la réparation intégrale.”

53 BROWER and SHARPE, loc. cit, p.160.

*4 Starrett Housing Corporation et al. v. Iran, Concurring Opinion to Award No 314-24-1, of 14 August
1987, 16 Iran-US CTR. 112, 237, 254.

55 MANN, loc. cit. p. 385.

39

127.

128.

129.

130.

A decade later, Judge SCHWEBEL concluded:

it is plain that the contemporary disposition of
international law accords with that found in the national law
of States that are commercially advanced, namely, it permits
the award of compound interest where the facts of the case
support the conclusion that that is appropriate to render just
compensation.5®

Arbitration practice confirms that compound interest is
increasingly recognised as an admissible remedy. Some
arbitration rules expressly mention the power of arbitrators to
grant compound interest;5’ the fact that other rules do not
expressly mention this power does not mean that they exclude
it.58

Commercial arbitration awards have granted compound interest
by reference to commercial usages, in cases where the creditor
showed that its financing obligations included compounding®? or
by references to local legislation where “the matured interest are
added to the sum at the end of each year” .©°

In ICSID arbitration compound interest has been awarded in an
increasing number of cases. In the Santa Elena v. Costa Rica
Award of 2000, the tribunal found:

... While simple interest tends to be awarded more frequently
than compound, compound interest certainly is not unknown
or excluded in international law. No uniform rule has
emerged from the practice in international arbitration as
regards the determination of whether compound or simple
interest is appropriate in any given case. Rather, the

56 Stephen M SCHWEBEL, Compound Interest in International Law, TDM 5, November 2005.
57 WIPO Rules Article 60 (b), AAA International Arbitration Rules, Article 28(4), LCIA International

Arbitration Rul

Rule 26.4, Article 27.6 Singapore International Arbitration Centre (SIAC). The fact

 

that other rules do not mention such powers may well be due to the different approach in civil law

  

described above.
se see e.g. Natasha AFFOLDER, Awarding Compound Interest in International

Arbitration, 12, American Review of International Arbitration (2001), 45, 52.
* See for instance ICC Award in Case No 5514 of 1990, Collection of ICC Arbitral Awards 1991 —

1995, 459, 463 et sev
solution which is based on compensation for los:

cepticism as to a general principle but approve the
ffered, 467.

 

, comments by Y.D. expr

 
  

© ICC Award in Case No 12112 (no date indicated), Collection of ICC Arbitral Awards 2008 — 2011,
179, 210.

40

131.

132.

133.

determination of interest is a product of the exercise of
judgement, taking into account all of the circumstance of the
case at hand and especially considerations of fairness....

... It is not the purpose of compound interest to attribute
blame to, or to punish, anybody for the delay in the payment
made to the expropriated owner; it is a mechanism to ensure
that the compensation awarded the Claimant is appropriate
in the circumstances.®!

This case was followed by a large number of other awards in
which compound interest was granted. In their study based on
42 ICSID awards from the period 2000 to 2013, UCHKUNOVA
and TEMNIKOV state:

At the outset, it shall be noted that the previously prevailing
practice of awarding only simple interest has been
discarded thanks in large part to the work of scholars such
as Dr FA Mann, Prof. John Gotanda and Judge Stephen
Schwebel.

[]
... following the landmark Santa Elena v. Costa Rica case,
only ten out of the 42 awards examined have applied simple
interest. Of those, the decision to apply simple interest is
explained by the applicable law, and in one case, the
claimant himself requested simple interest...°”

On the basis of this practice in ICSID arbitration, the Claimant
argues that “awards of compound interest, as opposed to simple
interest, have become the rule rather than the exception.”®3

As mentioned above, the Respondents rely on a principle
according to which “compound interest may be awarded for
expropriation but not for contract claims”, adding that the present
case concerns “a simple contract claim’.6+ In support of this
statement the Respondents rely on an award in ICSID

©! Compaiiia del Desarrollo de Santa Elena S.A. v. Republic of Costa Rica, ICSID Case No. ARB/96/1,
Award of 17 February 2000 (L. Yves FORTIER (President), Elihu LAUTERPACHT and Prosper
WEIL), paragraphs 103 and 104.

© Inna UCHKUNOVA and Oleg TEMNIKOV, A Procrustean Bed: Pre- and Post-award Interest in
ICSID Arbitration, 29 ICSID Review (2014), 648-659.

© Claimant's Clarification, paragraph 9.

© Respondents’ Observations, paragraph 12.

41

134.

135.

proceedings in which the tribunal indeed awarded only simple
interest. However, the tribunal in that case did so because the
local law prohibited compound interest® and the applicable BIT
specified that the treaty shall not derogate from the laws and
regulations of the host State.°© The passage which the
Respondents quote as expressing the “principle” asserted by this
award in reality is found in a part of the award which presents
the position of the respondent party,®” but is not adopted by the
tribunal.

The Respondents argue more generally that the ICSID cases in
which compound interest was applied concern expropriation
cases and that UCHKUNOVA and TEMNIKOV expressly excluded
from their study of ICSID awards cases of breach of contract.®®
In support for the distinction between expropriation cases and
contract cases the Respondents rely on the Santa Elena v. Costa
Rica Award of 2000 quoted above. That award indeed contains
the following passage:

Even though there is a tendency in _ international
jurisprudence to award only simple interest, this is
manifested principally in relation to cases of injury or simple
breach of contract. The same considerations do not apply to
cases relating to the valuation of property or property rights.
In case such as the present, compound interest is not
excluded where it is warranted by the circumstances of the
case.®9

The Santa Elena award does not explain the origin of the
distinction between “injury or simple breach of contract” cases
where only simple interest is awarded and “valuation of property
and property rights” where compound interest may be awarded.
In particular, it does not explain why the damage suffered as a
result of money withheld should be different according to the legal
basis on which the money is due.

© Duke Energy Electroquil Partners and Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No.
ARB/04/19, Award of 18 August 2008 (Gabrielle KAUFMANN-KOHLER (President), Enrique
GOMEZ-PINZON and Albert Jan VAN DEN BERG), paragraph 457.

© Tbid, paragraph 473.

§ Thid, paragraph 432.

© Respondents’ Observations, paragraph 11, referring to UCHKUNOVA and TEMNIKOV, 651.

© Loc. cit. paragraph 97.

42

136.

137.

138.

139.

In the view of the Tribunals, such a distinction cannot be justified
by reference to the ICSID Convention nor by reference to general
principles of law. Since it is generally accepted that interest is
intended to compensate for the loss of use of money, there is no
reason why these costs should be assessed differently when the
money is owed in a case of “simple breach of contract” and not for
expropriation. The Tribunals therefore take the numerous cases
in which ICSID tribunals have awarded compound interest as
confirmation of the conclusion that compound interest is
admissible in ICSID Convention arbitration even when the claims
made are based on a contract, as in the present case.

The question therefore is not whether an ICSID tribunal may
award compound interest but in what circumstances it may or
must do so and at what interval or rest.

7.2 The circumstances justifying compound interest in the
present case

Based on the principle that interest is intended to compensate a
creditor for the loss suffered as a result of the debtor’s failure to
pay amounts due when they fell due, the Tribunals have accepted
that the loss to be compensated may include compound interest
and that, therefore, compound interest may be awarded in
“appropriate circumstances””® or “if it is necessary to ensure full
reparation”.7!_ When examining in which circumstances it is
“appropriate” to award compound interest and when quantifying
such interest one must, therefore, consider primarily the loss
which the claimant demonstrates having suffered. This is a
question of evidence. Professor MARBOE states:

In the absence of specific evidence on compounding and the
compounding intervals, the acceptance of compound of [sic]
interest by international investment tribunals is still not to
be taken for granted.?2

Professor BERGER explains it in the following terms:

% Santa Elena v. Costa Rica, paragraph 104.

7! Continental Casualty v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Award of 5 September
2008 (Giorgio SACERDOTI (President), V.V. VEEDER and Michell NADER), paragraph 310.

% Op. cit, paragraph 6.242.

43

Given that the practice of banks varies as to the exact
method of compound interest charge, especially if the sum
outstanding is calculated on the basis of continued
capitalisation of interest with quarterly, half-year or yearly
rests, the claimant may not rely on a prima facie rule as to
the amount of compound interest but has to provide the
tribunal with detailed evidence substantiating his damages
caused by the bank’s charging compound interest.73

140. This position reflects a distinction between statutory interest,
legal interest, or intéréts moratoires (on the one hand) and
compensatory interest (on the other), recognised in many
jurisdictions as well as in ICSID awards. The former are due at
a prescribed rate on the sole basis of the delay without the
requirement of showing evidence of any damage, while the latter
require proof of the loss claimed.7*

141. Similarly, tribunals have adopted a “conservative approach” in
cases where the claimant failed to provide evidence for the
calculation.75

142. In most cases in which ICSID tribunals have awarded compound
interest, they have done so without discussing the question
whether the party claiming compound interest actually
demonstrated having suffered loss in the form of paying
compound interest or foregoing an investment opportunity on
terms including such interest. Instead, tribunals and scholarly
writers discussing the matter have relied on the decisions of other
tribunals, concluding that “compound interest is the norm in
recent expropriation cases under ICSID”;’© or they have considered

7 Klaus Peter BERGER, International Economic Arbitration, Kluwer 1993, 631.

7 See e.g. Société Ouest-Africaine de Béton Industriel (SOABI), ICSID Case No. ARB 82/1, Award of
25 February 1988 (Aron BROCHES (President), J.C. SCHULSZ and Keba MBAYB), paragraph 636;
Herbert SCHONLE, Intéréts moratoires, intéréts compensatoires et dommages-intér’ets de retard en
arbitrage international, in DOMINICE, PATRY, REYMOND, Etudes de droit international en
Vhonneur de Pierre Lalive, Basel 1993, 649; also UNIDROIT Principles Article 7.4.9; MARBOE, op.
cit. paragraph 6.52 uses the term “legal interest” for interest where the claimant need no prove “the
actual damage caused by the delay”.

75 Marion Unglaube and Reinhard Unglaube v. Republic of Costa Rica, ICSID Case Nos. ARB/08/I
and ARB/09/20, Award of 16 May 2012 (Judd KESSLER(President), Franklin BERMAN and
Bernardo CREMADES), paragraph 319., The passage concerns the rate of interest but the reasoning
can be applied equally to compounding.

7 Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic
of Ecuador ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Award of 5 October 2012 (L. Yves FORTIER (President),
David A.R. WILLIAMS and Brigitte STERN), paragraph 840.

 

44

more closely financial practice, accepting that, in modern
commercial relations, compounding is a commercial reality. In
these relations a creditor is adequately compensated for its loss
only if it receives compound interest.

In finance and all commercial transactions, compound
interest is the norm. [...] parties dealing at arm’s length will
always insist that interest be compounded on any
outstanding balances for the simple reason that compound
interest could have been earned on the money had it been
paid.77

143. The position has been adopted by ICSID tribunals. One such

tribunal, for instance, stated:

. it is universal practice of banks and other loan providers
in the world market to provide monies at a cost amounting
to or equivalent to compound rates of interest and not simple
interest.78

144. As stated by an author who has extensively addressed matters of

interest in international arbitration:

In short, in the modern world of international commerce,
almost all financing and investment vehicles involve
compound, as opposed to simple, interest. Thus, it is neither
logical nor equitable to award a claimant only simple interest
when the respondent's failure to perform its obligations in a
timely manner caused the claimant either to incur finance
charges that included compound interest or to forego
opportunities that would have had a compounding effect on
its investment. 79

145. Based on the experience of the Banking Commission of the

International Chamber of Commerce and its members,
SENECHAL contrasted the absence of a “real international
consensus in international arbitration” concerning the choice

7 Jeffrey M. COLON and Michael S. KNOLL, prejudgment Interest in International Arbitration,
Transnational Dispute Management, vo. 4, Issue 6 (November 2007), 9.
78 Gemplus S.A., SLP S.A. Gemplus Industrial S.A. de C.V. v. United Mexican States and Talsud v.

 

 

United Mexican States, ICSID Case Nos. ARB (AF)/04/3 and ARB(AF)/04/4, Award of 16 June 2010

(L. Yves FORTIER (President), Eduardo MAGALLON and V.V. VEEDER), paragraphs 16-26.
7° John Yukio GOTANDA, Compound Interest in International Disputes, Oxford International Law
Forum, at http://ouclf.iuscomp.org/articles/gotanda. At FN 275 with further references.

146.

147.

148.

between simple or compound interest with the reality of the
financial world:

Still, in the finance world, compound interest is the
international standard applied in most time value
applications. Indeed, the adoption of compound interest
reflects the majority of commercial realities, in that a loss of
value incurred by a company that is active in normal trading
operations implies the loss of use of that value. Not
recognising that reality would lead to awarding a windfall
to the respondent.8°

One ICSID tribunal expressed this conclusion as follows:

The time value of money in free market economies is
measured in compound interest; simple interest cannot be
relied upon to produce full reparation for a claimant’s loss
occasioned by delay in payment.8!

In the light of these and other concurring statements about
international commercial practice,8? the Tribunals accept that
compounding is a commercial reality firmly established in
international commercial relations and therefore presumed to be
a regular element of damages when money owed is withheld.
Consequently, the Tribunals are of the view that in international
commercial relations a claim for compound interest does not
require any specific evidence.

Some ICSID tribunals have reached this conclusion by accepting
that “compound interest reflects economic reality” as an inherent
general rule of the time value of money rather than by insisting
that the specific incidence of this reality be demonstrated in each
case.83 On this basis and referring to the writings of MANN and
SCHWEBEL, to the Santa Elena award and other legal materials,
the tribunal in the Oko Pankki v. Estonia case, concluded:

80 Thierry J SENECHAL, Present-day Valuation in International Arbitration: a Conceptual Framework
for Awarding Interest, in DE LY and L. LEVY, Interest, Auxiliary and Alternative Remedies in
International Arbitration, Paris (ICC Publication No 684), 219, 230.

8! Continental Casualty v. Argentina, paragraph 309.

®° E.g. AFFOLDER, loc. cit. 91.

83 OKO Pankki Oyj and others v. Republic of Estonia, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/6, Award of 19
November 2007 (Otto L.O. DE WITT WIJNEN (President), L. Yves FORTIER and V.V. VEEDER),
paragraph 345.

46

149.

150.

151.

152.

This discretionary approach to the award of compound
interest under international law may now represent a form
of jurisprudence constante in ICSID awards.8*+

The tribunal in Gemplus and Talsud v. Mexico stated in even
firmer terms:

In the Tribunal’s opinion, there is now a form of
»jurisprudence constante” where the presumption has
shifted from the position a decade or so ago with the result
it would now be more appropriate to order compound
interest, unless shown to be inappropriate in favour of
simple interest, rather than vice-versa.85

In the present case, the Tribunals consider that they should
recognise this ordinary commercial reality by making provision
for compound interest. The question that remains to be
considered is that of the most appropriate interval to be ordered.

7.3 The interval or rest

While commercial practice is firmly established with respect to
the principle of compounding, the intervals (or rests) for
compounding vary considerably. This has been observed by
learned writers and by ICSID tribunals:

There are no general rules regarding the compounding
intervals.®©

SENECHAL describes the practice:

There are no prescribed standards for choosing one
particular compounding period over another (annually,
quarterly, monthly or daily are the most common options).
The compounding period usually depends on the financial
products chosen by the client.

“ Ibid. paragraph 349.
85 Gemplus and Talsud v. Mexico, paragraphs 16-26.
* Occidental Petroleum v. Ecuador, paragraph 843.

47

On the conservative side, we suggest using the yearly
approach. Furthermore, the yearly compounding period is
implicit in using average annual returns on the market.87

153. Intervals may be annually, semi-annually, quarterly, monthly or
even shorter. In the practice of international arbitral tribunals,
including ICSID tribunals, various intervals have been applied.
In many cases arbitral tribunal have chosen an interval without
providing an explanation.88

154. Legal writers provide some guidance. MANN points out the
considerable variations in the choice of the interval and suggested
that “in a specific case it may be necessary to investigate local
practices”, adding that “a judge who would award quarterly or
half-yearly rests would not go far wrong” .89

155. MARBOE refers to the study of the ICC Banking Commission as
reported by SENECHAL and mentions the yearly compounding.
She adds as a suggestion, “if a certain financial product has been
chosen as a reference for setting the interest rate, the compounding
interval of this instrument should be used ...”.9°

156. Similarly COLON and KNOLL refer to the period over which
interest is calculated and conclude: “A tribunal should therefore
use the same compounding period in computing the award as the
reference interest rate”.?!

87 Loc. cit. 231, 233.

88 The Tribunal in Gemplus and Talsud v. Mexico, at paragraphs 16-26 simply stated “As to rest-
periods, the Tribunal is content to accept the Claimants’ submission that these should be yearly rests.”
The Tribunal in Gold Reserve Inc. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB
(AF)/09/1, Award of 22 September 2014 (Piero BERNARDINI (President), Pierre Marie DUPUY and
David A.R. WILLIAMS), awarded interest compounded annually; it justified why it awarded
compound interest but did not explain why it chose annual compounding (paragraph 854). In Micula v.
Romania the Claimant sought interest compounded quarterly; the Tribunal gave reasons why
compound interest had to be awarded but did not discuss the interval. It simply found the request for
interest compounded quarterly to be “reasonable”; paragraph 1271. Significantly, the tribunal in the
OKI Pankki v. Estonia case discussed in some detail the justification of compound interest (paragraphs
343 — 357), but then decides on annual compounding without giving reasons for the choice of the
interval (paragraph 357). The tribunal in the ICSID case of SAIPEM S.p.A v. People’s Republic of
Bangladesh (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07), awarded simple interest because that had been the decision
in the underlying ICC award. UCHKUNOVA and TEMNIKOV mention four ICSID tribunals having
awarded shorter compounding intervals for post award interest of which only one provided reasons for
the choice of the interval; those reasons consisted in observing that current LIBOR interests rates were
very low (p. 665).

8° Compound interest, loc. cit., 585.

% Op. cit. paragraph 6.224.

°! Loc. cit. p. 18. They refer to a case in which a court in the United States awarded interest on the basis
of the U.S. prime rate, which in practice is compounded quarterly, but ordered annual compounding.

 

48

157. A different approach was chosen by the tribunal in the ICSID case
of Occidental Petroleum v. Ecuador: the tribunal decided on an
annual interval; it did so by reference not to the specific costs
incurred by the claimant but in consideration of “recent trends in
investment arbitration” and “the large amount of the Award and
the number of years that have passed since the violation” .°?

158. In the present case, the Claimant seeks monthly compounding;
but does not adduce any evidence that could assist the Tribunals
in deciding that compounding should be in monthly intervals
rather than in any other intervals. Given the variety of intervals
which occur in practice, the Tribunals are not in a position to
accept that any specific interval of compounding is so firmly
established that it can be taken as commercial practice which
does not require further demonstration.

159. The Claimant has not shown that its costs, incurred specifically
or shown to be current in the market in which it operates, include
monthly compounding; or that foregone investments would have
enabled it to receive interest compounded in this interval. The
Tribunals have no basis for assuming that the Claimant incurred
such costs or was preventing from earning interest at that basis.
They must therefore make the most conservative assumption and
can award compounding only in annual intervals.

160. The Claimant seeks to support its request for monthly
compounding by a different line of argument, stating that
“compounded interest is justified to encourage Petrobangla to
comply in a timely fashion with its payment obligation” and
compounding interest on a monthly basis “furthers this result’.°°
Some tribunals have indeed included in the award an element to
“encourage” the award debtor to comply in a timely fashion with
its obligations flowing from the award, for instance by increasing
the rate for post-award interest and reducing the compounding
interval.

161. This practice implies that considerations other than the
compensation for the Claimant’s loss would impact on the
decision on the compounding interval. The issue has been

°2 Paragraph 845.
°8 Claimant's Clarification, paragraph 18.

49

162.

163.

164.

considered already above in Section 6. To complete these
considerations the following explanations may be added:

These changes can be explained by the desire of some
tribunals to ensure prompt compliance with the award by
adding a punitive element to interest and thereby turning the
post-award interest from a purely compensatory instrument
into a sanction. It is not clear whether international law
permits the use of post-award interest to punish the
respondent for non-compliance with the award.9*

The practice of adding a punitive element in the decision on
interest has been considered by the ICSID tribunal in the case of
EDF v. Argentina:

In connection with the terms of compound interest, the
change from annual to monthly compounding sought by
Claimants and adopted by some tribunals can be explained
by the desire of these tribunals to ensure prompt compliance
with the award by adding what can be seen as a punitive
element, a change that this Tribunal cannot endorse.?°

As explained above, the Tribunals see no basis in the
circumstances of the present case which would empower or
entitle them to impose sanctions on a Party for non-compliance
with their decision.

In conclusion, the Claimant has not established a basis for
compounding interest at an interval shorter than annual. In the
absence of such evidence, the Tribunals consider that a
conservative approach to the requisite interval for compounding
is warranted. The Tribunals order that interest must be
compounded annually.

°4 RIPINSKY and WILLIAMS, loc. cit. 389.

°5 EDF International $.A., SAUR International S.A. and Le6n Participaciones Argentinas S.A. v.

Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/23, Award of 11 June 2012 (William W. PARK
(President), Gabrielle KAUFMANN-KOHLER and Jestis REMON), paragraph 1340.

50

8. COSTS

165. In its Request the Claimant also sought a decision on cost in
terms that would include the awarded costs to be capitalised and
subject to compound interest as the remainder of the sum
awarded. It requested “post-award interest on the total amount
awarded to Niko, that is the amount in principal, plus pre-award
interest, plus costs”, specifying its “submission that the Tribunals
should assess costs at this point of the proceedings, so that the
principal amount on which post-decision interest will be due is
known’ .9

166. The Tribunals recognise that it may be indicated in certain
circumstances to decide on a party’s costs not only in the final
award but also at some prior stages of the proceedings. In the
present case, the claims and the decisions made by the Tribunals
and those still outstanding are interrelated to a point that the
Tribunals consider it preferable to defer the cost decision to a
later stage.

° Claimant’s Request, paragraph 23.

51

167.

()

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

DECISION

Based on the arguments and evidence before it and in view of the
considerations set out above, the Arbitral Tribunals now make
the following decision:

Petrobangla shall pay into an escrow account USD 25’312’747
and BDT 139’988’337, plus interest (a) in the amounts of USD
5’932’833 and BDT 49’849’961 and (b) as from 12 September
2014 at the rate of six month LIBOR +2% for the U.S. Dollar
amounts and at 5% for the amounts in BDT, compounded
annually;

The escrow account shall be opened by the Claimant at a
reputable, internationally operating bank according to
standard conditions in international banking practice and
providing that funds in the escrow account shall be released
only (a) as instructed by the present Arbitral Tribunals or (b)
by joint instructions of Niko and Petrobangla;

Petrobangla shall ensure that the U.S. Dollar amounts paid
into the Escrow Account are freely available to Niko without
any restrictions if and when payment to Niko is ordered by the
present Arbitral Tribunals;

Until the amounts due as per above (i) have been fully paid to
Niko at its free disposition or otherwise released from the
Escrow Account, Petrobangla shall continue to pay interest on
these amounts at the rate of six month LIBOR +2% for the U.S.
Dollar amounts and at 5% for the amounts in BDT,
compounded annually. At the end of each year, the Bank shall
inform Petrobangla about any interest earned on the Escrow
Account during the course of the year. Petrobangla may
deduct the interest so earned from its interest payments for
the corresponding period. If the interest earned on the
amounts in the Escrow Account during a year exceeds the
interest due by Petrobangla, the exceeding amount shall
remain in the account without any credit to Petrobangla;

If any difficulties occur which prevent the operation of the

Escrow Account as intended by the present decision, any
Party may address the Tribunals for a ruling as required.

52

[signed] [signed]

Prof. Campbell McLachlan QC Prof. Jan Paulsson
Arbitrator Arbitrator

[signed]

Mr Michael E. Schneider
President

53

