International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes

 

NOBLE ENERGY, INC.
MACHALAPOWER CIA. LTDA.
CLAIMANTS
v.

THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
CONSEJO NACIONAL DE ELECTRICIDAD
RESPONDENTS

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/12

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

Rendered by an Arbitral Tribunal composed of:
Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, President of the Tribunal
Dr. Bernardo M. Cremades, Arbitrator
Mr. Henri Alvarez, Arbitrator

Ms. Natali Sequeira, Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal

March 5, 2008

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS. 5

21

2.2

21

2.2

THE FACTS RELEVANT TO JURISDICTION

The parties

 

The Claimants

 

The Respondent:

 

The project and the dispute

 

The Concession Contract and the Investment Agreement

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The origin of the present dispute 8
PROCEDURAL HISTORY, 1
Initial phase 11
The written phase on jurisdicti 13
The hearing on jurisdicti 14
POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES 15
The Respond ” position 15
The Clai ’ position 17
ANALYSIS 17
Introductory matters 17
Procedural objection with respect to the Respondents’ oral argument.............:cce 18

 

The relevance of previous ICSID decisions or awards ...

 

 

 

The provisions relevant to the Tribunal’s COMPEtENCE.............cccceceetesesesesteesesesteneneeees 18
Applicable law 23
Uncontroversial matters 24
Objections related to the parties to the arbitration...............::sssssssssssessseseeeeeneseneees 24
Is there a dispute between a Contracting State and national(s) of other

Contracting States for the purpose of the ICSID Convention?.............cccceeeeeees 24
Is there a dispute between a Contracting State and national(s) of the other

Contracting State for the purpose Of the BIT?...........ccccescceseseseeesseseseeeeeesesnsteseseseseenes 25
2.2.1 Noble Energy 25

a) = A mational Of the US ....c.ccccccccecccssccceccseeeeeecscsseceseseeeeesesseseseeeseeeseesieeseaes 25

2.3

3.2

3.3

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b) Is Noble Energy a shareholder for the purposes of the BIT?........2.:.0. 26
(i) — Positions Of the PpartieS .........c cece ececes cece ceceeeeeseseeteeeeeeeeees 26
(ii) — Tribunal’s determination .........ccccccceccce cece cscs cscs cecereeseseeeeeeeneneeseee 27
2.2.2 MachalaPower 29
Is there a dispute between the parties to the contractual dispute resolution
clauses? 29
2.3.1. The Investment Agreement
a) _ Did Noble Energy step into Samedan Oil Corporation’s shoes? ...........30
b) Can Noble Energy rely on the arbitration clause contained in the
Ir nt Agreement? 30
(i) — Positions Of the PpartieS .........c cece ececes cece ceceeeeeseseeteeeeeeeeees 30
(ii) Tribunal’s determination........
c) Can MachalaPower invoke the arbitration clause contained in the
Ir nt Agreement? 36
2.3.2 The Concession Contract 37
2.3.3 Conclusion 37
Objections related to the nature of the disputes ..............sssssssesesesseesseeseeneeeseaeeees 37
Is there a legal dispute arising directly out of an investment for the purposes of
the ICSID Convention? 37
3.1.1. A legal dispute. 38
@) — PoSitiONS Of the PAPTICS............ccececccseccctetsesestetenessseeteeseseetsesssesestsnseeses 38
b) — Tribunal’s d ination.... 38
3.1.2 Adispute arising directly out of an investMent.............ccce eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 39
a) — PoSitions Of the Parti€S.......0...ccecececec ects ee cece eececeeeeeeeeeseseeeceeeseeeeeesseeeeaes 39
b) — Tribunal’s d ination.... 39
(i) | Noble Energy.
(ii) | MachalaPower.
Is there a dispute for the purposes Of the BIT? ..........c.cccsccsssesesseeesesesesesesssesesneneseeeseeee 4
3.2.1 Is there an investment dispute for the purposes of the BIT?............:cccceees A

3.2.2 Are the facts alleged by Noble Energy, if proved, capable of
constituting breaches of the BIT?

 

a) Positions of the parties...
b) — Tribunal’s d ination.... 44
(i) — Applicable test .......0.cccccccccccscecceccseseeeseeeeeeesesteceeseseseneseseseseeneesees 44
(ii) | Alleged breaches.

 

(iii) Conclusion of the TribUnal ...........cccccccccceesese eects teeeeeesceeeneneeeeee 50

4.2

4.3

5.1
5.2

Vi.

3.3.1. Guarantees of legal, contractual and financial stability contained in the
Concession Contract and the Investment Agreement.

3.3.2 Discriminatory and arbitrary measures ...
3.3.3 Most favored generator standard or concessionaire treatment
3.3.4 Expropriation

 

3.3.5 Conclusion

 

Consent to arbi

Consent in writing

 

Scope of the consent

 

4.2.1. Was there consent to dispose of the three disputes in one single
proceeding?

 

a) — PoSitions Of the Parti€S..........ccccececse cece es cece ee ce eeeeseseeeseeeeeeeeeeeteeeseenenee

b) — Tribunal’s de ination...

4.2.2 Damages allegedly sustained by EDC............ccccccccesescseeeeeesesneseseeeseeeneee
Other conditions related to the CONSENE ............sccccecsceeesesesteneseseeestesesesesteseneseseeneneee

4.3.1 Conditions under the BIT .........cscccccscscseesesesteneseseeeenesesestsnsssseseseeesesesneenees

4.3.2 Conditions under the Agreements
F ini bjection: Place and L of the Arbitr:
Positions of the partie
Tribunal’s determination

Costs

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER

 

 

 

54

54
54
55
60

61

61

 

62
62
63
65
66
66

Arbitration Rules
BIT

Concession Contract

Exh. C-

Exh. RA C-

Exh. R-

ICSID

ICSID Convention

Investment
Agreement

LA. C-

LA. R-

RA or Request
C-Mem.
R-Mem.
C-C.Mem.
R-Reply
C-Rejoinder

C-Answer

Tr.

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

Bilateral investment treaty; specifically “Treaty Between the Government
of the United States of America and the Government of the Republic of
Ecuador for the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment”
of 27 August 1993

Concession Contract between CONELEC and MachalaPower Cia. Ltda.
dated 15 October 2001

Claimants’ Exhibits

Claimants’ Exhibits filed with the Request for Arbitration as supplemented
Respondents’ Exhibits

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States

Investment Agreement signed on 15 October 2001 by the Ecuadorian
Government and Samedan Oil Corporation

Claimants’ Legal Authorities

Respondents’ Legal Authorities

Request for Arbitration of 15 March 2005

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits dated 26 June 2006

Respondents’ Memorial on Jurisdiction dated 18 September 2006
Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction dated 13 November 2006
Respondents’ Reply on Jurisdiction dated 2 January 2007

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction dated 2 February 2007

Claimants’ Answers to the Questions of the Tribunal Members dated 23
March 2007

English transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction

11

1.2

THE FACTS RELEVANT TO JURISDICTION

This Chapter summarizes the factual background of this arbitration in so far as it is
necessary to rule on the Respondents’ objections to jurisdiction.

THE PARTIES
The Claimants

The Claimants are Noble Energy, Inc. (“Noble Energy”) and MachalaPower Cia.
Ltda. (“MachalaPower’) (collectively hereinafter referred to as the “Claimants”).

Noble Energy is a company incorporated and existing under the laws of the State of
Delaware, United States of America. Its principal place of business is situated at 100
Glenborough Drive, Suite 100, Houston, Texas, 77067, United States of America.

MachalaPower is a company incorporated and existing under the laws of the
Cayman Islands. It has a branch in Ecuador with its principal place of business in
Ecuador at Av. 12 de Octubre N24-593 and Francisco Salazar Street, Edf. Plaza
2000, Piso 14, P.O. Box 17-11-6520, Quito, Ecuador. It is indirectly owned by Noble
Energy.

The Claimants are represented in this arbitration by Mr. R. Doak Bishop, Mr.
Roberto Aguirre-Luzi and Mrs. Isabel Fernandez de la Cuesta of the law firm of King
& Spalding LLP, 1100 Louisiana Street, Suite 4000, Houston, Texas, 77002, United
States of America; and by Mr. Sebastian Pérez-Arteta and Mr. Javier Robalino
Orellana of the law firm of Pérez, Bustamante & Ponce, Av. Republica de El
Salvador 1082, Quito, Ecuador.

The Respondents

The Respondents are the Republic of Ecuador (“Ecuador”) and the Consejo
Nacional de Electricidad (“CONELEC”) (collectively hereinafter referred to as the
“Respondents”).

The Respondents are represented in this arbitration by the Procurador General del
Estado, Mr. Xavier Garaicoa. CONELEC is represented by its Executive Director Mr.
Fernando Izquierdo and its Procurador Mr. Ivan Armendariz. They are also
represented by Mrs. Maria Rosa Fabara Vera and Mr. Diego Ramirez Mesec of the

21

law firm of Fabara y Compafiia, Av. Diego de Almagro N30-118 y Republica, Quito,
Ecuador and by Mr. George von Mehren, Mr. Kevin Levey and Mrs. Sarah Rathke of
the law firm of Squire, Sanders, & Dempsey LLP, 1201 Pennsylvania Avenue NW,
Washington D.C., 20044-0407, United States of America.

THE PROJECT AND THE DISPUTE
The Concession Contract and the Investment Agreement

In 1996, the Ecuadorian Government launched a privatization program of its
electricity sector and enacted a series of decrees and regulations, and more
particularly Decree No. 754, collectively referred to by the Claimants in the Request
as the Electricity Act.

Until 1996, the Instituto Ecuatoriano de Electrificaci6n (“INECEL”) owned all
generation, transmission and distribution companies. By virtue of the Electricity Act,
INECEL was dissolved and unbundled into 18 distribution companies, six generation
companies and one transmission entity. The Electricity Act created CONELEC as
the Regulator of the Ecuadorian Electricity Sector which was made responsible for
enforcing the provisions of the Electricity Act and regulating the tariffs of the
generation, transmission and distribution companies. CONELEC was also
authorised to grant concession contracts on behalf of Ecuador for public electricity
generators, distributors and transmission companies. The Electricity Act also
created the Centro Nacional de Control de Energia (“CENACE”) which was in
charge of managing the physical and commercial operations of the wholesale
electricity market.

MachalaPower is an independent thermoelectric generator. Under the Electricity Act,
it was allowed to sell the electricity it produces in the spot market and under power
purchase agreements (PPAs). MachalaPower is indirectly owned by Noble Energy.
Noble Energy also indirectly owns an oil and gas company, EDC Ecuador Ltd.
(“EDC”), which entered on 2 July 1996 into a production sharing contract with
Petroecuador, the State entity active in the oil sector.

On 15 October 2001, MachalaPower and the Ecuadorian Government, represented
by CONELEC, signed a concession contract (the “Concession Contract”, Exh. C-3)
for the construction, installation and operation of an electric power generation plant,
the MachalaPower Plant Project. At that time, MachalaPower was a subsidiary of
Samedan Oil Corporation, a company incorporated in the State of Delaware and a

wholly-owned subsidiary of Noble Energy. Under the Concession Contract,
MachalaPower was authorized to generate electricity and to own the electricity so
generated. It was also authorised to deliver generated electricity to the wholesale
electricity market (“WEM”') created by the Electricity Act. The electricity generated
by lowest cost power generators was dispatched first. The MachalaPower Plant
commenced commercial electricity generation in September 2002. Phases II and Ill
of the Project were to be subsequently completed, at the latest by March 2011 for
Phase Ill. According to the Claimants, the Plant is the most cost efficient thermal
plant in Ecuador (other than hydroelectric generators), as it uses natural gas rather
than oil derivatives that are more expensive.

On 15 October 2001, Samedan Oil Corporation and the Ecuadorian Government
signed an investment agreement (the “Investment Agreement”, Exh. C-2) which was
to be executed together with the Concession Contract, referred to in the Investment
Agreement as the Basic Contract. The estimated amount of the investment was
USD 228,200,000 to be made during the term of the Concession Contract, i.e. 31
years. According to the third item of the Investment Agreement, its object was “to set
forth clearly the treatment given to the Investor [Samedan] and the Recipient
Company [MachalaPower] with respect to the general and special guarantees and
assurances that will protect their Investment’. Under Article 3.1 of the Investment
Agreement, the State guaranteed full legal stability of the legal framework in force.
Samedan Oil Corporation merged with Noble Energy on 17 December 2002 (Exh.
C-201).

The Concession Contract and the Investment Agreement will be jointly referred to in
this Decision as the “Agreements”.

The origin of the present dispute

The Claimants have submitted the following disputes to the Tribunal: a dispute
between Noble Energy and the Respondents under the US-Ecuador bilateral
investment treaty, a dispute between the Claimants and the Respondents under the
Investment Agreement, and a dispute between MachalaPower and the Respondents
under the Concession Contract.

According to the Claimants, the WEM is a forum for electricity marketing. Supply of energy for
distributors and large consumers is made through the Spot Market (uniform spot price paid to all
generators established on an hourly basis) and the Term Market (agreed price under PPAs). By
contrast, final consumers purchase electricity at tariffs or prices determined and approved by
CONELEC (C-Mem., p. 26).

According to the Claimants, these disputes arise out of a series of decrees,
resolutions, decisions, policies, practices, acts and omissions of the Respondents,
through which they fundamentally breached the obligations they had assumed
towards the Claimants by altering the economic, regulatory, legal, and contractual
framework that had been specifically designed to induce investment, and upon
which Claimants had relied in making their investment in Ecuador (C-Mem., § 13).
The Claimants invoke more particularly the following events.

Until September 2003, MachalaPower included the value added tax (“VAT”) paid on
its purchase of natural gas for its power plant as a cost declaration to CENACE.
CENACE then included the VAT for gas purchases in the amount invoiced to each
customer on a prorated basis. In September 2003, CONELEC issued Resolution
09/03 under which generators were to exclude VAT on such purchases from their
variable costs of production, thereby changing the manner in which MachalaPower
treated its VAT.

The Claimants also argue that the Government changed the mechanism for the
payment of MachalaPower’s invoices causing a dramatic increase in its unpaid
receivables. By Decree No. 923 the Government decided that CENACE would no
longer collect from distributors and pay generators for the electricity sold in the spot
market. As of October 2003, MachalaPower was required to invoice and collect from
each distribution company directly. The Claimants submit that this change increased
MachalaPower’s collection risk. Further, the Claimants argue that Decree No. 923
amended the existing system of fideicomisos® by incorporating a new payment
mechanism called “the N-1 method”. Under the N-1 method, each month, the
fideicomisos pay for the electricity sold during the previous month until all the funds
are expended in an order of priority set by each of the Government's distribution
companies in the fideicomisos. Whereas under the old system CENACE was paying
the oldest bills first, under the N-1 method, it was now expending funds in a different
priority sequence, which the Claimants say had the effect of making any amounts
not fully paid in a given month virtually uncollectible. This modification allegedly
caused MachalaPower's receivables account to increase at a dramatic pace making
it impossible for the company to continue operating in a sustainable way.

According to the Claimants, at § 88 of their Memorial on the merits, a fideicomiso is a contractual
mechanism for the administration of one’s patrimony (assets and rights), which is irrevocably
transferred to a regulated administrator [CENACE], called the fiduciario (the “Fiduciario”) who will
manage the funds and make the necessary payments in accordance with the instructions provided in
the contract or as directed by the fideicomitente or trustor (the “Fideicomitente”). The Fiduciario must
be a financial institution authorized by the Government and must comply with strict legal requirements
for transparency in the management of the transferred patrimony. The contract is then formalized by a
Notary Public to guarantee its compliance with the Law and its effectiveness.

20.

21.

3

10

Furthermore, the Claimants contend that various agreements entered into between
Ecuador and Colombia in the context of the Andean Community resulted in a
Colombian interconnection, which enabled Colombian generators to export energy
to Ecuador with preferential treatment, which adversely affected MachalaPower's
business.

Finally, the Claimants argue that the Respondents generally refused to enforce the
existing legal framework. They provided no assistance to MachalaPower to recover
its unpaid receivables from its customers, contrary to the Government's alleged
undertaking. They also did not allow MachalaPower to exercise its right to suspend
the dispatch of electricity.

In addition, in the period of 2004-2005, the Government issued Decrees No.
1539/2004 and 338/2005, which set an artificially low price at $11 per barrel for
residual oil® bought from Petroecuador for certain of the Government's thermal
power generators, thereby granting subsidies to the state owned generators. By
reducing the price of residual oil, the Government allowed some generators to
switch from more expensive fuel oil — or diesel — to a combination of residual oil and
diesel. MachalaPower, on the other hand, uses natural gas to generate electricity
(C-Mem., 230). According to the Claimants, the reduction in the price of residual oil
caused the electricity of state-owned generators to be dispatched before that of
MachalaPower. As a result, MachalaPower now dispatches less electricity at lower
prices.

The Claimants submit that, as a result of the facts referred to above, Ecuador
breached its treaty obligations not to discriminate, not to expropriate without
compensation, and to provide national and most favored nation treatment. The
Claimants argue that these measures also resulted in Ecuador violating the
Concession Contract and the stabilization clause of the Investment Agreement, as
well as other provisions.

Residual oil is a low quality type of fuel, by contrast to fuel oil or natural gas.

22.

23.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

INITIAL PHASE

On 17 March 2005, the Claimants filed a Request for Arbitration (the “Request” or
“RA’) with the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or the “Centre”), accompanied by 9 exhibits (Exh. RA. C-1 to C-9). In the
Request, the Claimants invoked the provisions of the Treaty Between the United
States of America and the Republic of Ecuador regarding the Encouragement and
the Reciprocal Protection of Investment of 27 August 1993 (the “BIT”), which
entered into force on 11 May 1997 (Exh. C-1). They also invoked the ICSID
arbitration clause contained at Article 11(b) of the Investment Agreement and sought
the following relief:

1. A declaration that Ecuador and CONELEC have violated the
Treaty, International law and Ecuadorian law and breached the
Investment Agreement;

2. A declaration that the actions and omissions at issue are illegal,
arbitrary, discriminatory, unfair and inequitable, have failed to
provide national and most favored nation treatment, constitute an
expropriation or measures tantamount to expropriation without
prompt, adequate and effective compensation; and they have
altered the legal framework, the contractual rights and the
economic equilibrium of the Concession Contract upon which
Claimants made their investments in Ecuador;

3. A declaration that Ecuador and CONELEC take all appropriate
measures to comply with the terms of the Treaty, the Investment
Agreement, International law, and Ecuadorian law.

4. An award of damages to the Claimants for all damages caused to
their investment.

5. An award to the Claimants of all costs of this proceeding, including
their attorneys’ fees.

On 11 May 2005, the Claimants filed a Supplement to the Request for Arbitration to
include Respondents’ breach of the Concession Contract and invoked Article 22.2.2
of the Concession Contract which refers to ICSID arbitration any dispute of any
nature between MachalaPower and CONELEC. The Supplement was accompanied
by 7 exhibits (Exh. RA. C-10 to C-17) and contained a request by MachalaPower for
“an award granting it also the following relief’:

1. A declaration that Ecuador and CONELEC have breached the
Concession Contract and violated Ecuadorian law;

2. A Declaration that the actions and omissions at issue are illegal,
arbitrary, discriminatory, unfair and inequitable, and they have
altered the legal framework, the contractual rights and the
economic equilibrium of the Concession Contract upon which
Claimants made their investments in Ecuador;

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

3. A declaration that Ecuador and CONELEC take all appropriate
measures to comply with the terms of the Concession Contract and
Ecuadorian law;

4. An award of damages to MachalaPower for all damages caused to
their investment;

5. An award to the Claimants of all costs of this proceeding, including
their attorneys’ fees.

(Supplement to Request for Arbitration, p. 9)

On 22 March 2005 and 11 May 2005, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the
ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration
Proceedings (the “Institution Rules”), acknowledged receipt and transmitted a copy
of the Request and of the Supplement to Ecuador.

On 29 July 2005, the Secretary-General of the Centre registered the Request for
Arbitration as supplemented, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States
(the “ICSID Convention”). On the same date, in accordance with Institution Rule 7,
the Secretary-General notified the parties of the registration of the Request as
supplemented and invited them to proceed, as soon as possible, to constitute an
Arbitral Tribunal.

On 3 October 2005, in the absence of an agreement between the parties, the
Claimants elected to submit the arbitration to a Tribunal constituted of three
arbitrators, as provided in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. On 11 October
2005, they appointed Mr. Henri Alvarez, a national of Canada. On 29 November
2005, Ecuador appointed Dr. Bernardo M. Cremades, a national of the Kingdom of
Spain. CONELEC confirmed its approval of this appointment on 13 December 2005.
The parties agreed to appoint Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, a national of
Switzerland, as the President of the Tribunal.

On 4 January 2006, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID, in accordance with Rule
6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules),
notified the parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointment and that
the Tribunal was therefore deemed to be constituted and the proceedings to have
begun on that date. The parties were later informed that Mrs. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila,
ICSID Senior Counsel, would serve as Secretary to the Tribunal.

On 9 March 2006, the Tribunal held the first session of the Tribunal in Washington,
D.C. At the outset of the session, the parties expressed agreement that the Tribunal
had been duly constituted (Arbitration Rule 6) and stated that they had no objections
in this respect. The remainder of the procedural issues set forth in the agenda of the

29.

30.

31.

32.

13

session were discussed and agreed upon. In particular, the Tribunal and the parties
set different timetables for different case scenarios, one without objections to
jurisdiction, one with objections to jurisdiction joined to the merits, and one with
objections to jurisdiction to be briefed, heard, and decided separately. It was also
decided that the languages of the proceedings would be English and Spanish, and
that the place of arbitration would be Washington, D.C. The audio recording of the
session was later distributed to the parties. Minutes of the first session were drafted
and signed by the President and the Secretary of the Tribunal, and sent to the
parties on 11 April 2006.

On August 24, 2007, Nassib G. Ziadé, the Centre’s Chief Counsel informed the
Tribunal of the appointment of Ms. Natali Sequeira as Secretary of the Tribunal.

THE WRITTEN PHASE ON JURISDICTION

In accordance with the timetable agreed during the first session, the Claimants
submitted their Memorial on the Merits on 26 June 2006 (C-Mem.), accompanied by
199 exhibits (Exh. C-1 to Exh. C-199) and legal authorities (LA C-1 to C-152), as
well as three witness statements and four expert reports. In their Memorial, the
Claimants sought the following relief:

477. For the reasons stated herein, Claimants request an award
granting them the following:

1. A finding and declaration that Respondents violated the BIT;

2. A finding and declaration that Respondents have breached
the Concession Contract and the Investment Agreement;

3. An order that Respondents compensate Claimants for all
damages they have suffered, plus interest compounded
quarterly; and

4. An order that Respondents pay the costs of these

proceedings including the Tribunal’s fees and expenses, and

the cost of Claimants’ legal representation and others [sic]

costs.
By letter of the Secretary of the Tribunal of 7 August 2006, the Tribunal set time
limits for the filing of written submissions in the event that the Respondents raised
objections to jurisdiction and in the event that the Respondents did not raise
objections to jurisdiction.

In accordance with the timetable set forth in the above-mentioned letter of 7 August
2006, as amended by a letter of 29 August 2006 from the Secretary of the Tribunal,
the Respondents raised objections to jurisdiction in their Memorial on Jurisdiction
submitted on 18 September 2006 (R. Mem). Their Memorial was accompanied by

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

14

five exhibits (Exh. R-1 to R-5) and eight legal authorities (LA R-1 to R-8). No witness
statement or expert opinions were appended to it.

In accordance with the schedule set forth for the filing of written submissions on
jurisdiction contained in a letter of 20 September 2006 from the Secretary of the
Tribunal, the Claimants submitted their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction on 13
November 2006 accompanied by 54 exhibits (Exhibits C-153 to C-206). No witness
statements or expert opinion were appended to it.

On 30 November 2006, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No.1 (PO 1). In PO 1,
the Tribunal declared that the issue of jurisdiction would not be joined to the merits
of the case and confirmed the suspension of the case on the merits.

In accordance with the timetable set forth in PO 1, the Respondents filed their Reply
on Jurisdiction (R-Reply) on 2 January 2007 with exhibits R-6 to R-9 and legal
authorities LA-R9 to LA-R31.

In accordance with the timetable set forth in PO 1, the Claimants filed their Rejoinder
on Jurisdiction (C-Rejoinder) on 2 February 2007 with exhibits C-207 to C-215 and
legal authorities LA-C193 to LA-C216.

THE HEARING ON JURISDICTION

In accordance with PO 1, a pre-hearing telephone conference took place on
13 February 2007 between the parties and the President of the Tribunal for the
purposes of settling all outstanding organizational and procedural matters before the
hearing on jurisdiction.

On 26 February 2007, the Arbitral Tribunal held a hearing on jurisdiction in
Washington, D.C. In addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary, the
following persons attended the jurisdictional hearing:

(i) | On behalf of the Claimants:

Mr. Doak Bishop

Mr. Roberto Aguirre-Luzi
Mr. Sebastian Pérez-Arteta
Mr. Javier Robalino

Mr. David Shelfer

39.

40.

A.

42.

43.

Mr. John Z. Tomich

Mr. James Burgess
(ii) | On behalf of the Respondents:

Ms. Maria Rosa Fabara Vera

Mr. Diego Ramirez Mesec

Mr. George M. von Mehren

Ms. Sara Rathke

Mr. Kevin Levey

Mr. Marco Varea
Mmes. Rathke and Fabara Vera and Messrs von Mehren and Ramirez Mesec
addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Respondents. Messrs. Bishop and Aguirre

Luzi presented oral argument on behalf of the Claimants. They raised a preliminary
objection which the Tribunal addresses below in section IV.1.1.

At the close of the hearing, the Tribunal put questions to the parties who answered
in writing on 23 March 2007.

The jurisdictional hearing was audio recorded and a verbatim transcript was
prepared and delivered to the parties (Tr.).

The Tribunal has deliberated and thoroughly considered the parties’ written
submissions on jurisdiction and the oral arguments delivered in the course of the
jurisdictional hearing. In the following sections, the Tribunal will first summarize the
parties’ positions (Ill), then it will analyse such positions (IV), and finally it will set
forth its conclusion on jurisdiction (V).

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

THE RESPONDENTS’ POSITION

In their written and oral submissions, the Respondents have put forward the
following main contentions (R-Mem., {| 93):

ti)

(iii

(iv)

(vi)

vii)

viii)

16

The Centre lacks jurisdiction and the Tribunal lacks competence under the
ICSID Convention. According to the Respondents, the dispute is not a legal
dispute which arises directly from an investment.

Noble Energy has no jus standi under the BIT because it indirectly owns
MachalaPower and pursues the latter's claims.

MachalaPower has no jus standi under the BIT because it is not an American
national.

The Centre lacks jurisdiction over the subject matter and the Tribunal lacks
competence because the dispute is a commercial dispute with the distribution
companies and the Centre has no jurisdiction over contractual claims.

Noble Energy has no jus standi under the Investment Agreement because it is
not a party to it nor has it acceded to it.

MachalaPower has no jus standi under the Investment Agreement or under
Ecuadorian law because it is merely the recipient company of the investment
and it is not protected as such.

The Centre lacks jurisdiction and the Tribunal competence pursuant to the
dispute resolution clause of the Concession Contract, which provides for
mediation and arbitration before the “Arbitration Center of the Chamber of
Commerce” of Quito.

There is a lack of subjective and objective identity of the disputes submitted to
arbitration. Such disputes are independent from each other and can thus not
be resolved in one single arbitration. Indeed, their only common element is
that they have been brought together before ICSID.

44. On the basis of these arguments, the Respondents request the following relief:

For the reasons set forth in this Reply in Support of Memorial on
Jurisdiction, Respondents request the Tribunal to proceed under Rule
41(6) of the Arbitration Rules and declare the lack of jurisdiction of ICSID
and the lack of competence of the Tribunal to settle complaints filed by
Claimants arising out of the Concession Contract, Investment Contract,
and BIT, under regulations in said instruments and ICSID Convention;
and refuse all the other CLAIMANTS' allegations, particularly those in
paragraph 131 of the Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction.

(4 120, R-Reply)

45.

46.

47.

THE CLAIMANTS’ POSITION

In their written and oral submissions, the Claimants have developed the following

four main arguments:

(i) | Ecuador gave its consent to the arbitration;

(ii) the matter of jus standi relates to the merits of the case.

(iii) in any event, both Noble Energy and MachalaPower have jus standi under the

BIT, the Investment Agreement and the Concession Contract; and

(iv) the dispute relates to measures taken by, and the conduct of, Ecuador and
arises directly out of one investment, and it should be resolved in one

arbitration proceeding.

In reliance on these arguments, the Claimants request the following relief:

Based on Claimants’ presentations and clarifications made in this
Counter-Memorial, Claimants respectfully request the following
relief in the form of an Award:

1.

An order immediately re-commencing the merits as provided
by the Tribunal at the first hearing;

A declaration that the dispute is within the jurisdiction of the
ICSID Convention and within the competence of this
Tribunal;

An order dismissing all of Respondents’ objections to the
admissibility of the dispute and dismissing all of
Respondents’ objections to the jurisdiction and competence
of the Tribunal; and

An order that Respondents pay the costs for these
proceedings, including the Tribunal’s fees and expenses,
and the costs of Claimants’ representation, along with
interest.

(C-C.Mem, $131)

ANALYSIS

INTRODUCTORY MATTERS

Before turning to the issues to be resolved, the Tribunal wishes to address certain
preliminary matters, i.e., a procedural objection raised by the Claimants at the
hearing (1.1); the relevance of previous ICSID decisions (1.2); the relevant
provisions related to the Tribunal’s competence (1.3); the applicable law at the stage

of jurisdiction (1.4) and certain uncontroversial matters (1.5).

11

48.

1.2

49.

50.

1.3

51.

52.

Procedural objection with respect to the Respondents’ oral argument

At the outset of their oral argument presented at the hearing, the Claimants objected
that the Respondents had introduced new material and evidence in their oral
argument. The Tribunal is of the opinion that the issues developed by the
Respondents during their oral arguments were aimed at rebutting issues developed
in the Claimants’ Rejoinder and are therefore admissible. The Claimants’ objection is
therefore dismissed.

The relevance of previous ICSID decisions or awards

In support of their positions, both parties relied on previous ICSID decisions or
awards, either to conclude that the same solution should be adopted in the present
case or in an effort to explain why this Tribunal should depart from that solution.

The Tribunal considers that it is not bound by previous decisions. At the same time,
it is of the opinion that it must give due consideration to earlier decisions of
international tribunals. It believes that, subject to compelling contrary grounds, it
should adopt solutions established in a series of consistent cases. It also believes
that, subject to the specific provisions of a given treaty; to the circumstances of the
actual case and the evidence tendered, it should seek to foster the harmonious
development of investment law and thereby to meet the legitimate expectations of
the community of States and investors towards certainty of the rule of law‘.

The provisions relevant to the Tribunal’s competence

The Tribunal’s competence is contingent upon the provisions of Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention, the BIT, the Investment Agreement and the Concession
Contract.

The relevant provision of the ICSID Convention is Article 25(1), which reads as
follows:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment between a Contracting State (or any
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to
the Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting State,
which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre.
When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its
consent unilaterally.

On the precedential value of ICSID awards, see J. Paulsson, International Arbitration and the
Generation of Legal Norms: Treaty Arbitration and International Law, (2006) 3 Transnational Dispute
Management, Issue 5 and Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Arbitral Precedent: Dream, Necessity or
Excuse?, Freshfields lecture 2006, 23 Ars. INT'L 357 (2007).

19

53. The relevant provision of the BIT is Article VI, which provides for ICSID arbitration in

the following terms:

ARTICLE VI

1.

For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute
between a Party and a national or company of the other Party
arising out of or relating to (a) an investment agreement between
that Party and such national or company; (b) an investment
authorization granted by that Party's foreign investment authority to
such national or company; or (c) an alleged breach of any right
conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to an investment.

In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute
should initially seek a resolution through consultation and
negotiation. If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national
or company concerned may choose to submit the dispute, under
one of the following alternatives, for resolution:

(a) — to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party that is a
party to the dispute; or

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed
dispute-settlement procedures; or

(c) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

(a) Provided that the national or company concerned has not
submitted the dispute for resolution under paragraph 2 (a) or
(b) and that six months have elapsed from the date on which
the dispute arose, the national or company concerned may
choose to consent in writing to the submission of the dispute
for settlement by binding arbitration:

(i) to the International Centre for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes ("Centre") established by the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States, done at
Washington, March 18, 1965 (ICSID convention"),
provided that the Party is a party to such Convention;
or

(ii) to the Additional Facility of the Centre, if the Centre is
not available; or

(iii) in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL), or

(iv) to any other arbitration institution, or in accordance
with any other arbitration rules, as may be mutually
agreed between the parties to the dispute.

(b) | Once the national or company concerned has so consented,
either party to the dispute may initiate arbitration in
accordance with the choice so specified in the consent.

Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment
dispute for settlement by binding arbitration in accordance with the
choice specified in the written consent of the national or company
under paragraph 3. Such consent, together with the written
consent of the national or company when given under paragraph 3
shall satisfy the requirement for:

(a) written consent of the parties to the dispute for purposes of
Chapter Il of the ICSID Convention (jurisdiction of the

Centre) and for purposes of the Additional Facility Rules;
and

(b) an "agreement in writing" for purposes of Article Il of the
United Nations Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York,
June 10, 1958 ("New York Convention").

54. The Investment Agreement provides for arbitration as follows:

ELEVENTH — Arbitration

a.

The Parties agree that if a dispute arises, in connection with the
Investment or the performance of the Investment Agreement, the
Investor and/or the Recipient Company, with MICIP [i.e. Minister of
Foreign Trade, Industrialization, Fishing and Competitiveness],
shall seek to resolve it through consultations and negotiations with
the entities directly or indirectly involved in the conflict.

Since (i) the Convention on Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments between Ecuador and the United States of America,
and (ii) the Convention on Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States (the "Conventions")
are in force in Ecuador, any disputes that have not been resolved
in an amicable fashion shall be submitted to arbitration to the
International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)
established in the Conventions. Arbitration pursuant to this clause
shall take place at the seat of the ICSID in Washington D.C.,
United States of America, which is a member state of the United
Nations Convention on Recognition and Execution of Foreign
Arbitration Awards published in Official Register No. 43 of
December 29, 1961.

For all matters not set forth in this Clause 11, the provisions of
paragraphs 22.2.2 (International Arbitration) and 22.5 (Waiver of
Regular Jurisdiction) of Clause 22 of the Basic Contract shall be
observed. The parties agree to include those paragraphs to this
Investment Agreement for all the effects thereof.

In any procedure for resolution of disputes pertaining to an
investment, it shall not be possible to use as defense, cross-claim,
right to counterclaim or otherwise the fact that the Investor or the
Recipient Company has received or shall receive, pursuant to the
terms of an insurance or guarantee agreement or any other
agreement executed by the Investor or the Recipient Company,
any indemnification or other compensation for damages claimed by
the Investor or the Recipient Company; and

Pursuant to the last paragraph of Article 42 of the Law on
Arbitration and Mediation, any awards issued from international
arbitration proceedings shall have the same effect and shall be
enforced in the same manner as awards issued from an
Ecuadorian arbitration proceeding and, consequently, they shall
have the effect of an executed judgment and res judicata and shall
be enforced in the same manner as judgments passed in a last
instance, following a compulsion order even if issued against the
State or any State Institution pursuant to the provisions of Article
39 of the Modernization Law.

The Minister, on behalf of the State, recognizes that in connection
with this Investment Agreement or any Dispute, neither the State
nor any State Institution may allege any sovereign or other
immunity in favor of itself or in favor of its assets or property of any
nature, regardless of their location, other than national property

20

destined for public use as referred to in the Legal Framework in
Force (Article 623 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code), or from notices,
summons, actions, counterclaims, exceptions, recourses,
enforcement measures, or any other proceedings applicable or
purported to be applicable.

(English translation provided by the Claimants, Exh. C-2)

The Concession Contract provides for the “solution of disputes” as follows:

CLAUSE 22 - SOLUTION OF DISPUTES

22.1. Mediation process: Any disagreements and the resolution of all
disputes arising from the interpretation, application and performance of
this Contract, excepting such technical matters that according to this
Contract or to the law must be decided by a competent authority shall be
submitted to the legal representatives of the Parties for resolution.

If within the time period of ten days following submission the
disagreement has not been resolved by the legal representatives of the
Parties, the Parties shall submit their disagreements on matters expressly
indicated in this Contract, as well as others mutually agreed by them, to a
mediation process.

The Mediator shall be appointed by agreement of the Parties within 10
days following the date when the legal representatives of the Parties
ought to have solved the disagreement. If there is no agreement on the
Mediator, a mediator will be chosen from the list of mediators of the
Arbitration and Mediation Center of the Quito Chamber of Commerce,
and mediation shall be conducted in accordance with the Law on
Arbitration and Mediation and the Regulations of the Center.

The Parties shall provide the Mediator with all written or oral information
and other evidence required to reach a solution of the dispute. Having
taken cognizance of the antecedents, the Mediator shall propose such
alternatives for solution that he shall deem pertinent. The mediation
process terminates when a document is signed stating the total or partial
agreement or, otherwise, that it has been impossible to reach an
agreement. The document shall be subject to the provisions of Article 47
of the Law on Arbitration and Mediation. In all cases, any expenses
involved in the participation of such Mediator shall be paid by the Parties
in equal portions.

In the event that the Parties have failed to reach an agreement pursuant
to the procedure specified hereinabove, the Parties may submit their
disagreement to arbitration pursuant to subclause 22.2 of this Contract.

22.2 Arbitration: In accordance with the Law on Arbitration and
Mediation and the Convention, as defined herein below, the Parties
submit the resolution of all disputes arising from the interpretation,
application and performance of this Contract to arbitration. Arbitration
shall take place at the Arbitration and Mediation Center of the Quito
Chamber of Commerce or at the International Center for Settlement of
Investments Disputes ("ICSID"), at claimant's option. The other party
waives any right to oppose or challenge claimant's selection. Arbitration
shall be guided by the provisions of this Contract, the Law on Arbitration
and Mediation, [Article eleven (11) of the Ley Organica de la
Procuraduria General del Estado,] the Regulations of the Arbitration
Center of the Quito Chamber of Commerce, and the documents relating
to the case submitted to arbitration, or to the Convention as described in
subclause 22.2.2.

21

22.2.1 National arbitration:

If the claimant decides to resort to national arbitration, such arbitration
shall be conducted in accordance with the Law on Arbitration and
Mediation, the Regulations of the Arbitration Center of the Quito Chamber
of Commerce, and the documents relating to the case submitted to
arbitration. [...]

22.2.2 International arbitration:

If the plaintiff decides to resort to international arbitration, such arbitration
shall be conducted in accordance with the Convention on Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (the
“Convention") and with the provisions set forth below.

22.2.2.1 The Parties recognize that the Convention on Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (the
"Convention") executed by the Republic of Ecuador as a member state of
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development on January
15 1985 and published in Official Register No. 386 of March 2, 1986, and
ratified by the Ecuadorian Congress on February 7, 2001, as published in
Official Register No. 309 of April 19, 2001, is applicable to any dispute of
any nature that may arise between the Parties in relation to this Contract
(a "Dispute"). The Parties shall be obligated to submit any Dispute to the
jurisdiction and venue of the International Center for Settlement of
Investment Disputes ("ICSID") to be settled and resolved pursuant to the
provisions of the Convention.

22.2.2.2 The procedure to designate the arbitrators shall be as set forth in
subclause 22.2.1.3. If the parties fail to agree about the designation of the
third arbitrator, or if the Tribunal has not been created, the provisions of
Article 38 of the Convention shall be observed. No arbitrator designated
pursuant to this clause shall be an employee or representative or a
former employee or a former representative of that person.

22.2.2.3 The international arbitration process established in subclause
22.2.2 shall be as set forth in the Convention, except for the modifications
to the procedure specified hereunder.

22.2.2.4 The Parties recognize and agree that for the purposes of Article
25 of the Convention, any dispute is and shall be regarded as a legal
dispute directly arising from an investment between a contractual state
and a national of another contractual state.

22.2.2.5 CONELEC, in representation of the Ecuadorian State and for the
purposes of Article 26 of the Convention, represents that in order to
resort to international arbitration pursuant to this clause it is not
necessary to previously exhaust administrative proceedings or other
channels to resolve a dispute.

22.2.2.6 All arbitration proceedings conducted pursuant to the
Convention shall take place in Quito, Ecuador and in the Spanish
language. If for any reason they cannot take place in Quito, Ecuador,
they shall take place at the permanent Court of Arbitration of the ICSID.

22.2.7 The expenses incurred in the arbitration shall be paid by the Party
specified by the Arbitration Tribunal in its award, including operating
expenses for the Tribunal and those corresponding to the use of its
venue; however, each Party shall pay the fees of the arbitrator
designated by it or of the one designated on its behalf, whatever the
outcome of the arbitration. The fees of the alternate arbitrators and of the
Chairman of the Arbitration Tribunal shall be paid by the Party that is
assessed to pay the arbitration expenses. Fees for principal and alternate
arbitrators shall be paid in accordance with the rates established by
ICSID.

22

1.4

56.

57.

23

22.3 Service of process and nature of obligations.

With respect to the procedures set forth in this Clause for enforceability of
an award against the assets of either Party submitted before the courts of
Ecuador:

(a) CONELEC designates its legal representative to receive service of
process on its behalf in that jurisdiction for any enforceability process at
the address to be indicated for that purpose.

(b) CONCESSIONAIRE designates its legal representative to receive
service of process on its behalf in that jurisdiction for any enforceability
process at the address to be indicated for that purpose.

22.4 Continued performance: During any proceedings involving a
dispute pursuant to this Clause, both Parties shall continue performing
their obligations under this Contract.

22.5 As provided in the last part of the third subclause of Article 21 of the
Electric Sector Regime Law and in Article 4 of the Law on Arbitration and
Mediation, since the Parties have agreed to submit and resolve their
disputes according to arbitration proceedings, they shall not resort to the
courts of Ecuador, whose jurisdiction they expressly waive, for any matter
or dispute derived from the application, interpretation or performance of
this Contract.

(English translation provided by the Claimants, Exh. C-3, text between
brackets inserted by the Tribunal)

Applicable law

The Respondents have argued that, pursuant to Article 42(1) of the ICSID
Convention, Ecuadorian law governs jurisdiction, whilst the Claimants contend that
the ICSID Convention and its Arbitration Rules are applicable to this issue (Tr., pp.
77 and 136).

The Tribunal is of the opinion that Article 42(1) is irrelevant for purposes of
jurisdiction. Article 42 of the ICSID Convention is a conflict rule which deals with the
law governing the merits of the dispute®. Jurisdiction is a different matter. It is not
subject to this conflict rule but is governed by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention or,
as the tribunal in CSOB v. Slovakia held, “[t]he question of whether the parties have
effectively expressed their consent to ICSID arbitration is not to be answered by
reference to national law. It is governed by international law as set out in Article
25(1) of the ICSID Convention’”®.

Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, Article 42, p. 553, § 4.

Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, A.S. (CSOB) v. The Slovak Republic, |CSID Case No. ARB/97/4,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999, § 35, LA. C-9. See also Enron v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/01/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 January 2004, § 38, LA. C-7. See also CMS v.
Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Decision on Jurisdiction, 17 July 2003, § 87-89, LA. C-
5. See C. Schreuer, Consent to Arbitration, The Oxford Handbook of International Investment Law (P.
Muchlinski, F. Ortino, C. Schreuer eds.) (forthcoming).

1.5

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

21

63.

24

Uncontroversial matters

There is no dispute between the parties as to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal to
decide the jurisdictional challenges brought by the Respondents pursuant to Article
A1 of the ICSID Convention.

It is also undisputed that four conditions must be met for the Tribunal to uphold
jurisdiction under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, i.e., (i) the dispute must be
between a Contracting State and a national of another Contracting State, (ii) the
parties must have expressed their consent to ICSID arbitration in writing, (iii) the
dispute must be a legal one, and (iv) it must arise directly from an investment.

It is further common ground that the conditions set in any other instruments which
are the basis of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction must also be met.

The Tribunal will now review the Respondents’ objections taking into account the
requirements of the ICSID Convention, the BIT, the Investment Agreement and the
Concession Contract, when applicable, without distinguishing between objections to
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and objections to the admissibility of the claims’. It will
proceed with this review by examining in the following sections: the objections raised
in connection with the parties to these proceedings (2); the nature of the dispute (3);
and the parties’ consent (4). Finally, it will review the remaining objection (5).

OBJECTIONS RELATED TO THE PARTIES TO THE ARBITRATION

The Tribunal will ascertain whether there is a dispute between a Contracting State
and nationals of other Contracting States for purposes of the ICSID Convention
(2.1), and for purposes of the BIT (2.2), as well as a dispute between the parties to
the Agreements (2.3).

Is there a dispute between a Contracting State and national(s) of other
Contracting States for the purpose of the ICSID Convention?

It is undisputed that the Respondents are the State of Ecuador and CONELEC, an
“agency designated to the Centre by that State”. Ecuador became a Contracting
State of the ICSID Convention on 15 January 1986, which Convention has been in
force in Ecuador since 19 April 2001 (Exh. C-50 and C-52). Ecuador designated
Consortium Groupement L.E.S.I. - DIPENTA v. République Algérienne Démocratique et Populaire,

Award, 10 January 2005, 19 /CSID Rev—FiLJ 426 (2004), 42, p. 441, available at. .
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/lesi-sentence-fr.pdf.

64.

65.

66.

67.

2.2

68.

69.

25

CONELEC to the Centre on 21 August 2002 for purposes of Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention and CONELEC is thus to be considered as an agency of the
Republic of Ecuador.

On the Claimants’ side, the arbitration involves two entities which were nationals of
ICSID Contracting States at the time of their consent to ICSID arbitration.

At the time of its consent to ICSID arbitration, i.e. on 14 March 2005° and at the date
of the Investment Agreement (see infra), Noble Energy was a national of the United
States of America. The United States of America became a Contracting State of the
ICSID Convention on 10 June 1966, which has been in force in the this country
since 14 October 1966.

MachalaPower at the time of its consent (see infra), which is contained in the
Investment Agreement and the Concession Contract, was a national of the Cayman
Islands, which are an overseas territory of the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom
became a Contracting State of the ICSID Convention on 19 December 1966; the
Convention entered into force in this country on 18 January 1967. The UK has not
excluded the Cayman Islands from the application of the ICSID Convention. It is not
disputed among the parties that the fact of having established a branch in Ecuador
does not suffice to make MachalaPower a national of Ecuador.

Accordingly, the dispute is between an ICSID Contracting State, Ecuador, and
nationals of other ICSID Contracting States, the United States of America and the
United Kingdom.

Is there a dispute between a Contracting State and national(s) of the other
Contracting State for the purpose of the BIT?

2.2.1 Noble Energy

The Tribunal must ascertain whether Noble Energy can invoke the BIT by virtue of
its nationality (a) and in its capacity of shareholder (b).

a) A national of the US

There is no doubt that Noble Energy qualifies as a national of a Contracting Party to
the BIT under the applicable laws of the United States of America.

By letter of 14 March 2005 sent by its counsel to Ecuador, Noble Energy consented to ICSID arbitration
under the BIT and under the Investment Agreement (Exh. C-57).

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

26

b) Is Noble Energy a shareholder for the purposes of the BIT?

The Claimants further contend that Noble Energy is entitled to bring a claim
under the BIT in its capacity as shareholder of MachalaPower.

(i) Positions of the parties

The Respondents argue that Noble Energy cannot bring a claim under the BIT
because it did not make the investment itself and pursues MachalaPower's claims.
In support of this argument, the Respondents emphasize that Noble Energy does
not own MachalaPower directly and rely on the ICJ decision in Barcelona Traction.
At the hearing, they further contended that Article 25 of the ICSID Convention does
not allow a grandparent company to bring a claim and referred to Amco Asia which,
they say, is an example of a case where the Tribunal refused to take into account
the nationality of the controlling company, in line with Barcelona Traction (Tr., pp.
52).

In addition, the Respondents further object that Noble Energy is too remote from
MachalaPower for it to qualify as an investor. This objection raises the question of
the required connection between the (indirect) shareholder and its (indirect)
investment. To support their objection, the Respondents rely on the following
statement of the Enron tribunal:

[T]here is indeed a need to establish a cut-off point beyond which
claims would not be permissible as they could have only a remote
connection to the affected company.®

On the contrary, the Claimants contend that Noble Energy does not assert the rights

of MachalaPower but its own rights based on a separate cause of action.
Specifically, they make the following contentions in their Counter-Memorial:

To the extent that Noble Energy discusses the rights of MachalaPower
under the Concession Contract and Ecuadorian law, it does so not in the
context of any rights belonging to MachalaPower, nor by asserting any
claim under the Concession Contract or Ecuadorian law, which are
asserted directly by MachalaPower in this same case. Noble Energy is
simply setting out the relevant framework and factual context in which the
Tribunal must evaluate whether the conduct of Ecuador amounts to a
violation of the BIT’s protections.

(C-C.Mem., $74)

For the Claimants, the Respondents’ reliance on Barcelona Traction is inapposite as
such decision applies in the context of diplomatic protection. The issue at stake is a

Enron v. Argentine Republic, op. cit., 4 52.

75.

76.

77.

27

different one. ICSID decisions in cases involving the Argentine Republic have
established that a shareholder, even an indirect one, can bring a claim under a BIT.
For example, the CMS v. Argentina tribunal analyzed the issue in the context of the
Argentina - US BIT, drafted in terms very similar to the BIT applicable in this case,
and held that there was “no bar in current international law to the concept of allowing
claims by shareholders independently from those of the corporation concerned”. It
added that this was true “even if those shareholders are minority or non-controlling
shareholders”"°.

The Claimants further submit that the BIT covers investments both owned or
controlled directly and indirectly. Therefore, indirect shareholders are not precluded
from invoking the BIT. The so-called “grandfather rule” invoked by the Respondents
does not exist in the context of investment arbitrations under BITs (C-Answer, 23
March 2007, {| 30). Contrary to the Respondents’ assertion (R-Reply, { 105), arbitral
awards do recognize that a shareholder can present a claim for its personal
damage. Indeed, ICSID decisions have allowed indirect shareholders to bring claims
under a BIT, in particular Enron v. Argentina, Siemens v. Argentina, Azurix v.
Argentina"’, or Gas Natural v. Argentina. This last decision did so in the following
terms:

The assertion that a claimant under a bilateral investment treaty lacked
standing because it was only an indirect investor in the enterprise that
had a contract with or a franchise from the state party to the BIT has
been made numerous times, never, so far as the Tribunal has been made.
aware, with success. *

The Claimants refer moreover to the US model BIT and emphasize that “the
drafters of the US model BIT (on which the BIT is based) intended to avoid the
result reached by the ICJ in the Barcelona Traction case” (C-Answer, 23 March
2007, { 29).

(ii) Tribunal’s determination

The Tribunal concurs with previous tribunals that have held that an indirect
shareholder can bring a claim under the ICSID Convention and under a BIT in
respect of a direct and an indirect investment"’. Failing any contrary wording, the

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, op .cit., 4 48.

Azurix v. Argentine Republic, \CSID case No. ARB/ 01/12, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 December 2003,
LA. C-6.

Gas Natural SDG. S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/10, Decision of the Tribunal on
Preliminary Questions on Jurisdiction, 17 June 2005, 4 50, LA C-174.

For a general discussion of this matter, see C. Schreuer, Shareholder Protection in International
Investment Law, (2005) 2 Transnational Dispute Management, issue No.3.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

28

BIT and the ICSID Convention encompass actions of indirect shareholders for their
damages.

Barcelona Traction’ is of no assistance for present purposes. That case dealt with a
claim of diplomatic protection and cannot be transposed in the context of a BIT
which protects direct and indirect investment including “shares of stock or other
interests in a company or interests in the assets thereof’ (Article |(1)(ii) of the BIT).

The Respondents’ reference to Amco'® is of no help, either, for it is inapposite. That
decision discussed the standing of a foreign parent company not explicitly named in
the consent agreement entered into by the local subsidiary. It reviewed the
relationship between the companies in the specific context of Article 25(2)(b) of the
ICSID Convention, i.e. of foreign control over a local company.

This said, how indirect can a shareholder be and still qualify as an investor for treaty
purposes? Is there a limit and, if so, is it reached here? In other words, how many
layers or corporations can there be between the direct shareholders and the indirect
investor? MachalaPower is wholly and directly owned by Noble Energy International
Ltd (registered in the Cayman Islands), which is wholly and directly owned by
Samedan of North Africa, Inc. (registered in Delaware), which is in turn wholly and
directly owned by Noble Energy (see form 10-K for 2005 at Exh. C-5 and Certificate
of Ownership and Merger at Exh. C-201). Differently worded, there are two
intermediate layers between MachalaPower and Noble Energy.

The Enron tribunal stated that there should be a cut-off point in the string of
companies to be taken into account. Given the facts at stake, the Tribunal in that
case found, however, that the cut-off point was not reached, because Argentina had
specially invited the shareholders to make the investment and the investors had
decision-making power in the management of the local company"®.

This Tribunal does not disagree with the statement made by the Enron tribunal.
There may well be a cut-off point somewhere, and future tribunals may be called
upon to define it. In the present case, the need for such a definition does not arise.
Indeed, the cut-off point, whatever it may be, is not reached with two intermediate
layers. The relationship between the investment and the direct shareholder, on the
one hand, and the indirect shareholder, on the other, is not too remote. That

Barcelona Traction, Light & Power co. (Belgium v. Spain), LA. R-1.

Amco Asia Corp. v. Republic of Indonesia, \CSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Jurisdiction, 10 May
1988, LA C-218.

Enron v. Argentine Republic, op. cit., § 50-57.

83.

84.

2.3

85.

86.

29

relationship was recognized in the Investment Agreement whose purpose is set out
in Clause “Third”, which says that “Investor ... shall enjoy all the guarantees set forth
in ... (the “Law’), as well as in all international treaties executed by the State
regarding investment promotion and guarantees and international double taxation.”
The Tribunal notes that at all relevant times, Noble Energy has been the ultimate
parent of all of the subsidiary companies involved in the arbitration and that these
subsidiaries were wholly owned either directly or indirectly by Noble Energy.

Provided that the other applicable requirements are met, the Tribunal thus
concludes that Noble Energy has standing under the ICSID Convention and the BIT
in its capacity as indirect shareholder of MachalaPower.

2.2.2 MachalaPower

In their Counter-Memorial ({ 112), the Claimants have expressly stated that
MachalaPower does not invoke the BIT in the following terms:

Surprisingly, Respondents object to MachalaPower’s jus standi under

the BIT. This objection is flawed because MachalaPower did not bring a

claim under the BIT, but only under the Concession Contract and the
Investment Agreement. Therefore this objection should be rejected’”.

Is there a dispute between the parties to the contractual dispute resolution
clauses?

The Tribunal will now review the jurisdictional objections related to the parties on the
basis of the Investment Agreement (2.3.1) and of the Concession Contract (2.3.2).

2.3.1 The Investment Agreement

The Respondents object that Noble Energy (b) and MachalaPower (c) cannot rely
on the arbitration clause contained in the Investment Agreement for purposes of
establishing the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. To decide on this objection, the Tribunal
will first examine the relation between Noble Energy and Samedan Oil Corporation
(a).

The request for relief in the Request for Arbitration begins as follows:

For the reasons stated herein, Noble Energy and MachalaPower request an award granting them the
following relief:

1. A declaration that Ecuador and CONELEC have violated the Treaty...
[Emphasis added]

87.

88.

89.

90.

30

a) Did Noble Energy step into Samedan Oil Corporation’s shoes?

According to the Claimants, Delaware law governs the merger and its effects. It
follows that the consequences of the merger are that “Noble Energy succeeded to
all of Samedan’s rights and obligations under its contracts” (C-Rejoinder, 4 99).
Section 259(a) of the Delaware General Corporations Law refers to the surviving or
resulting company as “possessing all the rights” of the merged companies and
states that all property “shall be vested” in the surviving or resulting company (C-
Answer, 23 March 2007, 958, Exh. LA. C-211).

The Respondents contend that Ecuador law and the terms of the Investment
Agreement govern the consequences of the merger. The Tribunal will revert later to
the applicability of the Investment Agreement. At this juncture, with respect to the
applicable national law, it agrees with the Claimants that Delaware law governs the
validity and effects of the merger between Samedan Oil Corporation and Noble
Energy, both being companies incorporated under the laws of Delaware"®.

On the basis of the certificate of ownership and merger of 17 December 2002 (Exh.
C-201), the Tribunal is satisfied that Samedan Oil Corporation was merged into
Noble Energy and that Noble Energy is the surviving entity of the merger, it being
understood that “all property, rights, privileges, powers and franchises, and every
other interest shall be thereafter as effectually the property of the surviving [...]
corporation” and that “all debts, liabilities and duties of the respective constituent
corporations shall thenceforth attach to said surviving [...] corporation” (Section 259
of the Delaware General Corporation Law (LA. C-211)). In other words, Noble
Energy has absorbed Samedan Oil Corporation and succeeded to all its rights and
obligations.

b) Can Noble Energy rely on the arbitration clause contained in the
Investment Agreement?
(i) Positions of the parties

The Respondents contend that Noble Energy is not a party to the Investment
Agreement. They consider that Ecuadorian law and the terms of the Investment
Agreement govern this issue and argue that the absorbing company in a merger
does not automatically acquire all of the absorbed company’s rights over the assets.
Specifically, they submit that Noble Energy should have complied with the applicable

8 Delaware General Corporation Law (section 259), LA. C-211

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

31

procedures set forth in the Investment Agreement (Tr. p. 62) for it to acquire all the
rights of Samedan Oil Corporation.

Articles 7 and 8 of the Investment Agreement provided for procedures for the
assignment of all or part of the investment and the accession to the Investment
Agreement in accordance with certain provisions of Regulatory Decree No. 1132
issued under the Law on Promotion and Guarantee of Investments (the
“Regulations”; Exhibit C-21). Article 10 (b) of the Regulations provided that transfers
or assignment needed to be registered with the Central Bank of Ecuador or with the
Ministry of Foreign Trade, Industrialization, Fishing, and Competitiveness (MICIP).
Article 25 of the Regulations established that an assignment or, in the case of
mergers by fusion, absorption or succession, a transfer could be made freely
provided that the title giving rise to the assignment was registered with the MICIP. In
addition, in the event of transfer or assignment of a public service, a state
authorization was required, in the present case an authorization from CONELEC.

In this context, the Respondents also claim that they did not intend to execute an
agreement with Noble Energy and that is the reason why the Investment Agreement
provided in Clause 8 that new investors had ‘the alternative to either accede to [the

agreement] or execute a new one” (R-Reply, 4 50).

By contrast, the Claimants contend that Noble Energy is a party to the Investment
Agreement by virtue of the merger which took place on 17 December 2002 between
Samedan Oil Corporation, the signatory of the Investment Agreement, and Noble
Energy, the latter being the surviving entity (Exh. C-201).

In the Claimants’ view, there was no need for Noble Energy to accede to the
Investment Agreement because it became automatically and directly party to it
through the merger by take-over or absorption (Tr., p. 145). No assignment or
transfer of rights was involved, as “the nature and essence of the juridical person
remains the same” (C-Answer, 23 March 2007, § 49). What was involved was
“simply merging a wholly-owned subsidiary into the parent company” (C-Answer, 23
March 2007, 456). In addition, under Delaware Law, a merger is not a transfer of
assets (C-Answer, 23 March 2007, footnote 63).

Therefore in the Claimants’ view, Clause 7 of the Investment Agreement entitled
“Assignment” does not apply to Noble Energy. The same is true of Article 25 of the
Investment Regulations also entitled “Assignment”. In addition, the accession

96.

97.

98.

99.

32

procedure provided for in Clause 8 of the Investment Agreement applies only in the
event that a new investor joins, which is not the situation here.

As an alternative argument, the Claimants invoke the cases of Holiday Inns and
Amco to argue that even if Noble Energy is not deemed a signatory of the
Investment Agreement, the Tribunal has jurisdiction over it based on the reality of
the investment and the actual parties in interest (C-Answer, 23 March 2007, { 64 to
70). Based inter alia on Holiday Inns and Banro Resources v. Congo, the Claimants
argue that the parent company ought to be a party to the contract through its
participation in the performance. In other words, ICSID tribunals are not formalistic
when they assess their competence and review the circumstances surrounding the
case, in particular the relationships among the companies involved. In this respect,
the Claimants explained in their Answer of 23 March 2007 that Noble Energy does
business through its subsidiaries and that all the funding of MachalaPower
originated from Noble Energy (C-Answer, {| 61).

(ii) Tribunal’s determination

The Tribunal must now turn to the provisions of the Investment Agreement. Indeed,
it is not because Noble Energy has succeeded to Samedan Oil Corporation’s
contractual rights that it may not be bound by possible restrictions to which its
predecessor may have agreed. The potentially relevant provisions are Clauses 2.10,
2.7, the Parties Clause, Clauses 8 and 7. The Tribunal will review them in sequence.

The Tribunal first notes Clause 2.10 of the Investment Agreement which defines a
“party” to such agreement as follows:

Party or Parties shall have the meaning set forth in the Parties Clause of
this Investment Agreement, including any Person acquiring the status
of Investor as a result of his accession to this Investment Agreement in
accordance with the Regulations and this Investment Agreement.
[Emphasis added]

In turn, Clause 2.7 defines an investor as:

the maker of an Investment in accordance with the provisions of the
Regulations and this Investment Agreement, including the Person
identified as such in the Parties Clause of the Investment Agreement, any
other person who has accede [sic] to this Investment Agreement in
accordance with the Regulations, and in each case their successors,
assigns and designees.

[Emphasis added].

100. In the Parties Clause of the Investment Agreement, Samedan Oil Corporation is

identified as the investor. The Tribunal has established that Noble Energy

101.

33

succeeded to all the rights and obligations of Samedan Oil Corporation, i.e. all the
rights and obligations of the investor. Therefore, by virtue of Clause 2.7 combined
with Clause 2.10 Noble Energy must be deemed a party to the Agreement. This
said, it is true that Clause 2.10 refers to “accession to this Investment Agreement in
accordance with the Regulations and this Investment Agreement’. In view of the
clear wording of Clause 2.7, the Tribunal does not believe that this reference in
Clause 2.10 should change its conclusion. For the sake of completeness, the
Tribunal will nevertheless review the other contract provisions which may possibly
be pertinent.

In this latter connection, the Tribunal concurs with the Claimants that Clause 8 of the
Investment Agreement entitled “Accession” only applies when several investors are
involved in the project. The wording of Clause 8 in connection with Article 19 of the
Regulations shows that such clause is inapplicable to the present fact situation.
Clause 8 reads as follows:

a. The protection and guarantees derived from this Investment
Agreement shall be valid and effectual for each Investor who has
executed or acceded to it subsequent to the Commencement Date, and
their individual rights shall not be affected due to the fact that other
Investors have not executed the corresponding Investment Agreement or
have not acceded to it, or that other Investors or the Recipient Company
have not complied with the obligations assumed under the respective
Investment Agreement; and

b. In such cases, any investors who participate directly or indirectly in
the Recipient Company for purposes of performing the Project may elect
to execute an Investment Agreement that shall protect their investment
individually or, at their discretion, may accede to this Investment
Agreement executed by the Recipient Company pursuant to the
provisions of Article 19 of the Regulations.

102. Article 19 of the Regulations to which Clause 8 refers reads as follows:

EXECUTION OF THE INVESTMENT CONTRACT. The investment
contract shall be executed by the Ministry of Foreign Trade,
Industrialization and Fishing on behalf of the Ecuadorian State, and the
investor that requested execution of the contract, whether acting in its
own name or through a duly authorized representative. If the investment
is made through an investment vehicle, the investment vehicle shall also
sign the investment contract together with the applicant or at a different
time.

The investment contract, upon the acknowledgement of the relevant
signatures, shall be notarized at a Notarial Office within thirty days
following the execution of the contract. This notarial act shall be
considered an undetermined amount notarial act.

When several investors participate in the same project, each of them or
all of them jointly shall be entitled to appoint an attorney in fact, unless
they appoint the investment vehicle to represent the investments made or
to be made by the investors taking part the project, who request to be
protected under an investment contract. All the protections and

103.

104.

34

guarantees arising out of the investment contract shall be valid and
effective for each of the investors which executed the contract or
thereafter accepted the provisions contained therein, without their
individual rights being impaired by the fact that other investors have failed
to execute the pertaining investment contract or to accept the provisions
contained therein, or by the fact that the investment vehicle has failed to
fully comply with the obligations undertaken under the pertaining
investment contract.

In these cases, the investors participating in the investment vehicle shall
be entitled to execute an investment contract for the execution of the
project, which protects their individual investments or to adhere to the
investment contract executed by the investment vehicle through a sworn
statement made before a Notary Public, a copy of which shall be
forwarded to the Ministry of Foreign Trade, Industrialization and Fishing,
together with the pertaining application, which shall state, in addition to
the information required by Section 17 of these Regulations, the Notary
Public in charge, and the date of notarization of the investment contract
to which they have adhered. The Ministry of Foreign Trade,
Industrialization and Fishing shall express in writing its conformity with
this adhesion, within 15 working days immediately following the filing of
the application. The investor which has adhered to an investment
contract shall notarize its sworn statement as well as the approval of the
Ministry of Foreign Trade, Industrialization and Fishing, and a marginal
note shall be included in the notarization evidencing the pertaining
investment contract. This notarization shall also be considered an
undetermined amount notarial act.

If the investment consists of a contract, an authorization or a license for
the construction or use of public works or the provision of public services,
the investment contract shall be executed at the time of the execution of
the relevant contract, authorization or license whose stability is
guaranteed by the investment contract executed, or after such contract,
authorization or license has been granted, at the discretion of the
interested investor. In the latter case, the date of execution of the contract
or the date on which the authorization or license has been granted shall
be considered the commencement date for all the purposes of these
Regulations.

The MICIP shall, at all times, verify compliance with the terms and

conditions agreed upon in the investment contract, and with the specific

commitments undertaken by the investor under the investment contract.

To that effect, the investor shall furnish the MICIP with the information

necessary for such verification, as requested, in accordance with

applicable laws.
Clause 7 of the Investment Agreement entitled “Assignment” provides that the
Investor is free to transfer or assign its investment pursuant to the provisions of
Articles 10(b) and 25 of the Regulations, i.e., “the terms defined by article 6 of the
Substituting Regulations to the Investment Promotion and Guarantee Law’
(Clause 2 Investment Agreement), or the Regulatory Decree to the Law on

Promotion and Guarantee of Investment (Exh. C-21).

Article 10(b) of the Regulations deals with free remission of capital, earnings and
other payment abroad. Article 25 of the Regulations entitled “Assignment” provides
that transfer or assignments will only be effective if the new investor complies with
the accession procedures under the Regulations. It makes an exception for transfers

10:

106.

10

5.

@

N

35

resulting from mergers, absorptions, and other corporate restructuring. In these
cases, it is sufficient (“sd/o bastara”) to register the title giving rise to the transfer
with the MICIP. In the event that the investment relates to a project involving a
concession or the provision of public services, the registration with the MICIP.
requires a prior authorization of the State, specifically of the agency which awarded
the concession.

The record does not show that Noble Energy applied for such an authorization and
registered the transfer. Nor does it contain any evidence to the effect that Ecuador
or CONELEC were advised of the merger. To the contrary, the evidence
demonstrates a considerable lack of transparency of the Claimants’ structure during
the course of the project. For instance, some correspondence was still sent on
Samedan Oil Corporation’s letter head as late as 2004'°. Similarly, letters dated
2005 were sent to the MICIP on behalf of MachalaPower and “Samedan
International (antes Samedan Oil Corporation)’”*°.

The question thus arises whether the non-compliance with the terms of Article 25 of
the Regulations prevents Noble Energy from relying on the Investment Agreement
for jurisdictional purposes. The Arbitral Tribunal comes to the conclusion that it does
not for the following reasons.

First, the Tribunal does not believe that Clause 7 of the Investment Agreement and
Article 25 of the Regulations apply to the merger by absorption of a wholly-owned
subsidiary into its parent company. This understanding appears supported by the
wording and underlying rationale of Clause 2.7. When a parent absorbs its
subsidiary and thus becomes formally the investor in the latter's place, there is no
real change in the “investor” from the State’s perspective. No previously unknown
entity has entered into the contractual relationship. The only real change is a
shortening of the corporate chain of ownership, which should not impact the State in
any way. This is especially true here where the nationality of the parent and

For example, letters were sent from MachalaPower and Samedan Oil Corporation to report new
investments to the Ministry in 2002 (Annexes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 of Exh. C-11). Even more confusing, a letter
of 10 August 2004 (Exh. C-34) shows under the heading MachalaPower the indication “a subsidiary of
Samedan Oil Corporation” when Samedan Oil Corporation had allegedly ceased to exist in December
2002. The same applies to various letters sent in 2003 and 2004 (Exh. C-122, 123, 124, 152, 153, 156,
158, 159 and 179). To answer the Tribunal’s questions on that point, the Claimants explained in their
Answer of 23 March 2007 that they were mistakes and that employees had used up old stationery.
Specifically, these were letters dated respectively 18 and 25 January 2005 and 16 March 2005 (Exh.
C-11, annexes 6, 7 and 8). In answer to the Tribunal’s question in this respect, on that point, the
Claimants stated that Samedan International (now Noble Energy International Ltd.) was a wholly
owned subsidiary of Noble Energy (C-Answer, 23 March 2007, § 61). This statement only adds to the
existing confusion. The correspondence invoked by the Claimants (Exh. C-33, C-49, C-56, C-57, C-58)
to further support their position are letters sent to initiate amicable consultations, dated as of August
2004, and which state “Noble Energy, Inc, formerly called Samedan Oil Corporation”.

108.

@

109.

o

110.

11

112.

113.

36

subsidiary is the same. Similarly, one could not properly raise an argument of
intuitus personae. On the one hand, the Investment Agreement does not appear to
have been entered into intuitus personae, which is for instance apparent from the
content of Clause 7. On the other hand, in economic terms, the persona is
essentially unchanged when the parent replaces (absorbs) a wholly-owned
subsidiary.

Second, if the requirements of Article 25 of the Regulations were nevertheless to be
deemed applicable, then the Tribunal would regard them as mere formalities and not
as conditions precedent to the acquisition of the rights of a party in the specific
circumstances of this case. This conclusion is derived from the same grounds as
those indicated above by the Tribunal to consider the non-application of this Article
(see 107 above).

Therefore, the Tribunal holds that Noble Energy may rely on the Investment
Agreement to establish the jurisdiction of this Tribunal.

ce) Can MachalaPower invoke the arbitration clause contained in the
Investment Agreement?

The Respondents argue furthermore that MachalaPower is not a party to the
Investment Agreement because it is only the recipient of the investment and not the
foreign investor itself. According to the Respondents, Ecuadorian law does not
intend to protect the recipient company of the investment.

. The Tribunal disagrees with the Respondents. The Parties Clause of the Investment

Agreement specifies that Ecuador (the State), Samedan Oil Corporation (the
Investor), and MachalaPower (the Recipient Company) are all parties to the
agreement. It expressly states that “the State, the Investor and the Recipient
Company shall be jointly identified as the ‘Parties’”.

In addition, the dispute resolution clause in Clause 11(a) and (b) of the Investment
Agreement quoted above leaves no doubt when it provides that the “/nvestor and/or
the Recipient Company” shall seek to resolve disputes through consultations and
negotiations and failing so, by arbitration.

MachalaPower also undertook various contractual obligations, such as the
commitment to make the investment in the power plant. At the same time, the State
provided certain guarantees, for example legal and tax stability in Clause 3, to both
the Investor and the Recipient Company, MachalaPower.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

3.1

120.

37

Furthermore, as the Claimants stress, Clause 11 (c) of the Investment Agreement
incorporated by reference Clause 22.5 of the Concession Contract. By virtue of such
clause, the parties waived their right to bring any disputes arising out of the
Investment Agreement before the local courts since they had agreed to submit and
resolve their disputes according to arbitration proceedings (Tr., p. 128). As a
consequence of this express waiver, ICSID arbitration was the only dispute
resolution method available under the Agreements.

Accordingly, the Tribunal has no hesitation concluding that MachalaPower is entitled
to rely on the ICSID arbitration provision contained in the Investment Agreement.

2.3.2 The Concession Contract

As for the Concession Contract, there is no doubt that MachalaPower is a party to
this contract and that it can invoke its terms, including the arbitration agreement. As
for Noble Energy, the Claimants have not alleged that it is a party to the Concession
Contract.

2.3.3. Conclusion

Therefore, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants can invoke the arbitration clauses
contained in the Investment Agreement and the Concession Contract, provided that
the other conditions of Clauses 11 and 22 of the respective agreement are satisfied.
These conditions will be examined below.

It follows that the Respondents’ objections as to the “jus standi” or standing of the
Claimants as parties to the Investment Agreement and/or the Concession Contract
are dismissed.

OBJECTIONS RELATED TO THE NATURE OF THE DISPUTES

The Tribunal first will review whether the disputes at issue meet the requirements of
the ICSID Convention (3.1). It will then examine if such disputes fall within the scope
of the BIT (3.2), including if the facts alleged may constitute treaty breaches. It will
finally assess if the disputes are within the ambit of the Agreements (3.3).

Is there a legal dispute arising directly out of an investment for the purposes
of the ICSID Convention?

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention requires a legal dispute (3.1.1) arising directly
out of an investment (3.1.2).

121.

122.

123.

124.

38

3.1.1 Alegal dispute
a) Positions of the parties

According to the Respondents, there are no legal disputes as such between the
parties. Ecuador and CONELEC “are not connected in any way to the electric power
distribution companies’ (the “Distribution Companies’) debts, which constitute a
merely commercial matter that exclusively concerns those companies” (R-Mem.,
40).

The Claimants contend that there are legal disputes between the parties, which
arise out of the series of governmental measures through which the Respondents
repudiated their undertakings. These measures give rise to disagreements on points
of law or fact, to conflicts of legal views or interest between the parties. Such
disagreements or conflicts constitute “disputes”, as defined in many international
decisions.

b) Tribunal’s determination

In the Tribunal’s opinion, the dispute or disputes submitted to it are of a legal nature
as they involve a disagreement about legal rights or obligations. Or, to use the
words of the Report of the Executive Directors of the World Bank on the
Convention*', the present dispute is legal in nature because it deals with “the
existence or scope of [the Claimants’ ... legal right[s}’ that will be examined in more
detail in sections 3.2 and 3.3 below and with the nature and extent of the relief to be
granted to the Claimants as a result of the Respondents’ alleged violation of such
rights.

Whether the rights asserted by the Claimants are ultimately found to exist and
whether Ecuador is ultimately liable for the acts complained of must await the
proceedings on the merits. Subject to determining whether the disputes arise directly
out of an investment within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, which
will be discussed next, the Tribunal holds that the assertion of such rights has given
rise to legal disputes which fall within the scope of the jurisdiction of the Centre as
set forth in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

See Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
Between States and Nationals of Other States; International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, 18 March 1965, § 26; available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/ basicdoc/partB-
section05.htm#03.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

39

3.1.2 A dispute arising directly out of an investment
a) Positions of the parties

The Respondents argue that the disputes do not arise directly out of an investment
because the claims only refer to “actions that could have affected the payment
capacity of the distribution companies and could have increased their outstanding
debt’ to MachalaPower (R-Mem., § 30). Thus, the disputes are said to be of a
commercial nature and to result from the conduct of private parties (R-Reply, {| 79).

By contrast, the Claimants say that the disputes relate to Noble Energy’s
investments which include directly and indirectly: “(i) equity interests in
MachalaPower and EDC; (ii) the ownership and control of contractual and legal
rights through the Concession Contract, the Investment Agreement and the
Production Sharing Contract ("PSC"); (iii) well in excess of $450 million invested by
Claimants in Ecuador; (iv) the electricity generated by their power plant; and
(v) claims to money and performance having an economic value" (C-C.Mem., 4 50).

The Claimants argue that MachalaPower made an investment as well. In their view,
“a large part of Claimants’ investment in the Machala Power Project has been
performed and made by MachalaPower. Actually, under the Concession Contract,
MachalaPower was responsible to make - and it actually made - the investment in
the Machala Power Plant Project” (C-C.Mem., § 121).

b) Tribunal’s determination

It is common ground that the ICSID Convention contains no definition of the term
“investment”. The Tribunal concurs with earlier ICSID decisions which, subject to
minor variations, have relied on the so-called “Salini test”. Such test identifies the
following elements as indicative of an "investment" for purposes of the ICSID
Convention: (i) a contribution, (ii) a certain duration over which the project is
implemented, (iii) a sharing of operational risks, and (iv) a contribution to the host
State’s development, being understood that these elements may be closely
interrelated, should be examined in their totality and will normally depend on the
circumstances of each case.

The Tribunal will now review whether the investments at stake fulfill these
requirements, first for Noble Energy (i) and then for MachalaPower (ii).

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

40

(i) Noble Energy

As already mentioned, Noble Energy has an indirect participation in MachalaPower.
There is no doubt that under the ICSID Convention, shares in a company qualify as
an investment”.

In addition, the Tribunal notes that Clause 11(c) of the Investment Agreement refers
to the Concession Contract. Clause 22.2.2.4 of that contract provides that “/t/he
Parties recognize and agree that for the purposes of Article 25 of the [ICSID]
Convention, any dispute is and shall be regarded as a legal dispute directly arising
from an investment between a contractual state and a national of another
contractual state.”

Contrary to the Respondents’ allegations, the fact that certain aspects of the dispute
may be connected to the debts of the distribution companies does not change their
nature and transform them into commercial disputes. The disputes submitted to the
Tribunal relate to and arise directly from the implementation of a project which was
clearly not a mere commercial operation. The Concession was to last 31 years and
the project clearly benefited the State’s development and involved a risk for the
investors.

(ii) MachalaPower

The Tribunal considers that MachalaPower made an investment as well. Indeed,
under the Agreements, MachalaPower was to build the necessary infrastructure to
operate the plant. It is the owner of the plant pursuant to Clause 6.4 of the
Concession Contract and the owner of its assets and equipment.

As the Tribunal has already mentioned in connection with Noble Energy's
investment, Clause 22.2.2.4 of the Concession Contract expressly acknowledges
that ‘[t]he Parties recognize and agree that for the purposes of Article 25 of the
[ICSID] Convention, any dispute is and shall be regarded as a legal dispute directly
arising from an investment between a contractual state and a national of another
contractual state.”

It follows from the above considerations that there is a legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment for the purposes of the ICSID Convention.

See for example, in lieu of many others, CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, op.

cit., | 49 to 56.

3.2

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

41

Is there a dispute for the purposes of the BIT?

The Tribunal must now assess whether there is an investment dispute between
Noble Energy and the Respondents for the purposes of the BIT (3.2.1) and, if so,
whether such dispute is sufficiently substantiated (3.2.2).

3.2.1 Is there an investment dispute for the purposes of the BIT?

Article VI of the BIT, which was quoted in its entirety above, provides for ICSID
arbitration if there is an investment dispute. In its first paragraph, it defines an
investment dispute as follows:

[A]n investment dispute is a dispute between a Party and a national
or company of the other Party arising out of or relating to (a) an
investment agreement between that Party and such national or company;
(b) an investment authorization granted by that Party's foreign investment
authority to such national or company; or (c) an alleged breach of any
right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to an
investment. [Emphasis added]

 

  

Also relevant in this context is Article I(1) of the BIT, which gives the following
definition of investment:

(a) “investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of one
Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or
companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service
and investment contracts; and includes:

(i) tangible and intangible property, including rights, such as
mortgages, liens and pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a
company or interests in the assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having
economic value, and associated with an investment;

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and
permits pursuant to law.
The Claimants argue that both the Investment Agreement and the Concession
Contract must be considered as investment agreements within the meaning of
Article VI of the BIT (C-Mem., { 43-49).

The Tribunal notes that the Investment Agreement complied with the Investment
Decree and was drafted on the basis of the Model Investment Agreement issued by
Ministerial Decree on 30 January 2001 (Exh. C-48). It is thus satisfied that there is
an investment dispute between the Respondents and Noble Energy “arising out of or
relating to an investment agreement” under Article VI(1)(a) of the BIT.

141.

142.

42

As a next question, the Tribunal will review whether the dispute also falls within the
scope of Article VI(i)(c). There is no doubt that Noble Energy’s equity interest in
MachalaPower constitutes an investment pursuant to the definition of the BIT
referred to above. It is equally clear that the Claimants allege violations by Ecuador
of “rights conferred or created by this BIT’, namely by Articles II(1), II(3)(a), II(3)(b),
Il(3)(c), I(3)(c) and Ill. It follows that there is a dispute about alleged breaches of
rights created by the BIT with respect to an investment.

Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied that there is an investment dispute arising out
of or related to an investment agreement and involving alleged breaches of Treaty
rights. This conclusion is subject to the requirement that the facts alleged are
capable of constituting treaty breaches, as elaborated in the following section.

3.2.2 Are the facts alleged by Noble Energy, if proved, capable of constituting

143.

144.

145.

breaches of the BIT?

The parties differ on whether the Claimants need to show a prima facie case of a
treaty breach to establish jurisdiction. This question only arises with respect to Noble
Energy, which is the only claimant entitled to raise treaty claims.

a) Positions of the parties

The Respondents argue that the Centre lacks jurisdiction over purely contractual
claims (R-Mem., {| 56-60) and that the umbrella clause contained in the BIT cannot
transform contract claims into claims based on a treaty (R-Mem., § 57; Reply on
Jurisdiction, § 114 and Tr., p. 32).

The Respondents also submit that the disputes involved third parties for which
Ecuador is not liable. They have identified at least four claims over which the
Tribunal has allegedly no jurisdiction because they do not involve the Government,
i.e., the claim that the distributors’ Trust gave MachalaPower a lower priority than to
other generators; the claim that the trust implemented the N-1 collection method; the
claim that the WEM agents failed to contribute to a Guarantee Fund; and the claim
that residual oil was sold to oil-using thermo generators at domestic prices (R-Reply,
q 102). In passing, they agree that the distribution companies should pay
MachalaPower’s outstanding invoices (R-Reply, § 94). During the hearing, the
Respondents withdrew their objection regarding the priority issue acknowledging
that Decree 573 indeed set payment priorities (Tr., p. 169).

146.

147.

148.

149.

43

The Respondents further state that the Tribunal must examine the facts in order to
reach a jurisdictional determination, while they accept that the actual proof of the
facts was a matter for the merits. According to the Respondents, the Tribunal cannot
assume that the facts presented by the Claimants are correct (Tr., p. 35) or “labelling
is not enough to establish jurisdiction” (Tr., p. 35).

For the Claimants, the objection based on the umbrella clause pertains to the merits.
In any event, the Claimants rely on the umbrella clause contained in Article II.3(c) of
the BIT to establish that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over both treaty and contract
claims.

On the basis of the ICJ decision in Oi! Platforms, the Claimants argue that they
“need not establish at the jurisdictional level either that the facts alleged are true or
accurate or that such facts, if proved, would necessarily violate the BIT’ (C-
Rejoinder, 4 13). They only need to establish that the requirements of Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention are satisfied.

Regarding the objection that the disputes did not involve the Government, the
Claimants contend that the measures complained of were taken directly by the
Respondents in breach of the stabilization clause in the Agreements and the BIT
(Tr., p. 108) for the following reasons:

- Residual oil is a subsidy given by the State to oil burning generators that
altered the market conditions in violation of the stabilization clauses contained
in the Agreements (Tr. p.102).

= The creation and the amendment of the fideicomisos and the implementation
of the N-1 system were due to governmental acts. Because the privatization
process failed, the Government needed to allocate the scarce revenues
collected by the distribution companies among the various players and created
the fideicomisos, establishing priorities to secure the payment of energy to
transmission and generator companies. An Inter-Institutional Agreement was
signed in 2004 (Exh. C-120) whereby payment priorities and percentages of
collection were established as well as the N-1 payment system. Amendments
made in 2003 and 2004 through Decree 573 benefited state owned
transmission and generation companies and disadvantaged others, such as
MachalaPower (Tr., pp. 106-108).

- As for the Guarantee Fund, it was adopted by the Government to ensure
payment to the generators before the Agreements were signed. Once the

150.

151.

152.

44

Agreements were signed, the Government eliminated that guarantee because
the distribution companies had insufficient resources to fund the Guarantee
Fund (Tr., p. 108).

b) Tribunal’s determination
(i) Applicable test

The Tribunal first wishes to distinguish this case from previous ICSID cases. Indeed,
unlike some tribunals in previous cases, the Tribunal is not in a situation in which it
must identify claims arising from a contract including a forum selection clause which
are submitted to the Tribunal under the BIT. Indeed, here the two contracts and the
BIT all refer to ICSID arbitration; there is no issue of parallel jurisdiction. The task for
this Tribunal is rather to delineate which claims can benefit from protection under the
BIT, by contrast to those benefiting from protection under the agreements. This is
not a matter of jurisdiction but rather of the applicable legal framework.

This clarification being made, for those claims which are treaty-based, the Tribunal
considers that a mere allegation of breach is not enough to establish jurisdiction. For
jurisdictional purposes, under the BIT, Noble Energy must establish that the facts
which it alleges may constitute breaches of the treaty pursuant to the test articulated
in the separate opinion of Judge Higgins in Oi! Platforms, who proposed the
following approach:

The only way in which, in the present case, it can be determined whether
the claims of [Claimant] are sufficiently plausibly based upon the 1955
Treaty is to accept pro tem the facts as alleged by [Claimant] to be true
and in that light to interpret Articles |, |V and X for jurisdictional purposes,
that is to say, to see if on the basis of Iran’s claims of fact there could
occur a violation of one or more of them”.

The Tribunal notes that other international decisions, among which /mpregilo v.
Pakistan™ and Bayindir v. Pakistan*®, have adopted the same approach.

Case concerning Oil Platforms (/slamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), \CJ, Separate

opinion, 12 December 1996, { 32, footnotes omitted, available at www.icj-cij.org.

Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction of
22 April 2005, § 254; available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/impregilo-decision.pdf. “The
present Tribunal is in full agreement with the approach evident in this jurisprudence. It reflects two
complementary concerns: to ensure that courts and tribunals are not flooded with claims which have no
chance of success, or may even be of an abusive nature; and equally to ensure that, in considering
issues of jurisdiction, courts and tribunals do not go into the merits of cases without sufficient prior
debate. In conformity with this jurisprudence, the Tribunal has considered whether the facts as alleged
by the Claimant in this case, if established, are capable of coming within those provisions of the BIT
which have been invoked”.

Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case No.
ARB/03/29, Decision on Jurisdiction of 14 November 2005, § 197, available at

153.

154.

155.

156.

45

In the present instance, the Respondents have raised a general objection that
“labelling is not enough” and two main arguments, i.e., the umbrella clause does not
allow the Claimants to present contract claims under the BIT and the disputes are
not with the State or CONELEC. The Respondents have not elaborated on each and
every treaty claim. Be this as it may, the Tribunal will assess for each claim whether
the facts alleged may be capable, if proved, of constituting breaches of the BIT. This
assessment is made prima facie for purposes of jurisdiction only and does not pre-
empt any different findings on the merits.

(ii) Alleged breaches
* Article II(3)(c ): The umbrella clause

The Respondents contend that the Claimants raise only contract claims, which
cannot fall within the ambit of the BIT. According to the Respondents, the Claimants
purport to use the umbrella clause contained in the BIT to allege that breaches of
the Agreements constitute treaty violations. They submit that this is a jurisdictional
issue (Tr., p. 22). For the Claimants, this pertains to the merits of the case. Having
said that, the Claimants invoke, in any event, the umbrella clause contained in
Article 1I(3)(c) of the BIT®® to establish that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over both
treaty and contract claims.

The Tribunal has found jurisdiction over Noble Energy under the BIT on both the
basis of its shareholding and of its claim derived from the Investment Agreement. It
need not therefore embark on a discussion about the application of the umbrella
clause at this stage. It must, however, review whether the facts upon which Noble
Energy bases its claim may be capable of constituting a breach of Article II(3)(c) of
the BIT.

Noble Energy alleges that the Respondents breached numerous obligations which
were binding on the latter in favour of the former, namely in the Claimants’ words:

. Respondents obligated themselves to provide general and specific
legal stability to Claimants. This commitment by the Government
was made in Article 3.1 of the Investment Agreement, Clause
12.4.5 of the Concession Contract and Articles 23 and 271 of the
Constitution and Article 12 of the Investment Decree.

 

26

http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/ARBO329Decisionjurisdiction.pdf: “In performing this task, the
Tribunal will apply a prima facie standard, both to the determination of the meaning and scope of the
BIT provisions and to the assessment whether the facts alleged may constitute breaches. If the result
is affirmative, jurisdiction will be established, but the existence of breaches will remain to be litigated on
the merits.”

“Each Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments.”

46

. Respondents obligated themselves not to discriminate against
Claimants or Claimants' investment. This commitment was made in
Article 3.4 of the Investment Agreement and Clause 12.1.4 of the
Concession Contract, Articles 244 and 249 of the Constitution,
Article 21 of the Investment Law, Article 14 of the Investment
Decree and Article 1 of the CAN Decision 536.

. Respondents obligated themselves to provide MachalaPower with
treatment at least as good as that given to the most favored
generator in the electric power sector. This commitment was made
in Clause 26 of the Concession Contract and Article 10 of the
Electricity Law.

. Respondents obligated themselves to suspend the dispatch of
MachalaPower's electricity to those distributors not paying their
bills. This commitment was undertaken in Clause 12.1.6 of the
Concession Contract.

. Respondents obligated themselves to approve tariffs at a level
such that the price of electricity would cover the total costs of
generation. This commitment was undertaken in Article 53 of the
Electricity Law.

. Respondents obligated themselves to gradually increase the tariffs
in order to cover the full costs of generation. This commitment was
made in CONELEC Resolutions No. 123/98 of October 23, 1998,
and 87/00 of May 24, 2000.

(C-Mem., 4314)

157. On this basis, the Tribunal observes that it appears that Ecuador’s obligations vis-a-

vis the Claimants stem not only from the Agreements but also from laws and
regulations. It also notes that the Investment Agreement appears to contain a
stabilization clause which may constitute an obligation of a State capable of falling
within the scope of an umbrella clause*”.

* Article III(3)(b): Arbitrary and discriminatory measures

158. According to Noble Energy, the Respondents took the following arbitrary measures:

27

. They suspended the increases in the price of electricity paid by
final consumers and failed to fully compensate the difference
between the full economic costs of generation and the price
collected by distributors in violation of the Electricity Law and
regulations and the stabilization clauses of the Constitution and the
Agreements.

. They adopted the N-1 method of payment, subjecting bills unpaid
in the current month to the last priority order for payment, thus
making old bills virtually uncollectible.

. They refused to enforce the regulatory framework and to suspend
dispatch, impose interest, fines and other sanctions on state-
owned companies.

The Tribunal has noted the argument of the Respondents’ counsel at the hearing according to which
“observe is not a word that we use to describe a contractual commitment or a legal commitment’ (Tr.,
p. 24). It finds however, that this argument does not change its preliminary assessment.

47

. They modified the fideicomisos to benefit Colombian generators
and the state-owned transmission and distribution companies to
the prejudice of MachalaPower, which was downgraded in the
priority order, in breach of the stabilization clauses.

. They granted a prepayment to the Colombian generators, but not
to MachalaPower, in breach of the stabilization clauses and the
discrimination obligations.

. They granted subsidies to state-owned oil-burning generators that
buy liquid fuels from Petroecuador to the prejudice of
MachalaPower in breach of the stabilization clauses.

(C-Mem., $323)

159. In addition, the Respondents allegedly took discriminatory measures favouring

160.

161.

Colombian generators and state-owned generation, distribution, and transmission
companies, or amending the fideicomisos, and not granting subsidies to
MachalaPower.

Article II(1): National and most favored nation treatment.

According to Noble Energy, the MFN provision was violated because Ecuadorian
and Colombian power generators, with whom it was in like circumstances, benefited
from a more favourable treatment, receiving subsidies and being thus able to reduce
their declaration costs and gain dispatch volume.

Article II(3)(a): Fair and equitable treatment

Noble Energy contends that Ecuador violated Article II(3)(a) that protects the
legitimate expectations which it derived from various contractual and legal
obligations of the State, in particular from the following:

. Article 249 of the Constitution provides that "The contractual
conditions [...] shall not be unilaterally modified by virtue of laws or
other provisions".

. Article 33 of the Constitution and the Preamble of the Investment
Decree state that legal certainty is one of the fundamental rights
that the State must recognize and guarantee.

. The preamble of the Investment Law states that “foreign
investment must be fostered and promoted so that it contributes,
together with national investment, to Ecuador's economic
development, ensuring the legal certainty required for investments
to be adequately made, on the basis of a stable legal and
institutional framework".

. Sections 31.8 and 23.1.1 of the Concession Contract, and Articles
3 and 9 of the Investment Agreement freeze the legal framework
that applies to them as it was on the date the Concession Contract
was signed (Oct. 15, 2001)

. Article 3.1.2 of the Investment Agreement provides that Claimants,
their Investment and the Concession Contract "shall enjoy full legal

stability in accordance with the Legal Framework in Force", which
"(i) may not be unilaterally modified by law or by any other
provisions of any kind affecting them, or by changes in the
interpretation or application thereof and (ii) may be modified only
by mutual written agreement of the Parties expressly stating such
modifications", and that "the economic and financial conditions
considered for the Project and the Investment" shall not be
affected, altered, or modified.

. Section 24 of the Concession Contract states that if "the
[Concession] Contract, particularly the competitive conditions of
this [Concession] Contract" are altered or modified "causing
damages to [MachalaPower], the State shall recognize a
compensation for the damages inflicted" in order to restore or
maintain economic and financial stability.

. Section 13.2.3. of the Concession Contract states that
Respondents "shall not interfere directly or indirectly with
[MachalaPower's] management, resources or operations, except
as provided in this Contract.”

(C-Mem., 4 362)

162. According to Noble Energy, it was unfair and inequitable for the Respondents:

. to establish and promote a series of legal, contractual and
economic commitments to induce Claimants to invest in the
Ecuadorian gas and electricity industries, to enjoy the benefits of
investments in excess of US$ 100 million received in reliance on
those commitments, and then to effectively repudiate them by
altering the key rules and safeguards that had been designed to
attract Claimants to these sectors.

. to violate its own domestic laws such as the legal rights and
guarantees established in the Ecuadorian Constitution, the
Investment Law, the Electricity Law, the Investment Decree, the
Electricity Decree, and Decision CAN 536, among others.

. to violate the commitments and assurances undertaken in the
Electricity Regulatory Framework.

. to suspend the gradual increases of the electricity prices paid by
final consumers, setting them at levels that are insufficient to cover
the Spot Price payable to generators in violation of the Electricity
Law.

. to refuse to enforce the Regulatory Framework and the
Concession Contract by, among other things, refusing to suspend
the dispatch of MachalaPower's electricity to delinquent
distributors, forcing MachalaPower to supply electricity to
distributors that were not paying MachalaPower's bills.

. to modify the distributors’ fideicomisos to benefit the Colombian
generators, the Ecuadorian state-owned distributors, generators
and transmission companies, redirecting funds collected by the
fideicomisos that could have been used to pay MachalaPower's
bills.

. to prepay Colombian generators thereby reducing the funds
available in the WEM, contributing to MachalaPower's receivables
debt.

. to encourage investors to make hundreds of millions of dollars
investments in efficient, state-of-the-art power generation units by

163.

164.

49

establishing a market-driven system for determining the energy
Spot Price that gave a competitive edge and_ legitimate
expectations of profits to efficient generators, only to replace this
system with one characterized by Government intervention and
subsidized prices for liquid fuels used by MachalaPower's
competitors that deprive MachalaPower of its legitimate profit
expectations.

. to set local subsidized prices for liquid fuel used by oil-burning
generators and refuse to price PetroEcuador's participation share
under the PSC with those local liquid fuel prices.

. to subject the payment of bills under Decree 105/2005 to the
condition of MachalaPower withdrawing its ICSID arbitration.

(C-Mem., 4.364)

* Article Ill: Expropriation

The Claimants argue that the ownership of electricity generated by MachalaPower
and its rights to receive money proceeds from the sale of electric power constituted
an investment for Noble Energy. It follows that the Respondents are in breach of
Article Ill of the BIT since:

Respondents expropriated Claimants’ electricity and proceeds directly,
indirectly or by measures tantamount to expropriation. Respondents’
measures changed the method of collecting payments, altered the
payment order of the fideicomisos, refused to enforce the legal
framework and the contracts, prepaid Colombian generators, and forced
Respondents to provide power to the Government's companies even
when they refused to pay for service. Respondents also took specific
revenues from Claimants by forcing them to continue to provide power to
distributors that would not pay for electricity, in violation of Claimants’
contractual right to cut off power to these non-paying companies.
Claimants were left with an obligation to provide power to generators, yet
they lost the means to collect for their services, essentially forcing them
to provide power without being fully compensated for it. These measures
functioned to create MachalaPower's receivables debt, which continues
growing at a substantial pace, constituting an expropriation of rights,
power and revenues. (C-Mem., 398).

* Article II(3)(a): Full protection and security

The Claimants contend that the Respondents failed to provide full protection and
security to their investment by refusing to suspend service or to fine delinquent
distributors or impose corresponding interest (C-Mem., { 409). The Respondents
allegedly also destroyed the protections and security provided for by Ecuadorian law
such as the setting of tariffs covering the costs of the power system and creating a
Guarantee Fund to pay for transaction in the WEM (C-Mem., 4 412).

165.

166.

3.3

167.

168.

50

(iii) Conclusion of the Tribunal

Without prejudging the dispute on the merits, the Tribunal finds that the facts alleged
by Noble Energy in support of the claims just set forth may be capable of
constituting breaches of the BIT, if proven in the second stage of this arbitration. It is
thus satisfied that Noble Energy has made a sufficient prima facie showing for
purposes of jurisdiction. This said, to establish a violation of the BIT at the merits
stage, Noble Energy will need not only to prove the facts but also to establish the
law and, wherever applicable, to show that the State acted in its sovereign capacity
and not as any contract partner’.

In coming to the conclusion that it has jurisdiction over Noble Energy's BIT claims,
the Tribunal is aware that the Respondents have argued that the disputes involve
third parties in relation to the payment of invoices and that the State is not
responsible for the actions of distribution companies. These arguments raise
questions of attribution of State responsibility for the disputed measures. According
to the test set forth above, it is not for the Tribunal at the jurisdictional stage to
examine whether the acts complained of give rise to the State’s responsibility,
except if it were manifest that the entity involved had no link whatsoever with the
State, which is not the case here. This is a matter for the Tribunal to decide when
assessing the merits of the dispute. If it becomes necessary (it may not be
necessary, as this is only an alternative position taken by Noble Energy), the
Tribunal will rule on the issue of attribution under international law, especially by
reference to the Articles on State Responsibility as adopted in 2001 by the
International Law Commission and as commended to the attention of Governments
by the UN General Assembly in Resolution 56/83.

Is there a dispute arising out of the Agreements?

Clause 11(a) of the Investment Agreement refers to a dispute “in connection with the
Investment or the performance of the Investment Agreement’. Clause 22.2.2.1 of the
Concession Contract refers to “any dispute of any nature that may arise between the
Parties in relation to this Contract”.

As the Tribunal understands it, the Respondents’ objection that the disputes involve
other parties than the Respondents is not limited to the BIT claims. The Tribunal

See e.g., Consortium RFCC v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/06, Award, 22
December 2003, Vol. 20, No. 2, ICSID Rev.—FlLu. (2005), § 104.

169.

170.

171.

51

thus needs to review the contract claims and also determine if they fall within the
scope of the dispute settlement provisions of the Agreements.

 

3.3.1 of legal, and fi ial stability ined in
the C ion C and the I Ag

 

The Claimants allege that the Respondents breached the Concession Contract and
the Investment Agreement, especially the guarantees of legal, contractual and
financial stability, including the intangibility clauses protecting against a unilateral
modification of the Agreements (Clause 7.1 of the Concession Contract, Clause 3 of
the Investment Agreement), the stabilization clauses freezing the legal framework
(Clauses 31.8 and 23.1.1 of the Concession Contract and 3 and 9 of the Investment
Agreement), as well as the stabilization clause protection against changes which
may affect the competitive conditions of the contract (Clause 24.1 of the Concession
Contract).

The Respondents allegedly did so by adopting measures which modified the legal
framework in force at the time of the execution of the Agreements and changed
MachalaPower’s operating conditions. More specifically, the Respondents are said
to have indefinitely suspended the gradual tariff increases through CONELEC
Resolution 87/02. They also changed the payment mechanism (fideicomisos)
through Decrees 573, 923/2003 and by amendments made in 2003 and 2004.
Further, CONELEC decided to prepay Colombian generators, who had shared the
same priority in the fideicomisos with private generators. CONELEC’s Resolution
2/2003 then worsened the liquidity of the WEM, reduced the funds available to pay
MachalaPower’s spot market transactions, and increased its receivables. Moreover,
Decree 1539/2004 allowed oil burning power plants to acquire residual oil from
Petroecuador at an artificially low price, impacting MachalaPower’s dispatch, spot
prices and revenues. With the same impact, Decree 338/2005 subsidized prices for
all liquid fuels used in the power sector. Finally, CONELEC’s Resolution 09/2003
eliminated the VAT from the variable costs declarations of the generators, lowering
the spot energy price.

3.3.2 Discriminatory and arbitrary measures

All the above facts are alleged to violate Article 14 of the Investment Decree, which
was expressly referred to in Clause 3.5 of the Investment Agreement, and which
provides that:

172.

173.

174.

175.

176.

52

[uJnder no circumstances shall the direction, exploitation, maintenance,
use, acquisition, expansion, or disposition of the investments or of the
benefits arising therefrom be impaired in any way through the adoption of
arbitrary or discriminatory measures.

In addition, an obligation not to discriminate against the Claimants and their
investment was contained at Clause 3.5 of the Investment Agreement, Clause
12.1.4 of the Concession Contract, Articles 244 and 249 of the Constitution (Exh. C-
18), Article 21 of the Investment Law, and Article 1 of the CAN Decision 536 (Exh.
C-105). Based on the above described facts, the Claimants aver that the
Respondent did not comply with such obligation.

3.3.3 Most g at t or ionaire t

 

The Claimants submit that, under the Concession Contract, MachalaPower is
entitled to the same treatment as the most favored concessionaire, as Clause 23.1.1
of that agreement provides:

GRANTOR represents and recognizes that the Contract is subject to the

laws of Ecuador in force at the time of its execution. Therefore,

CONCESSIONAIRE shall be treated in accordance with such laws under

no less favorable conditions in relation to the treatment received by other

electric power generation concessionaires, whether individuals or
corporations.

Consequently, the Claimants argue that a more advantageous clause regime agreed
with other electric power generation concessionaires (as alleged by the Claimants)
are deemed incorporated pari passu into the Concession Contract (Clause 26),
which has not been the case.

3.3.4 Expropriation

Pursuant to the Claimants’ argument, the Agreements also contained provisions
according to which the Respondents would not expropriate the Agreements (Clause
3.6 of the Investment Agreement, Clause 24.1 of the Concession Contract). The
above mentioned facts allegedly constitute an expropriation of the rights granted
under the Agreements.

3.3.5 Conclusion

The Tribunal considers that the above-mentioned claims fall within the scope of the
Agreements’ dispute settlement provisions and are thus within the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal. The consequences, if any, of the possible involvement of third parties will
have to be examined at the merits stage of the proceedings.

177.

41

178.

179.

180.

181.

53

CONSENT TO ARBITRATION

Last but not least, the Tribunal now turns to the existence of consent to arbitration.
In this respect it will review whether the parties have consented to arbitration in
writing (4.1). It will further especially examine the Respondents’ objections related to
the scope of consent (4.2).

Consent in writing

Ecuador consented in writing to ICSID arbitration under the BIT when it executed
and ratified the BIT. It also consented in writing to ICSID arbitration when it executed
the Investment Agreement and the Concession Contract.

CONELEC consented in writing to ICSID arbitration when it executed the
Concession Contract.

Pursuant to Article 25(3) of the ICSID Convention ‘{cjonsent by a constituent
subdivision or agency of a Contracting State shall require the approval of that State
unless that State notifies the Centre that no such approval is required”. Ecuador
made no such notification to the Centre. The Tribunal must thus examine if the State
has approved CONELEC’s consent.

First, the Tribunal notes that CONELEC’s Executive Director was entitled and
authorized by Law to consent to arbitration. The Electric Regime Law (Exh. C-22)
provides that CONELEC Executive Director is authorized to execute concession
contracts for power generation, transmission or distribution. Article 21 specifically
states:

Article 21 Disputes: Any disputes arising among power generation,
transmission and distribution entities, the consumers and the Energy
Control Center by reason of electric power supply or public electric
transmission and distribution services may be submitted to arbitration
pursuant to the Law or may be submitted to examination and resolution
of the Executive Director of CONELEC. His resolutions may be appealed
to CONELEC. The resolution maybe impugned at the competent courts.

At all events, the parties shall give notice to CONELEC of the reasons for
the dispute.

In accordance with the Political Constitution of the Republic, the
laws and international conventions in force, the parties to
concession contracts may agree to definitively resolve their
disputes through national or international arbitration. If the parties
decide to submit a dispute to arbitration, they cannot resort to the
jurisdictional courts for the same matter.

District administrative courts shall hear and resolve any legal claims
pertaining to matters relating to or deriving from the relations between the

182.

183.

184.

4.2

185.

186.

54

public entity that grants the concession and the concessionaire. The
procedure to be followed shall be subject to the relevant laws.

[Emphasis added]

Second and most importantly, the Concession Contract was signed by the then
President of Ecuador, Mr. Gustavo Noboa Bejarano, as witness of honor (“Testigo
de honor’). The Tribunal therefore concludes that CONELEC’s consent to ICSID
arbitration was satisfactorily approved by the State.

Noble Energy consented to ICSID arbitration under the BIT and the Investment
Agreement by a letter dated 14 March 2005 sent to the Government (Exh. C-57). As
seen above, Noble Energy was vested with the rights under the Investment
Agreement further to the merger with its wholly-owned subsidiary, Samedan Oil
Corporation.

MachalaPower consented to ICSID arbitration by signing the Investment Agreement
and the Concession Contract. It reiterated its consent under the Concession
Contract in a letter sent to Ecuador on 9 May 2005 by Mr. John Z. Tomich, Vice
President, General Manager and legal representative of MachalaPower and EDC
(Exh. C-58).

Scope of the consent

The parties have debated the scope of their consent to arbitration, specifically as to
whether they agreed to resolve all these disputes submitted to this Tribunal in one
single arbitration (4.2.1) and whether their consent covered losses allegedly suffered
by EDC (4.2.2).

4.2.1. Was there consent to dispose of the three disputes in one single
proceeding?

a) Positions of the parties

The Respondents argue that the disputes submitted to this Tribunal lack subjective
and objective identity and that their only “common element happens to be ICSID” (R-
Mem., § 76; R-Reply, § 13-17). They submit that Ecuadorian law, applicable by
virtue of Article 42.1 of the ICSID Convention, Article 8 of the BIT and Clause 9 of
the Investment Agreement, does not allow such a “joinder’” of different disputes in
one arbitration. Article 72 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code is said to prohibit that two or
more persons who have different rights or actions of different origins join them in
one action (Tr., pp. 79-81).

187.

188.

189.

190.

191.

55

The Claimants reply that consent to ICSID jurisdiction given by the Respondents
“includes consent to consolidate the investment disputes initiated by Claimants into
one proceeding” (C-Answer, 23 March 2007, 2). Nothing in Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention or in the BIT prevents the Claimants from choosing to raise all of their
claims in one single arbitration. Such a choice is particularly appropriate in the
context of a “unified contractual and investment scheme” (C-Answer, 23 March
2007, ¥ 2). In addition, the three instruments provide similar protection and
guarantees against discriminatory and arbitrary acts, interference with the use of the
investment and expropriation, as well as the benefit of the MFN clause.

b) Tribunal’s determination

At the outset, it may be helpful to canvas the nature of the issue on which a
determination is needed. The Tribunal first notes that all the parties involved have
consented in writing to the jurisdiction of ICSID under the relevant instruments. It
also observes that all the other jurisdictional requirements are met. Hence, the
present objection is not a matter of jurisdiction subject to Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention and the respective provisions in the other relevant instruments. Rather,
it is a matter relating to the conduct of the procedure covered by Article 44 of ICSID
Convention®®.

It is equally important to note that the present issue is not whether third parties can
be joined to these proceedings. Nor is it a question of whether separate proceedings
which are already pending before different tribunals can be consolidated. The issue
is merely whether claims raised in this arbitration under the BIT, the Investment
Agreement, and the Concession Contract can be disposed of together.

Article 44 of the ICSID Convention provides that arbitration proceedings are
governed by the Convention and, unless the parties agree otherwise, by the ICSID
Arbitration Rules. Whenever the ICSID Convention and Rules are silent on an issue
“the Tribunal shall decide the question” in the exercise of its general procedural
powers.

In the exercise of these powers, what test must the Tribunal apply to decide whether
the claims submitted to it should all be resolved in this arbitration? Failing other

By analogy, one may refer to Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler/Laurence Boisson de Chazournes et al.,
Consolidation of Proceedings in Investment Arbitration: How Can Multiple Proceedings Arising from the
Same or Related Situations be Handled Efficiently?, 21(1) ICSID Review — Foreign Investment Law
Journal (2006), pp. 101-102, who conclude that a decision to consolidate separate proceedings is not a
decision on jurisdiction but a procedural order.

192.

193.

194.

195.

56

guidance, the Arbitral Tribunal will seek inspiration from the law and practice on
consolidation of separate proceedings.

A primary requirement for consolidation is connectivity or the existence of a
connection between the cases to be dealt with together®°. In the present case, there
is an obvious interdependence between the different disputes submitted to this
Tribunal. They stem from the same facts, the same overall economic transaction,
and the same measures. Moreover, the measures complained of and the relief
sought under the different instruments offer significant similarities.

Another important consideration for the consolidation of separate proceedings is the
promotion of fair and efficient dispute resolution. This same consideration is also
sometimes articulated in terms of interest of justice or procedural or judicial
economy*". In this instance, there is no question that it is more efficient to deal with
all the claims in one proceeding rather than to resolve them separately. It also
appears fair to resolve all the disputes in one arbitration. It will avoid contradictions
or inconsistencies on identical or related issues and, there is no reason to believe
that the parties’ procedural rights would be adversely affected by a single procedure.

It is a controversial issue whether the consent of the parties is required to
consolidate separate proceedings*. Whether or not consent is required to
consolidate separate proceedings can be left open here. In the present case, there
is in any event an implied consent to have the pending disputes arising from the
same overall economic transaction resolved in one and the same arbitration. Even
though there is no express language to this effect in the dispute resolution clauses,
the consent is manifest from a number of elements which the Tribunal will review
now.

This review implies the interpretation of the parties’ intent. For purposes of this
interpretation, the Tribunal accepts the approach adopted in the numerous decisions
— ranging from Holiday Inns v. Morocco to Tradex v. Albania and including Amco v.
Indonesia, SOABI v. Senegal and SPP v. Egypt — which have insisted on the need
to interpret the real intentions of the parties in light of the circumstances of the case.
It is true that these decisions dealt with jurisdiction. Because the issue at stake
hinges upon the existence of consent, the Tribunal finds it appropriate to adopt a

Ibid., pp. 85-86, and citations therein.

See for example, Canfor Corp. v. United States of America, Tembec et alt. v. United States of America,
Terminal Forests Products Ltd. v. United States of America, Order of the Consolidation Tribunal, 7
September 2005, {{ 76, 183.

Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler/Laurence Boisson de Chazournes, op. cit., pp. 87-88, and citations therein.

196.

197.

198.

199.

57

similar test for the present determination, although it is not a matter of jurisdiction but
of procedure.

Without addressing these decisions in detail, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the
middle ground advocated in SPP v. Egypt is appropriate when interpreting the
parties’ consent in the present case:

Thus, jurisdictional instruments are to be interpreted neither restrictively
nor expansively, but rather objectively and in good faith, and jurisdiction
will be found to exist if — but only if — the force of the arguments militating
in favor of it is preponderant.*°

In ascertaining the parties’ intentions, a tribunal also looks inter alia at the
expectations of the parties, as they may be established in view of the agreement or
the transaction as a whole®*. The importance of acknowledging the parties’
reasonable and legitimate expectations in interpreting arbitration agreements was
emphasized in SOABI v. Senegal where the Tribunal held:

In other words, the interpretation must take into account the
consequences which the parties must reasonably and legitimately be
considered to have envisaged as flowing from their undertakings. It is this
principle of interpretation, rather than one of a priori strict, or, for that
matter, broad and liberal construction, that the Tribunal has chosen to
apply.

The rules on interpretation being specified, the Tribunal now turns to the factors
from which it draws the parties’ consent to a joint resolution of the disputes
submitted to it. As a general observation, it first notes that the disputes at issue are
closely related: they all arise out of the same investment project and the same
overall economic transaction.

Second, more specifically with regard to the disputes based on the Concession
Contract and the Investment Agreement, it is clear that the latter is closely linked to
the former. In addition to the fact that they were signed on the same day (Art. 1.4
Investment Agreement), many cross-references show the connections between the

See SPP v. Egypt, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 April 1988, LA, C-30, § 63. This middle ground
approach is echoed by other ICSID tribunals, such as the one in CSOB v. The Slovak Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999: “[I]n determining how to interpret
agreements to arbitrate under the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal is guided by an ICSID decision
[Amco v. Indonesia] which held that ‘a convention to arbitrate is not to be construed restrictively, nor,
as a matter of fact, broadly or liberally. It is to be construed in a way which leads to find out and to
respect the common will of the parties [...] Moreover [...] any convention, including conventions to
arbitrate should be construed in good faith, that is to say by taking into account the consequences of
the commitments the parties may be considered as having reasonably and legitimately envisaged”. Op.
cit., 4 34, footnote omitted.

Amco Asia Corp. v. Republic of Indonesia, \CSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Award of 25 September 1983, 9
14, 1 ICSID Reports 389.

SOABI v. Senegal, ICSID Case No. ARB/82/1, Award, 25 February 1988, § 4.10, ICSID Rev. — FILJ
125 (1991).

200.

201.

202.

58

two instruments. For instance, the term of the Investment Agreement is based on
and covers the duration of the Concession Contract (Art. 4.a Investment
Agreement). The same is true with respect to the legal stability (Art. 4.c Investment
Agreement). Moreover, certain commitments of the investors are defined by
reference to the Concession Contract (Art. 6.1 Investment Agreement). Further, both
the choice of law and the arbitration clauses contain references to the Concession
Contract (Art. 9 and 11.c Investment Agreement). Finally and more importantly, the
purpose of the Investment Agreement, as defined in Article 3, is “to set forth clearly
the treatment given to the Investor and the Recipient Company [MachalaPower] with
respect to the general and special guarantees and assurances that will protect their
investment’. Such provision then confirms that the investor will benefit from all the
protections existing under both national law and international treaties:

Therefore, the State ratifies that the Investor, its Investments, the

Recipient Company, this Investment Agreement and the Basic Contract

shall enjoy all the guarantees set forth in Title lV and in Articles 22 and 23

of the Substituting Regulations to the Investment Promotion and

Guarantee Law pursuant to the provisions written at the end of the first

paragraph of Article 249 and in the last paragraph of Article 271 of the

Constitution, and the provision of Titles IV, VI and VII of the Investment

Promotion and Guarantee Law (the “Law”), as well as in all

international treaties executed by the State regarding investment

promotion and guarantees and international double taxation.

[Emphasis added]
The third aspect to be taken into account is that the dispute settlement clauses are
coordinated in all instruments. They all provide for ICSID arbitration. The two
agreements expressly permit the referral of any disputes arising from them to
arbitration under the ICSID Convention. In sub clause 22.2.2.1, the Concession
Contract specifically recognizes that the ICSID Convention applies and that for the
purposes of Article 25, any dispute shall be regarded as a legal dispute arising from

an investment between a contractual state and a national of another state.

As a fourth factor, the Tribunal notes that the Republic of Ecuador which is a party to
the Investment Agreement and to the BIT is also present in the Concession
Contract. CONELEC entered into the Concession Contract “acting as the competent
public entity on behalf of the State” and can be designated as “the State” pursuant to
Clause 1.1. The “Ecuadorian State” is again referred to, for example, in Clause 24.1,
in which it grants certain “guarantees, indemnities and assurances in favor of
CONCESSIONAIRE”.

Fifth, the BIT itself shows that the Contracting States accepted the possibility that an
investment dispute be decided together with a contract dispute. Indeed, it defines an

203.

204.

59

investment dispute as inter alia “a dispute between a Party and a national or
company of the other Party arising out of or relating to (a) an investment agreement
between that Party and such national or company”. This particularly makes sense if
one takes into account that an analysis of the performance of the Investment
Agreement may be necessary to rule on Noble Energy’s claim brought on the basis
of the BIT, especially in light of the argument under the umbrella clause.

Finally, the Tribunal finds useful support in the text of the Investment Promotion and
Guarantee Law Regulations (Exh. C-21). These regulations apply to contracts
entered into between the State or a public institution and an investor. They establish
a link between contract and treaty disputes, as they provide that investors may
pursue all remedies under contract and treaty against the State and submit both to
ICSID arbitration in the following terms:

Section 24.- REMEDIES. Each investment contract shall state that, upon
failure by the State to comply with its obligations undertaken by virtue of
the contract, the investor and the investment vehicle shall be
entitled, among other options, to request the application of all the
remedies and to exercise all the actions applicable under the
Ecuadorian legal system and under the international conventions
signed and ratified by Ecuador including the right to demand
compliance with its rights arising out of the contract, the
Constitution, and the international conventions, pursuant to the
provisions set forth in the investment contract and in Sections 18, 249,
and 271 of the Constitution, among other relevant legal provisions. The
investor and the investment vehicle shall also be entitled to be paid a
monetary compensation for the damage sustained, which should include
an item for the loss of earnings. Any controversy which may arise
between the State, or any public institution, and the investor and, where
applicable, the investment vehicle, shall be settled in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Section 29 of these Regulations and the
pertaining provisions contained in the investment contract. ...

[Emphasis added]

Section 29.- ARBITRATION. Whenever any controversy arises out of the
Investment or of the performance of the investment contract, the investor
and, where applicable, the investment vehicle together with the Ministry
of Foreign Trade, Industrialization and Fishing, shall attempt to settle it
through consultations and negotiations with the entities which are directly
or indirectly related to the conflict

In accordance with the provisions of Section 32 of the [1997] Law [on
Investment Promotion and Guarantee], the investment contract shall
state that upon failure by the parties to settle the controversy amicably,
the controversy may be submitted to the jurisdiction of the
International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes,
by the C i on the of
Dispute between Contracting States and Nationals of Other
Contracting States.

[Emphasis added]

It results from these provisions that Ecuador provides a general legal framework
which favors dispute settlement with foreign investors and most particularly ICSID

205.

207.

208.

60

arbitration for both contract and treaty disputes, irrespective of the nature of the
claims.

Taken together, these provisions, the multiple references to ICSID arbitration in the
context of both contractual and treaty disputes, the broad reference in the relevant
instruments to the various sources of the parties’ rights and obligations showing
strong connections between contract and treaty disputes and no intent to segregate
the two categories, and the numerous connections between the different instruments
out of which the disputes arise must all be deemed to reflect an intention to deal with
disputes arising out of the various instruments and subject to different legal systems
in a single proceeding.

. For the avoidance of doubt, the Tribunal specifies that resolving different disputes in

a single proceeding does not mean merging disputes, or applicable laws, or
remedies. In the further course of this arbitration, the parties and the Tribunal will
have to distinguish each dispute under its own applicable rules, even though facts,
evidence and arguments may be common to all or some of them. In particular, the
Claimants will have to specify which relief is sought with respect to which
Respondent and on which basis, unlike the present wording of paragraph 477 of the
Memorial on the Merits (quoted in paragraph 30 above). Indeed, each Respondent
is entitled to know which claims it faces, and which damages it has allegedly caused
to each Claimant. The Tribunal will assess this matter in a procedural order to be
issued after the present decision.

In sum, the Tribunal finds that the tests applicable to the consolidation of separate
proceedings, to which it resorts by analogy, leads to the conclusion that the disputes
submitted to this Tribunal can all be heard in these proceedings.

4.2.2 Damages allegedly sustained by EDC

In their Reply, the Respondents argued that Noble Energy claims damages in an
amount of USD 128.7 million incurred by its indirect subsidiary EDC under the Oil
Production Sharing Contract entered into by EDC and Petroecuador (R-Reply, {| 42).
They contended that the Tribunal cannot dispose of such a claim, EDC not being a
claimant in these proceedings.

. The Claimants answered that this argument was a misguided attempt to address the

merits of the case at the jurisdictional stage. In any event, they insisted that “Noble
Energy is seeking compensation for the damages it has suffered to its investment as
a result of the Respondents’ measures” (C-Rejoinder, J 160). They also stressed

210.

4.3

21

212.

213.

214.

215.

61

that EDC was an investment of Noble Energy in Ecuador, and that Noble Energy
may thus raise claims for damages which it incurred as a result of the Respondents’
actions vis-a-vis EDC.

In the Tribunal’s opinion, the Respondents’ objection is premature. Indeed, it is a
matter of the merits to decide whether Noble Energy may be entitled to
compensation on certain grounds and, if so, in what amount.

Other conditions related to the consent

. The Claimants also argued that they have satisfied the other requirements which

must be met under the BIT (4.3.1) and the Agreements (4.3.2) prior to initiating the
arbitration proceedings.

4.3.1. Conditions under the BIT

Under the BIT, investment disputes must first be sought to be resolved through
consultation and negotiation. Failing such a resolution within six months from the
date on which the dispute arose, the investor can invoke the ICSID arbitration
clause.

Noble Energy notified the dispute under the BIT to the Respondents on 19 August
2004 (Exh. C-33). It then sought to reach an amicable resolution in various meetings
held with Government officials which were described in Mr. John Z. Tomich’s
witness statement (Exh. C-14). Accordingly, consultations took place and more than
six months have elapsed since the dispute arose without resolution.

4.3.2 Conditions under the Agreements

Clause 11(a) of the Investment Agreement also requires resolution “through
consultations and negotiations with the entities directly or indirectly involved in the
conflict’. Acting on its own and on MachalaPower’s behalf, Noble Energy notified the
dispute under the Investment Agreement to the Respondents on 19 August 2004
and requested that negotiations commence (Exh. C-49).

Clause 22 of the Concession Contract provides for ICSID arbitration (subparagraph
22.2.2) on the condition that (i) any disagreement or dispute be submitted to the
legal representatives of the Parties for resolution and if the representatives fail to
resolve the dispute within ten days (ii) the dispute be submitted to a mediation
process (subparagraph 22.1).

216.

217.

5.1

218.

219.

220.

62

On 10 August 2004, MachalaPower notified the dispute to CONELEC (Exh. C-34).
On 23 November 2004, it proposed the appointment of a mediator and requested
the Arbitration Centre of the Chamber of Commerce of Quito to proceed with the
appointment, which the Centre did. Thereafter, three mediation sessions were held
without result and the mediator thus terminated the mediation proceedings on 22
April 2005 (Exh. C-47, minutes of the session).

Consequently, the conditions set by the Concession Contract are satisfied.

REMAINING OBJECTION: PLACE AND LANGUAGE OF THE ARBITRATION
Positions of the parties

In their Reply, the Respondents insisted that arbitration of disputes under the
Concession Contract must take place in Quito, Ecuador, and be conducted in
Spanish pursuant to Clause 22.2.2.6 of the Contract. They further argue that under
such clause, if the proceedings cannot take place in Quito, they must be held at the
“Permanent Court of Arbitration of the ICSID”. The Respondents understand this to
be the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague, Netherlands. For the
Respondents, this is a matter which pertains to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and
relates to the consent of the parties (Tr., p. 166).

By contrast, the Claimants view the place and the language of the arbitration as
matters of procedure, which were settled during the first session of the Tribunal. The
parties agreed then that the place of arbitration would be Washington, D.C., and that
the procedural languages would be English and Spanish. Based on Arbitration Rule
27, the Respondents thus waived their right to assert this objection. In addition, the
proceedings being bilingual, the language requirement of the Concession Contract
is in any event met (Tr., p. 132).

The Respondents further contend that accepting another location than Quito would
constitute an amendment of the Concession Contract which requires an approval by
CONELEC’s board of directors granted in writing with the participation of
CONELEC’s managing directors and converted into a public deed. In addition, the
amendment would imply the consultation of the Attorney General under Ecuadorian
law. In response, the Claimants denied any relevance to the provisions for an
amendment of the Concession Contract under Ecuadorian law.

5.2

221.

222.

223.

224.

225.

226.

63

Tribunal’s determination
The ICSID Convention contains the following rules on the place of arbitration:

Article 62

Conciliation and arbitration proceedings shall be held at the seat of the
Centre except as hereinafter provided.

Article 63

Conciliation and arbitration proceedings may be held, if the parties so
agree,

(a) at the seat of the Permanent Court of Arbitration or of any other
appropriate institution, whether private or public, with which the
Centre may make arrangements for that purpose; or

(b) at any other place approved by the Commission or Tribunal after
consultation with the Secretary-General.
Accordingly, the place of ICSID arbitrations is at the seat of the Centre in
Washington D.C., unless (i) the parties agree otherwise, and (ii) their agreement
chooses either the seat of the PCA in The Hague (or any other institution with which
ICSID can make arrangements) or another place which the Tribunal approves®.

In the Concession Contract, MachalaPower and CONELEC have agreed on the
place of arbitration in the following terms:

22.2.2.6 All arbitration proceedings conducted pursuant to the
Convention shall take place in Quito, Ecuador and in the Spanish
language. If for any reason they cannot take place in Quito, Ecuador,
they shall take place at the Permanent Court of Arbitration of the ICSID.

(Translation provided by the Claimants, Exh. C-3).

At the first session in this arbitration, the Tribunal suggested that the place of
arbitration be Washington, D.C. and counsel for the parties on both sides agreed*’.

On this basis, the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the place of arbitration will
be Washington, D.C., for the following main reasons. Before addressing the
reasons, it wishes to specify that this is a matter of procedure which does not affect
jurisdiction.

It is true that in the Concession Contract the parties have selected Quito as place of
arbitration. It is equally true that they have made an alternate choice “if for any
reason they [the arbitration proceedings] cannot take place in Quito, Ecuador” in

C. Schreuer, op. cit. , Article 62, p. 1246, J 12.

Audio recording of first session, minute 15'44; Item 6 of Minutes of the first session of the Arbitral
Tribunal, which reads: “After consultation with the Parties, the Tribunal decided that the place of
arbitration would be Washington, D.C., without prejudice to holding sessions with the parties, or the
Tribunal sitting without the parties, at any other place as convenient’.

227.

228.

229.

64

favour of “the Permanent Court of Arbitration of the ICSID”. |n reliance on the
express reference to ICSID, the Arbitral Tribunal understands this designation to
mean the seat of the Centre, not the PCA in The Hague.

Accordingly, the question now becomes whether “for any reason” the arbitration
“cannot take place in Quito”. The Tribunal finds that this question must be answered
in the affirmative on three main grounds. First, the parties have consented at the first
session, to the Arbitral Tribunal’s proposal to choose Washington, D.C. as place,
and have not objected to the Minutes restating such choice. Second, having
proposed and confirmed Washington, D.C., the Tribunal has not approved a
different choice, which approval is a requirement under Article 62(b) of the ICSID
Convention. Third, because they form an integral part of the overall investment
dispute, contract claims are being settled together with treaty claims and there is no
question of a place other than Washington, D.C., for the treaty claims.

As a result, the Tribunal considers that there are valid reasons why the arbitration
cannot take place in Quito and it thus confirms the choice of Washington, D.C., as
the place of arbitration. This being said, it adds that, unlike in other types of
arbitration, the place of arbitration in ICSID proceedings carries no legal
consequences as the ICSID system is self-contained®. In particular, the choice of
the place of arbitration does not trigger the application of the local arbitration law nor
create jurisdiction of the local courts in aid and control of arbitration. The place is a
matter of convenience and the Tribunal notes in this respect that the representation
of both parties includes lawyers from firms located in Washington, D.C. Be that as it
may, the Tribunal does not rule out that sessions may be held at any other place,
including Quito, if appropriate.

The question of the language of the proceedings must also be examined. As the
Respondents correctly point out, Clause 22.2.2.6 of the Concession Contract
provides that Spanish should be the language of the arbitration. In the Tribunal’s
opinion, the reasoning set forth above in connection with the place of arbitration
applies mutatis mutandis to the language. Moreover, in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 22, each party can choose one language among the three official
languages of the Centre. The Claimants chose English and the Respondents chose

C. Schreuer, op. cit., Article 62, p. 1242, ¥ 3.

65

Spanish. As a result, although not the exclusive one, Spanish is indeed one of the
languages of the arbitration®®.

Costs

Having concluded that it has jurisdiction over the present dispute, the Tribunal
reserves all questions concerning the costs and expenses of the Tribunal and of the
parties for subsequent determination.

Audio recording of first session, minute 15°59; Item 7 of Minutes of the first session of the Tribunal

Arbitral, which reads: “The President noted Arbitration Rule 22 and invited each party to present its
views regarding this issue. Having considered the parties' position, the Tribunal decided that the
languages of the proceedings shall be English and Spanish. It was further agreed that the primary
written submissions of the parties (i.e. Memorial, counter-Memorial, Reply and Rejoinder) shall be
submitted in either language, and that translations thereof be provided within ten (10) working days
after the respective date of submission. [...] The Tribunal agreed that it will render its decisions in both
languages and that simultaneous interpretation will be provided during the Tribunal hearings. The
procedural communications from the Secretariat to the parties can by made either in English or in
Spanish”.

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal:

¢ takes due notice that MachalaPower does not raise claims under the BIT;

* decides that the disputes submitted to it in this arbitration are within the
jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal.

PROCEDURAL ORDER

Accordingly, the Tribunal:

e will issue appropriate directions for the continuation of the proceedings on the

merits;

* confirms that the place of the arbitration is Washington, D.C., and that the
procedural languages are English and Spanish as specified in the Minutes of the
first session of the Tribunal;

* reserves the issues of costs and expenses of the Tribunal and of the parties for

subsequent determination.

Mr. Hi Dr. Bernardo M. Cremades

 

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler

