In the Matter of an Ad Hoc Arbitration under the Treaty between the Federal Republic of
Germany and the People’s Republic of Poland concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments between:

NORDZUCKER AG

Claimant

THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND
Represented by the Minister of the State Treasury of the Republic of Poland

Respondent

 

THIRD PARTIAL AND FINAL AWARD

 

TRIBUNAL
Professor Andreas Bucher, Arbitrator
Dr. Maciej Tomaszewski, Arbitrator

Mrs. Vera Van Houtte, Chairman

-

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABBREVIATIONS.
THE PARTIES.

11. The Claimant.

1.2. The di

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL...

2. Co-Arbitrator appointed by the Claimant
2.2. Co-Arbi inted by the d

 

2.3. Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal...
ARBITRAL PROCEEDINGS
FACTS

 

PRAYERS FOR RELIEF.

 

5.1. The Claimant
5.2. The

 

DISCUSSION

 

6.1. The Parties’ positions.
6.1.1. The Claimant’s Sub
6.1.2. The 's Reply.
6.2. The Arbitral Tribunal’s assessment of the damages

 

 

 

 

7.3. Liability for costs
DECISION

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS

BIT:

Cws:

GAM:

IPO:

MEN:

NoA:
PHMN:
PHMP:
RepoDam:
RWS:

SoC:

SoD:
SoDam:
SoRep:
SoReb:

SPA:
Transcript I:
Transcript II:
Transcript II:

Transcript IV:

Bilateral Investment Treaty between Germany and Poland
Witness Statement of Claimant (as numbered by it)

General Assembly Meeting

Initial Public Offering

Most Favoured Nation clause

Notice of Arbitration of Nordzucker dated 17 February 2006
Post-hearing Memorial of Nordzucker dated 25 January 2008
Post-hearing Memorial of Poland dated 25 January 2008
Reply on Damages of the Respondent dated 5 June 2009
Witness Statement of Respondent (as numbered by it)
Statement of Claim of Nordzucker dated 15 December 2006
Statement of Defence of Poland dated 30 April 2007
Submission on Damages of the Claimant dated 10 April 2009
Statement of Reply of Nordzucker dated 30 July 2007
Statement of Rebuttal of Poland dated 17 September 2007
Share Purchase Agreement

Transcript of the hearing on 5 November 2007

Transcript of the hearing on 6 November 2007

Transcript of the hearing on 7 November 2007

Transcript of the hearing on 8 November 2007

1 THE PARTIES
11. The Claimant

Ll Nordzucker AG, (“Nordzucker” or “the Claimant”) is a private company organized and
existing under the laws of Germany.

2. Nordzucker is the second largest sugar company in Europe. The large majoiity of its
shareholders are sugar beet farmers’ associations.

3. Nordzucker’s registered office is located at:

Kuchenstrasse 9
38100 Braunschweig
Germany

and it is entered in the Commercial Register Amtsgericht Braunschweig under HRB No.
2936.

4. The Claimant is represented in this arbitration by:

Mr. John S. Willems

Ms. Melis E. Acuner

Mr. Charles R.P. Nairac
White & Case, LLP

11, Boulevard de la Madeleine
75001 Paris

France

Mr. Piotr Galuszynski

Mr. Arkadiusz Korzeniewski

Ms. Nathalie Vidrascu

White & Case W. Danilowicz, W. Jurcewicz I Wspolnicy Kancelaria Prawna Sp.K.
ul. Marszalkowska 142

00-061 Warszawa

Poland

1.2. The Respondent

5. The Respondent is the Republic of Poland (“Poland” or “the Respondent”) represented by the
Minister of the State Treasury of the Republic of Poland (the ‘State Treasury”).

6.

7

21.

2.2.

The Minister of the State Treasury has his offices at:

ul. Knucza 36/Wspélna 6
00-522 Warszawa

Poland is represented in this arbitration by:

Prof. Grzegorz Domariski

Ms. Julita Zimoch-Tucholka
Mr. Krzysztof Zakrzewski

Of counsel:

Dr. Lechostaw Stepniak

Ms. Monika Malinowska-Hyla
Ms. Anna Wojciechowska
Domariski Zakrzewski Palinka Sp.K.
Rondo ONZ 1

01-124 Warsaw

Poland

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
Co-Arbitrator appointed by the Claimant
In its Notice of Arbitration of 17 February 2006, Nordzucker appointed as Co-Arbitrator:

Professor Dr. Andreas Bucher
Ch. des Prés de la Gradelle 16
1223 Cologny

Switzerland

Co-Arbitrator appointed by the Respondent
Poland has appointed in its Reply dated 15 May 2006 as Co-Arbitrator:

Dr. Maciej Tomaszewski
Weil, Gotshal & Manges LLP
Warsaw Financial Centre

UL. Emilii Plater 53

00-113 Warsaw

Poland

2.3.

3.

Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal

The two Co-Arbitrators by letter dated 28 June 2006 invited to act as Chairman of the
Arbitral Tribunal:

Mrs. Vera Van Houtte
Stibbe

Loksumstraat 25

1000 Brussels
Belgium

Mrs. Van Houtte accepted her nomination by letters of 29 June 2006 and 7 July 2006. The
Co-Arbitrators informed the Parties and the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber
of Commerce of the appointment of the Chairman by letters of 7, 10 and 11 July 2006.

ARBITRAL PROCEEDINGS!

On 17 February 2006, the Claimant sent a Notice of Arbitration to the Respondent “Pursuant
to Article 4 of the Treaty concerning the encouragement and reciprocal protection of
investments of 10 November 1989 (the “BIT”), executed by the Federal Republic of
Germany and Poland, as amended by the Protocol of 14 May 2003”.

Article 11 of the BIT as it was amended on 14 May 2003 through a Protocol amending and
supplementing the original BIT (the “Protocol”), reads as follows:

“ (I) Any disputes pertaining to the investments made between the investor of one of the
Contracting Parties and the other Contracting Party as regards the rights and obligations
hereunder should be, wherever possible, resolved amicably between the Parties to such
dispute.

(2) If such dispute fails to be resolved amicably within six months after one of the Parties to
the dispute reports it, the investor shall have a right to refer it either to the competent courts
of the other Cc ing Party or to the i ional tribunal of arbitration. If the investor of
one of the Contracting Parties has referred the dispute concerning the investment within the
territory of the other Contracting Party to the competent court of the other Contracting
Party, such investor shall have a right to, by the time of judgement issue, withdraw the
claims and refer such dispute to the international tribunal of arbitration. In such case, the
other Contracting Party shall give its consent to the claim withdrawal. The investor may

 

* « mote detailed description of the arbitral proceedings until the end of 2008 is contained in chapter 3 of the Partial Award dated
10 December 2008.

refer such dispute to the ir ional tribunal of arbitration also ing the juds
issue provided that it is allowed by the international law of the other Contracting Party.

(3) If the Parties to the dispute do not make another arrangement, the provisions of
paragraphs 3 to 5 of article 10 shall be applied mutatis mutandis subject to the proviso that
the members of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be appointed by the Parties to the dispute and
that, if the periods mentioned in paragraph 3 of Article 10 are not observed, either
Contracting Party may in the absence of any other relevant agreements invite the Chairman
of the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce to make the necessary
appointments. The award shall be recognized and enforced under the Convention of
10 June 1958 on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards.

4) [one sed”

On 28 June 2006, the Co-Arbitrators nominated as Chairman of the Tribunal Mrs. Vera
Van Houtte, who accepted the nomination by letters of 29 June 2006 and 7 July 2006, and
the Co-Arbitrators informed the Parties and the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm
Chamber of Commerce of the appointment by letters of 7, 10 and 11 July 2006.

 

On 8 September 2006, the Parties and the Arbitral Tribunal during a meeting organized in
Brussels signed the Tenns of Reference which provide i.a. that:

- the agreed place of arbitration is Brussels, Belgium;

- the arbitral proceedings shall be governed by these Terms of Reference and the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, and, where the latter are silent, by any Specific
Procedural Rules or directions as the Arbitral Tribunal has given in Procedural Order
No. 2 and thereafter may give from time to time;

- the arbitration proceedings shall be conducted in English.

The procedural agenda was laid down in Procedural Order No. 3, as amended thereafter at
the Parties’ requests. Thus the Parties filed the submissions referred to in chapter
0. Abbreviations above, and a hearing was held on 5-8 November 2007.

On 10 December 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal issued a first Partial Award in which the
Arbitral Tribunal concluded that it has jurisdiction to entertain a claim based on an alleged
breach of the obligations in article 2 (1) first and third sentences of the Treaty concerning the
encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments signed on 10 November 1989
between Germany and Poland, as amended by the Protocol of 14 May 2003.

On 19 December 2008, an original signed copy of this first Partial Award was deposited with
the Clerk of the First Instance Court of Brussels. Thereafter, the Arbitral Tribunal resumed its
deliberation on liability.

23.

24.

25.

26.

On 29 January 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal issued a second Partial Award, dated
28 January 2009, deciding that Poland breached its duty under article 2 (1) third sentence of
the Treaty by failing to fmalize the sales procedure within a reasonable time and uselessly
protracting it, also by its lack to communicate transparently with the candidate investor
during the last period of the pre-contractual phase of a sales procedure of the Gdafisk and
Szczecin Sugar Groups.

On 13 February 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal in its Procedural Order No. 6 gave the Parties an
opportunity to file a submission on damages which takes into account the first and second
Partial Awards and which was to be strictly limited to damages.

On 19 February 2009, an original signed copy of the second Partial Award was deposited
with the Clerk of the First Instance Court of Brussels.

On 25 March 2009, the Claimant requested a postponement of the due date for its
Submission on Damages from 28 March 2009 till 10 April 2009 and the Respondent agreed
to respond to the Claimant’s Submission by 5 June 2009. In its letter of the same day, the
Arbitral Tribunal agreed to amend the submission dates accordingly.

On 31 March 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal was informed by the Claimant that the Respondent
had started an annulment procedure before the Brussels Court of First Instance in relation to
the first and second Partial Awards dated 10 December 2008, respectively 28 January 2009.

On 8 April 2009, the Respondent requested the Arbitral Tribunal to suspend the arbitral
proceedings pending final disposition by the Court of First Instance of Brussels of the
Respondent’s application for the annulment of the first and second Partial Awards. It also
indicated that the Claimant’s announcement of 25 March 2009 that it was preparing jointly
with its expert an updated damages model, would require from the Respondent a lot of time
and money to reply to the Claimant’s Submission on Damages which could be avoided by a
suspension of the arbitration.

On 9 April 2009, the Claimant objected to this request and on the same date, the Arbitral
Tribunal rejected the request for suspension and, in its Procedural Order No. 7, confirmed the
filing dates contained in its letter of 25 March 2009. The Arbitral Tribunal emphasized that
its decision was without prejudice to its future assessment of damages and a possible
suspension following receipt of the Respondent’s submission on damages on 5 June 2009, if
justified at that time.

On 14 April 2009, the Claimant’s Submission on Damages, together with a Supplemental
Witness Statement on a Supplementary Expert Report, were duly received by the Arbitral
Tribunal.

27.

28.

29.

31,

5.1.

34,

On 5 June 2009, the Respondent filed its Reply to Nordzucker’s Submission on Damages,
together with a Supplementary Report of its own expert.

On 10 August 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal informed the Parties that unless the Parties’ wished
to have a hearing on damages, there was in its opinion no need to have such hearing, and
invited the Parties to submit their Statement on Costs, simultaneously, by 28 August 2009,
and their reactions on the other Party’s statement by 11 September 2009.

On 18 August 2009, the Claimant informed the Arbitral Tribunal that it did not consider a
further hearing necessary and the Respondent sent the same message on 20 August 2009.

At the Parties’ joint request, the above dates for the Statement on Costs were postponed and
thus the Parties filed their Statement on Costs on 18 September 2009 and their Response to
the other Party’s Statement on Costs on 2 October 2009.

On 25 ber 2009, the ibmitted further to its on Costs of 18
September 2009 a detailed breakdown of fees and costs it had incurred in connection with
these arbitral proceedings, as the Claimant had done already on 18 September 2009.

On 30 October 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal declared the proceedings closed.

FACTS

The Arbitral Tribunal refers to chapter 4 of its first Partial Award dated 10 December 2008
for the description of the main facts relating to the merits of the dispute.

PRAYERS FOR RELIEF
The Claimant
In its Submission on Damages, the Claimant requests that the Tribunal:

(a) award Nordzucker compensation and damages in an amount of € 153.7 million, plus
interest at the rate of 8% per annum from 3] December 2005 to the date of the Arbitral
Tribunal’s partial award on damages;

(b) award Nordzucker the amount of its legal fees and costs incurred in this proceeding,
including the arbitrators’ fees and expenses, the fees and expenses of experts, and legal
costs (including the fee of counsel);

$.2.

35.

61.

6.1.1.

36.

37.

38.

(c) award Nordzucker post-award interest on any monetary award, through the date of
actual payment, and;

(d) award Nordzucker any other relief that the Arbitral Tribunal deems appropriate.”
The Respondent

In its Reply to Nordzucker’s Submission on Damages, the Respondent “requests that the
Arbitral Tribunal dismisses Nordzucker’s claims in their entirety and order Nordzucker to
pay all the costs, disbursements and expenses incurred by Poland in defending its position,
including, but not limited to legal, consulting, and witness fees and expenses, travel and
administrative expenses, and the costs of the Tribunal”.

DISCUSSION
The Parties’ positions
The Claimant’s Submission

In its Submission on Damages dated 10 April 2009, Nordzucker acknowledges the Arbitral
Tribunal’s finding that “Poland breached its duty under article 2 (1) third sentence of the
[BIT], by failing to finalize the sales procedure within a reasonable time and uselessly
protracting it, also by its lack to communicate transparently with the candidate investor
during the last period of the pre-contractual phase of a sales procedure of the Gdarisk and
Szczecin Sugar Groups”. It argues, however, that its damages are much greater than what the
Arbitral Tribunal mentioned in its second Partial Award: “Jn this way, it [Poland] has
caused Nordzucker a set-back of at least half a year for alternative investment plans and
costs for the useless follow-up of the process and the situation in respect of the Szczecin and
Gdarisk Groups”.

Nordzucker is of the opinion that, had Poland complied with its obligations under the BIT, it
should either have been transparent with Nordzucker about the need to increase the price, or
have officially repeated the “second stage” of the privatisation procedure, and that, in both
cases, Nordzucker “would certainly have taken some action to make sure that it would not
stay with just two Sugar Groups in Poland”.

Nordzucker argues that if the need to increase the price had been made clear by Poland,
Nordzucker’s Management Board would have increased the price by an additional
€ 2 million and relies therefore on the written witness statement of Dr. Einfeld dated
10 April 2009 (CWS 6): “Had we been informed of this [need to increase the price by an

? SoDam §§ 14 and 15

39.

40.

41.

6.1.2,

42.

43.

additional 7.4 %J, in my personal view it is obvious that Nordzucker would have agreed to
such an increase”.

According to Nordzucker, Poland’s “Jack of transparency in its dealings with Nordzucker
was thus the direct cause of the negative outcome of the privatisation process for the
Szczecin and Gdatisk Sugar Groups” and resulted not only in a “set-back of at least half a
year for alternative investment plans and costs for the useless follow-up of the process”, but
also in Nordzucker’s loss of the opportunity to obtain the four Sugar Groups it planned to
purchase in Poland.

Nordzucker claims damages on basis of their assessment as explained in its Post-hearing
Memorial of 25 January 2008 which it updates in its Submission on Damages, in order to
take into account actual (instead of projected) data that have become available since the end
of 2007. Thus, it now quantifies its damages at € 153.7 million (instead of € 160.6 million)
based on a calculation of net present value as of 31 December 2005, including interest until
31 December 2005. The adjustments to the claim have been performed by Nordzucker’s
quantum expert and are explained in the latter’s Supplemental Expert Report.

Nordzucker furthermore claims (i) pre-award interest on this amount from 31 December
2005 to the date of the Arbitral Tribunal’s award on damages, at the “appropriate and
reasonable” flat rate of 8%, and (ii) post-award interest on all amounts awarded to
Nordzucker (including legal fees and costs), through the date of payment, “at an appropriate
rate to be detennined by the Arbitral Tribunal”, for which it proposes a flat rate of 10% per
annum, compounded semi-annually, or, alternatively the average LIBOR rate plus 2 per cent,
compounded semi-annually.

The Respondent’s Reply

In its Reply on Damages of 5 June 2009, the Respondent claims that Nordzucker’s
Submission on Damages is in breach of article 32 sections 1 and 2 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules because it disregards the final and binding conclusions of the Arbitral
Tribunal conceming the consequences of the breach by Poland of its duty under article 2 (1)
third sentence of the BIT.

Poland moreover considers that Nordzucker has disregarded Procedural Order No 6 and
deliberately misinterpreted the second Partial Award, and should therefore not be given
another opportunity to present a new submission on damages which would comply with the
decisions made by the Arbitral Tribunal in the second Partial Award.

Poland argues that there is no evidence that, if it had informed Nordzucker of the fact that a
price increase was needed, Nordzucker would have agreed to pay such price, and the sale

? SoDam §§ 42 and 44

45.

46.

6.2.

47.

48.

49.

50.

would have been made. The third written witness statement, dated 10 April 2009, from
Mr. Einfeld, one of Nordzucker’s witnesses, that “in my personal view it is obvious that
Nordzucker would have agreed to such an increase” is no such evidence and numerous other
facts and elements in other submissions and witness statements of Nordzucker rather prove

the contrary.

Finally, according to Poland, Nordzucker fails to prove that it would in any case have bought
the Gdansk and Szczecin Groups, no matter the level of the new evaluation of the shares and
the reaction of a competitor who had also been selected as a candidate purchaser for the
Gdarisk Group.

As regards the calculation of Nordzucker’s damages, Poland files a Supplementary Report
from its own expert, with comments on Nordzucker’s Supplementary Expert Report and
criticizes Nordzucker’s production on 15 January 2008 of forecast figures which were much
higher than the actual figures which are now produced but which were according to Poland
nonetheless known by Nordzucker.

The Arbitral Tribunal’s assessment of the damages

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that Nordzucker now mainly presents an updated calculation of
its damages which follows the line of its submissions on damages filed up to and including
its Post-hearing Memorial. This means that the damages presented in the Submission on
Damages of 10 April 2009, as those presented prior to the Arbitral Tribunal’s first and
second Partial Awards, consist of the loss by Nordzucker of the earnings which Nordzucker
expected to realize in Poland following its acquisition of the Gdafisk and Szczecin Groups.

Such presentation of Nordzucker’s damages assumes that Nordzucker would have acquired
the two Groups but for Poland’s infringement of the BIT. It also assumes that the sale of the
Gdansk and Szczecin Groups to Nordzucker would have gone through in any event and that
no event, other than the breach of the BIT which the Arbitral Tribunal found Poland to have
committed, could have caused the sale to Nordzucker to fail.

These assumptions are inaccurate, though, are not contained in the second Partial Award and

are not supported by the facts to the extent verifiable and verified in the first and second
re nok a p.dacta|to'the/extent ple (end Verilog in Mhesticsyand) secon

 

 

~ Partial Awards.

Nordzucker’s assumptions are based on the inaccurate premise that “had the State Treasury
complied with its obligations under the BIT, it should either have transparently informed
Nordzucker that Nordzucker had to (marginally) increase the price offered for the Szczecin
and Gdansk Groups, failing which the privatisations would not be completed by the State
Treasury, or promptly followed the steps to officially repeat the “second stage" of the
privatisation procedure. Had either of these courses of action been pursued by the State
Treasury, Nordzucker “would certainly have taken some action to make sure that it would

N=

52.

53.

not stay with just two Sugar Groups in Poland" (reference omitted], for example by paying
the State Treasury’s desired price increase".

First, Nordzucker has not proven that both or either of the options it describes, would
necessarily have led to its purchase of the Gdafisk and Szczecin Groups.

Even if Nordzucker had been told explicitly that there would be no sale unless it increased its
price, there is no evidence that the sale would have gone through. The Arbitral Tribunal has
in its second Partial Award reviewed the submissions and the witness evidence and found
that they show that Nordzucker considered from the beginning of 2001 that there was no
more room for price negotiations and was even convinced that it was entitled to acquire the
two Groups at the prices it had offered. Nordzucker’s launching of the Polish cout
procedures to obtain orders that the shares were to be handed over to it, establishes this
conviction. This Arbitral Tribunal finds it implausible that Nordzucker would have reacted
differently if, on 18 January 2001, Mr. Jeznach had not merely given a hint, but actually
requested that the price be increased as a condition for the sale to go through.

Nordzucker has not proven either that, if the second option had been followed (repeating the
“second stage”), it would have bought the Groups. Repeating the second stage would have
implied a new valuation and it is uncertain what increase in the price might have been
required thereafter and whether it would indeed have been in the order of 7.4% as calculated
by the Arbitral Tribunal.

Second, Nordzucker foregoes the possibility of other options for Poland besides the two
mentioned ones. More transparency and diligence of the State Treasury, might also have led
the State Treasury to adopt a decision, in a GAM organized at the beginning of 2001, not to
agree with the sale and thereby close the sales procedure. This would have left Nordzucker
without any purchase and without any remedy as the procedure clearly provided the consent
of the State Treasury as shareholder in the GAM as a last condition for the sale. As the
Arbitral Tribunal found in its second Partial Award, withholding of this consent was not
subject to specific conditions and thus was always a possibility.

Third, even if Poland had followed one of the two options described by the Respondent, there
is no evidence that Nordzucker would have concluded the sale. Mr. Lukas’ statement, quoted
at § 46 above, that, whichever of the two courses of action the State Treasury had pursued,
Nordzucker would, in both cases, “certainly have taken some action to make sure that it
would not stay with just two Sugar Groups in Poland”, does not prove (i) that Nordzucker
would have raised its price, and (ii) that it would subsequently have acquired the two
additional Groups. The payment of the State Treasury’s desired price increase is mentioned
as a mere example by Mr. Lukas of “some action”, thus showing that other action might also
have been taken by Nordzucker. The statement may just as well refer to legal action, as

“SoDam § 15 and CWS 5 § 15

Nordzucker in fact decided to take as soon as there was as much as a “hint” that
Nordzucker’s price was insufficient.

56. Also Dr. Einfeld’s declaration in his supplemental written witness statement which he
submitted in full knowledge of this Arbitral Tribunal’s second Partial Award, does not
constitute evidence that Poland’s lack of transparency was the cause of Nordzucker not
acquiring the two Groups: “J cannot say today with absolute certainty what we would have
done if the State Treasury had been transparent. I confirm that what is certain though is that
we would have consulted Nordzucker’s management board and followed some course of
action designed to ensure that we could complete the privatisation process’. Again, this
“course of action” can mean several things, besides increasing the price, such as suing
Poland on basis of a legal undertaking which Nordzucker believed to exist. In any case,
increasing the price still gave no guarantee that the sale would actually take place.

57. Dr. Einfeld misquotes the Arbitral Tribunal when he states that “the Arbitral Tribunal has
found that Nordzucker would have had to increase the price by an additional 7.4% in order
to secure a positive outcome to the privatisation process”®, The calculation of the Arbitral
Tribunal related to the price needed in order to represent PLN 2000 per tonne of quotas”
which the State Treasury considered as a minimum. At no time has the Arbitral Tribunal
indicated that such price increase would have guaranteed the sale of the two Groups to
Nordzucker.*

(sa. {eather tho Arbival Tribunal bas concluded that the State Treasury was free in its decision
(whether to consent to a sale or not, even if all other conditions for it were fulfilled’.
Nordzucker seems to assume fhat, once the sales procedure was launched, Poland was
obliged to conclude it by a sale. This view is not correct, though.

 

59. Moreover, Nordzucker in its Submission on Damages concentrates on the price issue and
totally overlooks the political opposition which had grown over time against the sale. There
is no certainty that, even if the second phase had been repeated and a higher (the highest)
price had been offered by Nordzucker, the responsible Secretary of State would stil! have felt
sufficiently confident that the opposition to the privatisation could be placated with a a
price.

60. lta summary, Nordzucker has not proven that the damages which it claims are caused by the _

| lack of transparency of Poland. \It has not proven that, if Poland had been ‘appropriately —

transparent and dilige diligent, , Nordzucker would have bought the two Groups, nor that it failed to

Scws6,§ 12

SCWS6,§ 13

7 Second Partial Award, § 55

* The Tribunal also notes that such assumption has been taken as a basis for an adjustment of the calculation of the claim in Mr,
Lageiberg’s Supplementary Report of 9 April 2009, while the Report does not refer accordingly to the Tribunal’s conclusions on
which its decision in the second Partial Award was based (cf. in particular § 82-85, 95, and the “Decision”

? Second Partial Award, § 82

 

62.

63.

65.

66.

“Poland during ano during another half year.
. pee ecco

buy the Groups as a result of the lack of transparency of Poland. If Nordzucker eventually
could not purchase the Gdarisk and Szczecin Groups, and cannot now claim the damages it is
seeking, this is due to the fact that Poland had no legal obligation to sell these Groups to it
and was free to refuse its consent to the sale or to the investment. There having been no
investments in these two Groups, Nordzucker cannot claim damages for the loss of those
investments.

Nordzucker, which brought this claim on the basis that the BIT had been breached by

Poland’s refusal to sell the two Groups to Nordzucker, i is, notwithstanding the second Partial ‘

Award, still claiming damages which could be caused ‘by Poland only if it had an obligation

“to sell the Groups to Nordzucker: ermined that no such obligation
existed and this d s
infringement of the BIT.

       

Nordzucker seems to disregard the importance of the words “within a reasonable time” and
not to grasp the true meaning of “finalise” in those paragraphs of the second Partial Award in
which the Arbitral Tribunal criticized Poland for having “failed in its duty to manage the
sales procedure diligently and fairly and to finalise it within a reasonable time” (§65) and for
“failing to finalise the sales procedure within a reasonable time and uselessly protracting it,
also by its lack to communicate transparently with the candidate investor during the last
period of the pre-contractual phase of a sales procedure of Gdansk and Szczecin Groups”
(p. 32).

Poland’s breach of the BIT does not consist in its not finalising the sales procedure but in not
doing so within a reasonable time. Moreover, to “finalise” the sales procedure does not
necessarily mean to “close the sale” but can also mean “terminate the sales procedure” in any
other way, e.g. by deciding not to sell and informing the candidate buyer thereof, or by
allowing the candidate buyer to withdraw its offer.

 

\ The ' darmaged demonstrated by Nordzucker therefore have no causal link with the breach
which the Arbitral Tribunal decided in its second Partial Award to have been committed ey
jroien

_Nondawoker, in an attempt to prove that it suffered more damages than those linked to the set-

back of at least half a year for alternative investment plans and costs for the useless follow-up

of the sales process and the situation in respect of the Szczecin and Gdarisk Groups, has
——

neglected to prove the damages Possibly su suffered a: as a result delay in an alternative

_ investment and of the fiuitless

   
  

 

The Arbitral Tribunal has checked whether the Clait
such costs, ‘but did note then: Thé Arbitral 1
~—whether the damages which it had envisaged as a possible consequence of the breach of the

 
 

WA.

67.

68.

69.

70.

Ts

BIT by Poland have actually been suffered by Nordzucker, nor a way to assess the quantum
of these damages.

COSTS
The Parties’ Arguments

In their Submissions on Costs of 18 September 2009, each Party requests that the other be
ordered to bear all the costs of the arbitration, including legal fees and costs and arbiteators’
and experts’ expenses and costs.

With this request, the Parties disregard the first sentence of article 10 (5) of the BIT and
choose for the application of the second sentence. Article 10 (5) of the BIT provides as
follows:

“ Each Contracting Party shall bear the cost of its own member and of its counsel in the
arbitral proceedings; the cost of the chairman and the remaining costs shall be borne in
equal parts by the Contracting Parties. The arbitral tribunal may make a different regulation
concerning costs."

Each Party calls upon the Arbitral Tribunal to use its authority to adopt a different decision
on costs in its award and specifically relies on the UNCITRAL Rules of which article 38
confirms the arbitrators’ freedom to fix the costs in its award and article 40 (1) states that the
costs of the arbitration (as defined in article 38) shall in principle be bore by the
unsuccessful party, but that the Arbitral Tribunal may apportion each of such costs between
the Parties if it ines that i ible in the cit of the case.

Each Party considers in its submission that the other is unsuccessful in this arbitration.
Nordzucker emphasizes that the Arbitral Tribunal found in its first Partial Award that it had
jurisdiction to entertain a claim based on an alleged breach of the obligations in article 2 (1)
first and third sentences of the BIT and that it found in its second Partial Award that Poland
had breached its obligation to treat Nordzucker in a fair and equitable manner “by failing to
Jinalize the sales procedure within a reasonable time and uselessty protracting it, also by its
lack to communicate transparently with the candidate investor during the last period of the
pre-contractual phase of a sales procedure of Gdansk and Szczecin Sugar Groups”.

Poland, on the other hand, submits that the degree of success achieved by the Parties has to
be considered and that Nordzucker has achieved only minor success on jurisdiction, liability
and damages. It emphasizes that the first Partial Award held that the Arbitral Tribunal had no
jurisdiction for the alleged breached of several articles of the BIT — except one — and that, in
the second Partial Award, on liability, the Arbitral Tribunal dismissed three allegations of

72.

73.

72.

74.

75.

76.

77.

 

after had already wi in its of Reply, its claims
based on two other articles of the BIT. As regards damages, Poland is of the opinion that
Nordzucker presented a calculation of damages which was not in accordance with the
Arbitral Tribunal’s guidelines in the second Partial Award dated 28 January 2009 and that, if
it had complied therewith, the amount of damages would probably not have exceeded 1% of
the amount claimed by Nordzucker in this arbitration.

Poland furthermore refers to the link between the costs engaged for the presentation of, and
the defence against, claims which are dismissed, but gives no further details e.g. of the
portion of its costs which relates to the defence against unsuccessful claims.

It finally points out that 's costs are not in ion to 'S
possible compensation, and to Poland’s costs.

Costs of the arbitration

 

's costs, as evid d by Appendix I to its on Costs of 18 September
2009, consist of:

— fees and disbursements of White & Case LLP: € 2,177,059.91
— fees and disbursements of experts: € 445,273.73
Total € 2,622,333.64

The costs of Poland as shown in its Appendix I of 25 September 2009 amount to:

— fees and disbursements of DZP: € 687,491.15
— fees and disbursements of experts: € 526,801.24
Total € 1,214,292.39

According to article 38 (a) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the fees of the Arbitral Tribunal are to
be fixed by the Arbitral Tribunal itself in accordance with article 39. They shall be
reasonable in amount, taking into account the amount in dispute, the complexity of the
subject matter, the time spent by the arbitrators and any other relevant circumstances of the
case.

Having taken these various elements into account, the Arbitral Tribunal’s fees can reasonably
be determined as follows:

— Co-Arbitrators: € 274,250
— Chairman € 261,000
Total € 535,250

78.

79.

73,

81.

82.

83.

84,

The travel and other expenses incurred by the Arbitral Tribunal (including the costs for the
hearing room of the procedural meeting of 8 September 2006) amount to € 32,000.

The costs for the hearing room and break out room for the arbitrators as well as for the court
reporter for the witness hearing of 5-8 November 2007 have been advanced by the Parties on
a 50/50 basis. They are not included in the Parties’ respective costs as mentioned in
paragraphs 69 and 70 above which the Parties claim from each other.

Liability for costs

The Parties’ respective requests to order the other Party to pay all costs of the arbitration and
to disregard the rule of article 10 (5) of the BIT is clearly based on each Party’s conviction
that it is successful in the arbitration and that the other is unsuccessful.

The Arbitral Tribunal disagrees with these unilateral views. There can be no doubt that
Nordzucker is not successful: it filed a claim for “not less than” € 185.4 million, later reduced
to € 153.7 million and even if the Arbitral Tribunal found in its first Partial Award that it had
limited jurisdiction and in its second Partial Award that there was a breach of one of the BIT
provisions, it cannot recover anything on basis of the Final Award. This does not mean that
Poland is successful, however: the Arbitral Tribunal found that Poland did breach its

“obligation under the BIT to treat Nordzucker, although only a candidate investor engaged in
the sales procedure for the Gdansk and Szczecin Sugar Groups, in a fair and equitable
manner.

Consequently, the “costs follow the event” rule can in this case not possibly lead to an order
for one Party to bear all the costs as both Parties request. Furthermore, a strict apportionment
on basis of the “degree” of success, respectively failure, of each Party in this arbitration is not
easy to make, as the Arbitral Tribunal has no information to determine which costs have to
be apportioned between jurisdiction, liability and damages, or between the different initial
requests for relief of the Claimant.

Both article 10 (5) of the BIT and article 40 (1) of the UNCITRAL Rules grant the Arbitral
Tribunal authority to deviate from their respective principal rule on costs. Taking into
account the mitigated success of each Party, the Arbitral Tribunal considers it appropriate
that each Party shall bear its own costs (including all fees and costs of its counsel, witnesses,
interpreters and experts), with the exception, mentioned in paragraph 84 hereafter, of
Poland's costs for the Supplementary Expert Report, filed with Poland’s Reply to
Nordzucker's Submission on Damages.

The Arbitral Tribunal is of the opinion that Nordzucker has in its Submission on Damages of
14 April 2009 disregarded the second Partial Award on liability, although it was clear from
the Arbitral Tribunal's Procedural Order No. 6 that the right to file an additional submission
on damages was intended merely to allow to take account of the Partial Awards issued in the

85.

86.

87.

meantime, not to “actualise" Nordzucker's original damage calculation. Thus, the Arbitral
Tribunal finds that the costs for Poland's Supplementary Expert Report, dated 29 May 2009,
which amounts to € 71,000 (invoice of 27 May 2009) according to Poland's letter of 25
September 2009, must be borne by Nordzucker.

Given the above mentioned mitigated success of each Party, the Arbitral Tribunal considers it
appropriate to apportion the costs of the arbitration on a 50-50 basis between the Parties.

The advance on costs fixed by the Arbitral Tribunal at € 574,000 has been paid in equal
shares by the Parties. Consequently, the Arbitrators’ fees and costs are fully paid and € 6,750
will be reimbursed to the Parties together with the remaining amount in the trust account
which represents interests after deduction of banking costs. Each Party will be paid 50% of
these amounts.

The costs of the hearing room and court reporter for the witness hearing have been advanced
by the Parties, each for 50%. These 50-50 payments are thus final.

DECISION

For the above stated reasons,

The Tribunal decides:

1, to dismiss Nordzucker’s Claim for Damages, now in an amount of € 153,7 million.
2, that each Party shall bear its own costs, except as provided in item 3 hereafter.

3. that Nordzucker shall pay to Poland an amount of € 71,000 representing the costs of
Poland's Supplementary Expert Report of 29 May 2009.

4. that the fees and costs of the Arbitrators, amounting to € 567,250, and other costs of the
arbitration shall be borne in equal parts by the Parties.

5. as the Parties have each paid 50% of the advance of € 574,000 on fees and costs of the
Arbitral Tribunal and also shared equally the advance on other costs of the arbitration,
€ 6,750 will be reimbursed to the Parties together with the remaining amount in the trust
account,

6. to dismiss all other claims of either Party.

Signed in seven originals, one for each Party, one for each member of the Arbitral Tribunal, one for
deposit with the clerk of the Court of First Instance and one as a reserve copy.

Seat of the Arbitration: Brussels

.2.3.,.M2009

A fer Z

Andreas Bucher Maciej Tomaszewski
Co-Arbitrator Co-Arbitrator

 

Vera Van Houtte
Chairman

20

