Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/11/1)

Excerpts of the Award of April 30, 2014 made pursuant to Article 53(3) of the ICSID
Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules of 2006

Claimant

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated Limited (“NSPI’, a Canadian corporation)
Respondent

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (“Venezuela”)

Tribunal

Hans Van Houtte (President of the Tribunal, Belgian), appointed by the Parties
David A.R. Williams (New Zealand), appointed by the Claimant

Ratil Emilio Vinuesa (Argentine/Spanish), appointed by the Respondent
Award

Award of April 30, 2014

Instrument relied on for consent to ICSID arbitration

Agreement between the Government of Canada and the Government of the Republic of Venezuela for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments dated July 1, 1996, which entered into force on January 28,
1998 (“Canada-Venezuela BIT’)

Procedure

Applicable Arbitration Rules: — YCSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) (“AF”) Rules of 2006

Place of Proceedings: Paris, France
Procedural Languages: English and Spanish
Full procedural details: Available at https://www.worldbank.org/icsid

Factual Background

Between 1999 and 2007, the Claimant received a supply of coal from a mine in the Zulia region of
Venezuela pursuant to a supply agreement and confirmation letters entered into with a company
incorporated in Aruba (“company X”) that was in turn controlled by Venezuelan state-owned entities. At
the end of 2007, the Claimant was informed by company X that it would be indefinitely suspending all
shipments of coal to NSPI. After further exchanges of correspondence and meetings between NSPI and
company X in the first half of 2008, company X confirmed that it was required to suspend coal shipments
to NSPI because of a government directive, which in its view constituted a force majeure event under the
supply agreement.

In 2008, NSPI commenced a commercial arbitration proceeding in Halifax, Nova Scotia, against company
X, and subsequently commenced another arbitration proceeding against Venezuela under the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules on the basis of the Canada-Venezuela BIT. The Halifax arbitration was later suspended
and in 2010, a tribunal in the UNCITRAL arbitration ruled that it did not have jurisdiction over NSPI’s
claims.

The Claimant filed a request for arbitration against Venezuela with the Additional Facility (“AF”) in
2011, alleging breach of the Canada-Venezuela BIT. According to the Claimant, the dispute related to
Venezuela’s unilateral termination of the Claimant’s right to receive supplies of coal at fixed prices from
company X. Venezuela objected to the jurisdiction of the AF Tribunal.

On April 30, 2014, the AF Tribunal rendered an award unanimously declining jurisdiction on the basis
that the dispute did not arise out of an “investment” within the meaning of the Canada-Venezuela BIT.

EXCERPTS

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between
NOVA SCOTIA POWER INCORPORATED (CANADA)

Claimant

and

BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/11/1

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Hans Van Houtte, President
Professor David A.R. Williams, QC, Arbitrator
Professor Ratil Emilio Vinuesa, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Paul-Jean Le Cannu

Date of dispatch to the Parties: April 30, 2014

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Excerpts of Award

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing
NOVA SCOTIA POWER
INCORPORATED (CANADA):

Mr. John Terry

Mr. Stuart Svonkin
Mr. Geoff Watt
Torys LLP

Suite 3000

79 Wellington St. w.
Box 270, TD Centre
Toronto, Ontario
Canada M5K 1N2

Representing
BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF
VENEZUELA:

Dr. Manuel Enrique Galindo

Procurador (E) General de la Reptiblica

Dra. Magaly Gutierrez

Dra. Julisbeth Carolina Castillo Yelamo

Av. Los Ilustres

cruce con calle Francisco Lazo Marti

Edif. Sede Procuradoria General de la Republica
Urb. Santa Monica,

C.P. 1040

Caracas, Venezuela

and

Dr. Ronald E.M. Goodman
Mr. Thomas Bevilacqua

Ms. Melida Hodgson

Ms. Alexandra Meise Bay

Mr. Ivan Urzhumov

Ms. Angelynn Meya

Mr. Carlos Arrue Montenegro
Mr. Diego Cadena

Mr. Rodrigo Tranamil

Ms. Angélica Villagran

Mr. Peter Hakim

Foley Hoag LLP

1875 K Street., N.W., Suite 800
Washington, D.C. 20006-1238
United States of America

and
39, rue du Colisée

75008 Paris
France

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

IL.

Il.

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS*
INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES .....ccccsssssssssssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssesssenes 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 2
FACTUAL BACKGROUND 5
Subject matter of this dispute 5
Prior pr ding: 5

 

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS ON JURISDICTION AND TRIBUNAL’S

 

 

 

 

ANALYSIS 5
Overview of the Parties’ Positi 6
1. Respondent’s Position 6
2. Claimant’s Position 6
3. Tribunal’s Analysis of a Preliminary Issue............cccccece eee eeeeeeeeeeseteeeeteeeteeeeeeeeeees 6

 

Burden and Standard of Proof 6
1. Overview of the Parties’ Position 6
a. Respondent’s Position 7
b. — Claimant’s Position 7
2. Tribunal’s Analysis 7

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The dispute does not arise out of an “investMent” ..........csssscsssessecessesessssessssessssessssesssees 8
1. Interpretive Approach 8
a. Respondent’s Position 8
b. — Claimant’s Position 8
ec. Tribunal’s Analysis 8
2. Contribution 15
a. Respondent’s Position 15
b. — Claimant’s Position 15
ec. Tribunal’s Analysis 15
3. Duration 18
a. Respondent’s Position 18
b. — Claimant’s Position 19
ec. Tribunal’s Analysis 19
4. Risk 20
a. Respondent’s Position 20
b. — Claimant’s Position 20

 

* The page numbers in the Table of Contents of these Excerpts do not correspond to the original page
numbers of the Award.

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

VI.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ec. Tribunal’s Analysis 20
5. Tribunal’s Conclusion on “investment?”...........c.ccccccssesseseeseseeteseeseseeseseesestesesteneaneneas 22
The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction under the BIT because the dispute does not arise out
of an investment made “‘in the territory” of Venezuela.
1. Parties’ Position
a. Respondent’s Position 24
b. — Claimant’s Position 24
2. Tribunal’s Analysis 24
The dispute arises out of an ordinary commercial transaction ..........cssscsssessseessseeessees 25
1. Parties’ Position 26
a. Respondent’s Position 26
b. — Claimant’s Position 26
2. Tribunal’s Analysis 27
The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the claim asserted under the umbrella clause of
the UK-V la BIT 28
1. Parties’ Position 28
a. Respondent’s Position 28
b. — Claimant’s Position 28
2. Tribunal’s Analysis 28
COSTS 28
AWARD 30

 

iii

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Excerpts of Award

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

BIT or Treaty

Cl. Mem.

Cl. C-Mem. Jur.

Cl. Rej.

[J
[J

2007 Confirmation Letters

[J

Coal Supply Agreement

E [CE] [RE]
[company X]
ICSID Additional Facility Rules

ICSID Convention

ICSID or the Centre

LA [CLA] [RLA]
NSPI or Claimant
Request or RFA

Resp. Mem. Jur.

Agreement between the Government of
Canada and the Government of the Republic of
Venezuela for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments dated July 1, 1996

Memorial of Nova Scotia Power Incorporated
dated May 14, 2012

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction of Nova
Scotia Power Incorporated dated December 10,
2012

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction of Nova Scotia
Power Incorporated dated April 22, 2013

[J
[J

Confirmation Letter 3 (coal supply for 2008-
2011) and Confirmation Letter 4 (coal supply
for 2008), both dated July 13, 2007

[J

Coal Supply Agreement dated October 18,
2005 between [company X] and NSPI

Exhibit [Claimant] [Respondent]
[company X]

Rules Governing the Additional Facility as
amended effective April 10, 2006

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated March 18, 1965

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

Legal Authority [Claimant] [Respondent]
Nova Scotia Power Incorporated

Request for Arbitration of Nova Scotia Power
Incorporated dated November 2, 2010

Memorial on Jurisdiction of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela dated August 27, 2012

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Excerpts of Award

Resp. Reply

Schedule C to the ICSID Additional Facility
Rules

Tr. [Day #], [page/line]

UK-Venezuela BIT

VCLT

Venezuela or Respondent

Reply on Jurisdiction of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela dated February 19,
2013

Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules
(Schedule C), as amended effective April 10,
2006

Transcripts of the hearing on jurisdiction held
from June 19 through 21, 2013

Agreement between the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the Government of the Republic of
Venezuela for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments dated March 15, 1995

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
concluded at Vienna on May 23, 1969

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

1. This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre’’) on the basis of the Agreement between the
Government of Canada and the Government of the Republic of Venezuela for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments dated July 1, 1996 (the “BIT” or “Treaty”),
which entered into force on January 28, 1998, and the Rules Governing the Additional
Facility (the “ICSID Additional Facility Rules”) and Schedule C to the ICSID Additional
Facility Rules, as amended and in effect from April 10, 2006.' The dispute relates to the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela’s termination of Nova Scotia Power Incorporated’s right
to receive up to 1.7 million metric tonnes of coal at fixed prices from the Paso Diablo coal

we 2
mine in Venezuela.”

2. | The Claimant is Nova Scotia Power Incorporated, a company incorporated under the laws

of Canada,* hereinafter referred to as “NSPI’ or the “Claimant.”

3. The Respondent is the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, hereinafter referred to as

“Venezuela” or the “Respondent.”

4. The Claimant and the Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties.”

The Parties’ respective representatives and their addresses are listed above on page @.4

! This arbitration has been brought under Article 2(a) and (alternatively) (b) of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules,
which provide as follows:

The Secretariat of the Centre is hereby authorized to administer, subject to and in accordance with these Rules,
proceedings between a State (or a constituent subdivision or agency of a State) and a national of another State,
{falling within the following categories:

(a) conciliation and arbitration proceedings for the settlement of legal disputes arising directly out of an investment
which are not within the jurisdiction of the Centre because either the State party to the dispute or the State whose
national is a party to the dispute is not a Contracting State; and

(b) conciliation and arbitration proceedings for the settlement of legal disputes which are not within the jurisdiction
of the Centre because they do not arise directly out of an investment, provided that either the State party to the
dispute or the State whose national is a party to the dispute is a Contracting State.

> The Claimant has valued its losses in excess of US$ [...] (See Claimant’s Memorial (“Cl. Mem.”), { 145-148).

* See Request for Arbitration (“RFA”), | 5 (CE-Schedule C).

4 By letter of September 14, 2011, the Centre transmitted to the Parties a letter dated September 8, 2011 from the
Respondent and a letter from ICSID to the Respondent of September 14, 2011. The Respondent indicated in its
letter that Dr. Carlos Miguel Escarré Malavé had been designated as Procurador General de la Reptiblica de

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

5. On November 2, 2010, ICSID received a request for arbitration dated November 2, 2010

from NSPI against Venezuela (the “Request”).

6. On January 26, 2011, the Secretary-General of ICSID approved access to the Additional
Facility and registered the Request in accordance with Articles 4 and 5 of Schedule C to
the ICSID Additional Facility Rules and notified the Parties of the registration. In the
Notice of Registration, and pursuant to Article S(c) and (e) of Schedule C to the ICSID
Additional Facility Rules, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute
an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Chapter III of Schedule C to

the ICSID Additional Facility Rules.

7. The Parties agreed that the Tribunal would consist of three arbitrators, one to be appointed
by each party, the third arbitrator and President of the Tribunal to be appointed by

agreement of the Parties.

8. The Claimant appointed Professor David A.R. Williams QC, a national of New Zealand, as
arbitrator on April 13, 2011 and on April 18, 2011 Professor Williams accepted the
appointment and signed a declaration in accordance with Article 13(2) of Schedule C to the

ICSID Additional Facility Rules.

 

Venezuela on August 30, 2011 and that he and Dra. Ana Maria De Stefano Lo Piano were the only individuals to be
copied on all ICSID correspondence. The Centre confirmed in its letter to the Respondent that it would copy
Dr. Malavé and Dra. De Stefano on all future correspondence and, unless otherwise instructed, would continue
copying the law firm designated by the Republic (Foley Hoag LLP). By letter of February 15, 2012, the Centre

itted to the Parties from the dent dated February 13, 2012 and correspondence from
the Centre dated February 14, 2012. In the Respondent's letter, Dra. Cilia Flores informed the Centre that she had
been designated as Procuradora General de la Reptiblica on February 1, 2012. Dr. Flores requested that she and
Dra. Magaly Gutiérrez be copied on future ICSID correspondence. In its letter of February 14, 2012, the Centre
confirmed that it would do so. On May 14, 2013, the Centre transmitted to the Parties a letter from the Respondent
informing the Secretary-General of ICSID that Dra. De Stefano had ceased to perform her functions and that the
following individuals should now receive all future communications from the Centre: Dr. Manuel Enrique Galindo,
Procurador General Encargado; Dra. Magaly Gutiérrez Vifia, Coordinadora Integral del Despacho; y Dra. Yarubith
Escobar, Asistente del Procurador. By email of April 7, 2014, the Centre transmitted to the Parties a letter from the
Respondent informing the Secretary-General of ICSID that Dra. Escobar had ceased to perform her functions and
that the following individuals should now receive future communications from the Centre: Dr. Manuel Enrique
Galindo, Procurador General Encargado; Dra. Magaly Gutiérrez Vifia, Coordinadora Integral del Despacho
Encargada; y Dra. Julisbeth Carolina Castillo Yelamo, Coordinadora Integral Legal.

 

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Excerpts of Award

9. The Respondent appointed Professor Rati] Emilio Vinuesa, a national of Argentina and
Spain, on May 11, 2011 and on May 12, 2011 Professor Vinuesa accepted the appointment
and signed a declaration in accordance with Article 13(2) of Schedule C to the ICSID
Additional Facility Rules.

10. The Parties agreed to appoint Professor Hans van Houtte, a national of Belgium, as

President of the Tribunal on September 13, 2011.

11. On September 16, 2011, Professor van Houtte accepted the appointment and signed a
declaration in accordance with Article 13(2) of Schedule C to the ICSID Additional
Facility Rules. On the same date, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Article 13(1)
of Schedule C to the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, notified the Parties that all three
arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to
have been constituted on that date. Mr. Paul-Jean Le Cannu, ICSID Legal Counsel, was

designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

12. The Tribunal held its first session with the Parties on November 20, 2011 in Paris, France.
The Parties confirmed that the Members of the Tribunal had been validly appointed. It was
agreed, inter alia, that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be those in effect from
April 10, 2006,° that the procedural languages would be English and Spanish, with written
pleadings to be translated into the other language,° and that the place of proceeding would
be Paris, France.’ The Parties agreed on, and the Tribunal approved, a schedule for the
jurisdictional phase of the proceedings in the event that the Respondent were to confirm its
intention to raise objections to jurisdiction.* The results of the first session were reflected

in minutes, which were duly conveyed to the Parties (“Minutes of the First Session”).”

13. On April 9, 2012, the Claimant filed a request for the Tribunal to take a decision on the

Parties’ document production requests and objections, to which the Respondent replied on

5 See Minutes of First Session dated December 23, 2011, 1.1.
© See Minutes of First Session dated December 23, 2011, 10.1.
” See Minutes of First Session dated December 23, 2011, 49.1.
8 See Minutes of First Session dated December 23, 2011, 13.1.
° See ICSID letter to Parties dated December 23, 2011.

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

April 19, 2012. By letter of April 23, 2012, the Claimant withdrew its request, in light of

clarifications provided by the Respondent.

On May 14, 2012, the Claimant filed its Memorial along with supporting documents,
including witness statements and an expert report, in accordance with paragraph 13 of the
Minutes of the First Session. The Claimant also filed Spanish translations of its Witness

Statements and Expert Report on May 25, 2012 and of its Memorial on June 4, 2012.

Also in accordance with paragraph 13 of the Minutes of the First Session, the Respondent
confirmed its intention to raise jurisdictional objections on May 25, 2012 and submitted its
Memorial on Jurisdiction along with supporting documents on August 27, 2012. The

Respondent filed a Spanish translation of its Memorial on September 17, 2012.

The Claimant filed its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction on December 10, 2012 (including

supporting documents), with the Spanish translation following on December 23, 2012.

The Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction was subsequently filed on February 19, 2013, and
the Spanish translation followed on March 11, 2013, and the Claimant’s Rejoinder on
Jurisdiction was filed on April 22, 2013, with the Spanish translation following on May 10,
2013.

A hearing on jurisdiction took place at the World Bank’s office in Paris from June 19 to 21,
2013. In addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary of the Tribunal,

present at the hearing were:

For the Claimant:

Mr. John Terry Torys LLP
Mr. Stuart Svonkin Torys LLP
Mr. Geoff Watt Torys LLP
Professor Rudolf Dolzer

Mr. David Landrigan NSPI

Mr. Mark Sidebottom NSPI

For the Respondent:

Dr. Ronald E.M. Goodman Foley Hoag LLP

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

20.

21.

Il.

22.

36.

IV.

40.

Mr. Thomas Bevilacqua Foley Hoag LLP
Ms. Melida Hodgson Foley Hoag LLP
Ms. Alexandra Meise Bay Foley Hoag LLP
Mr. Ivan Urzhumov Foley Hoag LLP
Ms. Angelynn Meya Foley Hoag LLP
Mr. Carlos Arrue Montenegro Foley Hoag LLP
Mr. Diego Cadena Foley Hoag LLP
Mr. Rodrigo Tranamil Foley Hoag LLP
Ms. Angélica Villagran Foley Hoag LLP
Mr. Peter Hakim Foley Hoag LLP
Dr. Yarubith Escobar Procuraduria General, Venezuela
(on June 19, 2013)
Ms. Mariana Arenas Procuraduria General, Venezuela

(on June 19, 2013)
On July 2 and 3, 2013, the Parties filed jointly a chronology of events.
The Parties filed their submissions on costs on August 16, 2013.

The proceeding was declared closed on April 5, 2014, in accordance with Article 44(1) of
Schedule C to the ICSID Additional Facility Rules.'°

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

A. Subject matter of this dispute

[..-]

B. Prior proceedings
Led

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS ON JURISDICTION AND TRIBUNAL’S
ANALYSIS

What follows is a summary of the positions of the Parties, without prejudice to the Parties’
full arguments as submitted in their written and oral pleadings, including supporting

documents, which the Tribunal has taken into consideration in making its determinations.

° See Letter from ICSID dated April 30, 2014.

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

Al.

42.

44.

4S.

A. Overview of the Parties’ Positions

1. Respondent’s Position

2.  Claimant’s Position

3. Tribunal’s Analysis of a Preliminary Issue

The Tribunal finds it convenient to deal here with a preliminary issue. The Claimant has
argued that the Tribunal has jurisdiction because the Respondent has stated in the
UNCITRAL Arbitration that the present arbitration is the proper forum for the Parties’
dispute (presuming that the dispute resolution mechanism under the BIT is available to the
Claimant generally). The Tribunal is not convinced that the Respondent’s assertion before
the UNCITRAL Arbitration that the dispute could not be submitted under the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules under the tiered dispute resolution mechanism provisions of Article XII
(4) of the BIT because arbitration under the Additional Facility was available,” determines
the jurisdiction of this Tribunal in any way. For the Tribunal, it is clear that the
Respondent, in objecting to the UNCITRAL Arbitration as the correct forum, on the basis
that the ICSID Additional Facility was available, reserved its rights to object to jurisdiction
in this arbitration.° The indication of availability did not represent a concession to

jurisdiction.[...]

B. Burden and Standard of Proof

1. Overview of the Parties’ Positions

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

49.

50.

a. _ Respondent’s Position

 

b.  Claimant’s Position

2. Tribunal’s Analysis

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal notes that there appears to be little dispute between
the Parties as to the existence of the facts. Rather, the dispute centres on the interpretation
of those facts and whether or not they support jurisdiction. As such, discussion of burden
or standard of proof, and the Parties’ positions thereon, is of limited relevance and

somewhat academic.

Nonetheless, the Tribunal is of the view that in considering questions of burden and
standard of proof it is appropriate to distinguish in this jurisdictional phase between facts
required to support jurisdiction, and facts which go to the merits. The Tribunal agrees with
this “double approach,” as it was termed by the tribunal in Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. Czech
Republic, which requires the Claimant to positively establish key jurisdictional facts
whilst allowing for facts which go to the merits to be provisionally “accepted at face
value.”© The Tribunal now turns to examine the first limb of the Respondent’s first
jurisdictional objection,” namely that the dispute submitted to this Tribunal does not arise

out of an “investment.”

Phoenix Action, supra note 61, | 62.

°5 Eg. those said to establish that an investment has been made in the territory of a host State.

°° Phoenix Action, supra note 61, {[ 64.

© See supra | 43 a).

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

C. The dispute does not arise out of an “investment”

1.
a.
Sl Ld
b.
63. [ed
c.

Interpretive Approach

Respondent’s Position

Claimant’s Position

Tribunal’s Analysis

75. To ascertain whether there is an investment, the Tribunal must look to the terms of the BIT.

For the Tribunal, this is the focus of its enquiries, and is unaltered by what forum the

dispute is before. The relevant provisions of the BIT are the following:

ARTICLE I

Definitions

For the purpose of this Agreement: [...]

(f) “investment” means any kind of asset owned or controlled by an
investor of one Contracting Party either directly or indirectly, including
through an investor of a third State, in the territory of the other
Contracting Party in accordance with the latter’s laws. In particular,

though not exclusively, “investment” includes:

(i) — movable and immovable property and any related property rights,
such as mortgages, liens or pledges;

(ii) shares, stock, bonds and debentures or any other form of
participation in a company, business enterprise or joint venture;

(iii) money, claims to money, and claims to performance under
contract having a financial value;

(iv) goodwill;

(v) _ intellectual property rights;

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

(vi) rights, conferred by law or under contract, to undertake any
economic and commercial activity, including any rights to search for,
cultivate, extract or exploit natural resources.
but does not mean real estate or other property, tangible or intangible, not
acquired in the expectation or used for the purpose of economic benefit or

other business purposes.

Any change in the form of an investment does not affect its character as an
investment.

(g) “investor” means
in the case of Canada:

(i) any natural person possessing the citizenship of Canada in
accordance with its laws; or

(ii) any enterprise incorporated or duly constituted in accordance
with applicable laws of Canada,

who makes the investment in the territory of Venezuela and who does not
possess the citizenship of Venezuela; and

in the case of Venezuela:

(i) any natural person possessing the citizenship of Venezuela in
accordance with its laws; or

(ii) any enterprise incorporated or duly constituted in accordance
with applicable laws of Venezuela,

who makes the investment in the territory of Canada and who does not
possess the citizenship of Canada;

[J
ARTICLE XII

Settlement of Disputes between an Investor and the Host Contracting
Party

1. Any dispute between one Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party, relating to a claim by the investor that a measure taken
or not taken by the fanner Contracting Party is in breach of this
Agreement, and that the investor or an enterprise owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the investor has incurred loss or damage by

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

76.

77.

125

reason of, or arising out of, that breach, shall, to the extent possible, be
settled amicably between them.

2. If a dispute has not been settled amicably within a period of six months
from the date on which it was initiated, it may be submitted by the investor
to arbitration in accordance with paragraph (4). [...]

4. The dispute may, by the investor concerned, be submitted to arbitration

under:

(a) The International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID), established pursuant to the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, opened
for signature at Washington 18 March, 1965 (ICSID Convention),
provided that both the disputing Contracting Party and the Contracting
Party of the investor are parties to the ICSID Convention;

or

(b) the Additional Facility Rules of ICSID, provided that either the
disputing Contracting Party or the Contracting Party of the investor, but
not both, is a party to the ICSID Convention; or

In case neither of the procedures mentioned above is available, the
investor may submit the dispute to an international arbitrator or ad hoc
arbitration tribunal established under the Arbitration Rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL). [...5

The Tribunal notes that the Parties agree that in so far as there is a dispute regarding the
meaning of investment in the BIT, Article 31 of the VCLT should be followed. Article 31
of the VCLT provides that “[a] treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with
the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light
of its object and purpose.” Thus, the starting point for the application of the VCLT is the
“ordinary meaning” of the term investment. Article 32 of the VCLT sets forth
supplementary means of interpretation which, given the Tribunal’s findings below, have

not come into play.

The Tribunal is of the view that in examining whether or not an investment is present, the

definition of “investment” in the BIT cannot be considered self-sufficient. Indeed, one

Schedule A to the RFA; RLA-80.

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

78.

126

Le

127

might query if the language attached to “investment” in the BIT can even be properly

126

described as a definition” (i.e. a term which offers an exact description of the item in

question); this also indicates its limitations. In ascertaining the ordinary meaning of
“investment”, the Tribunal must do more than simply look to the list of examples offered

in Article I(f) of the BIT. The reasons for this are threefold. 17

First, the list of examples in Article I(f) is clearly non-exhaustive on its own terms.'*> The
open-ended nature of this part of the purported definition of investment calls for recourse
to inherent features. The Tribunal refers here to the awards in Joy Mining and Romak.
Whilst this Tribunal does not find it necessary to invoke Article 32(b) of the VCLT as the
Romak tribunal did, it finds the problems highlighted by the Romak tribunal to be relevant

considerations for ascertaining the ordinary meaning of the term “investment” in “context

9129

and in the light of its object and purpose. In Romak, the tribunal said (citing Joy

Mining):

184. In addition, for a number of reasons the Arbitral Tribunal finds that a
mechanical application of the categories listed in Article 1(2) of the BIT
would produce “a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.”
Such an outcome is contrary to Article 32(b) of the Vienna Convention.

185. First, said interpretation would eliminate any practical limitation to
the scope of the concept of “investment.” In particular, it would render
meaningless the distinction between investments, on the one hand, and
purely commercial transactions, on the other. As the Joy Mining tribunal
explained:

[...] if a distinction is not drawn between ordinary sales contracts, even if
complex, and an investment, the result would be that any sales or
procurement contract involving a State agency would qualify as an
investment. International contracts are today a central feature of
international trade and have stimulated far reaching developments in the

The Oxford English Dictionary (Oxford, 2010) defines definition as “a statement of the exact meaning of a word
] an exact statement or description of the nature, scope, or meaning of something.” (emphasis added)

See Romak, supra note 86, { 180: “The term ‘investment’ has a meaning in itself that cannot be ignored when

considering the list contained in Article 1(2) of the BIT.”

128

The introductory language for the list of examples in Article I(f) reads “In particular, though not exclusively,

‘investment’ includes” (see Romak, supra note 86, {{f 174, 180).
Article 31(1) of VCLT.

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

79.

80.

130

131

132

133

governing law, among them the United Nations Convention on Contracts
for the International Sale of Goods, and_ significant conceptual
contributions. Yet, those contracts are not investment contracts, except in
exceptional circumstances, and are to be kept separate and distinct for the
sake of a stable legal order. Otherwise, what difference would there be
with the many State contracts that are submitted every day to international
arbitration in connection with contractual performance, at such bodies as
the International Chamber of Commerce and the London Court of
International Arbitration?!”

This Tribunal considers that the “mechanical application” of the list of examples in

Article I(f) here would not suffice for the purposes of Article 31(1) of the VCLT.

Second, the interplay between Article I(f) and Article I(g) of the BIT, and the terms
“investment” and “investor” generally, support the necessity of recourse to inherent

features. “Investor” operates as a gateway for “investment.” The “investor” ““make[s] the

investment.”!*!

Moreover, Article XII has as its focus the “investor.” The Tribunal does
not see the terms “investor” and “investment” as separate and pertaining only to ratione
personae and ratione materiae respectively. By its plain meaning, the language in the BIT
makes it necessary to address the question of what it is to “make” an investment. This

question in turn requires recourse to the inherent features of an investment.

Third, the Tribunal is not convinced by the Claimant’s argument that because Article 2(a)
of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules does not impose additional requirement to establish
an “investment” beyond that contained in the BIT (in contrast to Article 25 of the ICSID

. 3
Convention), 132

the Tribunal should not look any further than the (self-contained)
definition of investment in Article I(f) of the BIT.' As the Tribunal has already
indicated, the BIT itself calls for the consideration of inherent features. What the ICSID
Additional Facility Rules or the ICSID Convention do or do not impose is not relevant in

this regard. It cannot be the case that the scope of “investment” in a bilateral investment

Romak, supra note 86, RLA-67, {ff 184-185, citing Joy Mining, supra note 86, 1 58.

Article I(g) of the BIT.
Cl. C-Mem. Jur., J 11.
Le. look only to the list set forth in Article I(f) of the BIT.

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

treaty changes depending on the arbitral forum.'** No matter what the forum, the ordinary
meaning of investment in the relevant bilateral investment treaty derives from something
more than a list of examples and calls for an examination of the inherent features of an

investment.

81. Discussing the task of defining the term investment in the ICSID Convention, the General
Counsel of the World Bank who shepherded the ICSID Convention into existence, stated
that “investment” is difficult to define but yet readily recognisable. '*> The Tribunal finds
this an apt view for the present circumstances (albeit that the comment was made in
relation to “investment” in the ICSID Convention), as well as one which speaks against
merely looking to a list of examples provided in the BIT. The term investment carries
inherent features as part of its ordinary meaning and these must be taken into account by

the Tribunal.

82. Before discussing what these inherent features are and whether they are present here, the

136

Tribunal must deal with two further issues. Firstly, object and purpose: ~” the Claimant has

argued that as the purpose of the BIT is to promote and protect investments, the protection

of those investments via the dispute resolution mechanisms in the BIT should not be too

4 see Romak, supra note 86:

194. The Arbitral Tribunal does not share this view, which could lead to “unreasonable” results. This view would
imply that the substantive protection offered by the BIT would be narrowed or widened, as the case may be, merely
by virtue of a choice between the various dispute resolution mechanisms sponsored by the Treaty. This would be
both absurd and unreasonable. Naturally, there are specific jurisdictional restrictions imposed by the ICSID
Convention (for example, the limitation with respect to physical persons who are dual nationals, or to the existence
of a “legal dispute”). However, said restrictions do not bear on the definition of “investment”. There is no dispute
that the ICSID Convention's drafters offered no definition for the term “investment.” There is no basis to suppose
that this word had a different meaning in the context of the ICSID Convention than it bears in relation to the BIT.
Indeed, the drafters appear to have excluded any specific definition from the ICSID Convention precisely to accord
contracting parties a great deal of flexibility in their designation of transactions or disputes as investment-related in
their instruments of consent.

195. On this basis, it would be unreasonable to conclude that the Contracting Parties contemplated a definition of
the term tments” which would effectively exclude recourse to the ICSID Convention and therefore render
meaningless — or without effet utile — the provision granting the investor a choice between ICSID or UNCITRAL
Arbitration. As already noted, this would run counter to the rule of construction requiring the interpreter to infer
that a State party to two or more treaties which employ the same term in the same (or a similar) context intended to

give said term the same (or at least a compatible) meaning in all the treaties.
135

 

See C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd. ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2009), CLA-91, { 118.

'86 See Article 31 of VCLT.

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

83.

hastily withdrawn by a narrow reading of “investment.” The Tribunal disagrees with this.
The dispute resolution mechanisms provided for under Article XII of the BIT are
exceptional. An untenable situation would result were this not so. Neither the definition of
investment, nor the BIT, should function as a Midas touch for every commercial operator
doing business in a foreign state who finds himself in a dispute. None of the dispute
resolution mechanisms provided for in Article XII could bear the over-proliferation of

claims that would result from boundless interpretations of the term “investment.”

Secondly, the Claimant has argued that the prior treaty making practice of both Canada and
Venezuela supports its reading of the term investment because in other instances these two
States have excluded certain types of commercial activity from the definition of
investment. Because this has not occurred in the BIT, it should be presumed that NSPI’s
alleged investment is included. The Tribunal does not find this argument persuasive.
Whilst it is accepted that other tribunals have had recourse to prior treaty making practice,
the Tribunal is not convinced that this avenue is open based on the interpretive framework
provided for in the VCLT, and thus whether it is appropriate. '*” The Tribunal notes that

'88 there would need

were prior treaty making practice to be examined as a factual matter,
to be substantial prior treaty practice and complete symmetry with regard to the particular
treaty provision between Canada and Venezuela’s practice, sufficient to evidence a
“meeting of the minds” and a common and continuous understanding. This may justifiably
shed light on a bilateral investment treaty. The Tribunal has not been presented with the
kind of comprehensive review of Canada and Venezuela’s prior substantial treaty-making
practice which would enable it to discern such symmetry. In fact, very few treaties were
referred to. The Tribunal further notes that even were such symmetry established looking
at prior treaty-making practice requires caution. Each treaty or international agreement is a

different bargain struck and based on different sets of circumstances.

'57 Te. the prior treaty making practice of two States does not fit within the “context” outlined in Article 31(2) of the

VCLT, and, in the event that supplementary means of interpretation under Article 32 of the VCLT are to be
employed, nor does it fit within those enumerated.
'38 Te, not as a supplementary means of interpretation (VCLT, Article 32) or as a contextual matter (VCLT, Article

31).

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

84.

85.

88.

90.

The Tribunal considers that an investment can be said to be present when a contribution
has been made for a sufficient duration with the hope of receiving a benefit (including the
inherent risk that one will not result). Or, to put it in more traditional terms, an investment
requires contribution, duration and risk. These well-established features have been
recognized by many an investment arbitration tribunal as the triad representing the
minimum requirements for an investment. '39 The Tribunal deals with each of these in turn
but notes that as suggested by the “triad” moniker, these elements are by nature
interrelated: the type of alleged contribution will often affect the measurement of risk, as
does duration (e.g. the longer the duration potentially the greater the risk); duration and risk

can only be measured by the term of any contribution that has been made; and so on.

2. Contribution

a. _ Respondent’s Position

 

b.  Claimant’s Position

ce. Tribunal’s Analysis

As an initial matter, it is important that the subject matter and focus of the Tribunal’s

enquiry be clarified. The Claimant describes the alleged investment at issue in these

wl 51

proceedings as its “contractual rights to coal from the Paso Diablo mine. For the

Tribunal, these rights are not in place until the 2007 Confirmation Letters have been

19 See Romak, supra note 86, | 207; Italy v. Cuba, supra note 86, 81; Alps Finance, supra note 86, {| 231-241;
Saba, supra note 88, [ 110; Caratube, supra note 81, | 360; Quiborax, supra note 81, | 219; LESI, S.p.A. and
Astaldi S.p.A. v. People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/3), Decision of July 12, 2006
(“LESL-Astaldi v. Algeria”), | 72(iv), RLA-47; see also Antoine Abou Lahoud and Leila Bounafeh-Abou Lahoud v.
Democratic Republic of the Congo (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/4), Award of February 7, 2014, {Jf 313, 325;
M. Meerapfel Séhne AG v. Central African Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/10), Award of May 12, 2011, | 183,
excerpts available on the ICSID website; Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile
(ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2), Award of May 8, 2008, {| 232; Consortium Groupement L.E.S.I .- DIPENTA v.
People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/08), Award of January 10, 2005, {| 13(iv).

‘5! Cl]. Mem., 47.

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

91.

92.

152

2

entered into. '> Thus, it is the 2007 Confirmation Letters (and the contractual rights
provided for therein, in combination with the incorporated terms of the Coal Supply
Agreement) under which [company X] defaulted, which is the alleged investment at issue

in these proceedings.

The Claimant has argued at several junctures! that its overall relationship with [company
X], including the purchase of coal under previous Confirmation Letters, as well as the Coal
Supply Agreement and its predecessor, the Framework Agreement, is relevant and indeed
perhaps part of the investment at stake. The Tribunal is not convinced by this. Certainly
the previous Confirmation Letters, under which performance has already occurred, are not
part of the alleged investment for present purposes. Whilst the 2007 Confirmation Letters
are expressed to be part of the Coal Supply Agreement,'™ and the Coal Supply Agreement
offers a framework for the 2007 Confirmation Letters, it is important that without the 2007
Confirmation Letters, there is no contractual right to coal. In essence, the “investment” at
issue here, if any, is the right to pay for and receive coal under the 2007 Confirmation
Letters. Following on from this, and more specifically, it is the actual sales and receipt of
coal that the 2007 Confirmation Letters provided for, and which had still to be specified in
terms of specific quantities, delivery dates and shipping modalities, that is at the heart of

the alleged investment.

Under the Coal Supply Agreement and the 2007 Confirmation Letters, the Claimant was to
make no payment to [company X] until title to the coal had passed to it and it had been
invoiced.'*> Thus, the only contribution that is in question here is a commitment to make a
contribution. The Claimant has alleged that a commitment to make a contribution can

constitute an investment. The Tribunal accepts that an investment may be constituted by a

The Tribunal notes that even then, several details regarding the sale and receipt of the coal remained to be

determined, such as the exact quantity (i.e. if the options under the Confirmation Letters were exercised then the
quantity might fluctuate) and the delivery date.

153 See supra { 89; see also Cl. C-Mem. Jur., {ff 93, 109-114; Cl. Rej., Wf 56-63.
'4 See, e.g., the penultimate paragraph of CE-83.

155

Under clauses 8.1 and 11.2 of the Coal Supply Agreement, title to the coal was to pass when coal left the

loader/unloader. Thereafter [company X] would invoice NSPI and NSPI was to effect payment within ten days.
The 2007 Confirmation Letters provided that title would pass when the coal “leaves the loader” (CE-82, CE-83).

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

93.

94.

commitment to make a payment in some circumstances, as indicated by the tribunals in
Deutsche Bank v. Sri Lanka and Malicorp v. Egypt, but finds that the circumstances

discussed in these cases are not present here.

In Deutsche Bank, which involved a hedging contract, a fundamentally different type of
transaction was at issue. In the Deutsche Bank scenario, the tribunal identified the
contribution that the Respondent received as, inter alia, a reduction in exposure to market
volatility and the immediate ability to purchase oil at prices substantially below the
prevailing market price. The tribunal also emphasized other non-monetary “contributions,”
such as the commitment of resources made by Deutsche Bank both before and after the
conclusion of the hedging agreement.'°° These commitments are very different from the
alleged commitment in the present scenario. At its heart, this transaction involves payment
for goods received. NSPI knew how much it had committed to pay, and how much coal it
would get in return, because they had agreed upon and stipulated it. It was essentially
value for value. While some benefit may have been gained by the Respondent regarding
certainty of future income, it lacks the immediacy of the benefit found in Deutsche Bank
where the hedging party was able to take a course of action that would otherwise have cost

it considerably more.

The nature of the commitment in Deutsche Bank was also characterized by far greater risk
than is the case here. The Tribunal discusses the notion of risk separately and more
extensively below,'™” but it is at play here in distinguishing the type of commitment that
can found an investment (as in Deutsche Bank) and the type that cannot (the present
scenario). Deutsche Bank hoped that its investment in hedging commitments would bear a
good return, but it could not be sure. NSPI on the other hand, could be sure what they were
getting: the quantity of coal they negotiated for at the agreed price. The resulting

commitment made by NSPI is therefore quite different.

186 See Deutsche Bank v. Sri Lanka, supra note 98, {| 298-300.
157 See infra YW 104-111.

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

95.

96.

97.

98.

Finally, in Deutsche Bank the payments committed to were predicated on events that were
not within the parties’ control (the price of oil). Here the payments were predicated on

events that could be controlled by the parties (the delivery and collection of coal).

Similarly, the Tribunal does not find the decision in Malicorp of utility. Malicorp involved
a very long term and significant “build, operate, transfer” concession contract.'"* The
Tribunal notes that in contrast to the scenario here the nature of the contributions Malicorp
had started making (such as increasing share capital and setting up an Egyptian company)
and was to make in the future, involved not only massive outlays of funds but also non-

'° These contributions were to be

monetary (though not without value) contributions.
made over a long period of time.'® Such contributions, or the commitment to make them,
are the type that properly constitute an investment. These are far more profound and
involved contributions that went beyond the simple transfer of funds after the delivery of

coal contemplated by NSPI.

Thus, whilst the Tribunal accepts in principle that a commitment to contribute can satisfy
the “contribution” criteria, given the fundamentally different nature of the contribution
contemplated by NSPI, compared to those in the cases where a commitment to contribute
has been accepted, the Tribunal is not convinced that NSPI made a similar commitment to
make a contribution. A commitment to simply pay money in the future after delivery of
goods is inadequate to be considered as the contribution which forms the basis of an

investment.

3. Duration

a. _ Respondent’s Position

 

188 Malicorp, supra note 148, | 4.

'9 Malicorp, supra note 148, {J 3-33, 111-114.

1 “Nevertheless, there is nothing per se to prevent the view that the long-term contractual commitment of a party to
thereafter perform services fulfilling traditional criteria also amounts to a contribution. It was envisaged that the
construction alone would entail costs in excess of 200 million dollars, that the work and most of all the operation of
the airport would continue for several years” (emphasis added, Malicorp, supra note 148, 111).

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

99.

b.  Claimant’s Position

ce. Tribunal’s Analysis

100. As the Tribunal has already found that in the circumstances at hand, the commitment to

101.

buy coal is not adequate to satisfy the criterion of contribution, in seeking to apply the
criterion of (certain) duration, the Tribunal does so only for the sake of completeness.'””
The Parties dispute which aspect of the relationship between NSPI and [company X] is
relevant for the question of duration. The Tribunal has clarified that it is the Confirmation
Letters that are relevant for its enquiries; the much longer relationship between NSPI and
[compny X] is not relevant.’ Thus, in applying the criterion of duration, there are two
possible time periods for examination: 1) the duration of NSPI’s commitment to make
purchases of coal, and 2) the actual transaction constituted by each delivery of and

payment for coal.

The Tribunal finds that were the “commitment” at hand sufficient to go on with an inquiry
as to duration, it is the duration of the commitment that would be relevant, rather than the
one-off transactions that took place each time coal was delivered and paid for. The
Tribunal notes that one of the relevant Confirmation Letters provided for the delivery of
coal “from 2008 to 2011 (inclusive)”'® but dealt with “Contract Quantity” on an annual
basis (i.e. there was a one year commitment over the course of 2008 to buy [...] MT at [...]
per MT, and so on, for 2009 to 2011 170) Thus, the relevant duration, which would likely
suffice were other criteria met, is an amalgamation of several time periods under the

Confirmation Letters.

167 See Resp. Mem. Jur., 1 54.
18 see supra 91.

' CE-82.

" CE-82.

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

102.

103.

105.

106.

107.

4. Risk

a. _ Respondent’s Position

[J

b.  Claimant’s Position

L..]
ce. Tribunal’s Analysis

It has been said by other tribunals that risk for the purposes of “investment” is relatively
easy to establish, and that the very existence of a dispute shows that a risk was present.'””
The Tribunal does not find such analysis helpful. It may be that any transaction involves a
tisk, but what is required for an investment is a risk that is distinguishable from the type of
risk that arises in an ordinary commercial transaction. Furthermore, the relevant risk is that
which is specific to the investment which did take place, not the lost opportunity to make a

different investment or commercial decision.

The risk alleged by the Claimant is, in essence, that NSPI would be paying more for coal
than it had contracted for, or more than the market price. The Claimant has also argued
that there was a risk to its supply. However, the latter is also in essence the risk that NSPI
would be paying more for coal than they had contracted to with [company X], for if it had
to go to the market to cover its shortfall then the market would likely demand more than its

contracted price with [company X].

The Claimant also argues that it was exposed to the risk inherent in the notion of

investment - that a contribution, '®°

of long duration, would be reduced in value or affected,
such that the investment would not yield the benefit expected. The risk the Claimant refers
to is, however, the far more simple risk of exposure to a higher price for a product - for the

Tribunal, this is not a risk that is inherent to an investment. The Tribunal also notes that it

See Fedax, supra note 122, 4 40; Cl. Rej., 158.
189 See supra {1 90-96.

20

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

appears it is not uncommon or extraordinary to commit in a coal supply contract to the

purchase of goods over a mid-long term period. '*! Thus, the type of risk involved here

appears to be, for the coal industry, “normal commercial terms.” !*?

108. Additionally, here, the risk is not one that affects the contribution and the alleged
investment, but rather is the risk that NSPI would have to go to the market for coal at
potentially higher prices. The Tribunal finds these to be risks that any coal buyer could be
exposed to in any coal purchase arrangement. This is therefore only a coal market-related
risk and not a risk inherent in the more involved notion of investment. Furthermore, the
Tribunal notes that this risk was mitigated by clause 16.1 of the Coal Supply Agreement,
which gave the Claimant protection against the higher price it might have to pay on the

market if there was non-delivery.

109. The Tribunal turns briefly to the cases which the Claimant relies upon to argue that a

3

commercial risk is adequate to satisfy the inherent criteria for an investment.'** In this

regard, the Claimant relies on Toto v. Lebanon and Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade

S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco.'*4

110. Both Toto and Salini involved long term construction contracts. Thus, whilst there was
what may broadly be termed “commercial risk” involved, it was a particular type and scope
of commercial risk that is not only characterized by the duration of the investment but also

by the nature of the contribution. In Salini, a veritable litany of risks was recognised by the

5

Tribunal, compared to the very limited commercial risk at issue here.!® In Toto, the

'S! See RE-21.

'8 Joy Mining, supra note 86, 156.
'8 To a lesser extent the Claimant also referred to GEA Group Aktiengesellschaft v. Ukraine (ICSID Case
No. ARB/08/16), Award of March 31, 2011, RLA-30. The Tribunal does not find this case to be apposite or useful
in considering the criteria of risk. In GEA, the claimant had provided a product to its commercial partner (Oriana)
in advance of payment. Whilst the transaction involved the sale of goods, as is the scenario here, the positions of the
claimants are reversed and the risk for the claimant in GEA was far more palpable. GEA Group Aktiengesellschaft
had advanced tangible property on a delayed payment basis. The risk of non-payment was substantial and tangible
property and the loss of value from it because of non-payment was involved.

18 See Cl. C-Mem. ff 94-95, citing Toto Costruzioni. v. Lebanon, supra note 174; Salini v. Morocco, supra note
117.

'85 The risks identified in Salini v. Morocco included (inter alia) “the risk associated with the prerogatives of the
Owner permitting him to prematurely put an end to the contract, to impose variations within certain limits without

21

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

particular type of contribution, in addition to duration and risk was central to the Tribunal’s

reasoning, and is thus distinguishable here. '*°

11

. Turning now to the Claimant’s assertion of political risk, the Tribunal does not find that, in
this specific context, the type of risk required for an investment is present either. The
political risk, in view of the type and duration of the commitment by NSPI, is minimal.
Had NSPI established lasting infrastructure in Venezuela that was at the mercy of the

government, political risk may be more determinative. Here however, if at any point NSPI

 

felt that perceived political risks had become untenable, it had options to manage this: it
could have sought to terminate the Coal Supply Agreement on its terms or (attempted to)

invoke the force majeure clause, for example.

112. The Tribunal has not found that the risks alleged are of the sort that is inherent in the
notion of investment. Moreover, the Tribunal notes that NSPI’s reference to the alleged
tisk to its supply is somewhat at odds with the measures that NSPI took to protect itself

against this risk. 187

5. Tribunal’s Conclusion on “investment”

113. For all of the foregoing reasons, the Claimant has not shown that its alleged investment
met the established criteria of contribution, risk, and duration. The Tribunal also notes

that, taking a simpler approach, commentary and many arbitral awards positively state that

 

      

changing the manner of fixing prices; the risk consisting of the potential increase in the cost of labour in case of
modification of Moroccan law; any accident or damage caused to property during the performance of the works;
those risks relating to problems of co-ordination possibly arising from the simultaneous performance of other
projects; any unforeseeable incident that could not be considered as force majeure and which, therefore, would not
give rise to a right to compensation; and finally those risks related to the absence of any compensation in case of
increase or decrease in volume of the work load not exceeding 20% of the total contract price” (Salini v. Morocco,
supra note 117,55).

'86 “A construction contract in which the execution of the works extends over a substantial period of time involves
by definition an element of risk” (Toto Costruzioni v. Lebanon, supra note 174, 478).

 

 

'87 Clause 16.1 of the Coal Supply Agreement provides that if [company X] fails to deliver coal, it will pay NSPI the
difference between the contracted price for the coal and the market price. Clause 9.3 supports this provision,
permitting NSPI to call a letter of credit to be put in place to secure compliance with clause 16.1. See supra
427.

22

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

188

a contract for the sale of goods cannot usually be an investment. As a general

proposition, sale of goods agreements have been repeatedly rejected as investments by
commentators and tribunals alike.'®? In this particular case, the question merits the deeper
analysis that has been attempted here, as to say that no sale of goods contract could ever be
an investment would be to engage in simplistic labeling, but these findings and
commentary are at least indicative. The Tribunal has analyzed whether the ‘commitment’
involved here is an investment, as this is how the argument was put by the Claimant.
However, the Tribunal notes that if one examines the transactions that would have resulted
from the commitment, one is left with an arrangement that is essentially still a sale and
purchase of coal, even if it was more complicated in genesis and composition. None of the
particular features of the supply agreement were enough, taking into account the overall
factual circumstances, to transform the agreement into an investment. There being no
“investment” within the meaning of the BIT, the Tribunal upholds the Respondent’s
jurisdictional objection that this dispute does not arise out of an “investment.” For the sake
of completeness, the Tribunal will now briefly turn to the Respondent’s objection that the

alleged investment has not been made “‘in the territory” of the Respondent.

188 See Joy Mining, supra note 86, | 58; Global Trading, supra note 140, 1 55 (quoting MHS v. Malaysia, supra note
98, I 69, 72) (concluding that whatever may be the limits inherent in the ICSID Convention’s definition of
“investment,” the definition does not mean “sale” and excludes “‘a simple sale and like transient commercial
transactions’”); I. Shihata & A. Parra, The Experience of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes, 14 ICSID REVIEW — FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL (1999), 299, RLA-35, at 308); see
also F. Yala, The Notion of ‘Investment’ in ICSID Case Law; A Drifting Jurisdictional Requirement?, 22(2)
J. INT’L ARB. (2005) 105, RLA-28, at 119 (“[S]tand alone contracts for the sale of services should not qualify as
an investment for purposes of the ICSID jurisdiction. However, when theses [sic] contracts entail a form of capital
commitment associated with a transfer of technology, know-how, or manufacturing processes, they could be
considered to constitute investments, provided that other criteria are fulfilled (such as duration or risk).”)); see also
R. D. Bishop, et al., FOREIGN INVESTMENT DISPUTES: CASES, MATERIALS AND COMMENTARY
(2005), RLA-65, p. 9.

' E.g., MHS v. Malaysia, supra note 98, {| 69-72 (referring to Aron Broche’s different observations made during
and following the travaux préparatoires about the meaning of the term “investment” and noting, at { 69, “It appears
to have been assumed by the Convention’s drafters that use of the term ‘investment’ excluded a simple sale and like
transient commercial transactions from the jurisdiction of the Centre.”), RLA-49; Phoenix Action, supra note 61,
{82 (“There are indeed some basic criteria and parties are not free to decide in BITs that anything — like a sale of
goods or a dowry for example — is an investment.”), RLA-64.

  

23

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

114.

122.

129.

130.

225

D. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction under the BIT because the dispute does not

“

arise out of an investment made “‘in the territory” of Venezuela
1. Parties’ Positions

a. _ Respondent’s Position

 

b.  Claimant’s Position

 

2. Tribunal’s Analysis

Given the Tribunal’s findings above on whether or not the Claimant has made an
“investment,” discussion of the territoriality requirement is somewhat redundant.

Nonetheless, the Tribunal will briefly deal with this requirement to a limited extent here.

The Tribunal finds that the contractual rights to coal under the Confirmation Letters are
properly characterized as an intangible asset. The coal to be purchased was located in
Venezuela, but NSPI carried out no physical in-country activities in connection with this
and had no established, physical, in-country presence. By the Claimant’s own account,
what is at issue here are contractual rights. A contractual right by its very nature has no
fixed abode in the physical sense, for it is intangible. However, a lack of physical presence
is not per se fatal to meeting the territoriality requirement; intangible assets, with no
accompanying physical in-country activities, have been accepted as investments for the
purposes of bilateral investment treaties by many tribunals. The awards of those tribunals
are therefore apposite and instructive. Further, the Tribunal agrees with the approach taken
in several such cases, whereby tribunals have looked to whether the host State received a

benefit.??° However, this “benefit” does not necessarily have to be economic development,

See, e.g. Abaclat v. Argentina, supra note 81, | 374: “The Tribunal finds that the determination of the place of the

investment firstly depends on the nature of such investment. With regard to an investment of a purely financial
nature, the relevant criteria cannot be the same as those applying to an investment consisting of business operations
and/or involving manpower and property. With regard to investments of a purely financial nature, the relevant

24

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

131.

13

N

a highly subjective element. As has been noted in connection with economic development
as an inherent economic feature of “investment,” incorporating this criterion may run the
tisk of using hindsight improperly; it is the alleged investment at the time of its inception
that should be considered, not the impact that the investment has ultimately had.”*°
However, the Tribunal recognises that in cases where the intangible asset at issue is a
financial instrument, a further enquiry regarding economic development may be

appropriate as these instruments are frequently aligned with economic development (e.g.

fund raising) by a host State.

The Tribunal notes that no matter its ultimate beneficial ownership, [company X], to whom
NSPI would pay money for Paso Diablo coal, is a non-Venezuelan company. Moreover,
[...], the operator of Paso Diablo, was partly owned by two foreign entities, [...] and [...],
who were paid dividends, financed by the sale of Paso Diablo coal.”7 It is thus clear that
at least some of the proceeds of Paso Diablo coal may have ultimately benefited non-
Venezuelan companies. The Tribunal finds that these facts make it unclear to what extent
cash flows terminated in Venezuela and thus the extent to which the host State received

benefit.

E. The dispute arises out of an ordinary commercial transaction

This jurisdictional objection is in response to the Claimant’s alternative argument that
jurisdiction subsists under Article 2(b) of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, read in

connection with Article 4(3).28

133. Article 2(b) of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules provides that:

The Secretariat of the Centre is hereby authorized to administer, subject to
and in accordance with these Rules, proceedings between a State (or a

 

criteria should be where and/or for the benefit of whom the funds are ultimately used, and not the place where the
funds were paid out or transferred”. See also Inmaris, supra note 98, J 124.

6 See Deutsche Bank v. Sri Lanka, supra note 98, 295.

7 See Resp. Mem. Jur., {ff 103-105.

8 See Resp. Mem. Jur., {i 87-88, 94; Resp. Reply, { 11.

25

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

constituent subdivision or agency of a State) and a national of another State,
falling within the following categories:

[.]

(b) conciliation and arbitration proceedings for the settlement of legal
disputes which are not within the jurisdiction of the Centre because they do
not arise directly out of an investment, provided that either the State party to
the dispute or the State whose national is a party to the dispute is a
Contracting State; [...].

134. Article 2(b) is subject to Article 4(3) of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, which

provides that:

In the case of an application based on Article 2(b), the Secretary-General
shall give his approval only if he is satisfied (a) that the requirements of that
provision are fulfilled, and (b) that the underlying transaction has features
which distinguish it from an ordinary commercial transaction.

135. In this proceeding, the Secretary General issued a Notice of Registration in the following

terms:

Registration of this Request is without prejudice to the powers and functions
of the tribunal with regard to jurisdiction, competence and the merits, as
provided by Article 5(d) of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules.”

1. Parties’ Positions

a. _ Respondent’s Position

136. [...]

b.  Claimant’s Position

 

° Resp. Mem. Jur., | 14 citing the Notice of Registration. Article 5(d) of Schedule C to the ICSID Additional
Facility Rules requires that the Secretary General “remind the parties that the registration of the request is without
prejudice to the powers and functions of the Arbitral Tribunal in regard to competence and the merits.” Thus, no
issue arises as to the impact of the Secretary General's “approval” under Article 4(3) of the ICSID Additional
Facility Rules on this Tribunal.

26

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

143.

144.

145.

146.

2. Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal observes that the interaction between the BIT and the ICSID Additional

Facility Rules in the scenario at hand poses novel questions.

In line with its conclusions on the existence of investment above, the Tribunal notes first

that the BIT is paramount.”*>

The BIT (and consequently the dispute mechanisms
thereunder, as well as the consent to same) hinges upon the existence of an investment.
This cannot be overridden by Article 2(b). It is the BIT which defines the outer boundaries

of the contracting parties’ consent under the BIT™*

and which provides a gateway to
dispute resolution under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules. The Tribunal recognises that
this means that the ostensibly unqualified reference in the BIT to arbitration under the
Additional Facility is in fact implicitly limited, in so far as Article 2(b) permits recourse to
the ICSID Additional Facility for a dispute that arises out of an economic transaction that

is not an investment.

For the Tribunal, this construction is clear from the text of Article XII, which states that a
“dispute may, by the investor concerned, be submitted to arbitration under [...] the
Additional Facility Rules of ICSID [...].” As it is explicitly stated, this provision is
available to an investor; someone who is not an investor (i.e. who has not “made” an
“investment”) cannot, under the clear terms of the BIT, gain access to the Additional

Facility.747

The Tribunal’s conclusion on the interaction of Article XII of the BIT with Article 2(b) of
the ICSID Additional Facility Rules is definitive. If there is no investment within the
meaning of the BIT, as has been determined here, there is no “alternative” basis for

jurisdiction under Article 2(b). The Tribunal has therefore not deemed it necessary to

48 See supra J 75, 80.
246 See Resp. Reply, { 10.
47 See supra 79.

27

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

consider whether “the underlying transaction has features which distinguish it from an

ordinary commercial transaction.”

F. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the claim asserted under the umbrella
clause of the UK-Venezuela BIT

1. Parties’ Positions

a. _ Respondent’s Position

147. [J

b.  Claimant’s Position

 

2. Tribunal’s Analysis

150. Given its conclusions on the existence of an investment, the Tribunal does not find it
necessary to consider the question of whether it has jurisdiction over a claim under the
most favoured nation clause (incorporating an umbrella clause) in the BIT. On any
construction, even that of the Claimant,” it would be necessary for an investment to be
present for the most favoured nation clause to be exercised in the way that the Claimant

alleges. As the Tribunal has found that no investment is present, this argument is

redundant.
Vv. COSTS
151. This arbitration involved novel issues of investment law. Much case law was discussed,

and the Tribunal has found much of it useful, but there were no “bright line” or clear-cut
cases upon which to rely. Both Parties raised arguments worthy of consideration, and
conducted themselves fairly and professionally. There were no exceptional circumstances

or procedural incidents that would have bearing on the allocation of costs.

48 Article 4(3) of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules.
260 See Cl. C-Mem., J 134; Cl. Rej., {9 175-176.

28

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

152. Having considered all the circumstances of this arbitration, in the exercise of its discretion,

the Tribunal has concluded that it is fair and appropriate that both sides bear the arbitration

261

costs~” in equal shares and that each side bears its own legal and other costs. However,

the Tribunal notes that while the Claimant paid its share of the third and last advance

262

payment requested by the Centre,“ the Respondent failed to do so. Since the Claimant’s

third and last advance payment has not been used in this arbitration, it shall be reimbursed

in full to the Claimant.

261 Te. the fees and expenses of the Members of the Tribunal, and the expenses and charges of the ICSID Secretariat.
The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed financial statement of the case account as soon as the
account has been finalized.

© By letter dated January 10, 2014, the Centre requested that each party make an additional advance payment in the
amount of US$ 75,000. The Centre confirmed receipt of the Claimant’s payment by letter of January 24, 2014.

29

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

VI. AWARD

153. For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal has decided that:

a) The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the dispute submitted to it in this

arbitration.

b

The Parties shall bear in equal shares the costs of these proceedings comprising
the fees and expenses of the Members of the Tribunal and the expenses and
charges of the Secretariat, the exact amount of which shall be subsequently
notified by the Secretariat. Since the Claimant’s third and last advance
payment has not been used in this arbitration, it shall be reimbursed in full to

the Claimant.

c) Each Party shall bear its own expenses.

Made at Paris, France, in English and Spanish, both versions being equally authentic.

30

Nova Scotia Power Incorporated (Canada) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Excerpts of Award

 

[signed] [signed]
Professor David A.R. Williams, QC, Professor Ratil Emilio Vinuesa
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: Date:
[signed]

Professor Hans Van Houtte

President

Date:

31

