 

Neutral Citation Number: [2005] EWHC 774 (Comm)

Case No: 2004 FOLIO 656
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
COMMERCIAL COURT
IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION APPLICATION:

Royal Courts of Justice
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL

 

Date: 29" April 2005

Before :
MR JUSICE AIKENS

Between
THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR Claimant/
Respondent

- and -

OCCIDENTAL EXPLORATION AND Defendant/
PRODUCTION COMPANY Applicant

Mark Cran QC, David Lloyd Jones QC and Simon Birt (instructed by Weil, Gothal and
Manges) for the Claimant/Respondent
Christopher Greenwood QC and Toby Landau (instructed by Devoise and Plimpton
LLP ) for the Defendant/Applicant

Hearing dates: 1% 2" and 3“ March 2005

Judgment Approved by the court
for handing down
(subject to editorial corrections)

 

If this Judgment has been emailed to you it is to be treated as ‘read-only’.
You should send any suggested d its as a separate Word document.


Judgment Approved by rt for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration

{subject to editorial corrections)

Mr Justice Aikens:
A. Summary of the Issue raised by the application of Occidental

1. This application concerns the English law doctrine of “non - justiciability”. The
doctrine establishes a general principle that the Municipal courts of England and
Wales do not have the competence to adjudicate upon rights arising out of
transactions entered into by independent sovereign states between themselves on the
plane of international law. The issue arises in the context of an Arbitration Award,
dated 1 July 2004, which was made by a Tribunal of three arbitrators following an
arbitration between Occidental Exploration and Production Company (“Occidental”)
and the Republic of Ecuador (“Ecuador”). The arbitration was held under the
Arbitration Rules of UNCITRAL and the seat of the arbitration was London.
Ecuador then issued an Arbitration Application’ challenging the Award under section
67(1) of the Arbitration Act 1996, on the ground that the arbitrators had exceeded
their jurisdiction. Ecuador invites the court to set aside the Award.”

2. Occidental, which is the defendant to that application, says that the doctrine of non -
justiciability applies to prevent the English Court from determining that challenge to
the Award. This is because Occidental’s claim, the arbitration proceedings and the
Award all arose out of the terms of a Bilateral Investment Treaty between the USA
and Ecuador signed on 27 August 1993 (“the BIT”).

3. Occidental issued an Application Notice dated 24 November 2004 raising the point
and seeking an order that the Court dismiss Ecuador’s Application on the ground of
non — jusiciability? This is the first time that an arbitration award rendered pursuant
to a Bilateral Investment Treaty has been brought before the English Courts. I was
told that there are well over 2000 current BITs and that the number of arbitrations
arising out of them has dramatically increased in recent years.

B. The parties and the factual background to the arbitration

4. The following factual background is set out for the purposes of the present
application. The Defendant is a Californian Corporation and has been engaged in the
exploration of oil in the territory of Ecuador since 1985. Under a contract dated 21
May 1999 (“the 1999 Contract”) between Occidental and Petroecuador (a state-
owned corporation of Ecuador), Occidental obtained the exclusive right to carry out
hydrocarbon exploration and exploitation in Block 15 of the Ecuadorian Amazon
basin region. In the past Petroecuador had had the exclusive right to exploit oil in
Ecuador. Under the 1999 Contract, Occidental became a principal engaged in the
exploration and exploitation of Ecuador’s oil fields.*

Issued on 1] August 2004.
Pursuant to section 67(3)(c) of the Arbitration Act 1996 (“the 1996 Act”).
Ecuador’s Arbitration Application has also challenged the Award on the grounds of serious irregularity
in the procedure and/or affecting the Award, under section 68 of the 1996 Act. Although originally
Occidental’s application asserted that the doctrine of non — justiciability applied to that aspect of Ecuador’s
application as well, that was not pursued before me: see para 43 of Occidental’s Outline Argument.

This change was made possible by an amendment to Ecuador’s Hydrocarbons Law in 1993, so as to
permit participation or production — sharing agreements: Arbitration Award para 27.

3

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
{subject to editorial corrections)

5.

Cc.

5
para 8

7
8

days:
9

The scheme of the 1999 Contract is that Occidental assumed virtually all the costs of
its exploration and exploitation activities. In return, Occidental received a percentage
of the oil produced and it was able to export the oil.’ Clause 8.1 of the 1999 Contract
sets out an elaborate formula which determines the percentage of the oil produced to
which Occidental is entitled. It was known as “Factor X”.

Occidental made local purchases in Ecuador and imported goods and services from
outside Ecuador in connection with the production of oil, which was subsequently
exported in accordance with the 1999 Contract. Occidental paid VAT on these
purchases and imports. It made regular applications to the Ecuadorian Internal
Revenue Service® for the refund of VAT payments made after July 1999.’ At first
repayments were made. But on 28 August 2001 the SRI passed Resolution 664,
which denied Occidental’s claims for reimbursements. Further Resolutions were
made by the SRI in 2002 and 2003, denying VAT refunds to Occidental and
demanding the repayment to the SRI of refunds that had been made to Occidental
from July 1999 to September 2000.

The initial view of the SRI was that the Resolutions denying Occidental the right to
VAT refunds were justified on the ground that Factor X was calculated so as to take
account of VAT payments. However, it seems that subsequently both the SRI and
then Ecuador (in the arbitration) took the view that Occidental had no right to VAT
refunds under Article 69A of the ITRL, because VAT refunds were only available to
exporters of “manufactured” products and the crude oil exported was not
“manufactured”.

Occidental filed four law suits in the Tax District Court No 1 of Quito,’ objecting to
the Resolutions that the SRI had passed so as to deny Occidental the right to VAT
refunds. The various lawsuits complained that the SRI Resolutions (denying
Occidental the right to VAT refunds) were a violation of provisions in Ecuadorian
law, in particular Articles 65 and 69A of ITRL.” The fact that Occidental pursued
these lawsuits in the Tax District Court gave rise to one of the issues on jurisdiction
that the Arbitrators had to consider.

Occidental gave up submitting VAT refund applications as a futile exercise.

In 2002 Occidental invoked the arbitration procedures provided for in the BIT and
started an arbitration against Ecuador. Occidental alleged that the actions of the SRI
(for which it said the Republic of Ecuador was responsible) amounted to breaches of
Ecuador’s obligations under the BIT, ie. were a breach of Ecuador’s treaty and public
international law obligations. In order to see how this fits in with the treaty it is
necessary to explain BITs in general and the provisions of this BIT in particular.

The Bilateral Investment Treaty

This had not been possible under previous contracts: Witness statement of Eric Ordway: B 1/Tab 3

Known as the “Servicio de Rentas Internas” or “SRI”.

The applications were made under Article 69A of the Internal Tax Regime Law (“ITRL”).

Under Ecuadorian tax law, an appeal of SRI resolutions must be made by the affected party within 20
Award para 33.

Award: para 38.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
(subject to editorial corrections)

Ll.

10
n

Bilateral Investment Treaties have been developed as a mechanism to encourage
investment between states, but using “investors” that are non — governmental
organisations. It is a long — standing principle of public international law that states
owe duties to other states to protect their citizens. This is known as the “doctrine of
international protection”.'° Effectively, BITs are treaties that acknowledge this
principle of public international law, apply it to particular circumstances between two
states and develop the protection of investors by giving them “standing” to pursue a
state directly in “investment disputes” between an investor and a state Party in ways
set out in the BIT.'' The issue at the heart of this application is the nature of those
rights and how they fit in with English Municipal law principles, when an investor
has invoked its right to pursue an investment dispute through the mechanism of an
arbitration which is, as both parties accept, subject to the 1996 Act and principles of
English Municipal law.

By the end of 2002 there were 2,181 BITs in force.'? When the USA — Ecuador
Bilateral Investment Treaty was transmitted by the President of the USA to the Senate
for its advice and consent to ratification, the Letter of Transmittal stated that the
Treaty was designed to protect US investment and to encourage private sector
development in Ecuador, as well as to support the economic reforms taking place
there.

In the “Letter of Submittal” sent to President Clinton by the Secretary of State,
submitting to the President the USA/Ecuador Treaty, “the principal BIT objectives”
are set out in the letter. These objectives include the principles: (i) that investments
of nationals and companies of either Party'* will receive either “national treatment or
most favoured nation treatment”, whichever is the better; (ii) that investments are
guaranteed freedom from performance requirements;'* (iii) that expropriation can
occur only in accordance with international standards; for a public purpose; in a non
— discriminatory manner; under due process of law and upon payment of prompt,
adequate and effective compensation. Most importantly for present purposes, (iv)
there is the principle that nationals and companies of either Party will have access to
binding international arbitration without first resorting to domestic courts in relation
to investment disputes.

The scheme of the USA/Ecuador BIT is as follows:
(i) The Preamble sets out the aim of the Treaty, which is to promote greater

economic cooperation and investment between the Parties, but on a defined
and agreed basis;

See: E de Vattel, Le Droit des gens ou les principes de Ia loi naturelle, vol 1, 309 (1758).
Paulsson: “Arbitration without Privity” (1995) 10 ICSID Rev — Foreign Investment LJ 232 at pages

255-6.

2

UNCTAD, World Investment Report for 2003, 17; quoted in Douglas, “The Hybrid Foundations of

Investment Treaty Arbitration” (2003) BYIL 151, hereafter “Douglas”.

1B
“
1s

Letter of President Clinton dated 10 September 1993: B 2/Tab 19 page 317.
That is either state that is a Party to the BIT.
Such as the need to use local products or to export goods.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
{subject to editorial corrections)

Q)
G)

@
6)
(6)

)

(8)

(9)

Article I sets out various definitions. “Investment” is defined broadly.'°

Article II sets out the basis on which each Party will permit and treat
investment, which is in accordance with the principle set out at (i) in the
preceding paragraph. It also provides that the Parties will ensure that
investment will have fair and equitable treatment according to international
law standards.

Article III deals with expropriation or nationalisation of investments.
Article IV deals with transfers, particularly of funds.

By Article V the Parties agree to consult promptly to resolve any disputes in
connection with the Treaty.

Article VI deals with the resolution of “investment disputes” between a State
Party and a national or company of the other State Party. Its terms are central
to this application and I will return to them in the next paragraph.

Article VII concerns the resolution of disputes between the two Parties to the
treaty, ie. USA and Ecuador. If necessary, disputes are to be submitted to
an arbitral tribunal, for binding decision “in accordance with the applicable
rules of international law”.

Article X deals with the tax policies of each Party and provides that each Party
should strive to accord fairness and equity in the treatment of investments of
nationals and companies of the other Party. _ It states that the provisions of the
Treaty, in particular Articles VI and VII will nevertheless apply to matters of
taxation only to a certain extent, as set out in the Article. This Article gave
rise to argument about its scope in the arbitration between Occidental and
Ecuador.

15. Article VI must be set out in full. It provides:

16

“1. For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute between a
Party and a national or company of the other Party arising out of or relating to (a)
an investment agreement between that Party and such national or company; (b) an
investment authorization granted by that Party’s foreign investment authority to
such national or company; or (c) an alleged breach of any right conferred or
created by this Treaty with respect to an investment.

2. In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute should initially
seek a resolution through consultation and negotiation. If the dispute cannot be
settled amicably, the national or company concerned may choose to submit the
dispute, under one of the following alternatives, for resolution:

The definition starts: ‘/mvestment means every kind of investment in the territory of one Party owned or

controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service

7

and investment contracts". It then enumerates various examples.
Article VII (1).

Judgment Approved by tl rt for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
(subject to editorial corrections)

3.

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party that is party to the
dispute; or

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute-settlement
procedures; or

(c) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

(a) Provided that the national or company concerned has not submitted the

dispute for resolution under paragraph 2 (a) or (b) and that six months have
elapsed from the date on which the dispute arose, the national or company
concerned may choose to consent in writing to the submission of the dispute for
settlement by binding arbitration:

(i) to the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“Centre”) established by the Convention on the Settlement
of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other states,
done at Washington March 18, 1965 (“ICSID Convention”), provided
that the Party is a party to such Convention; or

(ii) to the Additional Facility of the Centre, if the Centre is not
available; or

(iii) in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL); or

(iv) to any other arbitration institution, or in accordance with any other
arbitration rules, as may be mutually agreed between the parties to the
dispute.

(b) once the national or company concerned has so consented, either party
to the dispute may initiate arbitration in accordance with the choice so
specified in the consent.

4. Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment dispute for
settlement by binding arbitration in accordance with the choice specified in the
written consent of the national or company under paragraph (3). Such consent,
together with the written consent of the national or company when given under
paragraph (3) shall satisfy the requirement for:

(a) written consent of the parties to the dispute for purposes of Chapter II
of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and for purposes of
the Additional Facility Rules; and

(b) an “agreement in writing” for purposes of Article II of the United
Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards, done at New York, June 10, 1958 (“New York
Convention”).

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
(subject to editorial corrections)

5. Any arbitration under paragraph 3(a) (ii), (iii) or (iv), of this Article
shall be held in a state that is a party to the New York Convention.

6. Any arbitral award rendered pursuant to this Article shall be final and binding
on the parties to the dispute. Each Party undertakes to carry out without delay the
provisions of any such award and to provide in its territory for its enforcement.

7. In any proceeding involving an investment dispute, a Party shall not assert, as
a defense, counterclaim, right of set-off or otherwise, that the national or
company concerned has received or will receive, pursuant to an insurance or
guarantee contract, indemnification or other compensation for all or part of its
alleged damages.

8. For purposes of an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this Article, any
company legally constituted under the applicable laws and regulations of a Party
or a political subdivision thereof that, immediately before the occurrence of the
event or events giving rise to the dispute, was an investment of nationals or
companies of the other Party, shall be treated as a national or company of such
other Party in accordance with Article 25 (2) (b) of the ICSID Convention”.

D. The dispute between Occidental and Ecuador and the arbitration

16. On 4 April 2002 Occidental gave notice to Ecuador'® that a dispute had arisen. After
six months had elapsed from that date, on 11 November 2002 Occidental sent a
Notice to Ecuador invoking the arbitration provisions of Article VI of the BIT. The
Notice stated that, in accordance with Article VI.3(a)(iii), the Notice constituted
Occidental’s written consent to an arbitration under UNCITRAL Rules. The Notice
sets out details of the parties to the arbitration, gives a statement of the dispute and
asserts that Occidental has the right to seek relief through the arbitration proceedings
that it has invoked in accordance with Article VI.3 of the BIT. Paragraph 20 of the
Notice alleges that Ecuador has failed to honour its obligations under the BIT and
under international law. Occidental identified breaches of Articles I1.3(a),'°
11.3(b),”° and IIl.1?! of the BIT and set out its case. It nominated the Honourable
Charles N Brower as arbitrator.””

17. Subsequently, Ecuador nominated Dr Patrick Barrera Sweeney” as its arbitrator. In
accordance with Article 7 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (“the Rules”),
Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuna™* was appointed as Chairman of the arbitrators.
The parties were unable to agree on a place where the arbitration should be held. So,

e In accordance with Article VI.2 and 3(a) of the BIT.

To accord fair and equitable treatment to Occidental’s investment at all times, full protection and
security and treatment no less favourable than that required by international law.

9 Not to impair in any way by arbitrary or discriminatory measures the management, operation,
maintenance, use or enjoyment of Occidental’s investment.

7 Not to expropriate directly or indirectly through measures tantamount to expropriation all or part of
Occidental’s investment in Ecuador except for a public purpose, in a non — discriminatory manner, upon
payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation and in accordance with due process of law and the
general principles of treatment provided for in Art. II(3) of the BIT.

He had been a member of the Iran ~ USA Claims Tribunal at the Hague since 1983.

A distinguished Ecuadorian lawyer who had acted as Legal Advisor to the Central Bank of Ecuador.
Professor of International Law at the University of Chile and President of the Administrative Tribunal of
the World Bank; formerly Ad Hoc Judge on the Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.

B
4

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
(subject to editorial corrections}

E.

in accordance with Article 16 of the Rules the arbitrators considered submissions,
held a hearing on the issue and decided that it should be London.”* In the hearing
before me, it was agreed that London should be regarded as the seat of the arbitration
for the purposes of section 3 of the 1996 Act.

In September 2003, Ecuador raised objections to the jurisdiction of the arbitration
Tribunal and the admissibility of Occidental’s claims. The parties submitted written
cases on these issues, but the Tribunal decided to join those issues to the merits of the
case. A ‘hearing on jurisdiction, admissibility and the merits was held in
Washington DC between January 26 — 30 2004. “Post — hearing Memorials” were
submitted on 16 April 2004. The Award was dated 1 July 2004 and sent to the

parties on 12 July 2004.

The Decision of the Arbitrators on the Jurisdiction and Admissibility Issues and

the Merits of Occidental’s claims.

19,

20.

The Award records”’ that Ecuador raised three objections to the Tribunal hearing
Occidental’s claims. Ecuador’s arguments were:

(1) _ that Occidental had submitted four lawsuits to Ecuadorian courts on the
question of the VAT refund, so that Occidental had irrevocably chosen to
submit its claims to the courts or administrative tribunals of Ecuador in
accordance with Article V.2(a) of the BIT. That choice precluded submission
of the disputes to arbitration under Article VI.3.78

(2) In any event, Occidental’s claims were precluded by the terms of Article X of
the BIT, because the claim for refunds of VAT (save for any claim of
expropriation) did not fall within the matters of taxation embraced in
paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of Article X.2, so that the claim was outside those
matters that can be the subject of arbitration under Article VI of the BIT.

(3)  Occidental’s submission that there had been an expropriation of its investment
by means of the taxation measures adopted by Ecuador” was unarguable, so
that even if the claim fell within Article X.2, the Tribunal should not admit it
as a claim.

The Tribunal gave its decision on each of these three arguments on jurisdiction and
admissibility. On the first issue (the “fork in the road” point), it held that Occidental
would only have been precluded from bringing its claim in arbitration if there had
been a real choice between tribunals, each of which could have determined the same
claim. That was not the case here and Occidental had simply preserved its position
with regard to “non-contractual domestic law questions” in the Ecuadorian courts,
whilst pursuing “treaty — based” issues in arbitration.*°

Decision of 1 August 2003.

Award para 16.

At para 37.

This argument was dubbed “the fork in the road” argument in the Award.
Contrary to Article III of the BIT.

Award, paras 57 to 63.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
{subject to editorial corrections)

21.

22.

23.

24.

On the second jurisdictional issue, the Tribunal concluded that the key was the proper
construction of Article X of the BIT. The arbitrators rejected Ecuador’s argument that
all matters of taxation were outside the Treaty, apart from the specific categories
mentioned in Article X.2(a), (b) and (c). The Tribunal concluded, after a close
analysis of the Treaty wording and the negotiating history of the BIT, that the claim
did fall within the BIT. The Tribunal held that the real issue was whether the VAT
refund had been secured by the calculation of Factor X in the Participation Contract,
so that it was fair of the SRI to pass Resolutions that denied Occidental the right to a
refund of VAT (as Ecuador argued), or whether the refund had not been secured by
Factor X, in which case the denial of a right to a refund in accordance with Ecuador’s
Tax Law was unfair, (as Occidental argued). The arbitrators said that, put this way,
the issue “automatically” brought in the question of whether Occidental had been
accorded “fair and equitable treatment”, as required under Article II. Therefore the
Tribunal had jurisdiction to consider the issue for two reasons. First, as there was a
dispute about what was embraced by Factor X, that was a matter concerning the
“observance” of the Participation Contract, which is an “investment agreement”.
Therefore the claim concerned a matter of taxation with respect to the “observance of
terms of an investment agreement” within Article X(2)(c). Secondly, because the
claim raised issues under Article II of the BIT.*!

On the third point the Tribunal commented that, normally, a claim of expropriation
should be considered on the merits. But it concluded that it was so clear in this case
that there had been no expropriation that the point should be dealt with at the
jurisdictional stage. The Tribunal held the expropriation claim was inadmissible.”

The Award then considered the merits. The arbitrators concluded® that: (1) the
VAT refund was not within Factor X as calculated in accordance with the
Participation Contract. (2) Accordingly, Occidental was entitled to have the VAT
refunded under both Ecuadorian law and also Andean Community Law. (3) Because
the VAT refunds had not been made, Ecuador was in breach of its obligation (under
Article II.1 of the BIT) to accord Occidental a treatment no less favourable than that
accorded to nationals or other companies. (4) Therefore Ecuador had also breached
its obligations concerning fair and equitable treatment as required by Article II.3(a) of
the BIT. (5) The claim that Ecuador had impaired the operation of Occidental’s
investment by arbitrary measures (contrary to Article II.3(b) of the BIT) was only
partially upheld. This was because the SRI had not acted deliberately to deprive
Occidental of the VAT refunds; rather this had resulted from “an overall rather
incoherent tax legal structure”.

The Tribunal concluded that these breaches had caused Occidental damage. The
arbitrators held that Occidental could retain the VAT refunds it had obtained and that
it was entitled to be paid VAT refunds of over US$73 million for the period up to 31
December 2003. Interest was also awarded, so that the total of VAT refunds and
interest due to Occidental was US$75,074,929.34

Award paras 74 — 77.

Award para 92.

Award paras 199 — 200.

Because of the extant claims before the Ecuadorian Courts, the Tribunal made provision to prevent any

double recovery by Occidental.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
(subject to editorial corrections

F. Ecuador’s Challenge to the Award

25. | The Arbitration Notice that was issued by Ecuador on 11 August 2004 attaches a
document called “Particulars for Arbitration Claim Form”. This sets out in detail the
remedies Ecuador claimed and the grounds in support of them. As already noted, the
Award is challenged on two bases: first, that the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction.
Secondly that there were serious irregularities as to the procedure of the reference
and/or that affected the Award. The present “non — justiciability” argument is
directed only at the jurisdictional challenge.

26. The jurisdictional challenge focuses on two points. First, Ecuador says that the
Tribunal wrongly interpreted and applied Article X.1 of the BIT, 5 by determining
that Article X.1 imposed “an obligation on the host State that is not different from the
obligations of fair and equitable treatment embodied in Article II, even though
admittedly the language of Article X is less mandatory”. Ecuador argues that the
erroneous conclusion that Article X.1 created an enforceable obligation on “the host
State” \ed the Tribunal to hold (wrongly) that it had jurisdiction to consider the claim
of Occidental that Ecuador had been in breach of its Treaty obligations (under Article
Il) in its treatment of Occidental in relation to the VAT refunds.?

27. Secondly, Ecuador says that the Tribunal wrongly interpreted and applied Article X.2
of the BIT in holding that the dispute between Occidental and Ecuador concerned a
“matter of taxation....with respect to....(c) the observance and enforcement of terms
of an investment agreement...as referred to in Article VI(1)(a) or (b)”? The
reasoning of the Tribunal was that part, at least, of the dispute found its origin in the
investment agreement (ie. the Participation Contract) “insofar as it is disputed
whether VAT reimbursement is included in Factor X”. That enabled the Tribunal
to consider whether Ecuador had been in breach of Article II.

28. | Ecuador submits that: (i) on the correct interpretation of Article X.2, it did not
permit claims alleging breach of Article II which concerned any issue of taxation to
be submitted for determination in accordance with Article VI, because Article II is not
mentioned in Article X at all;“' (ii) the “observance and enforcement” of the terms
of the Participation Contract were not in issue between the parties, let alone “central
to the dispute”, (iii) the Tribunal interpreted Article X.2 too broadly.”

G. Occidental’s Response: the “non — justiciability” issue raised.

35 Article X.1 provides: “With respect to its tax policies, each Party should strive to accord fairness and

equity in the treatment of investment of nationals and companies of the other party”.

36 "Award: para 70.

Particulars to Arbitration Application: para 20.

Article X.2 provides: “Nevertheless, the provisions of this Treaty, and in particular Article VI and VII
shall apply to matters of taxation only with respect to the following: (a) expropriation, pursuant to Article III;
..(¢) the observance and enforcement of terms of an investment agreement or authorisation as referred to in
Article VI(1)(a) or (b)....”

» Award: paras 72 and 73.

Award: para 72.

Ecuador pointed out that this was in contrast to Articles III and IV which are both specifically mentioned
in Articles X.2 (a) and (b) respectively.

#2 Particulars to Arbitration Notice: para 19.

37
38

40
a

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
{subject to editorial corrections)

29.

30.

31.

H.

32.

B

On 11 August 2004 Occidental issued a cross application. In that application it stated
that if the court decided that it would set aside the Award on the grounds raised e
Ecuador, then Occidental would wish to make a cross application to challens e th
Tribunal’s conclusion on jurisdiction with regard to the “expropriation” issue.*

that stage Occidental did not raise the “non —justiciability” point.

On 24 November 2004 Occidental issued a further Application Notice. This asserted
that Ecuador’s challenge to the Award under sections 67 and 68 of the 1996 Act
required the court to interpret provisions of an international treaty between two
foreign states (ie. the BIT). The notice continued: “Jt is a rule of English law,
however, that such a task of interpretation is not justiciable in the English Courts.
This, therefore, prevents [Ecuador’s] challenge from proceeding”. Occidental
asked that this issue be dealt with as a preliminary point. On 21 December 2004
Colman J ordered that this be done and set a timetable for the service of evidence and
a hearing of the preliminary point on “non — justiciability”.

That hearing took place before me on 1, 2 and 3 March 2005. Although voluminous
witness statements have been filed, the facts are not in dispute so far as this
application is concerned and the arguments dealt with the law. 1 heard Mr
Greenwood QC on behalf of Occidental and from Mr Lloyd Jones QC on behalf of
Ecuador. I am very grateful to them both for their most interesting and helpful
submissions. I reserved judgment.

The parties’ arguments in outline

Occidental’s Argument: | Mr Greenwood submitted that if the court had to decide
the merits of Ecuador’s section 67 challenge to the Award on jurisdiction, this would
involve a complete rehearing of the issues and the judge would have to approach the
question of jurisdiction wholly afresh and without any preconception that the Tribunal
had made the right decision. Therefore the court would have to interpret the BIT,
rule upon its scope, effect and application and so determine the jurisdiction of the
arbitrators. This exercise would involve: a consideration of the negotiating history
and travaux préparatoires of the BIT and materials emanating from each state’s
government; an examination of many other treaties to which the UK was also not a
party; and evidence or submissions as to the views of both states on their
understanding of the scope, meaning and application of the BIT.** As the USA is
not a party to these proceedings, all this would be done in the absence of one of the
Parties to the BIT. English courts are very reluctant to rule on the rights and
obligations of a state that is not a party to the proceedings before it.“ The conclusion
of the English court on the interpretation of the BIT would affect both Ecuador and
the USA, as Parties to the BIT. Moreover, as the wording of this BIT is in a

Application Notice of 11 August 2004, para 10. This application was made under section 67 of the

1996 Act.

“4

Cf: Azov Shipping Co v Baltic Shipping Co [1999] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 39 at 41 per Longmore J; Azov

Shipping Co v Baltic Shipping Co [1999] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 158 at 161 per Colman J.

This broad investigation would be necessary because Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on

the Law of Treaties 1969 demands consideration of such matters in order to interpret treaties.

Mr Greenwood referred in particular to the Buttes case (see below): [1982] AC 888 at 938C, per Lord

Wilberforce, and the decision of the Divisional Court in CND v Prime Minister [2002] EWHC 2759 QB at
para 37, per Simon Brown LJ.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
(subject to editorial corrections) .

33.

34.

36.

50

standard form that has been employed in many others, any ruling of the court would
have an impact on other BITs to which states other than the UK are Parties.

Mr Greenwood submitted that it is precisely because such an exercise would require
the English court to consider the executive and diplomatic actions of foreign states for
which there are “no judicial or manageable standards by which to judge these
issues”,” that the courts have developed the doctrine of non — justiciability. This
doctrine was enunciated by Lord Wilberforce in the Buttes Gas case after a full
review of the authorities and it remains the law, despite some immaterial
qualifications subsequently. Mr Greenwood particularly relied on the statements of
principle made by Lord Oliver in JH Rayner (Mincing Lane) Ltd v DTI (“The Tin
Council Case”).”

Allied to this principle is a second one, Mr Greenwood submitted. This is that
English courts will not interpret treaties that have not been incorporated into English
law. Again, Mr Greenwood relied particularly on statements of the House of Lords
in the Tin Council Case.”

Mr Greenwood submitted that if the court were to entertain the application of Ecuador
under section 67 of the 1996 Act, it would inevitably mean that it would have to: (i)
tule upon the meaning of a treaty to which the UK was not a party and which was not
part of UK domestic law; (ii) rule upon the transactions between the USA and
Ecuador on the plane of international law; (iii) embark upon a difficult task of treaty
interpretation without being sure that it had all the relevant necessary materials before
it and without the USA being a party to the proceedings. He submitted that the fact
that the arbitration had its seat in London, so that the 1996 Act applied, could not
justify the court trampling on the well — established principles referred to above. He
pointed out that section 67(3) of the 1996 Act is not mandatory,” so that the court
can decline to make an order if to do so would contravene other English law
principles. He argued that it is clear that the 1996 Act is subject to the principle of
non — justiciability because of the saving of common law principles in section 81(1)
of the Act.*!

Ecuador’s Argument: Mr Lloyd Jones accepted that the BIT is a treaty governed
by public international law and that it has not been made a part of the Municipal law
of the UK. However, he submitted that, just because the proposed application
under section 67 of the 1996 Act would involve consideration of a non — incorporated
treaty between two friendly states, that does not make the matter a “no — go” area for
the English Court. In this case the two state Parties to the BIT had expressly agreed
that disputes between an investor and a state Party to the BIT could be determined by
arbitration proceedings in states that are party to the New York Convention 1958.
If there is an issue as to the scope of the jurisdiction of the arbitrators who have been

Per Lord Wilberforce in Buttes Gas and Oil Co v Hammer (“The Buttes Gas case”) [1982] AC 888 at

[1990] 2 AC 418 at 499 F-H.
Particularly per Lord Templeman at page 476H to 477A; 481 B-C.
It provides: “On an application under this section challenging the award of the arbitral tribunal as to its

substantive jurisdiction, the court may by order...”.(emphasis mine).

That provides: “Nothing in this Part shall be construed as excluding the operation of any rule of law

consistent with the provisions of this Part...” That section is at the end of Part 1, in which section 67 is also
placed.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
subject to editorial corrections)

appointed by the mechanism specifically set up by the state Parties to the BIT, then it
should be justiciable before the court that supervises the arbitral process. Here that
must be the English Court, because London is the seat of the arbitration and it is
accepted that the arbitral procedure is governed by the 1996 Act.”

37. Mr Lloyd Jones submitted that the court must distinguish between and consider two
different matters in this case. First, the creation of the agreement to arbitrate the
particular dispute that has arisen in this case between Ecuador and Occidental; and
secondly, the nature of the rights that Occidental wishes to exercise by bringing its
claim in the UNCITRAL arbitration proceedings.

38. As to the first matter, he submitted that the effect of Article VI.2 of the BIT was that
if an “investment dispute” arose between an investor and a state Party, then there
was a “standing offer” by the State Party to submit that dispute to one of the three
methods of dispute resolution set out in Article V1.2 (a), (b) and (c), the last one of
which is binding arbitration as set out in Article V1.3. Occidental accepted
Ecuador’s “standing offer” to arbitrate by its Notice of Arbitration and Statement of
Claim. This meant that the parties to the arbitration agreed to arbitrate on the terms
set out in the BIT, particularly Articles VI and X. Then, once the Tribunal had
decided that London would be the seat of the arbitration, the arbitration became
subject to the Municipal law of the state of the seat of the arbitration, ie. in this case,
the law of England and Wales.

39. | Mr Lloyd Jones drew an analogy with the case of Philippson v Imperial Airways
Limited.** In that case the contract of carriage by air incorporated the Warsaw
Convention 1929, at a time when it was not implemented in English domestic law.
But in order to determine what the parties to the contract meant by “international
carriage” in the contract terms, it was necessary to construe the terms of the Warsaw
Convention and interpret the definition of “international carriage” which was
described in the Convention as “the carriage between two places within the territory
of two “High Contracting Parties” to the Convention. That is what Lord Atkin did,
and also Lord Wright. *°

40. As to the second matter, Mr Lloyd Jones submitted that the nature of the claim put
forward by Occidental against Ecuador was a private law right, as opposed to a
public international law right that was being exercised by Occidental (the investor) on

2 Mr Lloyd Jones relied on the judgments in three Canadian cases, where courts had held that awards

made by arbitral tribunals constituted under Chapter 11 of the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA”) were susceptible to review by the Canadian Courts on the question of jurisdiction under the
Cc bitration Act or the C bitration Act of Canada: United Mexican

States v Metalclad (2001) 5 ICSID Rep 236; United States of Mexico v Martin Roy Feldman Karpa, 11
January 2005; AG of Canada v SD Myers Inc, 13 January 2004. He also referred to Czech Republic v
CME: Czech Republic BY (2003) 42 1LM 919, where ‘the Svea Court of Appeals in Sweden reviewed an issue
of j of ip d to d an i dispute under a BIT between the Czech
Republic and the USA.

Law and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration (4" Ed. 2004) by Redfern & Hunter para 1
~ 142.
[1939] AC 332
%8 As Lord Atkin recognised: page 351.
6 At pages 348 —351; 364 - 369

 

Judgment Approved by the court for handikQBkn ‘The Hon Mr Justice ATER of Ecuador y Occidental Exploration
(subject to editorial corrections) Presiding Judge of the South Eastern Circuit

behalf of the USA, as the other state Party to the BIT.” He submitted that it was
important to note that Article VI.5 of the BIT stipulated that if the investor and state
Party chose arbitration (other than one under the auspices of the International Centre
for the Settlement of Investment Disputes —“ICSID”), then it had to have its seat in a
state that is a party to the New York Convention 1958. That indicated that any award,
made in favour of either an investor or a State Party, is to be enforceable like any
other award involving private law rights, pursuant to the New York Convention
1958. The State Parties also agree that an award will be enforceable in their own
states: Article V1.6 of the BIT.

41. Therefore, he submitted, the English courts might have to enforce an award made
pursuant to Article VI.3(iii) of the BIT. Yet one of the grounds on which a court can
refuse to enforce a New York Convention award is that it deals with a difference “not
contemplated by or not falling within the terms of submission to arbitration... 8 oe
a challenge was made to a BIT arbitration award on the ground of excess of
jurisdiction, the English court would have to examine that issue and determine it in
order to see to what extent (if at all) the award could be recognised or enforced:
section 103 (4) of the 1996 Act.

42. Mr Lloyd Jones submitted that this analysis had the following consequences.
English courts have examined treaties that are not incorporated into English
Municipal law if it is necessary to do so in order to determine some domestic law
right or interest. Mr Lloyd . Jones pointed particularly to the decision of Hobhouse J
in Dallal v Bank Mellat,”’ in which the judge examined the jurisdiction of the Iran —
US Claims Tribunal, which was established by a treaty between two states and which
was not part of UK Municipal law. The judgment concluded that the source of the
authority of the arbitration tribunal lay in the treaty that set up the Claims Tribunal,
ie. it was derived from international law. Hobhouse J decided that the tribunal
derived its competence from international law and that international comity required
the English Courts to recognise the validity of its decisions. Therefore Bank Mellat
could rely on a defence of issue estoppel to Mr Dallal’s claim against it in the English
Court. Mr Lloyd Jones also relied on CND v The Prime Minister." 1n that case
Simon Brown LJ said that the English courts would not interpret “an instrument
operating purely on the plane of international law”, unless it was necessary to do so

“in order to determine rights and obligations under domestic law”. — Mr Lloyd
Jones said that in the present case Ecuador had the right, granted by section 67 of the

*7 Mr Lioyd Jones relied upon the argument set out in Douglas, pp 169-70; 179 - 180 and the

acceptance, in argument, of that position by the USA in the case of GAMI Inc v United States of Mexico (see
para 13 of the US Submissions), an arbitration conducted under Chapter 11 of the NAFTA and under
UNCITRAL Rules. The contrary position was expressed by a distinguished arbitration panel in another
NAFTA case: The Loewen Group Inc v USA, Award of 26 June 2003: (2003) 42 ILM 811; see particularly
Para 233. That Award was made under the auspices of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes —“ICSID”, Washington, DC. Douglas argues that this observation is wrong in principle and an
inaccurate description of the NAFTA arbitration process: pp 162-3; 175-6; 193.

New York Convention Article V.1(c); Arbitration Act 1996 section 103(2)(d). Convention Awards are
enforceable in the same manner as a judgment of the court under section 101.
% [1986] QB 441.
At page 462A
[2002] EWHC 2759 QB (Divisional Court)
See: para 36. Cf para 40: “There is no foothold in domestic law for any ruling to be given on
international law”; and conclusion at para 47 (i). Maurice Kay LJ and Richards J agreed with the judgment of
Simon Brown LJ, whilst adding reasons of their own.

61
@

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
{subject to editorial corrections)

L

43.

44.

45.

1996 Act, to ask the court to review the exercise of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, which
it had exercised in a certain way and had decided that Occidental has private law
tights that it can enforce against Ecuador in any court of a state that is party to the
New York Convention.

Analysis

Points of Agreement: There are a number of matters that are not in dispute between
the parties. These include the following points:

qd) The BIT is an agreement between states on the plane of international law.

(2) In this case the nature of Occidental’s allegations against Ecuador is that
Ecuador has been in breach of its international law treaty obligations towards
the USA that are set out in the BIT, particularly in Article [13. Occidental
argued that, as a result of these breaches, it suffered loss, totalling US$75
million. In the arbitration Occidental claimed a private law remedy, ie.
damages or compensation of US$75 million.

(3) | The Tribunal awarded damages or compensation of some US$75 million.
That Award, if not challenged, can be given recognition and can be enforced
under the provisions of the New York Convention 1958.

(4) The seat of the arbitration between Occidental and Ecuador, which was only
decided after the Tribunal had been constituted and had heard argument on the
point, was London.

(5) Part One of the Arbitration Act 1996, (which includes section 67), applies to
arbitrations “where the seat of the arbitration is in England and Wales and
Northern Ireland”: see section 2(1) of the 1996 Act. Therefore, unless the
court is prevented from doing so by some principle of non —justiciability, the
court has jurisdiction to determine Ecuador’s challenge to the Award of the
Tribunal as to its substantive jurisdiction, which is made under section 67 of
the 1996 Act.

(6) There is a general principle of English common law which has been called,
for convenience, the “non — justiciability” principle. The argument concerns
its scope and application in this case.

The issues to be decided: Two issues have to be decided, in my view. They are:

(1) What is the nature of the right or remedy that Ecuador wishes the English
Court to consider that might infringe the “non — justiciability” principle in
English law?

(2) Does the “non — justiciability” principle prevent the court from considering
that right or remedy?

What is the nature of the right or remedy that Ecuador wishes the English Court
to consider that is said to infringe the “non — justiciability” principle in English
law?

judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
(subject to editorial corrections)

46.

47.

48.

49.

a

Two sets of rights and remedies require consideration. First, there are those which arise
under the BIT itself. Secondly, there are the rights arising from the fact that
Occidental called on Ecuador to arbitrate a dispute and an arbitration has taken place
with its seat in London.

During the hearing there was much debate on whether the rights and remedies that
Occidental was seeking to enforce in the UNCITRAL arbitration arose under public
international law or Municipal or private law. Mr Greenwood submitted that they
were the former; Mr Lloyd — Jones that they were the latter. It is obvious that the
BIT creates obligations between Ecuador and the USA on the plane of public
international law. For example, Article III imposes obligations on the states not to
expropriate or nationalise investments except in limited, defined circumstances.

However, this BIT (in common with others) also clearly gives investors the right to
make claims directly against states - in Mr Greenwood’s phrase, it gives them
“standing”. | Mr Greenwood submitted that the rights, eg. those set out in Articles
11.3, Il and X.1, remain public international law rights which are rights of the states,
which the investor is permitted to enforce. He relies particularly on statements of the
arbitration tribunal in the Loewen case,> which was an Award made under Chapter
11 of the NAFTA. As the Loewen case featured strongly in much of the argument
about the nature of the rights and claims of Occidental, I should explain the nature of
that arbitration and the decision of the tribunal on the relevant point.

The claimant in the Loewen case arbitration was a Canadian corporation that was
owned and controlled by a US corporation. The respondent was the Federal
Government of the USA. The arbitration arose out of a commercial dispute between
two groups of companies, both of which, at the time, contained US corporations.
One group was the Loewen group; the other was the O’Keefe group. The latter
brought proceedings in the Mississippi State Court against the Loewen group for
damages for breaches of commercial contracts. The jury awarded the O’Keefe group
damages (including punitive damages) of US$500 million. The Loewen group did
not raise the necessary and very large bond to appeal the verdict and so settled with
the O’Keefe group for US$175 million. By the time of the NAFTA arbitration, the
Loewen group had purported to assign any claims it had under NAFTA to a Canadian
corporation, which was owned and controlled by a US corporation. That fact gave
rise to one of the principal issues in the case.

In the NAFTA arbitration the claimants were The Loewen Group Inc, (“TLGI”, a
Canadian corporation) and Mr Raymond Loewen, a Canadian citizen and the
principal shareholder and chief executive of TLGI. They sought compensation for
damage inflicted on TLGI and another Loewen company (Loewen Group
International Inc — “LGII”), and for damage to Mr Loewen’s interests which were
said to be a direct result of alleged violations of Chapter 11 of the NAFTA, that had
been committed primarily in the State of Mississippi in the course of the litigation
between the Loewen group and the O’Keefe group.

Award of arbitrators Sir Anthony Mason, Judge Abner J Mikva and Lord Mustill given on 23 June

2003. Held under the auspices of the Centre for Settl of Disputes, W

Dc.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
{subject to editorial corrections)

50.

Sl.

52.

z

&

The tribunal first heard and dismissed one ground of objection to the competence and
jurisdiction of the tribunal and it adjourned other grounds. The tribunal went on to
consider the merits and the adjourned questions concerning competence and
jurisdiction. | After the final hearing on the merits, the USA raised a further
objection to the competence and jurisdiction of the tribunal, based on the
reorganisation of TLGI under Chapter 11 of the US Bankruptcy Code. That
reorganisation had resulted in the assignment by TLGI of its NAFTA claims to a
newly created Canadian corporation, NAFCANCO, which was owned and
controlled by a US Corporation.

On the merits, the arbitrators concluded that the trial and verdict in the Mississippi
court were improper and could not be squared with minimum standards of
international law and fair and equitable treatment. They then had to consider the
question of whether the claimants had a valid claim for an international wrong. That
required the tribunal to decide whether it lacked jurisdiction because the claimants
had not exhausted their “local remedies” before a party could bring a complaint of a
breach of international law by a State. That in turn required the tribunal to decide
whether the State in question (ie. the USA) provided local (or domestic) remedies, in
the form of rights of appeal, that were effective, adequate and reasonably available
to the complainant in the circumstances of the case. The arbitrators decided that,
because Loewen did not explain why it had entered into the settlement, it could not
hold that the domestic remedies were ineffective, inadequate or not reasonably
available. It held that Loewen had failed to pursue its domestic remedies “notably the
[Mississippi] Supreme Court option”, so that Loewen had not shown a “violation of
customary international law and a violation of NAFTA for which [the USA] is

responsible”.

The effect of that conclusion was that there could be no claim against the USA under
NAFTA. However, the tribunal then dealt with the objection to their jurisdiction
which had been taken after the main hearings on the merits, ie. that arising out of
TLGI filing for protection under Chapter 11 of the US Bankruptcy Code. Before it
had gone out of business, TLGI assigned all of its right, title and interest in the
NAFTA to a new company, NAFCANCO. In fact the NAFTA claim was the only
interest of NAFCANCO and the pursuit of the claim its only business.°’ The tribunal
held further hearings on this point and both Canada and Mexico submitted their views
on the issues raised by this objection.

The point taken by the USA was that NAFCANCO was owned and controlled by a
US Corporation, LGII, which had been renamed Alderwoods Inc. The USA said
that the format of NAFTA and in particular Chapter 11 of it was to protect the
investing parties of one Contracting Party to the treaty against the unfair practices
occurring in one of the other Contracting Parties. The tribunal agreed that NAFTA
“was not intended to and could not affect the rights of American investors in relation
to the practices of the United States that adversely affect such American investors.
Claims of that nature can only be pursued under domestic law”. Further, in that
case if NAFTA were being used by an American investor, then it “would in effect

Award: para 142.
Award: para 168.
Award: para 217.
Award: para 220.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
{subject to editorial corrections)

34.

56.

57.

ag

create a collateral appeal from the decision of the Mississippi Courts”, which was
not the intent of NAFTA at all.° Therefore the issue that the tribunal had to consider
was the nationality of the claimants. Under NAFTA, was the rule the same as in
customary international law, ie. that a claim for compensation (by one state against
another) for a failure to protect the assets of an entity of the claimant state, could only
be maintained if the entity concerned had been a national of the claimant state from
the time that the claim arose until the time of resolution of the claim?

The argument of the USA was that even if a claim under NAFTA had existed at a
time when the claimants were Canadian entities, if subsequently they became (even
in part) US entities, then there was no longer “diversity of nationality” between the
entity claiming and the respondent State, so that a NAFTA claim that had existed
beforehand ceased to do so. The tribunal remarked that the effect of the assignment
and change of nationality of the claimant interests was something “a private lawyer
might well exclaim [was an] uncovenanted benefit to the defendant [that] would
produce a result so unjust that it could be sustained only by irrefutable logic or
compelling precedent, and neither exists”. It is in that context that the remarks of
the tribunal which are relied on so heavily by Mr Greenwood, arise.

In paragraph 233 of the Award, the arbitrators pointed out that NAFTA claims are
not the same as rights of action under private law that arise from personal obligations,
which are brought into existence by domestic law and are enforceable through
domestic tribunals and states. The tribunal stated that NAFTA claims had quite a
different character which stemmed from public international law. The passage on
which Mr Greenwood relies then continues:

“..by treaty, the powers of States under [public international law] to take
international measures for the correction of wrongs done to its nationals has
been replaced by an ad hoc definition of certain kinds of wrong, coupled with
specialist means of compensation. These means are both distinct from and
exclusive of the remedies for wrongful acts under private law: see Articles 1121,
1131, 2021 and 2022 [of NAFTA].....There is no warrant for transferring rules
derived from private law into a field of international law where claimants are
permitted for convenience to enforce what are in origin the rights of Party states.
If the effects of a change of ownership are to be ascertained we must do so, not by
inapt analogies with private law rules, but from the words of Chapter Eleven [of
NAFTA], read in the context of the treaty as a whole, and of the purpose which
it sets out to achieve”.

The tribunal concluded that, under the provisions of NAFTA, _ the rule of continuous
nationality obtained. It also concluded that the consequence of TLGI’s decision to go
into Chapter 11 insolvency was that the “chain of nationality” that NAFTA required
had been broken so that the tribunal had no jurisdiction to determine the claim.”

I have spent some time analysing the Loewen decision because Mr Greenwood
attaches much importance to the characterisation of the claimants’ claims that is made
by the tribunal at paragraph 233 of the award. But there are several points to note

Award: paras 223 and 224.
Award: para 232.
Award: para 234, 237 and 240.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
(subject to editorial corrections)

58.

59.

60.

61.

1
n
B

about what the Loewen tribunal says. First, it is analysing the position under the
NAFTA, as opposed to the current treaty, a BIT between Ecuador and the USA.
Secondly, the precise nature of the claim was not central to the point at issue in this
part of the award; the key issue was whether there was continuity of nationality.
Thirdly, it is noteworthy that when the arbitrators discuss the history of the doctrine
of continuous nationality in the context of claims by one state against another, they
comment on how the nature of “investment claims” has changed.”' They note that
claimants have been allowed to “prosecute claims in their own right more often” and
that in such cases provision has been made for the amelioration of the strict
requirement of continuous nationality. They observe that this has been spelt out in
specific treaties, including many “so-called BITs”.

I am satisfied that the tribunal did not intend to make any general comment on the
nature of claims made under BITs against states by investors that are entities created
and existing under Municipal (or “domestic” or “private”) law. I am equally satisfied
that the tribunal did not intend to lay down any general rule that, whatever the nature
of the claim by the Municipal law entity, it was being made on behalf of the other
State Party to the treaty.

That does not solve the question of the nature of the rights and remedies given to an
investor under a BIT. Mr Lloyd Jones pointed to the fact that, by Article VI, the BIT
creates a direct relationship between a State Party and an investor so it can enforce its
own rights. But that does not answer the question on the nature of the rights.
Secondly Mr Lloyd Jones observed that the BIT confers rights which have effect in
the Municipal law of Ecuador and can be enforced in the Municipal courts of
Ecuador.” — But those facts do not help in the analysis from the standpoint of the
English law and jurisdiction.

Mr Greenwood emphasised that if the rights are private or Municipal law rights, then,
classically under English conflicts of laws rules, they must be governed by some
proper law or other, which is determinable at the time the rights are created.” There
is nothing in the BIT to suggest that this exercise would be conducted if an investor
made a claim against a state under the provisions of Article VI. Instinctively, it seems
to me improbable that the Contracting State Parties intended that investors should be
given the right to make claims that are governed by a particular Municipal law.

In the absence of anything else to guide me I go back to the fact that the BIT creates
rights and obligations between states on the level of public international law. Given
the wording of the BIT, and in particular the wording of Article VI.1 and V1.2, two
points seem to me to be logical. First, that the State Parties to the BIT intended to
give investors the right to pursue, in their name and for themselves, claims against
the other State party. Secondly, that those rights are granted under public
international law and must be determined on principles of public international law, as
they were by the Tribunal in this case.

See para 229 of the Award.
See: Arts IIL.2; VI.1(c) and VI.2(a).
See, eg: Armar Shipping Co Ltd v Caisse Algerienne D’Assurance et de Reassurance [1981] 1 WLR

207 at 215 per Megaw LJ.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
(subject to editorial corrections}

62.

64.

65.

66.

67.

Next there is the question of the rights and remedies created by the arbitration. Mr
Greenwood correctly pointed out that there are two aspects to these rights. First there
is the agreement to arbitrate, which is contained in the BIT itself. As I have already
indicated, that is in the form of a standing offer to arbitrate by the State Party, which
offer can be accepted by the investor. Is that agreement governed by a Municipal
law? If it is then it has to be capable of identification at the moment that the
agreement is made.

Again it seems to me inherently unlikely that the arbitration agreement would be
governed by a Municipal law. The arbitration agreement between parties will
determine the scope and nature of the issues that can be arbitrated between the parties.
In the case of the BIT the scope of the arbitration agreement which is created by
operation of Article VI.3 (a) and (b) must be within the confines of the wording of the
BIT itself, in particular that of Article VI.1. There is no doubt that those provisions
are governed by public international law. It would be logical that the arbitration
agreement which is based on the BIT is also governed by the same law. Indeed,
because the substantive rights and obligations created by the BIT are so intertwined
with the scope of any arbitration concerning them, any other answer would be
unworkable. In the current case the Tribunal dealt with both the merits and the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal together and did so according to principles of public
international law. The decision to use those principles for determining their
jurisdiction (ie. the scope of the arbitration agreement), was obviously right.
Whether those principles were used correctly is a different point and that is what
Ecuador wishes to challenge under section 67 of the 1996 Act.

That leaves the law by which the arbitral procedure is conducted. Everyone agrees
that this is indeed governed by Municipal law, ie. the 1996 Act.

So which of these three groups of rights and remedies is it that Ecuador wishes the
English court to consider that might infringe the “non — justiciability” principle? _ It
is not, at least directly, the first one, ie. the substantive rights granted to Occidental
by virtue of the provisions of Articles VI.1 and VI.2 of the BIT. Ecuador has to
accept that if the Tribunal interpreted the BIT correctly and had jurisdiction to
consider the claims asserted by Occidental, then (subject to the section 68 challenge),
it cannot question the Tribunal’s power to make the Award it did.

Ecuador wishes the Court to consider the second bundle of rights and obligations, ie.
the right to arbitrate certain claims. The scope of those rights is to be interpreted and
defined according to public international law principles. It is because those rights
concern the interpretation of a treaty to which the UK is not a party and which has not
been incorporated into UK Municipal law that Occidental asserts that the Court
cannot exercise the power it would otherwise have (under section 67) to consider
Ecuador’s jurisdictional challenge.

Does the “non — justiciability” principle prevent the court from considering
Ecuador’s challenge to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to determine the claims
~asserted by Occidental?

Mr Greenwood submits that the statements of principle made by the House of Lords in
leading cases make it clear that the English court must not consider the scope of the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal, because that depends on the proper interpretation of a

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
(subject to editorial corrections)

68.

69.

treaty that has not been incorporated into English Municipal law. Therefore the courts
have no power to enforce any rights created by the treaty, which is an agreement
between states and on the plane of international law. He relied in particular on
statements made in the leading case of JH Rayner Ltd v Department of Trade,” (“the
Tin Council case”) particularly those of Lord Templeman and Lord Oliver. In that
case various traders in the London tin market claimed sums from the member States of
an international body, the International Tin Council, which had been established under
a series of multi — lateral treaties to which the UK was a party. But those treaties had
never been incorporated into English Municipal law. The ITC was accorded a
corporate identity in English law by a series of Orders in Council. The ITC failed to
meet substantial obligations to tin traders when the member States withdrew support for
its activities (principally the sale and purchase of tin stocks to maintain world prices).
The tin traders sought to fix liability on the States that were members of the ITC. Four
main arguments were put forward in an attempt to do so. All failed at all stages of the
litigation.

All the arguments required the courts to look at the various International Tin
Agreements (“ITAs”) that established and continued the ITC, the latest of which was
called “ITA 6”. Lord Oliver dealt with the issue of the extent to which the courts
could consider ITA 6 under the heading of “The Principle of Non — Justiciability”.”
He set out the following principles,” noting that the contest was not so much in the
principles themselves but the area of their operation. (1) “Municipal courts have not
and cannot have the competence to adjudicate upon or to enforce the rights arising
out of transactions entered into by independent sovereign states between themselves
on the plane of international law.” (2) “A treaty is not part of English law unless
and until it has been incorporated into the law by legislation”. (3) “So far as
individuals are concerned, it is res inter alios acta from which they cannot derive
rights and by which they cannot be deprived of rights or subjected to obligations...as
a source of rights and obligations [an unincorporated treaty] is irrelevant”. (4)
However, those “propositions do not...involve the corollary that the court must never
look at or construe a treaty”. Lord Oliver gave three examples where that was
commonly done: where the treaty was incorporated into Municipal law directly;
where it was done indirectly to give effect to treaty obligations; and where parties
had entered into a “domestic” contract and incorporated the wording of a treaty. 7 (5)
The court could refer to a treaty and the facts of its conclusion and terms where that
was a part of the factual background against which a particular issue arose. “Which
states have become parties to a treaty and when and on what the terms of the treaty
are are questions of fact. The legal results which flow from it in international law,
whether between the parties inter se or between the parties or any of them and
outsiders are not and they are not justiciable by Municipal courts”.

Lord Oliver returned to this topic when he dealt with the appeal of one of the tin
traders, Maclaine Watson & Co Ltd, which had sought the appointment of a receiver
over the assets of the ITC. The argument was that one of those assets was a right of
action that the ITC had as against the member states of ITA 6 to be indemnified by

x, [1990] 2AC 418, at 476 (Lord Templeman) and 499 - 500 (Lord Oliver of Aylmerton).

6

At page 499E.
Lords Keith, Brandon and Griffiths agreed with Lord Oliver and also with Lord Templeman, who gave

the only other substantial speech. Lord Templeman made the same points in different language.

7

Lord Oliver cited the Philippson case [1939] AC 332 as an example of this last category.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
{Subject to editorial corrections)

the member states against the liabilities of the ITC in respect of sales and purchase
contracts. Two questions arose: (i) did the ITC have a cause of action for an
indemnity against the member states; and if it did (ii) was that justiciable in the
English courts? Lord Oliver concluded that if any right to be indemnified existed, it
could only be found in ITA 6, an unincorporated treaty between sovereign states.
Lord Oliver’s preferred ground” for concluding that the court could not entertain the
application for the appointment of a receiver was that the receiver would be
attempting to obtain an indemnity from the member States by relying on the terms of
ITA 6, an unincorporated treaty. That would involve a court having to see whether
its terms provided for an indemnity either expressly or by implication. That was not a
justiciable issue.”

70. Mr Lloyd Jones pointed to the fact that there have been criticisms of the breadth of the
“non — justiciability” rule as stated in The Tin Council case. But in Re McKerr, ©”
Lord Steyn noted that the “rule” enunciated by the House of Lords in The Tin
Council case , that an unincorporated treaty can create no rights or obligations in
domestic law, had been subsequently affirmed by the House in two further cases.*!
Lord Steyn observed that distinguished commentators had attacked the “narrowness”
of the decision on this point, although he acknowledged that the critics would accept
“the principled analysis” of Kerr LJ in the Court of Appeal that “the liability of the
member states under international law is justiciable in the national court and that
under international law the member states were not liable for the debts of the
international organisation”. He said that “a comprehensive re-examination must
await another day”. 8

71. Despite the tempting blandishments of Mr Lloyd Jones’ arguments, I must take the
“rule” as I find it in The Tin Council case. The question is whether it applies to
prevent the court considering Ecuador’s challenge to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in this
case. In order to answer that it is vital to do two things. First, to note that because
the seat of the arbitration between Ecuador and Occidental is London, in principle the
court has jurisdiction to entertain a challenge to the Tribunal’s substantive
jurisdiction. Secondly, to examine closely what the court would have to do in order
to deal with that challenge.

72. Because the court has the jurisdiction, in principle, to examine a challenge to the
substantive jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal by virtue of section 67 of the 1996 Act,
it is necessary to see if, in doing so, it would infringe any of the “rules” of non —
justiciability as set out by Lord Oliver. I will go through the principles set out by
Lord Oliver that I have already enumerated above.

73. First, will the court have to adjudicate upon or enforce rights arising out of
transactions entered into by independent sovereign states between themselves on the
plane of international law? It will, in part, but that is not the end of the matter.
Some of the rights created by the BIT, which is a treaty between the USA and

* He noted that in the Court of Appeal, Ralph Gibson LJ had also held that a claim for an indemnity would

involve considering the agreement of sovereign states in international law, so would be precluded by “act of
state non — justiciability”: see pages 519 E — F and 522F.

At pages 521E and §22E.

[2004] 1 WLR 807 at 821,

Rv Sec of State for the Home Dept, Ex p Brind [1991] I AC 696; R v Lyons [2003] I AC 976.

At page 822C -H.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
(subject to editorial corrections}

74.

75.

Ecuador on the plane of international law, are rights that are given to a class of
entities which exist on the plane of Municipal law, ie. “investors”. In particular, the
right to arbitrate “investment disputes” as defined in Article VI.1, is given to
Municipal law entities. That right can be exercised in an arbitral tribunal (set up
under UNCITRAL arbitration rules) that will be subject to procedural laws
(UNCITRAL arbitration rules and, if the seat is in England, the 1996 Act), which
exist on the “Municipal” or “private” or “domestic” law plane. So, although the
rights have their origin in international law, they are rights that are intended to be
exercised by Municipal law entities in a tribunal that is subject to control under
Municipal laws. This, in my view, distinguishes the position in the present case
from that in The Tin Council case. There the essence of the decision was that the tin
traders, Municipal law entities, did not have any rights against the member States in
international law that the court could entertain. In this case, Occidental and Ecuador
have agreed that rights with their origin in international law will be considered by a
tribunal whose procedure is subject to Municipal law.

In this regard, it is instructive to note the approach of the Divisional Court in The
CND v The Prime Minister.” 1n that case the CND sought declaratory relief from
the court as to the true meaning of the UN Security Council Resolution 1441, and
more particularly whether that Resolution authorised States to take military action in
the event of non — compliance by Iraq with its terms. Simon Brown LJ summarised
the application thus: “Jn short, the court is being invited to declare that the UK
Government would be acting in breach of international law were it to take military
action against Iraq without a further Resolution”® — The Court held that it had no
jurisdiction to declare the true interpretation of an international instrument (the
Resolution) which had not been incorporated into domestic law “and which it is
unnecessary to interpret for the purposes of determining a person’s rights or duties
under domestic law".

In the course of his analysis of the cases and the arguments of Mr Singh QC on behalf
of the CND, Simon Brown LJ pointed out that all the cases relied on by Mr Singh to
show that the court had pronounced on some issue of international law were “cases
where it has been necessary to do so in order to determine rights and obligations
under domestic law”.** Simon Brown LJ referred to R ex p Abbasi v Sec of State
Sor Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs [2002] EWCA Civ 1598, R v Home Sec.
ex p Launder [1997] 1 WLR 839, Rv DPP ex p Kebilene [2002] 2 AC 326 and
Oppenheimer v Cattermole [1976] AC 249 as all being examples of where the court
examined an issue of international law in order to determine rights and obligations
under English law. He noted that in the present case “there is...no point of reference
in domestic law to which the international law issue can be said to go; there is
nothing here susceptible of challenge in the way of the determination of rights,
interests of duties under domestic law to draw the court into the field of international

f Simon Brown LJ later expressed the point thus: “Here there is simply no
foothold in domestic law for any ruling to be given on international law”.

[2002] EWHC 2759 QB

Para 2 of the judgment.

Conclusion (i) at para 47 of the judgment.
Para 36.

Para 36.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
{subject to editorial corrections)

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

In my view, in this case there is a foothold in domestic law for a ruling to be given on
international law. That foothold is the right given by section 67 of the 1996 Act to a
party to an arbitration, whose seat is in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, to
challenge the jurisdictional ruling of the arbitral tribunal. That is a Municipal, private
or domestic law right. There is nothing in the 1996 Act to say that it is not available
in certain circumstances. Even if the 1996 Act is subject to the principles of “non —
justiciability” in general, the effect of the analysis of Simon Brown LJ in the CND
case must be that the court is entitled to consider an unincorporated treaty if it has to
do so in order to determine rights that exist under domestic law.

Secondly, will the court be considering a treaty that is not part of English law? It
would. But, in my view, it is entitled to do so if it must in order to determine the
domestic law right of Ecuador to challenge the jurisdictional ruling of the Tribunal.

So far as Lord Oliver’s third principle is concerned, in this case the BIT, although
unincorporated in English law, is not entirely “res inter alios acta from which
[individuals] cannot derive rights and by which they cannot be deprived of rights or
subjected to obligations » 88 Article VI.1, VI.2 and VI.3 does create rights and
obligations for “individuals” ie. investors. It is the scope of those rights and
obligations on which the Tribunal has ruled that Ecuador wishes to challenge under
section 67.

As for Lord Oliver’s analysis of the position in the receivership application in The
Tin Council case, in my view the situation is again different in the present case. In
that case Lord Oliver held that the right of indemnity that the receiver would have
asserted would have been one that only existed (if at all) in international law by virtue
of ITA 6. The court would not adjudicate on that, because if it existed at all it must
have been purely on the international law plane and had no reference to any domestic
law rights or obligations. —_In this case the arbitral Tribunal has already made a
ruling on the existence of rights that a Municipal law entity (Occidental) has and
which can be enforced under Municipal law. It is the domestic law right of Ecuador
to challenge that ruling which leads into a consideration of international law.

I accept that the position in the present case does not fall within the examples that
Lord Oliver gives when a court can look at or construe a treaty. In particular, it is
not the same as in the Philippson case. 1 agree with the submission of Mr
Greenwood that it is an incorrect analysis of the position to suggest that Ecuador and
Occidental have concluded a Municipal law contract based upon or incorporating the
terms of the BIT.

But that does not affect my conclusions and analysis set out above. To my mind the
exercise of examining the terms of the BIT in order to see whether or not to grant a
right given by section 67 of the 1996 Act is no different in kind to that done by
Hobhouse J in Dallal v Bank Mellat,”” where he examined the authority of the US —
Tran claims tribunal, which he held was derived from international law. He did that
exercise in order to determine whether the claimant in the English proceedings was

At page 500C of the report.
Although the applicants had, in both the CA and the HL, relied on domestic law analogies to

demonstrate the existence of the right to indemnity by virtue of the terms of ITA 6.

[1986] QB 441.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
{subject to editorial corrections)

82.

83.

84.

1

entitled to bring a further claim or was prevented from doing so by the defence of
issue estoppel. In short Hobhouse J considered international law for the purpose of
determining rights and obligations under domestic law.

Mr Greenwood’s riposte to the argument that section 67 constitutes the domestic law
right on which a consideration of international law issues can be founded is to say that
section 67 is itself subject to the principles of “non — justiciability”. Therefore a court
should refrain from exercising its jurisdiction to consider the right to challenge the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal, because that would raise “non — justiciable” issues. I
cannot accept that argument. If it were correct, then, logically, the same must be
true of the challenge made by Ecuador under section 68 of the 1996 Act.”! It is
noteworthy that Ecuador alleges that there were serious irregularities in the procedure
of the Tribunal that affect the Award because, amongst other things, the Tribunal
“failed to have regard to the principle of international law that international tribunals
cannot declare the internal invalidity of rules of national law” and that the Tribunal
exceeded its power by overriding legal proceedings before the Courts of Ecuador.”
Those appear to me to raise issues of international law and go, once again, to the
question of the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. But Mr Greenwood accepts that Ecuador
can mount its section 68 challenge.

Further, if Mr Greenwood is correct, it would mean that the English court could not
consider a defence to an application, under section 101 of the 1996 Act, to enforce
an award by a tribunal made under Article VI.3 of this BIT. As I understood him,
Mr Greenwood accepted that if an award made under VI.3 of the BIT were presented
to the English court for recognition and enforcement under section 101 of the 1996
Act, the English Court would be bound to recognise and enforce it unless it upheld
one of the limited grounds for refusing to do so. But he did suggest that if one of
those grounds (eg. that in section 103 (2)(d), excess of jurisdiction), raised a
“justiciability” issue, the court could refuse to apply that ground.” In my view the
answer to this point is the same. An entity that is challenging the right to enforce an
award has a statutory right to do so under section 103. The court would be entitled to
consider the BIT to decide the scope of the arbitration agreement and whether the
award was within its terms and so determine the rights of the parties granted under
domestic law.

As for the practical difficulties that Mr Greenwood said would be involved if the court
did have to consider the challenge to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and to interpret the
BIT, I think that they should not be overestimated. The English courts do have to
interpret international treaties and conventions and when they do they apply the rules
of interpretation laid down in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969.
That is not a reason for refusing to undertake the task, however burdensome. I
accept that the USA will not be a party to the proceedings, so that the court should be
slow to rule on the rights and obligations of a state which is not a party to those
proceedings. But that is a consequence of the structure of dispute resolution
mechanism set up by Article VI of the BIT and so must have been contemplated by

Occidental’s application of 24 November 2004 did indeed claim that Ecuador’s section 68 application

could not be heard because it offended the principles of “non — justiciability”.

8

Grounds 7(1) and (4) of Ecuador’s Application: B1/TAB 2 pages 17 and 18.
He relied on a statement of Mance LJ in Dardana v Yukos [2002] 2 Llyd’s Rep 326 at 330 para 8. But

that did not refer to a justiciability issue, but domestic law defences such as estoppel.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down Republic of Ecuador v Occidental Exploration
(subject to editorial corrections}

85.

J.

86.

87.

4
95

the State Parties. And, if need be, the USA could make submissions through
Occidental or apply to intervene to be heard on relevant points.

I appreciate also that Article VII provides the means whereby the state Parties to the
BIT can resolve a dispute as to the interpretation or application of the BIT through an
arbitral tribunal “in accordance with the applicable rules of international law”.**
But there is no dispute as between the USA and Ecuador, so far as I know. And that
provision of the BIT cannot detract from the rights given to Occidental to have an
investment dispute resolved in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article
VI. That is what it has done and that is what Ecuador wishes to challenge.

Conclusion

For all these reasons,”* I have concluded that the doctrine of non — justiciability does
not prevent the court from entertaining Ecuador’s application to challenge the
substantial jurisdiction of the Tribunal under section 67 of the 1996 Act. Indeed, in
my view it would be odd if the English court could not do so, once the Tribunal had
chosen London as the seat of the arbitration and had therefore made its procedure
subject to Part 1 of the 1996 Act.

Accordingly, I must dismiss the application of Occidental dated 24 November 2004,
which was, effectively, to strike out Ecuador’s application to challenge the Tribunal’s
substantive jurisdiction under section 67 of the 1996 Act.

Article VII.1
I should note that Ecuador raised a further argument based on Article 6 of the ECHR, but | did not need

to address that in the light of my conclusions.

 

 

 

 

 

