 

Neutral Citation Number: [2006] EWHC 345 (Comm)

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

Case No: 04/656

 

QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
COMMERCIAL COURT
Royal Courts of Justice
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL
Date: 02/03/2006
Before :
MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Between
The Republic of Ecuador Claimant
- and -
Occidental Exploration & Production Co Defendant

Mr M Cran QC, Mr D Bethlehem QC and Mr S Birt (instructed by Weil Gotshal &
Manges, LLP, London) for the Claimant
Mr C Greenwood QC and Mr T Landau (instructed by Debevoise & Plimpton, LLP,
London) for the Defendant

Hearing dates: 12", 13", 14", 15" and 16" December 2005
Further written submissions sent by Claimant on 19” December 2005.

Approved Judgment

(subject to editorial corrections)
I direct that pursuant to CPR PD 39A para 6.1 no official shorthand note shall be taken of this
Judgment and that copies of this version as handed down may be treated as authentic.

 


MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

Mr Justice Aikens :

A.
1,

1
2
3
4

The Story so far.

This is the second stage of proceedings in the English courts in which the Republic of
Ecuador (“Ecuador”) challenges an arbitration award dated 1 July 2004. The
arbitration was held under the Arbitration Rules of UNCITRAL and the seat of the
arbitration was London. The dispute between Ecuador and the Occidental
Exploration and Production Company (“OEPC”) which gave rise to the arbitration
award arose in connection with a Bilateral Investment Treaty between the USA and
Ecuador signed on 27 August 1993 (“the BIT”) and a contract between OEPC,
Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos de Ecuador (“Petroecuador”), a state-owned
corporation of Ecuador, dated 21 May 1999 (“the Contract”). The Contract granted
OEPC the exclusive right to carry out the exploration and exploitation of
hydrocarbons in an area called Block 15 in the Ecuadorian Amazon basin region.'

The dispute giving rise to the arbitration was whether OEPC was entitled to obtain
tefunds of VAT payments that it had made. The VAT payments were on purchases of
goods and services made both locally and imported, in connection with the
production of oil which was subsequently exported in accordance with the Contract.
The dispute originally arose between OEPC and Ecuador’s Internal Revenue Service.”
But that could not be resolved. So, in 2002, OEPC invoked the arbitration
procedures set out in the BIT and started an arbitration against Ecuador. OEPC
alleged that the actions of the SRI (for which it said the Republic of Ecuador was
responsible) amounted to breaches of Ecuador’s obligations under the BIT, ie. were
a breach of Ecuador’s treaty and public international law obligations.

The award was in OEPC’s favour. Ecuador then issued proceedings in the
Commercial Court to set aside the award, relying on sections 67 and 68 of the
Arbitration Act 1996 (“the Act”). The principal argument of Ecuador is that the
arbitrators had exceeded their jurisdiction, as defined in the terms of the BIT. OEPC
challenged the right of Ecuador to question the arbitrators’ jurisdiction under section
67 of the Act,’ asserting that the issue of the arbitrators’ jurisdiction was not
“Susticiable” before the English courts. OEPC said that such a challenge could not be
dealt with by the English Courts because the arbitration arose out of a Treaty between
States and was on the plane of public international law.

Colman J ordered that the “justiciability” point should be determined as a preliminary
issue. I heard the matter and gave judgment on 29 April 2005. I held that Ecuador’s
challenge to the award under section 67 of the Act was “justiciable”. I gave OEPC
permission to appeal. The appeal was heard by Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers
MR and Clarke and Mance LJJ (as they all then were). The Court of Appeal handed
down judgment on 9 September 2005, dismissing the appeal.*

Ecuador’s challenge to the award under section 67 of the Act is, in essence, that the
arbitrators made an award on claims of OEPC that were “matters of taxation” and,

Clause 4,2 of the Contract: Core Bundle (“CB”)/Tab 9/page 54.

Known as the “‘Sevicio de Rentas Internas” or “SRI”.

But not the right to challenge the award for “serious irregularity” under section 68.

Judgment of 29 April 2005 reported at /2005] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 240; CA’s judgment reported at /2006] 2

WLR 70

USTICE AIKEN: Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

[R.
Approved Judgment

B.
8.

5

7

under the terms of Article X of the BIT, such matters fell outside the ambit of the BIT
and so could not be the subject of a claim in arbitration under the dispute resolution
procedure set out in Article VI of the BIT. Alternatively, Ecuador says that the
arbitrators exceeded their powers in such a way as to constitute a serious procedural
irregularity in the arbitral proceedings, which has resulted in a substantial injustice to
Ecuador. Therefore the award can be challenged under section 68 of the Act.

OEPC disputes both these allegations. It also has a contingent cross — application,
which asserts that the arbitrators wrongly concluded that they lacked jurisdiction to
determine a claim of OEPC based on alleged expropriation. _ OEPC wishes to
challenge that conclusion of the Tribunal, under section 67 of the Act. But OEPC
will do so only if Ecuador is successful in its challenges. For its part, Ecuador
submits that OEPC’s contingent challenge would be invalid, because it is a thinly
disguised attempt to challenge the award on the merits, which is impermissible
without leave to appeal on a point of law under section 69 of the Act. Neither
OEPC nor Ecuador has applied to obtain leave to appeal under section 69.

It is now well — established that a challenge to the jurisdiction of an arbitration panel
under section 67 proceeds by way of a re — hearing of the matters before the
arbitrators. The test for the court is: was the Tribunal correct in its decision on
jurisdiction? The test is not: was the Tribunal entitled to reach the decision that it
did. The section 68 application in this case was much bound up with the section 67
challenge. The hearing of all the applications took place before me between 12 — 16
December 2005.° Both parties very sensibly concentrated their evidence and
submissions on the key areas of dispute. Therefore it was not necessary to call any
oral evidence, either factual or expert. There was a great deal of documentary
material before the court, including seven bundles of authorities. I was greatly
assisted by the full written and oral argument of Mr Mark Cran QC and Mr Daniel
Bethlehem QC for Ecuador, and Mr Christopher Greenwood QC for OEPC. I am
grateful to them, their juniors and their teams. I reserved judgment.

The Bilateral Investment Treaty between the USA and Ecuador

As I pointed out in my jud on the “justiciability” issue, Bil 1 I
Treaties have been developed as a mechanism to encourage investment between
States, by using “investors” that are non — governmental organisations. It is a long
— standing principle of public international law that States owe duties to other States
to protect their citizens. This is known as the “doctrine of diplomatic protection”.°
Effectively, BITs are treaties that acknowledge this principle of public international
law, apply it to particular circumstances between two States and develop the
protection of investors by giving them “standing” to pursue a State directly in
“investment disputes” between an investor and a State Party in ways that are set out
in the BIT.” By the end of 2002 there were 2,181 BITs in force.®

Ecuador sent written reply submissions on its section 68 application on 19 December 2005.
See: E de Vattel, Le Droit des gens ou les principes de la loi naturelle, vol 1, 309 (1758).
Paulsson: “Arbitration without Privity” (1995) 10 ICSID Rev — Foreign Investment LJ 232 at pages

255-6.

UNCTAD, World Investment Report for 2003, 17; quoted in Douglas, “The Hybrid Foundations of

Investment Treaty Arbitration” (2003) BYIL 151.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS

Ay

9.

12.

9
10

roved Ji nt

In its judgment on the “justiciability” issue, the Court of Appeal held that the present
BIT confers or creates direct rights in international law in favour of investors. The
point at which these rights are created or conferred might be in issue; but, at the
least, it is at the point when investors pursue claims in one of the ways provided by
Article VI of the BIT.”

The USA/Ecuador Treaty was signed in Washington on 27 August 1993. At that time
there were 13 BITs in force for the USA. BITs concluded by the USA were based on
a prototype model which went through several editions. At the time of the
USA/Ecuador Treaty, the current prototype (also called the BIT Model Negotiating
Text) was the September 1987 Draft."

When the USA/Ecuador Treaty was submitted to President Clinton by Secretary of
State Warren Christopher, recommending that the Treaty be submitted to the Senate
for its advice and consent to ratification, the “Letter of Submittal’ set out the
objectives of the BIT and summarised its principal provisions. In the present case
both parties relied on statements in the Submittal Letter describing the ambit of
Article X of the BIT, (which deals with tax matters), as an aid to the proper
construction of that Article. That passage in the Submittal Letter states:

“Article X (Tax Policies)

The Treaty exhorts both countries to provide fair and equitable
treatment to investors with respect to tax policies. However, tax
matters are generally excluded from the coverage of the
prototype BIT, based on the assumption that tax matter are
properly covered in bilateral tax treaties.

The Treaty, and particularly the dispute settlement provisions,
do apply to tax matters in three areas, to the extent they are not
subject to the dispute settlement provisions of a tax treaty, or, if
so subject, have been raised under a tax treaty's dispute
settlement procedures and are not resolved in a reasonable
period of time.

The three areas where the Treaty could apply to tax matters are
expropriation (Article Ill), transfers (Article IV) and the
observance and enforcement of terms of an investment
agreement or authorization (Article VI (1) (a) or (b)). These
three areas are important for investors, and two of the three--
expropriatory taxation and tax provisions contained in an
investment agreement or authorization--are not typically
addressed in tax treaties.”

In my judgment on the “justiciability’ issue I described the scheme of the
USA/Ecuador BIT. That general description is not controversial and it may help to
set it out again here to get an overall view of the BIT’s scope and content:

[2005] 1 WLR 70 at 83, para 18.
Text annexed to “United States Investment Treaties Policy and Practice” by KJ Vandevelde (1992):

DWRAol 6/Tab 122/p 2717.

Al

a

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

)

(8)

(9)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
pproved Judgment

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
ent

The Preamble sets out the aim of the Treaty, which is to promote greater
economic cooperation and investment between the Contracting Parties (ie. the
two signatory States), but on a defined and agreed basis.

Article I sets out various definitions. “Investment” is defined broadly and this
definition is relevant in the current dispute.

Article II sets out the basis on which each Contracting Party will permit and
treat investment. The general principle is that investments of nationals and
companies of either Party will receive either “national treatment or most
favoured nation treatment” whichever is the better. Article II also provides
that the Parties will ensure that investment will have fair and equitable
treatment according to international law standards. This Article was central
to the arbitration and relevant to the current challenge.

Article III deals with expropriation or nationalisation of investments.
Expropriation or nationalisation of investments is not to take place either
directly or indirectly except for a public purpose and on defined conditions.
Article III is relevant to OEPC’s contingent cross — challenge to the arbitration
tribunal’s apparent conclusion that it did not have jurisdiction to deal with
OEPC’s allegations of expropriation.

Article IV deals with transfers, particularly of funds, that are related to an
investment. The State Parties agree to permit transfers to be made freely and
without delay in and out of their territories.

By Article V the Parties agree to consult promptly to resolve any disputes in
connection with the Treaty.

Article VI deals with the resolution of “investment disputes” between a State
Party and a national or company of the other State Party. Its terms, together
with those of Article X, are central to these applications.

Article VII concerns the resolution of disputes between the two Parties to the
treaty, ie. USA and Ecuador. If necessary, disputes are to be submitted to
an arbitral tribunal, for binding decision “in accordance with the applicable

rules of international law”.!?

Article X deals with the tax policies of each Party and provides that the tax
policies of each State Party should strive to accord fairness and equity in the
treatment of investments of nationals and companies of the other Party.
Article X states that the provisions of the Treaty, in particular Articles VI and
VII will not apply to matters of taxation except only to a limited extent, as set
out in the Article. This Article is central to the disputes I have to rule on.

13. I have set out the wording of all the relevant Articles of the BIT in Appendix 1 to this
judgment. I will refer to particular Articles as necessary in the body of the judgment.

" The definition starts: “/nvestment means every kind of investment in the territory of one Party owned or
controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service
and investment contracts”. It then enumerates various examples.

Article VII (1).

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

Cc.

14.

The final words of the BIT state that the Treaty was done in duplicate, in the Spanish
and English languages, both texts being equally authentic.

The Participation Contract for Block 15,

Petroecuador’s business is the exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons. Since
1985, OEPC had concluded contracts with Petroecuador for the exploration and
exploitation of hydrocarbons in Block 15 of the Amazon region of Ecuador. But in
the earlier contracts OEPC had only rendered services to Petroecuador in relation to
exploration and exploitation. OEPC had received a fee for its services and virtually
all of its expenses were reimbursed, including any VAT that OEPC had paid on
purchases made to provide services. Prior to the revision of the contract with
Petroecuador in 1999, it was Petroecuador that received all the crude oil that was
produced. That was because, prior to 1993, Ecuador’s Hydrocarbons Law gave
Petroecuador a monopoly over oil produced in Ecuador.

In 1993 Ecuador’s Hydrocarbons Law was amended. This enabled foreign companies
to engage in production sharing agreements with Petroecuador. In 1999 the existing
contract between OEPC and Petroecuador was modified. The modified Participation
Contract'? became effective on 1 July 1999. Its key change was that OEPC would in
future participate as a principal in the production of oil in Block 15. The basis for
OEPC’s participation and its extent is set out in Clause 8 of the Participation Contract.
In summary, OEPC assumed virtually all the costs of its exploration and exploitation
activities and had to pay VAT on expenses it incurred.'* But the question of any
refund of VAT is not dealt with expressly in the Contract. In return for providing its
services OEPC received a percentage of the oil produced and it was enabled to export
that oil.

Clause 8.1 of the Participation Contract sets out the method for calculating OEPC’s
“Contractor Participation”. That includes a “Factor X”. Factor X is itself calculated
using an elaborate formula. Broadly speaking, once the Factor X figure has been
computed, it is multiplied by the production figure and then divided by 100. That
exercise produces the proportion of the total oil production to which OEPC is entitled
under the Participation Contract.

OEPC submitted to the Tribunal and submits now that when the modified
Participation Contract was being negotiated, a critical element in reaching agreement
on the formulation of Factor X and so the level of OEPC’s participation in the
production of oil in Block 15, was the parties’ joint understanding on how VAT
payments would be treated. _ OEPC submits, as it did in the arbitration, '® that its
investment was based on an agreed economic model by which VAT would be paid by
OEPC but would then be reimbursed by the Ecuadorian authorities. This underlying
basis is challenged by Ecuador.

Clause 1 of the Participation Contract states that “the following are the contracting
parties: on the one hand the Republic of Ecuador,

CB/Tab 9.
Clause 5.1.17 obliges OEPC to pay taxes as may be required by the laws and regulations of Ecuador.
Award para 108. This is disputed by Ecuador.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

D.

20.

21.

22.

23.

through... PETROECUADOR...and on the other [OEPC]”. OEPC submits that this
makes it clear that Ecuador is a party to the Participation Contract.

Each side relied on a number of the terms of Participation Contract. I have set out the
relevant ones in Appendix 2 of this judgment. The principal relevant clauses are 4.2,
5.1.5, 5.1.17, 8.1, 8.6, 11.1, 11.11 and Annexes 14 and 16.

The source of the dispute between the parties: Ecuador’s tax legislation.

Under the law of Ecuador before 30 April 1999, there was no general right of an
exporter to obtain a refund of VAT that it had paid on inputs in making an export.
Article 65 of Ecuador’s Internal Tax Regime Law (“ITRL”) grants a right to a tax
credit in some circumstances, in respect of VAT that had been paid. But it did not
grant a right to a refund of VAT paid. However, the Law for the Reform of Public
Finance 99 — 24 introduced Articles 69A, B and C into the ITRL. Article 69A
provides that individuals and corporations that have paid VAT on the acquisition or
importation of goods which are used in the production of goods that are exported have
the right to have the VAT reimbursed. Article 69A does not allow for refunds of
VAT paid on services.

OEPC made local purchases of goods and imported goods that were required for the
production of oil pursuant to the Participation Contract. OEPC’s share of the oil was
later exported. OEPC applied to the Servicio de Rentas Internas (“SRI”) for a refund
of the VAT paid on these purchases. At first the repayments were made. Then the
Ecuadorian authorities changed their position. By Resolution 664 of 28 August
2001, the SRI denied OEPC’s claim for a refund of VAT for the period from October
2000 to May 2001. The precise basis on which the SRI refused to make a refund was
in dispute in the arbitration.  Ecuador’s position, at least initially, was that the cost
of the VAT that was paid by OEPC was taken into account in evaluating “Factor X”,
so was a factor in calculating the participation percentage of the oil production to be
allowed to OEPC. Therefore the provisions of Article 69A were inapplicable and
OEPC could not claim a refund."

On 1 April 2002, the SRI passed a further Resolution, number 234. This “Denying
Resolution” annulled previous “Granting Resolutions” whereby OEPC had been
permitted to recover VAT that it had paid. It also instructed the relevant branch of the
SRI to recoup the VAT that had been refunded to OEPC.'” More Denying Resolutions
were passed subsequently.'® OEPC decided it was not worthwhile submitting further
VAT refund applications.

OEPC then filed four law — suits against the SRI in the Tax Court of District No 1 of
Quito. In those proceedings OEPC alleged that these “Denying Resolutions” were
contrary to Ecuadorian Law, in particular Articles 65 and 69A of the ITRL. The fact
that OEPC pursued these law ~ suits in the Tax District Court gave rise to one of the
issues that the arbitrators had to decide when determining their jurisdiction. This was
the so ~ called “fork in the road” issue.

Resolution 664 para 7, “Matters of Law” (f): EO2/vol 3/Tab I l/page 821.
Resolution 234: paras | and 2 of formal resolution: EO2/vol 3/Tab 12/page 842.
Resolutions 406 of 31 January 2003 and 026 of 6 March 2003.

MIR JUSTICE AIKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment

24. In 2002 OEPC invoked the arbitration procedure provided for in Article VI of the BIT
and the arbitration under UNCITRAL Rules was begun.'? OEPC’s complaint against
Ecuador was that the actions of the SRI (for which OEPC said the Republic of
Ecuador was responsible) amounted to breaches of Ecuador’s obligations under the
BIT, ie. were in breach of Ecuador’s treaty and public international law obligations.

25.  OEPC alleged” that Ecuador’s refusal to refund the VAT constituted a breach of
Ecuador’s BIT obligations in four ways. First, Ecuador was in breach of Article II.1,
ie. the obligation to afford equal treatment to that of other investors, both domestic
and foreign, in like circumstances. Secondly, it was in breach of Article II.3(a), ie.
the obligation to grant fair and equitable treatment and treatment no less favourable
than that required by international law. Thirdly, it was in breach of Article II.3(b),
ie. the obligation that neither Party would in any way impair the operation or
management of an investment by arbitrary or discriminatory measures. Lastly,
OEPC said that Ecuador was in breach of Article III.1, ie. the obligation not to
expropriate an investment either directly or indirectly, except in the circumstances
identified in the Article, which OEPC said were inapplicable.

E. The Arbitration and the Award.

26. The parties nominated their arbitrators”! and a chairman, Professor Francisco Orrego
Vicuna, was appointed under Article 7 of the UNCITRAL Rules. All three are well
~ known and respected public international law specialists. Having decided that the
seat of the arbitration should be London, the tribunal then had to deal with Ecuador’s
challenge to the tribunal’s jurisdiction and the admissibility of OEPC’s claims. The
tribunal received extensive submissions on those issues from the parties, but then
decided to join those issues to the merits of the case.” The Award published on 1
July 2004 therefore dealt with both jurisdiction and the merits.

The objections to jurisdiction as set out in the award and the Tribunal’s answers to
them.

27. The Award records™ that Ecuador raised three objections to the Tribunal hearing
Occidental’s claims. Ecuador’s arguments were:

(1) _ that Occidental had submitted four lawsuits to Ecuadorian courts on the
question of the VAT refund, so that Occidental had irrevocably chosen to
submit its claims to the courts or administrative tribunals of Ecuador in
accordance with Article V.2(a) of the BIT. That choice precluded submission
of the disputes to arbitration under Article VI.3.”* The tribunal dismissed this
argument and it is not relevant to the present hearing, except, perhaps, to
understand how various other arguments were put to the Tribunal.

On 4 April 2002 OEPC gave notice under Article V1.2 and V1.3(a) of the BIT that a dispute had arisen.
After the requisite 6 months, on 11 November 2002 OEPC sent Ecuador a Notice of Arbitration and Statement
of Claim.

2 OEPC’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim dated 11 November 2002 paras 20-40: EO2/ol
2/Tab 4/pp 357 — 364.

*! The Hon. Charles N Brower by OEPC; Dr Patrick Barrera Sweeney by Ecuador.

* Decision of 26 November 2003.

3 At para 37.

4 The “fork in the road” argument.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MB JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

28.

29.

30.

31.

(2)  Inany event, Occidental’s claims were precluded by the terms of Article X of
the BIT, because the claims for breaches of the BIT arising out of the alleged
failure to refund VAT (save for the claim of expropriation) did not fall within
the matters of taxation embraced in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of Article X.2.
Therefore the claims based on Article II of the BIT could not be pursued,
because, as they concerned matters of taxation, they were outside the scope of
the Treaty and outside the arbitration provisions of Article VI of the BIT.

(3)  Occidental’s submission that there had been an expropriation of its investment
by means of the taxation measures adopted by Ecuador” was unarguable, so
that even if the claim fell within Article X.2, the Tribunal should not admit it
as a claim.

On the second jurisdictional issue, the Tribunal concluded that the key was the proper
construction of Article X of the BIT. The arbitrators described Ecuador’s argument
that all matters of taxation were outside the Treaty, apart from the specific categories
mentioned in Article X.2(a), (b) and (c), as “not persuasive ”26 Nevertheless, the
arbitrators went on to consider whether the dispute fell within one of the three
paragraphs of Article X.2(a), (b) or (c). They said the relevant question in this
dispute was: “...whether the observance and enforcement of the terms o,

investment agreement concerning matters of taxation is at issue in this dispute”.

The Tribunal concluded that Contract was an “investment agreement” for the
purposes of Article X. They held that the dispute found its origin in the Contract,
“insofar as it is disputed whether VAT reimbursement is included in Factor X”.”*
The arbitrators said that this point had been brought up by Ecuador itself. It meant
that there was a dispute “concerning the observance and enforcement of the contract,
which brings the tax dispute squarely within the exceptions of Article X and hence
within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal”.??

The arbitrators emphasised that, at the heart of the dispute between the parties was
the issue of what had been taken into account in calculating Factor X in the
Participation Contract. Had the VAT refund been secured by the calculation of Factor
X in the Participation Contract, so that it was fair of the SRI to pass Resolutions that
denied Occidental the right to a refund of VAT (as Ecuador argued)? Or had the
refund not been secured by Factor X, in which case the denial of a right to a refund in
accordance with Ecuador’s Tax Law was unfair (as OEPC argued).”

The Tribunal concluded that the dispute, “one way or the other, [thus] is clearly
subject to the dispute settlement provisions of the Treaty”. That conclusion

Contrary to Article III of the BIT.

Paragraph 68 of the award.

Paragraph 71 of the awared.

Paragraph 72 of the award.

Paragraph 72 of the award. In the hearing before me, Mr Cran QC underlined the fact that the award

does not reproduce the exact wording of Article X.2(c), which states: “the observance and enforcement of the

terms of an investment agreement...

Paragraph 74 of the award.

M

32.

33.

MR SUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

JST} IN Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

“automatically” brought in the standards of treatment of Article II, including “fair
and equitable treatment” *' as required under Article II.

On this second jurisdictional question the award concludes, at paragraph 77, that:

“The Tribunal accordingly finds that, because of the relationship of the
dispute with the observance and enforcement of the investment Contract
involved in this case it has jurisdiction to consider the dispute in connection
with the merits insofar as a tax matter covered by Article X may be
concerned, without prejudice to the fact that jurisdiction can also be
affirmed on other grounds as respects Article X as explained above”.

On the third point the Tribunal commented that, normally, a claim of expropriation
should be considered on the merits. But it concluded that it was so clear in this case
that there had been no expropriation, that the expropriation claim was
“inadmissible” Before me there was argument on whether this conclusion on the
expropriation claim constituted a ruling on the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, or one on
the merits of the claim (or lack of them).

The Award’s conclusions on the merits of OEPC’s claim

34.

35,

The arbitrators concluded™ that: (1) the VAT refund was not within Factor X as
calculated in accordance with the Participation Contract. (2) Accordingly,
Occidental was entitled to have the VAT refunded under both Ecuadorian law and
also Andean Community Law. (3) Because the VAT refunds had not been made,
Ecuador was in breach of its obligation (under Article II.1 of the BIT) to accord
Occidental a treatment no less favourable than that accorded to nationals or other
companies. (4) Ecuador had also breached its obligations concerning fair and
equitable treatment as required by Article II.3(a) of the BIT. (5) The claim that
Ecuador had impaired the operation of Occidental’s investment by arbitrary measures
(contrary to Article II.3(b) of the BIT) was only partially upheld. This was because
the SRI had not acted deliberately to deprive Occidental of the VAT refunds; rather
this had resulted from “an overall rather incoherent tax legal structure”. That
confusion and lack of clarity resulted in “some form of arbitrariness, even if not
intended by the SRI”. However, the Tribunal concluded that this arbitrariness had
not caused any impairment of the management, operation, maintenance, use,
enjoyment, acquisition, expansion or disposal of the investment of OEPC, so could
not give rise to any further claim for breach of the BIT by OEPC.*®

The Tribunal concluded that the breaches of Articles II.1 and II.3(a) had caused
OEPC damage. The arbitrators held that OEPC could retain the VAT refunds it had
obtained and that it was entitled to be paid VAT refunds of over US$73 million for

Paragraph 75 of the award.

Mr Cran also relied on what he described as misquotation of the terms of Article X.2(c) in this paragraph.
Award para 92.

Award paras 199 — 200.

Award paras 161 — 166.

MR JUSTICE AIKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment
the period up to 31 December 2003. Interest was also awarded, so that the total of
VAT refunds and interest due to Occidental was US$75,074,929.°°

F. The provisions of sections 67 and 68 of the Arbitration Act 1996 and the parties’
applications.

36. Sections 67 and 68 of the 1996 Act provide:
“67. Challenging the award: substantive jurisdiction.

(1) A party to arbitral proceedings may (upon notice to the
other parties and to the tribunal) apply to the court-

(a) challenging any award of the arbitral tribunal as to its
substantive jurisdiction; or

(b) for an order declaring an award made by the tribunal on
the merits to be of no effect, in whole or in part, because
the tribunal did not have substantive jurisdiction.

A party may lose the right to object (see section 73) and the
right to apply is subject to the restrictions in section 70(2) and

(3) On an application under this section challenging an award
of the arbitral tribunal as to its substantive jurisdiction, the
court may by order-

(a) confirm the award,
(b) vary the award, or
(c) set aside the award in whole or in part.

(4) The leave of the court is required for any appeal from a
decision of the court under this section.

68. Challenging the award: serious irregularity.

(1) A party to arbitral proceedings may (upon notice to the
other parties and to the tribunal) apply to the court challenging
an award in the proceedings on the ground of serious
irregularity affecting the tribunal, the proceedings or the award.

A party may lose the right to object (see section 73) and the
right to apply is subject to the restrictions in section 70(2) and

(3).

% Because of the extant claims before the Ecuadorian Courts, the Tribunal made provision to prevent any
double recovery by Occidental.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
roved. ment

(2) Serious irregularity means an irregularity of one or more of
the following kinds which the court considers has caused or
will cause substantial injustice to the applicant-

(a) failure by the tribunal to comply with section 33
(general duty of tribunal);

(b) the tribunal exceeding its powers (otherwise than
by exceeding its substantive jurisdiction: see section

(c) failure by the tribunal to conduct the proceedings in
accordance with the procedure agreed by the parties;

(d) failure by the tribunal to deal with all the issues
that were put to it;

(f) uncertainty or ambiguity as to the effect of the
award;

(3) If there is shown to be serious irregularity affecting the
tribunal, the proceedings or the award, the court may-

(a) remit the award to the tribunal, in whole or in part,
for reconsideration,

(b) set the award aside in whole or in part, or

(c) declare the award to be of no effect, in whole or in
part.

The court shall not exercise its power to set aside or to declare
an award to be of no effect, in whole or in part, unless it is
satisfied that it would be inappropriate to remit the matters in
question to the tribunal for reconsideration.

(4) The leave of the court is required for any appeal from a decision of the court
under this section.”

Ecuador’s Applications

37.

The particulars of the relief sought by Ecaudor and the grounds for that relief are set
out in a detailed document called “Particulars for Arbitration Claim Form”. That was
served as part of the Arbitration Claim Form issued by Ecuador on 11 August 2004.
It challenged the Tribunal’s conclusions on jurisdiction as summarised above. It also
alleged that insofar as the Tribunal might have founded jurisdiction on the basis of
Article X.1 of the BIT, that was also a misconstruction of that Article. Ecuador

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MIR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

38.

39.

40.

submitted that Article X.1 did not create any enforceable obligations as between the
State Parties to the BIT and did not create any treaty rights in favour of investors.

Ecuador therefore sought to set aside the whole of the award save for those parts that
relate to OEPC’s claim under Article III.1 of the BIT, alleging expropriation.”

In respect of the challenge under section 68, Ecuador alleged in the Particulars for
Arbitration Claim Form that the Tribunal had exceeded its powers under the Treaty
and the UNCITRAL Rules. It had done so by holding that the Resolutions of the SRI
or the actions and proceedings before the courts of Ecuador are of no legal effect or
should have no legal effect. It also alleged the tribunal exceeded its powers by
ordering that Ecuador should desist from attempting in its courts or tribunals from
attempting to recover the VAT that had been refunded to OEPC and by declaring that
any such actions and proceedings would have no legal effect.*® It was submitted that
in making these decisions and orders the Tribunal had exceeded its powers and so
there was a serious irregularity within section 68(2)(b) of the Act. An allegation that
the Tribunal had failed to comply with its duty to act fairly under section 33 of the
Act, so that there was a serious irregularity within section 68(2)(a) was not pursued

before me.

Under the section 68 challenge, Ecuador sought to set aside the final sentence of
paragraph 202 of the award; sub — paragraphs (ii) and (iii) of the final sentence of
paragraph 209 of the award and paragraphs 6 and 10 (ii) and (iii) of the Decision of
the Tribunal.

OEPC’s contingent application.

41.

42.

G.

@

37

OEPC issued an Arbitration Claim Form on the same day as Ecuador, ie. 11 August
2004. OEPC was aware that Ecuador intended to challenge the award. _So, in
paragraphs 10 and 11 of the particulars of the remedy claimed, OEPC states that if
the court “is minded to disrupt any of the findings in paragraphs 68 — 77 of the award
or any conclusions on pages 72 to 74 of the award”, then OEPC would wish to
challenge paragraphs 80 to 92 of the award, pursuant to section 67 of the 1996 Act.
Paragraphs 80 to 92 of the award are in Section F, which sets out the Tribunal’s
findings concerning expropriation. As I have already noted, the Tribunal concluded
that “the claim concerning expropriation is inadmissible”.

OEPC’s case was that this was a conclusion on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in relation
to the “expropriation” claim and that it was wrong and so was open to challenge under
section 67.

Ecuador’s section 67 challenge to the Tribunal’s Award on Jurisdiction: the
arguments of the parties

Common Ground

Paragraphs 79-92 of the award and paragraphs | and 15 of the Decision in so far as they deal with

“expropriation”.
38

Award, paragraph 202, last sentence; para 209, last sentence, point (iii); Decision 10 (ii) and (iii).

AIK] Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

43.

45.

46.

(i)
47.

48.

49.

39.

When OEPC served its Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim dated 4
November 2002, it stated, in paragraph 20, that it related to a dispute “arising out of
or relating to [...] an alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty
with respect to an investment”. The paragraph then referred to the SRI Resolutions
664 and 234 and related actions and asserted that Ecuador had failed to honour its
obligations under the Treaty and international law. The Notice alleged that Ecuador
had committed four particular breaches of its obligations under the BIT and
international law: (i) a breach of Article II.3(a) — (duty to accord fair and equitable
treatment etc); (ii) breach of Article II.3(b) — (duty not to impair by arbitrary or
discriminatory measure); (iii) breach of Article III — (duty not to expropriate directly
or indirectly); and (iv) breach of Article II.1 — (duty to give no less favourable basis
for investment compared with others).

There can be no dispute, therefore, that OEPC’s claim before the Tribunal involves
“matters of taxation”. The claim relates to Ecuador’s refusal to make refunds of a tax,
VAT, to OEPC, to which OEPC said it was entitled under Ecuador’s tax laws.

Ecuador accepts that the Participation Contract is an “/nvestment Agreement” for the
purposes of Article VI.1(a)°? and therefore Article X.2(c).

It is also agreed between the parties that Article X.2 of the BIT does have the effect of
excluding “matters of taxation” from the scope of the treaty. The real issues before
the court are the extent of that exclusion and how the exclusion operates in the context
of the current dispute.

Ecuador’s Case

For Ecuador, Mr Cran submits that it is important at the outset to characterise the
nature of the dispute between OEPC and Ecuador and the claim by OEPC. He
submits that the dispute is an investment dispute “...arising out of or relating to...(c)
an alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to an
investment”, in the words of Article VI.1(c). But it concerns matters of taxation.
He argues that the BIT as a whole and Article VI in particular do not apply to matters
of taxation except to the very limited extent set out in Article X.2(a), (b) and (c) and
the proviso to Article X.

Mr Cran submits that, effectively, the BIT would apply to matters of taxation only
with respect to claims for expropriation (under Article IID); transfers (Article IV);
and claims in respect of the “observance and enforcement of terms of an investment
agreement or authorisation”, as referred to in Article V1.1 (a) or (b).

Mr Cran submits that if OEPC’s argument based on breach of Article III
(expropriation) is put to one side, then, the only possible way that OEPC could
properly put forward its claim is if it comes within the terms of Article X.2(c). In
other words, OEPC’s claim would have to concern “matters of taxation”, which are
“with respect to..... the observance and enforcement of terms of an investment
agreement.... as referred to in Article VI.1(a).....”.

Although there is a definition of “investment” in Article |.(a) of the BIT, there is no definition of an

“investment agreement”.

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

50.

51.

52.

53.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

Ecuador’s primary submission is that OEPC never advanced a case before the
Tribunal that its claim was a matter of taxation that came within Article X.2(c).
Ecuador says that OEPC did not submit to the Tribunal, either orally or in writing,
that Ecuador’s tax laws or the actions of the SRI violated the Participation Contract.
Indeed, Mr Cran submits that in the course of the oral hearing before the Tribunal,
OEPC’s counsel expressly disavowed any reliance on Article X.2(c).

In order to make good this argument, Mr Cran analysed the characterisation of the
case put forward by OEPC at various stages in the arbitration process. He submits
that this exercise demonstrates that OEPC’s case to the Tribunal was wholly based on
a breach of treaty rights. Ecuador points first to paragraph 17 of the Notice of
Arbitration and Statement of Claim itself. This states:

“17. Pursuant to Article VI(1), OEPC can submit for settlement by
binding arbitration an “investment dispute”, which includes a dispute
arising out of or relating to “an alleged breach of any right conferred or
created by this Treaty with respect to an investment”. Article I(1)(a) of
the Treaty defines “investment” to include every kind of investment in a
territory of a Party, including investment contracts and tangible and
intangible property, such as rights, a claim to money associated with an
investment, and any rights conferred by law or contract. In addition to
OEPC’s investments in personnel, equipment, machinery, technology,
and other goods and services necessary for the performance of its
exploration, exploitation and other contractual activities in Ecuador,
OEPC’s investment within the meaning of the Treaty therefore also
includes, without limitation, its right to VAT tax credits and
corresponding reimbursements conferred by inter alia, Articles 65 and 69A
of the ITR law, as well as its related claims to money (collectively,
“OEPC's investment”)”.”

Secondly, Mr Cran relies on the way OEPC put its case in its Answer on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility, following the Jurisdictional Objections of Ecuador. In particular
he notes paragraph 13 of OEPC’s Answer, which states:

“Accordingly, OEPC has submitted to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal an
investment dispute relating exclusively to “an alleged breach of any right
conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to an investment”.
Specifically, OEPC claims that the Denying Resolutions are in breach of
Ecuador's obligations under Articles II(1), II(3)(a), _ II(3)(b) and III of the
Treaty, which include an obligation to accord OEPC’s investment
treatment not less than that required by international law."*!

Thirdly, Mr Cran refers to OEPC’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, Admissibility and the
Merits, dated 28 October 2003. In particular, it is submitted that OEPC’s case at
paragraphs 69 to 80 and 89 all argue that the refusal of Ecuador to permit VAT
refunds constitutes a breach of its Treaty and international law obligations.

Ex.EO2/vol 2/tab 4/page 356 - 7
Ex. OE2/vol 2/Tab 7/page 418.
Ex OE2/Vol 6/Tab 42/pages 2039 — 2040 and 2045.

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

54,

55.

56.

57.

a
44

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

Fourthly, Mr Cran points to the way OEPC’s case is put in its Rejoinder on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, dated 13 November 2003.7 In a number of places
this states that the claim is not based on allegations of a breach of the Participation

Contract.*

Fifthly, | Mr Cran notes how OEPC’s case was put orally at the hearing on
jurisdiction, admissibility and the merits, which was held in Washington DC on 26 —
30 January 2004." Mr David W Rivkin, of Debevoise & Plimpton LLP, presented
OEPC’s case on jurisdiction. In his oral submission he stated:

“It is important for the panel to remember that it is the Government of Ecuador
that has raised the contract terms of the participation contract as a defence to its
unlawful withholding of the VAT refunds, not us. And this is where their entire
argument fails. Their entire argument has to rest upon this dispute arising out of
the investment agreement. But as we've pointed out, it fails for the simple
reason, because we’ve not made any claims under the investment agreement.
Rather, what we challenge is the unlawful actions which they've taken in failing
to provide our rights to the tax refund”.*

Ecuador also relies on a further characterisation of OEPC’s claim which was given by
Mr Rivkin in his oral submissions when answering a question from one of the
arbitrators, Dr Sweeney:

“Now, with respect to Article X(2)(c), and the observance and enforcement of an
investment agreement, as I said, our claim under the treaty, and in fact the
claim in the Quito courts, does not arise out of the participation contract, the
investment agreement. It arises out of the right to the refund under Ecuadorian
law, which is consistent with the international principle with respect to VAT of
the Destination Principle. It is the SRI which has tried to inject the participation
contract into the dispute by saying that somehow the participation contract
already provided for a tax refund, notwithstanding the fact that the SRI itself
says that it is the only authority which may properly engage in the enforcement of
the tax laws. So as a result, our claim here does not arise out of the observance
and enforcement of the terms of the investment agreement, it arises out of a
breach of the treaty obligation”.”

Mr Cran submits that, despite these clear statements by OEPC that it was not basing
its claim on Article X.2(c), the Tribunal wrongly concluded that, on the proper
construction of Article X, it had jurisdiction to consider the claim based on that
Article. The Tribunal used that conclusion on jurisdiction to deal with the merits of
OEPC’s claims under Article II of the BIT.

Ex. OE2/Vol 2/Tab 8.
Paragraphs 3, 20, 39, 44, 45 and 84 are all noted in the first witness statement of Eric Ordway of Weil,

Gotshal & Manges LLP, attorneys for Ecuador, at para 43: Bundle 3/Tab 1/page 21.

45

The Tribunal heard oral submissions on jurisdiction first. Mr Eric Ordway presented the case for

Ecuador, then Mr Rivkin made his submissions.
46

a7

Transcript of 26 Jan 2004: pages 111 — 112: Ex DWR 169A/page 4542.
Transcript of 26 Jan 2004: pages 132 ~ 133: Ex DWR 169A/pages 4547 — 8.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

58.

59.

60.

61.

Mr Cran’s second main submission is that even if OEPC did purport to make a case
before the Tribunal based on Article X.2(c) of the BIT, then, on the facts, the way
OEPC put its case in the arbitration and on the proper construction of Article X.2(c),
the claim was not a matter of taxation “....with respect to...the observance and
enforcement of terms of an investment agreement”. He submits that Article X.2(c)
limits severely the type of claim that an investor can make on a matter of taxation
with respect to an investment agreement. Its terms limit an investor’s rights to
claiming that a State Party’s tax laws violate the observance and enforcement of an
investment agreement. But OEPC’s claim was not so limited. Therefore the
arbitrators exceeded their jurisdiction.

Mr Cran submits that this construction of the scope of Article X.2(c) is supported by
three distinguished commentators. First, by Professor Kenneth J. Vandevelde, 8 in
his book United States Investment Treaty Policy and Practice (1992). He states, at
page 218:

“The third part of the BIT’s applicable to taxation measures is the
provision of the investor — to — state disputes article which authorises
the use of that article to enforce the terms of an investment agreement
or authorisation. That is, an investor contending that the host state's
tax laws violate an investment agreement or authorisation may seek
aremedy through the investor — to state disputes article’.

Mr Cran submits that it is implicit in this passage that there must be a claim by the
investor in which it alleges that the tax law of the Party concerned violates the terms
of the investment agreement. That would make it a claim “with respect to...the
observance and enforcement of terms of an investment agreement....as referred to in
Article VI.1(a)”, within Article X.2(c).

Mr Cran also relied on statements of Sir Ian Sinclair, former Legal Adviser to the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, who gave expert evidence for OEPC in the
arbitration.*” Mr Cran further relied on statements of Ms Gann, Professor at Duke
University Law School, in an article on the “US Bilateral Investment Treaty
Program” in the Stanford Journal of International Law.°! Mr Cran submits that Ms
Gann’s interpretation of the terms of a previous version of the US Model BIT in
similar terms to the current BIT is consistent with the comments of Professor
Vandevelde and his submission on the limited ambit of Article X.2(c).

Ecuador’s third submission relates to Article X.1 of the BIT. It is submitted that,
before the Tribunal, OEPC did not argue that Article X.1 created separate and
enforceable obligations on the Parties, so that the arbitrators therefore had
jurisdiction to deal with a claim asserting a breach of that Article. Mr Cran notes
that the Award does not record that Ecuador was in breach of Article X.1. Thus,
because OEPC did not assert before the arbitrators a breach of Article X.1 to found

Professor Vandevelde had been a lawyer at the State Department who had negotiated many BITs.
EO2/vol 5/tab 27/page 1596.
DWRI/ol 1/Tab I page 37 at paras 71 to 78. The opinion was given on the question of whether the

“tax matters exclusion” of Article X of the BIT related to all types of tax matters, ie. direct and indirect taxation,
or just direct taxation. That ceased to be an issue in the course of the hearing before me.

st

21 Stan.J. International Law page 373 (1985) at 426 — 8: DWRI/vol 5/Tab 101 page 2152 to 3.

Professor Gann was commenting on a previous version of the US Model BIT extant in 1985.

J A Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

62.

63.

64.

any claim against Ecuador, OEPC cannot now retrospectively assert that it had a
claim under Article X.1 and the arbitrators had jurisdiction to deal with it.

In his reply, Mr Cran put forward an argument based on an alternative construction of
Article X.2 of the BIT. He analysed the opening part of Article X.2, which reads:

“Nevertheless, the provisions of this Treaty, and in particular Articles VI and
VII, shall apply to matters of taxation only with respect to the following:...”

Mr Cran submitted that, on the true construction of the Article, the words “...only with
respect to the following...” referred back to the words “...shall apply...”, rather than
following on from or being descriptive of the words “...matters of taxation....”.
Therefore the introductory words of Article X.2 (before the paragraphs (a), (b) and (c))

should be read:

“Nevertheless, the provisions of this Treaty, and in particular Articles VI and
VI, shall apply only in respect of the following, in respect of matters of
taxation...”.

Mr Cran submitted that this was the correct construction and it made it clear that
Article X.2 (a), (b) and (c) are only relevant where there are claims concerning the
matters set out in those paragraphs. He submitted eight reasons why this
construction must be correct. The essence of these points is that if the wording of
Article X.2 (a), (b) and (c) is analysed carefully, then it is clear that the draftsmen
intended that if an investor party has a claim concerning “matters of taxation”, it
can only invoke the the BIT to a very limited extent. In particular, Mr Cran submits,
if an investor party has a claim under Article X.2(c), then although it can invoke
Article VI of the Treaty, it cannot use the fact that it has a claim falling within Article
X.2(c) to enable it to make a claim under Article II of the BIT.

Mr Cran analysed Section D of the Award, where the Tribunal dealt with the
meaning of Article X of the BIT and its jurisdiction with respect to OEPC’s claims
based on breach of Article I] of the BIT. Mr Cran concentrated on the central
paragraphs on this issue, ie. paragraphs 72 to 75 and 77 of the Award. They state:

“72, It was concluded above that the Modified Participation Contract
between OEPC and Ecuador indeed qualifies as an investment agreement.
Although, as also explained, the Claimant has not invoked here contract-based
rights, but rather has pursued the interpretation of domestic law in the courts of
Ecuador and treaty rights before this Tribunal, the fact is that in part the dispute
finds its origins in that Contract insofar as it is disputed whether VAT
reimbursement is included in Factor X. This view has been brought up by the
Respondent itself as one of its defences and has been invoked by the SRI as the
specific reason for denying reimbursement of VAT. To this extent, the
Respondent itself appears to accept that there is a dispute concerning the
observance and enforcement of the Contract, which brings the tax dispute
squarely within the exceptions of Article X and hence within the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal. There is here a typical situation of forum prorogatum.

73. That being so, and as the Tribunal has a duty to examine the
submissions by both parties, it can only come to the conclusion that a tax matter

MR JU!

I
Approved Judgment

65.

KEN: Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

associated with an investment agreement has been submitted to it for its
consideration. Even if the Claimant had not characterised the dispute as one
concerning the Contract,” the fact is that the Contract is central to the dispute.
Together with the question of the observance of the Contract, however, there is
one other issue that the Tribunal needs to keep in mind. That is the Claimant's
alleged right to reimbursement under Ecuadorian law, Andean Community law
and international law, an issue which is broader than that concerning the
observance of the contract.

74. This dispute has also a very particular meaning for the parties. In
spite of it having been extensively discussed as a tax matter, a closer look might
lead to the conclusion that what is really disputed is whether there is a right to
refund of taxes unchallengedly due and owing and in fact paid, and, if so, how to
achieve such reimbursement. In fact, the parties do not dispute the existence of
the tax or its percentage. What the parties really discuss is whether its refund has
been secured under Factor X of the Contract, as claimed by the Respondent, or if
that is not the case, whether, as argued by the Claimant, it should be recognized
as right under Ecuadorian Tax Law.

75. The dispute, one way or the other thus is clearly subject to the dispute
settlement provisions of the Treaty. This automatically brings in the standards of
treatment of Article II, including fair and equitable treatment. Paragraph | of
Article X thus acquires in this context its full meaning. This does not prevent of
course other aspects of the dispute concerning Treaty rights from being also
considered in this arbitration, independent of the meaning of the Contract, nor
does it prevent this Tribunal from interpreting the Contract to the extent relevant
to decide on the alleged Treaty violations.

77. The Tribunal accordingly finds that, because of the relationship of the
dispute with the observance and enforcement of the investment Contract involved
in this case, it has jurisdiction to consider the dispute in connection with the
merits insofar as a tax matter covered by Article X may be concerned, without
prejudice to the fact that jurisdiction can also be affirmed on other grounds as
respects Article X as explained above.”.

Mr Cran was critical of much of the Tribunal’s reasoning in this part of the Award.
In particular, first, he criticised the arbitrators’ treatment of Article X.1, especially
their conclusion (at paragraph 70) that Article X.1 imposed obligations “no different
from that of fair and equitable treatment in Article IT’. Mr Cran submitted that this
was not borne out by the language of Article X.1, which was, he said, purely
hortatory.

2 I think that this would, more accurately, be expressed as: “Even if the Claimant had characterised the

dispute as one not concerning the Contract...

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

66.

67.

68.

Secondly, he noted that the Tribunal did not accurately reproduce the wording of
Article X.2(c) in the penultimate sentence of paragraph 72. Therefore, he submits,
the Tribunal applied the wrong test to see if the claim fell within Article X.2(c).

Thirdly, he submits that the Tribunal was wrong to assert, in paragraph 72, that
Ecuador had raised as a defence the question of whether the reimbursement of VAT
was included in Factor X. In any event the Tribunal was wrong to determine
jurisdiction on the basis of a defence raised, rather than the nature of OEPC’s claim.

Fourthly, he submits that the Tribunal wrongly analysed the dispute between the
parties as one concerning “the observance and enforcement of the contract”,
because that was not the way OEPC put its claim. Lastly, he said that the Tribunal
characterised the central dispute as “whether [the VAT] refund has been secured
under Factor X of the Contract”,*’ then concluded it had jurisdiction over the claim
“because of the relationship of the dispute with the observance and enforcement of the
investment Contract involved in this case....insofar as a tax matter covered by Article
X may be concerned...”.> But, Mr Cran submits, it is not enough for there to be a
“relationship” between the dispute and the observance and the enforcement of the
investment contract. He submits that the Tribunal would only have jurisdiction to
deal with a dispute concerning matters of taxation if that dispute was “in respect to
the observance and enforcement of terms of the investment agreement”. That was not
what this dispute was about at all, so it was not within the BIT or the arbitrators’

jurisdiction.

(iii) OEPC’s case

69.

70.

Mr Greenwood, for OEPC, accepts that the question is: does this dispute fall within
Article X.2(c) of the BIT? He accepts that the dispute relates to “matters of
taxation”. But, in his submission, if the question of whether Ecuador was in breach
of its obligations under the BIT (in particular the obligations set out in Article II),
“depended on the interpretation, observance and enforcement of OEPC’s bargain, as
embodied in the Participation Contract”,® then the dispute would fall within
Article X.2(c).

He further submits that the dispute inevitably falls within Article X.2(c) because of
Ecuador’s case, on the merits, that OEPC had received the full value of VAT
payments it had made through the level at which OEPC’s participation was set under
the Contract, using the mechanism of the multiplicand “Factor X”. Therefore,
Ecuador’s defence to OEPC’s allegations of breach of treaty obligations was to say:
there is no unfairness, nor impairment of the operation of OEPC’s “investment”, nor
failure to give “most favoured nation” treatment to OEPC by the action of refusing to
make refunds of VAT payments. Mr Greenwood submits that Ecuador’s defence
argument inevitably put the Participation Contract at the centre of the dispute. That
therefore brought the dispute within Article X.2(c), because it concerned a “matter of
taxation with respect to...the observance and enforcement of terms of...” the
Participation Contract.

para 72

para 74

Para 77

Mr Greenwood’s wording: para 50 of OEPC’s Opening Submissions.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MRJUSTICE AIKENS

A

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

2

ve ent

In Mr Greenwood’s submission, Articles X.2 (a), (b) and (c) are “gateways”. So,
if a dispute between an investor and a State Party comes within the ambit of one of
those paragraphs, the consequence is that all the provisions of the BIT, and in
particular all the provisions of Article VI (the dispute resolution provisions) are then
effective. That means that a tribunal can determine whether, in relation to a matter
falling within Article X.2(c) (for example), the State Party has been in breach of its
treaty obligations under Articles II and III. Article VI will determine the scope of the
jurisdiction of a Tribunal; there is no further limitation on what it can consider.

The consequence of putting the argument this way, as Mr Greenwood accepts, is that
the Tribunal will have to delve into the merits of the dispute in order to come to a
conclusion on whether the dispute fell within its jurisdiction. That is what the
arbitrators decided must be done in this case. It is clear that the arbitrators had the
evidence on the merits very much in mind when considering the jurisdictional aspect
of their Award.

In support of this submission, Mr Greenwood invited me to consider some of the
evidence that was before the Tribunal concerning the negotiation of the Participation
Contract, to show the economic basis on which OEPC and Petroecuador had
concluded the Contract terms; in particular those relating to the amount of OEPC’s
share of the oil production from Block 15.°” He submitted that this evidence showed
two things. First, that OEPC and Ecuador had negotiated the Contract on the
understanding that VAT would be reimbursed by the SRI, so that the cost of VAT
would be something that OEPC would not have to bear. Therefore the economic
model on which the contract terms, particularly Factor X, was based, assumed VAT
would be repaid to OEPC.

Secondly, Mr Greenwood submitted that this evidence showed that the dispute
between OEPC and Ecuador related to matters of taxation (ie. the VAT refund) “with
respect to...the observance and enforcement of terms of” the Participation Contract.
That was because, on OEPC’s case, the terms and “the bargain” of the Contract
would only be observed and enforced if VAT was refunded, whereas Ecuador was
arguing the contrary.

Mr Greenwood showed me evidence that was before the Tribunal concerning the SRI
Resolutions and the reasoning behind them. The first relevant SRI Resolution,
number 664 of 28 August 2001,°8 does state that the reason why OEPC is not entitled
to a refund of VAT is that it had already been accounted for in the calculation of
Factor X in the Contract. Mr Greenwood submitted that the subsequent SRI
Resolutions® are all based on the same reasoning. Ecuador disputed this. But Mr
Greenwood submitted that whether it was in fact the case was irrelevant. The point is
that there was a dispute before the Tribunal on the question of whether the SRI’s
refusal to refund VAT was consistent with the observance of the terms of the Contract
or the enforcement of them.

I was referred to the evidence of Mr Larrea: DWR/vol 1/Tab 3; Mr Carillo: DWR/vol 11/Tab 169;

(both called by OEPC although they worked for Petroecuador at the time); Mr Berrazeuta: DWR/vol 2/Tab
14; and Mr Baquero: DWR/vol 2/Tab 15: both called for Ecuador.

58
59

EO2/vol 3/Tab 11.
That is: Resolution 234 of | April 2002; Resolution 406 of 31 January 2003 and Resolution 26 of 6

March 2003

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

76.

H.

Mr Greenwood also drew my attention to the evidence before the Tribunal of Ms De
Mena, the Director of the SRI. In her evidence Ms De Mena did make numerous
references to the Participation Contract as the basis for the SRI’s Resolutions. Mr
Greenwood submits that this also shows that the crux of the dispute between Ecuador
and OEPC is a matter of taxation with respect to the observance and enforcement of
terms of an investment agreement.

Discussion and conclusion on Ecuador’s section 67 challenge on the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction in relation to the claims under Article II of the BIT.

77.

78.

79.

The Award deals with both the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and the merits of the dispute
between the parties. The arbitrators decided the jurisdiction points first and held that
it had jurisdiction to deal with the claims under Article I]. The Tribunal then went on
to rule in favour of OEPC on the merits on the Article II claims. Therefore, plainly,
this is an “award made by the tribunal on the merits”, to which section 67(1)(b) of
the 1996 Act applies.®!

In this case Ecuador has challenged the substantive jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the
basis that the claims made by OEPC based on breaches of Article II of the BIT are not
matters that can be properly determined by the arbitrators. That is because, Ecaudor
argues, they are “matters of taxation” and, on the facts of this case, the claims of
OEPC fall outside any part of Article X.2 on its proper construction.

So what should the court consider in order to decide whether the arbitral tribunal had
“substantive jurisdiction” to determine the Article II claims of OEPC? Given the
structure of the BIT and the nature of OEPC’s claim in the arbitration, it is inevitable
that the court must examine not only the scope of the dispute resolution provisions in
the governing instrument, ie. the BIT, but also the way in which the parties have
presented the dispute to the Tribunal. Therefore the court will need to have regard
to the factual aspects concerning the merits of OEPC’s claim and Ecuador’s defence
to it, whilst taking care not to deal with the merits of OEPC’s claims. Logically, it
seems to me, the court has to consider first the nature of the dispute between the
parties. Then it must decide whether, on the true construction of the BIT, and
Article X.2_ in particular, the Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine the dispute.

The nature of the dispute

80.

60
6

The dispute arose because of the action of the SRI in passing the various Resolutions
that resulted in OEPC not being able to recover VAT paid on local purchases and on
the import of goods made in connection with export activities. This action appeared
to be contrary to the provision of Article 69A of the ITR which establishes a right to
request the refund of VAT on such purchases. The SRI concluded (in Resolution
664), that the provisions of Article 69A were not applicable, so OEPC could not
claim a refund of VAT, because:

“inasmuch as the Ecuadorian State, in issuing a reimbursement for the
investments, costs and expenses through the participation percentage,

DWR/Vol 2/Tab 17.
See: LG Caltex Gas Co Ltd v China National Petroleum Corpn [2001] 1WLR 1892 at paras 70 and

71, per Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers MR.

The Article is quoted in para 3 of the SRI Resolution 664 of 28 August 2001.

MR Jt

81.

82.

83.

84.

ICE AIKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

included in those reimbursements the VAT and other taxes assessed on such
ae OF
activity”.

In short, the SRI in that Resolution concluded that Factor X in the Contract took
account of the VAT paid so Article 69A was not applicable.

The same argument, in more elaborate form, was set out in Resolution 234 of 1 April
2002. The Resolution also refers to Clause 8.6 of the Contract. That was said to
demonstrate that OEPC was “perfectly aware that the VAT represented a determining
economic factor in the proposal and therefore, in the percentage of participation to be
received, which implies that said value directly affects the profitability of the project
and its corresponding economic stability "6

The SRI shifted its argument in the later two Resolutions which were passed on 31
January 2003 and 6 March 2003,°° but by then OEPC had served its Notice of
Arbitration on 4 November 2002. When the Director of the SRI, Senora Elsa de
Mena, gave her written and oral evidence in the hearing in January 2004, she
reverted to the argument that under the petroleum laws of Ecuador, the state had the
power to negotiate with petroleum companies. Therefore, she stated, the tax system
applicable to the contract with that company could be changed by virtue of the terms
of the Participation Contract. | Senora de Mena also reiterated the view that the
payment of VAT had been compensated in the Participation Contract. So, her
evidence was that the SRI’s actions had been both legal and just.

In many of its written submissions to the Tribunal, Ecuador emphasised that the case
turned on the relationship between the Participation Contract and Ecuador’s tax laws.
This point was made partly in support of the “fork in the road” argument that,
because OEPC had begun actions in the Quito courts, it could not pursue the same
claim through the arbitration mechanism set out in Article VI.3 of the BIT.” But in
its submissions on the merits, Ecuador made arguments about the relationship
between the terms of the Contract and the liability of OEPC to pay VAT. The point
was made in Ecuador’s Statement of Defence of 12 September 2003, which dealt
with the merits of the claim.® — Similar points were made in Ecuador’s Memorial on
the Merits.

On its side, OEPC’s case on the merits was set out in detail in the Claimants’
Memorial dated 28 October 2003.” This asserted that the new Article 69A of the

Resolution 664: para 7; Matters of Law (f): EO2/vol 3/Tab 11 page 821
See in particular para 7(s): EO2/vol 3/Tab 12 page 839.

Resolutions 406 and 26 respectively.

Statement of 18 December 2003: DWR/vol 2/Tab 17/para 30 page 606. See evidence in chief on 29

January 2004: pages 4827; 4828 and 4829, particularly lines 9 - 13.

See: eg. Ecuador’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of 27 October 2003: paras 19, 33

and 34: EO2/vol 6/Tab 41 at pages 1940, 1948 and 1949.

Ecuador’s Statement of Defence: para 13(c): “The Modified Participation Contract in Annex XVI

clearly contemplates that OEPC is responsible for payment of VAT. In addition, pursuant to clauses 8.6 and
11.11 as well as Annex XIV of the Contract, payment and collections of VAT, including any adjustments in such
payments and collections due to changes in the tax rate, were factored into the percentage of participation
enjoyed by OEPC”.

Ecuador's Memorial on the Merits of 18 December 2003 at paras 53 and 95 to 102: EO2/vol 2/Tab 9,

pages 538 and 560 to 566.

EO2/vol 6/Tab 42.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

85.

86.

87.

88.

ITRL was introduced after the negotiations for the modified Participation Contract,
but before execution. The Claimants’ Memorial argues that:

“because Ecuadorian law provides [an] unequivocal right to a tax credit and
reimbursement for VAT paid on the acquisition or importation of goods and
services that are used for the production of goods for export, both parties knew in
the negotiations of the participation contract that VAT “was not considered a
source of revenue for Ecuador”. 7

The Memorial then asserts that the negotiations relating to the Contract focused on the
costs that would be incurred by OEPC, because OEPC would be responsible for the
operational and capital expenditures in the fields. Paragraph 29 of the Memorial
continues:

“Witnesses who participated in the negotiations both for OEPC and for
Petroecuador confirm that VAT was never included in such costs. The reason for
this was simple: any VAT paid by OEPC had to be refunded by Ecuador
pursuant to the law described above”.

References are then made to witness statements of people who subsequently gave
evidence at the hearing in writing and, in some cases, orally.

The Memorial also deals with what it calls “Ecuador’s Contract Theory”, ie.
Ecuador’s case that OEPC would receive the VAT refund “in kind” from
Petroecuador through its share of oil, rather than as a credit voucher from the SRu.”
OEPC’s case, as set out, is that this “Contract Theory” is wholly discredited by
Petroecuador’s own documents, officials and the evidence of its personnel who
negotiated the Participation Contract.” OEPC’s Memorial on the Merits also joined
issue on Ecuador’s argument on the effect of Clause 8.6 of the Contract.

OEPC’s Memorial on the Merits also makes allegations about many other acts or
statements of Ecuador and Petroecuador. These points are all made in the context of
OEPC’s case that Ecuador’s conduct of denying OEPC the VAT refunds violated the
terms of the BIT and international law.”*

This attempt to summarise the very elaborate and lengthy written and oral
presentations of the two parties’ case demonstrates that Mr Greenwood is correct in
his submission that, in order to determine whether Ecuador was_ in breach of its
obligations under the BIT, the Tribunal had to consider the basis on which OEPC
made its investment in Ecuador. It had to investigate and determine what OEPC’s
legitimate expectations were by the time the Participation Contract was concluded in
May 1999; in particular the Tribunal had to investigate what Ecuador and OEPC
understood the position was on the repayment (if any) of VAT paid by OEPC. In
order to consider these questions there is, in my view, no doubt that the Tribunal had
to look into the factual background of the negotiations of the Participation Contract
and it also had to analyse the terms of the Contract itself.

Para 27 of the Memorial.

Paragraph 91 of the Memorial.

Paragraph 95 et seq of the Memorial.

See: paragraphs 69 — 80 of the Memorial: EO2/vol 6/Tab 42 pages 2039 ~ 2041.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS

89.

ve T

Having examined the cases of the parties put to the Tribunal, I would respectfully
agree with the Tribunal’s summary of the dispute at paragraph 29 of the Award:

“The dispute between the parties to this arbitration centres on the question
whether Factor X includes in the participation formula a reimbursement of VAT
paid by OEPC, as the Respondent contends is the case, and the related question
whether, if it is not, OEPC is entitled to VAT refunds under Ecuador's tax laws,
as OEPC argues. As will be noted in connection with jurisdiction, the Claimant
has not brought to this arbitration claims of a contractual nature, but rather only
claims concerning its rights under the Treaty. The respondent however, is of the
opinion that the claims are contractual in nature.”

The construction of the Bilateral Investment Treaty

90.

1s

The rules on Treaty interpretation are set out in the Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties 1969. Section 3 of the Convention is headed “Jnterpretation of
Treaties”. Article 31 paragraph | states:

“1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of
its object and purpose.

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which
establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the
parties so intended.”

Article 32 is headed “Supplementary means of interpretation”. It states:
“Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including the
preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to

confirm the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to determine the
meaning when the interpretation according to article 31:

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or

(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable”.

Mr Cran submitted that the last sentence inaccurately characterised the position of Ecuador. It is

accurate so far as the “fork in the road” argument on jurisdiction is concerned and that appears to be the point
the Tribunal is making here.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Al ved at

91.

92.

93.

94,

6

It is clear that, were it not for the fact that the current dispute concerned the question
of refunds of a tax, ie. VAT, the dispute between the parties would fall within Article
VI.1(a) and (c) of the BIT. That is because it is common ground that the
Participation Contract falls within the phrase “investment agreement” as used in
Article VI.1(a)’° and OEPC claims that Ecuador has breached rights conferred or
created by the BIT with respect to an “investment”, within Article VI.1(c) of the BIT.
But the dispute does involve “matters of taxation”. So the question is whether, on
the correct construction of Article X, in particular, Article X.2, it takes the present
dispute outside the scope of the BIT and therefore the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

In my view the Parties to the BIT intended that, generally, all matters of taxation
should be outside the scope of the BIT. | think that this is clear from the way Article
X.1 is phrased and the opening words of Article X.2. _ By Article X.1 each State
Party undertakes to the other, “with respect to its tax policies...to strive to accord
fairness and equity in the treatment of investment of nationals and companies of the
other party”. If any obligation is imposed between the State Parties to the BIT, the
obligation is to “strive” in respect of “tax policies”. It may be that if one State
party does not so strive, it would be in breach of an obligation to the other Party.
Whether Article X.1 also imposes an obligation on a State Party the breach of which
can give rights to an investor does not matter for the present case. This is because
OEPC accepts that Article X.1 would not give it any rights in addition to those set out
in Articles II and III. Nor does OEPC attempt to found the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on
the terms of Article X.1.

But although each State Party agrees with the other to “strive” with respect to its “tax
policies”, Article X.2 expressly states that “nevertheless, the provisions of this
Treaty, and in particular Articles VI and VII, shall apply to matters of taxation only
with respect to the following...”. To my mind that wording makes it clear that, apart
from matters of taxation that come within the three identified exceptions, all matters
of taxation are outside the ambit of the BIT.’” The Submittal Letter of the Secretary
of State to President Clinton explains that this general exclusion is based on the
assumption that tax matters are properly covered in bilateral tax treaties between
States. That explanation seems plausible. Therefore, in my view, unless a particular
“matter of taxation” comes within the ambit of Article X.2 (a), (b) or (c), then the
dispute resolution provisions of the BIT in Article VI cannot apply to any dispute that
arises between a State and an investor in relation to that “matter of taxation”.

To the extent that the Tribunal appeared to conclude that matters of taxation were
within the scope of the BIT on some broader basis, I must respectfully disagree.”*
In my view the wording of Article X.2 is clear and does not permit any more general
admission of tax matters within the scope of the BIT.

“Investment agreement” is not defined in either Article I or Article VI of the BIT, but Ecuador accepts

that it must include the Participation Contract.
7

At the start of the hearing before me, OEPC intended to argue that the opening words of Article X.2, on

their true construction, were limited to matters of “direct” taxation. On the third day of the hearing Mr
Greenwood announced that the argument would not be pursued. He was plainly right to make that concession.

8B

This appears to be the suggestion in paragraph 68 of the award.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

95.

96.

97.

98.

9

So, what is the ambit of the three exceptions in Article X.2? I note that the
Submittal Letter explains why these exceptions are put in.” The letter states:

“These three areas are important for investors, and two of the three —
expropriatory ion and tax provisi d in an i
agreement or authorisation — are not typically addressed in tax treaties”.

This suggests that there must be some link between investor and/or the investment
(including an investment agreement) and taxation.

Because of the specific reference to the dispute resolution aspects of the BIT in the
opening words of Article X.2 , (ie. the words “and in particular Articles VI and
Vil...”), it is clear that the framers of the BIT contemplated that the matters
comprised in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) could be the subject of disputes between a
State and an investor. Disputes might need to be resolved by one or other of the
mechanisms set out in Article VI or those of Article VII; hence the reference to those
Articles in particular. However, in my view Article X.2 is not concerned solely
with defining three particular types of dispute involving matters of taxation that can
be resolved using the mechanisms of Articles VI and VII. On its correct construction,
if a “matter of taxation” falls within the scope of paragraphs (a), (b) or (c), then the
whole Treaty applies to that “matter of taxation”. The opening words of Article X.2
say “..the provisions of this Treaty...”. Those words are clear and so must be given
their ordinary meaning. Moreover, this interpretation accords with the object of the
BIT. The Treaty sets out rules on how the Contracting Parties will treat investors and
their investments. Article X.2 accepts that, within a limited and defined scope,
“matters of taxation” will affect both investors and investments and so need to be
within the BIT provisions. Therefore it is logical that, to the extent of the scope
defined in Article X.2, the Contracting Parties should agree that all the rules set out
in the BIT, including those in Articles II and III, should apply to such “matters of
taxation” as are covered by Article X.2(a), (b) and (c).

It follows that I cannot accept the construction of Article X.2 that Mr Cran advanced
with skilful arguments in his reply. There is no need to rewrite the opening part of
Article X.2._ I therefore accept Mr Greenwood’s “gateway” argument: ie. that once
a claim comes within the ambit of Article X.2 (a), (b) or (c), that means that “..the
provisions of this Treaty, and in particular Articles VI and VII, shall apply....”,
which includes the provisions of Article II.

The next question, therefore, is what is embraced by the phrase “...matters of
taxation only with respect to....(c) the observance and enforcement of terms of an
investment agreement....as referred to in Article VI. 1(a)...."? First, as is now
correctly conceded by OEPC, “matters of taxation” must include all types of
taxation. That phrase is not limited to “direct” taxation only. Secondly, in my view
the words “matters of taxation” convey the sense of “affairs of taxation” and are
broad in their scope, except to the extent qualified by the content of paragraphs (a),
(b) and (c) of Article X.2.__ Thirdly, the effect of the words “only with respect to”
demonstrate that there has to be a link between a matter (or affair) of taxation and “the
observance and enforcement of terms of an investment agreement”. To my mind

Neither side suggested that these statements were incorrect; or that I could not take them into account in

interpreting Article X.2.

MR JUSTICE AIKENS

vel

99.

100.

101.

102.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
iu it

“with respect to” indicates that the link can be both direct and indirect. The words
“with respect to” in their ordinary meaning connote “as concerns”, or “with reference
to”, or “in connection with” and so are broad in effect.

Fourthly, the matters of taxation must concern, or have reference to, either “the
observance...of terms of an investment agreement” or “the....enforcement of terms
of an investment agreement”. So the relevant matter of taxation must concer either
the performance (“observance”) of terms of the investment agreement; or the
compulsion of the performance (“enforcement”) of terms of the investment
agreement. A test of whether something comes within paragraph (c) could be: does
a matter of taxation touch upon or affect the performance of terms of the investment
agreement or does a matter of taxation touch upon or affect enforcement of terms of
the investment agreement?

That leads on to the next question: what is meant by “terms” of an investment
agreement? Mr Cran argued that “terms” should be given its ordinary meaning and
that indicated either the express or implied terms of the investment agreement
concerned. Mr Greenwood argued for a broader interpretation. He submitted that, as
the BIT was based on the USA’s model BIT, it was intended for use with States
having both civil law and common law systems. So “terms” should not be given the
literal meaning that a common lawyer would give it. He submitted that the word
would embrace the whole contractual bargain, including the general principle of civil
law that the parties must deal with one another in good faith in relation to the
performance of the agreement.

I agree with Mr Greenwood’s interpretation of the word “terms”. The model BIT
was not drafted with either common law or civil law systems in mind. Common
lawyers often analyse contractual obligations in terms of express or implied terms of
the contract. Other systems of law are not so schematic. Parties to a contract may
owe duties to one another according to the general law to be applied. So, if, under the
investment agreement in question, the contractual bargain means that parties are
under an obligation of good faith or fair dealing according to the applicable law and
if, under the applicable law that obligation should be performed and is capable of
enforcement, then it is logical to call that obligation a “term” of the investment
agreement. In short, I think that, on its proper interpretation, the phrase “terms of
the investment agreement” means “the contractual bargain embracing all the parties’
obligations pursuant to the investment agreement”.

Lastly, the words “...an investment agreement...as referred to in Article VI.1.(a)...””
at the end of Article X.2(c) are there to identify the type of investment agreement with
which Article X.2(c) is concerned. “/nvestment Agreement” is not defined in Article
I of the BIT or anywhere else in the Treaty. But for the purposes of Article VI, an
“investment agreement” has to be one that is between a State Party and a national or
company of the other State Party. Article X.2(c) is limited in its effect to such types
of investment agreements.

Application of the interpretation of Article X.2 of the BIT to this case

MRJUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

I Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

Under the Contract, OEPC was obliged to carry out “on its own account and risk”
the activities of oil exploitation in Block 15.®° It was obliged, on its own account
and risk, to provide the necessary investments for production activities within Block
15. This meant, if necessary, building all necessary civil works and oil facilities to
produce and measure the oil."' OEPC also had to pay such taxes as might be required
by the laws and regulations of Ecuador.” —_ In return OEPC obtained a “Contractor
Participation” which was calculated on the basis set out in Clause 8.1, including the
so — called Factor X.

It is clear from the wording of Clause 8.6 of the Contract that the parties had
considered the “economy of this Participation Contract”, because that clause
prescribes what is to happen if one of the events identified in the clause has an impact
on “the economy of this Participation Contract”. One of the events identified is the
collection of Value Added Tax on any imports of equipment, machinery, materials
and other consumable supplies that OEPC would have to undertake. The question of
what VAT would be paid on those items had been raised by OEPC in the course of
the negotiations for the Participating Contract. The SRI had given its answer in the
“Consulta” dated 5 October 1998, which then formed Annex 16 to the Contract.
Clause 8.6 contemplates that if something happens in relation to VAT on the items
identified in the “Consulta”, then a “correction factor shall be included in the
participation percentages, to absorb the increase or decrease of the economic burden,
in accordance with Annex XIV".®

The precise way in which the mechanism in Clause 8.6 is triggered in relation to VAT
on imports is not relevant to my decision. But it is relevant that there is a contractual
provision to make corrections if tax changes have an impact on the “economy” of the
contract. That is because Clause 8.6 assumes and is intended to give effect to the
underlying understanding of the parties as to what the proper “economy” of the
Contract must be. Clause 8.6 creates an express obligation to make a correction
factor if the identified events have an impact on the Contract’s proper “economy”.

Clause 11.11 of the Contract also stipulates for a similar type of obligation to make a
correction factor if there is an unforeseen modification in the tax regime which has an
impact on the economy of the Contract. Again that presumes that the parties had
considered and decided on what was “the economy” of the Contract.

The dispute between Ecuador and OEPC that was before the Tribunal was whether,
in the circumstances, Ecuador’s decision that OEPC was not entitled to have a refund
of VAT was a breach of Ecuador’s obligations under Articles II and III of the BIT.
That dispute involved a matter of taxation, ie. the VAT payments. But in my view,
the dispute also involved a matter of taxation that “had reference to” the
“performance” of the “obligations of the Contract.”

I have reached this conclusion for three particular reasons. First, the matter of the
right to a VAT refund or not had reference to the obligations of OEPC to do all that
was necessary to exploit the oil in Block 15, including the obligation to build all

Clause 4.2 of the Participation Contract.

Clauses 5.1.5 and 5.1.6 of the Participation Contract.

Clause 5.1.17 of the Participation Contract.

Annex XIV sets out an elaborate formula for making an adjustment to take account of VAT on imports.

‘MR JUSTICE AIKEN:
Approved Judgment

109.

iS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

systems needed for that exploitation, because the VAT was paid in respect of
purchases made in pursuance of that obligation of OEPC. Secondly, the question of
a VAT refund had reference to the performance of OEPC’s contractual obligation to
pay all taxes according to Ecuador’s laws. The dispute was whether that contractual
obligation was concluded on the assumption or understanding that there would be a
refund of VAT paid. Thirdly, the VAT refund question had reference to the
underlying assumptions of the parties as to the “economy” of the Contract which
formed the basis of the bargain contained in the Contract’s terms: was the assumption
that VAT would be repaid or not? The underlying assumptions of the parties as to
the “economy” of the contract was fundamental to how the Contract terms were to be
observed and enforced.

Mr Cran argued that the consequence of this conclusion was that in cases arising
under Article X.2 (c) of the BIT, it would inevitably mean that a tribunal dealing with
a dispute would have to investigate the merits before it could decide whether it had
jurisdiction. | That may be so in some cases. But that is not so- unusual in
arbitrations. Sometimes the principal issue on the merits is whether a contract has
been formed; and the putative contract has an arbitration clause as one of its terms.
One party says the contract was valid and binding; the other says not. If the matter
is considered by an arbitral tribunal then its jurisdiction will depend on whether the
contract was indeed valid and binding. So, of necessity the tribunal will have to go
into the merits in order to decide its jurisdiction. That situation is expressly
contemplated by section 67(1)(b) of the 1996 Act.

Conclusion on Ecuador’s section 67 challenge

110.

111.

For these reasons, I conclude that the Tribunal was correct in holding that it had
jurisdiction to consider the dispute between OEPC and Ecuador on whether, in the
circumstances, Ecuador had been in breach of its obligations under Article II of the
BIT. For, once the dispute came within Article X.2(c), the “gateway” to the rest of
the BIT, including Articles VI.1 (c) and the obligations of Article II, is opened. All
the provisions of the BIT, and in particular Articles VI and VII, will apply and can be
relied upon by OEPC.

I must deal specifically with Mr Cran’s point, forcefully argued, that, before the
Tribunal, OEPC did not rely on Article X.2(c) as a foundation of the arbitrators’
jurisdiction. I accept that this appears to be the case from the material I have been
shown. However the matter is made complicated by the fact that OEPC had to deal
at the same time with two jurisdictional objections by Ecuador. The first was the
“fork in the road” argument of Ecuador. Ecuador argued that the claims of OEPC
before the Quito courts related to an investment agreement between Ecuador (via
Petroecuador) and OEPC and so fell within the terms of Article VI.1(a) of the BIT.
Ecuador submitted that as OEPC had exercised its right under Article VI.2(a) of the
BIT to raise its claim before the Quito courts, then OEPC could not raise the same
claim against Ecuador under the BIT arbitration procedure, because that would raise
the same claim as that before the Quito courts. Therefore OEPC was precluded from

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MI JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117,

8s

ve

pursuing its claim under the BIT by virtue of the terms of Article VI.3: in short,
OEPC had taken a “fork in the road”.

In the written and oral submissions on the question of jurisdiction, OEPC was at
pains to emphasise that its claim in the BIT arbitration was not a claim under the
investment agreement, but was a claim for a breach of a right conferred on OEPC by
the BIT in respect of its investment, within Article VI.1(c) of the BIT.5 | suspect
that is why OEPC did not put forward a positive case that, for its claim under the
BIT, OEPC could rely on Article X.2(c) to found the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

But the fact that OEPC did not put forward the particular plea that there was
jurisdiction under Article X.2(c) but, instead, there was a more general basis for it,
did not preclude the Tribunal from holding, as it did, that it had jurisdiction by virtue
of Article X.2(c). It was, after all, Ecuador’s own case that only Article X.2(c)
might apply but it argued that, on the proper interpretation of that provision and the
facts, the dispute did not fall within it. The Tribunal disagreed with Ecuador’s
construction of Article X.2(c) and held it had jurisdiction.

Before me, OEPC specifically based its jurisdiction case on Article X.2(c). Mr Cran
did not argue that OEPC were debarred from putting that case forward now. He
could not do so.

For these reasons the challenge of Ecuador to the award based on section 67 of the
Act must be dismissed.

Ecuador’s section 68 challenge

In its section 68 application, Ecuador focuses on particular parts of the award in
which the Tribunal: (i) makes statements about SRI Resolutions and their effect;
(ii) makes orders that OEPC should desist from carrying on its claims against the SRI
in the Ecuador courts; and (iii) declares that those proceedings shall have no legal
effect. Ecuador submits that in making these pronouncements and orders, there
was a serious irregularity affecting the tribunal and the award, because the tribunal
exceeded its powers (other than by exceeding its substantive jurisdiction), contrary to
section 68(2)(b) of the Act.

Ecuador submits that these pronouncements and orders of the Tribunal purport to
interfere with the sovereign, internal affairs of Ecuador. They therefore constitute a
serious irregularity affecting the tribunal or the award because the tribunal has no
powers to interfere with the internal affairs of Ecuador. This interference has caused
or will cause a substantial injustice to Ecuador. Mr Bethlehem QC, who argued this
point for Ecuador, emphasises that the bona fides of the Tribunal is not being
questioned or challenged.

Article VI.3(a) states: “3(a) Provided that the national or company concerned has not submitted the

dispute for resolution under paragraph 2(a) or (b)....” the arbitration procedure set out in Article V1.3 can be
used to settle disputes within the scope of Article VI.1 of the BIT.

86

This is reflected in the Tribunal’s summary of the arguments on this point in paragraphs 38 to 42 of the
award.
Paragraph 202 last sentence; paragraph 209 last sentence, items (ii) and (iii) and Decisions paragraphs

6 and 10 (ii) and (iii) of the award.

MR

118.

119.

120.

87

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

The parts of the award that are criticised are all in Section VII, which is headed
“Remedies”. The first sub — heading is “A. Compensation Due”. Having stated its
conclusion that Ecuador was in breach of its treaty obligations under Articles II.1 and
11.3, the Tribunal says that those breaches “...have a causal link to four separate but
related situations in which the rights of the Claimant have been affected and damage
has ensued”. The award then continues, in paragraph 202:

“The first situation concerns the amounts refunded under the Granting
Resolutions. The Respondents cannot order the Claimants to return the amount
of VAT refunded by the Granting Resolutions as OEPC had a right to such
refunds because no alternative mechanism was included in the Contract as the
SRI believed. The Tribunal accordingly holds that the Claimant is entitled to
retain the amounts so refunded and that the SRI Denying Resolutions requiring
the return of those amounts are without legal effect”.

In paragraph 209 of the award, the Tribunal notes again that OEPC has pursued its
claims in Ecuador’s courts “...separate from the claims brought to this Tribunal for
breaches of Treaty rights”. The Tribunal thought that there might be a risk of double
recovery by OEPC. In order to forestall that, the Tribunal said, in the last sentence
of paragraph 209 that:

“\..the Tribunal: (i) holds that OEPC shall not benefit from any additional
recovery; (ii) directs the Claimant to cease and desist from any local court
actions, administrative proceedings or other actions seeking refund of any VAT
paid through December 31, 2003; and (iii) holds that any and all such actions
and proceedings shall have no legal effect”.

Those conclusions and orders are reflected in the terms of paragraphs 6 and 10 of the
Decision of the Tribunal to which I have already referred.

The steps in Mr Bethlehem’s arguments are as follows: first, it is a basic principle of
public international law that international tribunals are not competent to declare the
internal validity of national rules or procedures unless States expressly give a tribunal
the competence to do so. This is because the international legal order must respect the
reserved domain of domestic jurisdiction.*” Secondly, States are free to determine
the manner in which they will comply with their international obligations.** Thirdly,
it is the task of an international tribunal such as the tribunal in the present case, which
was acting under UNCITRAL Rules, to determine the rights and obligations of
Ecuador and OEPC in accordance with the terms of the BIT. That involves
determining the rights and obligations of the parties to the arbitration as a matter of
international law. Fourthly, it is accepted that the tribunal was competent to order
injunctive relief or specific performance against a party to the arbitration. But the
tribunal cannot exercise such powers if, in doing so, the effect of these orders is to
purport to determine the internal validity and legal effect of measures of national law
and to make orders that are directed at internal Ecuadorian legal procedures. _ Fifthly,
the orders made in paragraphs 6 and 10 of the Decision violate Ecuador’s right, in
international law, to determine how it will fulfil its international law obligations
towards OEPC under the BIT, as the tribunal have determined. Therefore, sixthly,

See eg: Brownlie, Principles of Public International Law (6" Ed.2003) at page 39.
See eg: Oppenheim’s International Law (9" Ed.1992, by Jennings and Watts) at ‘para 21 pp 82-3.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

121.

ve

the tribunal exceeded its powers under international law. In doing so it committed a
“serious irregularity” within section 68. Lastly, this serious irregularity has
caused and will cause “substantial injustice” to Ecuador, because of the effect of
the orders made, by virtue of their interference with the internal affairs of Ecuador.

Mr Greenwood submits, for OEPC, that the scope of the tribunal’s powers to grant
remedies is governed by English law, not international law. He submits that the
parties have not expressly agreed what powers the tribunal will have to grant remedies
and there is nothing in the UNCITRAL Rules to define the scope of their powers.
Therefore the matter is governed by section 48 of the Arbitration Act 1996. It is
clear, he submits, that the tribunal has the power to grant declarations (section
48(3)), and also injunctions (section 48(5)). There is no general rule of public
international law which prevents the tribunal from making the orders it has done in
this case. Therefore the tribunal acted within its powers. Furthermore, there is no
substantial injustice to Ecuador, because any orders made by the tribunal of a positive
nature were made against OEPC, not Ecuador.

Discussion and conclusion.

122.

123.

124.

In its judgment on the “justiciability” issue, the Court of Appeal concluded that, at
least from the moment when an investor submits a dispute with a State Party to
arbitration under Article VI of the BIT, the BIT confers or creates rights in
international law in favour of the investor.” The tribunal was therefore dealing with
the rights of OEPC in international law and the obligations that Ecuador owed to
OEPC as a matter of international law. It must follow, in my view, that if the
tribunal concluded that international law rights of OEPC had been violated by
Ecuador, or the latter was in breach of its international law obligations, then the
tribunal will have to consider what remedies are available in international law to
repair any damage caused to OEPC by Ecuador’s breach of OEPC’s international law

rights.

In the absence of any express agreement between the parties to the arbitration in
which the international law rights and obligations of the parties are to be determined,
the remedies that the tribunal can grant must be those that are generally available to
deal with breaches of international law as determined by the tribunal. _A tribunal
must be entitled to make a declaratory judgment of the rights and obligations of the
parties in international law. It has been described as a power that is “necessarily
inherent in the tribunal” that is dealing with rights and obligations under international
law.” That is the “implicit foundation” of an award of monetary damages. There
can also be no doubt that a tribunal that has the power to determine rights and
obligations in international law has the power to award monetary compensation to a
party to the proceedings before the tribunal.”!

In Section VII of the award, at paragraph 201, the tribunal states that the breaches of
the BIT by Ecuador, (which were listed in the previous paragraph), “have a causal
link to four separate but related situations in which the rights of the Claimant have
been affected and damage has ensued”. The arbitrators deal with the first situation in

[2005] 1 WLR 70 at 83 para 19.
Collier & Lowe: The Settlement of Disputes in International Law (1999) page 250.
Ibid. page 252

RSI

I
Approved Judgment

125.

126.

127.

128.

Ot

IKE! Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

paragraph 202 of the award. I have already set out that paragraph. The second
sentence of paragraph 202 refers to the fact that, in the SRI’s Resolution 234, it had
ordered that the appropriate unit of the SRI should begin legal actions with the
intention of collecting the VAT that had been reimbursed to OEPC.” As I read that
sentence in paragraph 202, the tribunal is declaring the rights of OEPC, as a matter
of international law. That is how I read the third and fourth sentences also. The
tribunal is declaring that the statements in SRI Resolutions ordering the return to the
SRI of VAT that has been reimbursed to OEPC are in breach of OEPC’s international
law rights. It must be within the powers of the tribunal to declare that the statements
by the SRI are in breach of international law, and so, as a matter of international law,
“are without legal effect”.

In paragraph 209 of the award, the tribunal is dealing with the consequences of its
order that OEPC is entitled to monetary compensation from Ecuador, as set out in
paragraph 207. In paragraph 209, which I have also set out above, the tribunal
notes that OEPC has made claims in the Ecuadorian courts for refunds of VAT and so
the two sets of claims (ie under the BIT and in the Courts) might give rise to the
possibility of double recovery. It seems to me that the three numbered orders of the
tribunal in the last sentence of paragraph 209 are consequential declarations that
follow from the tribunal’s decision that OEPC is entitled to monetary compensation
from Ecuador for breaches of the BIT. In principle, it seems to me, the tribunal
must have the power to make orders that are intended to give proper effect to its
primary order granting OEPC monetary compensation.

The first numbered order is directed at OEPC. It is not directed at Ecuador. It is not
declaring “the internal invalidity”of any rule of Ecuador’s national laws. Nor is it
directing Ecuador to perform its international law obligations in any particular way.
The same is true of the second numbered order. In fact, I was told by Mr Greenwood
that OEPC has withdrawn all but one of the proceedings in Ecuador and would be
ending the last one soon.

The third numbered order is also directed at OEPC. _In the light of the other two
orders it is not strictly necessary. But, as I read it, the order is making no declaration
on the effect or validity of any national law of Ecuador; nor is it ordering Ecuador to
perform its international law obligations in any particular way. The only effect of
the order is to make a declaration as regards OEPC’s attempts to make claims in the
Ecuadorian courts. It is an order which is consequential to the order granting OEPC
monetary compensation, in order to ensure that OEPC does not obtain a double

recovery.

The same analysis applies to Decisions 6 and 10 of the award. Therefore I conclude
that the tribunal has not acted in excess of its powers in the statements identified by
Ecuador. _ It has certainly not been in breach of the principles of public international
law to which Mr Bethlehem referred. Moreover, even if the third order in Decision
10 of the Award might possibly be regarded as made in excess of the tribunal’s
powers, that order cannot possibly be said to have caused “substantial injustice” to
Ecuador. On the contrary, the order, together with all the others that are criticised,
were made so as to protect Ecuador. They cause Ecuador no injustice whatsoever.

See para 7(z) and Resolution 2: EO2/vol 3/Tab 12/pages 841 and 842.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

129.

J.

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.

3
94

Therefore I must dismiss Ecuador’s section 68 application.

OEPC’s contingent section 67 application concerning the tribunal’s decision on
OEPC’s “expropriation” claim.

As I have concluded that both of Ecuador’s applications must fail, OEPC’s
contingent application does not arise for decision. The matter was argued in detail,
however, so I will deal with it very briefly.

OEPC’s case is that, in the arbitration, it submitted that the VAT refunds to which
OEPC was entitled were part of its “investment”, within Article I of the BIT. OEPC
argued that Ecuador expropriated that part of OEPC’s investment by “unlawfully,
arbitrarily,  discriminatorily and retroactively taking OEPC’s rights to VAT
refunds”,”® so that Ecuador was in breach of its treaty obligations under Article III of

the BIT.
In the award, at paragraph 80, the tribunal stated:

“A claim of expropriation should normally be considered in the context of
the merits of a case. However, it is so evident that there is no
expropriation in this case that the Tribunal will deal with this claim as a
question of admissibility”.

Mr Greenwood submits that the tribunal dealt with the expropriation issue as a matter
of its jurisdiction and concluded that it did not have jurisdiction to consider that claim.
He says that this is clear from the terms of the award dealing with this aspect of the
case at paragraphs 78 to 92. He submits that the wording of the award in this section
is such that it is not an award on the merits of OEPC’s expropriation claim. Mr
Greenwood notes that under Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules,” a tribunal has
power to deal with jurisdiction arguments, but does not have power to deal with the
merits summarily. He submits that, in this award on public international law issues,
the tribunal’s characterisation of the expropriation claim being “inadmissible” is an
indication that it is dealing with the matter as a question of jurisdiction. This is
because, in international law, issues of jurisdiction and inadmissibility are both
treated as pre — merits questions.

Mr Cran took me through the parties’ written submissions on the issues of jurisdiction
and the merits which were lodged before the decision of the tribunal to deal with the
jurisdiction and merits issues at one hearing.°* At the time Ecuador’s Jurisdictional
Objections were submitted on 12 September 2003, it is unclear whether Ecuador was
arguing that the tribunal had no jurisdiction to decide the “expropriation” claim
because it fell outside Article X.2 of the BIT, or whether Ecuador was submitting that
the tribunal should reject jurisdiction over that claim because it was hopeless on the
merits.” However, when Ecuador submitted its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and

The phraseology quoted in para 81 of the award.
This provides: “dn general, the arbitral tribunal should rule on a plea concerning its jurisdiction as a

preliminary question. However, the arbitral tribunal may proceed with the arbitration and rule on such a plea
in their final award”

95
96

401.

That decision was made on 26 November 2003.
See: Jurisdictional Objections of Respondent Republic of Ecuador para 33: EO2/vol 2/Tab 6/page

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MIR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

135.

136.

137.

138.

Admissibility, on 27 October 2003, it stated, at paragraphs 159 and 161, under

Heading IV, “Claimant’s Expropriation Claim is Inadmissible”: ”

“159. Ecuador agrees with Claimant that Article X.2 does not exclude
expropriation claims with respect to tax matters. Therefore, if there were
no fork in the road provision, the Tribunal would have jurisdiction over a
proper expropriation claim. However, as Ecuador has pointed out, what
Claimant has alleged could not be an expropriation within the meaning of
the Treaty or international law, even assuming all of Claimant’s factual
allegations in its Statement of Claim were true (as is not the case).

161. In any event, Ecuador freely agrees that tribunals normally do
not reject claims on grounds of admissibility, prior to the airing of the
factual issues. Nevertheless, it is clear that in unusual circumstances,
tribunals have dismissed claims on a preliminary basis on grounds that the
claimed facts could not amount to a violation of the Treaty provisions
invoked.”

It is thus clear that, by the time of the hearing on jurisdiction and the merits, Ecuador
had conceded that the tribunal had jurisdiction to deal with OEPC’s expropriation
claim. However, Ecuador was submitting that the expropriation claim was hopeless
as a matter of fact and law.

It is, in my view, equally clear that tribunal was dealing with the merits of the
expropriation claim in paragraphs 78 — 92 of the award. The phraseology of
paragraphs 86 to 89 make this plain. The tribunal decided that, because it was “so
evident that there is no expropriation in this case”, therefore it should deal with this
claim as a matter of “admissibility”. English lawyers may find that a curious word
to use in the circumstances. But that does not matter. In my view it is evident,
looking at the substance of paragraphs 78 — 92 of the award, that the tribunal was
making an award on the merits of the expropriation claim. It did not decide it had no
jurisdiction to entertain the claim.

Accordingly, there is no basis on which OEPC can mount an application to challenge
this part of the award under section 67. | OEPC wanted the tribunal to consider the
expropriation claim on its merits. In effect it did so, and it dismissed the claim.

Conclusions.
I will summarise my conclusions:

i) The tribunal had jurisdiction to determine OEPC’s claims based on Ecuador’s
alleged breaches of Article II of the BIT. The dispute fell within the terms of
Article X.2.(c) of the BIT. Therefore Ecuador’s application challenging the
jurisdiction of the tribunal under section 67 of the Arbitration Act 1996 must
fail.

El2/vol6/Tab 41/page 2006.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MIR SUSTICE AIKENS:
Approved Judgment

ii)

iii)

Ecuador’s application under section 68 of the Act also fails. The tribunal did
not exceed its powers (within the terms of section 68(2)(b)). In any event,
Ecuador has been caused no “substantial injustice” even if the tribunal did

exceed its powers.

If it had been necessary to decide the issue, OEPC’s jurisdictional challenge
(under section 67) to the tribunal’s conclusion on the expropriation claim
would have failed. Ecuador had conceded jurisdiction and the tribunal’s
award on this claim dismissed it on the merits.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

 

APPENDIX 1:

Wording of the relevant parts of the Letter of Submittal to the President of the
USA and the relevant Articles of the Treaty between the United States of
America and the Republic of Ecuador

Submittal Letter.
“Investment

The Treaty's definition of investment is broad, recognizing that
investment can take a wide variety of forms. It covers
investments that are owned or controlled by nationals or
companies of one of the Treaty partners in the territory of the
other. Investments can be made either directly or indirectly
through one or more subsidiaries, including those of third
countries. Control is not specifically defined in the Treaty.
Ownership of over 50 percent of the voting stock of a company
would normally convey control, but in many cases the
requirement could be satisfied by less than that proportion.

The definition provides a non-exclusive list of assets, claims
and rights that constitute investment. These include both
tangible and intangible property, interests in a company or its
assets, "a claim to money or performance having economic
value, and associated with an investment," intellectual property
rights, and any right conferred by law or contract (such as
government-issued licenses and permits). The requirement that
a "claim to money" be associated with an investment excludes
claims arising solely from trade transactions, such as a simple
movement of goods across a border, from being considered
investments covered by the Treaty.

Under paragraph 2 of Article I, either country may deny the
benefits of the Treaty to investments by companies established
in the other that are owned or controlled by nationals of a third
country if 1) the company is a mere shell, without substantial
business activities in the home country, or 2) the third country
is one with which the denying Party does not maintain normal
economic relations. For example, at this time the United States
does not maintain normal economic relations with, interalia,
Cuba or Libya.

Paragraph 3 confirms that any alternation in the form in which
as asset is invested or reinvested shall not affect its character as
investment. For example, a change in the corporate form of an
investment will not deprive it of protection under the Treaty.”

“Article X (Tax Policies)

MI Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

The Treaty exhorts both countries to provide fair and equitable
treatment to investors with respect to tax policies. However, tax
matters are generally excluded from the coverage of the
prototype BIT, based on the assumption that tax matter are
properly covered in bilateral tax treaties.

The Treaty, and particularly the dispute settlement provisions,
do apply to tax matters in three areas, to the extent they are not
subject to the dispute settlement provisions of a tax treaty, or, if
so subject, have been raised under a tax treaty's dispute
settlement procedures and are not resolved in a reasonable
period of time.

The three areas where the Treaty could apply to tax matters are
expropriation (Article III), transfers (Article IV) and the
observance and enforcement of terms of an investment
agreement or authorization (Article VI (1) (a) or (b)). These
three areas are important for investors, and two of the three--
expropriatory taxation and tax provisions contained in an
investment agreement or authorization--are not typically
addressed in tax treaties.”

The Treaty Wording:
“TREATY BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
AND THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
CONCERNING THE ENCOURAGEMENT
AND RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF INVESTMENT

The United States of America and the Republic of Ecuador
(hereinafter the "Parties");

Desiring to promote greater economic cooperation between
them, with respect to investment by nationals and companies of
one Party in the territory of the other Party;

Recognizing that agreement upon the treatment to be accorded
such investment will stimulate the flow of private capital and
the economic development of the Parties;

Agreeing that fair and equitable treatment of investment is
desirable in order to maintain a stable framework for
investment and maximum effective utilization of economic
resources;

MIR JUSTICE AIKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment

ent

Recognizing that the development of economic and business
ties can contribute to the well-being of workers in both Parties
and promote respect for internationally recognized worker
rights; and

Having resolved to conclude a Treaty concerning the
and reciprocal p ion of i

Have agreed as follows:

ARTICLE I

1. For the purposes of this Treaty,

(a) "investment" means every kind of investment in the territory
of one Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by
nationals or companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt,
and service and investment contracts; and includes:

(i) tangible and intangible property, including rights, such as
mortgages, liens and pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a
company or interests in the assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having
economic value, and associated with an investment;

(iv) intellectual property which includes, inter alia, rights
relating to:

literary and artistic works, including sound recordings;
inventions in all fields of human endeavor;

industrial designs;

semiconductor mask works;

trade secrets, know-how, and confidential business information;
and

trademarks, service marks, and trade names; and

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and
permits pursuant to law;

(d) "return" means an amount derived from or associated with
an investment, including profit; dividend; interest; capital gain;

MR JUSTICE AIKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment

royalty payment; management, technical assistance or other
fee; or returns in kind; ”...............

“ARTICLE II

1. Each Party shall permit and treat investment, and activities
associated therewith, on a basis no less favorable than that
ded in like situations to in or iated activities
of its own nationals or companies, or of nationals or
of any third country, whichever is the most favorable, subject
to the right of each Party to make or maintain exceptions falling
within one of the sectors or matters listed in the Protocol to this
Treaty. Each Party agrees to notify the other Party before or on
the date of entry into force of this Treaty of all such laws and
regulations of which it is aware concerning the sectors or
matters listed in the Protocol. Moreover, each Party agrees to
notify the other of any future exception with respect to the
sectors or matters listed in the Protocol, and to limit such
exceptions to a minimum. Any future exception by either Party
shall not apply to investment existing in that sector or matter at
the time the exception becomes effective. The treatment
accorded pursuant to any exceptions shall, unless specified
otherwise in the Protocol, be not less favorable than that
accorded in like situations to investments and associated
activities of nationals or companies of any third country.

2. (a) Nothing in this Treaty shall be construed to prevent a
Party from maintaining or establishing a state enterprise.

(b) Each Party shall ensure that any state enterprise that it
maintains or establishes acts in a manner that is not inconsistent
with the Party's obligations under this Treaty wherever such
enterprise exercises any regulatory, administrative or other
governmental authority that the Party has delegated to it, such
as the power to expropriate, grant licenses, approve commercial
transactions, or impose quotas, fees or other charges.

(c) Each Party shall ensure that any state enterprise that it
maintains or establishes accords the better of national or most
favored nation treatment in the sale of its goods or services in
the Party's territory.

3. (a) Investment shall at all times be accorded fair and
equitable treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security and
shall in no case be accorded treatment less than that required by
international law.

(b) Neither Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or
discriminatory measures the management, operation,

MIR JUSTICE ALIKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment

maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion, or
disposal of investments. For purposes of dispute resolution
under Articles VI and VII, a measure may be arbitrary or
discriminatory notwithstanding the fact that a party has had or
has exercised the opportunity to review such measure in the
courts or administrative tribunals of a Party.

(c) Each Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered
into with regard to investments.

6. Neither Party shall impose performance requirements as a
condition of establishment, expansion or maintenance of
investments, which require or enforce commitments to export
goods produced, or which specify that goods or services must
be purchased locally, or which impose any other similar
requirements.”

“ARTICLE II

1. Investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized either
directly or indirectly through measures tantamount to
expropriation or nationalization ("expropriation") except: for a
public purpose; in a nondiscriminatory manner; upon payment
of prompt, adequate and effective compensation; and in
accordance with due process of law and the general principles
of treatment provided for in Article 11(3). Compensation shall
be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated
investment immediately before the expropriatory action was
taken or became known, whichever is earlier; be calculated in a
freely usable currency on the basis of the prevailing market rate
of exchange at that time; be paid without delay; include interest
at a commercially reasonable rate from the date of
expropriation; be fully realizable; and be freely transferable.

2. A national or company of either Party that asserts that all or
part of its investment has been expropriated shall have a right
to prompt review by the appropriate judicial or administrative
authorities of the other Party to determine whether any such
expropriation has occurred and, if so, whether such
expropriation, and any associated compensation, conforms to
the principles of international law.

3. Nationals or companies of either Party whose investments
suffer losses in the territory of the other Party owing to war or
other armed conflict, revolution, state of national emergency,
insurrection, civil disturbance or other similar events shall be

MIR JUSTICE AIKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment

accorded treatment by such other Party no less favorable than
that accorded to its own nationals or companies or to nationals
or companies of any third country, whichever is the most
favorable treatment, as regards any measures it adopts in
relation to such losses.”

“ARTICLE IV

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers related to an investment
to be made freely and without delay into and out of its territory.
Such transfers include: (a) returns; (b) compensation pursuant
to Article III; (c) payments arising out of an investment dispute;
(d) payments made under a contract, including amortization of
principal and accrued interest payments made pursuant to a
loan agreement; (e) proceeds from the sale or liquidation of all
or any part of an investment; and (f) additional contributions to
capital for the maintenance or development of an investment.
[*38]

2. Transfers shall be made in a freely usable currency at the
prevailing market rate of exchange on the date of transfer with
respect to spot transactions in the currency to be transferred.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, either
Party may maintain laws and regulations (a) requiring reports
of currency transfer; and (b) imposing income taxes by such
means as a withholding tax applicable to dividends or other
transfers. Furthermore, either Party may protect the rights of
creditors, or ensure the satisfaction of judgments in
adjudicatory proceedings, through the equitable, non-
discriminatory and good faith application of its law.”

“ARTICLE VI

1, For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a
dispute between a Party and a national or company of the other
Party arising out of or relating to (a) an investment agreement
between that Party and such national or company; (b) an
investment authorization granted by that Party's foreign
investment authority to such national or company; or (c) an
alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty
with respect to an investment.

2. In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the
dispute should initially seek a resolution through consultation
and negotiation. If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, the

I Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

national or company concerned may choose to submit the
dispute, under one of the following alternatives, for resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party that is a
party to the dispute; or

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed
dispute-settlement procedures; or

(c) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

3. (a) Provided that the national or company concerned has not
submitted the dispute for resolution under paragraph 2 (a) or (b)
and that six months have elapsed from the date on which the
dispute arose, the national or company concerned may choose
to consent in writing to the submission of the dispute for
settlement by binding arbitration:

(i) to the International Centre for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes ("Centre") established by the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States, done at
Washington, March 18, 1965 ("ICSID Convention"),
provided that the Party is a party to such Convention;
or

(ii) to the Additional Facility of the Centre, if the
Centre is not available; or

(iii) in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law (UNCITRAL); or

(iv) to any other arbitration institution, or in
accordance with any other arbitration rules, as may be
mutually agreed between the parties to the dispute.

(b) Once the national or company concerned has so consented,
either party to the dispute may initiate arbitration in accordance
with the choice so specified in the consent.

4. Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any
investment dispute for settlement by binding arbitration in
accordance with the choice specified in the written consent of
the national or company under paragraph 3. Such consent,
together with the written consent of the national or company
when given under paragraph 3 shall satisfy the requirement for:

(a) written consent of the parties to the dispute for purposes of
Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre)
and for purposes of the Additional Facility Rules; and

MIR JUSTICE AIKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

Approved Judgment
(b) an "agreement in writing" for purposes of Article II of the
United Nations Convention on the Recognition and

Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York,
June 10, 1958 ("New York Convention").

5. Any arbitration under paragraph 3(a)(ii), (iii) or (iv) of this
Article shall be held in a state that is a party to the New York
Convention.

6. Any arbitral award rendered pursuant to this Article shall be
final and binding on the parties to the dispute. Each Party
undertakes to carry out without delay the provisions of any
such award and to provide in its territory for its enforcement.”

“ARTICLE X

1. With respect to its tax policies, each Party should strive to
accord fairness and equity in the treatment of investment of
nationals and companies of the other Party.

2. Nevertheless, the provisions of this Treaty, and in particular
Article VI and VII, shall apply to matters of taxation only with
respect to the following:

(a) expropriation, pursuant to Article III;
(b) transfers, pursuant to Article IV; or

(c) the observance and enforcement of terms of an investment
agreement or authorization as referred to in Article VI (1) (a) or
(b),

to the extent they are not subject to the dispute settlement
provisions of a Convention for the avoidance of double taxation
between the two Parties, or have been raised under such
settlement provisions and are not resolved within a reasonable
period of time.”

APPENDIX 2
The Wording of the Relevant clauses of the Participation Contract

“THREE: INTERPRETATION, LANGUAGE AND
DEFINITIONS OF THIS PARTICIPATION CONTRACT.

ICE Al Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment

3.1 Conventional Interpretation.- The Parties agree that this
Participation Contract shall be interpreted in accordance with
the provisions of Title Xffl, Book Four of the Ecuadorian Civil
Code, and stipulate that the titles and order of Clauses and sub-
clauses are only for the purposes of identification and reference.

3.1.1 Any tolerance of the Parties which refers to lack of
compliance with the obligations established in this Participation
Contract, in no case shall imply a change or alteration of its
stipulations and said event shall not constitute a precedent for
the interpretation of this Participation Contract, nor shall it
constitute a source of any rights in favor of the Party that did
not comply with its obligations.”

3.1.2 In case of discrepancies, the stipulations contained in this
Participation Contract shall prevail over any provisions
contained in other documents, which due to their legal,
technical or financial nature, maybe considered of a secondary
order.

3.1.3 The Parties agree and expressly note that in case of
discrepancies between the provisions of this Participation
Contract and legal provisions and regulations, said legal
provisions and regulations shall prevail; nevertheless, the
provisions of this Participation Contract shall prevail insofar as
they determine, specify, clarify and or apply said legal
provisions and regulations.

3.1.4 Invalidity or impracticability of performance of any
stipulation of this Participation Contract shall not cause nullity,
nor affect the performance and enforceability of the remaining
contractual stipulations in this Participation Contract.”

“4.2 Contractor shall have the obligation and exclusive right to
carry out, on its own account and risk, the activities for
Crude Oil exploitation in the Participation Contract Area,
as well as Additional Exploration of the Participation
Contract and eventual exploitation of Crude Oil in the same
area, including minimum Additional Exploration activities
agreed to in the Amended Contract and ratified in Annex
XV of this Participation Contract.”

MR JUSTICE ALKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment

“5.1.5 On its own account and risk, proceed with the estimated
investments for production activities within the Participation
Contract Area, as well as with all the expenditures needed to
comply with this Participation Contract. Additionally, if
necessary, Contractor shall build all civil works and oil facilities
and, on its own account, acquire and install the equipment to
carry out volumetric measurements and determinations,

ip dj water and sedi! and
other measurements that may be necessary in order to
determine Fiscalized Production.”

“5.1.17 Pay the taxes, contributions and customs duties as may
be required by the laws and regulations of Ecuador. Contractor
shall comply with the requirements established bylaw,

specially with refe to the p ion of declaration
determination and withholding of taxes, maintenance and
exhibition of books and registers.”

“5.3 Rights of Contractor. In addition to what has been
stipulated in this Participation Contract and the provisions of
the Hydrocarbons Law and its regulations, Contractor shall
have the right to:

5.3.1 Perform in the Participation Contract Area, all activities
set forth as the objective in Clause Four of this Participation
Contract.

5.3.2 Receive and freely dispose of Contractor Participation as
established in Clause 8.1 of this Participation Contract.

5.3.3 Use and have access to all technical and operating
information related to the Participation Contract Area, such as
geologic, geophysical, well drilling, production and any other
information that Contractor may require from
PETROECUADOR or the Corresponding Ministry for the
Participation Contract Area. The costs of copying said
information shall be borne by Contractor.

5.3.4 Use, in accordance with the law and the provisions of this
Participation Contract, roads, means of transport and
communication in existence or to be built, as well as the water
and natural building materials required for hydrocarbon
operations.

MR JUSTICE AIKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment

5.3.5 At any time during the term of this Participation Contract,
introduce partial reductions of the Participation Contract Area,
keeping the continuity of parcels, in accordance to the law,
without affecting the 1992 Development Plans and other plans,
Yearly Programs and Budgets in force or other obligations
under this Participation Contract.

5.3.6 Besides the rights provided by Law and in this
Participation Contract, said Contract does not grant Contractor
other rights of any nature over the soil, subsoil or over any
other natural resources existing there, nor over areas
expropriated in favor of PETROECUADOR for the
performance of this Participation Contract, nor its easements,
nor over works carried out on them. The delimitation of the
Participation Contract Area only serves the purpose of
determining the surface on which Contractor has the right to
execute activities covered by this Participation Contract.

5.3.7 To use at no cost the Crude Oil and Natural Gas
forthcoming from the Participation Contract Area that may be
needed for its field operations, in accordance with the
provisions of Clause 10.4, including but not limited to electric
power generation for its operation. In the case of Natural Gas,
said use shall be subject to prior authorization by the
Corresponding Ministry.

5.3.8 Obtain from the Corresponding Ministry the timely
incorporation of the Contract Area fields into national
production.”

“EIGHT: PARTICIPATION AND DELIVERY PROCEDURES.-

8.1 Calculating Contractor Participation.-__ Contractor
Participation shall be calculated according to the following

formula:

pc = XQ
100

Where:

PC _ - Contractor Participation
Q = Fiscalized Production

X - Average factor, in percentage, rounded out to the third
decimal, corresponding to Contractor Participation, calculated
according to the following formula:

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MIR JUSTICE AIKENS
‘Approved Judgment
x = XLpl +X2.g2+X3.q3 + Y
q
Where:
q= is average daily Fiscalized Production for the
corresponding Fiscal Year.
qi = __ is the partofq lower than LI
q2 = _ is the part of q between LI and L2.

q3= _ is the part ofq greater than L2.

8.1.1 BASE AREA: Is that area comprising the Laguna.,
Jivino, Napo, Itaya and Indillana fields.

Parameters LI, L2, XI, X2 and X3 for the Base Production of
the Base Area are the following:

LI= 14,000 Barrels per day.

L2= 20.000 Barrels per day.

X1= 83.50%
X2 = 79.00%
X3 = 70.00 %

The “Y” factor shall not be used for the Base Area in the
formula indicated under numeral 8.1, inasmuch as the Parties
know the quality of the Crude Oil of this Area.

8.1.2 Possible Reserves.- The term possible reserves of Block
15 shall be understood as the volume of hydrocarbons that
Contractor could discover as a result of Additional Exploration
works under the Amended Contract and the Participation
Contract in Block 15, excluding the volumes corresponding to
the Base Area and the Limoncocha and Edén-Yuturi Unitized
Fields, which have their own factors to establish the
Participation of the Parties.

For Possible Reserves, parameters LI, L2, Xl, X2, X3, shall be
the following:

Ll = 30.000 Barrels per day.
L2 = 60.000 Barrels per day.
Xi = 80.00 %

X2 = 75.00%

MR JUSTICE AIKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment

X3 = 60.00 %

For Possible Reserves, in the event that commercially
exploitable hydrocarbons are found within the Participation
Contract Area of an API quality lower or higher than the
current average (22.54 - API), the “Y” factor shall be included
in the formula for calculating Contractor’s percentage of
Contractor Participation, in accordance with the following
definition and formula:

“Y” is a parameter for correction of quality (C) of the Crude
Oil produced in the Participation Contract Area, expressed as a
percentage. If the Crude Oil of the Participation Contract Area
is of a quality that is less than 22.54 - API but greater than 15 -
API, there shall be a compensation in favor of Contractor.
When the Crude Oil from the Participation Contract Area has a
quality greater than 22.54 - API but less than 35 API this
compensation shall be in favor of the Ecuadorian State, and
shall be calculated in the following manner:

a) If 15° API<C<22.54°API, thenY2.0x(22.54°-C)
b) If 22.54° API <C <35° API, then Y - 1.0 x (22.54°-C)
c) If C>35° API Y-10.

“C” being the average yearly quality of Crude Oil from the
Participation Contract Area, measured in degrees API.

State Participation in the cumulative production of the Base
Area and in Possible Reserves of Block 15 shall not be less
than that determined in Art. 9 of the Regulations for the
Application of the Reformatory Law to the Hydrocarbons Law
No. 44.

8.1.3 To establish the Participation of the State and the
Contractor Participation, factors “Q” and “C” shall be
estimated by the Parties on an advanced quarterly basis. To
determine the final Participation of the State and Contractor
Participation, actual values of Fiscalized Production and
degrees API for the corresponding Fiscal Year shall be used.
Factor “X” will be estimated within the first ten (10) days
following the corresponding Quarter, on the basis of daily
Fiscalized Production and quality of same in the immediately
preceding Quarter.

8.2 Contractor’s Gross Income Under this Participation
Contract.- [s Contractor Participation, calculated at the annual
average of the actual selling price, which in no event shall be
lower than the Reference Price of the Crude Oil from the

IR. Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

Participation Contract Area, plus other income from
Contractor’s activities relative to this Participation Contract.

In the event that Contractor decides to receive its participation
in cash for a period of not less than one year, under prior
agreement with PETROECUADOR for which the Parties shall
sign the corresponding agreement which shall not imply an
amendment of this Participation Contract, the Parties shall
‘ determine the amount and terms of the negotiation. However,
for tax reasons, in this case, Contractor’s gross income shall be
the actual selling price negotiated with Contractor.

From said gross income, deductions will be made and income
tax shall be paid, in accordance with clauses 11.1 and 11.2.

8.3 Reference Price:

8.3.1 In the event that PETROECUADOR has not made
foreign sales during the immediately preceding calendar month,
the Reference Price shall be established on the basis of a
average sale of a basket of crudes, mutually agreed to by the
Parties, the prices of which shall be obtained from specialized
publications of recognized prestige. The Parties shall sign an
agreement which will determine the basket of crudes and the
procedure used to obtain the Reference price of the Crude Oil.

8.4 Quality Adjustment for Crude Oil Reference Price (degrees
API). In order to determine the Reference Price for
Participation Contract Area Crude Oil, the Parties shall make
an adjustment for the quality of said Crude Oil Reference Price
based on the following formula:

Pc= PM(+K.DC)

100
Where:
Pc = Reference Price of the Crude Oil of the
Participation Contract Area. (Adjusted for quality):
PM = — Crude Oil Reference Price (Without adjustment
for quality)
DC = Difference between the quality of the

Participation Contract Area Crude Oil and the average
weighted quality of the Crude Oil used to calculate the
Reference Price. This is measured in degrees API and
calculated according to the following expression.

DC = CC-CM

cc = API Gravity of Crude Oil produced in the
Participation Contract Area.
CM = _ Average API Gravity of the Crude Oil used to

calculate the Reference Price (PM).

In the event that the Reference Price (PM) were established in
accordance with the basket of crudes, CM shall correspond to
the average degrees API of said basket.

K = Quality correction factor for the Reference Price

K= 1.3 if 15 PAPI <CC<25 °API.

K= LIL if 25°API <CC<35°API

K= __ Lland DC = 10 if CC>35°API

If Correction Factor K does not reflect the reality of the market
during a continuous period of twelve (12) months, it may be
revised by agreement between the Parties. If controversies

should arise on this matter, same shall be submitted to
resolution by a consultant.

8.5 State Participation iii Production.-Once production has
started, State Participation shall be calculated as follows:

PE = (100-X
100
Where:
PE = State Participation.

X and Q are defined in Clause 8.1.

8.5.1 In the event that PETROECUADOR should come to an
agreement with Contractor for the. commercialization of State
Participation through Contractor, the effective selling price
shall be applied.

8.5.2 Other Income.- The Ecuadorian State shall receive
income tax and other taxes in accordance with pertinent laws.

8.6 Economic Stability: In the event that, due to actions taken
by the State of Ecuador or PETROECUADOR, any of the
events described below occur and have an impact on the
economy of this Participation Contract:

a. Modification of the tax regime as described in clause 11.11.

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

b. Modification of the regime for remittances abroad or
exchange rates, as described in clause 12.1 and 12.3
respectively.

c. Reduction of the production rate, as determined in clause

d. Modification of the value of the transport rate described in
clause 7.3.1 in accordance with the procedure established in

Annex XIV.

e. Collection of the Value Added Tax, VAT, as set forth in
Official Letter No. 01044 of October 5, 1998, which appears as
annex number XVI, pursuant to which the Directorate of
Internal Revenue Service states that the imports by the
contractor for the operations of block 15 under the structure of
the participation contract, are subject to said tax.

In the cases indicated in letters a) and b), the Parties shall enter
into amending contracts as indicated in clause 15.2, in order to
reestablish the economy of this Participation Contract When the
events indicated in letters c), d) and e) occur, a correction factor
shall be included in the participation percentages, to absorb the
increase or decrease of the economic burden, in accordance
with Annex No XIV.”

“ELEVEN: TAXES, LABOR PARTICIPATION AND
CONTRIBUTIONS.-

11.1 Tax Regime and Labor Participation.- Contractor shall pay
income tax in accordance with the provisions of Title I of the
Internal Tax Regime Law. Contractor shall also pay the
contributions and taxes described in clauses 11.3, 11.4, 71.5,
11.6 and 11.7 of this Participation Contract, as well as the labor
participation of /5% stipulated in the Labor Code.

11.11 Tax Regime Modification: In the event that: a) there is a
modification of the tax or labor participation regimes in effect
as of the signing date of this Participation Contract, as these are
described in this Clause; and/or (b) of their legal interpretation;
and/or (c) the creation of new taxes or levies not foreseen in
this Participation Contract, which have an impact upon the
economy of same, a correction factor shall be included in the
participation percentages that shall absorb the increase or
decrease of the aforementioned tax burden or labor
participation. This correction factor shall be calculated between
the Parties, following the procedure outlined in Art. Thirty-one

All Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS
Approved Judgment

(31) of the Regulations for the Application of the Reformatory
Laws to the Hydrocarbons Law. The modification of this
Participation Contract will take into account the date on which
the corresponding modification or legal interpretation of the
indicated tax or labor regimes went into effect, or the date on
which the new taxes not covered in this Clause were created.”

“TWENTY TWO: APPLICABLE LAW, DOMICILE,
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE

22.1 Applicable Legislation.- This Participation Contract is
governed exclusively by Ecuadonan law, which is understood
to include all laws in effect at the time of its signing.

22.1.1 Contractor expressly declares that it has full knowledge
of Ecuadorian Law applicable to Participation Contracts for the
Exploration and Exploitation of Hydrocarbons.

22.1.2 In any claims resulting from actions or resolutions of the
National Direction for

Hydrocarbons, the Corresponding Minister shall be the highest
administrative instance. However, Contractor shall have the
right to go directly before the District Tribunal No. 1 of
Administrative Law, the competent legal body to hear direct
claims or to resolve appeals against the decisions of the
Corresponding Ministry. In claims arising from acts or .
resolutions issued by the General Direction of the Internal
Revenue Service, said organization shall be the higher
administrative instance. After this, Contractor have the right to
appeal before the Fiscal District Tribunal No.1, the competent
jurisdictional body for hearing review direct claims or resolving
appeals regarding decisions made by the Minister of Finance.

22.1.3 In compliance with the provisions of Art. Three (3) of
Law No. 44, the Parties have agreed to submit controversies
arising from the interpretation or execution of this Participation
Contract to arbitration in accordance with the provisions of
Clauses 20.2, 20.3 and 20.4.

22.1.4 Legal Framework: Norms applicable to this Participation
Contract, at the time of its execution, include but are not
limited to the following:

The Hydrocarbons Law, published in Official Gazette No.
Seven hundred and eleven. (711) of November fifteenth (15),
nineteen hundred and seventy eight (1978).

MR JUSTICE AIKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

ve

Law No. One hundred and one (101), published in Official
Register No. three hundred and six (306) of August thirteen
(13), Nineteen hundred and eighty two. (1982).

Law No. Zero eight (08), published in Official Register No.
Two hundred and seventy seven (277) of September twenty
three (23), Nineteen hundred and eighty five (1985).

Decree Law No. twenty four (24), published in Official Gazette
No. Four hundred and forty six (446) of May twenty nine (29),
nineteen hundred and eighty six. (1986).

Law No. forty four (44), published in Official Register No.
Three hundred and twenty six (326) of November twenty nine
(29), Nineteen hundred and ninety three (1993). Corrected by
Errata, published in Official Gazette No. Three hundred and
forty four (344) of December twenty four (24), Nineteen
hundred and ninety three (1993).

Law No. Forty Nine (49), published in Official Gazette No.
Three hundred and forty six (346) of December twenty eight
(28) Nineteen hundred and ninety three (1993).

Reformatory Law to the Hydrocarbons Law, published in
Official Gazette No. Five hundred and twenty three (523) of
September nine (9), Nineteen hundred and ninety four(1994).

Special Law of the Ecuadorian State Petroleum Company
(PETROECIJADOR) and its Affiliated Companies, published
in Official Register No. Two hundred and eighty three (283) of
September twenty six (26), Nineteen hundred and eighty nine
(1989), its amendments and pertinent regulations.

Law No .Zero zero six (006), of Financial and Tax Control,
published in Official Gazette No. Ninety seven (97) of
December twenty nine (29), Nineteen hundred and eighty eight.
(1988).

Internal Tax Regime Law, published m Official Gazette No
Three hundred and forty one (341) of December twenty two
(22), Nineteen hundred and eighty nine (1989) and its
amendments.

Law No. Ten 0) that creates the tax for the Amazon Region
Eco-development Fund, published in Official Gazette No.
Thirty (30) of September twenty one (21), Nineteen hundred
and ninety two (1992), and its reform in Law No. Twenty (20),
published in Official Gazette No. one hundred and fifty two
(152), of September fifteen, (15), Nineteen hundred and ninety
seven (1997).

MR JUSTICE AIKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment

Law No. Forty (40), creation of Substitute Revenues for the
Napo, Esmeraldas and Sucumbios Provinces, published in the
supplement of the Official Gazette No. 248, of August 7, 1989.

Arbitration and Mediation Law, published in Official Gazette
No. One hundred and forty five (145), of September four (4),
Nineteen hundred and ninety seven (1997).

General Insurance Law, published in Official Gazette No. 290
of April 3, 1998.

Basic Customs Law, published in Official Gazette No. 359 of
July 13, 1998.

16.- Regulations for the Application of Law No. forty four (44),
issued by Executive Decree No. One thousand four hundred
and seventeen (1417), published in Official Gazette No. Three
hundred and sixty four (364) of January Twenty one (21),
Nineteen hundred and ninety four (1994) and its reforms.

Cost Accounting Regulations for Participation Contracts for the
Exploration and Exploitation of Hydrocarbons, issued through
Executive Decree No. One thousand four hundred and eighteen
(1418), published in Official Gazette No. Three hundred and
sixty four (364) of January Twenty one (21), Nineteen hundred
and ninety four (1994). and its reform which appears in
Executive Decree No. one thousand two hundred and thirty
three (1233), published in Official Gazette No. Two hundred
and eighty five (285) of March Twenty seven (27), Nineteen
hundred and ninety eight (1998).

Hydrocarbons Operations Regulations, issued through
Ministerial Decision No. six hundred and eighty one (681), of
May eight (8), Nineteen hundred and eighty seven (1987),
reformed through Ministerial Decision No. One hundred and
eighty nine (189), published in Official Gazette No. One
hundred and twenty three (123) of February three (3), Nineteen
hundred and eighty nine (1989).

Environmental Regulations for Hydrocarbon Operations In
Ecuador, published in Official Gazette No. Seven hundred and
sixty six (766) of August twenty four (24), Nineteen hundred
and ninety five (1995).

Executive Decree No. Five hundred and forty three (543),
published in Official Gazette No. One hundred and thirty five
(135) of March one (1), Nineteen hundred and eighty five
(1985).

Executive Decree No. Eight hundred and nine (809), published
in the Official Gazette No. one hundred and ninety seven (197),

MIR JUSTICE AIKENS- Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment

of May thirty one (31), Nineteen hundred and eighty five
(1985) and its reforms.

Ministerial Decision No. Zero ninety nine (099), published in
Official Gazette No. two hundred and fifty seven (257), of
February 13, Nineteen hundred and ninety eight (1998).

In the event of a conflict between the above mentioned
documents, the order of priority amongst them shall be the
following: Laws, Regulations and this Participation Contract.

22.2 Domicile, Jurisdiction and Competence.- The Parties
submit to Ecuadorian laws, and controversies shall be
substantiated by the provisions of clauses 22.1.2 and 22.1.3. of
this Participation Contract. This provision shall prevail even
after the termination of this Participation Contract, up to the
time when the operating permit of Contractor in Ecuador is
legally canceled, regardless of the causes for termination.

22.2.1 In the event of controversies that may arise as a result of
the performance of this Participation Contract, in accordance
with Ecuadorian Law, Contractor expressly waives its right to
use diplomatic or consular channels, or to have recourse to any
national or foreign jurisdictional body not provided for in this
Participation Contract, or to arbitration not recognized by
Ecuadorian law or provided for in this Participation Contract.
Lack of compliance with this provision shall constitute grounds
for the forfeiture of this Participation Contract.

22.2.2 The Parties agree to use the means set forth in this
Participation Contract to settle questions or controversies that
may arise during the term hereof, as well as to observe and
comply with decisions issued by experts, arbiters, judges or
competent tribunals in all applicable cases, according to the
provisions of this Participation Contract.

22.3 Communications and Notices.-

22.3.1 The Documents presented by Contractor to
PETROECUADOR or the Corresponding Ministry by virtue of
this Participation Contract shall be subject to the provisions of
Art. Eighty Two (82) of the Hydrocarbons Law.

22.3.2 Notices to be served between the Parties shall be in
writing, in Spanish and will be sent to the following addresses:

PETROECUADOR MINISTRY OF
ENERGY ANDMINES

Empresa Estatal Petrdleos del Ecuador Santa Prisca 223

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

MR JUSTICE AIKENS

Approved Ju
Ediflcio Matriz Fax: 570-350
Alpallana y 6 de Diciembre Quito, Ecuador

Telex: 2213 CEPE ED
Apartado Postal 5007, 5008

Quito Ecuador

CONTRACTOR

OCCIDENTAL EXPLORATIONANDPRODUCTION
COMPANY

Ediflcio Vivaldi

Av. Amazonas No.3837
Telephone: 467 500
FAX (593 2) 468 850
Quito, Ecuador

22.3 The Parties may indicate new addresses, and timely
written notice shall be served for this matter.

22.4 For all the effects of this Contract, its shall be understood
that a communication was received by the other Party when
there is record of receipt by the notified Party”

“ANNEX XIV

PETROECUADOR OEPC
BLOCK 15: CONVERSION FROM A _ SERVICE

CONTRACT
TO A PARTICIPATION CONTRACT
ADJUSTMENT PARAMETERS

ADJUSTMENT FOR PAYMENT OF VALUE-ADDED TAX
(VAT) ON IMPORTS

dIVA = dX*Q*P

Xe = Xo+dX

NS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

dX =dIVA
Q*P

Xc=Xot dIVA
Q*P

ADJUSTMENT FOR CHANGE IN THE OIL PIPELINE
TARIFF

dT = dt*Q*Xo

PCc = Pco +dT

PCc= Xc*Q*p

PCo= Xo*Q*P

PCc = Xo * Q* P+ dt * Q* Xo

PCc = Xe *Q* P= X0*Q*P+dt*Q* Xo
Xc*P =Xo*P+ dt* Xo

Xc = Xo + dt * Xo

P
201 v
page 2
DEFINITIONS:
dIVA = Variation in the amount of VAT paid on imports
dx = Variation in the average weighted Factor X for
one Fiscal Year
Q = Production of the Contract Area
P = Crude Oil Reference Price
Xo = Average weighted Factor X, uncorrected, for one
Fiscal Year
Xe = Average weighted Factor X, corrected, for one
Fiscal Year
dT = Variation in the total amount due to a change in

the oil pipeline tariff

dt = Variation in the oil pipeline tariff. The first value
of dt that appears in the Participation Contract shall be
calculated according to the following expression:

Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

dt =  Tpe — Tac
where:
Tpe = Tariff actually paid by the Contractor, expressed

in dollars, at December 31, 1997.

Tac = Tariff agreed upon in the Participation Contract,
ie., $1.30 per barrel, expressed in dollars at December 31,
1997.

As indicated in the Participation Contract, the Nelson-Farrar
index shall be used to express *Tpe in dollars at December 31,
1997.

The adjustment shall be made whenever the absolute value of
dt/Tac is greater than or equal to 15%.

For subsequent variations in dt, Tac shall be replaced by the
most recent tariff actually paid by the Contractor, expressed in
dollars at December 31, 1997.

PCo = Contractor’s Participation, uncorrected
PCc = Contractor’s Participation, corrected

Explanatory note: The Law for the Reform of Public Finances,
published in issue No. 181 of the Official Gazette, which
became effective on May 1, 1999, was not taken into
ideration in the negotiations for establishing the i
of the Participation Contract for Block 15. Therefore, in the
event a formal clarification is not provided by the competent
authorities, to the effect that said Law does not eliminate the
exemption contemplated in Article 87 of the Hydrocarbons
Law, the Contractor shall be entitled to request a revision of the
“X” factors, in accordance with the provisions of Section
11.11 of the Participation Contract”

TI IKEN! Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)

Approved Judgment

ANNEX XVI
[seal]
REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
[logo}
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE 202v

Internal Revenue Service

Case No. 19980814604

Subject: Reply to question
Official Communication No. 01044

Quito, October 5, 1998

Dr Alberto Gomez de la Torre, Legal Representative
OCCIDENTAL EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION
COMPANY (OEPC) ECUADOR

Avenida Amazonas 3837 y Corea, Edificio Vivaldi, or
Casillero Judicial No. 545

Quito

I refer to your communication of August 26, 1998, in which
you informed us that on January 25, 1985, CEPE (now
PETROECAUDOR) and OCCIDENTAL, signed a Contract for
the Provision of Services for the Exploration and Exploitation
of Hydrocarbons in Block 15 of the Ecuadorian Amazon
Region.

Petroecuador and Occidental are currently in the final
negotiations for converting the Contract for the Provision of
Service in Block 15 to a Participation Contract for the
Exploration and Exploitation of Hydrocarbons in that block,
which contract will become effective on January 1, 1999.

You also stated that in the said Participation Contract, the State,
acting through Petroecuador, delegates to the contractor the
right to explore for, and exploit, for hydrocarbons in the

MR JUSTICE AIKENS Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment

contract area, making and incurring, on its own behalf and at its
own risk, all of the investments, costs, and expenses required
for exploration and exploitation. Once production starts, the
contractor shall be entitled to a participation of the production
of the contract area, which shall be calculated on the basis of
the percentages offered and agreed to in the said contract, based
on the volume of hydrocarbons produced.

When the change from the Contract for the Provision of
Services to the Participation Contract is made, Occidental shall
cease to be Petroecuador’s operator, and shall not receive any
reimbursement for its investments, costs, and expenses, which
shall be charged directly to the account of Occidental, who
therefore, shall be entitled to a participation negotiated with the
State, which participation shall constitute its gross income,
from which it must make the appropriate deductions and on the
basis of which it ,must pay the corresponding income tax.

On the basis of the foregoing information, you have asked
whether the imports of equipment, machinery, materials and
other consumable supplies that Occidental will have to make
pursuant to the Participation Contract (which imports will allow
Occidental to continue to fulfill its contractual obligations) after
the Contract for the Provision of Services has been converted to
a Participation Contract, which contract is tentatively expected
to become effective on January 1, 1999, will be taxed at the
10% VAT rate or at the zero rate for this tax .

On this matter, I must state the following:

Article 54 of the Internal Tax Regime Law contains a limitative
list of the goods whose purchase, whether domestic or through
imports, is taxed at the zero VAT rate. Accordingly, if your
principal purchases or imported goods that are not listed in the
said article, those goods will be taxed at the 10% VAT rate.

On the other hand, although paragraph a) of Section 13 of
Article 54 of the above -mentioned law imposes a zero tax rate
on goods brought into Ecuador by companies, such as
Petroecuador, that are in the public sector, Decree Law No. 05,
as published in issue No. 396 of the Official Gazette, dated
March 10, 1998, imposes a 10% VAT on goods brought in by
public-sector companies whose earnings are subject to the
payment of income tax, in accordance with the provisions of
the second part of Section 2 of Article 9 of the Internal Tax
Regime Law pursuant to which the public companies that are
subject to income tax are different from companies that provide
public services, inasmuch as the companies subject to income
tax compete with the private sector, engaging is commercial
and industrial activities, mining, tourism, and services in
general, and therefore are subject to the 10% VAT rate.

IR JUSTICE AIK] Ecuador v Occidental (No 2)
Approved Judgment

Consequently, Petroecuador falls into this legal category, given
that its name and those of its affiliates appear on the list of
public -sector companies that are required to pay income tax,
which list is published by the Tax Administration in accordance
with the provisions of Article 10 of the Implementing
Regulations for the Internal Tax Regime Law. Therefore,
regardless of whether the contract in question is a Contract for
the Provision of Services or a Participation Contract, the goods
that are brought in by your client in order to fulfill its
contractual obligations are subject to the said tax at the 10%
rate.”

