INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN
OCCIDENTAL PETROLEUM CORPORATION
OCCIDENTAL EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION COMPANY
(CLAIMANTS)

- AND -

THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11)

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal
Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C., President
Mr. David A.R. Williams, Q.C., Arbitrator
Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Gonzalo Flores

Assistant to the Tribunal (Through 16 December 2011)
Renée Thériault

Representing the Claimants
David W. Rivkin

Marjorie J. Menza
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP

Gaétan J. Verhoosel
Carmen Martinez Lopez
Covington & Burling LLP

Donald P. de Brier
Laura C. Abrahamson
Occidental Petroleum Corporation

Representing the Respondent
Dr. Diego Garcia Carri6n
Procurador General del Estado

George von Mehren
Stephen P. Anway
Squire, Sanders (US) LLP

Eduardo Silva Romero
Pierre Mayer

José Manuel Garcia Represa
Dechert LLP

Date of dispatch to the parties: 5 October 2012

IL.

Il.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

PROCEDURE 1
A. Registration of the Request for Arbitration .....0..0..0 cece erent 1
B. Constitution of the Tribunal and Commencement of the Proceeding......... 3
Cc. Written and Oral Phases of the Proceeding ............ccccceceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 4
FACTUAL BACKGROUND ....cccessssssssssssessesnesnesseeseesecensencenceneeneeneeneeseenecsneeneene 31
A. Introduction 31
B. OEPC’s Development and Operation of Ecuador’s Block 15...........004. 33
Cc. The Participation Contract... cece eee eeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeesseeeneneneneneienees 35
D. The Unitized Fields Joint Operating Agreements..........0..:cceeeeeeeeee 40
E. The Farmout With AEC.........ccccccscssesceesteseeteseeteseeeseeneseensseeseseeneseeneseenes 4l
F. The OCP Pipeline 49
G. The Farmout and Ecuador.

H. The Moores Rowland AUudit.........c.cccccccscssestesesteseetesseeseeeseesseeeseeeseenes s7
I. The VAT Dispute. 60
J. The Caducidad Proceedings and Related Event ............:cceeeeeeeeeeee 61
K. The Caducidad Decree ......c.cccccccscescssesceesteseeteseeteseeeseeeseeessensseeeseeneseenes 66
THE CLAIMANTS? CLAIMS ....ccsscssssssssessessessessesneesecensencencsncenceneesceneenecsneeneene 68
A. The Claimants’ Position..........c.cccccccscesesseesteseeteseeeseeseseeeseeseseeneseeeseenes 68

1. Overview of the Claimants’ Positio:

 

2. The Claimants’ First Main Argument: Breach Due to
Absence of Termination Event .

 

(a) Alleged Violations of Articles 74.11 and 74.12 of

 

the HCL.
(b) Alleged Violations of Hydrocarbons Regulations............ 80
(c) Alleged Diplomatic Pressures..........0.cccccceeeeneeeneeee 81

The Claimants’ Second Main Argument: Breach

 

 

 

Notwithstanding Termination Event........0..0. cece 82
B. The Respondent’s Position ..
1. Overview of the Respondent’s Position..........0.0ccceeeeeeeees 85
2. The Respondent’s Defense to the Claimants’ First Main
Argument: The Caducidad Decree Complied Fully with
Ecuadorian Law ........c.ccccecccseeseseeeseeeseeseseeseseeseseeseseensseeneseensseeees 89
(a) Alleged Violations of Articles 74.11 and 74.12 of
(b) Alleged Violations of Hydrocarbons Regulations............ 99
(c) Alleged Diplomatic Pressures 99
3. The Respondent’s Defense to the Claimants’ Second Main
Argument: The Caducidad Decree Complied Fully with the
Treaty and International Law...........c ccc eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 100

IV. THE RESPONDENT’S COUNTERCLAIM ..

 

 

A. The Respondents Position ...........cccceeeeeeeeeseeeseeeseseecseeteteeeseeeneeeee 104

B. The Claimants’ Position..........c.ccccccsesseseeeseeestesesteseseesestesestesssneneaeenees 106

Vv. ANALYSIS 107
A. The Tribunal’s Jurisdiction over the Claimants’ Claims ...............000 107

B. The Tribunal’s Findings in Connection with the Claimants’ Claims ..... 108

1. OEPC’s Breach of the Participation Contract... 108

 

(a) Preliminary Observations.

(b) Evidence of a Transfer of Rights under the
Participation Contract

 

(c) Nature of the Rights to be Transferred: The Joint
Operating Agreement

 

(d) The Farmout Agreement ...........c cscs 124

(e) Privity of Contract... cece eects eeeeeeneneeeeeee 126

-ii-

VI.

(f) The Remaining Allegations of Breach of the

 

 

 

 

 

Participation Contract and HCL Violations..........0.0.0.... 128
2. OEPC’s Duty to Obtain Authorization for the Transfer of
Rights under the Participation Contract... 129
3. The Proportionality of the Sanction for the Unauthorized
Transfer of Rights under the Participation Contract..........0..... 148
(a) Preliminary Observations.........0..ccccccee teeta 148
(b) The Parties’ Competing Cases 00.0.0... cece 150
(c) Proportionality in Ecuadorian law .......0..ceee eee 152
(d) Proportionality in the Context of International
Investment Disputes
(e) Detailed Arguments regarding Proportionality............. 159
(f) Common Ground between the Parties «0.0.20... 166
(g) Outstanding Issues ......0..eee cee eects ee eeeeeeeeneeeeee 166
(h) Alternatives to Caducidad ....ccccccceccseseceteeeseteeseseneeee 167
(i) The Background to the Caducidad Dectee............00. 171
@) The Influence of the VAT Award........ccceee 174
(k) Was the Caducidad Decree a_ Proportionate
Response? .......c.cecseesecees ese eeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeecseeseseeeseneeeeeaeee 178
(a) Expropriation in Breach of Article III of the Treaty 183
(m) The Remaining Allegations of Breach under the
Treaty and Ecuadorian Law 184
QUANTUM 185
A. Introduction 185
B. The Respondent’s Procedural Objections in connection with Law 42 and
the VAT Interpretative Law... cece eeneneeeee tte teteeeeeeeees 186

c. The Ecuadorian Law 42

1.

Introduction

- ili -

The Impact of Law 42.

 

 

 

 

 

(a) The Respondent’s Position ..........c cece 188
(b) The Claimants’ Position..........c.sccccsceesessesesteeeteseeteneeee 192
(c) The Tribunal’s Analysis and Conclusion..............008 196
Gi) Preliminary Observations ............cccccceseeeeeeseees 196
(ii) Characterization of Law 42 and _ the
Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objection............0... 196
(iii) Analysis of Law 42 occ eee eens 201
(iv) Final observations ........0.cccccccsesseseeseseeseseeeseeees 210
D. The Ecuadorian VAT Interpretative Law ..0.....0..c cece eee 214
1. Introduction 214
2. The Respondent’s Procedural Objections ..........000ccceeeee 214
3. The Impact of the VAT Interpretative Law ..
(a) The Respondent’s Position ..........c cece 214
(b) The Claimants’ Position...........cccccceeceseseeeeseteereseteeeeeeeeee 215
(a) The Tribunal’s Analysis and Conclusion..............008 216
E. The Farmout Agreement ...0.......cccccecce eee eeeeeeeeeeseeeeesceseteseseeeneneaeeeee 222
1. The Parties’ Initial submissions .............c.cccccceeeseseeteseeeseeneee 222
(a) The Respondent’s Position ..........c cece 222
(b) The Claimants’ Position...
2. The Dictum of the Permanent Court of International Justice
in the Chorz6w Factory Case
(a) Introduction: The Chorzéw Factory Dictum..............0. 225
(b) The Respondent’s Interpretation... cece 226
(c) The Claimants’ Interpretation... 227
3. The Parties’ Additional Submissions.............ccccccceeeseseeteseeees 229
(a) The Respondent’s Additional Submissions .................. 230

-iv-

(b)

The Claimants’ Additional Submissions

 

 

 

4. The Tribunal’s Analysis and Conclusion...........00cceeeeee 235
(a) Tntroduction ......c.cececceceeseeeeseeeeeseseeeeseseneeseseneeseaeeeeeeaeeeeee 235
(b) Ecuadorian Law ........cccccceesesceceseeeeeeseseeeeeeeeneeeeaeneeeeaeeee 237
(c) New York Law.......cecececcsceseseseeseeeeeeseeneeeeeneeseeeeeeeseeeeee 250
(d) Finding: 252
F. The Fault of the Claimants Prior to the Caducidad Decteé.............1000+ 257
1. The Respondents Position ...........ccccccee ee eeeeeeeneeeneneeneeeeees 257
2. The Claimants’ Position..........c.cccccscceseeseseeseseeeseeeseeseseeseseenees 258
3. The Tribunal’s AnalySis............ccccccece eee eeeeeeeeeeneneneseeneeeeees 258
4. The Tribunal’s Conclusion ..........c.ccccsscscseecsseeeseeteseeeseeeseenees 266
G. Remaining Quantum Issues .0...........cccccece ees ee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenes 267
1. Introduction 267
2. Fair Market Value (“FMV”) ........ccccccseeseeeeseseeeeseseeeereseneereseeeee 272
(a) The Claimants’ Position...........cccccceeceseseeeeseteereseteeeeeeeeee 272
(b) The Respondent’s Position ..........c cece 273
(c) The Tribunal’s Conclusion ..........cccececeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeneee 273
3. The Discounted Cash Flow (“DCF”) Method ...........::ceeeeeeeee 274
4. Volume and Production Profile of Block 15........ccccccceeeeees 275
(a) The Parties’ Expert Reports

()

(ii)

(iii)

 

NSAI Expert Report dated 17 September
2007.

RPS Scotia’s Expert Report dated March

 

RPS Scotia June 2009 Report Entitled
“Ecuador Block 15 Reserves Certification
and Plan of Development Study as of
January 1, 2009” 00. eeeeeeneneneeeeeeees 277

(iv) RPS Scotia’s Rebuttal Expert Report dated
September 2009 .........cccccccecseeceeeteseeeseeneseeeseenes 277

(v) NSAI Supplemental Expert Report dated 12
June 2009.

(b) The Tribunal’s Conclusion

 

Reserve Adjustment Factors (“RAFS”).......00cccsseeeeeeeees 285
Oil Price Projections .......... ccc eee eeeeeeeeeneeeeeeteeetseeeeeeees 288
Discount Rate .......c.cccccccsccsccsecteseeseseeieseeteseeeseeeseseseesseeeseeneseenes 291

Operating (OPEX) and Capital (CAPEX) Expenditure

 

Forecasts 292
Use of Comparable Sales .0........ccccccee eee eeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeees 295
Consequential Damages .............ccccceceeeeeeeeneeeteneeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 297

 

(a) Preliminary Issues

(b) The Claimants’ Position...........cccccceeceseseeeeseteereseteeeeeeeeee 301

 

(i) Ship-or-Pay damages.....

(ii) | Employee Termination Co:

 

(iii) Value of a Stranded Cargo ..

 

(c) The Respondent’s Position ..........c cece
(i) Ship-or-Pay Damages... eters 302
(ii) | Employee Termination Costs 00.0.0... cee 303

(iii) Value of a Stranded Cargo

(d) The Tribunal’s Conclusions

  

 

(i) Ship-or-Pay Damages... eters 304
(ii) | Employee Termination Costs 00.0.0... cee 307
(iii) Value of a Stranded Cargo... 307
Calculation of Damages ............cc cee ee eeeeeeeeeseneeeteeeeeeeeeeees 308
Interest. 308
(a) The Claimants’ Position...........cccccceeceseseeeeseteereseteeeeeeeeee 309

 

(b) The Respondent’s Position .

-Vvi-

(c) Recent Trends in Relation to Interest in ICSID
AWALGS 0... eeceseeceseeestesestesestesesesessesesesestesestesssseneseessaenees 312

312
315

(i) Simple v. Compound Interes!

 

 

(ii) Interest Rate.

 

 

 

 

(iii) Compounding Intervals «00.0.0... 316
(d) The Period during which Interest Must Accrue.............. 317
(e) The Tribunal’s Conclusion ..........cccececeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeneee 317
13. Ecuadorian Taxes ........ccccccccccesesseseeeseeteseenessenesseeseesseensseeneseenes 318
H. The Tribunal’s Findings in connection with the Respondent’s
Counterclaim 319
1. The Respondent’s Allegation that the Claimants Initiated
and Prosecuted this Case in Bad Faith ...........ccccceeeseseeeeteseenes 320
2. The Respondent’s Allegation that OEPC Breached Clause
22.2.1 of the Participation Contract Through its Use of
Diplomatic Channels
3. The Respondent’s Allegation of Destructive and Unlawful
Conduct on the part of the Claimant:
(a) Lost Block 15 Production Due to Release of
Drilling Rigs.
(b) Damages to Data and Software.........c ccc 323
4. The Respondent’s Allegation that the Claimants Failed to

VII. COSTS

Pay the Assignment Fee and to Negotiate a New
Participation Contract More Favourable to the Respondent....... 323

324

 

VII. AWARD

325

 

~ Vii -

Abbreviation
“AEC”

“BIT” or “Treaty”

“DCF”
“DNH”
“FMV”
“HCL”
“OCP”
“OEPC”
“OPC”

“PetroEcuador”

“RABs”
“SOTE”

“VAT”

GLOSSARY

Definition

Alberta Energy Corporation

Treaty Between the United States of America and
the Republic of Ecuador Concerning the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investment

Discounted Cash Flow

National Hydrocarbons Directorate

Fair Market Value

Hydrocarbons Law

Oleoducto de Crudos Pesados

Occidental Exploration and Production Company
Occidental Petroleum Corporation

The Republic of Ecuador’s national oil company
and successor to Corporacion Estatal Petrolera
Ecuatoriana (“CEPE”). Today, Empresa Ptiblica
de Hidrocarburos del Ecuador.

Reserve Adjustment Factors

Sistema de Oleoducto Trans-ecuatoriano

Value Added Taxes

- viii -

THE TRIBUNAL
Composed as above,
After deliberation,

Makes the following Award:

IL PROCEDURE

A. Registration of the Request for Arbitration

1. On 17 May 2006, Occidental Petroleum Corporation (“OPC”) and Occidental
Exploration and Production Company (“OEPC’”), two U.S. companies, (together the
“Claimants”) incorporated in the States of Delaware and California, respectively, filed
with the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the
“Centre”) a Request for Arbitration under the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (“ICSID Convention’)
against the Republic of Ecuador (“Ecuador” or the “Respondent”) and Empresa Estatal

Petréleos del Ecuador (“PetroEcuador”).!

2. The parties’ dispute concerns the termination [caducidad] of a 1999 Participation
Contract between OEPC and PetroEcuador for the exploration and exploitation of
hydrocarbons in Block 15 of the Ecuadorian Amazon region (the “Participation

Contract”).

' PetroEcuador was Ecuador's national oil company and the successor to Corporacién Estatal Petrolera
Ecuatoriana (“CEPE”). By letter to the Centre of 29 September 2006, the Claimants withdrew their claims
against PetroEcuador.

3. The Request for Arbitration invoked Ecuador’s consent to ICSID arbitration
contained in the 1993 Treaty Between the United States of America and the Republic of
Ecuador Concerning the Encouragement and Protection of Investments (the “BIT”), and

PetroEcuador’s consent to ICSID arbitration in the Participation Contract.

4. On 22 May 2006, ICSID acknowledged receipt of the Request for Arbitration and,
in accordance with Article 36(1) of the ICSID Convention, transmitted copies of the
Request for Arbitration and accompanying documentation to the Republic of Ecuador

and PetroEcuador.

5. By letters of 7, 16 and 29 June 2006, ICSID requested additional information
from the Claimants. By letters of 13, 23 and 29 June 2006, the Claimants provided
information supplementing their Request for Arbitration. Further information was

provided by the Claimants by letter of 6 July 2006.

6. On 13 July 2006, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID, in accordance with
Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention, registered the Request for Arbitration, and

notified the parties of the registration under ICSID Case Number ARB/06/11.

7. The Request for Arbitration included (in paragraphs 76 and 77) a Request for
Provisional Measures. In accordance with a schedule fixed by ICSID pursuant to Rule
39(5) of ICSID’s Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “ICSID Arbitration
Rules”), and later amended with the agreement of the parties, the Claimants filed a

particularized Application for Provisional Measures on 18 October 2006. Ecuador then

filed a response to the Claimants’ Application on 1 December 2006, followed by the

Claimants’ Reply of 15 December 2006 and Ecuador’s Rejoinder of 30 December 2006.

B. Constitution of the Tribunal and Commencement of the Proceeding

8. By letter dated 29 September 2006, the Claimants informed the Centre that they
had selected the method envisaged in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention for the
constitution of the Tribunal (i.e. the Tribunal would consist of three arbitrators, one
arbitrator appointed by each party and the third, who would be the president of the
Tribunal, to be appointed by agreement of the parties). By same letter, the Claimants
informed the Centre of their appointment of Mr. David A.R. Williams, QC, of New

Zealand, as an arbitrator. Mr. Williams accepted his appointment on 18 October 2006.

9. On 13 October 2006, the Claimants requested ICSID to appoint the arbitrators not
yet appointed and to designate an arbitrator to be the president for of the Tribunal in this

case, pursuant to Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 4(1).

10. By letters of 25 October, 21 November, 1, 12, 13 and 27 December 2006 and 5
January 2007, the Centre consulted with the parties in connection with the appointment of
the arbitrators not yet appointed, as envisaged in Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and

ICSID Arbitration Rule 4.

11. By letter of 25 January 2007, the Centre informed the parties that, pursuant to
Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 4, the Acting Chairman
of ICSID’s Administrative Council had appointed Professor Brigitte Stern, a national of

France, as a co-arbitrator and Mr. L. Yves Fortier, QC, of Canada, as the third arbitrator

and President of the Tribunal. Professor Stern accepted her appointment on 31 January
2007. Mr. Fortier accepted his appointment on 5 February 2007. At the time of their
respective appointments, Professor Stern was a member of the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators
appointed by France and Mr. Fortier was a member of the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators

appointed by the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council.

12. By letter of 6 February 2007, the Secretary-General of ICSID notified the parties
that, all three arbitrators having accepted their appointments, the Tribunal was deemed to
be constituted and the proceeding deemed to have begun on that date. By the same letter,
the Secretary-General provided copies of the declarations of independence and
impartiality signed by each member of the Tribunal in accordance with ICSID Arbitration
Rule 6 and informed the parties that Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila, Senior Counsel, ICSID,

would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

Cc. Written and Oral Phases of the Proceeding

13. The Tribunal and the parties held a preliminary telephone conference on 16
February 2007, during which it was agreed that the First Session of the Tribunal would be
held on 2 May 2007 at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. It was also agreed that
a hearing on the Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures would be held on 3
May 2007. The telephone conference was recorded and copies of the audio recordings

were provided to the parties and the members of the Tribunal.

14. By letter of 19 February 2007, the parties were invited to simultaneously submit

any further documents and/or testimony related to the Claimants’ Application for

Provisional Measures that they may wish to rely upon by 20 April 2007. Both parties

submitted additional documentation on 18 April 2007.

15. With the agreement of the parties and the members of the Tribunal, the President
of the Tribunal held an organizational pre-hearing telephone conference with the parties
on 26 April 2007. The conference was attended by Messrs. David W. Rivkin, Mark W.
Friedman and Gaétan Verhoosel from Debevoise & Plimpton LLP and by Ms. Laura C.
Abrahamson, Assistant General Counsel of OPC, on behalf of the Claimants; Mr. Paul
Reichler and Ms. Janis Brennan, from Foley Hoag LLP, Mr. Alberto Wray, at the time
with the law firm of Cabezas & Wray Abogados in Quito, and Ms. Claudia Salgado from
Ecuador’s Procuraduria General del Estado [Ecuador’s Attorney General’s Office],
participated on behalf of the Respondent; Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila and
Messrs. Gonzalo Flores and Emilio Rodriguez-Larrain, from the ICSID Secretariat, and
Ms. Renée Thériault, then from the law firm of Ogilvy Renault LLP in Ottawa,
Mr. Fortier’s law firm, also participated in the conference call. During the conference
call, a number of agreements were reached in connection with the organization of the
forthcoming First Session and the hearing on the Claimants’ Application for Provisional
Measures. Among these, the parties agreed to the appointment of Ms. Thériault as
Assistant to the Tribunal. The telephone conference was recorded and copies of the

audio recordings were provided to the parties and the members of the Tribunal.

16. The First Session of the Tribunal and the hearing on the Claimants’ Application
for Provisional Measures were held, as scheduled, on 2-3 May 2007 at the seat of the

Centre in Washington, D.C. In attendance were the three members of the Tribunal,

Mr. L. Yves Fortier, Professor Brigitte Stern and Mr. David A.R. Williams. In the
absence of Ms. Alvarez-Avila, Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Senior Counsel, ICSID, was in
attendance for the ICSID Secretariat. Ms. Renée Thériault, Assistant to the Tribunal, was
also present. The Claimants were represented by Messrs. David W. Rivkin, Mark W.
Friedman, Shane Spelliscy, Claudio D. Salas and Gaétan Verhoosel, from Debevoise &
Plimpton LLP, and by Ms. Laura Abrahamson and Messrs. Gerald Ellis and Terry
Lindquist of OPC. The Respondent was represented by Dr. José Xavier Garaicoa Ortiz,
Ecuador’s Procurador General del Estado [Attorney General], Mr. Alberto Wray of
Cabezas & Wray Abogados in Quito, Mr. Paul Reichler, Ms. Janis Brennan and
Ms. Clara Brillembourg of Foley Hoag, LLP in Washington, D.C., Ms. Claudia Salgado,
of the Office of Ecuador’s Attorney General, Ms. Maria Augusta Carrera from

PetroEcuador and Mr. Peter Phaneuf from TrialTek Consulting.

17. During the First Session, the parties confirmed that the Tribunal had been
properly constituted in accordance with the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration
Rules and that they had no objection to the appointment of any of the members of the
Tribunal. The parties also confirmed their agreement to the appointment of Ms. Renée
Thériault, an associate in Mr. Fortier’s law firm of Ogilvy Renault, as Assistant to the
Tribunal. Finally, the parties agreed to a number of procedural matters which were
reflected in summary minutes prepared by the Secretariat and circulated to the parties and
the Tribunal. During this session, the parties agreed that the jurisdiction/liability phase
and quantum phase (if required) should be separated, but the Claimants requested that the
timetable for the quantum phase be fixed at the same time as the liability phase so as

avoid unnecessary delay. [A copy of the Minutes is attached to this Award as Annex1].

-6-

18. Upon conclusion of the First Session, the parties addressed the Tribunal on the
Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures. Messrs. Rivkin and Friedman
addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Claimants and Mr. Reichler addressed the
Tribunal on behalf of the Respondent. During the hearing, and following consultations

between the parties, the Claimants’ Application was significantly amended.

19. In accordance with the schedule fixed during the First Session (slightly amended
by the Tribunal, following delays in the parties’ production of documents), the Claimants
filed a Memorial on Liability, with accompanying documentation, on 23 July 2007. The
accompanying documentation included, inter alia, the witness statements of Messrs.
Andrew Patterson, Casey Olson, Fernando Albuja, Gerald Ellis, John L. Keplinger, Paul

MaclInnes, and Steven Bell; and the Expert Report of Dr. Hernan Pérez Loose.

20. On 17 August 2007, the Tribunal issued its unanimous Decision on Provisional
Measures.” In its Decision, the Tribunal, after careful consideration of the parties’
positions, concluded that the Claimants had failed to demonstrate that an order for
provisional measures was justified in the circumstances and thus dismissed their

Application.

21. By letter of 24 August 2007, the parties were informed that Mr. Gonzalo Flores,
Senior Counsel, ICSID, would replace Ms. Alvarez-Avila as Secretary of the Tribunal,

following her departure from ICSID.

* Available online at icsid.worldbank.org and attached to the Award as Annex 2.

22. On 17 September 2007, the Claimants filed a Memorial on Damages with
accompanying documentation. The accompanying documentation included, inter alia, the
Second Witness Statements of Messrs. Fernando Albuja, Gerald Ellis, and Andrew
Patterson; the Witness Statement of Dr. Surendra Pal (S.P.) Sing; the Expert Reports of
Prof. Joseph P. Kalt and Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc., and a Second Expert

Report of Dr. Hernan Pérez Loose.

23. Successive changes in the Republic of Ecuador’s representation led the
Respondent to request, on 17 September 2007, a modification to the schedule for written
pleadings agreed during the First Session. The Claimants opposed the Respondent’s
request by letter of 24 September 2007. The Respondent replied by letter of 15 October

2007.

24. On 31 October 2007, with the agreement of his co-arbitrators, the President of the
Tribunal held a telephone conference with the parties to address: (a) the Respondent’s
request for a new procedural calendar and (b) the Respondent’s representation in this
case. During the call, it was concluded that the procedural timetable established by the
Tribunal during the First Session would have to be amended. It was further decided that
the parties would confer and try to agree on an amended calendar and that a further
telephone conference would be held on 31 January 2008 in order to consider revisions to
the procedural calendar. The telephone conference was recorded and copies of the audio

recordings were provided to the parties and the members of the Tribunal.

25. By letter of 20 December 2007, the Republic of Ecuador informed the Tribunal
that it had selected the law firm of Squire, Sanders & Dempsey LLP as its new counsel of

record. The firm is now known as Squire, Sanders (US) LLP.

26. On 23 January 2008, the parties wrote separately to the Tribunal to inform it that
they had failed to reach agreement on a revised procedural calendar and, in their

respective letters, each party proposed a procedural calendar to the Tribunal.

27. As agreed, a telephone conference call was held between the President of the
Tribunal and the parties on 31 January 2008. Ms. Laura Abrahamson from OPC, as well
as Mr. David W. Rivkin and Ms. Carmen Martinez Lopez from Debevoise & Plimpton
LLP, participated in the teleconference on behalf of the Claimants. The Respondent was
represented in the telephone conference by Mr. Carlos Venegas, Ms. Claudia Salgado and
Ms. Christel Gaibor, from Ecuador’s Procuraduria General del Estado and by
Messrs. George von Mehren and Stephen P. Anway, from Squire, Sanders (US) LLP.
During the telephone conference both parties were given full and equal opportunity to
elaborate on their respective submissions of 23 January 2008. The telephone conference
was recorded and copies of the audio recordings were provided to the parties and the

members of the Tribunal.

28. On 11 February 2008, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No.1 directing a
revised procedural calendar, including a timetable for the jurisdictional phase of the
arbitration with separate timetables for each of the liability and quantum phases (as

required).

29. Pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1, the Respondent, on 7 March 2008, filed a
Memorial on its Objections to Jurisdiction, with accompanying documentation. The
accompanying documentation included, inter alia, an Expert Report by Dr. Juan Pablo
Aguilar Andrade. The Claimants filed a Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, with
accompanying documentation, on 4 April 2008. The accompanying documentation

included, inter alia, a Third Expert Report by Dr. Hernan Pérez Loose.

30. By letter of 14 April 2008, the Republic of Ecuador informed the Tribunal that, in
addition to Squire, Sanders (US) LLP, the law firm of Dechert LLP would represent the

Respondent in this proceeding.

31. Pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1, the Respondent filed a Reply on Jurisdiction,
with accompanying documentation, on 23 April 2008. The accompanying documentation

included, inter alia, a Second Expert Report by Dr. Juan Pablo Aguilar Andrade.

32. By letter dated 28 April 2008, the Republic of Ecuador informed the Tribunal of
the appointment of Dr. Diego Garcia Carrién as the new Procurador General del Estado
[Attorney General], following the resignation of Dr. Xavier Garaicoa Ortiz. In the same
letter, the Republic of Ecuador requested amendments to the procedural calendar
established in Procedural Order No. 1. The Claimants opposed this request by letter

dated 29 April 2008.

33. On 6 May 2008, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, amending the

calendar established in Procedural Order No. 1.

-10-

34. The Claimants filed a Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, with accompanying
documentation, on 12 May 2008. The accompanying documentation included, inter alia,

a Fourth Expert Report by Dr. Hernan Pérez Loose.

35. As directed by Procedural Order No. 1, a two-day hearing on jurisdiction was
held at the World Bank’s offices in Paris, on 22-23 May 2008. The three members of the
Tribunal, Mr. L. Yves Fortier, Professor Brigitte Stern and Mr. David A.R. Williams,
attended the hearing. Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Secretary of the Tribunal, and Ms. Renée
Thériault, Assistant to the Tribunal, were also present at the hearing. During the hearing,
the Claimants were represented by Messrs. Rivkin and Verhoosel and Ms. Martinez
L6pez of Debevoise & Plimpton LLP and by Ms. Laura Abrahamson and Mr. Gerald
Ellis of OPC. The Republic of Ecuador was represented by Dr. Diego Garcia Carrién,
Procurador General del Estado; Messrs. Carlos Venegas and Francisco Paredes and
Ms. Claudia Salgado, from the Attorney General’s office; Messrs. George von Mehren,
Stephen P. Anway, Hernando Diaz and Rostislav Pekar of Squire, Sanders (US) LLP;
Messrs. Eduardo Silva Romero, Pierre Mayer, George Foster and Edward Kling of
Dechert LLP; Dr. Galo Chiriboga, Ecuador’s Minister of Energy and Mines; and

Dr. Maria Angélica Martinez, from PetroEcuador.

36. During the hearing, the parties’ respective counsel made extensive opening and
closing submissions on the various issues raised by the Respondent’s jurisdictional
challenge. Dr. Juan Pablo Aguilar Andrade and Dr. Hernan Pérez Loose also appeared as
expert witnesses at the hearing and were examined by counsel under the control of the

Tribunal.

-ll-

37. On 16 June 2008, in accordance with the procedural calendar amended by the
Tribunal in Procedural Order No. 2, the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on
Liability, with accompanying documentation. The accompanying documentation
included, inter alia, witness statements of Ministers Pablo Teran and Ivan Rodriguez and
of Mr. Felipe Sanchez. It also included an Expert Report by Mr. Timothy Martin and a
Third Expert report by Dr. Juan Pablo Aguilar Andrade. In accordance with ICSID

Arbitration Rule 40, the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial also included a Counterclaim.

38. On 11 August 2008, the Claimants filed a Reply on Liability, with accompanying
documentation. The accompanying documentation included, inter alia, a Fifth Expert
Report from Dr. Hernan Pérez Loose; Expert Reports from Messrs. Andrew B. Derman
and Norman E. Maryan Jr.; First Witness Statements from Messrs. Derek Aylesworth,
Tan Davis and Gary Guidry; Second Witness Statements from Messrs. Steven Bell, John
L. Keplinger, Paul MacInnes and Casey Olson; and Third Witness Statements from
Messrs. Fernando Albuja, Gerald Ellis and Andrew Patterson. The Claimants’ Reply

included a Response to the Respondent’s Counterclaim.

39. On 9 September 2008, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Jurisdiction. In its
Decision, which forms an integral part of the present Award and is attached to it as
Annex 3, the Tribunal addressed the two jurisdictional challenges raised by the Republic
of Ecuador, namely: (a) that the adjudication of the parties’ dispute was governed by the
Participation Contract, which excluded caducidad from arbitration; and (b) that the
Claimants failed to comply with the 6-month cooling-off period required under the BIT.

In its conclusions, the Tribunal, unanimously, ruled that (a) “based on elementary

-12-

principles of contract interpretation, any exception to the availability of ICSID arbitration
for the resolution of disputes arising under the Participation Contract, in this case
caducidad-related disputes, requires clear language to this effect. Had the parties wished
to exclude such disputes from ICSID jurisdiction and confer exclusive jurisdiction to the
Ecuadorian administrative courts in this regard, they could have done so. They did not
and the Tribunal will not imply such wording in the clause;” and (b) that “the caducidad
procedure at issue in this arbitration was in fact initiated in 2004. As noted earlier, for
some 18 months or so prior to the issuance of the actual Caducidad Decree on 15 May
2006, OEPC made a number of submissions seeking to rebut the allegations on the basis
of which the caducidad procedure was initiated, but to no avail. Furthermore, the
Tribunal accepts, albeit without prejudging the merits, that attempts at reaching a

negotiated solution were indeed futile in the circumstances.”

40. The Tribunal accordingly declared that it had jurisdiction over OEPC’s and
OPC’s claims in this arbitration and that the arbitral proceedings would continue to the
merits phase in accordance with the calendar established in the Tribunal’s Procedural

Order No. 1 as modified by Procedural Order No. 2.

Al. On 19 September 2008, the Respondent filed a Rejoinder on Liability, with
accompanying documentation, which included, inter alia, a Witness Statement from
Mr. Angel Basantes; Second Witness Statements from Ministers Ivan Rodriguez and
Pablo Teran; a Third Witness Statement from Mr. Wilson Pastor Morris; an Expert

Report from Dr. Marcelo Merlo Jaramillo; a Second Expert Report from Mr. Timothy

-13-

Martin; and a Fourth Expert Report by Dr. Juan Pablo Aguilar Andrade. The

Respondent’s Rejoinder included a Reply on its Counterclaim.

42. On 23 September, 10 October and 20 October 2008, the Tribunal issued

Procedural Orders No. 3, 4 and 5 concerning production of documents.

43. By letter of 27 October 2008, the Tribunal fixed the venue and dates for a hearing
on liability. The hearing would be held at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C.,

from 13 to 20 December 2008.

44. On 14 November 2008, the Claimants filed a Rejoinder to the Respondent’s
Counterclaim, with accompanying documentation. The accompanying documentation
included, inter alia, a Sixth Expert Report from Dr. Hernan Pérez Loose; a Second
Expert Report from Mr. Andrew B. Derman; a Second Expert Report from Mr. Norman

E. Maryan Jr.; and a Fourth Witness Statement from Mr. Gerald Ellis.

45. On 2 December 2008, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6 concerning the
hearing on liability and objections raised by the Respondent to certain sections of the

Claimants’ Rejoinder to Respondent’s Counterclaim.

46. As scheduled, a hearing on liability was held at the seat of the Centre in
Washington D.C. from 13 through 20 December 2008. The three members of the
Tribunal, Mr. L. Yves Fortier, Professor Brigitte Stern and Mr. David A.R. Williams,
attended the hearing. Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Secretary of the Tribunal, and Ms. Renée

Thériault, Assistant to the Tribunal, were also present during the hearing.

-14-

47. During the hearing, the Claimants were represented by Mr. Donald P. de Brier,
Executive Vice-President and General Counsel of Occidental Petroleum Corporation, Ms.
Laura Abrahamson, OPC’s Assistant General Counsel, Mr. Jaime Alarcén from OPC and
Messrs. David W. Rivkin, Gaétan Verhoosel, Claudio D. Salas, Marco Serrano, Max
Drawe and Marshall Weber and Ms. Carmen Martinez Lopez from Debevoise &

Plimpton LLP.

48. During the hearing, the Republic of Ecuador was represented by Dr. Diego Garcia
Carrién, Ecuador’s Procurador General del Estado; Messrs. Alvaro Galindo, Francisco
Paredes and Luis Alberto Cabezas-Klaere from the office of the Attorney General,
Messrs. Eduardo Silva Romero, Pierre Mayer, José Manuel Garcia Represa, George
Foster and Bernard Powell, from Dechert LLP, Messrs. George von Mehren, Stephen P.
Anway, David Alexander, Pedro Martinez-Fraga and Ms. Ann Catherine Kettlewell,
Ms. Karen van Horn and Ms. Danielle Sundberg from Squire, Sanders (US) LLP,
Mr. Ronald E. Goodman, from Foley Hoag LLP; Messrs. Andrés Donoso, Francisco
Ricaurte and Ms. Triana Vasquez, Ms. Titha Moreno and Dr. Maria Angélica Martinez,

from PetroEcuador.

49. During the hearing, Messrs. Rivkin and Verhoosel addressed the Tribunal on
behalf of the Claimants. Messrs. Garcia Carrién, von Mehren, Silva Romero and Mayer
addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Respondent. During the eight-day hearing, the
following twenty-one witnesses and experts were examined by counsel, under the control
of the Tribunal: Paul McInness, Casey Olson, Steven Bell, Andrew Patterson, Fernando

Albuja, John Keplinger, Gary Guidry, Ian Davis, Gerald Ellis, Derek Aylesworth, Pablo

-15-

Teran, Luis Felipe Sanchez, Angel Basantes, Ivan Rodriguez, Wilson Pastor Morris,
Hernan Pérez Loose, Marcelo Merlo, Juan Pablo Aguilar Andrade, Andrew Derman,

Norman Maryan Jr., and Timothy Martin.

50. By letter of the Respondent dated 9 January 2009, the parties informed the
Tribunal of their agreement on a briefing schedule for the quantum phase of the
proceeding. Pursuant to this agreement, which was confirmed by the Claimants’ email of
15 January 2009, the Respondent would file a Counter-Memorial on Quantum on 9
March 2009; the Claimants would file a Reply on Quantum on 12 June 2009; the
Respondent would file a Rejoinder on Quantum on 8 September 2009; and the Claimants
would file a Rejoinder on Counterclaim Damages on 15 October 2009. Finally, in
accordance with the parties’ agreement, a hearing on quantum would be held in
November 2009. The parties were informed of the Tribunal’s approval of the agreed

timetable by email from the Secretary of the Tribunal on 16 January 2009.

51. In accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions at the closing of the hearing on
liability, both parties filed post-hearing briefs, with accompanying documentation, on 13
February 2009. Also in accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions, on 26 February

2009, the parties’ filed a Joint Chronology of Relevant Events.

52. In accordance with the agreed timetable, on 9 March 2009, the Respondent filed a
Counter-Memorial on Quantum and a Memorial on Counterclaim Damages, with
accompanying documentation. The accompanying documentation included, inter alia, a

Witness Statement from Mr. Alberto Panchi; a Fourth Witness Statement from

-16-

Mr. Wilson Pastor Morris; and Expert Reports of from Mr. Daniel Johnston, RPS Scotia,

Mr. Alfredo Corral Borrero and Mr. Hernan Salgado Pesantes.

53. On 20 and 21 March 2009, the Tribunal held a hearing with the parties at the
offices of the World Bank in Paris. The hearing was a continuation of the hearing on
liability held in Washington, D.C. in December 2008. The three members of the Tribunal,
Mr. L. Yves Fortier, Professor Brigitte Stern and Mr. David A.R. Williams, attended the
hearing. Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Secretary of the Tribunal, and Ms. Renée Thériault,

Assistant to the Tribunal, were also present at the hearing.

54. During the hearing, the Claimants were represented by Mr. Donald P. de Brier
and Ms. Laura Abrahamson from OPC, Messrs. David W. Rivkin, Gaétan Verhoosel,
Marco Serrano and Claudio D. Salas (by video-conference) and Ms. Carmen Martinez
L6pez, Ms. Ruth Miller and Ms. Marjorie Menza (by video-conference) from Debevoise
& Plimpton LLP. Also present during the hearing was Dr. Hernan Peréz Loose, the

Claimants’ legal expert.

55. During the hearing, the Republic of Ecuador was represented by Dr. Diego Garcia
Carrién, Ecuador’s Procurador General del Estado; Messrs. Alvaro Galindo and
Francisco Paredes and Ms. Claudia Salgado from the Office of Ecuador’s Attorney
General, Messrs. Eduardo Silva Romero, Pierre Mayer, José Manuel Garcia Represa,
George Foster and Ms. Natalia Belomestnova, from Dechert LLP; Messrs. George von
Mehren and Stephen P. Anway, from Squire, Sanders (US) LLP; and Dr. Wilson Narvaez

and Ms. Triana Vasquez from PetroEcuador.

-17-

56. During the hearing, Messrs. Rivkin and Verhoosel addressed the Tribunal on
behalf of the Claimants. Messrs. Garcia Carrién, von Mehren, Silva Romero and Mayer
addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Respondent. At the end of the hearing, the
President of the Tribunal informed the parties that, while the Tribunal would attempt to
issue a decision on liability before the scheduled quantum hearing in November 2009,
there were many sizable and important issues to be considered. Therefore, the parties
should continue to prepare for the quantum hearing, regardless of whether or not it may

be necessary as a result of the decision on liability.

57. By letter dated 4 May 2009, counsel for the Claimants informed the Tribunal that
Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel and Ms. Carmen Martinez Lopez had joined the law firm of
Covington and Burling LLP, but that they would continue to form part of the Claimants’

representation.

58. On 12 June 2009, the Claimants filed a Reply on Damages and Counter-Memorial
on Counterclaim Damages, with accompanying documentation. The accompanying
documentation included, inter alia, a Fourth Witness Statement from Mr. Fernando
Albuja, a Second Witness Statement from Mr. Ian Davis, a Fifth Witness Statement from
Mr. Gerald Ellis, a Third Witness Statement from Mr. Paul MacInnes, a Witness
Statement from Mr. John W. Morgan, a Fourth Witness Statement from Mr. Andrew
Patterson, a Second Witness Statement from Dr. Surendra Singh, a Seventh Expert
Report from Dr. Hernan Pérez Loose, a Supplemental Expert Report from Netherland,

Sewell & Associates, and a Rebuttal Expert Report from Prof. Joseph P. Kalt.

- 18 -

59. By letter of 11 August 2009, the Respondent objected to the admissibility of some
of the Claimants’ claims. By letter of 20 August 2009, the Claimants filed observations to
the Respondent’s objections. On 27 August 2009, the Respondent replied to the

Claimants’ response. On 28 August 2009, the Claimants filed a rebuttal.

60. On 31 August 2009, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 7 concerning the

Respondent’s challenge to the admissibility of some of the Claimants’ claims.

6l. On 8 September 2009, the Respondent filed a Rejoinder on Quantum and Reply
on Counterclaim Damages, with accompanying documentation, which included, inter
alia, a Fifth Witness Statement of Mr. Wilson Pastor Morris; a Second Witness Statement
from Mr. Alberto Panchi; a Fifth Expert Report from Dr. Juan Pablo Aguilar Andrade; a
Second Expert Report from Mr. Alfredo Corral Borrero; a Rebuttal Expert Report from
Mr. Daniel Johnston; a Second Expert Report from Mr. Hernan Salgado Pesantes; and a

Rebuttal Expert Report from RPS Scotia.

62. On 21 September 2009, the Tribunal informed the parties by letter that it would
not be in a position to issue its findings on liability prior to the hearing on quantum in
November 2009. On 2 October 2009, the Tribunal held a pre-hearing telephone
conference with the parties. The conference was recorded and copies of the audio

recordings were provided to the parties and the members of the Tribunal.

63. On 5 October 2009, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 8 concerning

production of documents.

-19-

64. On 15 October 2009, the Claimants filed their Rejoinder on Counterclaim

Damages, with accompanying documentation.

65. By email of 16 October 2009, the Claimants informed the Tribunal that, as
requested during the 2 October 2009 telephone conference, the parties had reached an

agreement as to the manner in which to conduct the hearing on quantum.

66. On 29 October 2009, the parties, as requested by the Tribunal, simultaneously
filed Pre-Hearing Skeleton Briefs. On 30 and 31 October 2009, both parties filed

additional exhibits in respect of the hearing on quantum.

67. On 3-7 November 2009, the Tribunal held a hearing on quantum with the parties
at the offices of the World Bank in Paris. The three members of the Tribunal,
Mr. L. Yves Fortier, Professor Brigitte Stern and Mr. David A.R. Williams, attended the
hearing. Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Secretary of the Tribunal, and Ms. Renée Thériault,
Assistant to the Tribunal, were also present at the hearing. At the beginning of the
hearing, the Tribunal confirmed that (as the parties had previously been informed),
despite sustained deliberations it had not proved possible for the Tribunal to issue its
decision on liability prior to the commencement of the quantum hearing. This possibility
was foreshadowed at the liability hearing and, as the dates for the quantum hearing had
been set for a considerable time, they had decided nevertheless to proceed with the

hearing.

68. During the hearing, the Claimants were represented by Mr. Donald P. de Brier,

Ms. Laura Abrahamson, Ms. Melissa Schoeb and Mr. Diego Cattani from OPC;

- 20 -

Messrs. David W. Rivkin, Marco Serrano, William Castledine and Claudio D. Salas and
Ms. Marjorie Menza and Ms. Ruth Miller from Debevoise & Plimpton LLP; and by

Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel and Ms. Carmen Martinez Lopez of Covington & Burling LLP.

69. During the hearing, the Republic of Ecuador was represented by Dr. Diego Garcia
Carrién, Ecuador’s Procurador General del Estado; Messrs. Alvaro Galindo and
Francisco Paredes from the Office of Ecuador’s Attorney General; Messrs. Pierre Mayer,
Eduardo Silva Romero, José Manuel Garcia Represa, Philip Dunham, José Caicedo
Demoulin, Juan Felipe Merizalde Urdaneta, Octavio Fragata Martins de Barros and
Mr. Erik Johnston, from Dechert LLP; Messrs. George von Mehren, Howard Nicols,
Dave Alexander and Ms. Sarah Rathke and Ms. Karen van Horn from Squire, Sanders
(US) LLP; Cptn. Jorge Abarca from PetroEcuador; and Dr. Andrés Donoso from

Petroamazonas.

70. During the hearing, Messrs. Rivkin and Verhoosel addressed the Tribunal on
behalf of the Claimants. Messrs. Garcia Carrién, von Mehren, Silva Romero, Mayer and

Nicols and Ms. Rathke addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Respondent.

71. During the six-day hearing, the following seventeen witnesses and experts were
examined by counsel under the control of the Tribunal: Fernando Albuja, S.P. Singh,
John W. Morgan, Paul McInness, Ian Davis (by video-conference), Andrew Patterson,
Gerald Ellis, Alberto Panchi, Wilson Pastor Morris, Hernan Pérez Loose, Hernan Salgado
Pesantes, Juan Pablo Aguilar Andrade, Alfredo Corral Borrero, Lee George, Gene B.

Wiggins, Joseph P. Kalt and Daniel Johnston.

-21-

72. On 18 December 2009, in accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions, the parties
simultaneously filed (a) Post-Hearing Briefs on Quantum and (b) Post-Hearing Briefs on
the Impact of Law 42 (HCL Amendment) and the VAT Interpretative Law on Quantum,
with accompanying documentation. The Respondent’s accompanying documentation

included, inter alia, a Third Expert Report from Mr. Daniel Johnston.

73. On 22 January 2010, the parties simultaneously filed (a) Reply Post-Hearing
Briefs on Quantum and Counterclaim Damages, and (b) Reply Post-Hearing Briefs on the
Impact of Law 42 (HCL Amendment) and the VAT Interpretative Law on Quantum, with

accompanying documentation.

74. On 4 February 2010, the Tribunal held a second hearing on quantum (closing
arguments) at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. The three members of the
Tribunal, Mr. L. Yves Fortier, Professor Brigitte Stern and Mr. David A.R. Williams,
attended the hearing. Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Secretary of the Tribunal, and Ms. Renée

Thériault, Assistant to the Tribunal, were also present at the hearing.

75. During the hearing, the Claimants were represented by Mr. Donald P. de Brier,
Ms. Laura Abrahamson and Mr. Gerald Ellis from OPC; Messrs. David W. Rivkin,
Marco Serrano and Claudio D. Salas and Ms. Marjorie Menza and Ms. Kimberley
Dettman of Debevoise & Plimpton LLP; and by Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel and Ms. Carmen

Martinez Lopez of Covington & Burling LLP.

76. During the hearing, the Republic of Ecuador was represented by

Dr. Diego Garcia Carrién, Ecuador’s Procurador General del Estado, Messrs. Alvaro

-22-

Galindo, Francisco Paredes and Felipe Aguilar from the Office of Ecuador’s Attorney
General, Messrs. Pierre Mayer, Eduardo Silva Romero, José Manuel Garcia Represa,
Philip Dunham and José Caicedo Demoulin from Dechert LLP; Messrs. George von
Mehren, Howard Nicols and Christopher Panek and Ms. Sarah Rathke and Ms. Rachel
Harris from Squire, Sanders (US) LLP, and Messrs. José Murillo and Geovanny Nuiiez

from PetroEcuador.

77. During the hearing, Messrs. Rivkin and Verhoosel addressed the Tribunal on
behalf of the Claimants. Messrs. Garcia Carrién, von Mehren, Silva Romero, Mayer,

Nicols and Garcia Represa addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Respondent.

78. On 15 February 2011, the President of Tribunal wrote to the parties as follows:

... The Tribunal has reached the point in its deliberations where it requires the
assistance of both parties' experts, Mr. Joseph Kalt and Mr. Daniel Johnston, in
order to help the Tribunal assess the proper calculation of damages.

Therefore, in accordance with Rule 34 (2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the
Tribunal calls upon the parties to produce Messrs. Kalt and Johnston for
consultation with the Tribunal at the ICSID's headquarters in Washington at
10.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 27 April 2011. If the parties agree, the Tribunal
would wish to consult with the parties' experts alone without the presence of
counsel.

79. On 23 February 2011, the President of the Tribunal, in response to the parties’
reply to his letter of 15 February 2011, wrote to the parties as follows:
On behalf of the Tribunal, I acknowledge receipt of the parties’ replies the
contents of which have been noted.
To be clear, the Tribunal reiterates that its deliberations are continuing. The
Tribunal requests the parties to protect the date of 27 April 2011 for
consultation with Messrs. Kalt and Johnston. Again, to be clear, this

consultation will not take place without the presence of counsel unless both
parties agree.

-23-

Finally, the Tribunal notes that both parties request that they be informed of the

issues it wishes to discuss with their experts. The Tribunal agrees. This

information will be communicated to the parties after the consultation of 27

April 2011 has been definitely confirmed. The parties are invited to confirm by

Monday, 7 March 2011, their and the experts’ availability on the proposed

date...
80. On 11 March 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 9, concerning the
production of further expert evidence. In its Order, the Tribunal noted that “[i]n the event
the Tribunal, after it concludes the first phase of its deliberations, makes a positive finding of
liability, it will be required to determine the fair market value of Block 15 as of 16 May 2006
... [T]o assist the Tribunal in its continuing deliberations, the Tribunal deems it necessary to
require the assistance of the parties’ experts with respect to certain issues regarding the
determination of the fair market value of Block 15 as of 16 May 2006.” Accordingly, the
Tribunal invited the parties’ experts, Professor Kalt and Mr. Johnston, “to confer and produce
jointly a report estimating the fair market value of Block 15 as of 16 May 2006, using the
discounted cash flow method.” The Tribunal further established a procedure for the

parties to comment on the experts’ joint report and declared the consultation date of 27

April 2011 vacated.

81. As requested by the Tribunal, on 11 April 2011, the parties’ experts, Professor
Joseph P. Kalt and Mr. Daniel Johnston, issued a Joint Expert Report, which was

circulated to the parties and the members of the Tribunal.

82. In accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions in Procedural Order No. 9, both

parties submitted observations on the Experts’ Joint Report on 18 April 2011.

-24-

83. On 1 May 2011, the Tribunal informed the parties of its decision to hold a hearing
at the seat of the Centre in Washington D.C. with the parties and their experts Professor

Kalt and Mr. Johnston.

84. On 13 May 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 10, providing the
parties’ instructions with respect to the organization of a one-day hearing to be held on 30
June 2011 at the seat of the Centre in Washington D.C. In this Order, the Tribunal
requested that Professor Kalt and Mr. Johnston confer again and produce jointly to the
Tribunal, by 10 June 2011, a supplemental report addressing the parties’ comments. The
two experts were asked by the Tribunal to be present at the 30 June hearing to assist the

Tribunal and answer questions which may be put to them by the Tribunal.

85. On 10 June 2011, Professor Kalt and Mr. Johnston submitted to the parties and
the Tribunal their Supplemental Joint Expert Report. On 17 June 2011, both parties filed
observations on the Experts’ Supplemental Joint Report, as directed in Procedural Order

No. 10.

86. On 20 June 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 11, with further

directions to the parties’ experts.

87. On 24 June 2011, Professor Kalt and Mr. Johnston, pursuant to the terms of
Procedural Order No. 11, submitted to the parties and the Tribunal a Second

Supplemental Joint Expert Report.

88. As scheduled, the Tribunal held a one-day hearing at the seat of the Centre in

Washington D.C. on 30 June 2011. The three members of the Tribunal, Mr. L. Yves

-25-

Fortier, Professor Brigitte Stern and Mr. David A.R. Williams, attended the hearing.
Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Secretary of the Tribunal, and Ms. Renée Thériault, Assistant to the

Tribunal, were also present at the hearing.

89. During the hearing, the Claimants were represented by Ms. Laura Abrahamson
and Messrs. Paul MacInnes and Gerald Ellis from OPC; David W. Rivkin, Greg Senn,
Julian S. Manu-Sarbeng, Vonn Ricks and Kirk Monroe and Ms. Marjorie Menza and Ms.
Bethany A. Davis Noll of Debevoise & Plimpton LLP. The Claimants’ expert, Professor
Joseph P. Kalt, Mr. Stephen Makowka and Ms. Nandana Thomas, from Compass

Lexecon, were also present during the hearing.

90. During the hearing, the Republic of Ecuador was represented by Dr. Diego Garcia
Carrién, Ecuador’s Procurador General del Estado, Mr. Francisco Grijalva, Ms. Christel
Gaibor and Ms. Gianina Osejo from the Office of Ecuador’s Attorney General; Messrs.
George von Mehren, Howard Nicols and Ms. Rachel Harris from Squire, Sanders (US)
LLP; Messrs. Eduardo Silva Romero, Philip Dunham and Alvaro Galindo from Dechert
LLP. The Respondent’s expert, Mr. Daniel Johnston, as well as Messrs. Erick Johnston

and René Daigre were also present during the hearing.

91. At the beginning of the hearing, the President of the Tribunal made the following

statement:*

As the parties will recall, on 15 February 2011, the tribunal informed the
parties that it had reached the point in its deliberations both as to liability and

> Hearing Transcript (30 June 2011) at pages 11-12.

- 26 -

quantum where it required the assistance of both parties' respective quantum
experts, Professor Joseph Kalt and Mr. Daniel Johnston. More specifically, the
tribunal stated that, in the event, after it concludes the first phase of its
deliberations, it should make a positive finding of liability, it will be required
to determine the fair market value of Block 15 as of 16 May 2006. If it decided
-- if it decided to use the discounted cash flow method in order to estimate this
value, the tribunal formed the view that Professor Kalt and Mr. Johnston, who
had given evidence earlier on the use of that method, could answer certain
specific questions and help it with certain calculations.

During the hearing, the members of the Tribunal posed questions to the parties’ experts

and counsel.

92. On 6 October 2011, the President of the Tribunal wrote, on behalf of the Tribunal,

to the parties as follows:

Members of the Tribunal continue their intense deliberations. The Tribunal
regrets that its decision has taken longer to finalize than it would have wished.
However, the parties have submitted to the Tribunal, in their extensive written
and oral submissions, a myriad of factual and legal issues which all need to be
analyzed and determined. The Tribunal is confident that its deliberations will
end soon and a decision issued shortly thereafter.

In recent days, the Tribunal has been addressing an issue which, in its view,
neither party has dealt with comprehensively in its prior submissions. The issue
concems the interpretation of the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating
Agreement.

The Respondent submits [...] that the calculation of damages (if any) to be
awarded to the Claimants in the circumstances must be limited to a 60%
interest in Block 15 because of the transfer by the Claimants to AEC under the
terms of the Farmout Agreement of 40% of their interest under the
Participation Contract. The Claimants do not accept the Respondent’s
contention [...]

The governing law clause of the Farmout Agreement provides:

This Agreement shall be governed by and construed, interpreted and
applied in accordance with the laws of the State of New York, United
States of America, excluding any choice of law rules or conflict of
law principles which would refer the matter to the laws of another
jurisdiction, except to the extent that the laws of Ecuador require
application of the laws of Ecuador to the Participating Agreements
and Block 15 or other property situated in or operations or activities
conducted in Ecuador.

-27-

The Tribunal notes that the Claimants argued that the transfer of the “economic
interest” to AEC would not be considered an assignment under New York law
and that, as a result, the non-assignment clause in Article 16(1) of the
Participation Contract was not breached [...] . Accordingly, the Claimants did
not analyze the effect and validity of an assignment, (assuming an assignment
had indeed occurred as a result of the Farmout Agreement and the Joint
Operating Agreement), in breach of Article 16(1) of the Participation Contract
and Article 79 of the Hydrocarbons Law. In addition, the Claimants did not
analyze Ecuadorian and New York law in this regard. The Tribunal further
notes that the Respondent argued that New York law is irrelevant to the issue
of whether an assignment under the Farmout Agreement and the Joint
Operating Agreement (if any) is in breach of Ecuadorian law (Counter-
Memorial on Liability, para 185).

In sum, neither party, in their quantum submissions, referred to the effect of
Article 79 of the Hydrocarbons Law or Article 16(1) of the Participation
Contract on the assumption that an assignment of rights occurred as a result of
the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement.

The Tribunal now invites the parties to assume that an assignment of rights did
occur as a result of the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement.
On the basis of this assumption, the parties are requested to undertake a
detailed analysis of the effect of an assignment of rights made under a contract
governed by New York law (i.e. the Farmout Agreement and the Joint
Operating Agreement) in violation of a non-assignment clause set forth in a
contract governed by Ecuadorian law (i.e. Article 16(1) of the Participation
Contract) and in violation of Article 79 of the Hydrocarbons Law. The parties
are further requested to address both New York law and Ecuadorian law and to
make submissions accordingly, even if one or both parties may consider that,
for any reason, New York law and/or Ecuadorian law may not be relevant to
the determination of the effect of the Farmout Agreement and the Joint
Operating Agreement.

 

The parties’ submissions will be exct d simul ly and submitted to
the Tribunal within 28 days from this date. The Tribunal will then decide
whether reply briefs are necessary.
While the parties may refer to new legal authorities with their respective
submissions, they may not file any document which is not already in the
record.

93. On 3 November 2011, the parties simultaneously filed briefs in response to the

Tribunal’s directions of 6 October 2011. As directed by the Tribunal, the parties filed

simultaneously reply briefs on 22 November 2011.

- 28 -

94. On 16 December 2011, Ms. Thériault, the assistant to the Tribunal, left the

successor law firm to Ogilvy Renault, Norton Rose OR, and thus ceased her functions.

95. On 23 February 2012, the President of the Tribunal wrote, on behalf of the

Tribunal, to the parties as follows:

...Members of the Tribunal have now conferred on whether to schedule a
hearing in person, as requested by the Respondent, in order to address orally
the issues raised by the Tribunal in its communication of 6 October 2011 to the
parties and then briefed extensively by them in the submissions of 3 and 22
November 2011.

While the Tribunal remains of the view that a hearing is not necessary, it notes
that the Claimants, in their communication of 20 February, stated that they had
no objection to a hearing. In the circumstances, the Tribunal has decided to
accede to the Respondent’s request and schedule peremptorily a hearing in
London on Thursday 12 April 2012. The Hearing will commence at 10 a.m.
and end at 5 p.m.

The parties are invited to confer and agree a timetable for the hearing which
they will communicate to the Tribunal by 23 March 2012.

The parties are put on notice now that, immediately after the hearing of 12
April, the Tribunal will declare the proceeding closed in accordance with
ICSID Arbitration Rule 38.

96. In accordance with the Tribunal’s directions, a hearing with the parties was held
in London, United Kingdom on 12 April 2012. The three members of the Tribunal,
Mr. L. Yves Fortier, Professor Brigitte Stern and Mr. David A.R. Williams, attended the

hearing. Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Secretary of the Tribunal was also present at the hearing.

97. During the hearing, the Claimants were represented by Mr. Donald P. de Brier,
Ms. Laura Abrahamson, Mr. Michael L. Preston and Mr. Gerald Ellis from OPC; Messrs.
David W. Rivkin and Ms. Marjorie Menza of Debevoise & Plimpton LLP; Messrs.
Gaétan Verhoosel and James O’Shea and Ms. Carmen Martinez Lopez of Covington &

Burling, LLP.

-29 -

98. During the hearing, the Republic of Ecuador was represented by Dr. Diego Garcia
Carrién, Ecuador’s Procurador General del Estado, Ms. Christel Gaibor and Ms. Gianina
Osejo from the Office of Ecuador’s Attorney General; Messrs. George von Mehren, and
Stephen P. Anway from Squire, Sanders (US) LLP.; Messrs. Eduardo Silva Romero and
Pierre Mayer and Ms. Audrey Caminades from Dechert LLP; and H.E. Ambassador Ana

Alban, Ecuador’s Ambassador to the United Kingdom.

99. During the hearing, Messrs. Rivkin and Verhoosel addressed the Tribunal on
behalf of the Claimants. Dr. Garcia Carrién and Messrs. von Mehren, Anway, Silva

Romero and Mayer addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Respondent.

100. At the end of the hearing, the President of the Tribunal, in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 38(1), declared the proceedings closed and invited the parties to submit

statements of the costs incurred by them in the conduct of these proceedings.

101. In accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions, the parties simultaneously filed
their Statements of Costs and Fees on 30 April 2012 (revised by Respondent on July 9,

2012 and by Claimants on July 16, 2012).

102. As the procedural history of this case makes abundantly clear, this proceeding has
been very lengthy. In fact, the procedural history of this arbitration set out above is not
meant to be exhaustive. From the outset, the parties have raised a myriad of legal and
factual issues pertaining to provisional measures, jurisdiction, merits and liability. In
addition, the Tribunal, throughout this arbitral proceeding, has been required to address

numerous procedural requests and applications, all of which were extensively and

-30-

diligently briefed by the parties, resulting in literally thousands of pages of submissions
and exhibits. The Tribunal considers it unnecessary to describe these submissions

beyond the account set forth above.

103. As has been seen, the Tribunal has issued a 47 page Decision on the Claimants’
Application for Provisional Measures, a 44 page Decision on Jurisdiction and 11
important Procedural Orders. The Claimants have submitted 32 statements by 14
witnesses and 15 reports by 5 experts. For its part, the Respondent has submitted 18
statements by 11 witnesses and 17 reports by 7 experts. The Claimants have filed 662
exhibits and 667 legal authorities and the Respondent has filed 379 exhibits and 368 legal
authorities. In all, there have been 9 hearings, comprising 22 days, since the First Session
of the Tribunal on 2 May 2007. The many written submissions of the Claimants consist
of 2,226 pages and the written submissions of the Respondent 1,964 pages. The

transcripts of all proceedings consist of 5,291 pages.

104. The Tribunal wishes to acknowledge the dedication and professionalism of
counsel for both the Claimants and the Respondent who have assisted the Tribunal

throughout this arbitration.

Il. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

A. Introduction

105. This proceeding concerns various alleged breaches by Ecuador under both
domestic and international law, especially under the Treaty Between the United States of

America and the Republic of Ecuador Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal

-31-

Protection of Investment (the “Treaty” or “BIT”). In addition, the Claimants rely on an
agreement referred to as the “Participation Contract” dated 21 May 1999 between OEPC,
Ecuador and Petroecuador in connection with the exploration and exploitation of
hydrocarbons in what has been identified as “Block 15” of the Ecuadorian Amazon. The
caducidad of the Participation Contract was declared by decree of the Ecuadorian
Minister of Energy and Mines on 15 May 2006, resulting in termination of the

Participation Contract.

106. By way of introduction, the Tribunal recalls that the relief sought by the

Claimants in their Request for Arbitration is set forth as follows:

Claimants respectfully request an award in their favor,

(a) Declaring that Respondents have breached their obligations
under the Participation Contract and the Operating Agreements,
the Treaty, and Ecuadorian and international law;

(b) Ordering Respondents to declare null and void the Caducidad
Decree and to reinstate fully OEPC’s rights under the
Participation Contract and the Operating Agreements;

(c) Directing Respondents to indemnify Claimants for all damages
caused as a result of their breaches, including costs and expenses
of this proceeding, in amounts to be determined at the hearing,
which Claimants believe will exceed US$1 billion;

(d) Directing Respondents to pay Claimants interest on all sums
awarded, in amounts to be determined at the hearing, and to

order any such further relief as may be available and appropriate
in the circumstances.

107. The Tribunal further recalls that, in response, the Respondent has denied the

Claimants’ allegations of breach and formulated a counterclaim as follows:

Ecuador respectfully requests that the Tribunal:

-32-

1. Declare that Ecuador has complied with its obligations under the
Participation Contract, Ecuadorian law, and the Treaty, and dismiss
all of the Claimants’ claims without prejudice.

2. Declare that OEPC breached the Participation Contract by using
diplomatic channels and making recourse to the U.S. Government in
connection with disputes arising out of or relating to the performance
of the Participation Contract in contravention of Clause 22.2.1.

3. Declare that OEPC’s claims in this arbitration were not made in good
faith, and to the contrary, were asserted either negligently or with the
intent to cause harm to Ecuador, and did in fact cause such harm.

4. Declare that Ecuador suffered damages from OEPC’s breaches of
contract, malicious prosecution/abuse of rights, destruction of Block
15’s operation, and failure to pay assignment fees, and order OEPC
to pay such damages in an amount subject to proof;

5. Order the Claimants to pay interest on such amount at the legal rate;

6. Order the Claimants to pay the costs of this arbitration, including all
costs paid to ICSID and to the Tribunal, plus Ecuador’s attorneys’
fees and disbursements, as well as interest on the foregoing.

108. In order to fully understand the Tribunal’s analysis and findings on liability, it is
necessary to set out at some length the factual matrix disclosed by the written and oral

evidence presented by the parties during this arbitration. The Tribunal will now proceed

to do so.

B. OEPC’s Development and Operation of Ecuador’s Block 15

109. The area of land in Ecuador known as Block 15 covers approximately 200,000
hectares and is located several hundred kilometres east of Quito in Ecuador’s most
prolific oil-producing region, known as the Oriente Basin, deep in the Ecuadorian

Amazon rainforest.

110. Block 15 includes, in the western part, the producing fields of Limoncocha,

Yanaquincha, and the Indillana Complex, and in the eastern part, the Edén Yuturi field.

- 33 -

The Limoncocha and Edén Yuturi fields are located partially within, and partially outside
Block 15. They straddle the border between Block 15 and properties managed by
Petroproduccién, the operating subsidiary of Petroecuador. Under Ecuador’s
Hydrocarbons Law (the “HCL”), fields such as these, once declared to be common to
both a contractor and Petroecuador by the Minister of Energy and Mines, must be
“unitized” and run jointly by the contractor and Petroproducci6n pursuant to unitized

field agreements.

111. OEPC’s presence in Ecuador began on 25 January 1985, when it entered into a
services contract with the Corporacién Estatal Petrolera Ecuatoriana (now
Petroecuador).* Pursuant to that contract, OEPC provided services related to the

exploration and production of oil in Block 15 (the “Services Contract”).

112. Under the terms of the Services Contract, OEPC provided 100% of the services
required to produce oil in Block 15, ranging from identifying possible deposits through
exploration to producing the oil out of the ground. If OEPC discovered oil, it was
reimbursed for its costs and investments pursuant to various conditions and formulas in

the contract. However, 100% of the crude oil produced belonged to Petroecuador.

113. At the time the Services Contract was signed, Block 15 remained relatively
unexplored. Hence, OEPC’s initial focus in the block was on identifying possible
reserves for exploitation. After eight years of exploration, OEPC began production from

Block 15 in 1993. In May 1993, OEPC and Petroecuador also signed a unitized field

* Today, Empresa Ptiblica de Hidrocarburos del Ecuador.

-34-

agreement for the joint operation of the Limoncocha field. That unitized field agreement

was set to expire as soon as the Services Contract expired.

Cc. The Participation Contract

114. In 1993, Ecuador amended its HCL to allow the negotiation of “participation
contracts.” At its core, a participation contract is essentially a type of production sharing
agreement: the State and contractors share in the production of crude oil, with all
expenditures borne by the contractor. This contractual model gave producers a stake in
the production that made exploration risks more palatable. Further, it guaranteed
Ecuador a profit from its production share, since it no longer had any expenses associated

with oil production.

115. OEPC and Ecuador began the negotiation of their participation contract in
January 1997. The negotiations took nearly two years, and the Participation Contract was
finally signed on 21 May 1999 (the previously-defined ‘Participation Contract’).
According to Clause 1, the contracting parties were the “Republic of Ecuador, through
[...] Petroecuador [...] [and] Occidental Exploration and Production Company, Ecuador
Branch.” Pursuant to Clause 6.1 of the Participation Contract, OEPC had the right to
develop and to exploit the Indillana Complex, known as the Base Area in the Contract,
until 2012, and other fields from which production began after the signing of the
Participation Contract, such as the Edén Yuturi and Yanaquincha fields and potentially

the Paka Sur and Paka Norte fields, until 2019.

116. The Participation Contract, which expressly stated that it was to be “governed

exclusively by Ecuadorian law,” transformed the conditions under which OEPC operated

-35-

in Ecuador. Pursuant to Clause 4.2 of the Participation Contract, OEPC would no longer
be reimbursed for its expenditures in exploring and producing Block 15. In return for
accepting the obligation to explore, develop and exploit Block 15, and being responsible
for all the associated expenditures, OEPC received a share of the oil produced from
Block 15, referred to as OEPC’s “participation”. Clause 4.3 provided that “Contractor
shall invest capital and use the personnel, equipment, machinery and technology needed
for the faithful performance of such activities in consideration of which Contractor shall
receive, as participation, the percentage of Fiscalized Production provided for in Clause
8.1.” OEPC also had various other obligations under the Participation Contract,
including payment of all Ecuadorian taxes and duties; periodic reporting of certain
information to Ecuador; the establishment of good relations with the community; and the

protection of the environment.

117. The amount of OEPC’s participation was determined on the basis of the equation
described in the above-referred Clause 8.1. That equation took into account several
factors, including the field, the rate of production, and certain agreed-upon percentages.
At the end of 2005, OEPC’s participation was approximately 70% of the oil produced
from Block 15. After payment of expenses, taxes and other assessments, however,

between 1999 and 2006, OEPC allegedly received approximately 30% of total net profits.

118. Clause 8.5 established Ecuador’s participation in the oil produced from Block 15.
That participation was calculated as the balance of the oil produced from Block 15 over

and above OEPC’s participation. Pursuant to Clause 5.1.2, OEPC was obligated to

- 36 -

“Tt]ransfer to Petroecuador the State Participation at the Fiscalization and Delivery

Center.”

119. The Tribunal notes, since this provision will be referred to later in the present
Award, that OEPC was allowed to dispose freely of its share of the production from
Block 15 as it wished. Under Clause 5.3.2, OEPC had the right to “[rJeceive and freely
dispose of Contractor participation as established in Clause 8.1 of this Participation
Contract.” While OEPC could freely dispose of its participation, its ability to transfer or
assign its rights and obligations under the Participation Contract was subject to stringent
conditions. Chapter 16 of the Participation Contract, entitled “Transfer and Assignment”,
sets forth these conditions in provisions which are at the heart of the parties’ dispute in
this arbitration. These provisions, which are considered in greater detail later in this

Award, include the following:

16.1 Transfer of this Participation Contract or assignment to third parties of the
rights under the Participation Contract, must have the authorization of the
Corresponding Ministry, in accordance with existing laws and _ regulations,
especially the provisions contained in Art. 79 of the Hydrocarbons Law and
Executive Decrees No. 809, 2713 and 1179.

16.2 The prohibition to transfer or assign rights under this Participation Contract
without the approval of the Corresponding Ministry, as determined in Art. 79 of the
Hydrocarbons Law, is not an obstacle to freely trade Contractor’s stock, without
need of said authorization, provided that the trading of said stock does not change,
modify or extinguish the legal existence of Contractor, nor constitute a decrease in
its administrative, financial and technical capacities with reference to this
Participation Contract.

16.4 If Contractor deems it advisable to create consortia or associations for one or
several exploration and exploitation activities covered by this Participation
Contract, Contractor may do so with the prior acceptance of PETROECUADOR
and authorization from the Corresponding Ministry. Contractor’s obligations shall
continue to exist in their parts, and the companies forming the consortium or

-37-

association shall be jointly and severally liable for performance of same; and for
such purpose shall furnish the corresponding guarantees. A joint and several
c i shall itute an indispensable requi for PETROECUADOR
to accept the creation of the aforementioned consortia or associations.
PETROECUADOR shall continue to maintain its direct legal relations with
Contractor, to demand compliance with all obligations, and to pay the agreed
participation percentages.

 

16.5 The integration of such consortia or associations, or the withdrawal of
Contractor from same, without the authorization of the Corresponding Ministry,
shall constitute legal grounds for declaring the termination of this Participation
Contract.

120. The Tribunal also notes that these provisions were mirrored in the “Termination
and Forfeiture [Caducidad]” provisions of the Participation Contract, which stated that

“Tt]his Participation Contract shall terminate,” inter alia, as follows:

21.1.1 By a declaration of forfeiture [caducidad] issued by the Corresponding
Ministry for the causes and following the procedure established in Articles seventy
four (74), seventy five (75) and seventy six (76) of the Hydrocarbons Law, insofar
as applicable.

21.1.2 Due to a transfer of rights and obligations of the Participation Contract
without prior authorization from the Corresponding Ministry.

21.3 For the purposes of forfeiture and penalties, the provisions of Chapter IX
of the Hydrocarbons Law shall be applicable.

121. At this juncture, the Tribunal also observes that these provisions of the
Participation Contract refer to many of the provisions of Ecuador’s HCL’, in particular
the following:

5 As per the parties’ agreed translation of the HCL in effect on 15 May 2006.

- 38 -

CHAPTER IX
Caducidad, Sanctions and Transfers

Art. 74. The Ministry of Energy and Mines may declare the caducidad of
contracts, if the contractor:

 

11. Transfers rights or enters into a private contract or agreement for the
assignment of one or more of its rights, without the Ministry’s authorization;

12. Forms consortia or associations for exploration and exploitation operations, or
withdraws from them, without the Ministry’s authorization; and,

13. Commits repeat violations of the Law and the regulations thereto.

Art. 75. The declaration of caducidad of a contract implies the immediate return to
the State of the contracted areas, and the delivery of all equipment, machinery and
other exploration or production items, industrial or transportation installations, at
no cost to PETROECUADOR and, also in addition, the automatic loss of bonds
and securities provided under the Law and the contract, which shall remain to the
benefit of the State.

Art. 76. Before caducidad of a contract is declared, the Ministry of Energy and
Mines shall notify the contractor, providing it not less than thirty and not more than
sixty days from the date of the notification, to perform its unmet obligations or
dismiss the charges.

Art. 77. A breach of contract that does not cause caducidad effects or a violation
of the Law or Regulations shall be punished with a fine imposed by the National
Hydrocarbons Director, of two hundred to three thousand United States Dollars,
depending on the seriousness of the violation, in addition to compensation for the
damages caused.

 

Art. 79. The transfer of a contract or the assignment to third parties of rights
derived from a contract shall be null and void and shall have no validity
whatsoever if there is no prior authorization from the Ministry of Energy and
Mines, without prejudice to the declaration of caducidad as provided for in this
Law.

The State shall receive a premium for the transfer and the beneficiary company
shall enter into a new contract under more favourable economic conditions for the
State and for PETROECUADOR than the ones contained in the original contract.

- 39 -

As will become apparent, the provisions of Article 74(11) and Article 79 are of central

importance in this case.

D. The Unitized Fields Joint Operating Agreements

122. During the negotiation of the Participation Contract, OEPC sought to conclude an
overall agreement that would allow it to receive the full benefits of operating Block 15.
Thus, on the same day that the Participation Contract was signed, OEPC and
Petroproduccién also signed joint operating agreements for the unitized exploitation of
the common reservoirs in both the Edén Yuturi and Limoncocha fields (the “Unitized

Fields Joint Operating Agreements”).

123. Pursuant to Clause 3.3 of the Unitized Fields Joint Operating Agreements, OEPC
and Petroproduccién agreed that “[t]o obtain greater efficiency and economy in the
operation, [...] the management of the Unitized Field shall be treated as part of the
management of Block 15. Therefore, the same rights and obligations of the Parties under
the Participation Contract, in whatever is pertinent, shall be applicable to this Operational

Agreement.”

124. There was one significant change to the terms of the Participation Contract with
respect to these unitized fields. For the Limoncocha and Edén Yuturi fields, OEPC was
not deemed the sole operator. Rather, unlike Clause 4.2 of the Participation Contract,
which gave OEPC the “exclusive right” to develop and to produce from Block 15, Clause
5.1 of the Unitized Fields Joint Operating Agreements provided that “[u]nder the scheme
of Joint Management, Contractor and PETROPRODUCCION constitute the Operator for

the Unitized Field[s], starting on the Effective Date of this Operational Agreement.”

- 40 -

125. This joint operatorship was achieved through the establishment of a joint
operating committee (the “Unitized Fields Committee”), which was the executive body
charged with managing the joint operation of the Limoncocha and Edén Yuturi fields.
Among other things, the Unitized Fields Committee approved the budgets and

development plans, and was informed of the daily operations in the unitized fields.

126. The Tribunal observes that when the Participation Contract and the Unitized
Fields Joint Operating Agreements were signed in 1999, OEPC was producing
approximately 28,000 barrels per day from Block 15. After the signature of these
agreements, OEPC began a significant capital expenditure program in Block 15 and
allegedly increased daily production from Block 15 from approximately 28,000 barrels
per day to over 100,000 barrels per day, a level of production it maintained through 2006.
Production from the Edén Yuturi field allegedly accounted for the majority of this
increase. During this period, the field was thus brought from being entirely undeveloped

to producing 70% of the oil produced from Block 15.

E. The Farmout with AEC

127. In order to finance the expansion of its operations in Ecuador, OEPC sought an
arrangement that could provide the necessary funds, as well as diversify and reduce its
exposure. At the same time, Alberta Energy Corporation Ltd. (“AEC”), through the
related entity AEC International (“AECI” or “AEC”), was looking to expand its
investments in Ecuador. AEC had originally considered purchasing outright Block 15
from OEPC in 1999, together with two unrelated companies, City Investing and City

Oriente, which operated blocks to the north of Block 15. However, while it did purchase

-41-

the City companies that year, it did not approach OEPC about a purchase of Block 15
until 2000. On 15 May 2000, AEC made a formal proposal to OEPC to acquire OEPC’s

entire interest in Block 15. OEPC rejected AEC’s proposal.

128. AEC then proposed to “farmin” to Block 15. OEPC stated to the Tribunal that a
farmout agreement with AEC was an attractive alternative because it allowed OEPC to
continue to invest in Block 15 but with less of its own capital and to diversify its in-
country risk. The negotiations led to the signing on 9 August 2000 of a Letter of Intent
which described in some detail (at paragraph 1) the proposed farmout as a two-stage

transaction as follows:

1. PROPOSED FARMIN TRANSACTION

AEC International a Business Unit of Alberta Energy Company Ltd., or
its designated direct or indirect wholly owned subsidiary (collectively
hereinafter referred to as “AECI”’), would acquire a 40% economic
interest in Block 15 by farming it to OEPC’s interest as follows (the
“Farmin Transaction”).

(a) AECI would farmin to Block 15 to acquire a 40% economic
interest in Block 15 from OEPC. The economic interest would
be a “working interest” or “participating interest” except that it
would not include nominal legal title to Block 15 or interest as a
party to the Participation Contract. While OEPC would continue
to own 100% of the legal title of the participating interest in
Block 15 under the Participation Contract, OEPC would hold
AECT’s 40% economic interest as a “nominee” or “bare trustee”
with the obligation to convey legal title, subject to government
approvals, at a mutually agreeable time following AECI’s
payment of all amounts required to earn its interest. Prior to
such conveyance, while OEPC holds AECI'’s interest in trust,
OEPC shall be obligated to represent the interest of AECI, as if
AECI were a participant with a 40% interest under the terms of a
standard joint operating agreement to be mutually agreed. After
such acquisition, the economic interests associated with Block
15 would be shared as follows (subject to paragraph (b) below):

OEPC 60%
AECI 40%

-42-

(b)

AECI would earn its 40% economic interest by paying a total of
U.S. $180 million (subject to increase as described below)
towards OEPC’s share of Block 15 exploration and development
expenditures. This U.S. $180 million shall be paid as U.S. $70
million as described in Clause 1(c) below, plus 90% of OEPC’s
60% share (the “OEPC Carry”) of: (A) the total capital
expenditures to be incurred in connection with the development
of Block 15, including, without limitation, costs associated with
the construction of ancillary pipelines or facilities related to
Block 15 crude oil production and (B) costs otherwise properly
incurred under the Participation Contract for drilling, exploration
or exploitation (collectively, “Block 15 Capex”), for the calendar
years as set forth below (each, an “Annual Carry Amount”),
pursuant to the following schedule:

Calendar Year Annual Carry Amount
2001 US$50 million
2002 US$25 million
2003 US$20 million
2004 US$15 million

For each calendar year set forth above (each, a “Year”) AECI
shall pay its 40% share of Block 15 Capex plus the Annual Carry
Amount to satisfy the OEPC Carry, and the Annual Carry
Amount shall constitute a cap on AECI’s obligation to pay the
OEPC Carry; provided that:

(i) if AECI satisfies the OEPC Carry for any Year, then
additional Block 15 Capex for such Year, shall be shared
among OEPC and AECI as set forth in paragraph (a)
above;

(ii) if the amount of the OEPC Carry for any Year except
2004 is less than the Annual Carry Amount for such
Year, then AECI shall add 110% of the shortfall amount
(the “Carry Over Amount”) to the Annual Carry Amount
for the following Year, thereby increasing the Annual
Carry Amount for the following Year; and

(iii) if the amount of the OEPC Carry for 2004 is less than
the Annual Carry Amount for such Year, then AECI
shall pay to OEPC, on or before January 31, 2005, an
amount equal to the shortfall amount as an advance by
AECI to OEPC of OEPC’s 60% share of Block 15
Capex to be incurred thereafter. AECI and OEPC shall
each act in good faith and use reasonable efforts to
conduct development, drilling, exploration and
exploitation operations on Block 15 so as to minimize
the shortfall amount for 2004.

-43-

(c)

(d)

(e)

()

129. Negotiations continued through the late summer and early fall. On 19 October
2000, the parties signed the Farmout Agreement (the “Farmout” or ‘“Farmout
Agreement”), which contained the terms originally outlined in the Letter of Intent. The
parties also signed an operating agreement for the purpose of implementing the Farmout
(the “Joint Operating Agreement” or “JOA” and, together with the Farmout Agreement,
the “Farmout Agreements”).
October 2000. The contract was made retroactive to 1 October 2000, i.e. the beginning

of the fourth quarter.

AECI shall pay to OEPC, on the Closing Date, as hereinafter
defined, the sum of U.S. $70 million as an advance by AECI to
OEPC of OEPC’s 60% share of Block 15 Capex incurred after
the Effective Date, as hereinafter defined, in excess of the OEPC
Carry. Notwithstanding OEPC’s obligation ultimately to use this
U.S. $70 million and any shortfall amount payable to OEPC
pursuant to Clause 1(b)(iii) above for its 60% share of Block 15
Capex, nothing herein shall prohibit, limit, or otherwise restrict
OEPC, in the meanwhile, from loaning all or any portion of such
U.S. $70 million and/or such shortfall amount to one or more of
its affiliates, at a reasonable fair market interest, with such
interest to be for OEPC’s account and used to pay OEPC’s Block
15 Capex incurred after the Effective Date in excess of OEPC
Carry.

The effective date of the proposed Farmin Transaction shall be
August 1, 2000 (the “Effective Date”), and the closing date shall
be at a time and date mutually agreed by the Parties and as soon
thereafter as practicable (the “Closing Date’), subject to
satisfaction or waiver of the conditions set forth in Section 5 of
this letter. On the Closing Date AECI shall acquire, effective as
of the Effective Date, a 40% economic interest in Block 15 and
40% of OEPC’s (or its affiliate’s, as the case may be) interest, if
any, in the OCP Pipeline Project.

Each of Alberta Energy Company Ltd. and Occidental Oil and
Gas Corporations will cause their respective subsidiaries to
perform their obligations under the Transaction Documents (as
defined below).

OEPC will be the Operator under the Joint Operating
Agreement.

-44-

The parties did not, however, close the deal until 31

130. The Farmout, an agreement governed by the laws of New York, provided for two
phases. In the first phase of the transaction AEC purchased a 40% so-called “economic
interest” in Block 15. Essentially, through contributions to OEPC’s Block 15
investments, AEC purchased the right to 40% of OEPC’s share of Block 15’s production.
This stage of the Farmout was described in Article II, titled “Farmout of Interest in
Farmout Property”. The central provisions of Article II of the Farmout provided as

follows:

Art. 2.01 Effective as of the Effective Time, and subject to obtaining required
governmental approvals, if any, OEPC agrees at Closing (as defined in Section
2.06) to farm out and transfer to AECI, and AECI agrees at Closing to assume all
obligations that originate, accrue or arise after the Effective Time with respect to, a
40% economic interest (the “Farmout Interest”) in the Farmout Property, subject,
however, to payment by AECI of the amounts required to earn such interest as
hereinafter provided and subject to the terms and provisions set out hereinafter.
The Farmout Interest to be transferred to AECI as of the Effective Time includes a
“working interest” or “participating interest” in the Participating Agreements and
Block 15 except that it does not include nominal legal title to an interest in Block
15 or an interest as a party to the Participating Agreements. OEPC shall continue
to own 100% of the legal title to the Participating Agreements and to the interests
in Block 15 granted or provided for in the Participating Agreements; provided that
from and after the Effective Time OEPC shall hold legal title to the interest in the
Farmout Property represented by the Farmout Interest of AECI in the Participating
Agreements and Block 15 as a “nominee” with the obligation to convey legal title
to such interest to AECI, subject to obtaining required governmental approvals,
promptly following AECI’s payment of all amounts required to earn the interest in
the Farmout Property represented by the Farmout Interest as hereafter provided and
the expenditure of such amounts by OEPC as Operator under the JOA for Block 15
Capex (as hereinafter defined). Prior to such conveyance, while OEPC holds legal
title to AECI’s interest in the Farmout Property on behalf of AECI, OEPC shall be
obligated, at the sole risk, cost and expense of AECI, to act with respect to the
Farmout Interest of AECI as AECI shall direct from time to time as if AECI were a
party to the Participating Agreements owning legal title to a 40% interest in the
Participating Agreements and the interests therein granted in Block 15, subject to
and in accordance with the terms and provisions of the JOA provided for in Section
2.02.

Art. 2.03 For such period of time that under Ecuadorian law OEPC holds legal title
to the Farmout Interest on behalf of AECI pursuant to this Agreement, OEPC and

-45-

AECI recognize and agree that taxable items attributable to the Farmout Interest
will be required to be included on the Ecuadorian tax returns of OEPC’s branch
registered in Ecuador and that OEPC will pay AECI’s Farmout Interest share of
Ecuadorian Tax on behalf of AECI. If Closing occurs, AECI agrees to reimburse
OEPC for any Ecuadorian Taxes payable by OEPC, or its Ecuador branch, that are
attributable to the Farmout Interest. [...]

Art. 2.07 If all required governmental approvals, if any, for the transfer to AECI of
the Farmout Interest pursuant to Section 2.01 (being the transfer of an economic
interest in the Farmout Property as provided therein as opposed to the transfer of a
legal title interest as provided for in Section 4.01) have not been obtained on or
before March 31, 2001 then any party hereto may elect, at its option, to terminate
this Agreement by written notice of termination delivered to the other parties,
whereupon this Agreement shall terminate without any further liability or
obligation on the part of any party hereto. [...]

131. The second stage of the Farmout was described in Article IV of the Farmout
Agreement, titled “Assignment of Legal Title.” Article 4.01 provided that this phase
could not occur until and unless two conditions were met: AEC had made the required

payments, and the Government had given its prior authorization:

Art. 4.01 Promptly after AECI has made all payments of the OEPC Carry provided
for in Sections 3.03, 3.04 and 3.05 and OEPC as Operator under the JOA has
expended such amounts for Block 15 Capex, OEPC and AECI shall execute and
deliver such documents as are required to convey legal title to AECI in and to a
40% economic interest in the Participating Agreements and Block 15 and to make
AECI a party to the Participating Agreements as owner of such 40% economic
interest (subject to obtaining required governmental approvals). Any transfer fees
or administrative charges imposed by any government agency or department with
respect to such transactions shall be paid by AECI.

132. In exchange for its economic interest in the production from Block 15, AEC
agreed to pay 40% of all the capital and operating expenses in developing Block 15.

Article 2.02 of the Farmout provided:

As between OEPC and [AEC], [AEC] upon Closing shall be obligated and agrees
to perform all obligations and to bear and pay all costs, charges, expenses and

- 46 -

133.
development costs. Under Article 3.02, approximately $70 million was to be paid upon
Closing. Pursuant to Article 3.03, AEC’s payment of the remaining amount was spread

over four years according to the following schedule: $50 million in 2001, $25 million in

liabilities attributable to the Farmout Interest in the Participating Agreements and
Block 15 [...].

AEC also agreed to pay approximately $180 million towards OEPC’s historical

2002, $20 million in 2003 and $15 million in 2004.

134.

The Joint Operating Agreement refers to the Farmout at Article 3.2.1 as follows:

Pursuant to the provisions of the Farmout Agreement, AECI has on the Effective
Date a forty percent (40%) interest in the Participating Agreements that until the
Transfer Date shall be equivalent economically to, but shall not include, nominal
legal title and, thereafter, shall include legal title. As between OEPC and AECI,
AECI shall be obligated and agrees to perform all obligations and to bear and pay
all costs, charges, expenses and liabilities attributable to the Farmout Interest in
the Participating Agreements and Block 15, and shall be entitled to the rights and
benefits attributable to such Farmout Interest, accruing from and after and
attributable to periods of time after 4:00 a.m. local time in Ecuador on the
Effective Date under and subject to the terms and provisions of this Agreement,
in the same manner and to the same extent as if AECI held legal title to a 40%
economic interest as a participant in the Participating Agreements and Block 15
as a Non-Operator under this Agreement, both prior to and after legal title to the
40% interest comprising the Farmout Interest in the Participating Agreements
and Block 15 is conveyed from OEPC and AECI pursuant to Section 4.01 of the
Farmout Agreement. Likewise, as between OEPC and AECI, subject to the
provisions of Article III of the Farmout Agreement, OEPC shall be obligated to
perform all obligations and to bear and pay all costs, charges, expenses and
liabilities attributable to the remaining 60% interest in the Participating
Agreements and Block 15 owned and held by OEPC for its own account, and
shall be entitled to the rights and benefits attributable to such remaining 60%
interest, accruing from and after and attributable to periods of time after the
Effective Time under and subject to the terms and provisions of this Agreement
applicable to OEPC as Operator and owner of such remaining 60% interest. This
results in the following effective Participating Interests, for purposes of this
Agreement.

OEPC 60%
AECI 40%

-47-

135. Pursuant to Article 4.2.1 of the Joint Operating Agreement, OEPC, as sole
operator, had “all of the rights, functions and duties of [the] Operator under the
Participating Agreements [i.e. the Participation Contract and Unitized Fields Joint
Agreements] and [...]shall conduct all Joint Operations.” As defined in Article 1.40 of
the Joint Operating Agreement, a Joint Operation is an “operation[ ] or activit[y] carried
out by [the] Operator pursuant to this Agreement for Block 15 [...], the costs of which are

chargeable to all Parties.”

136. Under the Joint Operating Agreement, a two-member management committee
was established, with OEPC and AEC each electing one member (the “Management
Committee”). Pursuant to Article 5.2 of the Joint Operating Agreement, the Management
Committee had the “power and duty to authorize and supervise Joint Operations that are
necessary or desirable to fulfill the Participating Agreements and properly explore and
exploit the Agreement Area in accordance with this Agreement and in a manner
appropriate in the circumstances.” That responsibility was to be exercised “[w]ithout

prejudice to the rights and duties of Operator under this Agreement.”

137. Furthermore, Article 4.2.2 provided that “[i]Jn the conduct of Joint Operations
Operator shall [...] [p]erform Joint Operations in accordance with the provisions of the
Participating Agreements, this Agreement, and the approvals and instructions of the

Management Committee not in conflict with this Agreement [...].”

138. Finally, Article 5.13.5 provided that “[n]o decision of the Management
Committee shall be binding if it conflicts with a decision by any Integrated Management

Committee with Petroecuador for the Eden-Yuturi Unit or the Limoncocha Unit or any

- 48 -

other unit in which all or any portion of Block 15 is hereafter unitized.’” AEC had no

representation on the Unitized Fields Committee.

F. The OCP Pipeline

139. At the time the Participation Contract was signed, the only way of bringing oil
from the Oriente Basin to the coast for export was through the aging state-owned
pipeline, known as the SOTE. By that time, however, the SOTE was already operating at
its maximum capacity, and was not capable of transporting the heavier variety of crude

that OEPC found in the Edén Yuturi field.

140. The idea for a new pipeline running from the Oriente Basin to the coast at
Esmeraldas was first considered by a consortium of foreign producers in 1998, but
Ecuador eventually decided to place the contract to build the pipeline out for bid. To this
end, Occidental and other foreign oil companies operating in Ecuador formed two
companies, Oleoducto de Crudos Pesados (OCP) Ltd. (“OCP Ltd.”) and its wholly owned

operating subsidiary, Oleoducto de Crudos Pesados (OCP) Ecuador S.A. (“OCP S.A.”).

141. In August 2000, OCP Ltd. submitted its bid to construct the pipeline. Ecuador
selected OCP Ltd.’s bid over the bids of two other groups in the final quarter of 2000,
and the deal was finalized between November 2000 and February 2001. The OCP
project was of such importance to Ecuador that the then Minister of Energy and Mines,

Pablo Teran, personally conducted the negotiations.

142. Occidental originally took a 24% equity interest in OCP Ltd. However,

Occidental subsequently transferred 40% of that interest to AEC, which reduced

-49-

Occidental’s interest to 14.3%. Because of several further minor and unrelated revisions
to OCP Ltd.’s ownership structure, Occidental’s interest in OCP Ltd. was subsequently

reduced to 14.15%.

143. On 15 February 2001, OCP Ltd. and Ecuador signed the “Contract to Construct
and Operate the Heavy Crude Oil Pipeline and Provision of Public Services for
Transportation of Hydrocarbons” (the “OCP Contract”). Subsequently, on 3 July 2001,
OCP Ltd. signed an approximately $700 million contract with Techint International
Construction Corporation to build the OCP pipeline. Construction was completed in
August 2003. The total cost of the OCP project was approximately $1.5 billion. The
pipeline runs 500 kilometres from Lago Agrio in the Oriente Basin to Balao in the
province of Esmeraldas on the Pacific coast, and ascends and descends nearly 3,000
meters in elevation during that span. It has a capacity of 450,000 barrels per day, though
it has never reached that capacity. The first oil was shipped through the OCP pipeline in

the fall of 2003.

144. The OCP pipeline was financed through a combination of equity contributions by
the owners of OCP Ltd., guaranteed debt, and financing from lenders. As of 2004,
Occidental had made equity contributions of $78 million to the $1.5 billion project and

guaranteed debt worth $118 million.

145. OCP Ltd. secured the majority of the financing through the ship-or-pay
commitments from the pipeline’s users. These commitments were contained in

agreements between the users and OCP S.A. called Initial Shipper Transportation

-50-

Agreements (“ISTAs”). OEPC entered into such an ISTA with OCP S.A. on 30 January

2001, as subsequently amended on 29 May 2001 and 31 July 2001.

146. Pursuant to the ship-or-pay commitments, each sponsor purchased a certain
amount of pipeline capacity, and agreed to pay for that capacity, even if the sponsor did
not use it. OEPC had originally planned on purchasing 70,000 barrels per day of such
guaranteed capacity. Following the Farmout, however, OEPC committed in its ISTA to
42,000 barrels per day. The difference, 40% or 28,000 barrels per day, was purchased by

AEC in performance of the Farmout.

G. The Farmout and Ecuador

147. On 24 October 2000, senior executives of both OEPC and AEC flew to Quito
from the United States and Canada in order to meet with the Minister of Energy and
Mines, Pablo Teran, in the Minister’s office. The purpose of the meeting was to inform
the Minister about the Farmout and discuss the commitment to the OCP pipeline and new
projects in Ecuador. Casey Olson, then Executive Vice President for Business
Development of Occidental, and Paul MacInnes, then President and General Manager of
OEPC, attended this meeting on behalf of OEPC. Steven Bell, then Vice President
International of AEC, and Stephen Newton, then President and General Manager of AEC
Ecuador, attended on behalf of AEC. Minister Teran was the only representative of

Ecuador present at the meeting.

148. There were two distinct subject matters which were addressed during the meeting
and the meeting itself had two distinct phases. The purpose of the first session, which

lasted about 45 minutes, was to present the Farmout to Minister Terdn and was attended

-51-

by both the OEPC and AEC officials. In the second session, attended only by the OEPC
officials and Minister Teran, the parties discussed new projects in Ecuador that OEPC

was interested in pursuing.

149. There is much controversy in this proceeding about what was said, or not said,
during the first session of this meeting. The Tribunal will analyze in a later Section of the
present Award’ the meeting of 24 October and subsequent events. In this Section, the

Tribunal will only set out the facts which inform the background of the arbitration.

150. Both parties acknowledge that no copy of the Farmout Agreement or the Joint

Operating Agreement were handed to Minister Teran during the meeting.

151. The next day, on 25 October 2000, Mr. MacInnes wrote to Minister Teran
regarding the previous day’s meeting. Mr. MacInnes wrote that the Farmout was an
“imminent transaction pursuant to which [OEPC] intends to transfer to [AEC] 40% of its
economic interest in the Participation Contract.” Mr. MacInnes also wrote that,
following that first stage of the transaction, “OEPC will continue being the only
‘Contractor’ entity under the Contract for Block 15;” and that “once [AEC] has complied
with its obligations contemplated in the transfer agreement, OEPC shall transfer to [AEC]
the legal title corresponding to 40% of its interests [...] subject to the approvals that the
Government of Ecuador may require at that time.” The letter ended with a request to the
Minister to “confirm [...] [the] consent with respect to the aforementioned transfer of

economic interests in favor of [AEC].”

° See infra, Part V.B.1.

-52-

152. As explained later in this Award, one of the central issues in this proceeding is
whether, during the meeting of 24 October 2000, Minister Teran in fact indicated that
government approval was (or was not) required for the transfer of the economic interest
to AEC under the Farmout. In this regard, the Tribunal notes that upon closing the
Farmout on 31 October 2000, OEPC and AEC entered into a letter agreement mutually
waiving satisfaction of any required government approvals for the first stage of the
Farmout. That letter also expressly envisaged the requirement of government approval

for the contemplated future transfer of legal title to AEC.

153. Immediately after the Farmout’s closing, on 1 November 2000, OEPC’s ultimate
parent, OPC, issued a press release announcing the Farmout. The press release confirmed
that OEPC would remain the operator of Block 15 and that AEC would receive a 40%

economic interest in the operations.

154. Between late October and late November 2000, there were some meetings
between Mr. MacInnes and Petroecuador’s then Executive President, Mr. Rodolfo

Barniol, during which the Farmout was mentioned.

155. On 8 November 2000, a memorandum was sent by the Director, Operations
Control to the Director of Hydrocarbons Economy in the Ministry of Energy and Mines.

It read as follows:

SUBJECT: TRANSFER OF 40% OF THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS OF THE
BLOCK 15 PARTICIPATION CONTRACT BY OCCIDENTAL
EXPLORATION TO CITY INVESTING COMPANY

With regard to letter No. GG-014-00 dated October 25, 2000, in which
Occidental reports the transfer of 40% of the economic interests in the
Participation Contract for Hydrocarbons Production and Additional Exploration

-53-

for Block 15, including the OEPC rights in the Unified Production Operating
Agreements for the Unified Edén Yuturi and Limoncocha Fields to City
Investing Company, I would like to inform you of the following:

City Investing currently has a Participation Contract with the Government in the
Tarapoa Block and Fanny-18B and Mariann-4A Unified Fields and is the current
operator of the aforementioned Fields. Therefore, it has proven that it has
technical solvency, and for this reason, there would be no impediment for that
assignment of rights.

156. Ina letter dated 22 November 2000, the Director of the National Hydrocarbons
Directorate (“DNH”), Dr. Ratil Salgado, wrote to OEPC requesting information regarding

the technical and financial capabilities of AEC. This letter states:

BACKGROUND:

In communication GG-014-00 dated October 25, 2000, the company you
represent requests authorization to transfer 40% of the rights it has in Block 15,
including the Operational Agreements for Unified Exploitation of the Unified
Fields Edén Yuturi and Limoncocha, in favor of City Investing Company.

ANALYSIS:

According to stipulations in Art. 3 of Executive Decree No. 2713, published in
Official Register No. 694 of May 12, 1995, in which the Regulations to Art. 79
of the Hydrocarbons Law were issued, the total or partial transfer of rights and
obligations derived from a contract cannot for any reason originate the
deterioration of the financial solvency or operational capacity of the contractor,
nor can it negatively affect the work and investment chronogram contemplated in
the original contract or the economic participation of the State and
PETROECUADOR.

In view of this, the Minister of Energy and Mines, previous to the authorization
to transfer said rights and obligations, must make a technical - economic analysis
with the purpose of guaranteeing the work and operation of this current contract.

CONCLUSION:

The National Direction of Hydrocarbons, as a technical organism of the Ministry
of Energy and Mines, requires information to guarantee the economic solvency
of the company City Investing Company Limited, regarding:

Income Tax Declarations for the last two years.

-54-

Balances audited and duly notarized, for the last two years.
157. Dr. Salgado then met with OEPC’s Vice President of Government Relations,
Mr. Fernando Albuja, and two other OEPC representatives on 14 December 2000 in his

office to discuss OEPC’s October 25 letter to Minister Teran.

158. On 12 January 2001, Dr. Salgado sent a memorandum to Minister Teran which

reads, in full, as follows:

BACKGROUND:

Through letter GG-014-00 dated October 25, 2000, Occidental Exploration and
Production Company informed the Ministry of Energy and Mines of its intent to
assign 40% of the rights and obligations for Block 15 to City Investing Company
in the future, including the Unified Production Operating Agreements for the
Unified Edén Yuturi and Limoncocha Fields.

ANALYSIS:

At a meeting held on December 14 of this year at the Department of
Hydrocarbons Economy of this National Office, executives from Occidental
stated that the company is negotiating with City Investing Company to transfer
40% of the rights and obligations it has in Block 15. They will report the
decision when they reach a final agreement.

The representatives of this National Office explained to the company that when
they decide to assign the rights, they must request authorization from the
Ministry of Energy and Mines; otherwise, any participation of City Investing
Company in the current contract would be null and void, as stipulated by
Executive Decree No. 809 that issued the Regulations for Article 79 of the
Hydrocarbons Act, published in Official Gazette No. 197 of May 31, 1985.

CONCLUSIONS:

From the explanation given by executives from Occidental Exploration and
Production Company, we can conclude that the Company is not requesting
authorization to transfer rights, but only reporting on a possible transaction to be
made in the immediate future.

When the company decides to make that transfer, it will request the
corresponding approval from the Ministry of Energy and Mines, which will be

-55-

legalized after payment of the premiums for transfer and improvement of the
economic conditions of the contract.

The only company that will continue to participate in the current contract with
the Ecuadorian Government will be Occidental Exploration and Production
Company, owner of 100% of the shares.

159. Finally, on 17 January 2001, Minister Teraén responded to OEPC’s letter of 25
October 2000, noting the company’s “intention to transfer in the future 40% of the rights
and obligations of block 15,” and indicating that such a future transfer would require prior
government approval. Minister Teran also stated that OEPC “shall be the sole company
that will continue participating in the current contract with the Ecuadorian State since it is
the owner of 100% of the rights and obligations.” This letter, which tracks language from

the 12 January 2001 memorandum quoted above, reads in full as follows:

I acknowledge receipt of your letter GG-014-00, dated October 25, 2000, in
which the company that you represent made know to this Minister its intention to
transfer in the future 40% of the rights and obligations of block 15, including the
Operating Agreements for the Unified Exploitation of the Eden-Yuturi and
Limoncocha Fields in favor of City Investing Company, and further to the
meeting with officers of Occidental, please be advised of the following:

Executive Decree No. 809, which contains the Regulation to Art. 79 of the
Hydrocarbons Law, published in the Official Register No. 197, dated May 31,
1985, in its Article I stipulates that the total or partial transfer of rights and
obligations derived from a contract may be assigned in favor of third parties with
the prior authorization of the Corresponding Ministry, otherwise such transfer
will be invalid and may give rise to the contract’s termination.

In the meeting held at the National Directorate of Hydrocarbons, officers from
Occidental said that the 40% transfer of rights and obligations previously
mentioned would not be implemented at the moment, therefore once the
company you represent decides to perform said transfer, you must request to this
State Ministry the corresponding authorization and the issuance of the Ministerial
Decree through which such transfer will be legalized, with the prior payment of
the transfer fees and enhancement of the economic conditions of the contract, as
it is stipulated in Art. 1 of the Executive Decree 2731, published in the Official
Register No. 694, dated May 12, 1995.

- 56-

It is important to point out that Occidental Exploration and Production Company
shall be the sole company that will continue participating in the current contract
with the Ecuadorian State since it is the owner of 100% of the rights and
obligations.

160. The record does not disclose any response on the part of OEPC to Minister

Teran’s letter of 17 January 2001.

H. The Moores Rowland Audit

161. The issue of transfer of rights by OEPC to AEC surfaced again when, in 2003, the
audit firm Moores Rowland Ecuador (“Moores Rowland”) was retained by the DNH to
conduct the audit of OEPC. During their audit, Moores Rowland analyzed invoices from
OEPC to AEC for the sale of crude oil during the calendar year 2002 and, in this
connection, asked OEPC on 29 January 2004 to examine the contract between OEPC and

AEC in virtue of which these sales took place.

162. Shortly thereafter, on 9 February 2004, Moores Rowland wrote to the DNH
regarding the “current situation and decision of the Ministry of Energy and Mines” in
connection with OEPC’s “transfer in the future [of] 40% of the rights and obligations of

Block 15” to AEC.

163. Moores Rowland was then provided with unsigned but true copies of both the
Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement by Mr. Fabian Revelo of OEPC.
These copies were later given by Moores Rowland to Dr. Patricia Zurita, the DNH audits

coordinator.

-57-

164. Moores Rowland requested from OEPC an executed copy of its agreements with
AEC. OEPC decided not to accede to this request. The Tribunal notes the following

internal OEPC email of 8 March 2004:

We are not going to provide a copy of the agreement with Encana to the DNH
auditors. Informally, the DNH auditors have told us that not providing them with
a copy will determine the inclusion of a paragraph called “limitacidén al alcance”
(limitation to the audit scope). I consider we shall do nothing until the auditors
issue they [sic] report and/or DNH request us information on the deal with AEC.

165. On 15 March 2004, Mr. MacInnes wrote to Moores Rowland as follows:

In the year 2000, OEPC and AEC Ecuador signed an agreement by means of
which, subject to satisfying certain conditions and subject to approvals required
by the Ecuadorian Government, they committed themselves to transfer in the
future the legal title corresponding to 40% interest in the Contract for Block 15
and the Operation Agreements for Unified Exploitation. OEPC informed this to
the Ministry of Energy and Mines in letter GG-014-00 of October 25, 2000. In
said communication, we also stated that the Company I represent will continue
being the only one responsible for total obligations under the Participation
Contract for Block 15 until the indicated conditions are fulfilled and receive the
required approvals.

Consistent with the above, OEPC is the only entity that maintains signed with the
Ecuadorian State the Participation Contract for Block 15, including the year
2002, period that corresponds to the Cost Auditing that the Firm Moores
Rowland Ecuador Cia. Ltda. is performing in representation of the National
Direction of Hydrocarbons (“DNH”). Therefore, OEPC exercised and assumed,
in the year 2002, 100% of the rights and obligations derived from the
Participation Contract for Block 15.

During the 2004 exercise, the conditions agreed upon between OEPC and AEC
Ecuador will have been fulfilled for transfer of the legal title corresponding to
40% of the rights and obligations in the Contract for Block 15 and in the
Operational Agreements for Unified Exploitation. Therefore, in accordance
with letter GG-014-00 from OEPC and Official Letter No. 003-DNH-EH-CE-
P1, 01-0079, issued in response by the Minister of Energy and Mines, OEPC
will ask for the authorizations that may be required to make the transfer
according to applicable legal, regulatory, and contractual provisions, after the
referred conditions have been satisfied.

- 58 -

166. As part of the audit process, Moores Rowland then requested from OEPC that
they sign a representation letter. OEPC did so on 12 July 2004, and included a
representation to the effect that it had provided Moores Rowland with a copy of the

“Agreement with Alberta Energy Corp.”:

2. We have placed at your disposal:

d) The Agreement with Alberta Energy Corp — AEC, formally City Investing,
which, once the conditions set forth in such agreement have been met, and
subject to the authorizations from Petroecuador and the Ministry of Energy and
Mines, would culminate in the assignment of 40% of the rights and obligations of
the Participation Contract for the Exploration and Exploitation of Hydrocarbons
in Block 15 of the Ecuador Amazon Region and the unified fields of Edén Yuturi
and Limoncocha; [...]

167. Moores Rowland issued its audit report on 14 July 2004, noting therein that the
assignment of rights and obligations contemplated in the Farmout was made contingent
on future events and that the assignment “might or might not happen” at the end of the
four years during which the conditions were to be satisfied. The audit report
recommended to the DNH that OEPC seek government authorization for the assignment
during that year, assuming the assignment conditions were satisfied, and that the required

ministerial approval be granted to OEPC in order to properly register the assignment.

168. The evidence discloses that, by February 2004, AEC had made all payments due
to OEPC under the Farmout. The day after Moores Rowland issued its audit report, on
15 July 2004, OEPC wrote to the new Minister of Energy and Mines, Mr. Eduardo L6pez
Robayo, “request[ing] the Ministry to approve the transfer by OEPC to AEC Ecuador of

legal title to a 40% interest” in Block 15, as contemplated under the Farmout. In making

- 59 -

this request, OEPC referred to its letter of 25 October 2000, as well as Minister Teran’s

response of 17 January 2001.

169. The approval sought by OEPC was not granted. Rather, on 24 August 2004, as
set forth in more detail later in this Award, the Attorney General of Ecuador ordered the
Ministry of Mines and Energy to terminate the Participation Contract and the Unitized

Fields Joint Operating Agreements through a declaration of caducidad.

L The VAT Dispute

170. In August 2001, Ecuador’s tax authority, the SRI, contrary to its established
practice of refunding value added taxes (“VAT”) to oil companies, refused to grant such
refunds in the future and, retroactively, claimed refunds of the taxes already paid. OEPC
interpreted this decision to be a violation of Ecuadorian tax laws and the Treaty and, in
November 2002, filed an international arbitration claim against Ecuador to recover the

VAT refunds.

171. On 1 July 2004, the VAT Tribunal issued a $75 million VAT Award in OEPC’s
favor, finding that Ecuador’s conduct had been unfair and discriminatory. The VAT

Award was sent to the parties on 12 July 2004, and was immediately made public.

172. Ecuador challenged the award in the English courts. Its annulment application
was rejected by the High Court on 2 March 2006 and that decision was confirmed by the

Court of Appeal on 4 July 2007.

- 60 -

J. The Caducidad Proceedings and Related Events

173. On 20 July 2004, Gerald Ellis and Fernando Albuja met with Minister Lopez for
the purpose of introducing Mr. Ellis as the new President and General Manager of OEPC.
There is evidence in the record that, during this meeting, the Minister referred to the VAT
Award as well as OEPC’s alleged failure to comply with Ecuadorian laws and

regulations.

174. At around the same time, the Attorney General of Ecuador went to London to
consult with Ecuador’s attorneys with respect to a possible application before courts in
London for the annulment of the VAT Award. In the course of an interview where the
validity of the VAT Award was referred to, the Attorney General responded that “[w]e do
not recognize it, and so much so that we will propose its nullity. Now, I am also studying
the contract linking Occidental with the country. I want to check whether the contractual

norms have been strictly complied with.”

175. Upon his return from London, in the course of a radio interview, the Attorney

General stated:

In August 2004, once I came back from London, I went to the Energy Ministry
and asked the Hydrocarbons Directorate to present me all the documentation that
proved whether or not the Occidental Company was fulfilling the contract. Once
the information was checked, after twelve hours of work, we concluded that this
company had been in breach of contract.

176. On 3 August 2004, following receipt of OEPC’s request for approval of the
transfer to AEC of legal title to a 40% interest in Block 15, Dr. Zurita, the DNH audits

coordinator, submitted a memorandum to the National Director of Hydrocarbons. After

-61-

reviewing the terms of the 25 October 2000 letter from OEPC and the 17 January 2001

reply from Minister Teran, Dr. Zurita concluded as follows:

According to the abovementioned, it is determined that Occidental exploration
and Production Company on year 2000 carried out a transfer of the 40% of its
rights and obligations in Block 15, including the Operational Agreements de
Unified Exploitation of the Unified Fields Eden Yuturi and Limoncocha, in favor
of City Investing Company, currently Alberta Energy Company based on a
private agreement executed between the parties, which effective date was
October 1, 2000, transfer that was carried out without authorization of the
corresponding Ministry.

177. A few weeks later, on 24 August 2004, the Attorney General wrote to the Minister
of Energy and Mines, Mr. Lopez, and requested that he terminate the Participation

Contract. The Attorney General asserted that, in 2000:

[OEPC] transferred 40% interests and obligations from the Participation Contract
for Exploration and Exploitation of Hydrocarbons in Block 15 in favor of [AEC],
without having received the authorization of the Ministry of Energy and
Mines, as provided by Article 79 of the Hydrocarbons Law and the same
Participation Contract. (Emphasis in original)

178. The Attorney General also alleged that OEPC had committed a number of
technical infractions, which, he claimed, constituted a cause for termination under
Articles 74.13 and 77 of the HCL. Finally, in that letter, the Attorney General stated that
OEPC had not fulfilled its investment obligations with respect to Block 15, which, he
claimed, constituted a cause for termination of the Participation Contract under Article

74.6 of the HCL.

179. On the same day, the Attorney General sent a letter to the Executive President of
PetroEcuador requesting that PetroEcuador follow the process set out in Clause 21.2 of
the Participation Contract. The Tribunal recalls that Clause 21.2 provides that, in cases

where there may be cause for forfeiture (i.e. caducidad) of the contract, PetroEcuador

-62-

must serve OEPC with a notice of non-compliance and provide OEPC ten days to deny or
accept the allegation. If OEPC admitted the allegation of non-compliance, it had thirty

days to cure its breach.

180. In a letter to the Executive President of PetroEcuador dated 8 September 2004,
Minister L6pez, acting upon the Attorney General’s request of 24 August 2004,
instructed PetroEcuador to initiate the termination procedure. The Minister’s letter
attached OEPC’s request of 15 July 2004 for the transfer to AEC of 40% of the legal title
to Block 15, the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement, as well as a
report from the DNH listing various technical infractions committed by OEPC. Acting
on Minister Lopez’s letter, on 15 September 2004, PetroEcuador notified OEPC of its
alleged non-compliance with the Participation Contract. This notification gave OEPC ten
business days to respond to the allegations. On 24 September 2004, OEPC sent a

detailed 28-page letter to PetroEcuador denying the Attorney General’s allegations.

181. Nothing further happened until the first few months of 2005 when anti-American
and anti-foreign investor groups of demonstrators protested in the streets of Quito, in
particular in front of OEPC’s offices. The demonstrators voiced their concern that

OEPC’s contract had not yet been terminated.

182. In February 2005, Minister Lopez and PetroEcuador Executive President Hugo
Bonilla were called before the Ecuadorian Congress and questioned with respect to their

perceived procrastination over the termination of OEPC’s contract.

- 63 -

183. On 14 March 2005, Attorney General Borja wrote to PetroEcuador Executive
President Bonilla. He reminded Mr. Bonilla of the causes for termination of the
Participation Contract and insisted that the termination process be accelerated. In his
letter, the Attorney General also requested to be informed within ten days of all steps

taken in the process.

184. The Attorney General emphasized that the termination process should already
have been completed and warned that “the delay in the prosecution of the termination
process constitutes a lamentable injury to the Ecuadorian State,” and that “[t]here will not
be dignitary, authority, functionary nor public servant exempt from responsibility for acts
realized in carrying out his duties or for his omissions.” The Attorney General also

delivered the same message in a letter to the President of the Republic.

185. The record discloses that, during March and April 2005, Occidental had meetings
with PetroEcuador Executive President Bonilla, the President’s Chief of Staff, Mr. Carlos
P6lit, and the Minister of Labor, Mr. Ratil Izurieta, in an attempt to find a negotiated

solution to the situation.

186. In April 2005, after days of violent street protests in Quito, the Ecuadorian
Congress ousted President Gutierrez from power. Minister Lopez and Executive
President Bonilla resigned. President Gutiérrez was replaced by then Vice President

Alfredo Palacio.

187. On 18 June 2005, during a major strike, a number of government officials,

including the new Minister of Energy and Mines, Mr. Ivan Rodriguez, signed resolutions

-64-

making certain commitments to the Ecuadorian Orellana and Sucumbios provinces. The
first of these resolutions stated: “The Minister of Energy and Mines and the President of
PetroEcuador, as the competent authorities, commit to undertaking all of the necessary
steps for the departure from Ecuador of the companies Occidental and EnCana AEC for

having violated the juridical norms of the country.”

188. On 1 July 2005, the Attorney General issued a press release in which he stated
that he would insist again that the Minister of Energy and Mines conclude the termination
process and issue the “corresponding response”. He also affirmed in the press release
that the transfer to AEC on 1 November 2000 had been done “without authorization from
the Ministry of Energy and Mines, as provided by Article 79 of the Hydrocarbons Law

and the same Participation Contract.”

189. In addition, a report from a committee of PetroEcuador concluded that OEPC had
not discharged its burden of proof with respect to its denial of the Attorney General’s
allegations and recommended that the process of caducidad be initiated immediately.
The committee referred specifically to Articles 74, 75, 76 and 79 of the HCL as well as

Clause 21.2.2 of the Participation Contract.

190. On 2 August 2005, the new Executive President of PetroEcuador, Mr. Carlos
Pareja, responded to the Attorney General’s request and issued his recommendation to
the Minister to declare termination of the Participation Contract. The Tribunal notes that

Mr. Pareja resigned the day after issuing his recommendation to the Minister.

- 65 -

K. The Caducidad Decree

191. In early November 2005, as the record discloses, Minister Rodriguez was facing
several petitions for censure in Congress because of his failure to act on PetroEcuador’s
recommendation. On 10 November 2005, 27 members of Congress wrote to the
President of the Congress calling for the impeachment of Minister Rodriguez if he failed

to conclude the termination process.

192. Minister Rodriguez was notified of this letter on 14 November 2005. The next
day, November 15, the Minister officially notified OEPC of PetroEcuador’s findings that
there were causes for termination of the Participation Contract. He gave OEPC 60

business days either to cure the alleged violations or to disprove them.

193. On 7 February 2006, OEPC responded to the Minister’s notification in a 45-page
letter to which were attached numerous documents. OEPC contended that there was no
basis at all for termination of the Participation Contract. With this letter, OEPC
submitted several requests to the Government of Ecuador for the production of certain

documents.

194. On 16 February 2006, PetroEcuador’s Executive President Roman resigned.
Mr. Fernando Gonzalez was appointed as his successor, the sixth Executive President of

PetroEcuador since May 2004.

195. On 10 March 2006, Minister Rodriguez commissioned two experts to examine
and report on the documentary evidence submitted by the Attorney General,

PetroEcuador, and OEPC. Minister Rodriguez also received a report on the legal effects

- 66 -

of the Farmout from Andrew Derman who subsequently became the Claimants’ oil and
gas expert in the present proceeding. Mr. Derman concluded that the transfer of an
economic interest was not an assignment under the laws of New York, the governing law

of the Farmout.

196. On 15 March 2006, President Palacio’s press secretary stated that the
administration feared a coup d’Etat as a result of strikes and demonstrations which had
closed the highways in the north and center of the country. On 22 March 2006, the
strike’s leader issued a statement, promising that: “If caducity of the Occidental contract

is declared, we will lift the strike.”

197. In late April 2006, Minister Rodriguez sent the Attorney General a letter asking
him to confirm whether or not the law permitted a settlement with OEPC. On 2 May
2006, following a second request from the Minister, the Attorney General responded to
the Minister’s letter that the law did allow a settlement. He gave the same information to

PetroEcuador. The Attorney General’s opinion sparked a public outcry in the country.

198. On 9 May 2006, the then candidate for President, Dr. Rafael Correa, led a
demonstration outside OEPC’s offices in which he and other demonstrators called for a
symbolic “closure forever” of OEPC. The same day, various social organizations in
Ecuador declared that they would demand the impeachment of both President Palacio for
considering a settlement agreement with OEPC, and Attorney General Borja for opining

that such an agreement was legally possible.

-67-

199. On 15 May 2006, Minister Rodriguez issued the Caducidad Decree. The Decree
terminated, with immediate effect, OEPC’s Participation Contract and ordered OEPC to
turn over to PetroEcuador all its assets relating to Block 15. The thirty-three page Decree
included: (i) a summary of the termination process; (ii) block quotes from the letters of
the Attorney General, PetroEcuador and OEPC; (iii) additional description of these letters
and the positions articulated therein, as well as descriptions of other documents in the
record; (iv) a description of norms considered; and (v) approximately four pages of
reasoning. The Decree cited as a legal basis for caducidad Articles 74.11, 74.12 and

74.13 of the HCL.

200. On 16 May 2006, State officials arrived at OEPC’s offices in Quito and seized all
of its property, including computers, files and other equipment, which were now said to
be the property of the State. The next day, 17 May, other State officials, accompanied by
the National Police, seized OEPC’s oil fields in Block 15, including wells, drills, storage

facilities and other oil exploration and production assets.

I. THE CLAIMANTS’ CLAIMS

A. The Claimants’ Position

L. Overview of the Claimants’ Position

201. The Claimants’ principal contention in this arbitration is that the termination of
the Participation Contract was made without legitimate cause, i.e. in the absence of legal
grounds for termination under both the Participation Contract itself (otherwise referred to
by the Claimants as a “Termination Event”) and Ecuadorian law (namely the

Hydrocarbons Law). The Caducidad Decree was not, according to the Claimants, a

- 68 -

“good-faith response to a breach of Ecuador’s contractual interests.” Pointing to the
Respondent’s alleged “‘after-the-fact shifts in position”, the Claimants assert that “[t]he
evidence demonstrates that the Termination Decree was the product of a desire to find an
excuse for the predetermined conclusion to expel OEPC from Ecuador, which was
inspired by a desire for revenge for OEPC’s success in the prior BIT arbitration of the

VAT dispute and by the demands of political rivals and organized pressure groups.”

202. The Claimants contend that, due to its political significance, the caducidad
administrative proceedings were tainted from start to finish by a complete lack of due
process. In particular, the Claimants submit that the caducidad proceedings failed to
yield a result based on evidence or law, that the Ecuadorian authorities prejudged
OEPC’s alleged wrongdoing before the caducidad proceedings even began and that
OEPC was not given any meaningful opportunity to develop testimony during the

proceedings at issue.

203. Furthermore, the Claimants argue that it matters little whether an actual
“Termination Event” in fact occurred in the circumstances because “both international
and Ecuadorian law proscribe the unilateral termination of a government contract where,
as here, the alleged breach was always known and never objected to by the State, and

such termination was manifestly unfair, arbitrary, discriminatory and disproportionate.”

204. The Claimants accordingly present their case on liability on the basis of the two

following main arguments.

- 69 -

205. First, the Claimants maintain that by terminating the Participation Contract
without cause (i.e. in the absence of a Termination Event), the Respondent has breached
its obligations under both the Participation Contract and the Treaty. In advancing this
argument, the Claimants essentially allege that (i) the Farmout Agreement did not operate
an assignment of contractual rights and obligations in violation of Article 74.11 of the
HCL, and (ii) the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement did not create a

consortium in violation of Article 74.12 of the HCL.

206. Second, assuming a Termination Event is found to have occurred, the Claimants
contend that the Caducidad Decree would still be in breach of the Respondent’s
obligations under the Treaty and Ecuadorian law because it was unfair, arbitrary,

discriminatory and disproportionate.”

207. Each of the Claimants’ two main arguments on liability will now be developed in
more detail.

2 The Claimants’ First Main Argument: Breach Due to Absence of
Termination Event

208. As noted above, the Claimants argue that by terminating the Participation
Contract without legitimate cause, the Respondent breached its obligations under the

Treaty and international law. According to the Claimants, “[t]he Treaty proscribes

7 The Tribunal notes that the proportionality or otherwise of the Caducidad decree pervaded the
submissions of both parties (see paragraph 425 below). This was understandable since the Ecuadorian
Constitution firmly establishes as a matter of Ecuadorian law the principle of proportionality: see the
discussion at paragraphs 390 and 396 - 401 below. Moreover, as discussed in paragraphs 402- 409 below
numerous investment treaty tribunals have found that the principle of proportionality is part and parcel of
the overarching duty to accord fair and equitable treatment to investors.

 

    

      

-70-

(i) any failure to comply by the State with any contractual obligation into which it has
entered with regard to an investment; and (ii) the unjustified repudiation by the State of

any contract into which it has entered with an investor.” (Emphasis in original)

209. On this basis, the Claimants contend that the Respondent breached its duties
under Article II.3(c) of the Treaty which requires Ecuador “to observe any obligation it
may have entered into with regard to investments”, as well as its duties under
Article IL.3(a) prohibiting unfair treatment, Article 1II.3(b) prohibiting arbitrary

impairment, and Article III prohibiting expropriation.

210. In making their first main argument, the Claimants submit that the Respondent

has failed to demonstrate the occurrence of “Termination Events” under the HCL:

Ecuador claims that it was entitled under Article 74 of the HCL to terminate for
cause. However, the Termination Decree provides remarkably little by way of
explanation or argument and nothing by way of proof for that claim. Neither did
the papers of the Attorney General and Petroecuador from which the Minister
copied and pasted in his Termination Decree. This manifest lack of proof and
reasoning reflected Ecuador’s lack of evidence and arguments. As Claimants
will show below, none of the alleged Termination Events has in fact occurred.
For that failure alone, the Termination Decree was wrongful as a matter of both
Ecuadorian and international law.

211. Recalling that the Caducidad Decree and the proceedings that preceded it were
based principally on the Respondent’s view that the transfer of an economic interest to
AEC pursuant to the Farmout Agreements purportedly constituted an assignment of
rights and obligations in violation of Article 74.11 of the HCL, and that OEPC
purportedly committed various technical violations of Ecuadorian hydrocarbons
legislation contrary to Article 74.13 of the HCL, the Claimants deny that the Participation

Contract can be properly terminated on such grounds.

-71-

212. The Claimants also deny what they refer to as the Respondent’s “new grounds”
for termination, namely that the Farmout arrangement allegedly created a “consortium” in
violation of Article 74.12 of the HCL and that, in parallel, diplomatic pressures were

made against the Respondent in violation of Clause 22.2.1 of the Participation Contract.

(a) _ Alleged Violations of Articles 74.11 and 74.12 of the HCL

213. The Tribunal observes from the outset that although the Claimants’ wrongful
termination submissions (as well as those of the Respondent) regarding Articles 74.11
and 74.12 of the HCL significantly overlap, they predominantly address the former
(unauthorized transfer or assignment) rather than the latter (unauthorized consortium).
Thus, by reference to the two-stage transaction envisaged by the Farmout, the Claimants
reject the Respondent’s allegation that the Farmout violated the HCL because it was

tantamount to a wrongful assignment or transfer:

In the first stage, OEPC transferred a 40% economic interest in Block 15 to AEC,
in exchange for certain capital contributions by AEC. AEC’s economic interest
consisted essentially of 40% of OEPC’s share in the crude produced from Block
15. AEC’s capital contribution required payments from AEC to OEPC over the
course of four years and was known in the industry as the “earning obligation.”

Article 2.01 of the Farmout, which described this phase, specifically stated that
the Farmout of the economic interest:

does not include nominal legal title to an interest in Block 15 or an
interest as a party to the Participating Agreements. OEPC shall
continue to own 100% of the legal title to the Participating
Agreements and to the interest in Block 15 granted or provided for in
the Participating Agreements. CE-9 (OC00347). (Emphasis added)

Thus, the operative provision of the Farmout directly contradicts Ecuador’s claim
that an assignment or transfer occurred.

The second stage, which never came to pass, contemplated a future assignment
by OEPC of legal title to the 40% economic interest. As described in Article
4.01, that assignment was subject to: (i) AEC’s meeting its earning obligation;
and (ii) OEPC’s obtaining prior government approval:

-72-

[A]fter AEC has made all payments . . . OEPC and AEC shall
execute and deliver such documents as are required to convey legal
title to AEC in and to a 40% economic interest in the Participating
Agreements and Block 15 and to make AEC a party to the
Participating Agreements as owner of such 40% economic interest
(subject to obtaining required governmental approvals). CE-9
(0C00353). (Emphasis added)

When AEC met its earning obligation in July 2004, OEPC proceeded to request
government approval for the transfer of legal title to AEC. It sent a letter to this
effect to the then-Minister of Energy and Mines, Eduardo Lépez Robayo on July
15, 2004. The government never responded to the request, and OEPC therefore
did not proceed with the transfer. (Emphasis in original)

214. The Claimants further emphasize that the Farmout Agreement is governed by the
laws of New York, under which the transfer of an economic interest, they argue, does not

effectuate an assignment:

Under New York law, as presented in the opinion submitted by Andrew Derman,
the expert appointed by the Minister of Energy and Mines, an assignment does
not exist unless “the assignor’s right to performance by the obligor is
extinguished in whole or in part and the assignee acquires a right to such
performance.” CA-236, Restatement Second { 317; CA-235, American
Jurisprudence J 1; CA-237, Williston J 74:1. Put otherwise, an assignment
requires that “an assignee step[] into the assignor’s shoes and acquire[] whatever
rights the latter had.” CA-234, Furlong J 382. Under New York law, a mere
promise to assign rights and obligations in the future subject to conditions
precedent is not an assignment. CA-236, Restatement Second { 330; CE-127.
(0C02737; OC02741)

It is plain that as a matter of New York law, the transfer of a 40% economic
interest did not effectuate an assignment. The mere transfer of an economic
interest did not in any way create privity under the Participation Contract
between Ecuador and Petroecuador, on the one hand, and AEC, on the other.
That transfer of economic interest did not create any rights of AEC against
Ecuador or Petroecuador; nor did it create any obligations for AEC to them.

215. Regarding Ecuadorian law on assignment, the Claimants add:

Thus, under Ecuadorian law, for the transfer of economic interest under the
Farmout to constitute an assignment, it should have resulted in AEC exercising
rights and assuming obligations under the Participation Contract vis-a-vis
Ecuador and Petroecuador, and OEPC ceasing to exercise such rights and to
perform such obligations. HPL ER {[ 49. Additionally, under Ecuadorian law,
the assignment of a contract or personal rights occurs only when the assignor

-73-

turns over to the assignee a deed that describes the rights being assigned. HPL
ER V {{{ 18-27. In other words, there is no assignment without the physical
transfer from assignor to assignee of such deed. HPL ER V {21. As explained
below, neither of these conditions for an assignment has been met.

216. Based on the above, the Claimants aver that until legal title was transferred, only
OEPC remained liable vis-d-vis the Respondent and PetroEcuador for the performance of
the Participation Contract and, furthermore, that only OEPC could enforce its rights
under the Participation Contract. In other words, according to the Claimants, an
assignment or transfer of contractual rights required privity between AEC and the
Respondent and the transfer of a 40% economic interest did not create such privity.
Along the same lines, the Claimants also argue that a mere promise to assign rights and
obligations in the future subject to conditions precedent is not an assignment, and that a
contractual agreement to reimburse for taxes or other costs does not create an assignment

either.

217. Regarding the Respondent’s allegation that OEPC deliberately concealed the
Farmout Agreement, the Claimants answer that OEPC had neither the motive nor the
opportunity to do so. They further submit that OEPC fully knew that authorization by the

Respondent of the agreements at issue would ultimately be necessary:

In the Counter-Memorial on Liability, Ecuador surmises without support that
“OEPC presumably hoped that the true nature of the [Farmout Agreement and
the Operating Agreement] would never be known to Ecuador. ...” In fact, the
evidence proves that at all times prior to the eventual transfer of legal title,
OEPC recognized that authorization by Ecuador and full disclosure of all
agreements would occur. The agreement itself required full disclosure and
governmental consent. OEPC not only disclosed its relationship with AEC to
Ecuador in a series of meetings in 2000, but it would have provided copies of
the underlying agreements in 2000 if the Minister of Energy and Mines had
advised that approval was necessary at that stage — or if the Minister had simply
requested them.

-74-

218. This brings the Claimants to the underlying premise of their case, i.e. that the
Claimants did not ask for approval in 2000 because all OEPC was transferring at the time
was an economic interest, not a legal one. Arguing that it would have been “irrational”
for OEPC and AEC to conceal the nature of the Farmout, the Claimants contend that the
Respondent’s “concealment theory” requires, at a minimum, the following findings on
the part of the Tribunal:

. The agreements constituted a transfer of rights and obligations
under the Participation Contract.

. OEPC and AEC believed that the nature of the Farmout
Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement constituted such a
transfer that required immediate government approval.

e Nevertheless, in order to obtain certain short-term benefits, OEPC
and AEC chose to risk their substantial investments and their long-

term profits in Block 15 by concealing the “true nature” of the
Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement.

219. The Claimants maintain that “Minister Terdn, the Director of the DNH, and other
Ecuadorian government officials confirmed OEPC’s and AEC’s belief that no
government approval was necessary for the first stage of the transaction, the transfer of a
40% economic interest.” They further submit that OEPC had no reason to doubt that it
would have received approval for either stage of its transaction with AEC, based inter
alia on its “excellent relations with Ecuador in the fall of 2000.” The Claimants also

emphasize that OEPC never had any financial incentive to hide its relationship with AEC.

220. In addition, the Claimants argue that the Respondent’s “concealment theory” flies
in the face of the parties’ dealings at the relevant time, i.e. in late 2000. They contend

that the Respondent was informed of the Farmout at all relevant levels of government and

-75-

refer, in particular, to the 24 October 2000 meeting with Minister Teran, the November
2000 meetings with PetroEcuador, the 14 December 2000 meeting with the Director of

the DNH and the further communications with Minister Teran in January 2001.

221. Regarding Minister Teran’s testimony in particular, the Claimants state:

Minister Terén complains that OEPC and AEC never informed him of the
details of the Operating Agreement, but concedes that OEPC did inform him
that a transfer of legal title was subject to a future negotiation. Ecuador
apparently hopes that the Tribunal will read these two statements by Minister
Terén together to imply that no discussion of either AEC’s proposed
involvement in Block 15 or of the agreement between AEC and OEPC ever
occurred, although Minister Terdn does not actually say as much. Contrary to
what Ecuador seeks to imply, OEPC and AEC informed Minister Teran that
AEC would be offering its expertise to OEPC, and that OEPC and AEC were in
the midst of closing the deal to transfer an economic interest in Block 15. It is
not plausible that OEPC and AEC would schedule a meeting with Minister
Teran in 2000 only to limit the conversation, for all intents and purposes, to a
hypothetical transfer of legal title tentatively planned for 2004. In fact, OEPC
informed Minister Teran of the immediate transfer of economic interest and
everything that the transfer entailed.

222. The Claimants further add:

Ecuador concedes that OEPC communicated on several different occasions that
AEC had acquired an economic interest in Block 15. Ecuador seeks to diminish
these presentations by arguing that OEPC’s description of the Farmout
Agreement as a transfer of economic interest was insufficient. However, as
Claimants have shown, that description was entirely accurate for the earn-in
period of the transaction. In light of considerable effort spent by OEPC to
inform Ecuador of the transfer of economic interest and its public disclosure of
the transaction, it is implausible to suppose that OEPC’s efforts were part of a
campaign actually to withhold information. OEPC had no reason to conceal any
aspect of its relationship with AEC, but instead chose to communicate
repeatedly that AEC was acquiring an economic interest in Block 15.

223. As for the Respondent’s allegation that it inadvertently discovered the true nature
of the Farmout Agreements as a result of the 2003/2004 Moores Rowland audit, the

Claimants refute this suggestion in the following words:

- 76 -

DNH was continuously involved in exchanges or discussions about the Farmout
and Operating Agreements, between February and early May 2004. Not once
during that period — or thereafter until the VAT Award was issued — did the
DNH suggest that it learned anything from Moores Rowland about the Farmout
that it did not already know. Not once did the DNH suggest that OEPC would
face caducidad because of the Farmout. On the contrary, on May 10, 2004,
having discussed the matter with Moores Rowland and OEPC, the DNH
specifically subscribed to the conclusion that it would be “prudent” for OEPC to
“define and expedite the process of assignment of obligations and rights to
AEC,” so that the Ministry of Energy and Mines could authorize the transfer of
legal title and “thereby avoid any observation by the regulatory authorities.”
Thus, it is not at all surprising that, as noted above, Ecuador never alleged
concealment through the caducidad proceedings or in the Termination Decree.

224. In addition to rebutting the Respondent’s “concealment theory,” the Claimants
also reject the Respondent’s claim that the Caducidad Decree was a bona fide
implementation of a legitimate regulatory policy. In this regard, the Claimants submit
that the policy concerns raised by the Respondent are in fact reflected in Clause 16.2 of

the Participation Contract, which states:

The prohibition to transfer or assign rights [...] is not an obstacle to freely trade
Contractor’s stock, without need of said authorization, provided that the trading
of said stock does not change, modify or extinguish the legal existence of the
Contractor, nor constitute a decrease in its administrative, financial and technical
capacities.

225. The Claimants submit that, pursuant to that provision, “OPC could have sold its
entire 100% share of OEPC to AEC. As long as OEPC maintained ‘its administrative,
financial and technical capacities,’ the transaction would not have violated the HCL’s

underlying policy or warranted any sanction.”

226. The Claimants maintain that the Agreements with AEC did not reduce OEPC’s
ability to execute the Participation Contract and that even if AEC had operated Block 15
(which they deny), the Respondent does not dispute that it had already fully vetted and

was prepared to approve AEC as an operator of Block 15. They also argue that Minister

-77-

Terdn admitted that a financial relationship between OEPC and AEC was beneficial to
the Respondent. The Claimants accordingly conclude that the Farmout caused no harm

to the Respondent but provided, rather, significant benefit.

227. In terms of AEC’s rights under the Farmout Agreement and Joint Operating
Agreement, the Claimants deny the allegation of “operational control” put forward by the

Respondent as follows:

Ecuador’s case that an assignment occurred within the meaning of Article 74.11
rests on the assertion that “it is enough if the contractor agrees to share
[participation contract] rights with a third party, or otherwise gives the third
party the ability to influence the contractor’s performance of the contract.” Its
case that a consortium was formed within the meaning of Article 74.12 similarly
rests on the assertion that OEPC and AEC “enter[ed] into a binding agreement in
which they commit[ted] themselves to work together for exploration or
production operations.”

Both assertions are factually wrong. Under the terms of the Operating
Agreement, AEC could not direct either the day to day management or long
term development strategy of Block 15; and AEC never did direct either the day
to day management or long term development strategy of Block 15. (Emphasis
in original)

228. Specifically, the Claimants refute the Respondent’s argument that the funding and
voting provisions of the Joint Operating Agreement conferred upon AEC any control
over Block 15 operations. These provisions, according to the Claimants, only allowed

AEC to make financial decisions, not operational ones. The Claimants submit:

It was envisaged under the Operating Agreement that OEPC and AEC would
jointly fund operations in Block 15 as “joint operations,” and its voting
procedures gave both parties a vote on whether any particular proposed joint
operation should receive such funding. Clause 5.13. Ecuador cites these voting
procedures to claim that “all significant operational decisions ... required AEC’s
approval.” That is simply not true. The only right that AEC had under these
voting provisions was the right to refuse to fund a certain operation by not
approving certain items of a work plan and budget — not a right to preclude
OEPC from carrying out the operation altogether.

- 78 -

[.

 

Even with full access to the voluminous files OEPC left in Ecuador, the only
evidence Ecuador can produce to support this claim are a few documents
showing nothing more than AEC’s frustration at its lack of involvement in
Block 15 operations and a few letters recommending or “approving” specific
operational issues. As explained above, AEC’s “approval” only affected the
financing of operations, not the operations themselves. Ecuador has failed to
offer any evidence demonstrating that AEC possessed any control over the
operations at Block 15. Indeed, the frustration shown in the few letters cited by
Ecuador proves the absence of control by AEC rather than any ability in fact to
control these operations.

[J

OEPC alone established the key strategic Development Plans and the Work
Plans and Budget, and OEPC alone retained final decision-making authority
over day to day operations. AEC provided views and advice on specific
operations based on its independent assessment and its experience operating
other blocks. AEC never withdrew funding and knew it could not sole-risk
OEPC. As evidenced by AEC’s complaints about its lack of involvement in
Block 15 operations, OEPC never hesitated to exercise its final decision-making
authority. AEC was a watchful investor, but it never exercised rights or
assumed obligations under the Participation Contract, nor did it cause OEPC to
depart from its operational plans and objectives. (Emphasis in original)

229. In the words of the Claimants, “OEPC was always prepared to listen to AEC’s
opinions but was ultimately sovereign when making operational decisions.” It is the
Claimants’ position that AEC neither acquired in theory nor exercised in practice any
rights under the Farmout Agreement or the Joint Operating Agreement to direct either the
day-to-day management or long-term development strategy of Block 15. In this regard,
they add that “taking free advice from time to time does not equate with granting

operational control rights.”

230. Finally, the Claimants deny that AEC and OEPC in any way agreed to form a
consortium or association. This charge, according to the Claimants, is in fact a “new”
ground invoked by the Respondent to justify the Caducidad Decree. The Claimants

refute this allegation in the following words:

-79 -

[N]o Article 74.12 Termination Event has occurred because (i) a consortium
must have separate legal personality and AEC and OEPC did not create any
entity with separate legal personality; and (ii) even if no separate legal
personality were required, members of a consortium must undertake joint and
several liability; OEPC remained at all times the only party to the Participation
Contract with Petroecuador and Ecuador, and because AEC never assumed any
liability under the Participation Contract, OEPC never undertook joint and
several liability with AEC vis-a-vis Petroecuador and Ecuador. In any event,
general principles of Ecuadorian and international law preclude punishment on
the basis of concepts as ill-defined as “consortium” is under Ecuadorian law.

231. The Claimants thus object to the Respondent’s definition of a “consortium,” and

conclude as follows:

Unable to show that OEPC and AEC formed a consortium, Ecuador attempts to
employ untenably broad definitions and argues that a consortium within the
meaning of Article 74.12 is created whenever parties “enter into a binding
agreement in which they commit themselves to work together for exploration or
production operations.”

As shown above, this nebulous definition is baseless; but the Farmout and the
Operating Agreement do not meet even Ecuador’s untenably broad definition.
As shown above, AEC neither acquired nor exercised any rights under the
Farmout Agreement or the Operating Agreement to direct either the day to day
management or long term development strategy of Block 15. Therefore, even
under Ecuador’s erroneous definition, OEPC and AEC did not form a
consortium.

(b) Alleged Violations of Hydrocarbons Regulations

232. Regarding the Respondent’s allegations of technical infractions, the Claimants

characterize them as baseless, trivial and inconsequential. They write:

The 62 alleged technical infractions referenced by the Termination Decree’s [sic]
occurred over a period of five years, 2001-2006, and can be grouped as follows:
(i) 12 claims of drilling of individual wells either without prior authorization or
without proper notification; (ii) 14 claims of production from individual wells
above, or without, the authorized rates; (iii) 22 claims of reporting violations,
such as late filing of final drilling reports; and (iv) 11 claims of miscellaneous
violations. Due to the lack of substantiating documents in the administrative file
for almost half of the 62 alleged infractions, Claimants have been unable to
determine in any way the nature of three of these infractions.

- 80 -

233. The Claimants further refute the Respondent’s charge in this regard by arguing
that “no Article 74.13 Termination Event has occurred because Ecuador has failed to (i)
document nearly half of the technical infractions on which it purported to base the
Termination Decree; and (ii) disprove that the documented infraction allegations were
misapplications of the HCL regulation, took place in the unitized fields with
PetroEcuador’s knowledge and approval, and/or were of a clerical or otherwise

inconsequential nature.”

234. In addition, the Claimants aver that “the only alleged infractions Ecuador spends
any effort attempting to describe as serious and substantive are those alleging that OEPC
overproduced from certain individual wells,” i.e. 4 of the 62 alleged infractions. They
further emphasize that OEPC, like other oil companies operating in Ecuador, paid its
overproductions fines (at most $3,000 each). Finally, they expressly refer to an opinion
on the part of PetroEcuador regarding Petrobras to the effect that technical infractions for

which a fine has already been paid cannot give rise to caducidad.

(c) Alleged Diplomatic Pressures

235. The Claimants address the Respondent’s allegation that they sought the assistance
of the U.S. Government in violation of the Participation Contract by noting from the
outset that this consists of another entirely “new” ground put forward by the Respondent
and raised for the first time in this arbitration. More particularly, the Claimants submit as

follows:

Ecuador’s new theory should be dismissed because (i) under international law the
Tribunal should assess the lawfulness of Ecuador’s conduct solely on the basis of
the reasons stated in the Termination Decree; (ii) Clause 22.2.1 is unenforceable

-81-

as a matter of international law; (iii) Ecuador is estopped from invoking Clause
22.2.1 because it had knowledge of the relevant facts long before it began its
caducidad proceedings in 2002; and (iv) Ecuador failed to prove that Occidental
engaged in any proscribed conduct after the caducity proceedings began (and
indeed after 2002). To the contrary, once Ecuador began those proceedings in
2004, OEPC consistently informed the U.S. Government that it did not seek
diplomatic assistance.

236. The Claimants thus maintain that the Respondent was well aware of OEPC’s
frequent contact with the U.S. Government about the VAT dispute from 2001-2002, but
that OEPC did not seek any assistance from the U.S. Government after 2002, i.e. in

connection with the caducidad dispute.

3. The Claimants’ Second Main Argument: Breach Notwithstanding
Termination Event

237. As an alternative argument, the Claimants contend that even if a Termination
Event is found to have occurred in the circumstances, the termination of the Participation
Contract was unlawful under both the Treaty and Ecuadorian law on the grounds that it
was grossly unfair, arbitrary, discriminatory and disproportionate. In the words of the

Claimants:

Both the Treaty and Ecuadorian law guaranteed Claimants and their investments
fair, non-arbitrary, and non-discriminatory treatment. In passing the Termination
Decree, Ecuador blatantly disregarded these standards. Having openly
premeditated the termination, Ecuador imposed manifestly disproportionate
punishment on Claimants on grounds that it never substantiated in the face of
OEPC’s vigorous defenses and that were not found sufficient to warrant contract
termination in the case of other oil companies.

238. The discretionary nature of the ministerial decision which led to the Termination
Decree is central to the Claimants’ second main argument. Citing Article 79 of the HCL
regarding nullity of an unauthorized transfer or assignment, the Claimants contend that

“the nullity of the transfer itself, such as the Farmout Agreement if it were illegal, is

- 82 -

mandatory; but the possibility of terminating the underlying contract, the Participation
Contract, is entirely discretionary.” On this basis, the Claimants submit that the Minister
exercised his discretion in a manner inconsistent with the Treaty and Ecuadorian law for

the following reasons:

(i) the Termination Decree was manifestly disproportionate;

(ii) the Termination Decree frustrated the Claimants’ legitimate expectations;
(iii) the Termination Decree was unfair and arbitrary;

(iv) the Termination Decree was discriminatory;

(v) the Termination Decree denied the Claimants’ full protection and security;

(vi) the Termination Decree expropriated the Claimants’ investments without
compensation; and

(vii) the Respondent allowed PetroEcuador and Petroproducci6n to aid and abet
the Termination Decree.

239. In connection with their submission that the termination of the Participation
Contract was grossly unfair, arbitrary, discriminatory and disproportionate, the Claimants
reiterate their contention that the Respondent terminated the Participation Contract for
reasons of political expediency, rather than on the basis of evidence or law. The
Claimants also emphasize that the Respondent has not terminated the contracts of other
oil and gas operators in Ecuador (namely, Tripetrol and Petrobras), even though these
operators have assigned rights and obligations subject to government approval, and others
(such as Petrobell, Perenco, Tecpecuador and Canada Grande) have allegedly committed

as many or more technical infractions as OEPC in relation to production.

- 83 -

240. In addition, the Claimants rely on the prohibition against disproportionate
measures under the Treaty and do not accept the Respondent’s contention that any and all

Article 74 violations justify termination of the Participation Contract:

Accepting Ecuador’s simplistic proposition, for which it cites no authority, that
imposing “the very sanction that the law calls for in a specified context” is per se
proportionate would deny the very essence of the proportionality principle. A
finding that prohibited conduct has occurred is not enough to justify the
administration in imposing the harshest of sanctions in the administrative arsenal.
The administration must also carefully examine the particular circumstances of
the alleged prohibited conduct, including the consequences flowing from it. As
the cases cited above show, the Minister had to find that the contract was no
longer viable, or at least that serious damage had occurred, as well as
determining that the underlying policy of the contractual norm had been violated,
before it could terminate OEPC’s contract. No such finding was made here, and
as shown above, none could have been made. (Emphasis in original)

241. Referring to the circumstances in which the Caducidad Decree was issued, the
Claimants allege that it bore no relation to the requirements of general interest, and
reiterate that the Respondent had already vetted AEC and was prepared to approve it as a
participant in Block 15. In this regard, the Claimants add that neither the Farmout nor the
alleged technical infractions rendered continued performance of the Participation

Contract impossible or caused any damage to the Respondent.

242. In terms of their legitimate expectations, the Claimants refute the Respondent’s
suggestion that they were not entitled to place reliance on the government’s alleged
acquiescence of the Farmout. In particular, they take issue with the Respondent’s

interpretation of the Temple of Preah Vihear case on estoppel by conduct. They write:

[...] Contrary to Ecuador’s assertion, however, this standard is nowhere found in
the text of Temple of Preah Vihear, nor is it a settled rule of international law.
On the contrary, the doctrine of estoppel in international law has traditionally
included two elements: (i) clear, voluntary and authorized statements or conduct
from a party and (ii) reliance by the other party triggering either detriment to the

-84-

243.
that OEPC should have exhausted local remedies was specious as a jurisdictional theory
and remains so in its “reincarnation” as a merits theory, because the Treaty itself required

the Claimants to make an irrevocable choice between pursuing remedies before the

relying party or advantage to the party making the statement or engaging in
conduct. (“What appears to be the common denominator of the various aspects
of estoppel which have been discussed, is the requirement that a State ought to
maintain towards a given factual or legal situation an attitude consistent with that
which it was known to have adopted with regard to the same circumstances on
previous occasions.”) (emphasis added); (“Estoppel operates on the assumption
that one party has been induced to act in reliance on the assurances or other
conduct of another party in such a way that it would be prejudiced were the other
party later to change its position.”). (Emphasis in original)

Finally, the Claimants maintain that the Respondent’s “one-size-fits-all” argument

Ecuadorian courts or this Tribunal.

B.

L.

244.
the extent that it is based on an alleged “purely innocuous arrangement that the

Government had known about all along,” as pure fiction. The Respondent summarizes

The Respondent’s Position

Overview of the Respondents Position

At the outset of its pleadings, the Respondent characterizes the Claimants’ case, to

its own view of the facts of the case as follows:

OEPC’s transaction with AEC was not of the innocuous nature the Claimants
suggest, did require the approval of the Ministry of Energy and Mines (the
“Ministry”), and was not properly disclosed to Ecuador. In fact, the Claimants
repeatedly represented to the Government that the “first phase” of the
transaction involved only the transfer of what it called a passive “economic
interest” having no effect on any aspect of the Participation Contract. That was
false. Far from assigning a mere “economic interest,” the so-called “Farmout
Agreement” transferred to AEC a “‘working interest’ or ‘participation interest’”
in Block 15. As a result, OEPC was obliged, from the outset of the relationship,
“to act with regard to the Farmout Interest of [AEC] as [AEC] shall direct from
time to time as if [AEC] were a party to the Participation Agreement owning
legal title to a 40% interest in the Participation Agreements.” This fundamental
aspect of the OEPC/AEC arrangement was never disclosed to Ecuador.

- 85 -

On the same day they signed the Farmout Agreement, OEPC and AEC also
executed an undisclosed “Joint Operating Agreement.” Under that agreement,
AEC was given the right to appoint a representative to the Block 15
Management Committee that “supervised and directed” the Block 15 operations.
It also had the power to veto the most important decisions relating to Block 15’s
operations, such as the adoption of its development plan, work program, and
budget. Moreover, AEC could, at its election, conduct “exclusive operations” in
Block 15 without the participation or approval of OEPC. In sum, OEPC was
required to obtain AEC’s approval for all major operating actions, including, but
not limited to:

¢ submitting development plans;

e submitting work programs or budgets;

e making financial decisions;

e designating oil discoveries as commercial;

e amending or extending the Participation Contract; and

¢ assigning, selling, licensing or transferring any Participation Contract
rights.

It is undisputed that OEPC failed to disclose the foregoing terms to Ecuador.
And in its numerous meetings with the Government in 2000 and 2001, OEPC
never provided the Government with copies of the Farmout Agreement or the
Joint Operating Agreement. To the contrary, OEPC misrepresented to the
Government that it was still in negotiations with AEC over any possible future
transfer of rights. In reality, the Farmout Agreement and Joint Operating
Agreement had been executed on October 19, 2000 — five days before OEPC’s
first meeting with the Government on the matter.

Once these simple facts are understood, the real story emerges. As told by
Pablo Teran, then-Minister of Energy and Mines, in his witness statement, the
Government was never told of a “farmout” or that there had been (or would be
in the immediate future) an effective transfer of meaningful rights and
obligations under and in relation to the Participation Contract. Moreover,
Minister Teran made clear to OEPC that approval would be necessary if and
when OEPC and AEC reached an agreement on the transfer of rights and
obligations concerning the Participation Contract.

Thus, Minister Teran sent a letter to OEPC dated January 17, 2001, stating that
he would wait until OEPC and AEC had reached an agreement on the transfer of
rights and obligations under the Participation Contract and would expect OEPC
to seek prior approval at that time. He also warned that such a transfer without
authorization “would give rise to the contract’s caducidad.” Unbeknownst to
the Government, the transfer agreements between OEPC and AEC had already
been executed three months earlier. (Emphasis in original)

- 86 -

245. The Respondent refutes the Claimants’ interpretation of the Farmout Agreement

and the Joint Operating Agreement in the following words:

[T]he Claimants contended that anything short of a formal conveyance of a legal
interest was permissible without consent. That position is artificial,
disingenuous, and unsustainable under both Ecuadorian law and common sense.
The Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement created
immediately-effective rights for AEC to exert influence over the Participation
Contract area. They also created a means by which premiums arising from
Block 15 interests could be earned by others to the exclusion of Ecuador. Both
are objectionable unless fully informed consent is given in advance.

246. In addition, the Respondent takes issue with the Claimants’ alleged attempt to

circumvent the language of the agreements at issue:

Thus, the Claimants’ case has now been reduced to an argument that, although
the actual language of the Farmout Documents provided for AEC to receive
operational and managerial rights in Block 15 in 2000, OEPC and AEC had
some unwritten “understanding” that these rights could not be exercised until the
“second phase” of their transaction. The Claimants do not — and cannot — point
to a single contemporaneous document that reflects this understanding.

More fundamentally, this argument is flatly contradicted by two undeniable
facts. First, the argument is contradicted by what the Farmout Documents
actually say. Those agreements make unmistakably clear that operational rights
vested immediately. Indeed, the precise timing of the transfer of these
operational rights is clearly set forth by the Farmout Agreement itself:

The Farmout Interest is to be transferred to AECI as of the
Effective Time includes a “working interest” or “participation
interest” in the Participation Agreements and Block 15 except
that it does not include nominal legal title to an interest in
Block 15 ....

[J

Second, the Claimants’ argument that the operational rights assigned to AEC
were “illusory” is disproved by how the parties acted. As discussed in
Paragraphs 43 to 47 of Ecuador’s Counter-Memorial, AEC frequently exercised
its operational rights with respect to Block 15. These rights were hardly
“illusory,” and AEC’s conduct conclusively shows that it did not believe they
were. (Emphasis in original)

-87-

247. In terms of its overall position in this arbitration, the Respondent contends that
OEPC acted in bad faith vis-a-vis Ecuadorian officials by not disclosing the true nature of
its contractual relationship with AEC. In particular, the Respondent refers to the
circumstances in which the Farmout Agreements were inadvertently “discovered” by
Moores Rowland in 2003/2004, alleging that OEPC in fact then resisted disclosure of the

agreements.

248. More substantively, the Respondent maintains that OEPC’s conduct constituted
valid grounds for termination of the Participation Contract pursuant to Articles 74.11 and
74.12 of the HCL, i.e. where the contractor, it is recalled, “transfers rights or enters into a
private contract for the assignment of one or more of its rights” or “forms consortiums or
associations for the exploration or production operations, or withdraws from them,”
without authorization from the Ministry. As argued by the Respondent, “[i]t follows
necessarily that the issuance of the Caducidad Decree could not have been a breach of
the Participation Contract, because the Participation Contract is governed by Ecuadorian

law.” The Respondent adds:

[T]he issuance of the Caducidad Decree was explicitly contemplated in the
Participation Contract. As previously noted, the Participation Contract provides
at Clause 21.1.1 that the Contract shall terminate by caducidad if OEPC
commits any of the causes specified in Article 74 of the Hydrocarbons Law.
Accordingly, although the issuance of the Decree was not itself a contractual act,
the Contract clearly put OEPC on notice that it would be terminated under the
precise circumstances that ultimately arose, and OEPC accepted this when it
signed the Contract. The Caducidad Decree thus could in no event be
considered a breach of contract. Indeed, it is hard to imagine any legal regime
that would consider it to be a breach of contract for a party to a contract to take
an action to which its counterparty has explicitly consented, in response to that
counterparty’s own violations of the law and breaches of contract. (Emphasis in
original)

- 88 -

249. As for the Respondent’s defense to the Claimants’ allegation that the Caducidad
Decree was issued in violation of both the Treaty and international law (i.e. the
Claimants’ second main argument of breach notwithstanding a Termination Event), it
argues that “the relevant aspects of Ecuadorian law comported fully with international
standards and were applied by the Minister in an even-handed and rational manner.
Under these circumstances, Ecuador cannot be deemed to have violated any of its
obligations under the Treaty or international law in connection with the Claimants’

investment.” The Respondent accordingly considers the Claimants’ “attempts to cast
doubt on the thoroughness and integrity of the two-year caducidad investigation” as

entirely unfounded and irrelevant.

250. The Respondent’s defenses to the Claimants’ two main submissions will now be

reviewed in more detail.

2 The Respondent’s Defense to the Claimants’ First Main Argument: The
Caducidad Decree Ci lied Fully with Ecuadorian Law

251. The Respondent states that the Caducidad Decree complied fully with Ecuadorian
law because OEPC’s conduct constituted valid grounds for termination of the
Participation Contract, an agreement governed by the laws of Ecuador. The Respondent
describes the causes for caducidad under Articles 74.11 and 74.12 of the HCL as
encompassing situations where “a third party has acquired control or influence over
operational activities in the relevant fields, without the Ministry having been afforded the
opportunity to assess the suitability of that third party for this role, or even to monitor the

identity of the entities investing in the hydrocarbon sector in Ecuador.” The requirement

- 89 -

for authorization in such situations (and, conversely, the prohibition against unauthorized

transactions) is, according to the Respondent, based on sound policy reasons.

252. As part of its argument to the effect that the Caducidad Decree complied fully
with Ecuadorian law, the Respondent further submits that (i) the sanction of caducidad
was per se appropriate and proportionate in this case; (ii) the Ministry was not precluded
from declaring caducidad by the doctrines of actos propios, confianza legitima, buena fe,
or any other doctrine recognized by Ecuadorian law; (iii) the Respondent observed
OEPC’s due process rights during the caducidad investigation, and afforded OEPC a full
opportunity for challenging the Decree; and (iv) the requirement that OEPC turn over all
of its equipment and installations upon declaration of caducidad was agreed to by OEPC,

and was in no way unconstitutional.

(a) Alleged Violations of Articles 74.11 and 74.12 of the HCL

253. The Respondent argues first that OEPC concealed the fact that it had concluded a
Farmout with AEC without prior authorization by the Minister. In the words of the

Respondent:

It is undisputed that OEPC entered into the Farmout Agreement and Joint
Operating Agreement without prior authorization, and that no subsequent
authorization was ever granted. While the Claimants have alleged that OEPC
was led to believe that no authorization was required for their agreements with
AEC, they do not contend that OEPC obtained authorization. The only
question, therefore, is whether those agreements gave rise to a consortium or
association for the exploration or production operations, or whether they
constituted a transfer of rights or private agreement for the assignment of one or
more rights under the Participation Contract. (Emphasis in original)

254. From the Respondent’s perspective, the parties’ dispute is quite straightforward.

The Respondent maintains that certain core facts are agreed by the parties, including the

- 90 -

following which it deems “fatal” to the Claimants’ case, i.e. that (i) OEPC consistently
told the Government that it planned to transfer only an “economic interest” to AEC; (ii)
OEPC never informed the Government that AEC had been given operational and
managerial rights relating to Block 15; (iii) OEPC never provided copies of the Farmout
documents to the Government; and (iv) OEPC never described the transaction as a

“farmout” in any communication with the Government.

255. The Respondent is of the view that the Claimants are guilty of “a lengthy pattern
of deception” and that they “deserved to lose their contract”. The Claimants are also
accused of seeking to “distract from the evidence of their deceit by calling into question

the fairness of the caducidad process itself.”

256. Regarding the Claimants’ contention that the Respondent allegedly gave OEPC
the impression that authorization was not required in the circumstances, the Respondent
argues:
The Claimants contend that OEPC was justified in going forward with its
agreements with AEC without Ministry authorization, because Ecuadorian
officials led them to believe that authorization was not necessary. This
contention fails for two simple reasons. First, the officials in question could not
possibly have offered a meaningful appraisal as to whether or not authorization
was required without knowing the true nature of OEPC’s agreements with AEC,
and OEPC knew this. Second, those officials repeatedly emphasized to OEPC

that it would need to seek authorization from the Ministry before making any
transfer of rights. (Emphasis in original)

257. As previously noted, the Respondent further argues that the Farmout resulted in
more than the transfer of a mere “economic interest” and that the use of this term “was
clearly calculated to mislead.” The reality, according to the Respondent, is that “[fJar

from being a mere transfer of a passive ‘economic interest,’ the Farmout Agreement and

-91 -

its attendant Joint Operating Agreement immediately made AEC a full partner in the
Block 15 operations and transferred to it significant managerial rights and

responsibilities.”

258. Referring inter alia to Article 5.9 of the Joint Operating Agreement entitled
“Voting Procedure,” the Respondent emphasizes that “all significant operational
decisions regarding Block 15 required AEC’s approval” The Respondent quotes this

provision:

5.9 Voting Procedure
[...]

5.92 The following acts shall require affirmative vote of one (1) or
more Parties then having collectively at least sixty-six and two-thirds percent
(66-2/3%) of the Participating Interests [which would necessarily include AEC]:

5.9.2.1 Approval of a Development Plan;

5.9.2.2. Approval of a Work Program and Budget or any amendment or
modification thereof;

5.9.2.3 Overexpenditures on any line item of an approved Work
Program and Budget by more than twenty percent (20%) or U.S. $1,000,000,
whichever is less, of the authorized amount for such line item, or
overexpenditures for a Calendar Year of a total Work Program and Budget by
more than ten percent (10%) or U.S. $5,000,000, whichever is less; and

5.9.2.4 Decisions on financing Joint Operations (including any

decisions to repay indebtedness on any such financing) prior to the Transfer
Date.

259. The Respondent adds:

[F]rom the outset OEPC was “obligated, at the sole risk, cost and expense of
[AEC], to act with respect to the Farmout Interest of AECI as AECI shall direct
from time to time as if AECI were a party to the Participating Agreements

-92-

owning legal title to a 40% interest in the Participating Agreements and the
interests therein granting in Block 15.”

The Farmout Agreement added, moreover, that AEC would be entitled to all
“rights and benefits ... in the same manner and to the same extent as if AECI
held legal title to a 40% economic interest as a participant in the Farmout
Property as a Non-Operator under the Joint Operating Agreement, both prior to
and after legal title to the participating interest ... is conveyed from OEPC to
AECI.” In substance, therefore, AEC was to be treated exactly as if it were an
actual party to the Participation Contract as between AEC and OEPC from the
moment the Farmout Agreement closed. Indeed, the fact that the Farmout
Agreement granted AEC identical interests and powers before and after OEPC
made the contemplated transfer of “legal title” to AEC shows that the transfer of
formal “legal title” was inconsequential to AEC’s control over the interests in
question. (Emphasis in original)

260. Emphasizing that the Joint Operating Agreement, at Article 7.2.1, provides that
AEC may, on its own initiative, conduct “exclusive operations” in Block 15 (defined as
operations chargeable to the account of less than all parties to the Agreement), the

Respondent interprets the rights of AEC thereunder as follows:

These were not just paper rights. As shown by correspondence and meeting
minutes between AEC and OEPC produced by the Claimants in this arbitration,
AEC in fact frequently exercised its managerial and operational rights with
respect to Block 15 and regarded the arrangement as a “joint venture” between
the two companies. AEC was given, and exercised, voting rights with respect to
well locations, contributed to planning and budgeting decisions, and participated
in Block 15 operations in respect of which it demonstrated its willingness to
exercise its rights on important development decisions.

[J

As previously noted, one of the grounds for the Government’s declaration of
caducidad was that OEPC and AEC entered into an unauthorized consortium, in
violation of the Hydrocarbons Law. And this is precisely what OEPC and AEC
formed. Indeed, in their ordinary business communications, these companies
themselves referred to their arrangement as a “consortium.” In April 2004, for
example, representatives from AEC and OEPC discussed the possibility of
asking the Ministry for authorization for the transfer of “legal title” to OEPC’s
rights to AEC, and AEC’s representatives indicated that AEC would prefer to
delay seeking Government authorization for the time being: “For your info, my
current preference is to do nothing this calendar year, and next year approach the
government with the proposal to pay the transfer tax, but continue to leave the
‘consortium’ outside the country” — in other words, continue to hide it from the
Government.

- 93 -

Their use of this terminology is not surprising, as the arrangement established
between OEPC and AEC was of a nature that is commonly called a consortium
in the international oil and gas industry. As Mr. Martin explains, the term
“consortium” is typically used in the industry to encompass, among other things,
“[a] group of companies operating jointly, usually in a partnership with one
company as operator in a given permit, license, contract area, block, etc.”
Mr. Martin observes further that this concept “describe[s] exactly what
international O&G companies undertake to do in farmout agreements and JOAs,
including the Farmout Agreement and Operating Agreement that OEPC and
AEC signed and used to carry out their activities on Block 15. (Emphasis in
original)

261. According to the Respondent, an Article 74 violation does not require proof of

“control” per se:

[T]he Claimants’ experts assert that AEC’s Management Committee rights may
have been insufficient to give it “control” of operations in Block 15. This is
another red herring, because a third party need not have “control” over
operations in order for an Article 74 violation to occur. To the contrary, as
explained by Dr. Merlo, a “transfer of rights” occurs when the contractor
conveys to the transferee the right to participate in strategic and operational
decisions relating to petroleum exploration or extraction, thereby giving it
influence over operations. Similarly, a “consortium” is formed within the
meaning of Article 74.12 if a contractor and a third party “enter into a binding
agreement in which they commit themselves to work together for exploration or
production operations.” Hence, neither type of violation is contingent on the
third party obtaining “effective operational control.”

262. In any event, it is the Respondent’s position that AEC actually exercised
managerial and operational rights from the outset of its relationship with OEPC. The
Respondent accordingly submits that OEPC and AEC formed an_ unauthorized
consortium for the exploration and production of oil in violation of Article 74.12 of the
HCL. Furthermore, the Respondent rejects the Claimants’ contention that a “consortium”
requires the formation of a separate legal entity to carry out the joint operations.

Referring to Ecuadorian case law in this regard, the Respondent contends:

Thus, whereas the Claimants contend that the formation of a consortium requires
the creation of a distinct legal person, the decision clearly states that the mere
agreement between the parties to enter into a consortium (as defined by the

-94-

Court) is sufficient to create a consortium and that, as a consequence of the
parties’ agreement, a new legal entity exists, without the need to accomplish any
special formality.

It cannot be disputed that OEPC and AEC both (i) “contributed something in
common” (with AEC’s contribution consisting of, inter alia, providing funding
and expertise for the development of Block 15), and (ii) “divided among
them|[selves] the benefits derived from the common activity,” in the proportion
of 60%-40%, less the operating costs born in the same proportion. It follows
that OEPC and AEC did form a consortium, according to the definition given by
the Court. It also follows, although this is not relevant to the present case, that
this consortium had legal standing as a separate legal person. (Emphasis in
original)
263. In addition, the Respondent maintains that the formation of a consortium under
Ecuadorian law does not require that the third party assume joint and several liability for

the performance of the Participation Contract.

264. The Respondent also contends that the Farmout constituted a transfer of rights and
an agreement to assign rights to AEC in violation of Article 74.11 of the HCL. It argues
that, for purposes of this provision, “it is not necessary for the contractor to divest itself
completely of the rights in question; it is enough if the contractor agrees to share those
rights with a third party, or otherwise gives the third party the ability to influence the
contractor’s performance of the contract.” In fine, the Respondent characterizes the
Claimants’ contention that an actual “assignment” has not been effected in the

circumstances as a “red herring”.

265. Turning to the Claimants’ contention that OEPC in fact revealed the farmout
transaction with AEC to Ecuadorian officials, the Respondent denies that any such
disclosure was made and refers in particular to the meeting among OEPC, AEC and

Minister Terdan in the latter’s office in Quito on 24 October 2000:

-95 -

At the meeting, OEPC and AEC brought up their contemplated transaction
relating to Block 15. They spoke in generalities from a prepared “script,”
without referring to their transaction as a “farmout,” and without ever providing
Minister Teran with the Farmout Agreement or the Joint Operating Agreement.
Nevertheless, that script (now disclosed by the Claimants in this arbitration)
confirms that OEPC and AEC concealed the true nature of the transaction from
Minister Teran.

The script begins by asserting that “Oxy and AEC have agreed that AEC will
assume a 40% economic interest” and that there will be “no change in the
operations” and “no initial change in the contractual rights and obligations or
legal title for [Block 15]. What Minister Teran did not know, of course, was
that significantly more was being transferred to AEC. OEPC’s script also
suggests that OEPC stated that at a later date it “would seek to transfer 40% of
our legal title subject to the Government’s approval,” although, as Minister
Terdan has testified, OEPC assured Minister Terdn that this was a matter to be
left for future negotiation and would be subject to Ministry approval, if it
happened at all. (Emphasis in original)

266. In this regard, the Respondent further recalls the follow-up letter of 25 October
2000 sent to Minister Teran by Paul MacInnes. In this letter, OEPC expressly requests
“that the Ministry of Energy and Mines confirm as soon as possible, its consent with
respect to the aforementioned transfer of economic interest in favour of [AEC].” The
Respondent argues that this letter fails to disclose that OEPC had in fact already
concluded a binding agreement with AEC, and alleges that OEPC continued to conceal
this fact when it made a presentation to the Joint Management Committee of the

Limoncocha and Edén-Yuturi Fields on 22 November 2000.

267. Furthermore, the Respondent recalls the meeting between OEPC and the DNH on
14 December 2000. According to the Respondent, OEPC’s representatives present at this
meeting “falsely represented to the Government that [OEPC] was still in negotiations
with AEC over a possible future transaction”. This meeting led to the letter by Minister

Teran to OEPC dated 17 January 2001, which the Respondent characterizes as follows:

- 96 -

For avoidance of doubt, Minister Teraén made sure that OEPC knew the
consequences of making a transfer without authorization. In his January 17,
2001 letter, Minister Teran stated in no uncertain terms:

Executive Decree No. 809, which contains the Regulation to
Art. 79 of the Hydrocarbons Law, published in the Official
Register No. 197, dated May 31, 1985, in its Article I stipulates
that the total or partial transfer of rights and obligations derived
from a contract may be assigned in favour of third parties with
the prior authorization of the Corresponding Ministry,
otherwise such transfer will be invalid and will give rise to the
contract’s termination.

Thus, Minister Terdn specifically warned OEPC, as early as January 2001, that a
transfer of rights without approval would result in caducidad. Unbeknownst to
the Government, however, the deed had already been done — back in October
2000. (Emphasis in original)

268. The Respondent then addresses its discovery of what it refers to as the “true
nature” of OEPC’s relationship with AEC and the investigation that led to the caducidad
proceedings and, ultimately, the Caducidad Decree. This discovery is alleged to have
been made in the context of the 2003/2004 Moores Rowland’s audit of OEPC. The
Respondent disputes the Claimants’ suggestion that the caducidad proceedings were
initiated in retaliation to the VAT arbitration. Rather, according to the Respondent, “the
proximity of those events was of the Claimants’ own making.” The Respondent
particularizes its position as follows:

Specifically, it was the Claimants’ decision to make their request for transfer of

“legal title” to AEC immediately after the VAT Award was dispatched to the

parties that led to the discovery of the details of the relationship between OEPC

and AEC by the Minister of Energy and Mines and the Attorney General. The

timing of that request — following as it did on the heels of the VAT Award —

could not have been coincidental.

As the witness statement from OEPC witness Paul MacInnes reveals, AEC had

completed its required payments under the Farmout Agreement by the spring of

2004. Under the terms of the Farmout Agreement, OEPC should have

immediately sought authorization from the Government for the “second stage”

of the transaction, i.e., the transfer of “legal title” to AEC. But OEPC did not
make any such request at that time. Instead, it delayed for several months,

-97 -

failing to make the request until July 15, 2004, immediately after the award in
the VAT Arbitration was dispatched to the parties.

OEPC must also have known that any request for the transfer of “legal title” to
AEC would prompt scrutiny from the Ministry, given that the Ministry was
bound to conduct an investigation whenever a request for the transfer of rights
was made. OEPC must also have known that this could lead to the discovery of
the offending agreements by Government officials who would be able to
appreciate their significance. This may explain why OEPC did not make an
immediate request for the transfer of “legal title” to AEC when AEC’s payments
were completed in Spring 2004, and, instead, delayed until the VAT Arbitration
had concluded. Indeed, correspondence between OEPC and AEC in April 2004
confirms the parties’ intent, for the time being anyway, to “continue to leave the
‘consortium’ outside the country.” OEPC would have known that if it prevailed
in the VAT Arbitration, then made its request for transfer of legal title to AEC,
any adverse response by the Government could be made to appear retaliatory in
nature. OEPC has certainly not hesitated to characterize the Government’s
response in precisely that manner in this arbitration.

269. The Respondent then refutes the Claimants’ denial of motive to conceal the
Farmout Agreements in the following words:
The objective reality, however, is that the Claimants most certainly did have at
least two motives to conceal the Farmout: (i) the desire to avoid the payment of
a transfer fee and the enhancement to the economic terms of the contract, and
(ii) the desire to avoid any potential delay or complications that could have been
associated with the Ministry’s evaluation of the Claimants’ transfer request.
Further, AEC, in the context of deciding not to seek approval for the second
phase transfer, noted that it would have to “approach the government with the

proposal to pay the transfer tax,” and OEPC said that AEC might be concerned
about “anti-trust provisions.” (Emphasis in original)

270. The Respondent concludes that, in any event, the Claimants’ motive is irrelevant

in the circumstances.

271. Finally, the Respondent argues that the caducidad proceedings at all times
afforded the Claimants due process since OEPC was afforded the opportunity to respond

at each stage of the process.

- 98 -

(b) Alleged Violations of Hydrocarbons Regulations

272. As part of a parallel line of argument in support of its position that the Caducidad
Decree complied fully with Ecuadorian law, the Respondent contends that OEPC not
only sought to conceal the Farmout Agreements, but that its behaviour “was also a repeat
violation of the laws governing oil exploitation” thus forming “a secondary, but entirely
independent reason for caducidad.” These violations, however, are not said to have been

“essential” to the Minister’s decision to declare caducidad.

(c) Alleged Diplomatic Pressures

273. The Respondent asserts that it has discovered a third “separate” and
“independent” justification for termination of the Participation Contract in the
circumstances based on the Claimants’ repeated use of diplomatic channels to put
improper pressure on Ecuadorian authorities in violation of Clause 22.2.1 of the
Participation Contract. In this regard, the Respondent does not accept the Claimants’

explanations:

In any event, the point that the Claimants are now attempting to make — i.e., that
the Claimants lobbied the U.S. Government with regard to the VAT arbitration
but did not with regard to this dispute — is a distinction without a difference.
Both are prohibited under the plain terms of the Participation Contract, and both
give Ecuador grounds to declare caducidad. The Participation Contract
prohibits the use of “diplomatic or consular channels” with regard to any
“controversies that may arise as a result of this Participation Contract.” Article
22.2.1 of the Contract provides:

“Tn the event of controversies that may arise as the result of the
performance of this Participation Contract, in accordance with
Ecuadorian law, Contractor expressly waives its right to use
diplomatic or consular channels, or to have recourse to any
national or foreign jurisdictional body not provided for in this
Participation Contract. Lack of compliance with this provision
shall constitute grounds for the caducidad of this Participation
Contract.”

- 99 -

3.

274.
allegation that the Caducidad Decree was issued in violation of both the Treaty and
international law, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s first written submissions on
this point were filed prior to the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction referred to earlier in
this Award. The Respondent contends that the Claimants’ Treaty claims are necessarily

defective in light of the Claimants’ failure to challenge the Caducidad Decree before the

[J

More to the point, Ecuador certainly has presented evidence of post-2002
lobbying pressure with its Counter-Memorial. Among the evidence already
identified by Ecuador as showing post-2002 lobbying pressure is a telling e-mail
exchange between the Claimants and the U.S. State Department on August 23-
26, 2004. An examination of this document shows that it is a communication
initiated by the Claimants, inviting U.S. Government assistance in this very
dispute. (Emphasis in original)

The Respondent’s Defense to the Claimants’ Second Main Argument: The
Caducidad Decree Complied Fully with the Treaty and International Law

By way of a preliminary observation regarding the Respondent’s defense to the

Ecuadorian courts. In the words of the Respondent:

In its Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal denied Ecuador’s request for a stay
of the arbitration pending OEPC’s pursuit of claims before Ecuadorian courts,
but the denial of the request was in no way dispositive of Ecuadorian courts.
The Tribunal based its decision to deny the stay on its conclusion that the
Claimants were not contractually required to pursue their claims before
Ecuadorian courts. Decision on Jurisdiction (96. The reasoning of the Tribunal
seems to have been that since the Claimants were not contractually required to
bring their claims in Ecuador, there was not basis to direct them to pursue claims
in that forum before their present claims could be addressed on the merits. That
conclusion does not dispose of the present argument because Ecuador’s position
is that the Claimants’ Treaty claims are substantively defective even if the
Tribunal has jurisdiction over those claims and the Claimants were not
contractually required to bring their claims in Ecuador. This is true for the
simple reason that (as developed more fully below) the act of the Minister in
issuing the Caducidad Decree cannot attach responsibility to the State as a
substantive matter when there was a mechanism available for the review of that
act, which the investor simply failed to invoke. (Emphasis in original)

- 100 -

275. Because termination of the Participation Contract by way of caducidad was,
according to the Respondent, proper under Ecuadorian law, “this leads to the inevitable
conclusion that it was not an expropriation”. The Respondent contends that it is not open
to this Tribunal to conclude otherwise in the absence of a contrary ruling by the

Ecuadorian courts:

When considering the propriety of the termination under the Participation
Contract and its governing law, it is important to keep in mind that the
Caducidad Decree carries with it a presumption of validity, which may be
overcome only through a determination in an Ecuadorian administrative court.
Because the Claimants have not sought such a determination, they could not
possibly establish that the termination was wrongful under the Participation
Contract or under Ecuadorian law generally. It bears noting in this regard that
several BIT tribunals have acknowledged that an investor cannot state a valid
treaty claim if the viability of the claim under international law turns on whether
or not a contract governed by municipal law has been violated, and the investor
has not sought a ruling on that issue from a domestic court — provided, of
course, that the investor had the opportunity to pursue such a claim.

276. The Respondent adds that the Claimants’ Treaty and international law claims are
unsustainable even if redress had been sought before the Ecuadorian courts. The

Respondent argues:

The Claimants can hardly maintain that an expropriation occurred, or that their
legitimate expectations were violated, given that Ecuador issued the Caducidad
Decree in response to OEPC’s own violations of the Hydrocarbons Law,
particularly where the Participation Contract itself explicitly provided for that
result in such a situation. Nor can the Claimants credibly claim to have been
subjected to any arbitrary or discriminatory treatment, given that the Minister’s
decision was grounded in Ecuadorian law and was open to review by competent
Ecuadorian courts, and there were valid reasons for him to terminate the
OEPC’s contract, while leaving in place those of other investors. The simple
truth is that the Claimants have no one but themselves to blame for the forfeiture
of their investment.

277. The Respondent’s submissions to the effect that it did not violate the Treaty or

international law are articulated as follows:

- 101 -

@

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)
(vii)

278. The Respondent emphasizes that it acted in good faith in relation to OEPC’s
investment, that the Caducidad Decree was consistent with OEPC’s legitimate
expectations because it was specifically provided for under Ecuadorian law and the
Participation Contract and that the caducidad proceedings comported with due process
and were not motivated by political considerations.
Claimants’ allegation that the Respondent favored other contractors (such as Canada

Grande, Petrobras and Petrocol), it argues that these instances are readily distinguishable

the Respondent did not expropriate the Claimants’ investment
because the termination of a contract in accordance with its terms
and governing law is not an expropriation, and the Caducidad
Decree was a bona fide administrative sanction in furtherance of a
legitimate regulatory policy;

the Respondent did not violate the obligation to provide treatment
“no less favourable;”

the Respondent did not arbitrarily or discriminatorily impair
OEPC’s investment;

the Respondent did not deny the Claimants fair and equitable
treatment because, inter alia, the Claimants’ “legitimate
expectations” theories (estoppel, disproportionate sanction and
absence of due process) are unwarranted and, additionally, it
cannot be unfair and inequitable for the State to exercise a right
explicitly granted to it in a contract with the investor, in the
absence of any showing that the contract was obtained by fraud or
duress, or was otherwise unenforceable;

the Respondent did not deny the Claimants full protection and
security;

the Respondent did not violate the umbrella clause; and

the Respondent did not violate the Treaty based on conduct of
PetroEcuador.

from the present case.

- 102 -

Specifically, regarding the

279. The Respondent is also of the view that the Claimants’ submissions on the
proportionality of the caducidad sanction are without merit and that the Claimants’
assertion that it should have refrained from imposing caducidad in the absence of specific

harm or damage should be rejected.

280. Additionally, the Respondent argues that, contrary to the Claimants’ suggestion, it
was not estopped in the circumstances from declaring caducidad. The Respondent

maintains:

The Claimants do not come close to meeting the Temple of Preah Vihear
[estoppel] standard. To begin with, neither the Ministry, nor any other
Ecuadorian official, ever made a “clear statement of fact” that authorization was
not required for an agreement of the nature that was actually signed between
OEPC and AEC, let alone one that was “voluntary, unconditional, and
authorized.” Indeed, no indication from an official to the effect that
authorization did not seem to be necessary could have been “voluntary,” because
the Claimants withheld key details of OEPC’s contractual arrangements with
AEC in their discussions with officials, and never gave them a copy of the actual
agreements. Moreover, there was no “reliance in good faith” by OEPC, let
alone detrimental reliance. OEPC could not have relied on any statements of
Ecuadorian officials in good faith because it had concealed key details from
them, and was aware that they had no way of knowing the true nature of
OEPC’s agreements with AEC. And there was certainly no detrimental reliance
by the Claimants, because — far from suffering any detriment - OEPC made
profits from its investments in Ecuador that were made after the Farmout was
signed.

281. In conclusion, the Respondent reiterates its position as to the Claimants’

expectations in the circumstances of the present case:

In the instant case, the Claimants’ expectations at the time OEPC made its
investment were necessarily shaped by the terms of the Participation Contract
and the Hydrocarbons Law, both of which explicitly prohibited transactions of
the nature that OEPC surreptitiously entered into with AEC, and provided that
caducidad would be the sanction for any such unauthorized agreements. The
Claimants’ expectations were further confirmed by the letters from the Ministry
and DNH, which both stated that prior authorization would be required before
any such agreement could be concluded. Despite knowing full well about that
prohibition, and the sanction that would result if their violations came to light,

- 103 -

the Claimants went ahead and entered into the Farmout Agreement and the Joint
Operating Agreement with AEC, without prior authorization from the Ministry,
and concealed the true nature of both agreements from Ecuadorian authorities.
In this context, the Claimants cannot credibly claim that they had a legitimate
expectation that caducidad would not be declared when their violations were
discovered, and they have no equitable basis to seek relief from this Tribunal.

282. The Respondent’s counterclaim and the Claimants’

summarized next.

IV. THE RESPONDENT’S COUNTERCLAIM

A. The Respondent’s Position

283. The Respondent filed a counterclaim against the Claimants on the basis of four

distinct grounds:

@

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

284. The Respondent’s submissions regarding the first two heads of its counterclaim

are based principally on allegations of bad faith and coercion on the part of the

malicious prosecution (abuso del derecho) in relation to these
ICSID proceedings;

breach of Clause 22.2.1 of the Participation Contract regarding
waiver of the right to use diplomatic or consular channels;

the Claimants’ allegedly destructive and unlawful conduct
following the Caducidad Decree, including alleged damage to data
and software as well as unavailability of drilling rigs; and

the Claimants’ alleged failure to pay the required assignment fee
and negotiate a new participation contract more favourable to the
Respondent in accordance with Article 79 of the HCL.

Claimants, as reflected by the following:

The Claimants have launched these proceedings knowing that their claims in
relation to caducidad are objectively baseless and cannot succeed. They have
done so to apply further severe pressure on Ecuador — both in itself and in
combination with procuring the U.S. Government pressure noted herein — in

- 104 -

response thereto, are

order to coerce settlement and other concessions by making it extremely difficult
for Ecuador to maintain its defense in this action, and also to avoid the financial
consequences of creating a means by which synthetic interests in Block 15 could
be traded and profits thereby earned and concealed.

In a growing number of cases, claimants who have asserted baseless claims
purportedly founded in international law before ICSID or other tribunals have
been ordered to pay the fees and costs of the Respondent State, in order to
compensate the Respondent State for the burden and expense of defending the
claims. In this case, however, recovery of fees and costs alone could by no
means compensate Ecuador for all of the harm it has suffered from OEPC’s
wrongful conduct, which includes not only the expense associated with
defending these unworthy claims, but also the loss of profits arising on the
improper trading of Block 15 interests, and the substantial damage to Ecuador’s
reputation and economic prejudice in the market for foreign investment and
world opinion.

285. With respect to the amount of the damages which it says it has suffered as a result
of the Claimants’ fault, the Respondent maintains that they are not readily quantifiable in
economic or material terms. The Respondent accordingly argues that, under both
international law and Ecuadorian law, it is entitled to moral damages to redress the

consequences of the Claimants’ alleged malfeasance and prevent their unjust enrichment.

286. In connection with the third ground of its counterclaim, the Respondent seeks
economic damages to compensate it for losses allegedly suffered as a result of the
Claimants’ “destructive actions” regarding Block 15 following the issuance of the
Caducidad Decree. The alleged “destructive actions” principally consist of the
Claimants’ (a) release of two drilling rigs required to maintain production levels at Block
15 and (b) deactivation of Block 15’s operational software. These actions, the

Respondent contends, resulted in lost production damages of over $80 million.

287. The fourth and final head of the Respondent’s counterclaim, based on the

allegation that the Claimants failed to pay the assignment fee and negotiate a new

- 105 -

participation contract more favourable to the Respondent in accordance with Article 79 of
the HCL, is no longer pursued by the Respondent. It has made no attempt to quantify this

claim during the quantum phase of this proceeding.

B. The Claimants’ Position

288. The Claimants characterize the first two heads of the Respondent’s counterclaim

as “ludicrous”, and submit that they fail for the following reasons:
First, Ecuador’s counterclaim for abuse of process is legally misconceived. The
doctrine of abuse of process is seldom invoked in international practice, and
Ecuador is unable to cite a single international-law case in which a tribunal has
actually determined that an abuse of process occurred. The consensus that
emerges from the cases that deal with the issue is that, as long as the tribunal has
jurisdiction and the claims have been properly submitted, no abuse of process can

have occurred. Indeed, the cases question whether the doctrine of abuse of
process has any application at all in international arbitral practice.

L.]

Second, even if Ecuador’s expansive notion of abuse of process has any merit, it
would still fail because OEPC’s claims are fully justified by the facts and the
law, and Ecuador’s allegation of bad faith is completely baseless. (Emphasis in
original)

289. Noting that the Respondent’s counterclaim is based in part on the premise that the
Claimants have put forward their own claims in order to obtain “leverage”, the Claimants

rebut this allegation of bad faith by reasserting their submissions on liability.

290. As for the Respondent’s allegations of “destructive actions” on the part of the
Claimants, and in particular the release of two drilling rigs required to maintain
production levels at Block 15, the Claimants maintain that nothing in the Participation
Contract or the HCL required OEPC to maintain at the site equipment such as oil rigs that

were no longer in use. The Claimants further argue that PetroEcuador could have

- 106 -

assumed OEPC’s oil rig contracts had it wished to recall the rigs itself. The Claimants
otherwise contend that OEPC took all steps necessary to ensure the smooth transition of
Block 15 from OEPC to PetroEcuador, and that any ensuing difficulties, including
software-related issues, were the result of PetroEcuador’s own failure to plan adequately

for the Block 15 transition.

Vv. ANALYSIS

A. The Tribunal’s Jurisdiction over the Claimants’ Claims

291. The Respondent at the outset maintains that the Claimants’ Treaty claims are
“substantially defective” even if the Tribunal has jurisdiction over these claims because
“the act of the Minister in issuing the Caducidad Decree cannot attach responsibility to
the State as a substantive matter when there was a mechanism available for the review of
that act, which the investor simply failed to invoke.” The Claimants were legally
obliged, says the Respondent, to pursue a local challenge to the Caducidad Decree before

the courts in Ecuador.

292. In brief, the Claimants answer that this is a “recycled” version of the jurisdictional
argument advanced by the Respondent in its jurisdictional challenge which has been
dismissed by the Tribunal in its Decision on Jurisdiction’ and which is now being

“reincarnated” as a merits defense.

293. The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants. The matter is “res judicata.”

® See Decision on Jurisdiction dated 9 September 2008

- 107 -

294. In its Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal, after having referred to Article VI of
the Treaty and Clause 2.2.2.1 of the Participation Contract, stated very clearly that it
“does not accept that [...] the parties agreed that caducidad-related disputes under the
Participation Contract would solely be resolved by submission to the Ecuadorian

administrative courts [.. je?

295. The Tribunal then concluded that it “has jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claims

under both the Participation contract and the Treaty”.'°

296. This disposes of the Respondent’s preliminary objection which is dismissed.

B. The Tribunal’s Findings in Connection with the Claimants’ Claims

L. OEPC’s Breach of the Participation Contract

(a) Preliminary Observations

297. At the heart of the Claimants’ case in this arbitration lies the issue of whether the
Respondent, by issuing the Caducidad Decree on 15 May 2006, validly terminated the
Participation Contract in accordance with both the Participation Contract itself and its
governing law, namely Ecuadorian law and, in particular, the Hydrocarbons Law. In
addressing this issue, the Tribunal must first answer the specific question of whether
OEPC, upon entering into the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement

with AEC, (i) transferred or assigned rights under the Participation Contract contrary to

° Ibid. at paragraph 70.

10 Tbid. at paragraph 89.

- 108 -

Clause 16.1 of the Participation Contract and in violation of Article 74.11 of the HCL,
and/or (ii) created a consortium contrary to Clause 16.4 of the Participation Contract and
in violation of Article 74.12 of the HCL. In the event the Tribunal answers this question
in the affirmative, it will then have to determine whether or not authorization was
obtained in the circumstances — it is undisputed that in either instance, authorization on
the part of the Ecuadorian authorities was indeed required. And in the event that the
Tribunal finds that such authorization was not obtained, it will thereafter need to address
the question of whether or not the termination of the Participation Contract and the
Unitized Fields Joint Operating Agreements by the Respondent through the declaration of
caducidad was consistent with both the Treaty and customary international law as well as
Ecuadorian law, and in particular whether or not it was a proportionate sanction in the

circumstances.

298. As noted earlier in this Award, whilst the Claimants’ wrongful termination
submissions (as well as those of the Respondent) regarding the above significantly
overlap, they predominantly address the Respondent’s allegations of an unauthorized
transfer or assignment as opposed to the Respondent’s allegations of an unauthorized
consortium. The Tribunal will thus consider first the central issue of whether the
Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement operated a transfer or assignment
of rights under the Participation Contract contrary to Clause 16.1 thereof and in violation

of Article 74.11 of the HCL.

- 109 -

299. Crucial to this issue of the alleged prohibition to transfer or assign rights under the
Participation Contract are Clauses 16.1 and 16.2, which will be quoted again for ease of

reference. They read as follows:

SIXTEEN: TRANSFER AND ASSIGNMENT.-

16.1 Transfer of this Participation Contract or assignment to third parties of the
rights under the Participation Contract, must have the authorization of the
Corresponding Ministry, in accordance with existing laws and _ regulations,
especially the provisions contained in Art. 79 of the Hydrocarbons Law and
Executive Decrees No. 809, 2713 and 1179.

16.2 The prohibition to transfer or assign rights under this Participation Contract
without the approval of the Corresponding Ministry, as determined in Art. 79 of the
Hydrocarbons Law, is not an obstacle to freely trade Contractor’s stock, without
need of said authorization, provided that the trading of said stock does not change,
modify or extinguish the legal existence of Contractor, nor constitute a decrease in
its administrative, financial and technical capacities with reference to this
Participation Contract.

300. The Respondent argues that it was entitled to terminate the Participation Contract
in accordance with Clause 21.1.2 thereof, which expressly provided that the Participation
Contract shall terminate “[d]ue to a transfer of rights and obligations of the Participation
Contract without prior authorization of the Corresponding Ministry”. The Claimants, the
Tribunal recalls, deny that the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement
operated a transfer or assignment of contractual rights and obligations under the
Participation Contract. They accordingly contend that prior authorization in connection

with these Agreements, when entered into in 2000, was not required.

- 110-

(b) Evidence of a Transfer of Rights under the Participation Contract

301. As explained in more detail below, based on its review of the entirety of the
record, the Tribunal considers that there is ample evidence to conclude that the purpose
of the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement was to transfer from
OEPC as Contractor to AEC certain of the Contractor’s exclusive rights to carry out the
oil exploitation activities under the Participation Contract, as set forth under Clause 4.2 of

the Participation Contract, along with related rights and obligations.

302. The evidence of the intention to transfer OEPC’s exclusive right to carry out the
oil exploitation activities under the Participation Contract to AEC is found principally in
the Joint Operating Agreement which the parties entered into as envisaged in the
Farmout. Indeed, the very terms of the Joint Operating Agreement define its scope by
reference to an apportionment of rights under the Participation Contract as between
OEPC and AEC. Clause 3.1.1 of the Joint Operating Agreement — under the heading
entitled “Scope” — stated that “[t]he purpose of this Agreement is to establish the
respective rights and obligations of the Parties with regard to operations under the
Participation Agreements [which include the Participation Contract], including without
limitation the joint exploration, appraisal, development and production of Petroleum from
the Agreement Area [...].” (Emphasis added) This, in the Tribunal’s view, explicitly
evidences that the Joint Operating Agreement was intended to effectuate a transfer of

rights and obligations held under the Participation Contract to the benefit of AEC.

303. Similarly, the terms of Clause 3.3.1 of the Joint Operating Agreement — under the

heading entitled “Ownership, Obligations and Liabilities’ — stated that “[u]nless

-lil-

otherwise provided in this Agreement, all the rights and interests in_and_under_the
Participating Agreements, all Joint Property and any Petroleum and any Petroleum
produced from the Agreement Area shall, subject to the terms of the Participating
Agreements, be owned by the Parties in accordance with their respective Participating
Interests.” (Emphasis added) Again, this language explicitly evidences that the Joint
Operating Agreement served to operate a transfer of rights and obligations held under the
Participation Contract, resulting in AEC’s purported “ownership” over these rights to the

extent of its Participating Interest.

304. The Tribunal concludes that by virtue of having “ownership” over “all the rights
and interests in and under the Participating Agreements”, albeit to the extent of its 40%
respective Participating Interest, the parties intended that AEC acquire such ownership as
a result of a transfer of such rights and interests effected by the Joint Operating

Agreement.

305. The Tribunal observes that the prohibition to transfer or assign rights and
obligations under the Participation Contract is not expressed as being limited to total
transfers or assignments. This prohibition must be interpreted as encompassing partial
transfers or assignments such as the one effected by the Joint Operating Agreement. In
the event of a transfer or assignment of rights and obligations under the Participation
Contract, authorization was required regardless of whether (i) only a percentage of such
rights and obligations was being transferred or assigned, (ii) only some and not all of
such rights and obligations were being transferred or assigned, or (iii) only some aspect

and not all aspects (for instance legal title) of such rights and obligations were being

-112-

transferred or assigned. As set out in paragraphs 612-659 below, without this
authorization, any purported transfer (including a partial transfer) was invalid under the
HCL. The Tribunal’s finding in this regard is also confirmed by HCL-related legislation,
such as Executive Decree No. 809'', which expressly contemplates that both partial and

total transfers of rights and obligations must be authorized.

306. Although the Farmout was sometimes characterized by the Claimants as “merely”
transferring to AEC, in 2000, a 40% economic interest in Block 15, as opposed to legal
title to an interest in Block 15, the Tribunal does not accept that the transaction, whatever
may have been the parties’ intention, did not serve to effectuate a transfer of rights and
obligations requiring authorization on the part of the Ecuadorian authorities. As noted
above, neither the Participation Contract nor the HCL allow a narrow reading of the
concepts of transfer or assignment. They must be read as including all forms of such
transfers or assignments, be they total or partial in nature. The fact that OEPC may have
retained legal title in order to prevent any privity as between AEC and Ecuador in
relation to the Participation Contract — an issue which is addressed in more detail later in
this Chapter — does not, per se, mean that a transfer of rights and obligations was not
intended by the Joint Operating Agreement. Indeed, the Tribunal has already found that

the Joint Operating Agreement, by its very scope, contemplates such a transfer.

307. In addition, the Tribunal is not persuaded by the Claimants’ contention that,

irrespective of the Joint Operating Agreement, OEPC remained at all times the “sole

"' See Exhibit CA-570. See also CB-23.

- 113 -

guarantor” of the rights and obligations under the Participation Contract vis-a-vis
Ecuador and that, consequently, these rights and obligations could not have been
transferred to AEC. The reality is that by entering into the Joint Operating Agreement,
OEPC agreed to share with AEC some of the rights and obligations it had under the
Participation Contract and, in so doing, it agreed to a transfer of these rights and
obligations. As such, prior authorization on the part of the Ecuadorian authorities was

required.

(o) Nature of the Rights to be Transferred: The Joint Operating Agreement

308. As previously mentioned, the parties disagree as to the true nature of the rights
and obligations conferred by OEPC to AEC by virtue of the Farmout Agreement and, in
particular, the Joint Operating Agreement. The Claimants, on the one hand, contend that,
pursuant to the Farmout Agreements, AEC had no real power or influence in connection
with Block 15 operations, whereas the Respondent, on the other hand, submits that the
Farmout Agreements provided AEC with “operational” influence and control over

OEPC’s performance as a Contractor under the Participation Agreement.

309. In support of its allegation of “operational” influence and control, the Respondent
relies in particular on the funding and voting provisions of the Joint Operating Agreement
as evidence that AEC had the ability to direct the day-to-day management or long-term
strategy of Block 15 during the “earn-in” phase. The Claimants refute this contention,
arguing that, during the “earn-in” phase, AEC had no right per se under the Joint
Operating Agreement to force OEPC to operate Block 15 in one way or another.

According to the Claimants, the only right that AEC obtained under the Joint Operating

-114-

Agreement during the “earn-in” phase was the right to sit on the Management
Committee. Most of the decisions by the Management Committee, they argue, did not
require AEC’s concurrence — only those in connection with development and work plans,
budgets and joint operations. And the only consequence of a refusal by AEC to approve
a work plan or budget or operation, they conclude, was that AEC would not be required

to fund that particular operation.

310. The Tribunal notes that paragraph 2(a)(ii) of the Letter of Intent expressly stated
that the “Farmin Transaction is subject to the negotiation [...] of [...] a Joint Operating
Agreement [...] providing the Parties joint control (in accordance with normal Joint
Operating Agreement provisions) over programs and _expenditures_on Block 15.”
(Emphasis added) Thus, “joint control [...] over programs and expenditures on Block

15” was clearly part of the Joint Operating Agreement’s raison d’étre.

311. The Farmout Agreement itself refers to the Joint Operating Agreement as
“govern[ing] exploration, exploitation, development, maintenance, operation and
production of Block 15” (at Article 2.02). The Farmout Agreement also stated that

OEPC was to “serve as Operator under the JOA” (ibid.).

312. In this context, the Tribunal considers it apposite to highlight certain provisions of

the Joint Operating Agreement:

(i) Article 4.2 of the Joint Operating Agreement under the heading “Rights

and Duties of Operator” of Article 4 entitled “Operator”:

4.2.1 Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, Operator
shall have all of the rights, functions and duties of Operator under the

- HIS -

Participating Agreements and shall have exclusive charge of and shall
conduct all Joint Operations. Operator may employ independent
contractors and/or agents (which may include any Non-Operator,
Affiliates of Operator and Affiliates of any Non-Operator) in such Joint
Operations.

4.2.2 In the conduct of Joint Operations Operator shall:
L.]

4.2.2.4 Perform the duties for the Management Committee set
out in Article 5, and prepare and submit to the Management Committee
the proposed Work Programs, Budgets and AFEs as provided in Article
6. Operator shall perform all Joint Operations in accordance with
approved Work Programs and Budgets;

L.]

(ii) Article 4.10.3 of the Joint Operating Agreement under the heading entitled

“Removal of Operator” of Article 4 entitled “Operator”:

4.10.1 Subject to Article 4.11, Operator shall be removed upon receipt
of notice from any Non-Operator if:

LJ

4.10.3. Notwithstanding any provisions of this Article 4.10 to the
contrary, in no event may Operator resign or be removed prior to the
Transfer Date unless another Person legally entitled under the
Participation Agreements to become a successor Operator may be
appointed as successor Operator.

(iii) — Article 5.2 of the Joint Operating Agreement entitled “Powers and Duties

of Management Committee” of Article 5 entitled “Management Committee”:

Without prejudice to the rights and duties of Operator under this
Agreement, the Management Committee shall have power and duty to
authorize and supervise Joint Operations that are necessary or desirable
to fulfill the Participating Agreements and properly explore and exploit
the Agreement Area in accordance with this Agreement and in a manner
appropriate in the circumstances. [...]

- 116-

(iv) Article 5.9.2 of the Joint Operating Agreement entitled “Voting

Procedure” of Article 5 entitled “Management Committee”:

5.9.2 The following acts shall require affirmative vote of one (1) or
more Parties then having collectively at least sixty-six and two-thirds
percent (66-2/3%) of the Participating Interests [which would
necessarily include AEC]:

5.9.2.1 Approval of a Development Plan;

5.9.2.2 Approval of a Work Program and Budget or any
amendment or modification thereof;

5.9.2.3 Overexpenditures on any line item of an approved Work
Program and Budget by more than twenty percent (20%) or U.S.
$1,000,000, whichever is less, of the authorized amount for such line
item, or overexpenditures for a Calendar Year of a total Work Program
and Budget by more than ten percent (10%) or U.S. $5,000,000,
whichever is less; and

5.9.2.4 Decisions on financing Joint Operations (including any

decisions to repay indebtedness on any such financing) prior to the
Transfer Date.

L.]
(v) Article 5.13.5 of the Joint Operating Agreement under the heading entitled

“Effect of Vote” of Article 5 entitled “Management Committee”:

5.13.5 No decision of the Management Committee shall be binding if it
conflicts with a decision by any Integrated Management Committee with
Petroecuador for the Eden-Yuturi Unit or the Limoncocha Unit or any
other unit in which all or any portion of Block 15 is hereafter utilized.

(vi) Article 6.3 of the Joint Operating Agreement under the heading entitled

“Production” of Article 6 entitled “Work Programs and Budgets”:

On or before the 1“ Day of October of each Calendar Year, Operator
shall deliver to the Parties a proposed production Work Program and
Budget detailing the Joint Operations to be performed in the
Development Area and the projected production of schedule for the
following Calendar Year. Within Thirty (30) Days of such delivery, the

-H7-

Management Committee shall agree upon a production Work Program
and Budget.

(vii) Article 7.1.1 of the Joint Operating Agreement under the heading entitled
“Limitation on Applicability” of Article 7 entitled “Operations By Less Than All

Parties”:

7.1.1. No operations may be conducted in furtherance of the
Participating Agreements except as Joint Operations under Article 5 or
as Exclusive Operations under Article 7. No Exclusive Operation shall
be conducted which conflicts with a Joint Operation or which conflicts
with any of the Participating Agreements.

(viii) Article 14.1 of the Joint Operating Agreement under the heading entitled

“Relationship of Parties” of Article 14 entitled “Relationship of Parties and Tax”:

The rights, duties, obligations and liabilities of the Parties under this
Agreement shall be individual, not joint or collective. It is not the
intention of the Parties to create, nor shall this Agreement be deemed or
construed to create a mining or other partnership, joint venture or
association or (except as explicitly provided in this Agreement) a trust.
This Agreement shall not be deemed or construed to authorize any Party
to act as an agent, servant or employee for any other Party for any
purpose whatsoever except as explicitly set forth in this Agreement. It is
understood that each Party is entering into this Agreement for the
purpose of protecting and developing its Participating Interest. In their
relations with each other under this Agreement, the Parties shall not be
considered fiduciaries except as expressly provided in this Agreement.

313. The Tribunal further recalls that the parties, during the Hearing, pointed
extensively to Management Committee minutes for purposes of analyzing AEC’s actual
involvement with Block 15. The Claimants refer to such minutes as evidence that AEC
was only consulted as a mere financial backer with no actual veto power regarding
development plans, work plans and budgets, whereas the Respondent refers to such
minutes as evidence that AEC’s approval was required in connection with Block 15

expenditures and operations.

- 118 -

314. The Tribunal has already found that, subject to paragraphs 612-659 below, by
virtue of the Joint Operating Agreement, AEC was to acquire rights and interests in and
under the Participating Agreements, to the extent of its 40% Participating Interest. But as
can be gleaned from these provisions, the Joint Operation Agreement did not only seek to
operate as a general transfer of certain rights and interests in and under the Participating
Agreements. To the contrary, the Joint Operating Agreement resulted in the exercise of

specific managerial and voting rights by AEC in connection with Block 15.

315. In particular, the Tribunal notes that AEC was granted the right to veto all “acts”
of significance under the Joint Operating Agreement as a member — on an equal footing
with OEPC — of the Management Committee. Article 5.1 of the Joint Operating
Agreement stated that “[t]o provide for the overall supervision and direction of Joint
Operations, there is established a Management Committee composed of representatives
of each Party holding a Participating Interest.” The “Joint Operations”, the Tribunal
further recalls, are defined as “those operations and activities carried out by the Operator
pursuant to this Agreement for Block 15” (Article 1.40 of the Joint Operating
Agreement). As a member of the Management Committee, AEC thus acquired the
“power and duty to authorize and supervise Joint Operations that are necessary or
desirable to fulfill the Participating Agreements and properly explore and exploit the
Agreement Area in accordance with this Agreement and in a manner appropriate in the

circumstances” (Article 5.2). (Emphasis added)

316. The Management Committee’s “Voting Procedure” under Article 5.9.2 sheds

further light on AEC’s real and well defined rights in its capacity as a full member of the

- 119-

Committee. This provision identifies a number of “acts” which required a majority vote,
(thus the vote of both AEC and OEPC), including inter alia “Approval of a Development
Plan” (Article 5.9.2.1); “Approval of a Work Program and Budget or any amendment or
modification thereof’ (Article 5.9.2.2); “Overexpenditures on any line item of an
approved Work Program and Budget by more than twenty percent (20%) or U.S.
$1,000,000, whichever is less, of the authorized amount for such line item, or over
expenditures for a Calendar Year of a total Work Program and Budget by more than ten
percent (10%) or U.S. $5,000,000, whichever is less” (Article 5.9.2.3); and “Decisions on
financing Joint Operations (including any decisions to repay indebtedness on any such

financing) prior to the Transfer Date” (Article 5.9.2.4).

317. In the Tribunal’s view, these provisions demonstrate incontrovertibly that the
Joint Operating Agreement conferred to AEC real and specific managerial and voting
rights in connection with Block 15, and thereby sought to confer rights under the

Participation Contract, and the Tribunal so finds.

318. The fact that OEPC, as Operator, retained exclusive charge of all Joint Operations
pursuant to Article 4.2.1 of the Joint Operating Agreement does not modify the
Tribunal’s finding. In this connection, the Tribunal notes that when, on 15 July 2004,
OEPC made its formal request to PetroEcuador for the transfer to AEC of legal title to its
40% economic interest in Block 15, it confirmed explicitly that it would retain the
operation of Block 15 both before and after the “earn-in” phase. In other words, OEPC
remained sole Operator under the Participation Agreements both before and after AEC

was to acquire legal title. Consequently, the fact that OEPC, after execution of the

- 120-

Farmout Agreement retained exclusive charge of all Joint Operations is not a relevant
factor in the determination by the Tribunal of whether or not a transfer of rights to AEC

was to occur prior to the vesting of legal title to those rights.

319. A related issue — which the Tribunal need not determine in view of its earlier
finding — concerns the question of whether AEC, prior to the vesting of legal title, was
entitled to impose an “Exclusive Operation” in the event the Management Committee
failed to reach agreement on a “Joint Operation.” Article 7.1.1 of the Joint Operating

Agreement provided as follows:

No operations may be conducted in furtherance of the Participating Agreements
except as Joint Operations under Article 5 or as Exclusive Operations under
Article 7. No Exclusive Operation shall be conducted which conflicts with a
Joint Operation or which conflicts with any of the Participating Agreements.

320. In the Tribunal’s view, the issue of whether or not AEC could impose an
Exclusive Operation under the Joint Operating Agreement prior to obtaining legal title is
immaterial to the question of whether AEC acquired rights under the Participation
Contract. AEC’s rights in connection with Block 15 Exclusive Operations do not change
the fact that the Joint Operating Agreement conferred to AEC specific managerial and
voting rights in connection with such Block 15 Joint Operations, and thereby sough to

confer rights under the Participation Contract, as found earlier by the Tribunal.

321. Another argument by the Claimants is that AEC’s specific managerial and voting
rights cannot result in a transfer of rights under the Participation Contract because the
Joint Operating Agreement did not allow for decisions on the part of the Management

Committee that conflicted with the Participation Agreements. In support of this

-121-

argument, the Claimants point to the above-quoted Article 7.1.1 of the Joint Operating
Agreement, as well as Article 5.13.5 of the Joint Operating Agreement, which the

Tribunal reproduces again for ease of reference:

5.13.5 No decision of the Management Committee shall be binding if it
conflicts with a decision by any Integrated Management Committee with
Petroecuador for the Eden-Yuturi Unit or the Limoncocha Unit or any other unit
in which all or any portion of Block 15 is hereafter utilized.

322. The fact that rights under the Joint Operating Agreement were to be exercised in
accordance with the Participating Agreements (which would have been the case both
before and after AEC had acquired legal title) does not imply that such rights were not
being transferred to AEC or that they did not otherwise exist. It simply means, and the
Tribunal so finds, that OEPC could not transfer other rights than those it held under the

Participation Agreements: nemo dat quod non habet.

323. The distinction which must be made is between rights that may (or not) have been
immediately “exercisable” by AEC, as opposed to rights that were immediately
“transferable” to AEC. Hence, the Claimants contend that even if the Joint Operating
Agreement may appear on its face to transfer specific rights to AEC in connection with
the day-to-day management and operation of Block 15, these rights, they aver, could only

be exercised in the future, i.e. once legal title had been acquired by AEC.

324. In other words, according to the Claimants, the Joint Operating Agreement did not
operate an immediate transfer of rights, but rather a conditional transfer which would

only vest upon transfer of legal title to AEC.

- 122-

325. The Claimants’ expert on this point, Mr. Norman E. Maryan Jr., opined as
follows: “I believe that the Parties intended the JOA in this case to be broadly drafted to
enable its use both before and after legal title vested. I do not believe that such broadly
drafted Joint Operating Agreements, such as the JOA in this case, can support the
conclusion that AECI was vested with full rights of a non-operator from the inception of

the JOA.””

326. The Tribunal notes however that Mr. Maryan nuanced his opinion and admitted
that the rights were indeed granted, albeit “apparently”. He stated as follows: “I believe

that many of the rights apparently granted AEC under the JOA could, in fact, not be fully

exercised until after legal title vested.”" (Emphasis added)

327. The Respondent’s expert, Mr. A. Timothy Martin, when questioned at the
Hearing on Mr. Maryan’s views in this regard, opined as follows: “I disagree with this
conclusion. It is my opinion that most of the rights that you would normally see in an
industry JOA are, in fact, existent in this Operating Agreement, and they are fully

exercised both before and after legal title vested.” (Emphasis added)

328. Thus, the parties’ experts are in agreement that, on its face, the Joint Operating
Agreement operated, at a minimum, an apparent transfer of rights, but they disagree as to

whether such rights could be exercised by AEC prior to the transfer of legal title. In the
!? Expert Report of Norman E. Maryan Jr. dated 10 August 2008 at page 13.

'3 Ibid. at page 5.

' Hearing Transcript (20 December 2008) at page 1789.

- 123 -

Tribunal’s view, the fact that the debate between the experts focussed on whether certain
rights could be exercised, as opposed to whether such rights were to be transferred, is
irrelevant for purposes of the findings the Tribunal has made in respect of its
interpretation of the Joint Operating Agreement. The true issue is whether a transfer of
rights was to occur between OEPC and AEC upon execution of the Farmout Agreement
and the Joint Operating Agreement, i.e. whether a purported transfer of rights has been
established, and the Tribunal has conclusively found this to be the case. The issue of
whether such rights, once transferred, could or could not be immediately exercised is not

relevant to the Tribunal’s analysis.

(d) The Farmout Agreement

329. The Tribunal has found in the previous Section that, by its terms, the Joint
Operating Agreement purported to transfer rights to AEC which OEPC held under the
Participation Agreements. In the present Section, the Tribunal finds that the Farmout
Agreement by its terms, also purported to transfer rights to AEC, which OEPC held under

the Participation Agreements.

330. One of the central provisions of the Farmout Agreement, Section 2.01, provided
that, during the “earn-in” phase, OEPC would “hold[] legal title to AECI’s interest in the
Farmout Property on behalf of AECI”’. The “Farmout Property” was defined in Section
1.01 as including “the Participation Agreements and the rights and interest therein
granted to OEPC in and with respect to Block 15.” Section 2.01 of the Farmout

Agreement (quoted earlier) further provided, in relevant part, as follows:

-124-

Art. 2.01 [...]The Farmout Interest to be transferred to AECI as of the Effective
Time includes a “working interest” or “participating interest” in the Participating
and Block 15 except that it does not include nominal legal title to an
interest_in Block 15 or an interest as a party to the Participating Agreements.
OEPC shall continue to own 100% of the legal title to the Participating A
and to the interests in Block 15 granted or provided for in the Participating
Agreements; provided that from and after the Effective Time OEPC shall hold
legal title to the interest in the Farmout Property represented by the Farmout
Interest of AECI in the Participating A and Block 15 as a “nominee”
with the obligation to_ convey legal title to such interest to AECI, subject _to
obtaining required governmental approvals, promptly following AECI’s payment
of all amounts required to earn the interest in the Farmout Property represented by
the Farmout Interest as hereafter provided and the expenditure of such amounts by
OEPC as Operator under the JOA for Block 15 Capex (as hereinafter defined).
Prior to such conveyance, while OEPC holds legal title to AECI’s interest in the
Farmout Property on behalf of AECI, OEPC shall be obligated, at the sole risk.
cost and expense of AECTI, to act with respect to the Farmout Interest of AECI as
AECI shall direct from time to time as if AECI were a party to the Participating
A owning legal title to a 40% interest in the Participating A

and the interests therein granted in Block 15, subject to and in accordance with the
terms and provisions of the JOA provided for in Section 2.02. (Emphasis added)

 

331. It is clear to the Tribunal that this crucial Section 2.01 of the Farmout Agreement
confirms that AEC was to have de facto legal title to its interest in the “Farmout
Property,” but that this title was to be “held” by OEPC on its behalf until the required
governmental approvals were obtained. This provision further confirms that OEPC had
undertaken to act as the Contractor under the Participation Contract — a right it had
acquired on an exclusive basis — “as if’ AEC was a party to this Participation Contract.
In reality, as between OEPC and AEC, the situation was identical both before and after
conveyance of legal title in so far as the Participation Contract was concerned; they were
operating de facto pursuant to the Joint Operating Agreement “as if” legal title had
already been conveyed, and the ministerial authorization for the conveyance of legal title
was a mere formality. More fundamentally, in the view of the Tribunal, this meant that
OEPC was sharing with AEC its exclusive right to carry out Block 15 operations and was

obligated “to act with respect to the Farmout Interest of AECI as AECI shall direct from

- 125 -

time to time.” This Section 2.01 of the Farmout Agreement, coupled with those provisions
of the Joint Operating Agreement which the Tribunal reviewed previously, comfort the
Tribunal in its conclusion that OEPC did indeed seek to transfer to AEC under these

agreements rights it acquired from Ecuador under the Participation Contract.

(7) Privity of Contract

332. One of the Claimants’ main argument in support of its contention that OEPC did
not transfer or assign rights under the Participation Contract to AEC contrary to Clause
16.1 of the Participation Contract and in violation of Article 74.11 of the HCL is that,
until legal title was transferred to AEC, only OEPC remained liable vis-a-vis the
Respondent and PetroEcuador for the performance of the Participation Contract and that
only OEPC could enforce its rights under the Participation Contract. In other words,
according to the Claimants, an assignment or transfer of contractual rights required
privity between AEC and the Respondent and since the transfer of a 40% economic
interest did not create such privity, AEC did not acquire rights in the Participation

Contract that could be enforced against Ecuador.

333. The Tribunal is not persuaded by the Claimants’ submission. The fact that OEPC
may have retained legal title and that no privity as between AEC and Ecuador existed in
relation to the Participation Contract does not necessarily lead to the conclusion, in the
circumstances of this case, that the Farmout Agreement and/or the Joint Operating
Agreement did not purport to transfer rights from OEPC to AEC, as the Tribunal has

found.

- 126-

334. The Tribunal observes that, if it adopted the Claimants’ argument, an
unauthorized transfer or assignment of rights in a case such as the present one, could
never be found. Privity necessarily implies authorization on the part of the Ecuadorian
authorities since it requires that AEC be made a party to the Participation Contract, which
cannot happen without such authorization. The Claimants appeared to recognize that
their argument was illogical since they acknowledged that “neither the transfer of

economic interest nor the unauthorized transfer of legal title would have created privity.”

335. The Tribunal also observes that Article 4.01 of the Farmout Agreement confirms
the Tribunal’s conclusion. Under this Article, the conveyance of legal title and the
creation of privity between AEC and PetroEcuador under the Participation Contract are
clearly identified as two separate and distinct legal transactions. This Article, which is
found in Part IV of the Farmout Agreement, titled “Assignment of Legal Title’, reads as

follows:

Art. 4.01 Promptly after AECI has made all payments of the OEPC Carry provided
for in Sections 3.03, 3.04 and 3.05 and OEPC as Operator under the JOA has
expended such amounts for Block 15 Capex, OEPC and AECI shall execute and
deliver such documents as are required to convey legal title to AECI in and to a
40% economic interest in the Participating Agreements and Block 15 and to make
AECI a party to the Participating Agreements as owner of such 40% economic
interest (subject to obtaining required governmental approvals). Any transfer fees
or administrative charges imposed by any government agency or department with
respect to such transactions shall be paid by AECI. (Emphasis added)

 

336. In sum, the absence of privity in the circumstances of this case is of no
consequence in view of the Tribunal’s earlier findings that OEPC sought to transfer to
AEC rights it held under the Participation Contract. The Farmout Agreement itself

confirms the Tribunal’s conclusion.

- 127-

@ The Remaining Allegations of Breach of the Participation Contract and HCL
Violations

337. Having found that the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement
purported to effect a transfer of rights under the Participation Contract from OEPC to
AEC, the Tribunal need not address the question of whether it also created a consortium
contrary to Clause 16.4 of the Participation Contract and in violation of Article 74.12 of
the HCL. For the same reason, the Tribunal need not address the Respondent’s
allegations of technical infractions on the part of OEPC in violation of Article 74.13 of

the HCL.

338. Even if the Tribunal were to find in favor of the Respondent with respect to these
allegations, these findings would not affect the conclusion of the Tribunal that the
Caducidad Decree was not a proportionate response by Ecuador in the particular
circumstances of this case.!> In addition, the Tribunal notes that whether it finds one, two
or three violations by the Claimants of the HCL, the sanction remains the same:

Caducidad. The sanction is not cumulative.

339. The Tribunal will now turn to the issue of OEPC’s obligation to obtain
authorization from the “Corresponding Ministry” for this transfer and whether OEPC did

seek such authorization.

'S See Infra, paragraph 442.

- 128 -

2 OEPC’s Duty to Obtain Authorization for the Transfer of Rights under the
Participation Contract

340. As noted earlier, it is undisputed that in order to proceed with a transfer of rights
under the Participation Contract, OEPC was required to obtain prior authorization on the
part of the Ecuadorian authorities. The previously-quoted Clause 16.1 of the

Participation Contract clearly stated:

SIXTEEN: TRANSFER AND ASSIGNMENT.-

16.1 Transfer of this Participation Contract or assignment to third parties of the
rights under the Participation Contract, must_have the authorization of the
Corresponding Ministry, in accordance with existing laws and_ regulations,
especially the provisions contained in Art. 79 of the Hydrocarbons Law and
Executive Decrees No. 809, 2713 and 1179. (Emphasis added)

341. Just as clearly, Clause 21.1.2 of the Contract expressly provided that the
Participation Contract shall terminate “[d]ue to a transfer of rights and obligations of the
Participation Contract without prior authorization of the Corresponding Ministry.”

(Emphasis added) The Tribunal recalls that the Participation Contract tracks the

requirements of Ecuador’s HCL, in particular the following:
CHAPTER IX
Caducidad, Sanctions and Transfers

Art. 74. The Ministry of Energy and Mines may declare the caducidad of
contracts, if the contractor:

 

11. Transfers rights or enters into a private contractor agreement for the assignment
of one or more of its rights, without the Ministry’s authorization;

- 129-

Art. 79. The transfer of a contract or the assignment to third parties of rights
derived from a contract shall be null and void and shall have no validity
whatsoever if there is no prior authorization from the Ministry of Energy and
Mines, without prejudice to the declaration of caducidad as provided for in this
Law.

[...] (Emphasis added)
342. In its review of the evidence on this crucial issue, the Tribunal notes, firstly, that
the Letter of Intent dated 9 August 2000'°, signed prior to entering into of the Farmout
Agreement and Joint Operating Agreement, stated at paragraph 5 that the “Farmin
Transaction would be expressly conditioned upon the approval by the respective Boards
of Directors of AECI and Occidental Petroleum Corporation and necessary governmental
approvals, if any, including without limitation, the approval of Ministry of Energy and
Mines in Ecuador.” (Emphasis added) There was thus no consensus between AEC and

OEPC that ministerial authorization was necessary.

343. The evidence before the Tribunal discloses that the debate within the ranks of
OEPC as to whether or not ministerial authorization was necessary with respect to the
first phase of the Farmout continued after the execution of the Letter of Intent. Two
separate draft letters to the Ecuadorian Minister of Energy and Mines, both dated 23
October 2000, constitute proof eloquent that there were indeed two schools of thought in
this regard. These draft letters prepared by OEPC officials set forth different courses of
action and, in the Tribunal’s opinion, assist in understanding the events that followed.

The first draft letter, “Version A,” is worded as follows:

'© See supra at paragraph 128.

- 130-

I BACKGROUND

1. As you are aware, OEPC and PETROECUADOR entered into a
Participation Contract for upstream activities in Block 15 of the Amazon
Region, in the terms and conditions contained in the corresponding Public
Deed, recorded with the National Hydrocarbons Registry on June 2, 1999.

2. In order to reinforce the additional exploration work, development and
production of Block 15, OEPC and AOEPC [AEC] are in the process of
studying the possibility of executing an agreement based on which
AOEPC [AEC] would contribute funds to finance part of the investments
required for such purpose, in exchange of a share in the proceeds derived
from such investment. AOEPC [AEC] would not acquire the rights and
obligations derived from said Participation Contract, and OEPC will
continue to comply with said Contract and will continue to be the sole
liable party towards PETROECUADOR. Consequently, this negotiation
only implies the acquisition by AOEPC [AEC] of an economic interest in
the results produced by such additional exploration work, development and
production of the Block 15 Participation Contract, without AOEPC [AEC]
acquiring legal tile in said Contract. OEPC will continue to be the only
entity with legal rights and obligations under the Block 15 Participation
Contract.

3. Based on this negotiation, OEPC would recognize to AOEPC [AEC] the
right to acquire legal title and an effective share in the Block 15
Participation Contract, once the several conditions that would be stipulated
in the agreement, prior clearance from the Ministry of Energy and Mines,
and other requirements of Ecuadorian laws and the Block 15 Participation
Contract between OEPC and PETROECUADOR are met.

I REQUEST:

In view of the above and based on the provisions contained in Article 74(1) and
Article 79 of the Law on Hydrocarbons, as well as the regulatory rules issued for
the application of said law, we request the following:

Ll. Please confirm whether, as is our understanding, the transaction described
in the background to this request does not require the prior approval
referred to in Article 74(11) and 79 of the Law on Hydrocarbons. As
indicated above, this transaction does not imply an assignment of legal title
or rights in the Block 15 Contract, but rather it is a simple recognition in
favor of AOEPC [AEC] of an economic interest in the results derived from
said contract. If, however, AOEPC [AEC] will acquire legal title and
rights in the Block 15 Participation Contract once the conditions to be
stipulated in said agreement are fulfilled, then prior clearance from the
Ministry of Energy and Mines and compliance of other procedures and
requirements contemplated by Ecuadorian laws would be required;

-131-

2. On_a_ subsidiary basis, in the unlikely event that your answer to the
preceding point is negative, we request you authorize OEPC to assign to
AOEPC [AEC] an economic interest_in the results produced by the
additional exploration work, development and production of the Block 15
Participation Contract. In this case, we request you also authorize the
agreement by virtue of which both companies would agree that once
several conditions to be stipulated in the contract to be executed between
them have been fulfilled, OEPC would transfer to AOEPC [AEC] legal
title and rights in the Block 15 Participation Contract, prior compliance of
other procedures and requirements contemplated by applicable Ecuadorian
laws and regulations and the Block 15 Participation Contract. It should be
noted that the transaction described in the background to this request
would not, in any way, affect the rights and obligations assumed by the
Contractor — OEPC - under the Participation Contract with
PETROECUADOR; and that the transfer of rights in Block 15, which
would be made once the several conditions to be stipulated in said
agreement are fulfilled, would in no way diminish the capacity of the
Block 15 Contractor. Not only would OEPC continue to be jointly liable
for contract compliance, but AOEPC [AEC] would also be liable for the
compliance of said obligations. It should also be noted that the financial,
technical and operative capacity of AOEPC [AEC] to enter into upstream
contracts has already been qualified by the Ecuadorian Government since
the time Petroecuador executed several upstream contracts with said
company.

3. Lastly, in the event the answer to the first point is negative, we would also
appreciate your indicating whether the payments contemplated in Article
2.b of Presidential Decree 809 (Official Gazette 197, May 31, 1985) that
regulates the application of Article 79 of the Law on Hydrocarbons must
be made as a result of the authorization referred to in point 2 above; or,
otherwise whether such sums must be paid only when the transfer of rights
and obligations in the Block 15 Participation Contract, by OEPC in favor
of AOEPC [AEC], becomes effective. As repeatedly stated above, the
transfer would be made only when several conditions to be agreed in the
agreement that would be negotiated are fulfilled, and after other formalities
and requirements contemplated by Ecuadorian Law and the conditions
stipulated in the Participation Contract have been met. (Emphasis added)

344. Version B, on the other hand, is formulated as follows:

I BACKGROUND

1. As you are aware, OEPC and PETROECUADOR entered into a
Participation Contract for upstream activities in Block 15 of the Amazon
Region, in the terms and conditions contained in the corresponding Public
Deed, recorded with the National Hydrocarbons Registry on June 2, 1999.

- 132-

2. In order to reinforce the additional exploration work, development and
production of Block 15, upon receipt of all required government approvals,
OEPC and AOEPC [AEC] will complete an agreement based on which
AOEPC [AEC] would contribute funds to finance part of the investments
required for such purpose, in exchange for a forty percent (40%) share in
the proceeds derived from the Block including its unitized operations.
AOEPC [AEC] would only acquire the rights and obligations derived from
said Participation Contract at a future time and only after the Ministry of
Energy and Mines granted its express approval, prior to the time that such
rights are transferred. Until such future transfer is separately approved by
the Ministry of Energy and Mines and finalized with OAEPC [sic] [AEC],
OEPC will continue to comply with said Participation Contract and will
continue to be the sole party liable to PETROECUADOR. Consequently,
the agreement to be completed, for the present only implies the acquisition
by AOEPC [AEC] of an economic interest in the results produced from the
Block 15 Participation Contract, without AOEPC [AEC] acquiring any
legal title in said Participation Contract. OEPC will continue to be the
only entity with legal rights and obligations under the Block 15
Participation Contract.

3. In addition to the economic interest presently being acquired by AOEPC
[AEC], as described above, and based on the negotiated agreement to be
completed between OEPC and AOEPC [AEC], OEPC will commit to
assign to AOEPC [AEC], sometime during or after January, 2005, legal
title and an effective share in the Block 15 Participation Contract and its
unitized operations, but only once the several conditions stipulated in the
agreement, the requirement for prior clearance from the Ministry of
Energy and Mines, and other requirements of Ecuadorian laws and the
Block 15 Participation Contract between OEPC and PETROECUADOR
are satisfied. Separate approval of this transfer of interest in the Block 15
Participation Contract and unitized areas will be sought from the Ministry
of Energy and Mines at future time.

I REQUEST:

In view of the above and based on the provisions contained in Article 74 (11) (12)
and Article 79 of the Law on Hydrocarbons, as well as the regulatory rules issued
for the application of said law, we request the following:

Ll. Please grant for this transaction the prior approval referenced in Articles
74 (11) (12) and 79 of the Law on Hydrocarbons or else indicate that no
such approval is required for such transaction. As indicated above, this
transaction does not imply a present assignment of legal title or rights in
the Block 15 Participation Contract, but rather is a simple recognition in
favor of AOEPC [AEC] of an economic interest in the results derived from
said contract.

- 133 -

2. Under the negotiated agreement between OEPC and AOEPC [AEC],
AOEPC [AEC] may acquire legal title and rights in the Block 15
Participation Contract and unitized areas, provided that approval from the
Ministry of Energy and Mines is obtained prior to the time of the transfer,
and further, provided that the conditions to be stipulated in said agreement
are satisfied, and finally, provided that compliance of other procedures and
requirement contemplated by Ecuadorian laws is achieved.

3. Lastly, we would also appreciate your indicating whether the payments
contemplated in Article 2.b of Presidential Decree 809 (Official Gazette
197, May 31, 1985) that regulates the application of Article 79 of the Law
on Hydrocarbons must be made as a result of the authorization referred to
in point 1 above; or, otherwise whether such sums must be paid only when
the transfer of rights and obligations in the Block 15 Participation
Contract, by OEPC in favour of AOEPC [AEC], becomes effective as
described in point 2 above. As repeatedly stated above, the transfer would
be made only when several conditions to be agreed in the agreement that
would be negotiated are fulfilled, and after the other formalities and
requirements contemplated by Ecuadorian Law, including the requirement
for formal approval by the Ministry of Mines and Energy, and all other
conditions stipulated in the Participation Contract have been met.
(Emphasis added)

345. In the Tribunal’s view, the two camps within OEPC had sound and valid reasons
for advocating their respective positions. The proponents of Version A saw the Farmout
for what it truly was for oilmen, i.e. an “oil for money” deal which allowed OEPC to
finance and leverage its continued exploration of Block 15. In effect, AEC would serve
as a bank for OEPC. During the “earn-in” phase, OEPC would continue to be solely
responsible vis-a-vis PetroEcuador for the performance of all its obligations under the
Participation Contract. The future event which mattered and which would require
ministerial authorization was the eventual transfer of legal title to AEC of 40% of Block
15 sometime later when AEC, the farmee, had fulfilled its “earn-in” obligations under the

Farmout.

346. The proponents of Version A within OEPC (and AEC) were in good company

which included the Claimants’ expert on this issue, Mr. Andrew Derman. In his report

- 134-

submitted as part of this proceeding, Mr. Derman concluded, very categorically, that
“Tt]here was no transfer of legal title or rights and obligations under the Participation
Contract by OEPC to AEC under either the Farmout Agreement or the Operating

Agreement.”"” As he explained later in his report:

Under the Farmout Agreement, if AEC satisfied its payment obligations, AEC had
a right to receive from OEPC a portion of OEPC’s oil produced under the
Participation Contract. While OEPC could not guarantee that AEC would receive
legal title, as legal title required approval by the Government of Ecuador, OEPC
had a right to dispose of its oil freely, under the Participation Contract, and it could
give AEC a portion of such produced oil. AEC essentially financed a portion of
OEPC’s financial exposure and, like a bank, AEC was repaid and compensated
under the pre-agreed terms of the Farmout Agreement. If the Government of
Ecuador did not approve the assignment of legal title, AEC would be repaid and
compensated for its financing, but it would never secure its position and it would
never obtain ee title. Like a bank, AEC’s financing would remain
uncollateralized. ” (Emphasis added)

347. On the other hand, the proponents of Version B, probably the lawyers, advocated
that it was prudent to ask for “prior approval” for the “earn-in” phase. They had
obviously carried out a cursory examination of the agreements at issue. But tellingly, the
proponents of Version B were not dogmatic about the requirement of ministerial
authorization. As noted earlier, the key paragraph of their draft concluded “... or else

indicate that no such approval is required for such transaction.”

348. Members of the Version A clan prevailed. They did not heed the sound advice of
the lawyers and, in doing so, may have acted unwisely and been imprudent. Their

proposed course of action may have been risky, as later events confirmed, but, for the

' Expert Report of Andrew B. Derman dated 10 August 2008 at paragraph 15.

'8 Tbid. at paragraph 37.

- 135 -

reasons set forth in more detail below, the Tribunal fails to see any evidence that their
views were driven by bad faith. They were business people, seasoned oilmen, for whom
legal niceties were not as important as the business realities of the deal. Their behaviour,

unfortunately for the Claimants, was to have dire consequences.

349. That behaviour, as the record after 23 October 2000 illustrates, led to other
instances where OEPC’s silence and, in particular, one confusing written message,
resulted in serious misunderstandings and understandable confusion within the

Ecuadorian Ministry of Energy and Mines.

350. The saga which has culminated in the present dispute commenced on 24 October
2000. As noted earlier, on that date, senior executives of both OEPC and AEC flew to
Quito from the United States and Canada for the purpose of informing Minister Teran of
the transaction. The reason for the meeting was not conveyed to the Minister when the

appointment was scheduled.

351. The “script” prepared for that important meeting demonstrates, without the
shadow of a doubt, that the proponents of Version A had carried the day and that no
authorization would be sought for the “earn-in” phase. The first three numbered

paragraphs of this “script” tell the whole story in a nutshell by highlighting that:

1) Oxy and AEC have agreed that AEC will assume a 40% economic interest in
Block 15 effective 01 Oct 00.

2) AEC will assume a role as full partner effective 2005, subject to GoE approval.

3) No initial change in the contractual rights and obligations or legal title for BI1S.
No change in operational methodology for Petroecuador or the GoE. (Emphasis
added)

- 136 -

352. The first paragraph of the “script” thus, very succinctly, describes the “earn-in”
phase, for which no authorization is sought, nor confirmation that authorization is not
required. The second paragraph of the “script”, again succinctly, describes the
subsequent phase by which AEC would become a “full partner” by virtue of acquiring
legal title and for which “GoE approval” is required. The third paragraph sets forth the

Claimants’ view of the world during the “earn-in” phase.

353. During the meeting of 24 October 2000, Minister Teran was not provided with a
copy of the Farmout Agreement which OEPC and AEC had signed five days earlier.
While there is no evidence that the Minister asked for a copy of the Agreement, the
Tribunal has formed the view that the better course would have been to have handed a
copy to the Minister. After all, OEPC and the Government of Ecuador were partners
under the Participation Contract. If only on the basis of that contractual relationship,
OEPC should have concluded that the better course was to provide a copy of the Farmout

Agreement to their partner during that meeting.

354. On 25 October 2000, Paul MacInnes, President of OEPC, who had lead the OEPC
team during the meeting on the previous day wrote to Minister Teran. Due to the
importance of this letter, which has already been referred to’, the Tribunal will quote it
in full:

In our meeting held on October 24 of this year, we had the opportunity to notify

you about the imminent transaction pursuant to which Occidental Exploration and
Production Company (“OEPC”) intends to transfer to City Investing Company

'° See supra at paragraph 151.

- 137-

Limited (“CITY”) 40% of its economic interests in the Participation Contract for
the Exploitation and Additional Exploration of Hydrocarbons in Block 15 (the
“Block 15 Contract”). This transfer shall also include the rights of OEPC in the
Operating Agreements for Unified Exploitation of the Eden Yuturi and
Limoncocha Unified Fields.

After the consummation of this transaction, OEPC shall continue being the only
“Contractor” entity under the Block 15 Contract. Once CITY has complied with
its obligations contemplated in the transfer agreement, OEPC shall transfer to
CITY the legal title corresponding to 40% of its interests in the Block 15 Contract
and in the Operating Agreements for Unified Exploitation, subject to the approvals
that the Government of Ecuador may require at that time.

This transaction will not negatively affect any of the operations contemplated in the
Block 15 Contract or in the Operating Agreements for Unified Exploitation.

We are sure that this transaction will bring significant benefits to the Government
of Ecuador and the companies. Therefore, we respectfully request that the

Ministry of Energy and Mines confirm as soon as possible, your consent with
respect to the aforementioned transfer of economic interests in favor of CITY.

355. That letter is very confusing and at the source of conflicting evidence both as to

events prior to and subsequent to that date.

356. The Tribunal notes that the letter was written in Spanish but there is no dispute
between the parties as to the accuracy of the English translation. The introductory
paragraph, which refers to “the imminent transaction”, is clearly a reference to the “earn-
in” phase. The Tribunal recalls that, whilst the Farmout Agreement was executed on 19
October 2000 to be effective 1 October 2000, the Joint Operating Agreement was dated
31 October 2000 to “have effect from the Ist day of October 2000”. In other words,
while it may have been strictly correct for OEPC to refer to an “imminent transaction”, it
would have been more accurate to refer to a transaction (and thus a “transfer”) which had

taken place 6 days earlier, on 19 October 2000, and which was in effect since 1 October

- 138 -

2000. Indeed, the Tribunal notes that paragraph 1) of the “script” correctly stated that

“Oxy and AEC have agreed ....” (Emphasis added)

357. The Tribunal further observes that in the second paragraph of the letter of 25
October 2000, OEPC is clearly referring to the subsequent phase of the Farmout which, it
states, is “subject to the approval that the Government of Ecuador may require at that

time.”

358. As for the third paragraph of this letter, in the Tribunal’s view, it can only be
interpreted as referring to the “earn-in” phase. “This transaction” clearly refers to the

“imminent transaction” described in the introductory paragraph.

359. Thus, the first three paragraphs of the follow-up letter of 25 October 2000 are in

fact a reiteration, albeit more detailed, of the first three paragraphs of the “script.”

360. By contrast, the very last paragraph of the letter does not fit either the script or the
Version A approach. What is perplexing is that, after a few weeks of confusion, as the
Tribunal will demonstrate later, as far as OEPC is concerned, it acted vis-a-vis Ecuador as
if this last paragraph referred to the subsequent phase of the Farmout, not the “earn-in”
phase. In the Tribunal’s view, this clearly was not the case. That paragraph is
misleading. The Tribunal does not believe that OEPC intended to mislead Minister Teran

but that was nevertheless the result of the imprecise wording.

361. The paragraph at issue, the Tribunal recalls again, reads as follows:

We are sure that this transaction will bring significant benefits to the Government
of Ecuador and the companies. Therefore, we respectfully request that the Minister

- 139 -

of Energy and Mines confirm as soon as possible, your consent with respect to the
aforementioned transfer of economic interests in favour of CITY.

362. In the second sentence of that fourth paragraph, OEPC can only be seeking from
Minister Teran confirmation of his consent to the transfer (“‘transferencia’”) described in
the introductory paragraph, to wit the “earn-in” phase. This interpretation, the Tribunal
notes, contradicts the evidence of the Claimants’ witnesses who maintain that, at the 24
October meeting, Minister Teran, explicitly or implicitly, had agreed with them that no

ministerial authorization was required for the “earn-in” phase.

363. On the other hand, the mutual waiver executed by OEPC and AEC on 31 October
2000 also confirms the prevailing OEPC and AEC view that no government approval was
required for the transfer of the 40% economic interest. This waiver is consistent with
Version A, the script, and the first three paragraphs of the 25 October letter but not with
the fourth paragraph of that letter. It reads as follows: “Of even date herewith, [OEPC]
and [AECT] are consummating that certain Farmout Agreement [...] pursuant to which

OEPC is farming out and transferring to AECI a 40% economic interest in certain

properties [etc.]....”._ Then, in numbered paragraph 1, the mutual waiver of 31 October

2000 further confirms that the parties agree that:

1. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Farmout
Agreement or in any related document, OEPC and AECI hereby expressly waive
atisfaction of any and all i for governmental approvals applicable to
the transfer by OEPC to AECI of said 40% economic interest in the Farmout
Property. The foregoing mutual waiver is not intended, however, and shall not be
construed to constitute a waiver by either party hereto of any requirements for
governmental approvals applicable to (a) the assi; transfer or

transfers or conveyances by OEPC and Occidental del Ecuador, Inc. to AECI
provided for in that certain letter agreement or even date herewith, by and among
OEPC, Occidental del Ecuador, Inc., AECI and AEC OCP Holdings Ltd., relating
to the Oleoducto de Crudos Pesados (OCP) Project referred to therein. (Emphasis
added)

  

- 140 -

364. On 1 November 2000, OPC issued a press release. That news release is wholly
inconsistent with the theory of the Respondent that the Claimants wanted to conceal their
transaction with AEC. For the oil savvy operators in the Ministry of Energy and Mines
and the experienced oil engineers in PetroEcuador familiar with the intricacies of oil
exploration and operation by international companies such as OPC, that press release
contains the information which they needed to become cognizant of the Farmout, not the
minute detail of the actual transaction which would only have been revealed if they could
have read the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement, but certainly the

general structure of the farmout transaction.”” It read in relevant part as follows:

Occidental Petroleum Corporation (NYSE:OXY) said today that it has agreed to
farm out an interest in its operations in Block 15 in Ecuador to Alberta Energy
Company Ltd., of Calgary, Canada.

AEC will earn a 40-percent interest in the block and will assume certain capital
costs through 2004. Occidental will remain the operator.

365. An internal memorandum of 8 November 2000 within the Ministry will be
considered later in this Award when the Tribunal addresses the issue of whether the

sanction of caducidad was proportionate in the circumstances. At this juncture, the

°° In this context, the Tribunal notes the description provided by Mr. Derman of a farmout agreement. He
states (see Expert Report of Andrew B. Derman dated 10 August 2008 at paragraph 27): “Provisions like
Sections 2.01, 2.02, and 4.01 are common to farmout agreements under which a farmee party like AEC
acquires an interest in an oil and gas project by “earning-in” (paying money or performing services).
Typically, a farmee (AEC) earning into an oil and gas project negotiates to have some influence regarding
the management and operation of the farmout interest until title transfers, which like the Farmout
Agreement is subject to host government approval (where such approval is required) and satisfaction of the
farmee’s earn-in obligations. However, until title transfers and the farmee becomes a party to the host
government contract (in this case the Participation Contract), the farmor (OEPC) rem: olely responsible
to fulfill the obligations under the contract vis-a-vis the host government. Thus, the degree of participation
allowed to a farmee, who has no right or obligation vis-a-vis the host government, is the subject of much
negotiation.”

 
   

 

  

-141-

Tribunal notes that, in this memorandum, officials of the Ministry — acting on the
misleading request set out in the last paragraph of the 25 October 2000 letter — conclude
plainly that AEC “has proven that it has technical solvency” and that “there would be no

impediment for that assignment of rights” (i.e. the “earn-in” phase). It reads as follows:

SUBJECT: TRANSFER OF 40% OF THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS OF THE
BLOCK 15 PARTICIPATION CONTRACT BY OCCIDENTAL
EXPLORATION TO CITY INVESTING COMPANY

With regard to letter No. GG-014-00 dated October 25, 2000, in which Occidental
reports the transfer of 40% of the economic interests in the Participation Contract
for Hydrocarbons Production and Additional Exploration for Block 15, including
the OEPC rights in the Unified Production Operating Agreements for the Unified
Edén Yuturi and Limoncocha Fields to City Investing Company, I would like to
inform you of the following:

City Investing currently has a Participation Contract with the Government in the
Tarapoa Block and Fanny-18B and Mariann-4A Unified Fields and is the current
operator of the aforementioned Fields. Therefore, it has proven that it has technical
solvency, and for this reason, there would be no impediment for that assignment of
rights.

366. The Tribunal notes three important facets in this memorandum: (i) it refers clearly
to a “transfer” that has taken place, not a future transfer; (ii) AEC is well known in
Ecuador and is considered to have technical solvency (“solvencia técnica’); and (iii) in
characterizing the transfer, it speaks of an “assignment of rights” (“cesién de derechos’),

the very words used in Clause 16.1 of the Participation Contract.

367. It is plainly obvious that, within the Ministry, there reigns at that time much
confusion and that this confusion is due solely to the careless drafting by OEPC of the

last paragraph of the 25 October 2000 letter.

-142-

368. There was a meeting of the Joint Management Committee on 22 November 2000
attended by representatives of Petroproduccién and Occidental. Paul MacInnes reported
to the meeting on the “Agreement with AECI.” The relevant item in the minutes reads as

follows:

2. REPORT ON THE AGREEMENT WITH AECI

Paul MacInnes reports to the Joint Management Committee on the negotiations
carried out between OEPC and Alberta Energy Corporation International (AECI),
by virtue of which OEPC would sell to AECI 40% of the shares in Block 15, long
term. He indicates that a letter was sent to the Ministry of Energy and Mines
reporting on these negotiations. This change does not mean a change in OEPC

operations, as it is only a stake by AECI in part [of] the capital and OEPC could
invest in other projects.

The contractual obligations that OEPC has with the Government would remain
unchanged.

369. The minutes appear to suggest that the Farmout Agreement was in the process of
being negotiated (“venderd’). However, the evidence before the Tribunal does not
disclose who drafted the minutes which are signed by the participants but not by Paul
MaclInnes. In any event, in the Tribunal’s view, it demonstrates again that, for the

Claimants, their transaction with AEC was in the public domain in Ecuador. The

transaction was definitely not a secret.

370. Also on 22 November 2000, Dr. Salgado, the Director of the DNH in the
Ministry, wrote a letter to Paul MacInnes, in effect acknowledging receipt of Paul
MacInnes’ confusing letter of 25 October 2000. Dr. Salgado can be excused for
misinterpreting OEPC’s request to transfer to AEC 40% of its economic interests and

referring instead to a request for “authorization to transfer 40% of the rights it has in

-143-

Block 15” (i.e. the second phase). Quite naturally, Dr. Salgado then proceeds to ask for

“information to guarantee the economic solvency of [AEC]’”.

371. On 14 December, Dr. Salgado received a visit from Fernando Albuja of OEPC. It
is clear to the Tribunal that OEPC has now realized that its carelessness has caused much
confusion within the Ministry. Thus, Fernando Albuja’s mission was to put Version A

back on the rails.

372. As the Tribunal notes from the contemporaneous report of Fernando Albuja to
Paul MacInnes following that meeting, the last paragraph of the 25 October letter 2000 is
now stated to be “a notice of the future transaction”. As the Tribunal has already found,
this is clearly not what was written in the 25 October 2000 letter. But, the views of clan
A, as expressed in the script that no authorization is required for the “earn-in” phase
transfer, prevail again. Only the subsequent phase will require ministerial authorization
and there is no outstanding request for approval of the “earn-in” phase. In other words, it

was as if the last paragraph of the 25 October 2000 letter was never written.

373. The Tribunal considers it important to quote in full Fernando Albuja’s account of

this meeting:

We had a meeting with the DNH regarding the notice of the Minister about the
AECI deal. Their initial position was to understand the deal as a current transfer of
rights. They explained that they were ready to issue_a Ministerial Decree
authorizing the transfer. After reviewing with them the terms of our letter they
realized that the letter basically contains a notice of the future transaction. The
answer from the DNH to our letter will be as an acknowledgement of the notice
given to them stating that the corresponding Ministerial Decree will be issued once
OEPC request the government to authorize the transfer. Meanwhile OEPC will
remain 100% liable for the performance of Block 15 contract. (Emphasis added)

-144-

374. The confusion created by the wording of the last paragraph of the 25 October
2000 letter has thus been cleared up by the Version A proponents and, rightly or wrongly,
the conclusion of OEPC that the “earn-in” phase did not require ministerial authorization
remains the company mantra, with OEPC and Ecuador, as of this point, now on the same

page. For OEPC, it has cleared the air and the Ministry has been informed.

375. Fully in accordance with the message that he received from Mr. Albuja on 14
December 2000, Dr. Salgado reported to Minister Teran on 12 January 2001 that OEPC
intended to assign “in the future” 40% of the rights and obligations for Block 15 and,

“when they decide”, they “will require the corresponding approval.”

376. And thus, on 17 January 2001, Minister Teran wrote to Paul MacInnes an official
letter which brought the exchange between OEPC and the Ministry to an end for the time
being. Minister Teraén acknowledged that “(ijn the meeting held at the National
Directorate of Hydrocarbons, officers from Occidental said that the 40% transfer of rights
and obligations previously mentioned would not be implemented at the moment”. When
the “previously mentioned transfer,” was to be “implemented,” wrote the Minister, you
“must request to this State Ministry the corresponding authorization and the issuance of
the Ministerial Decree through which such transfer will be legalized, with the prior
payment of the transfer fees and enhancement of the economic conditions of the contract,
as it is stipulated in Art. 1 of the Executive Decree 2731, published in the Official

Register No. 694, dated May 12, 1995”.

-145-

377. The Tribunal notes that the OEPC 2000 mantra was still maintained three years
later when the Claimants described the 2000 Farmout Agreement to Moores Rowland. In

his letter of 15 March 2004, Paul MacInnes wrote:

In the year 2000, OEPC and AEC Ecuador signed an agreement by means of
which, subject to satisfying certain conditions and subject to approvals required by
the Ecuadorian Government, they committed themselves to transfer in the future
the legal title corresponding to 40% interest in the Contract for Block 15 and the
Operational Agreements for Unified Exploitation.
378. Although there is no specific reference in that letter to the transfer to AEC of a
40% economic interest in 2000, the letter is consistent with the conclusion reached by

OEPC and AEC in October 2000 when they visited Minister Teran that this was a two-

phase transaction and that the first phase did not require ministerial authorization.

379. The Tribunal finds in the record another statement by OEPC with the same
mantra in the letter sent to PetroEcuador in July 2004 in which it requested approval of
the transfer of legal title to AEC “... in accordance with Article 79 of the Hydrocarbons
Law and Article 46 of the Regulation for the Application of Law 44, and as contemplated
by Clause 16.1 of the Participation Contract.” The first phase is not mentioned explicitly
because, in October 2000, OEPC and AEC had reached the conclusion that it did not

require ministerial authorization:

In the year 2000, Occidental Exploration and Production Company (““OEPC”) and
AEC Ecuador LDT (formerly known as City Investing Company Limited) (“AEC”
Ecuador) entered into an agreement pursuant to which, subject to satisfying certain
conditions and subject to obtaining required government approvals, the parties
agreed to convey to AEC Ecuador in the future legal title to a 40% interest in the
Block 15 Participation Contract [...].

380. The Tribunal reiterates its conclusion. As the Tribunal’s analysis of the Farmout

Agreements earlier in this Award has demonstrated, the Claimants’ interpretation of the

- 146 -

Farmout Agreement was wrong. However, the Tribunal does not consider, as the
Respondent has argued, that it was made in bad faith. The Claimants’ failure to seek
ministerial authorization was a mistake, a serious mistake, but it was not done in bad
faith. Should Paul MacInnes and his colleagues, during their visit with Minister Teran on
24 October 2000, have given him a copy of the Farmout Agreement and the Joint
Operating Agreement so that his advisors could have formed their own opinion about the
true nature of the transaction? As stated earlier, the Tribunal has no hesitation in
answering its own question in the affirmative. OEPC and AEC were negligent in not
doing so. But again, the Tribunal does not find that failure to do so amounted to bad
faith. They may have been negligent but there was no intention on their part to mislead.
They were simply convinced that they were right and acted accordingly without seeking
to mislead the Ecuadorian government. In a number of instances, in the fall of 2000, they
revealed publicly in Ecuador that they had entered into a farmout transaction with AEC.
When they realized that their behaviour, and in particular the last paragraph of their 25
October letter, created confusion within the Ministry, they tried to dissipate that
confusion. Unfortunately, the confusion persisted until the spring of 2004 when officials

of the Respondent sighted and analysed the Farmout Agreements.

381. In conclusion, the Tribunal finds, based on the above, that OEPC, by failing to
secure the required ministerial authorization, breached Clause 16.1 of the Participation

Contract and was guilty of an actionable violation of Article 74.11 of the HCL.

382. The Tribunal will now address the Claimants’ allegation that the sanction

imposed by the Respondent for the failure to secure the required authorization for the

-147-

transfer of rights under the Participation Contract, namely the Caducidad Decree, was
inconsistent with the Treaty (Article II.3(a) and Article III.1) and Ecuadorian law because

it was, in the circumstances, manifestly disproportionate.

383. However, before turning to the proportionality of the Caducidad Decree, the
Tribunal recalls that the Claimants have also alleged that the Caducidad Decree was
inconsistent with the Treaty and Ecuadorian law because, inter alia, it frustrated their
legitimate expectations in the circumstances. Having concluded above that OEPC’s
failure to secure the required authorization on the part of the Ecuadorian authorities in
October 2000, while not amounting to bad faith, was negligent, the Tribunal considers
that the Claimants cannot be found to have had a legitimate expectation that the Minister
would not exercise his discretion and impose caducidad. The failure to secure the
required authorization meant that OEPC breached Clause 16.1 of the Participation
Contract and was guilty of an actionable violation of Article 74.11 of the HCL which, as
one option, expressly allowed the Minister to declare the caducidad of the Participation
Contract and the Joint Operating Agreements. For this reason, the Claimants’ allegation
that the Caducidad Decree frustrated their legitimate expectations is rejected.

3. The Proportionality of the Sanction for the Unauthorized Transfer of Rights
under the Participation Contract

(a) Preliminary Observations

384. The Tribunal has found that the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating
Agreement operated to effect a transfer of rights under the Participation Contract from

OEPC to AEC. The Tribunal has also found that this transfer required authorization on

- 148 -

the part of the Ecuadorian authorities, that this authorization was not sought, but that
OEPC’s failure to secure such authorization in October 2000, while imprudent and ill

advised, did not amount to bad faith.

385. The Tribunal recalls that the issue of the transfer of rights under the Participation
Contract by OEPC to AEC resurfaced in 2004 in the context of what has been referred to
as the Moores Rowland audit, described in some detail earlier in this Award. Ultimately,
Moores Rowland issued its audit report on 14 July 2004, noting therein that the
assignment of rights and obligations contemplated in the Farmout was made contingent
on future events and that the assignment “might or might not happen” at the end of the
four years during which the conditions were to be satisfied. The audit report
recommended to the DNH that OEPC seek government authorization for the assignment
during that year, assuming the assignment conditions were satisfied, and that the required

ministerial approval be granted to OEPC in order to properly register the assignment.

386. As also recalled earlier in this Award, AEC had in fact made all payments due
under the Farmout a few months earlier in February 2004. The day after Moores
Rowland issued its audit report, on 15 July 2004, OEPC wrote to the then-Minister of
Energy and Mines, Eduardo Lépez Robayo, “request[ing] the Ministry to approve the
transfer by OEPC to AEC Ecuador of legal title to a 40% interest” in Block 15, as
contemplated under the Farmout. In making this request, OEPC referred to its letter of

25 October 2000, as well as Minister Teran’s response of 17 January 2001.

387. The approval sought by OEPC was never granted and ultimately, following

caducidad proceedings, the Attorney General of Ecuador issued orders to the Ministry of

- 149 -

Mines and Energy to terminate the Participation Contract and the Unitized Fields Joint
Operating Agreements through a declaration of caducidad. On 15 May 2006, the
Caducidad Decree officially terminated, with immediate effect, OEPC’s Participation
Contract and ordered OEPC to turn over all its assets relating to Block 15. The purpose
of the following Section is to examine the proportionality of this sanction imposed by the

Respondent.

(b) The Parties’ Competing Cases"

388. The Claimants have submitted that even if any of the alleged Termination Events
had occurred, the Respondent would still have breached its obligations under the Treaty
and the Participation Contract by imposing a sanction which in the circumstances was
manifestly disproportionate. As to the Treaty, reliance was placed on Article II.3(a)
which obliges Ecuador inter alia to accord investments fair and equitable treatment.

There are several aspects to this argument as set out below.

389. The Claimants have contended that it was of critical importance that the
Minister’s authority to declare caducidad was discretionary in nature. The Claimants
have further contended that in exercising such discretion the Minister must adopt a

proportionate approach, as a matter of Ecuadorian law and under the Treaty.

390. The Claimants emphasized that the Caducidad Decree was expressly based on

contravention of the HCL (specifically Article 74) and not on breach of the Participation

*! Although reviewed earlier in this Award, the Tribunal considers it necessary, in this section, to
summarize the key arguments of the parties with respect to the proportionality issue.

- 150 -

Contract. Accordingly, it was an administrative act based on legislative powers, rather
than a private act grounded in private contractual rights. Under Ecuadorian law, a

Minister exercising such powers is bound to act in a proportionate manner.

391. The Claimants further submitted that the Caducidad Decree was not justified by
any or any sufficient interest in public welfare. The Decree did not specify any public
welfare factors that it was seeking to protect. To the contrary, it was the Claimants’
contention that the Respondent was intent on expelling OEPC from the country in

retaliation for the VAT Award and/or for other reasons of political expediency.

392. The alleged absence of any justifying policy reasons associated with public
welfare was reflected in the contention that the Farmout Agreement caused no harm or
damage to the Respondent. It was further supported by the contention that the Farmout
Agreement did not violate the policy rationale of the HCL’s prohibition on the
unauthorized assignment of rights (Article 74). Insofar as that latter point was concerned,
the Claimants relied on the fact that the Respondent had already scrutinized AEC in

relation to other blocks in Ecuador, and found it to be a suitable and solvent contractor.

393. Countering the proportionality argument, the Respondent argued that the question
of proportionality does not arise in circumstances where the sanction imposed was one
specifically agreed upon by the parties in their contract. OEPC having agreed that
caducidad could be ordered in certain identified circumstances, there could be no

objection when caducidad was in fact ordered in precisely such circumstances.

-151-

394. On the question of discretion, the Respondent disputed that there was a true
discretion in this case. Such choice as existed, it said, was either a choice to order
caducidad or to do nothing. The latter, from the point of view of a State in the

Respondent’s position, was not a realistic or appropriate option.

395. Further, the Respondent argued that in any event the sanction of caducidad was
indeed a proportionate response to the Farmout Agreement and the breaches of the
Participation Contract which it says were committed by OEPC. The Respondent
emphasized the national importance of the oil fields in question, and the right of the
Ecuadorian Government to strictly control and administer the activities of all parties

operating in those fields.

( Proportionality in Ecuadorian law

396. Clause 22.1 of the Participation Contract provides that the contract is to be

governed exclusively by Ecuadorian law.

397. The expert evidence for the Claimants (and on this general point there was no
challenge from the Respondent) was that the principle of proportionality applies
generally in Ecuadorian law. In Ecuador, the principle originates in the Constitution,

Article 24 of which provides:

Art. 24. In order to ensure due process, the following basic guarantees must be
observed, without prejudice to any others established by the Constitution,
international instruments, laws, or precedent:

[od

3. Laws shall establish due proportionality between offences and
penalties. The law shall also determine penalties other than those

- 152 -

involving the deprivation of liberty, depending on the nature of each case,
the character of the offender, and the convict’s reintegration into society.

398. At first blush, that provision would appear to be directed toward criminal rather
than commercial or administrative matters, but the evidence is that Article 24 of the
Ecuadorian Constitution is of wide application. In his original brief, the Claimants’
expert on Ecuadorian law, Dr. Pérez Loose”, explained that the Government is under a
duty to apply the principle whenever there is conflict between the Constitution and an
inferior law, such as the HCL.” It was Dr. Pérez Loose’s evidence that the Government
must weigh the content and purpose of any sanctioning measure with the conduct which
has been impugned, and with the loss of rights which the individual will suffer by reason

of the intended sanction.“

399. Dr. Pérez Loose cited the following statement of principle from a decision of
Ecuador’s Supreme Court of Justice, which specifically addresses clause 3 of Article 24

of the Constitution:

With [the] principle of proportionality of the penalties as a basis, all democratic
legal orders state that the measures or sanctions adopted within any legal or
administrative proceeding must be proportional with the facts or acts established as
violations. In this way, administrative responsibility is graduated in accordance

* The Tribunal recalls that, late in these dings (on 10 ber 2011), the d bmitted
“that the Tribunal should not give any credibility to the written reports submitted or the oral evidence given
by Mr. Pérez Loose” because he was acting as counsel with Mr. David Rivkin, the lead counsel for the
Claimants in the present case, in a new case against Ecuador. The parties were invited to brief the Tribunal
in respect of this matter. Having reviewed these submissions, the Tribunal then formed the view that the
credibility of Mr. Pérez Loose who gave evidence more than a year earlier as an expert witness on behalf of
the Claimants in the liability and quantum phases of this arbitration is in no way impacted on account of his
acting as counsel with Mr. Rivkin in 2011 in a family related dispute against Ecuador.

3 Expert Report of Hernan Pérez Loose dated 18 July 2006 at paragraph 107.

* Ibid.

- 153 -

with the fault committed and is not only a punitive action, through the coercion of
the sanction, but also preventive, because knowing the consequence of the probable
deviation, it reduces the possibility of other officials committing breaches. In this
sense, the mentioned principle of proportionality constitutes a requirement for the
Government, since to establish a sanction between the two limits, minimum and
maximum, it must consider the factual situation beforehand and attend to the end
sought by the rule [...].° (Emphasis added)

400. Dr. Pérez Loose explained that the wider application of the constitutional
principle of proportionality is further confirmed in the Regulation for the Control of
Discretion in Acts of Public Administration (Decree No. 3179 dated 19 October 2002).”°
The relevant provisions of that Regulation, of which Article 11 is the most important for

present purposes, are as follows:

Art. 2— ON DISCRETIONARY ACTS. The discretion envisaged by law, implies
choosing one among many equally valid options [...]

 

Art. 4— RATIONALE. Under the terms of the Constitution and these regulations,
the government is required to provide the rationale for its decision regarding these
administrative actions.

[...]

Art 6. — PROHIBITION OF ARBITRARY NATURE. The monitoring to be done
must be carried out based on the principle of prohibition of arbitrary nature. This
includes the most generic features, which are those that appear to be the most
suitable for the task to be carried out. It is not sufficient for the rationale to be
based on premises, but rather that the premises must be true.

[od

Art. 11 — PROPORTIONALITY. The measures involved in the discretionary
action must be proportionally suitable to the goal.

°5 As quoted in the Expert Report of Hernan Pérez Loose dated 18 July 2006 at paragraph 108.

°6 Expert Report of Hernan Pérez Loose dated 18 July 2006 at paragraph 107.

- 154-

401. For the Respondent, Dr. Aguilar accepted that the principle of proportionality was

an established feature of Ecuadorian law.””

During cross-examination, Dr. Aguilar also
accepted the applicability of the principle of proportionality in fact situations such as the

present one, where an administrative sanction is imposed following a violation of

relevant domestic law:

Q. To be clear, if a violation has caused no economic damage, then [the]
administration would have to take that into account in its proportionality
determination; is that right?

A. This, yes, but also how the violation has affected the integrity of the legal
system.

(d) _ Proportionality in the Context of International Investment Disputes

402. The application of the principle of proportionality may be observed in a variety of
international law settings, including cases in which the proportionality of
countermeasures taken in trade disputes is challenged before a WTO Panel under the

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (“GATT”).

403. On the application of proportionality generally in the context of administrative
action, the most developed body of jurisprudence is in Europe. It is very well-established
law in a number of European countries that there is a principle of proportionality which
requires that administrative measures must not be any more drastic than is necessary for

achieving the desired end. The principle has been adopted and applied countless times by

27 Expert Report of Juan Pablo Aguilar Andrade dated 19 September 2008 at paragraphs 77-78.

°8 Hearing Transcript (19 December 2008) at page 1582.

- 155 -

the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg, and by the European Court of Human

Rights in Strasbourg.

404. Against that background, the Tribunal observes that there is a growing body of
arbitral law, particularly in the context of ICSID arbitrations, which holds that the
principle of proportionality is applicable to potential breaches of bilateral investment
treaty obligations. In the present case, the Treaty provides at Article II.3(a) that
investments shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment, shall enjoy full
protection and security and shall in no case be accorded treatment less than that required
by international law. The obligation for fair and equitable treatment has on several
occasions been interpreted to import an obligation of proportionality. Cases cited by the
Claimants include:

e MTD Equity SDN.BHD. and other v. The Republic of Chile, ICSID Case

No. ARB/O1/7 (25 May 2004);

e LG&E Energy Corp. and others v. The Argentine Republic, CSID Case
No. ARB/02/1 (3 October 2006);

Tecmed S.A. v. The United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB
(AF)/00/2 (29 May 2003); and

e Azurix Corp. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12 (14
July 2006).

405. In MTD Equity, discussing the meaning of “fair and equitable treatment’, the

tribunal noted (at paragraph 109):

The parties agree that there is an obligation to treat investments fairly and
equitably. The parties also agree with the statement of Judge Schwebel” that “the

?° Called as an expert witness by the Claimants in that proceeding.

- 156 -

406.
particularly relied upon by the Claimants. In Tecmed, the claimant had committed some
licensing infringements in operating a landfill in Mexico.
became opposed to the operation and existence of the landfill, which dealt with hazardous
waste, and when Tecmed applied for renewal of its licence in 1998, the relevant

government body refused to renew the licence, citing the infringements. The tribunal

meaning of what is fair and equitable is defined when that standard is applied to a
set of specific facts.” As defined by Judge Schwebel, “fair and equitable
treatment” is “a broad and widely-accepted standard encompassing such
fundamental standards as good faith, due process, non-discrimination, and
proportionality.”

The earlier Tecmed case involved such a proportionality approach, and was

stated as follows (at paragraph 122):

407.
predominantly influenced and/or motivated by socio-political factors beyond the licence

violations (concerning storage of impermissible types of waste, or storage of excess

*° In support of the various propositions set forth in paragraph 122 of the Tecmed award, the tribunal cited

After establishing that regulatory actions and measures will not be initially
excluded from the definition of expropriatory acts, in addition to the negative
financial impact of such actions or measures, the Arbitral Tribunal will consider, in
order to determine if they are to be characterised as expropriatory, whether such
actions or measures are proportional to the public interest presumably protected
thereby and to the protection legally granted to investments, taking into account
that the significance of such impact has a key role upon deciding the
proportionality.

[...]
There must be a reasonable relationship of proportionality between the charge or

weight imposed to the foreign investor and the aim sought to be realized by any
expropriatory measure.*”

The Tecmed tribunal concluded that the responsible regulatory agency was

several decisions of the European Court of Human Rights.

- 1S7-

Certain community groups

waste) which had been alleged against Tecmed. The tribunal held that the manner of
operation of the landfill never compromised the ecological balance, the protection of the
environment or the health of local people (as alleged by certain pressure groups), and that
all the infringements committed were either remediable or remediated or subject to minor
penalties. Although the licence and applicable regulations prima facie permitted a refusal

to renew the license in the case of such violations, the tribunal held (at paragraph 149):

[I]t would be excessively formalistic, in light of the above considerations, the [BIT]
and international law, to understand that the Resolution is proportional to such
violations when such infringements do not pose a present or imminent risk to the
ecological balance or to people’s health, and the Resolution, without providing for
the payment of compensation [...] leads to the neutralization of the investment’s
economic and business value and the Claimant’s return on investment and
profitability expectations upon making the investment.
408. In discussing the European jurisprudence concerning review of decisions
affecting human rights, the Tecmed tribunal noted that such statements of the Strasbourg
Court also apply to the actions of the State in its capacity as administrator, and not only in
its capacity as legislator. The application of proportionality to an act of administration

(as opposed to the promulgation of legislation or regulations) was what was at issue in

Tecmed, and it is similarly at issue in the present case.

409. Following Tecmed, a subsequent ICSID tribunal in Azurix considered the issue of
proportionality in the context of measures taken supposedly for a public purpose. The
Azurix tribunal endorsed the reliance in Tecmed on case law from the European Court of

Human Rights — in particular the case of James and Others*' — and placed particular

+! In the Case of James and Others, Judgment of 21 February 1986 (http://hudoc.echr.coe.int).

- 158 -

emphasis on the need for proportionality between the means employed and the aim
sought to be realized. It is worth noting that this is the same principle which finds
expression in Article 11 of the Ecuadorian Regulation for the Control of Discretion in the

Acts of Public Administration.

(e) Detailed Arguments regarding Proportionality

410. The essence of the Respondent’s position was that caducidad was per se
appropriate and proportionate, mainly for the reason that it is specifically identified in the
Participation Contract and in the HCL as the appropriate sanction in the case of an

unauthorized transfer of rights.

411. While acknowledging that Article 74 of the HCL provides that the Minister
“may” declare caducidad, the Respondent drew attention to a subsequent regulation
being Decree No. 1363 dated 27 March 2001 (entitled “Regulation for the Transfer or
Assignment of Rights and Obligations of Hydrocarbon Agreements”), Article 14 of
which provides that “[t]he execution of private contracts or agreements that breach the
provisions of the [HCL] and of these regulations shall give rise to the declaration of
caducidad in the manner established by the Hydrocarbons Law.” (Emphasis added) This
is an unconvincing point — the regulation is subsidiary legislation and still only refers to a
process to be followed in accordance with the main legislation. The purpose of the
provision appears to be to provide that breach of the regulation is also to qualify as an act
which triggers Article 74 of the HCL (perhaps to distinguish it from other regulations,
which would require repeated breach to fall within the scope of Article 74.13). However,

there is nothing in this regulation tending to support a conclusion that the introductory

- 159 -

words of Article 74 in the main legislation (“may declare”) have been rewritten to

remove all discretion of the Minister.

412. The Respondent submitted in its Counter-Memorial on Liability that even if the
declaration of caducidad is discretionary, it could not offend the principle of
proportionality to impose a sanction which was expressly authorized and called for in

both the Participation Contract and the relevant legislation.

413. The principle of proportionality received more developed argument later in the
proceedings. Focus shifted to the question of whether the declaration was made pursuant
to the Participation Contract or the legislation, whether the Minister did or did not have a
discretion in the matter, and whether (considered objectively) the sanction was a

proportionate response to the breaches by OEPC.

414. In its Rejoinder on Liability, the Respondent challenged the Claimants’

proportionality argument on three grounds as follows:

(i) The various ICSID authorities cited by the Claimants were
distinguishable from the present case because none of those other
disputes involved a contract which expressly provided for the
sanction in question. In circumstances where the Claimants had
freely agreed that the Participation Contract “shall terminate” in
the event of an unauthorized transfer of rights and obligations, the
Respondent argued that the sanction of caducidad could not be

challenged as disproportionate or otherwise unreasonable;

- 160 -

(ii) Second, the Respondent also argued that as a matter of fact, the
sanction was not disproportionate. Although accepting that AEC
had previously been authorized to carry out similar operations in a
different block, the Respondent criticized OEPC’s actions as
having nonetheless deprived the Respondent of the opportunity to
exercise its regulatory prerogative. That was a serious violation
which warranted and required a serious response by way of

punishment and deterrent; and

(iii) Third, the Respondent argued that even if the Minister had
discretion to impose a lesser sanction, as a practical matter he
could not because it would have created a precedent making it
impossible ever to apply the full sanction in the future. Any
subsequent declaration of caducidad against a different contractor
in similar circumstances would, it was said, by met with claims of

discrimination.

415. As a separate point, the Respondent rejected the Claimants’ position that it was
relevant to the issue of proportionality to inquire into whether or not the Respondent had
suffered harm or damage from OEPC’s conduct. Apart from asserting that Ecuador did
indeed suffer damage, the Respondent’s main response on this point was to submit that
“no State is ever obliged to demonstrate harm to itself as a precondition to enforcing its

own laws”.

- 161 -

416. As to this latter point, the Tribunal considers that the Respondent failed to
properly appreciate the Claimants’ argument. The argument is not that the State must
prove harm, but that any penalty the State chooses to impose must bear a proportionate
relationship to the violation which is being addressed and its consequences. This is
neither more nor less than what is encapsulated in the Respondent’s own constitutional
rules about proportionality. In cases where the administration wishes to impose a severe
penalty, then it appears to the Tribunal that the State must be able to demonstrate (i) that
sufficiently serious harm was caused by the offender; and/or (ii) that there had been a
flagrant or persistent breach of the relevant contract/law, sufficient to warrant the
sanction imposed; and/or (iii) that for reasons of deterrence and good governance it is
appropriate that a significant penalty be imposed, even though the harm suffered in the
particular instance may not have been serious. The potential justification predicated on
deterrence explains why, for example, it may be proportionate to give a heavy fine for
speeding even where no accident occurred and where, plainly, the State suffered no
direct “harm” from the driver’s breach of the law. The potential for harm, and the need
to deter others from acting in the same way, justifies the imposition of a penalty even

though no identifiable harm was caused in the particular instance.

417. The test at the end of the day will remain one of overall judgment, balancing the
interests of the State against those of the individual, to assess whether the particular

sanction is a proportionate response in the particular circumstances. Accordingly, while

* To use the example selected by the Respondent.

- 162 -

it is possible to envisage many instances where punishment is imposed for violations
which have not directly caused harm, it is immediately apparent that such punishments
tend to be at the lower end of the scale — they are intended to educate and deter both the
offender and the general populace. But more serious punishments are still usually
reserved for instances where true harm has been suffered. And typically, the more
serious the harm then the more serious the punishment. This is a familiar principle in all
legal systems and, in this particular case, one need only look to Article 77 of the HCL
which expressly refers to the “seriousness of the violation” as follows: “A breach of
contract that does not cause caducidad effects or violation of the Law or Regulations
shall be punished with a fine [...] depending on the seriousness of the violation, in

addition to compensation for the damages caused.” (Emphasis added)

418. To return to the Respondent’s three arguments identified above, the Tribunal does
not accept the submission that the ICSID authorities relied upon by the Claimants can be
distinguished because of the absence of a contractual provision comparable to that found
in Clause 21 of the Participation Contract. As noted earlier, the Caducidad Decree was
not predicated upon breach of contract, but was instead issued pursuant to, and in reliance
upon, alleged breaches of Article 74 of the HCL. This is a point of general importance
given that the Respondent consistently advanced the plea that caducidad could not be a
breach of the Treaty when it was a penalty freely agreed to by OEPC. Accordingly, it is

an issue which deserves careful analysis.

419. There is no dispute that the Caducidad Decree refers only to Article 74 of the

HCL. That in itself might not be the end of the matter if the termination provisions of the

- 163 -

Participation Contract were identical as in the HCL, but they are not. Article 74.11 of the
HCL empowers the Minister to declare caducidad if the contractor “transfers rights or
enters into a private contract or agreement for the assignment of one or more of its rights,
without the Ministry’s authorization.” The Tribunal notes that the reference is to transfer
of rights only. By contrast, Clause 21.1.2 of the Participation Contract refers to an

unauthorized transfer of “rights and obligations.”

420. There was no suggestion by the Respondent that the “earn-in” stage of the
Farmout Agreement somehow effected a transfer to AEC of OEPC’s obligations under
the Participation Contract. The fact is that the only party who ever owed obligations to
PetroEcuador, and the only party against whom PetroEcuador might plausibly have
sought to enforce obligations owed under the Participation Contract, was OEPC. It is
presumably for that that reason that the Respondent sought to proceed under the HCL

rather than the Participation Contract.

421. Nor is the position changed by reason of the fact that OEPC agreed that the
contract “shall terminate” in the event of “a declaration of forfeiture issued by the
Corresponding Ministry for the causes and following the procedure established in Article
74 ... of the [HCL] ..2>4 The reference to a declaration of caducidad under the HCL can

only mean a declaration properly made — the contractor cannot be taken to have agreed to

3 The Caducidad Decree specifically refers (in relation to Article 74.11) only to the transfer of rights, and
the execution of a contract or private agreement for the assignment of one or more rights.

* Clauses 21.1. and 21.1.1 of the Participation Contract.

- 164 -

accept termination in circumstances where the decree is issued contrary to the

requirement of proportionality in Ecuadorian law.

422. The fact that a contractor agrees that caducidad may be a remedy in certain
situations does not mean that the contractor has waived its right to have such a remedy
imposed proportionately, or otherwise imposed in accordance with all relevant laws.
That is particularly so when, as in the present case, the parties agree that the contract is to
be governed by a system of law (Ecuadorian law) which expressly requires the principle
of proportionality to be observed. There is nothing in the Participation Contract to
indicate an intention to “contract out” of proportionality or any other legal principles of

general application.* 5

423. In any event, whatever OEPC agreed in the Participation Contract is only relevant
to actions taken under or pursuant to the contract — it cannot be relevant to action which
is taken independently of the contract and which does not proceed in reliance upon it. It
is a matter of central importance in this case that the Caducidad Decree was issued
pursuant to the provisions of the HCL. In those circumstances, there cannot be any doubt
that OEPC remained entitled to the full protection of Ecuadorian law, both procedural
and substantive, which would ordinarily apply to such actions regardless of what may or

may not have been agreed in the underlying contract.

* In any event, it must be doubtful whether parties could actually contract out of a principle of such central
importance that it is included in the Ecuadorian Constitution.

- 165 -

@ Common Ground between the Parties

424. During the Hearing on Liability, it was eventually a matter of common ground
between the parties that in issuing the Caducidad Decree, the Minister was exercising
discretion. That is to say, the Minister was not obliged to terminate the Participation
Contract. In particular, this was accepted by Minister Teradn in cross-examination when
he acknowledged that the power to declare caducidad was “optional, absolutely”.*°
Similarly, the Respondent’s expert, Dr. Aguilar, acknowledged during cross-examination

that “[the Minister] would have the discretion over the decision as to whether to declare

Caducidad.”*”

425. It was also common ground between the parties that, where the Minister has a
discretion, the principle of proportionality is relevant.** The Respondent’s arguments
were ultimately directed to persuading the Tribunal that proportionality was satisfied in
this case — either because proportionality was to be effectively “presumed” as a result of
the sanction itself being included in the Participation Contract as just discussed above, or

because of the actions of OEPC upon which the Caducidad Decree was predicated.

(@) Outstanding Issues

426. Accordingly, the issues that eventually emerged by the time of the parties’ post-

hearing submissions as being central to the question of proportionality were: (i) whether

°° Hearing Transcript (17 December 2008) at page 1582.
*7 Hearing Transcript (19 December 2008) at pages 1553-1554.

*8 Hearing Transcript (21 March 2009) at page 76, lines 16-21 and Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief on
Liability, paragraphs 155-158.

- 166 -

the Minister in fact had available to him some meaningful alternative short of declaring
caducidad; and/or (ii) whether in any event the sanction of caducidad was in this instance

a proportionate response to the violation of Article 74 of the HCL committed by OEPC.

427. Issue (ii) arises even if the answer to (i) is in the negative. To conclude otherwise
would be tantamount to finding that the HCL operates indifferently and would not give
due effect and recognition to the principle of proportionality. The Tribunal understands
that such a principle, established in the Constitution and reiterated in subsequent
legislation, would take precedence over the HCL.” Even if the Tribunal is wrong on that
question of domestic Ecuadorian law, the Tribunal has no doubt that the principle of
proportionality is applicable as a matter of general international law, and has been applied

in many ICSID arbitrations in the past.

(h) Alternatives to Caducidad

428. The Respondent submits that notwithstanding the acknowledgement of the
Minister’s discretion, there really was no option except to terminate. At the very most,

the only other option which could be said to exist was simply to do nothing.

429. The first difficulty with this argument for the Respondent is evident from its own
counterclaim. One of the heads of counterclaim is a claim for damages arising from the

failure of OEPC to pay the required transfer fee in or around October 2000, and to

* Expert Report of Hernan Pérez Loose dated 18 July 2006 at paragraph 107.

- 167 -

negotiate a new participation contract on terms more favourable to the Respondent. The

basis for this claim is Article 79 of the HCL which provides in its second paragraph that:

The State shall receive a premium for the transfer and the beneficiary company
shall enter into a new contract under more favourable economic conditions for the
State and for PETROECUADOR that the ones contained in the original contract.

430. The Respondent (through Minister Teraén) acknowledged that there have been
instances where, in addition to the transfer fee, the Government sought improvements to
the economic terms of the contract“’. As for the transfer fee, which in accordance with
Decree No. 2713 is based on the previous year’s profits resulting from the underlying
contract, the evidence was that if OEPC had sought consent to transfer in October 2000,
and if consent had been granted, the transfer fee would have been in the order of $1.1
million based on OEPC’s net income of $21.7 million in 1999. Furthermore, the
evidence was that by 2006, with extraction having increased in the intervening six years,
the transfer fee would have been tenfold, i.e. in the order of $11.8 million, based on

OEPC’s net income of $289.2 million in 2003.*!

431. If the Respondent considers it is entitled not only to terminate the Participation
Contract but also to claim by way of damages the fees which were potentially payable as
at the date the Farmout Agreement was made, then the Respondent could have likewise

pursued those fees at the same time as choosing not to terminate the Participation

*° Second Witness Statement of Pablo Terdn, paragraph 6. See also Hearing Transcript (17 December
2008) at page 1154, lines 10-20.

 

*! See also Regulation 1363, although this only sets a minimum figure for the transfer.

- 168 -

Contract. Indeed, the logic for the latter approach would seem stronger given that OEPC

would presumably receive the benefit of the Farmout Agreement continuing.”

432. A second difficulty with the argument that there was no option except to
terminate is that there was a further option available to the Respondent, short of declaring
caducidad, namely a variation on the provision (Article 79) requiring the contractor to
enter into a new contract with more favourable terms for the Respondent. That option
would have involved a negotiated settlement, which had the potential to reflect and
address all concerns which the Respondent may have as a result of the breach of contract
which occurred. Such a settlement might include any one or more of the following
features: (i) a transfer fee; (ii) a sum by way of compensation for any damage suffered;
(iii) varied terms for the Participation Contract, presumably aimed at improving the
contract for the Respondent by addressing the impact of the VAT Interpretative Law and
Law 42; and/or (iv) penalty sums payable by OEPC whether based on Article 79 of the

HCL or by agreement at some higher level (if so agreed).

433. In the present case the Attorney General has acknowledged that it was legal to

settle the case.*? Paragraph 15 of the Caducidad Decree records that OEPC’s efforts to

” The Tribunal notes that if, in 2006, the Respondent had decided not to declare caducidad, then under
Article 79 of the HCL, the purported ignment of rights by the Farmout Agreement would still have been
null and void under Ecuadorian law. It would have been null and void ab initio, but that would be a
problem for OEPC and AEC, and not a matter of concern for the Respondent. The first paragraph of
Article 79 provid The transfer of a contract or the assignment to third parties of rights from a contract
shall be null and void and shall have no validity whatsoever if there is no prior authorization from the
Ministry of Energy and Mines, without prejudice to the declaration of caducidad as provided for in this
Law.”

 

 

+ Letter from the Attorney General to PetroEcuador dated 4 May 2006, advising that “a compromise and
settlement is proper because it is so permitted by law”.

- 169 -

settle with the Respondent were finally rejected only on 15 May 2006. The fact that
settlement was being considered shows the Minister had a discretion not to declare
caducidad, and further a discretion to negotiate what the appropriate sanction (the

“settlement’’) might be.

434. In summary, the Tribunal considers that the foregoing options existed as an

alternative to caducidad", namely:

i) insistence on payment of a transfer fee in the order of USD 11.8 million;
and/or
ii) improvements to the economic terms of the original contract; and/or

iii) a negotiated settlement which could of course have covered any areas that
the parties so desired, including payment of the transfer fee which had

been avoided, renegotiation of the contract and additional compensation.

435. The final option was to have done nothing except perhaps issue a statement
making it plain to all foreign oil companies that all transfers of economic interests must
be authorized and that if not so authorized caducidad proceedings would be inevitable.

No doubt this option was viewed by the Respondent as unpalatable and unrealistic, but as

* Such an alternative does not arise from Article 77 of the HCL which provides as follows: “A breach of
contract that does not cause caducidad effects or a violation of the Law or Regulations shall be punished
with a fine imposed by the National Hydrocarbons Director, of two hundred to three thousand United States
Dollars, depending on the seriousness of the violation, in addition to compensation for the damages
caused.” This provision is not relevant to the Tribunal’s analysis regarding alternatives to caducidad since
its operation is confined to instances of breach of the Participation Contract which do not cause caducidad
effects nor a violation of the Law or Regulations.

   

    

- 170-

a matter of logic such an option did exist. Article 74 of the HCL is empowering only,

and not directive.

436. For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that the Respondent’s argument that there

was really no option but to terminate is unsound and it is not accepted.

@ The Background to the Caducidad Decree

437. As indicated earlier, the Tribunal has found that Article 74 of the HCL was
violated. Specifically, the Tribunal has concluded that the better interpretation of the
Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement is that they constituted an
unauthorized transfer of certain of OEPC’s rights under the Participation Contract.
Because of the absence of authorization, such transfer was a breach of the Participation

Contract and a violation of Article 74 of the HCL.

438. The background to the Caducidad Decree has been referred to at length
previously in this Award and need not be repeated in extenso here. It suffices to note

that:

(a) OEPC publicly announced the Farmout Agreement on 1 November 2000;

(b) By inter-departmental memorandum within the Ministry of Energy, it
was noted on 8 November 2000 that AEC was already party to a
participation contract for other fields and was the operator of those fields,
that it had demonstrated technical solvency, and that there would be “no
impediment for [the] assignment of rights [in OEPC’s Participation

Contract];”

-171-

(c

(d

(e

(f)

(g

(h

(i

Nearly four years passed, until early 2004 (the Moores Rowland audit)
during which time the Participation Contract proceeded without any
major incident, and all payments due under it to PetroEcuador were made

by OEPC;

During those four years, the Claimants also committed substantial further
investment to the OCP pipeline, and purchased a certain amount of

capacity on the pipeline through a long-term ship-or-pay commitment;

On 12 July 2004, the VAT Award was sent to the parties;

On 14 July 2004, Moores Rowland issued its audit report, noting that the
assignment of rights and obligations contemplated in the Farmout was
made contingent on future events and that the assignment “might or

might not happen;”

On 15 July 2004, OEPC sought approval for the 40% transfer to AEC;

On 24 August 2004, the Attorney General of Ecuador wrote to the
Minister of Energy and Mines and requested that he terminate the

Participation Contract;

On 18 June 2005, during a major strike and following civil unrest which
had persisted for several months, the new Minister of Energy and Mines,
Minister Rodriguez, signed a resolution stating: “The Minister of Energy
and Mines and the President of PetroEcuador, as the competent

authorities, commit to undertaking all of the necessary steps for the

-172-

G

(k)

a

departure from Ecuador of the companies Occidental and EnCana AEC

for having violated the judicial norms of the country”;

By letter dated 2 August 2005, the President of PetroEcuador wrote to the
Minister asking him to “declare the caducity of the Participation Contract
[...] according to the provisions set forth in Articles 74, 75, 76 and 79 of
the [HCL].” Responding to the argument of proportionality which had
been raised in correspondence by OEPC, the President of PetroEcuador
said: “Although from the year 2000, operations have been executed by
OEPC without any quantifiable economic damage resulting from the
transfer of its economic interests, nevertheless, their arguments have not
disproved the cause for caducity contemplated in numeral 11 of Article

74 of the [HCL].”

On 10 November 2005, 100 members of Congress petitioned the
President of Congress calling for an impeachment trial of Minister

Rodriguez if he did not advance the caducidad process;

On 26 March 2006, the leader of strikes which had been blocking
highways in the north and centre of Ecuador stated that “if caducity of the

Occidental contract is declared, we will lift the strike”;

(m) In late April and early May 2006, Minister Rodriguez and PetroEcuador

respectively asked the Attorney General whether the law permitted a

negotiated settlement with OEPC, and he advised them both that it did;

- 173 -

(n) On 9 May 2006, various social organisations declared that they would

demand the impeachment of the President for considering a settlement
agreement with OEPC, and of the Attorney General for opining that a

settlement was legally permitted;

(0) On 15 May 2006, the Caducidad Decree was issued.

439. The foregoing recitation of events shows that the question of whether a caducidad

decree should be issued had become a national political issue, especially after the

issuance of the Moores Rowland audit report and the publication of the VAT Award.

@ The Influence of the VAT Award

440. As to the influence of the VAT Award and its connection with the eventual

declaration of caducidad, the Tribunal refers to the following matters in particular:

(a) By March 2004, the Respondent was in possession of (unsigned) true

(b

copies of both the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating
Agreement. However, no action was taken until July 2004, after the
VAT Award was published, and after the Respondent received signed

copies of the Farmout Agreement and Joint Operating Agreement.

On 15 July 2004, three days after the VAT Award was published and one
day after the Moores Rowland audit report was issued, OEPC informed
PetroEcuador that the conditions in the Farmout Agreement of October
2000 had been met, and that OEPC was now requesting PetroEcuador to

approve the transfer of the 40% interest to AEC. At the same time,

-174-

OEPC submitted a formal request to the Ministry of Energy and Mines

for approval of the transfer in accordance with Article 79 of the HCL.

(c

After meeting with Mr. Ellis of OEPC, Minister Lopez wrote to him on
17 August saying as follows: “In order to have all the components to
form a decision on your request for authorization, kindly send to the
Office as soon as possible a certified copy of the Agreement executed
with AEC Ecuador Ltd in the year 2000 and the relevant operating
agreement that allowed OXY to continue as operator of Block 15 within

the framework of the said transfer agreement.”

(d

Accordingly, although the possibility of caducidad for violation of
Article 74.11 of the HCL had been raised in an internal memorandum
within the Ministry,“ the Minister appeared to be proceeding with an
open mind and wished to review the relevant documentation to address

the request for authorization.

(e

However, during August 2004, the Attorney General of Ecuador,
Dr. Borja, reacted strongly and publicly to the VAT Award which had
ordered Ecuador to pay $75 million to OEPC. Dr. Borja told the media
that he was examining OEPC’s contract with Ecuador to “check whether

the contractual norms have been strictly complied with.” The

4 Dr, Zurita, DNH Audits Coordinator, memorandum dated 3 August 2004. The Claimants noted that
Dr. Zurita was not called by the Respondent to give evidence.

- 175 -

(f)

(g

contemporaneous press clippings which were produced in evidence leave
no doubt as to the link between the VAT Award and Dr. Borja’s sudden
interest in reviewing OEPC’s performance of its contract, despite many
years of apparent satisfaction (on the part of the Respondent) with

OEPC’s operations within Ecuador.

On 24 August 2004, Dr. Borja wrote to his colleague, Minister Lopez, an
official letter which was released to the press. It referred to the transfer
by OEPC to AEC of “40% interests and obligations from the
Participation Contract [...] without having received authorization from
the Ministry of Energy and Mines” and requesting him to “apply the
provisions in the [HCL] and the referred contract, with regards to the
causes of caducity of same.” In making such a request, and in particular
in making it public, Dr. Borja on behalf of the Respondent was clearly
intending to create a situation whereby the only acceptable political
outcome was to find (i) that there had been a relevant violation of the
HCL or the Participation Contract, and that (ii) the only appropriate
sanction (being a sanction specifically requested by the Attorney

General) was to declare caducidad.

As well as releasing the letter, a press release of the same date (24 August
2004) announced further that “in the case of non-compliances by

Occidental with the State” the Attorney General had requested that

- 176 -

(h)

(i

@

Minister L6pez apply the provision of the HCL and the contract

regarding caducidad.

On 8 September 2004, Minister Lopez complied with the Attorney
General’s request and wrote to the CEO of PetroEcuador asking him to
commence the process under Clause 21.2 ef seg. of the Participation

Contract.

PetroEcuador in turn wrote to OEPC on 15 September 2004 giving
notification of breach of the Participation Contract and inviting OEPC to
respond within 10 days, disproving or accepting the breaches alleged.
OEPC responded in great detail (a 28-page letter) on 24 September 2004
denying all allegations in PetroEcuador’s notice of 15 September 2004.
OEPC’s letter specifically invoked the principles of “actos propios,”
estoppel, legitimate expectations, and proportionality — and also referred
to the four year administrative silence following October 2000 — and
concluded by stating that caducidad would be unlawful and in breach of

the Treaty.

The matter seems to have rested there for nearly six months until the
Attorney General became involved once again. On 14 March 2005, he
wrote to PetroEcuador in forceful terms requesting that they initiate
caducidad proceedings. Furthermore, the letter was copied to the
President of Ecuador together with the following message: “I insist that

said public official [PetroEcuador’s Executive President] should apply

-177-

441.

(k)

(l

the clauses contemplated in the [HCL], its regulations and the contractual

clauses, in order to declare caducity of the Participation Contract [...].”

The remaining steps in the process have been summarized above. The
Tribunal refers again to the resolution (comprising part of some meeting
minutes) which was signed on 18 June 2005 by the new Minister of
Energy and Mines, Minister Rodriguez, and the Minister of Government,
committing to undertaking “all of the necessary steps for the departure
from Ecuador of the [OEPC and AEC] for having violated the judicial
norms of the country”. There was also reference in the same set of
minutes to the VAT issue in general, the resolution stating that there

should be “a better control of the collection of the Value Added Tax.”

As noted earlier, there were attempts at settlement and in May 2006 the
Attorney General wrote to PetroEcuador advising that a “compromise

and settlement was proper because it is so permitted by law.”

That is the relevant background to the matter, and the context in which caducidad

was ultimately declared.

(k)

442.

Was the Caducidad Decree a Proportionate Response?

Based on the above, it is apparent that the VAT Award had created anger and

disappointment in Ecuadorian political circles. It is not appropriate in this Award to

discuss the merits or demerits of the VAT Award. It is sufficient to note that it seems to

- 178 -

have led to a good deal of ill-feeling against OEPC, as did the discovery that OEPC had

transferred rights under the Participation Contract in violation of the laws of Ecuador.

443. To the Tribunal, it appears that there were different camps in the Government’s
decision-making. One camp was proposing to take a hard line and insist upon caducidad.
Another camp appeared to be seeking an amicable resolution of the dispute. In the end

the former succeeded.

444. Turning then to the question of harm, as noted earlier, it is significant that farmout
agreements are very common in the oil and gas industry. In providing his evidence for
the Respondent, Minister Teran acknowledged that the Farmout was (or was likely to
have been) beneficial to the State: “[T]he obtainment of additional resources by OEPC to
increase its investments in Ecuador seemed to me to be a good idea since it was

beneficial to the country."

445. The fact that AEC was already an approved operator in Ecuador, and continued to
receive further approvals in relation to other projects/fields after signing the Farmout
Agreement, means that it is overwhelmingly likely that approval would have been given
if authorization had been sought in October 2000. Even if authorization could have been
reasonably withheld, it does not follow that the Respondent has suffered a loss. Indeed,
as recorded in PetroEcuador’s letter of 2 August 2005, the evidence shows that the

Respondent did not suffer any quantifiable loss as a direct result of AEC taking an

© Witness Statement of Pablo Terén dated 16 June 2006 at paragraph 23 and Hearing Transcript (17
December 2008) at pages 1144-1145.

- 179 -

economic interest in Block 15. Furthermore, it is likely that the involvement of AEC
with Block 15 actually resulted in increased investment in that Block, and thus increased

the return for PetroEcuador under the Participation Contract.

446. The rationale for the “approval” requirement in Articles 74.11 and 74.12 of the
HCL is readily apparent: the Respondent wishes to protect Ecuador’s natural resources,
and the income it can generate from them, by carefully assessing the technological
capability, financial soundness and overall suitability of any party who will have access
to and/or a measure of control over those resources. It goes without saying that such is

not an unusual or unreasonable precaution to adopt.

447. But, having been deprived of the opportunity on this occasion to “vet” a potential
third party, the question then shifts to whether the loss of that opportunity has actually
occasioned any harm. Has the Respondent, without its knowledge, been faced with the
fact that the operation of one of its oilfields was entrusted to an unsuitable third party,
and if so has there been any harm suffered? The answer to both questions, on the

evidence presented to this Tribunal, is clearly no.

448. The Claimants submitted that the Farmout Agreement did not offend the rationale
for the approval requirement in Article 74 of the HCL. To the extent that the Respondent
was deprived of the opportunity at the relevant time to consider the suitability of AEC,
then it must be that the Farmout Agreement did offend the rationale for the approval
requirement. OEPC circumvented the requirement for approval altogether.

Acknowledging that fact, the Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s submission that it is not

- 180 -

competent for OEPC or any other private party to arrogate to itself the right to oversee

and regulate the identity of contractors to be involved with Ecuador’s oilfields.

449. But that is a different matter from assessing whether the loss of the approval
prerogative in a particular instance has caused harm. Certainly it did not cause economic
harm in this case. The Respondent answers that point by asserting that OEPC’s breach in
this case “threatened the very integrity of Ecuador’s hydrocarbons regulatory regime —
and it required decisive action from the Ministry sufficient to pose an effective deterrent

to future violations.”

450. It can be accepted that some punishment or other step may well have been
justified, or at the very least defensible. The options available to the Respondent have
been explored above. The Tribunal does not necessarily disagree with the reasoning that
the Respondent could justifiably have wished to re-emphasize the importance of
adherence to its regulatory regime. But the overriding principle of proportionality
requires that any such administrative goal must be balanced against the Claimants’ own
interests and against the true nature and effect of the conduct being censured. The
Tribunal finds that the price paid by the Claimants — total loss of an investment worth
many hundreds of millions of dollars — was out of proportion to the wrongdoing alleged
against OEPC, and similarly out of proportion to the importance and effectiveness of the
“deterrence message” which the Respondent might have wished to send to the wider oil

and gas community.

451. Regarding the submission that as a practical matter the Minister could not choose

anything but forfeiture, lest future declarations of caducidad be met with claims of

- 181-

discrimination, the simple answer to this is that every case turns on its own facts. Despite
differences between the parties on the question of the precise circumstances in which
other contractors have faced potential proceedings for caducidad, the evidence was that
the Ministry of Energy and Mines has on several other occasions chosen not to declare
caducidad notwithstanding that violations of Article 74 had been alleged. As Lord Steyn
has famously noted, when giving his imprimatur to the importation into English law of

the principle of proportionality: “In law, context is everything.”

452. It follows that even if OEPC, as the Tribunal found earlier, breached Clause 16.1
of the Participation Contract and was guilty of an actionable violation of Article 74.11 (or
Articles 74.12 or 74.13), the Caducidad Decree was not a proportionate response in the
particular circumstances, and the Tribunal so finds. The Caducidad Decree was
accordingly issued in breach of Ecuadorian law, in breach of customary international law,
and in violation of the Treaty. As to the latter, the Tribunal expressly finds that the
Caducidad Decree constituted a failure by the Respondent to honour its Article II.3(a)
obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment to the Claimants’ investment, and to

accord them treatment no less than that required by international law.

47 \ fact which only serves to emphasize the central importance of the specific facts in any given case.

48 R. y. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Daly [2001] 3 All ER 433 at 447.

- 182 -

@ Expropriation in Breach of Article I] of the Treaty

453. The Claimants have also contended that the Caducidad Decree was an unlawful
expropriation of the Claimants’ investment in violation of Article III.1 of the Treaty,

which states:

ARTICLE IT

1. Investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized either directly or indirectly
through measures tantamount to expropriation or nationalization (“expropriation”)
except: for a public purpose; in a non-discriminatory manner; upon payment of
prompt, adequate and effective compensation; and in accordance with due process
of law and the general principles of treatment provided for in Article II(3).
Compensation shall be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated
investment immediately before the expropriatory action was taken or became
known, whichever is earlier; calculated in a freely usable currency on the basis of
the prevailing market rate of exchange at that time; be paid without delay; include
interest at a commercially reasonable rate from the date of expropriation; be fully
realizable; and be freely transferable.

 

454. In response, the Respondent maintains that it did not expropriate the Claimants’
investment because the termination of a contract in accordance with its terms and
governing law is not an expropriation, and that the Caducidad Decree was a bone fide

administrative sanction in furtherance of a legitimate regulatory policy.

455. The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants. Having found in the previous Section of
the present Award that the Caducidad Decree was issued in breach of Ecuadorian law, in
breach of customary international law and in violation of the Respondent’s Article IT.3(a)
obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment to the Claimants’ investment, the
Tribunal now has no hesitation in finding that, in the particular circumstances of this case
which it has traversed earlier, the taking by the Respondent of the Claimants’ investment

by means of this administrative sanction was a measure “tantamount to expropriation”

- 183 -

and thus in breach of Article III.1 of the Treaty. This phrase is found in NAFTA Article
1110 which provides that “[nJo party shall directly or indirectly ... expropriate an
investment ... or take a measure tantamount to ... expropriation...” In the well-known
case of Metalclad v Mexico”, in relation to the definition of “tantamount to

expropriation”, the Tribunal said:

“Thus, expropriation under NAFTA includes not only open, deliberate and
acknowledged takings of property, such as outright seizure or formal or
obligatory transfer of title in favour of the host State, but also covert or incidental
interference with the use of property which has the effect of depriving the owner,
in whole or in significant part, of the use or reasonably-to-be-expected economic
benefit, of property even if not necessarily to the obvious benefit of the host
State.”

(m) The Remaining Allegations of Breach under the Treaty and Ecuadorian Law

456. Having found that the Caducidad Decree was not a proportionate response in the
particular circumstances and as such was issued in breach of Ecuadorian law, in breach of
customary international law, and in violation of Articles II.3(a) and III.1 of the Treaty,
the Tribunal need not address the remaining allegations of breach under the Treaty and
Ecuadorian law raised by the Claimants, including the allegations that the Caducidad

Decree was imposed in a discriminatory manner or that it otherwise denied the Claimants

*° Metalclad Corporation v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award, 30
August 2000.

*° Ibid. paragraph 103 (emphasis added). See also e.g. S.D. Myers v. The Government of Canada, Partial
Award of 13 November 2000 (NAFTA) at paragraphs 280 and 285: “In general, the term ‘expropriation’
carries with it the connotation of a ‘taking’ by a governmental-type authority of a person’s ‘property’ with a
view to transferring ownership of that property to another person, usually the authority that exercised its de
jure or de facto power to do the ‘taking.’” [...] “The primary meaning of the word ‘tantamount’ given by
the Oxford English Dictionary is ‘equivalent.’ Both words require a tribunal to look at the substance of
what has occurred and not only at form. A tribunal should not be deterred by technical or facial (sic)
considerations from reaching a conclusion that an expropriation or conduct tantamount to an expropriation
has occurred. It must look at the real interests involved and the purpose and effect of the government
measure.”

 

 

  

- 184-

full protection and security. Indeed, even if the Tribunal were to make positive findings
in this regard, this would have no impact on the determination of the resulting damages.
For the same reason, the Tribunal need not address the Claimants’ allegation that the
Respondent allowed PetroEcuador and Petroproducci6n to aid and abet the Caducidad

Decree in a manner inconsistent with the Treaty or Ecuadorian law.

VI. QUANTUM

A. Introduction

457. In view of its findings on liability, the Tribunal now turns to the determination of
the quantum of the Claimants’ damages. In this regard, the Tribunal observes that in
addition to the applicable standard for valuing the Claimants’ losses and other related
quantum issues, there are four “core” threshold quantum issues that it must first resolve.

These issues concern the impact (if any) on the Tribunal’s determination of quantum of:

1) The Ecuadorian Law 42;

2) The Ecuadorian VAT Interpretative Law;

3) The Farmout Agreement; and

4) The fault of the Claimants prior to the Caducidad Decree.

458. All four of these “core” quantum issues have been raised by the Respondent in
response to the Claimants’ contention that compensation for their losses should be equal
to the full fair market value of the Participation Contract as of the date of the Caducidad

Decree, i.e. 15 May 2006. As will be seen, the Respondent argues that the quantification

- 185 -

of the Claimants’ losses must be reduced on account of each one of these four factors,
whereas the Claimants reject any suggestion that the damages they seek should be

anything less than the full market value of their investment.

459. The parties briefed the Tribunal, in writing and orally, at great length about these
four issues. The Tribunal will thus, before analyzing each issue, summarize the parties’
respective arguments, all of which have been taken into consideration by the Tribunal.

B. The Respondent’s Procedural Objections in connection with Law 42 and the
VAT Interpretative Law

460. The Respondent contends, as a preliminary matter and in the form of procedural
objections that, since the Claimants did not assert any claims based on Law 42 or the
VAT Interpretative Law during the liability phase of the arbitration, they are precluded
from challenging their lawfulness as a basis for their inapplicability during the quantum

phase.

461. The Claimants reply that, because the lawfulness of Law 42 or the VAT
Interpretative Law only became relevant in the event the Tribunal found the Respondent
liable to the Claimants, the time to raise those issues was in the quantum phase, more

specifically in their Memorial on Damages, which is precisely what they did.

462. The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants. It stands to reason that the Claimants’
argument that these two Ecuadorian laws should not be taken into account by the
Tribunal for purposes of quantifying their losses becomes pertinent to the Claimants’

damages claim only after and in the event the Respondent has been found liable.

- 186 -

463. The Tribunal notes, in addition, that the Claimants, in their Memorial on Liability,

stated very clearly that these issues would be addressed in their submissions on damages.

464. Accordingly, these procedural objections on the part of the Respondent are

dismissed.

Cc. The Ecuadorian Law 42
L. Introduction

465. Law 42, also referred to as the HCL Amendment, was passed by the Ecuadorian
Congress on 19 April 2006 and published in the Official Gazette on 25 April 2006. Law
42 added a provision to the HCL titled “‘State’s Participation in surplus from oil sales
prices not agreed upon or not foreseen”. This provision, which became Article 55 of the

HCL, states, in relevant part, as follows:

Contractor companies that hold participation contracts for the exploration and
exploitation of hydrocarbons in effect with the Ecuadorian State in accordance with
this Law, without prejudice to the volume of participation crude oil that
corresponds to them, when the average actual monthly FOB sales price of
Ecuadorian crude oil exceeds the average monthly sales price in effect on the date
on which the contract was executed [...] shall recognize a participation in favor of
the Ecuadorian State of at least 50% of the extraordinary revenues generated by the
difference in prices. For purposes of this article, extraordinary revenues shall be
understood to mean the difference in price described above, multiplied by the
number of barrels produced.

The price of crude oil as of the date of contract execution, used as reference to
calculate of the difference, shall be adjusted based on the United States’ Consumer
Price Index published by the Central Bank of Ecuador.*!

*! The Claimants observe that PetroEcuador determined the monthly average price in effect at the time of
the execution of the Participation Contract at $13.66 per barrel, which adjusted for inflation and quality of
oil was $16.43 as of June 2006.

- 187-

466. On 13 July 2006, Ecuador issued Decree 1672 implementing Law 42 at the 50%

2
rate.

2 The Impact of Law 42
(a) The Respondent’s Position

467. The Respondent maintains that any valuation of the Claimants’ damages should
take into account the impact of Law 42 since any valuation of the Claimants’ interest in
Block 15 would have to reflect the actual situation that a hypothetical purchaser of that

interest would have faced in Ecuador on 15 May 2006 after the enactment of Law 42.

468. In brief, it is the Respondent’s position that Law 42 did not violate the Treaty.
More particularly, the Respondent submits that Law 42 is nothing more than a generally-
applicable fiscal measure. The Respondent rejects the Claimants’ contention that Law 42
improperly modified the legal framework that existed at the time their investment was
made. Law 42, says the Respondent, cannot be found to violate the Claimants’ legitimate
expectations or otherwise deny them fair and equitable treatment and full protection and
security. The Respondent further denies that Law 42 imposed a unilateral modification

of the Participation Contract in breach thereof and in violation of the Treaty’s “umbrella”

clause, or that it otherwise operated an expropriation of the Claimants’ investment.

* The Tribunal notes that on 4 October 2007, Ecuador issued Decree 662 increasing the State’s
participation to 99%.

- 188 -

469. Clause 8.6 of the Participation Contract is central to the Respondent’s argument
that Law 42 does not modify the Participation Contract. The Tribunal will now cite this

clause and other related clauses of the Contract for ease of reference:

EIGHT: PARTICIPATION AND DELIVERY PROCEDURES.-

L.]

8.6 Economic Stability: In the event that, due to actions taken by the
State of Ecuador or PETROECUADOR, any of the events described
below occur and have an impact on the economy of this Participation

Contract:
a. Modification of the tax regime as described in clause 11.11.
b. Modification of the regime for remittances abroad or exchange

rates, as described in clause 12.1 and 12.3 respectively.

c Reduction of the production rate, as determined in clause 6.8.3.

d. Modification of the value of the transport rate described in clause
7.3.1 in accordance with the procedure established in Annex
XIV.

e Collection of the Value Added Tax, VAT, as set forth in Official

Letter No. 01044 of October 5, 1998, which appears as annex
number XVI, pursuant to which the Directorate of Internal
Revenue Service states that the imports made by the contractor
for the operations of block 15 under the structure of the
participation contract, are subject to said tax.

In the cases indicated in letters a) and b), the Parties shall enter into

ding contracts as indi din clause 15.2, in order to re-establish
the economy of this Participation Contract. When the events indicated in
letters c), d) and e) occur, a correction factor shall be included in the
participation percentages, to absorb the increase or decrease of the
economic burden, in accordance with Annex No. XIV. (Emphasis
added)

11.9 Exemptions: According to Art. 54 of the Hydrocarbons Law, Contractor is
exempt from payment of entry rates, surface rights, royalties and contributions to

compensation works, as well as the contribution to technical research set forth in
first section of the above mentioned provisions of the Hydrocarbons Law.

L.]

- 189 -

11.11 Tax Regime Modification: In the event that: a) there is a modification of
the tax or labor participation regimes in effect as of the signing date of this
Participation Contract, as these are described in this Clause; and/or (b) of their
legal interpretation; and/or (c) the creation of new taxes or levies not foreseen in
this Participation Contract, which have an impact upon the economy of same, a
correction factor shall be included in the participation percentages that shall
absorb the increase or decrease of the aforementioned tax burden or labor
This correction factor shall be calculated between the Parties,
following the procedure outlined in Art. Thirty-one (31) of the Regulations for
the Application of the Reformatory Laws to the Hydrocarbons Law. The
modification of this Participation Contract will take into account the date on
which the corresponding modification or legal interpretation of the indicated tax
or labor regimes went into effect, or the date on which the new taxes not covered
in this Clause were created.

 

L.]

15.2 Modifying Contracts.- After prior agreement between the Parties, there
shall be an opportunity to negotiate and enter into modifying contracts in those
cases determined in Art. 30 of the Regulations for the Application of Law 44,
especially in the following cases:

L.]

©) When the regime for taxes, foreign currency, remittance of funds abroad
or labor participation applicable to this type of contract in the country have been
modified, in order to re-establish the economy of this Participation Contract, in
accordance with sub-clauses 8.6 and 11.10.

L.]

470. It is the Respondent’s position that Law 42 cannot have “an impact on the
economy of this Participation Contract” as contemplated by Clause 8.6. Law 42 was
enacted in 2006, says the Respondent, merely for the purpose of capturing a portion of
the windfall profits that were by then flowing to oil companies in Ecuador as a result of
an “astounding and unforeseeable” increase in the price of oil. In so doing, the
Respondent claims to have done “nothing more than exercise its indisputable sovereign
authority to raise revenue for its governmental operations and the public welfare.” The
Respondent argues that the Claimants were not entitled to expect windfall profits

generated by prices for oil unimaginable at the time the Participation Contract was

- 190 -

signed. By reference to Clause 8.6 of the Participation Contract, the Respondent seeks to

refute the Claimants’ contention to the contrary as follows:

[...][T]here is no provision in the Participation Contract which could possibly
evidence Claimants’ supposed expectation. On the contrary, the provisions of
clause 8.6 make it clear that Claimants (i) knew and expected that OEPC’s
revenues may be adversely affected by changes in Ecuadorian law and (ii) agreed
that it would only be indemnified against such changes (a) if the measure at issue
fell within a certain class and (b) only to the extent necessary to re-establish the
economic value of the contract.

With oil prices at unimaginable highs, the value to OEPC of its Participation
Contract remained far greater than it could ever have imagined at the time it
negotiated it and certainly well above the agreed point of equilibrium.
Claimants’ bare assertion that they had an expectation that OEPC would be
entitled to the full value of its windfall profits unaffected by a law such as the
HCL Amendment is baseless. OEPC knew and expected at the time that it
executed the contract that State measures may impact its revenue stream from the
sale of its participation, and tried to deal with that situation in clause 8.6 of the
Participation Contract. Its problem is clause 8.6 is triggered only if some
measure fell within its ambit and reduced the net present value of the contract
below the agreed equilibrium point. The HCL Amendment did neither. In the
absence of a stabilization clause, Claimants could have had no legitimate
expectation that a measure such as the HCL Amendment would not be enacted
or, if it was, that they would be immune from its application. (Emphasis in
original)

471. The Respondent adds that even if Law 42 fell within the ambit of Clause 8.6, the
obligation imposed on the parties by Clause 8.6 would merely be to “reestablish the
economy of this Participation Contract.” According to the Respondent, Clause 8.6 is thus

a classic re-negotiation clause and not a stabilization clause.

472. Furthermore, the Respondent contends that even if Clause 8.6 required the parties
to negotiate amendments to the Participation Contract that would re-establish the agreed
economic value of the contract to OEPC in the event that the Respondent took some
measure which adversely affected it, the underlying premise was that the economic value

of the Participation Contract to OEPC was less than that which had been forecasted at the

-191-

time the contract was negotiated. In other words, says the Respondent, as long as the
price of Block 15 crude exceeds the $15 per barrel price agreed by the parties in
determining their respective participation percentages, the economic value of the
contract to OEPC will be above the value expected to be yielded at any given point in
time. That is so even if Law 42 is applied, since OEPC will still always enjoy 50% of

the upside of every cent above $15 per barrel.

473. Finally, the Respondent avers that even if an obligation to re-establish the
economic value of the Participation Contract did arise, the obligation on the parties was
to negotiate a modifying contract in accordance with Clause 15.2. According to the
Respondent, the mere enactment of Law 42 could never have amounted to a breach of
the Participation Contract and, in the circumstances, there could be no breach of

contract absent a failure on the part of the parties to agree a revised contract.

474. Echoing its submissions regarding the Caducidad Decree, the Respondent also
denies that Law 42 was a direct or indirect expropriation, that Law 42 discriminated
against the Claimants in favour of Ecuadorian companies, or that Law 42 caused arbitrary
and discriminatory impairment of the Claimants’ investment. The Respondent, in
addition, reasserts the constitutionality of Law 42 as declared by the Ecuadorian

Constitutional Court.

(bh) The Claimants’ Position

475. As previously noted, the Claimants contend that Law 42 — which they refer to as a

“value-depressing measure” — should not be taken into account for purposes of

- 192 -

quantifying their losses. Law 42, contend the Claimants, violates both the Treaty and

Ecuador’s Constitution.

476. More particularly, it is the Claimants’ position that, by enacting Law 42 in 2006,
the Respondent unilaterally introduced by law a contractual term that it had rejected in
1999 when it negotiated the Participation Contract, and subsequently failed to obtain in
2005 when the parties sought to renegotiate that contract on a mutually agreed basis.
According to the Claimants, Law 42 violates the express terms of the formula set out in
Clause 8.1 of the Participation Contract:

[...] Ecuador, by taking 50% (which increased in 2007 to 99%, see {| 246 above)

of OEPC’s revenues from Block 15 production above an arbitrary reference

price, radically modified the participation formula of Clause 8.1 of the

Participation Contract. That clause provides unequivocally that OEPC’s

participation will vary with volume and quantity, but not with price. CE-2,

Clause 8.1. In fact, as Mr. Albuja has explained and Ecuador has not denied, the

parties specifically considered tying OEPC’s participation to price fluctuations

during the negotiation of the Participation Contract but decided not to do so. See

CMD {{ 104-1078; FA WS II 44. It is therefore clear that the HCL Amendment

struck at the very heart of OEPC’s acquired rights under the Participation

Contract by changing the agreed upon participation formula of Clause 8.1 to

reduce OEPC’s agreed-upon share in production. (Emphasis in original)
477. The Claimants emphasize that, when the parties converted their Services
Agreement to a Participation Contract, they specifically agreed to tie their participations
exclusively to production volume, and not to oil prices, thereby giving the Claimants a

legitimate basis to expect that the Respondent would not subsequently retract that

essential part of the bargain. In the words of the Claimants:

* Clause 8.1 and 8.5 are set out infra, at paragraphs 512 and 513.

- 193 -

Most fundamentally, when an investor enters into a long-term contract with a
clear and unambiguous revenue-distribution formula, it can reasonably expect
that the agreed upon formula will allocate the risks and rewards of the parties
throughout the life of the contract. That is all the more true where, as here, the
investor assumed all of the risk of the required capital investment. An investor
cannot be fairly required in those circumstances to bear all of the risk of a low
price environment without the commensurate reward of a_ high price
environment.

478. The Claimants accordingly contend that the Respondent breached its obligation
under Article II.3(c) of the Treaty to observe any obligation it might have entered into
with regard to investments because Law 42 writes two essential terms out of the
Participation Contract, namely the production-sharing formula under Clause 8.1, as well
as OEPC’s right under Clause 5.3.2 of the Participation Contract freely to dispose of its
participation. According to the Claimants, the Clause 5.3.2 right is meaningless unless it
includes the right freely to enjoy the revenues from such disposal and Law 42, they add,
removed that right from the Participation Contract with respect to half of all pre-tax
revenues accruing from sales at a price in excess of the price of crude oil as of the date of

the Participation Contract.

479. In addition, the Claimants contend that, by enacting Law 42, the Respondent
breached its obligation under Article II.1 of the Treaty, pursuant to which the Respondent
is required to “treat investment, and activities associated therewith, on a basis no less
favourable than that accorded in like situations to investment or associated activities of its
own nationals or companies, or of nationals or companies of any third party.” According
to the Claimants, the impact of Law 42 was such that U.S. investments were inevitably
going to suffer losses that simply bear no comparison to any losses suffered by

Ecuadorian investments.

- 194 -

480. The Claimants also submit that Law 42 is in breach of the fair and equitable
treatment (Article II.3(a)) and full protection and security (Article II.3(b)) provisions of
the Treaty, reiterating that they had a legitimate expectation that the Respondent would
not impair the long-term contractual bargain on which they had premised their
investment. The Claimants stress that it is on the basis of that bargain that they decided
to put enormous capital at risk in Ecuador, and that they did so in the expectation that the
Respondent would not take away the reward of the investment once they had successfully

managed the risk of that investment.

481. Specifically, the Claimants refute the Respondent’s assertion that they could not
have expected to be insulated from any kind of generally applicable modification to
Ecuador’s tax or legal framework. Law 42 was not, say the Claimants, a “generally-
applicable modification to Ecuador’s tax or legal framework.” In this regard, the
Claimants submit that even with respect to companies with a participation contract, Law
42 was applied selectively (e.g. the Tarapoa contract was exempted from the application

of Law 42).

482. The Claimants also aver that, by enacting Law 42, the Respondent has breached
the Article III expropriation provision of the Treaty, arguing that the Respondent has
thereby deprived OEPC of (i) the participation in Block 15 production to which the
Participation Contract entitled it and that, it was specifically agreed, would not vary with
oil price fluctuations; and (ii) its right to freely dispose of its entire participation in Block

15 production and to receive the revenues from such free disposal. The Claimants add

- 195 -

that those rights are both a “claim to money” and a “right conferred by contract,” both of

which are expressly included in the Treaty’s definition of investment.

483. Finally, the Claimants assert that Law 42 violates the Ecuadorian Constitution
because (i) it violates the principles of legal security and non-retroactivity, (ii) the
principle of freedom of contract, (iii) it constitutes an unlawful confiscation, and (iv) it

violates the principle of equality of treatment.

( The Tribunal’s Analysis and Conclusion

@ Preliminary Observations

484. At the outset of its analysis of Law 42, the Tribunal recalls the title of the HCL
Amendment: “State’s Participation in surplus from oil sales prices not agreed upon or not

foreseen.”

485. The Tribunal notes that Decree 1672 fixed the “State’s Participation” at the level
of 50% of what Law 42 refers to as the “extraordinary revenues” earned by “Contractor
companies” such as the Claimants as a result of any increase in price above the monthly

average price in effect at the time of the execution of the Participation Contract.

486. The Tribunal further notes that the words “extraordinary revenues” are found

nowhere in the Participation Contract.

(ii) Characterization of Law 42 and the Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objection
487. Against this background, the Tribunal has determined that its analysis regarding

the impact of Law 42 requires that it first characterize this legislation. Is it a tax, a

- 196 -

royalty, a levy or, more generally, a “matter of taxation” under the Treaty, or is it

something else?

488. There is also a compelling procedural reason why the Tribunal must characterize
Law 42. At the Hearing on Quantum, the Respondent, for the first time in these
proceedings, claimed that “the question of Law 42 is excluded from the Arbitral
Tribunal’s jurisdiction in accordance with Article 10 of [the] Treaty”. In effect, as will
be seen, the Respondent was now adopting the position that Law 42 was a “matter of

taxation.”

489. The Tribunal recalls that the Respondent, throughout the Hearing on Quantum,
was loath to characterize Law 42. In its Post-Hearing Brief, the Respondent stated

categorically that Law 42 was not a royalty.

490. The Tribunal also recalls that at the Hearing on Quantum, the Respondent
submitted categorically that Law 42 “is not a tax”. In the words of counsel for Ecuador:
“{I]n Ecuador [...] for a tax to be created and imposed on the citizens, you need to follow
some special procedures in the constitution. Here, this Law 42 was issued pursuant to a

different procedure. So it couldn’t be a tax,” (Emphasis added)

491. The Claimants have argued, albeit in the alternative, that Law 42 is either a

royalty within the meaning and in breach of Clause 11.9 of the Participation Contract, or

* Hearing Transcript (6 November 2009) at page 161.

*5 Hearing Transcript (4 November 2009) at page 175.

- 197-

otherwise a tax or a levy within the meaning of Clause 11.11 of the Participation Contract
which requires an adjustment in the form of a correction factor pursuant to Clauses 8.6

and 11.11 of the Contract.

492. The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that Law 42 is not a royalty. Such a
characterization is contrary to the plain text of Clause 11.9 of the Participation Contract

as well as the plain text of the operative provision of Law 42 referred to above.

493. By its express terms, Clause 11.9 incorporates into the Participation Contract

Article 54 of the HCL which it repeats word for word:

11.9 Exemptions: According to Art. 54 of the Hydrocarbons Law, Contractor is
exempt from payment of entry rates, surface rights, royalties and contributions to
compensation works, as well as the contribution to technical research set forth in
first section of the above mentioned provisions of the Hydrocarbons Law.
(Emphasis added)

494. In addition, as also noted by the Respondent, a royalty is generally defined as a
payment made in exchange for access to a natural resource.©° This is clearly not what

Law 42 contemplates. The Tribunal thus concludes that Law 42 is not a royalty.

495. The Tribunal also agrees with the Respondent that Law 42 is not a tax. Again,
such a characterization is contrary to the plain text of Law 42 and, in any event, as
stressed by the Respondent, it was not “created” in accordance with the Ecuadorian

Constitution.

*© See Black’s Law Dictionary, 7th edition (1999).

- 198 -

496. In this regard, the Tribunal notes that the Claimants’ contention that Law 42 is a
tax was not pressed with much vigour in either their written or oral submissions. Even
their legal expert, Dr. Pérez Loose, could not bring himself to opine clearly that Law 42

was a tax.

497. In any event, even if Law 42 were a tax, it would not, in the opinion of the
Tribunal, create a jurisdictional barrier to the Claimants’ Law 42 claim under the Treaty

for the following reasons.
498. Article X of the Treaty provides that:
1. With respect to its tax policies, each Party should strive to accord fairness and

equity in the treatment of investment of nationals and companies of the other Party.

2. Nevertheless, the provisions of this Treaty, and in particular Article VI and VII,
shall apply to matters of taxation only with respect to the following:

(a) expropriation, pursuant to Article III;

(b) transfers, pursuant to Article IV; or

(c) the observance and enforcement of terms of an investment agreement

or authorization as referred to in Article VI (1) (a) or (b), to the extent they

are not subject to the dispute settlement provisions of a Convention for the

avoidance of double taxation between the two Parties, or have been raised

under such settlement provisions and are not resolved within a reasonable

period of time. (Emphasis added)
499. The Tribunal is of the view that Law 42, even if it was characterized as a “matter
of taxation”, would be captured by the “exception to the exception” of Article X.2(c) of
the Treaty. The dispute between the parties, in the present arbitration, relates directly to

the observance and enforcement of the terms of the Participation Contract which, in the

opinion of the Tribunal, is an investment agreement under Article VI(1)(a) of the Treaty.

500. The Respondent’s jurisdictional objection regarding Law 42 is thus dismissed.

- 199 -

501. Having found that Law 42 is neither a royalty nor a tax, it remains for the

Tribunal to determine whether Law 42 can be characterized as a levy.

502. The Tribunal notes that in its Post-Hearing Brief on Law 42, the Respondent
wrote that “[i]f the Arbitral tribunal requires that Ecuador characterize Law 42 under

Ecuadorian Law, Ecuador would submit that Law 42 is a levy.”

503. The word “levy” is not a defined term in the Participation Contract. In fact, the
word is only used once in the Participation Contract, in Clause 11.11, in the context of
“the creation of new taxes or levies not foreseen in this Participation Contract, which

have an impact upon the economy of same [...].””. (Emphasis added)

504. The Tribunal notes Clause 3.4.4 of the Participation Contract which reads as

follows:

3.4.4. For those definitions not included in this Participation Contract or in the
provisions that comprise the legal framework hereof, the Parties will refer to the
definitions included in the Hydrocarbons Law and its regulations, as well as
those generally accepted by the international oil industry.

505. There is no definition of “levy” in the Hydrocarbons Law or its regulations.

506. Neither party has represented to the Tribunal that a “levy” was a word “generally

accepted by the international oil industry”.

507. In the circumstances, the Tribunal refers again to Black’s Law Dictionary where

levy is defined as “the imposition of a fine or tax; the fine or tax so imposed”.

508. The participation of “50% of the extraordinary revenues” decreed by Law 42 in

favour of the Ecuadorian State cannot, in the view of the Tribunal, be considered as a fine

- 200 -

or tax. Rather, as evidenced by both its title and its express terms, Law 42 decrees an
increased participation “in favour of the Ecuadorian State” from “companies [such as

OEPC] that hold participation contracts”.

509. For purposes of characterizing Law 42, it is sufficient for the Tribunal to
conclude, as it now does, that the participation of Ecuador under Law 42 “in surplus from
oil sales prices not agreed upon or not foreseen,” is neither a royalty, a tax, a levy or any

other measure of taxation under the Participation Contract.

510. It is, as its title makes explicit, a unilateral decision of the Ecuadorian Congress to
allocate to the Ecuadorian State a defined percentage of the revenues earned by

contractor companies such as OEPC that hold participation contract.

511. The Tribunal will now turn to its analysis of Law 42.

(iii) Analysis of Law 42

512. In the Tribunal’s view, the analysis of Law 42 must commence with the
determination of the basis on which OEPC’s participation in the exploration and
exploitation of hydrocarbons in Block 15 was to be calculated. Clauses 8.1 and 8.5 of the
Participation Contract are very clear in that respect: PetroEcuador and OEPC agreed that,
as of May 1999, OEPC would receive a participation in the production of crude oil and

that such participation would be calculated as follows:

- 201 -

EIGHT: PARTICIPATION AND DELIVERY

PROCEDURES.-
8.1 Calculating Contractor Participation.- Contractor
Participation shall be calculated according to the following
formula:
PC X.Q
100
Where:
PC = Contractor Participation
Q = Fiscalized Production
x Average factor, in percentage, rounded out to the
third decimal, corresponding to Contractor
Participation, calculated according to the
following formula:
x= XLql + X2.q2 + X3.q3 +Y
q
Where:
q= is average daily Fiscalized Production for the corresponding
Fiscal Year.
ql= is the part of q lower than L1
q= is the part of q between LI and L2.
ge is the part of q greater than L2.

513. As for the Respondent, its participation was to be calculated as follows:

8.5 State Participation in Production. — Once production has
started, State Participation shall be calculated as follows:

PE = (100-~X)Q
100
Where:

PE = State Participation
X and Q are defined in Clause 8.1
514. Under the Participation Contract, the parties’ respective participations were thus

dependent exclusively on production volume.

- 202 -

515. The Tribunal recalls that the Participation Contract replaced a Services Contract
between the parties. As explained by Mr. Fernando Albuja,” under the Services Contract
model the Respondent remained the sole owner of the oil produced and thus captured the
higher revenues flowing from any increase in the price of oil. According to Mr. Albuja,
during the negotiations of the Participation Contract, OEPC proposed that the parties’
participations remain dependent on production volume but also vary with crude oil price
fluctuations. This proposal was rejected by PetroEcuador. In the words of Mr. Albuja,
“they insisted that under a participation contract [...] the parties’ participations could

only vary with production volume and not with price.”**

516. As a result, observes Mr. Albuja, “Occidental accepted the risk that crude oil
market prices would remain below the hypothetical $15 per barrel price, and
PetroEcuador accepted that each party would benefit from future price increases in
proportion to its volume-defined participations and that it would not receive more oil if

the price of oil increased.”

57 Mr. Albuja submitted four witness statements on behalf of the Claimants. From 1992 to 15 May 2006,
he worked for OEPC in Ecuador. See, in particular, his Second Witness Statement dated 17 September
2007. The Tribunal notes that Mr. Albuja’s evidence was not challenged or contradicted by the
Respondent.

 

°8 Second Witness Statement of Fernando Albuja dated 17 September 2007 at paragraph 8.

* Tbid. at paragraph 9.

- 203 -

517. Mr. Albuja adds: “Based on what PetroEcuador’s negotiators told me at the
time”, the parties therefore fully shared the understanding that Occidental would bear all
of the risk of low prices but would also take no less than what its participation entitles it

to in the case of high prices.”*!

518. In addition, the Tribunal notes that both before and after the conclusion of the
Participation Contract, the Respondent did agree, in other oil exploration and exportation

contracts, to tie the participation percentages to oil price fluctuations.

519. It is against that background that, in the fall of 2005, in a higher oil price
environment, the Respondent sought to revisit the bargain that it had struck with OEPC
(and other oil companies) seven years earlier and asked for a renegotiation of the
Participation Contract. While the evidence is not clear as to why these negotiations did

not lead to an agreement between the parties, it is a fact that they were not successful.

520. In April 2006, shortly before caducidad was declared, Law 42 was passed which,
as noted earlier, now made the Respondent’s participation in the revenues from oil

directly dependent on crude oil prices, in stark contradiction with Clauses 8.1 and 8.5 of

© Mr. Albuja refers specifically, in this connection, to an affidavit submitted in the VAT arbitration by
Patricio Larrea, whom he describes as PetroEcuador’s lead negotiator (see Second Witness Statement of
Fernando Albuja dated 17 September 2007 at paragraph 9).

°' Second Witness Statement of Fernando Albuja dated 17 September 2007 at paragraph 9.

- 204 -

the Participation Contract which sets the participation of the parties in the oil produced

without any reference to the price of oil.”

521. While it is true, as argued by the Respondent (and indeed admitted by the
Claimants), that Clause 8.1 does not contain any guaranteed revenue term and that Law
42 has not changed the percentage in the volumes, in the opinion of the Tribunal this is
not a complete answer to the question posed by the Respondent as to whether or not Law

42 should be taken into account for purposes of quantifying the Claimants’ losses.

522. It is clear to the Tribunal that, in the Participation Contract, the Claimants
knowingly accepted the risk of losses on its investment in case of a low price scenario
and the Respondent knowingly forewent the opportunity to increase its participation in
case of a high price scenario. This was the bargain which was struck by the parties and

which was reflected in the Participation Contract.

523. Law 42, by taking 50% of OEPC’s revenues from Block 15 production above the
agreed reference price, modified radically the participation of the parties agreed in Clause
8.1. The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants’ submission that “the HCL Amendment
struck at the very heart of OEPC’s acquired rights under the Participation Contract by
changing the agreed upon participation formula of Clause 8.1 to reduce OEPC’s agreed

upon share in production.”

© Mr. Albuja affirmed that “[s]ince under the participation contract we would make all required
investments at our own risk and our participation in production would be our only source of revenue, this
determination was an essential part of the [negotiation] process” (see Second Witness Statement of
Fernando Albuja dated 17 September 2007 at paragraph 5). (Emphasis added)

 

 

- 205 -

524. In addition, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent, with Law 42, wrote out of the
Participation Contract another right enjoyed by OEPC under the Participation Contract.
Under Clause 5.3.2, OEPC had the right to “freely dispose” of its participation.
Obviously, that right becomes meaningless unless it includes the right “freely” to enjoy
the revenues from such disposal. Law 42 extinguished that right with respect to half of

all revenues accruing from sales by OEPC at a price in excess of the reference price.

525. Thus, the Tribunal finds that with the introduction of Law 42, the Respondent
modified unilaterally and in a substantial way the contractual and legal framework that
existed at the time the Claimants negotiated and agreed the Participation Contract and

thereby violated Clauses 5.3.2 and 8.1 of the Participation Contract.

526. The considerable investments made by OEPC in Ecuador after the execution of
the Participation Contract were based upon the explicit representations made by the
Respondent during the negotiation of the Participation Contract which were then
crystallized in the participation agreed by the parties in Clauses 8.1 and 8.5. The
investor, OEPC, was justified in expecting that this contractual framework would be

respected and certainly not modified unilaterally by the Respondent.

527. In conclusion, Law 42 is in breach of the Participation Contract and flouts the
Claimants’ legitimate expectations. It is, as a result, in breach of the Respondent’s
Article II.3(a) Treaty obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment to the Claimants’
investment and the Tribunal so finds. In the circumstances, the Tribunal need not rule on

whether Law 42 is in breach of other provisions of the Treaty.

- 206 -

528. There remain three additional arguments of the Respondent which the Tribunal
needs to address. First, the Respondent claims that, by enacting Law 42 in the light of the
“astounding and unforeseeable” increase in the price of oil, it has done “nothing more
than exercise its indisputable sovereign authority to raise revenue for its governmental

operations and the public welfare.”

529. There cannot be any doubt that a sovereign State has the undisputable sovereign
authority to enact laws in order to raise revenue for the public welfare but, as is equally

well established, “the exercise of such right is not unlimited and must have its

boundaries.”

530. As the tribunal stated in the ADC award, “the rule of law, which includes treaty

164

obligations, provides such boundaries. The ADC tribunal continued with a statement

which the present Tribunal finds apposite and adopts:

Therefore, when a State enters into a bilateral investment treaty like the one in this
case, it becomes bound by it and the investment-protection obligations it undertook
therein must be honoured rather than be ignored by a later argument of the State’s
right to regulate.

° ADC Affiliate Ltd. and ADC & ADMC Management Ltd. v. Republic of Hungary (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/16), Award of 2 October 2006 at paragraph 423.

  

* Tbid.

5 Ibid. The Tribunal is of course mindful of the well-known international law principle summarized very
clearly by the Saluka tribunal (Saluka Investments BV v. Czech Republic, Partial Award of 17 March 2006
at paragraph 255): “It is now established in international law that States are not liable to pay compensation
to a foreign investor when, in the normal exercise of their regulatory powers, they adopt in a non-
discriminatory manner bona fide regulations that aimed at the general welfare.” However, the situation
is different where, as in the present case, the State is bound by the terms of a contract which it has entered
into with the investor. That contract fetters the State’s exercise of its regulatory powers.

 

  

 

- 207 -

531. The Respondent submits, in addition, that Clause 8.6 makes it clear that the
Claimants knew that their revenues could be adversely affected by changes in Ecuadorian
law and agreed that they could only be indemnified against such changes in certain

defined circumstances.

532. The Tribunal has already found that Law 42 did not create a royalty, a tax nor a
levy. Since, as the Respondent itself submitted, “Clause 8.6 is triggered only if some
measure fell within its ambit’, there is accordingly no need for the Tribunal to enter into
the debate between the parties with respect to the meaning of the “economy” of the
Participation Contract as referred to in Clause 11.11 regarding a “tax regime

modification.”

533. The Respondent also contends that a proportionate sanction for the Claimants’
breach of its obligation not to transfer rights under the Participation Contract without
authorization would have been re-negotiation of the Participation Contract so as to lead to
a result equivalent to that imposed by Law 42, and that, prior to caducidad, the Claimants
were prepared to recognize the principle of a “price sharing mechanism substantially
similar to the price sharing mechanism contained in the [...] Tarapoa Block Participation
Contract [...]” in a re-negotiated Participation Contract, as shown by the 22 February

2006 letter agreement between OEPC and Andes Petroleum Ecuador Ltd.

°° Exhibit C-425 and Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief on Law 42 of 18 December 2009 at paragraphs 44
and following.

- 208 -

534. In the view of the Tribunal, both of these contentions are wrong because they
overlook the simple fact that a re-negotiation of the Participation Contract did not occur.
The basic question to be answered in a valuation exercise such as the present one,
discussed below, is “what was the value of that which the Claimants actually lost?” The
question is not “what was the value of that which the Claimants might have lost had
history been different?” To answer this latter question, which is effectively what the
Respondent invites this Tribunal to do, would be to engage in impermissible speculation
as to the terms of any possible re-negotiation. The Tribunal cannot know what the terms
would have been, and in particular what the Claimants would have bargained for in
exchange for the arrangement in question. Thus, these factors cannot be taken into
account by the Tribunal in its determination of the fair market value of the Claimants’

investment.

535. This is why, in the view of the Tribunal, this letter agreement does not, as the
Respondent contends, show clearly that “a split of the extraordinary revenues very close
to the one encompassed in Article 2 of Law 42 would have been accepted by Claimants

67

as part of a renegotiation of the Participation Contract. At its highest, it is an

agreement by Andes that OEPC will have the “right to negotiate with the Ecuadorian

Government [...] to resolve the Caducity Proceedings” with the inclusion of terms nearly

° Ibid.

- 209 -

equivalent to Law 42.°° But, as noted in the previous paragraph, a re-negotiation of the

Participation Contract never did take place.

536. Consequently, as advocated by the Claimants, the Tribunal will not take into
account Law 42 for the purpose of its valuation of the quantum of the Claimants’

damages.

(iv) Final observations

537. Notwithstanding this conclusion, the Tribunal is compelled to address the
Respondent’s submission that the Tribunal must consider Law 42 because in valuing the
fair market value of the Participation Contract, and using the analogy of a willing buyer
and seller, “any willing buyer would have used the existence of Law 42 to obtain a

reduction of the price to be paid for Block 15 on May 15, 2006.”

538. In substance, the Respondent is saying that, either generally as part of commercial
behaviour or specifically given the requirements of authorization, Law 42 should feature

in assessing what Block 15 would realize in a hypothetical sale.

539. The Tribunal concludes that this argument suffers from a fundamental flaw. It is
obvious that a hypothetical third party would not pay more than would be justified by the
prospective returns on an investment, and that Law 42 would have to figure in an
assessment of these returns (either because of the risk of its continued application or

because Ecuador would insist on this as a pre-condition to authorization). But asking

°8 Exhibit C-425 at paragraphs 2(b), (c) and (e).

- 210-

what a hypothetical investor would pay under Law 42 which the Tribunal has found to be
in breach of the Participation Contract is irrelevant to assessing what OEPC, whose
contract protected it against things like Law 42, has actually lost. To reiterate, the test is
not “what would a hypothetical buyer pay in the circumstances as they are now”; the test
is “what have the Claimants lost.” The fair market value is a guide to answering this
question, but what must be calculated is the discounted cash flow value of the
Participation Contract (i.e. Block 15) excluding breaches of it (i.e. Law 42) by the

Respondent.

540. In essence, what this argument says is that the answer to the question “what have
the Claimants lost” is “the value (as assessed by discounted cash flow analysis) of the
Participation Contract, conformed to by the Respondent”; the answer to that question is
not “an opportunity to sell the Participation Contract to a third party.” It is in focussing

on the latter that Ecuador is mistaken.

541. This reasoning is persuasively presented by the Claimants when they observe that
“a State cannot reduce its liability for a wrongful act [here, expropriation/disproportionate
sanction via caducidad] on the basis of another wrongful act [applying Law 42 to OEPC
in breach of the Participation Contract]. [...] A valuation tool like the willing buyer

analogy cannot override that principle.’ The emphasized statement effectively refutes
the Respondent’s arguments based on the fair market value and the willing buyer/seller
standard. In particular, it renders its contention that “[i]nternational tribunals have noted

that petroleum companies can expect to be required to make economic concessions when

oil prices go up significantly and that such risk should be factored in the value that a

-211-

willing buyer would be willing to pay” irrelevant: regardless of how common it is in
general, OEPC specifically (and any purchaser of its investment) did not have to expect
to make such concessions and hence comply with Law 42, because the Participation
Contract shielded it against precisely such things. A similar logic refutes the suggestion
that the Respondent’s ability not to approve a transfer means Law 42 must be taken into
account: vis-d-vis OEPC and any potential buyer of the Participation Contract rights, Law

42 simply does not enter into the equation.

542. The above conclusions are supported in international law. The starting point is

the American International case. The relevant passage is worth citing at length:

In ascertaining the going concern value of an enterprise at a previous point in
time for purposes of establishing the appropriate quantum of compensation for
nationalization, it is — as already stated — necessary to exclude the effects of
actions taken by the nationalizing State in relation to the enterprise which actions
may have depressed its value.
543. On the other hand, prior changes in the general political, social and economic
conditions which might have affected the enterprise’s business prospects as of the date

the enterprise was taken should be considered.

544. The force of this passage must be even greater when “actions taken by the
nationalizing State in relation to the enterprise” are actions that themselves constitute a
breach of a contract between the State and the investor. The fact that Law 42 is in

violation of the Participation Contract means that it cannot be relegated to the status of

© See American International Group, Inc. and American Life Insurance Company v. The Islamic Republic
of Iran, Award of 19 December 1983, reprinted in 4 Iran-US C.T.R. 96 at page 107.

-212-

“changes in the general political, social and economic conditions.” While, without the
inconsistency with the Participation Contract, Law 42 could possibly have been
categorized as such a “background” change, in the specific context of the Participation

Contract it cannot be.

545. This is made even more plain by Marboe’s comment on the American

International principle:

It is, according to this view, necessary to distinguish the negative consequences

on the value which were caused by the actions of the State from those negative

consequences on the value caused by changes of the general political, social, and

economic conditions. The former must be excluded from the valuation because

otherwise the State would benefit from its own acts. The latter, however, fall

under the business risk.” (Emphasis added)
546. The emphasized passage makes it clear that to relegate a wrongful act (i.e. breach
of the Participation Contract by application of Law 42 to OEPC or its purchaser) to the
category of “background” change or “business risk” would be to allow the Respondent to
profit from its own wrongdoing, contrary to the general principles of international law
explicitly proscribing this. The necessary implication from this is that if a measure is not
lawful (even if not lawful only vis-a-vis OEPC because of its protection from things such

as Law 42 in the Participation Contract), then it must be discounted for valuation

purposes.
547. For all the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal will disregard Law 42 for the purpose

of its valuation of the quantum of the Claimants’ damages.

 Irmgard Marboe, Calculation of Compensation and Damages in International Investment Law (Oxford
University Press, 2009) at paragraph 3.258.

 

- 213 -

D. The Ecuadorian VAT Interpretative Law
L. Introduction

548. The VAT Law, also referred to as the VAT Interpretative Law, was passed by the
Ecuadorian Congress on 3 August 2004 very shortly after the VAT Award’s release on 2

August 2004. Its sole article provides as follows:

Article 69-A of the Internal Tax Regime Law [...] is hereby interpreted in the
sense that reimbursement of Value Added Taxes, VAT, is not applicable to
petroleum activities when referring to extraction, transportation and
commercialization of oil, since petroleum is not produced, but is extracted from
the respective reservoirs.

2 The Respondent’s Procedural Objections

549. The Tribunal recalls that it has already dismissed the Respondent’s initial
procedural objections pursuant to which the Respondent argued that the Claimants did
not assert any claims based on the VAT Interpretative Law during the liability phase of
the arbitration and that they were precluded from challenging its lawfulness as the basis

for its inapplicability during the quantum phase.

3. The Impact of the VAT Interpretative Law

(a) The Respondent’s Position

550. The Respondent, echoing its position regarding Law 42, submits that the VAT
Interpretative Law must be taken into account in the determination by the Tribunal of the
value of the Claimants’ investment because a “hypothetical buyer would have acquired
its interest after the enactment of the VAT Interpretative Law” and would therefore have

had no legitimate expectation to the VAT refunds.

-214-

551. With reference to the VAT Award, the Respondent asserts that the VAT
Interpretative Law seeks to clarify any ambiguities that may have existed prior to the
VAT Award. The Respondent adds that the VAT Award did not — and could not —
prevent Ecuador from promulgating an official and definitive interpretation of its own

domestic legislation.

(b) The Claimants’ Position

552. The Claimants do not accept that the VAT Interpretative Law, which they refer to
as another “value-depressing measure,” should be taken into account for purposes of
quantifying their losses. The Claimants contend that the VAT Interpretative Law violates
the terms of the VAT Award, the Treaty as well as directly applicable norms of Andean

Community Law. Their argument follows:

First, the VAT Tribunal found that the SRI’s decrees refusing VAT refunds to
OEPC were unfair, arbitrary, and discriminatory, in breach of Articles II.1 and
IL.3(a) of the Treaty. CE-180. By turning an executive decree into statute,
Ecuador changed the form of its wrongful conduct, but not its substance.

The VAT Interpretative Law is not any less discriminatory than the SRI’s
practice. Both the intent and effect of the law were plainly to single out one
specific group of foreign-owned companies. It does not matter in the eyes of
international law whether Ecuador discriminates by law, regulation, or decree.
CA-268, Articles on State Responsibility, Art. 4.1 (“The conduct of any State
organ shall be considered an act of that State under international law, whether the
organ exercises legislative, executive, judicial or any other functions...”). The
effect is exactly the same, and so is the resulting breach of Article II.1 of the
Treaty.

In addition, the VAT Interpretative Law unfairly and arbitrarily frustrated the
legitimate expectations of OEPC just as the SRI’s unlawful practice that it
purported to codify had done. As the VAT Tribunal found, when the parties
negotiated the Participation Contract, it was mutually acknowledged and
understood that OEPC would recover all VAT paid on the acquisition or
importation of goods and services used for the production of oil for export. CA-
18 Occidental { 136. It does not matter for purposes of international law whether
Ecuador frustrated that legitimate expectation by law, regulation, or decree. The

- 215 -

(a)

553.

“VAT Award”). Its main findings and conclusions are very pertinent to the Tribunal’s

effect is exactly the same, and so is the resulting breach of Article II.3(a) of the
Treaty.

Second, as the VAT Tribunal held, Article 4 of Andean Community Decision No.
388 expressly entitled OEPC to a refund of the “total amount” of VAT paid “in
connection with the acquisition of domestic or imported raw materials,
intermediate inputs, services, and capital goods consumed or used in the process
of production, manufacture, transport, or marketing of” oil for export. CA-348,
Decision No. 388, Art. 4.

Decision No. 388 is binding upon Ecuador. CA-350, Treaty establishing the
Andean Court of Justice, Art. 2 (“Decisions become binding for Member
Countries as of the date they are approved by the Andean Council of Foreign
Ministers or the Commission of the Andean Community.”). Ecuador could
therefore not derogate from Decision No. 388, whether it was by law, regulation,
decree, or otherwise. CA-350, Treaty establishing the Andean Court of Justice,
Art. 4 (Member States must “refrain from adopting or employing any such
measure as may be contrary to those provisions or that may in any way restrict
their application.”). A wealth of jurisprudence by the Andean Court of Justice
has reaffirmed these principles of direct applicability and supremacy of Andean
Community Law time and again. CA-353, Case 51-Al-202 15; CA-349, Case
07-AI-98 15; CA-352, Case 25-Ai-2001 17. (Emphasis in original)

The Tribunal’s Analysis and Conclusion

On 1 July 2004, the VAT Tribunal issued its Final Award (the previously-defined

analysis.

554.
reimburse OEPC for the VATs and that, furthermore, OEPC had a legitimate expectation
that Ecuador would reimburse those taxes because Ecuadorian law had provided such

reimbursement at the time OEPC made its investment.

The VAT Tribunal found that Ecuador was obliged, under the Treaty, to

Award, in particular, is very clear. It reads, in relevant part, as follow:

The Tribunal concludes on this matter that, as stated above, OEPC undertook its
investments, including its participation in the pipeline arrangements, in a legal
and business environment that was certain and predictable. This environment
was changed as a matter of policy and legal interpretation, thus resulting in the
breach of fair and equitable treatment. This breach relates to the effects of both

- 216 -

Paragraph 196 of the VAT

revoking the Granting Resolutions and denying further VAT refunds. [...]
(Emphasis added)

555. The VAT Tribunal also decided that OEPC was entitled to the refund of all VATs
paid, that such refund was not included in Factor X of the Participation Contract and that
the SRI Decrees refusing VAT refunds were “without legal effect” because Ecuador had
breached its obligations under Articles II.1 (discrimination), II.3(a) (fair and equitable

treatment) and II.3(b) (arbitrariness) of the Treaty.

556. Exactly one month after the VAT Award, on 2 August 2004, the Ecuadorian
Congress adopted the VAT Interpretative Law. The Tribunal recalls that its sole article
provides as follows:

Article 69-A of the Internal Tax Regime Law [...] is hereby interpreted in the
sense that reimbursement _of Value Added Taxes, VAT, is not applicable to

petroleum activities when referring to extraction, transportation and
commercialization of oil, since petroleum is not produced, but is extracted from
the respective reservoirs. (Emphasis added)

557. Since the VAT Interpretative Law was adopted 31 days after the VAT Award, it

is obvious to the Tribunal that the VAT Interpretative Law was a direct response to the

VAT Award with which, the Respondent admits, it disagreed “strongly”.

558. While the VAT Interpretative Law was presented as an attempt to clarify the
confusion identified by the VAT Tribunal, the fact of the matter is that the VAT
Interpretative Law accomplishes the very same effect as the SRI Decrees which the VAT

Tribunal had found to be in breach of certain provisions of the Treaty.

559. Under international law, a State can be found to have discriminated either by law,

regulation or decree. Article 4.1 of the Articles on Responsibility of States for

-217-

Internationally Wrongful Acts, as adopted by the International Law Commission, is

controlling. It provides that:

Article 4. Conduct of organs of a State

1. The conduct of any State organ shall be considered an act of that State under
international law, whether the organ exercises legislative, executive, judicial or
any other functions [...]

L.]

560. In the view of the Tribunal, the VAT Interpretative Law, unfairly and arbitrarily,
frustrated the legitimate expectations of the Claimants in precisely the same way as the
SRI’s Decrees and is thus also in breach of the Treaty. As such, as between the
Claimants and the Respondent, the VAT Interpretative Law is without legal effect and
should not be taken into account as a factor which impacts the fair market value of the

Claimants’ investment.

561. The Respondent also argues that the VAT Award “is in any event immaterial for
present purposes” since:
[t]he question at hand is not whether OEPC would have had an entitlement to
VAT reimbursements had it continued operating in Ecuador, but whether a
hypothetical purchaser of OEPC’s interest in Block 15 would have had such an
entitlement. And the answer to that question is no. Any such purchaser would
have acquired its interest after the enactment of the VAT Interpretative Law and,
therefore, would not be able to claim any “legitimate expectation” that such
reimbursements would be made. (Emphasis in original)

562. The Tribunal does not agree with the Respondent’s reasoning. As it demonstrated

in the previous Section of this Award’!, the appropriate question to be answered in a

7 See supra at paragraph 539.

- 218 -

valuation exercise such as the present one is “what have the Claimants lost”; the answer
to the question “what have the Claimants lost” is “the value (as assessed by discounted
cash flow analysis) of the Participation Contract, conformed to by the Respondent;” the
answer to that question is not “an opportunity to sell the Participation Contract to a third

party.”

563. In addition, the Tribunal observes that when a willing buyer establishes the fair
market value of the assets, he steps into the shoes of OEPC and he must be entitled to
claim, invoke and weigh all the provisions of the Participation Contract which OEPC
negotiated and bargained for with PetroEcuador. The hypothetical willing buyer is not
buying a hypothetical asset but rather an existing asset, to wit the Claimants’ investment
in Ecuador which, in virtue of the Participation Contract, included rights in favor of the

Claimants which were protected under the Treaty.

564. As the Tribunal emphasized earlier, nullus commodum capere de sua injuria
propria: a State cannot be allowed to take advantage of its own wrongful act.” The
result of the implementation of that well-known principle of international law is that “the
effects of actions taken by the nationalizing State in relation to the enterprise which
actions may have depressed its value” must be disregarded in the determination of that

value.”? The Tribunal, applying that principle to the facts of the present case, concludes

® See Bin Cheng, General Principles of Law as Applied by International Courts and Tribunals (Cambridge:
Grotius Publications Limited, 1987) at page 149; see also Tippetts, Abbett, McCarthy, Stratton v. TAMS-
AFFA et al., Award of 22 June 1984, reprinted in 6 Iran-U.S. C.T.R. 219 at pages 227-228.

® See American International Group, Inc. and American Life Insurance Company v. The Islamic Republic
of Iran, Award of 19 December 1983, reprinted in 4 Iran-US C.T.R. 96 at page 107.

- 219 -

that it must disregard the VAT Interpretative Law in determining the fair market value of

the Claimants’ investment.

565. There is one more facet of the VAT Interpretative Law which has been addressed
by the parties and which the Tribunal will now analyze: whether or not Clause 8.6(e) of

the Contract is triggered into effect in the circumstances of the present case.

566. The Tribunal recalls again that the relevant provisions of Clause 8.6 of the

Participation Contract read as follows:

EIGHT: PARTICIPATION AND DELIVERY PROCEDURES.-

L.]

8.6 Economic Stability: In the event that, due to actions taken by the
State of Ecuador or PETROECUADOR, any of the events described
below occur and have an impact on the economy of this Participation
Contract:

L.]

e Collection of the Value Added Tax, VAT, as set forth in Official
Letter No. 01044 of October 5, 1998, which appears as annex
number XVI, pursuant to which the Directorate of Internal
Revenue Service states that the imports made by the contractor
for the operations of block 15 under the structure of the
participation contract, are subject to said tax.

L.]

In the cases indicated in letters a) and b), the Parties shall enter into
amending contracts as indicated in clause 15.2, in order to re-establish
the economy of this Participation Contract. When the events indicated in
letters c), d) and e) occur, a correction factor shall be included in the

 

 

participation to absorb the increase or decrease of the
economic burden, in accordance with Annex No. XIV. (Emphasis
added)

567. It is clear that, for the correction factor to be triggered automatically into effect,

the VAT Interpretative Law must be found to have an impact on the economy of the

- 220 -

Participation Contract. The Tribunal notes that the parties to the Participation Contract
did not in any way specify how that impact was to be measured. It is thus left to the

Tribunal, in the exercise of its discretion, to do so.

568. The Tribunal recalls that the VAT Award held that OEPC has “a right to
reimbursement (of the VAT) under the law” and that “this reimbursement was not
included in OEPC’s contract”. The right of the Claimants to be reimbursed the Value
Added Tax has now been legislated out of existence. There is no doubt, in the view of
the Tribunal, that the VAT Interpretative Law has thereby increased the economic burden

of the Claimants and thus impacted the economy of the Participation Contract.

569. Consequently, any hypothetical willing buyer of OEPC’s rights under the
Participation Contract, relying on the findings and conclusions of the VAT Tribunal,”
would be entitled to apply for a correction factor in the participation percentages to

absorb the increase in its economic burden in accordance with Clause 8.6 and Annex No.

XIV of the Participation Contract.

570. In summary, in the opinion of the Tribunal, the VAT Interpretative Law should
not be taken into consideration in its determination of the fair market value of the assets
acquired by Ecuador as a result of the Caducidad Decree. Alternatively, if it is taken into
consideration, the Tribunal can assume the application of a correction factor in
accordance with Clause 8.6 of the Participation Contract and its Annex No. XIV which

would neutralize the effect of the VAT Interpretative Law and the Tribunal so finds.

7 See, in particular, VAT Award at paragraphs 111-114.

-221-

E. The Farmout Agreement
L. The Parties’ Initial submissions
(a) The Respondent’s Position

571. The Respondent submitted that any calculation of damages to be awarded to the
Claimants must be limited to a 60% interest in Block 15 because of the Claimants’

transfer of 40% of their interest under the Participation Contract to AEC.

572. According to the Respondent, the Claimants do not have standing to request

damages beyond their “remaining” 60% interest in Block 15.

573. The Respondent also maintains that by virtue of the Farmout Agreement, the
Claimants are the beneficial owners of only 60% of the Participation Contract and that, as
a result, they were entitled to only 60% of the total profits derived from their investment.
In the circumstances, argues the Respondent, an award granting the Claimants damages

on the basis of a 100% interest in Block 15 triggers a risk of double-jeopardy:

[I]f Claimants were to collect from Ecuador for losses attributable to the interest
of AEC or Andes in Block 15, Ecuador would be exposed to a potential double
jeopardy for the same purported losses, which would violate the principle of ne
bis in idem (“not twice for the same”). The possibility cannot be eliminated that
AEC and/or Andes will at some point assert claims against Ecuador for the loss
of their investment in a separate proceeding, under one theory or another — as
unjustified as any such claims would be. Because AEC and Andes are not parties
to the present arbitration, they could potentially argue that they are not bound by
its result and that any recovery made by OEPC should not be attributed to them.
The only way to eliminate this risk of double damages is for this Tribunal to deny
Claimants recovery for amounts attributable to the interest of AEC or Andes.”

7 See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Quantum and Memorial on Counterclaim Damages,
paragraph 49.

- 222 -

574. According to the Respondent, the Claimants’ argument that OEPC was the sole
owner of 100% of the rights under the Participation Contract thus “misses the point”.
The Respondent emphasizes that AEC paid due consideration to OEPC for the former’s
acquisition of a 40% economic interest in Block 15, and that OEPC would be unjustly
enriched if it now received, in addition, damages representing 100% of the fair market

value of the Participation Contract.

(b) The Claimants’ Position

575. The Claimants do not accept the Respondent’s contention that they are only
entitled to claim 60% of the value of the Participation Contract. According to the
Claimants, as the sole owner of the Participation Contract rights, OEPC has the necessary
standing to claim 100% of its damages. The Claimants characterize the Respondent’s
argument regarding standing as a belated objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction which
should have been raised at the very latest when the Respondent filed its Counter-

Memorial on Liability.

576. The Claimants maintain that, in any event, OEPC has always been the sole owner
of the Participation Contract rights and that both Claimants are entitled to 100% of the

value of those rights.

577. |The Claimants emphasize that the basis for their claims is OEPC’s sole ownership
of the rights conferred by the Participation Contract. Thus, according to the Claimants,
while OEPC has to meet its contractual liabilities vis-a-vis AEC (now Andes), that does

not confer to AEC any ownership of the Participation Contract rights.

- 223 -

578. As for the Respondent’s allegations of unjust enrichment and double-jeopardy,

they are refuted by the Claimants as follows:

First, there is no risk of unjust enrichment. OEPC has always been the sole
owner of the Participation Contract rights, and it continues to have a contractual
liability vis-4-vis Andes requiring OEPC to pay Andes an amount equal to 40%
of any compensation awarded in this arbitration. As in Enron, therefore, OEPC
holds 100% of both the equity and the related liabilities, and there is no risk of an
improper windfall. If Claimants are awarded 100% of the value of the
Participation Contract, they will be left with only 60% after honouring their
contractual obligations vis-a-vis Andes.
Second, there is no risk of double jeopardy. Upon the rendering of an award,
Andes will be able to enforce its contractual right to payment against OEPC.
However, Andes has no rights under the Participation Contract and would not be
able to make any claims against Ecuador. In any event a clear recording by the
Tribunal in its award that compensation is awarded for 100% of the Participation
Contract rights would indisputably preclude any future claims by Andes.
579. The Claimants assert that the issue of the 40% ‘“Farmout liability,” as the
Claimants put it, basically raises two fundamental questions: (i) whether the “Farmout
liability” is in the nature of a contractual obligation of OEPC vis-a-vis AEC as opposed to
a right of ownership of AEC in the Participation Contract with Ecuador or the Block 15
oil; and (ii) whether OEPC continued to have the “Farmout liability” after caducidad and

through the present.

580. The Claimants answer their own questions as follows: As a result of the Farmout,
AEC did not acquire any ownership right in the Participation Contract or the Block 15
oil, let alone a “perpetual” one. The Claimants also emphasize that their “Farmout

liability” “did not disappear with caducidad.”

581. The Tribunal notes the Claimants’ final prayer in this regard: “[T]he Tribunal
could fully safeguard Ecuador’s interest in this respect by recording in the award that

Claimants’ damages correspond to 100% of the value of the Participation Contract rights.

-224-

As soon as Claimants pay AEC its 40% of any award, its claims against OEPC under the
Farmout Agreement would have been fully satisfied, so that AEC could not have any
further claims.”

2 The Dictum of the Permanent Court of International Justice in the Chorzéw
Factory Case

(a) Introduction: The Chorzéw Factory Dictum

582. The Tribunal notes that both parties have relied, for purposes of their
diametrically opposed conclusions, on the often-quoted dictum of the Permanent Court of

International Justice in the Chorzéw Factory case.

583. Before it sets out the parties’ Additional Submissions and its conclusions on what
should or should not be excluded from the Claimants’ damages on account of the
Farmout Agreement, the Tribunal considers it useful to quote this dictum and then

summarize the parties’ different interpretations of it.

584. The dictum reads as follows:

On approaching this question, it should first be observed that, in estimating the
damage caused by an unlawful act, only the value of property, rights and interests
which have been affected and the owner of which is the person on whose behalf
compensation is claimed, or the damage done to whom is to serve as a means of
gauging the reparation claimed, must be taken into account. This principle, which
is accepted in the jurisprudence of arbitral tribunals, has the effect, on the one hand,
of excluding from the damage to be estimated, injury resulting for third parties
from the unlawful act and, on the other hand, of not excluding from the damage the
amount of debts and other obligations for which the injured party is responsible.
The damage suffered by the Oberschlesische in respect of the Chorzéw
undertaking is therefore equivalent to the total value — but to that total only — of the

- 225 -

property, rights and interests of this Company in that undertaking, without
deducting liabilities.” (Emphasis added)

(b) The Respondent’s Interpretation

585. The Respondent starts by reiterating the Chorzéw principle and contends that it

should be applied in the present case:

The Chorzow principle is fully applicable in the present case. Claimants’ damage is
restricted to the personal and actual loss of revenue arising from the loss of their
investment. Since Claimants, following the Farmout Agreement, only benefited
from 60% profits from Block 15, their damage is restricted to that loss
corresponding to their economic interest in Block 15. (Emphasis in original)

586. The Respondent insists on the fact that, as explicitly provided by Article 2.02 of
the Farmout Agreement, OEPC was only “entitled to the rights and benefits attributable
to such remaining 60% interest” upon closing. Moreover, OEPC could not, even before
caducidad, have sold 100% of the rights to a willing buyer, as 40% had already been paid
and acquired by AEC. It follows, says the Respondent, that “[b]ecause [...] AEC paid
due consideration to OEPC for the former’s acquisition of a 40% economic interest in
Block 15, OEPC would be unjustly enriched if it now received, in addition, damages

representing 100% the fair market value of the Participation Contract.”

587. The Respondent adds that even if the Tribunal were to follow the Claimants’
contention that “AEC acquired no more than a contractual right against OEPC to receive
from OEPC 40% of Block 15 production,” this would be characterized as an investment

since under Article 1c) of the Ecuador-China BIT, an “investment” includes money

7 Case concerning the Factory at Chorzéw (Claim for Indemnity) (Merits), P.C.1.J. Series A, No. 17
(Judgement of 13 September 1928) at page 31.

- 226 -

claims and any entitlement of economic value. On this point, the Respondent

accordingly submits:

[...] As a result, AEC/Andes’ 40% economic interest is an investment different
from Claimants’ investment. Such investment is not protected by the Treaty
because it does not belong to United States companies or nationals. As to OEPC, it
can only claim, on its own behalf, the value of its reduced investment.

Consequently, as Ecuador explained in its last submission, caducidad affected two
investments from two separate investors. Would caducidad to be found to be in
breach of Ecuador’s international obligations, the investors could claim
compensation, separately, for their own personal damage.

588. In the Respondent’s view, the concept of a “Farmout Liability” was entirely

invented by the Claimants for the sake of advancing their position:

Claimants, in order to benefit from the principle set forth by the Chorzéw case
(providing that liabilities should not be deducted from the injured party’s
damages), have simply invented the concept of a “Farmout Liability” which would
continue to be due to AEC/Andes after caducidad. Claimants have failed to point
to a single clause of the Farmout Agreement establishing such a liability.

589. Insum, the Respondent considers that OEPC, having transferred 40% of its rights
to AEC pursuant to the Farmout Agreement, can only claim for the 60% remaining rights

it held at the moment of caducidad.

( The Claimants’ Interpretation

590. The Claimants summarized their position in the following manner, consistent,

according to them, with the Permanent Court of International Justice’s dictum:

It is settled international law that contractual obligations and liabilities for which
the injured party remains responsible must not be excluded from its compensable
damages. Only when a third party has a right of ownership in the investment, the
compensable damage must be reduced to the extent of that third party’s ownership
right.

- 227 -

591. Based on this theoretical framework, the Claimants added that there are only two

salient questions for the Tribunal, i.e.:

(a) Whether the Farmout Liability is in the nature of a contractual obligation of
OEPC vis-a-vis AEC (as opposed to a right of ownership of AEC in the
Participation Contract with Ecuador or the Block 15 oil);

and

(b) Whether OEPC continued to have the Farmout Liability after caducidad and
through the present.

592. In response to these questions, the Claimants argue that AEC did not, as a result
of the Farmout Agreement, acquire actual legal title or actual ownership in the
Participation Contract. Rather, it only acquired “a contractual right to claim a certain
share of production from OEPC.” And they add that this contractual liability of OEPC

towards AEC remained with OEPC after caducidad.

593. Moreover, the Claimants submit that even if the Tribunal were to conclude that
AEC is the beneficial owner of 40% of the rights and interests in the Participation
Contract, this would be of no consequence given that there is no principle of international

law, say the Claimants, that limits standing to “beneficial owners.” They maintain that
the Respondent’s claim that only the beneficial owner of an investment can claim

damages under international law is irrelevant given that OEPC is the owner of 100% of

the rights under the Participation Contract.

594. The Claimants accordingly conclude that they are entitled to the entire fair market

value of the Participation Contract.

- 228 -

3. The Parties’ Additional Submissions

595. On 6 October 2011, during the Tribunal’s deliberations, the President, on behalf

of the Tribunal, wrote to the parties as follows:

Members of the Tribunal continue their intense deliberations. The Tribunal regrets
that its decision has taken longer to finalize than it would have wished. However,
the parties have submitted to the Tribunal, in their extensive written and oral
submissions, a myriad of factual and legal issues which all need to be analyzed and
determined. The Tribunal is confident that its deliberations will end soon and a
decision issued shortly thereafter.

In recent days, the Tribunal has been addressing an issue which, in its view, neither
party has dealt with comprehensively in its prior submissions. The issue concerns
the interpretation of the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement.

The Respondent submits (Counter-Memorial on Quantum, para 43; Post-Hearing
Brief on Damages, para 127) that the calculation of damages (if any) to be awarded
to the Claimants in the circumstances must be limited to a 60% interest in Block 15
because of the transfer by the Claimants to AEC under the terms of the Farmout
Agreement of 40% of their interest under the Participation Contract. The
Claimants do not accept the Respondent’s contention (Reply on Damages, paras
207-208; Post-Hearing Brief on Damages, para 15).

The governing law clause of the Farmout Agreement provides:

“This Agreement shall be governed by and construed, interpreted and
applied in accordance with the laws of the State of New York, United
States of America, excluding any choice of law rules or conflict of law
principles which would refer the matter to the laws of another jurisdiction,
except to the extent that the laws of Ecuador require application of the
laws of Ecuador to the Participating Agreements and Block 15 or other
property situated in or operations or activities conducted in Ecuador.”

The Tribunal notes that the Claimants argued that the transfer of the “economic
interest” to AEC would not be considered an assignment under New York law and
that, as a result, the non-assignment clause in Article 16(1) of the Participation
Contract was not breached (Memorial on Liability, para 244). Accordingly, the
Claimants did not analyze the effect and validity of an assignment, (assuming an
assignment had indeed occurred as a result of the Farmout Agreement and the Joint
Operating Agreement), in breach of Article 16(1) of the Participation Contract and
Article 79 of the Hydrocarbons Law. In addition, the Claimants did not analyze
Ecuadorian and New York law in this regard.

- 229 -

The Tribunal further notes that the Respondent argued that New York law is
irrelevant to the issue of whether an assignment under the Farmout Agreement and
the Joint Operating Agreement (if any) is in breach of Ecuadorian law (Counter-
Memorial on Liability, para 185).

In sum, neither party, in their quantum submissions, referred to the effect of Article
79 of the Hydrocarbons Law or Article 16(1) of the Participation Contract on the
assumption that an assignment of rights occurred as a result of the Farmout
Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement.

The Tribunal now invites the parties to assume that an assignment of rights did
occur as a result of the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating
Agreement. On the basis of this assumption, the parties are requested to undertake
a detailed analysis of the effect of an assignment of rights made under a contract
governed by New York law (i.e. the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating
Agreement) in violation of a non-assignment clause set forth in a contract governed
by Ecuadorian law (i.e. Article 16(1) of the Participation Contract) and in violation
of Article 79 of the Hydrocarbons Law. The parties are further requested to
address both New York law and Ecuadorian law and to make submissions
accordingly, even if one or both parties may consider that, for any reason, New
York Jaw and/or Ecuadorian law may not be relevant to the determination of the
effect of the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement.

596. Pursuant to the Tribunal’s directions, the parties, on 3 November and 22
November 2011, provided the Tribunal with their respective simultaneous written

submissions to the above. These submissions are now summarized.

(a) The Respondent’s Additional Submissions

597. In its Additional Submissions, the Respondent expressed the view that, under both
Ecuadorian and New York law, its contention that the Claimants would only be entitled
to 60% of the claimed damages remains valid. The Respondent contends that the nullity
provided for in Article 79 of the HCL does not apply de pleno derecho (automatically).
Instead, Article 1699 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code requires a judicial declaration to
effect that absolute nullity. The Respondent submits that no one has requested that the

nullity provided for in Article 79 be declared and no judge has made such a declaration.

- 230 -

It provided the following translations of Articles 1698 and 1699, as well as citing a

number of cases which, in its view, confirm the principles contended:

1698: “... the nullity produced by the omission of any requirement or formality
which the law demands for certain acts and contract to be valid, in consideration to
their nature, and not to the quality or status of the persons who execute or agree to
them, are absolute nullities”

1699: “The absolute nullity can and shall be declared by the judge, even if nor
party so requests, when it manifestly arises from the act or contract; it may be
claimed by anyone having an interest to do so, excepting those who have
performed the act or contract knowing or under the duty to know the vice
invalidating it; it may also be claimed by the Public Ministry, for the benefit of
morals or of the law; and it cannot be cured by ratification of the parties, nor by the
passing of a period of time of less than fifteen years.”

598. The Respondent’s position is that the nullity provided for in Article 79 is merely a
defence that could be raised should Andes or AEC pursue claims against it. However, if
declared, it would operate retroactively to void the transfer ex tunc. The Respondent
notes that the Claimants, as the party who has performed the act or contract knowing, or
being under a duty to know, the vice invalidating it, cannot request that the nullity be

declared.

599. While addressing New York and Ecuadorian law, the Respondent states that
neither law is relevant to calculating the amount of damages (if any) due to the Claimants
which can only be determined under international law. The Respondent therefore
reiterated its submissions on the application of international law to the question of
damages. In particular, the Respondent stresses that no willing buyer would have paid a
price based on 100% of the fair market value of Block 15. Therefore, the Claimants’

interests in Block 15 amounted to 60% of its fair market value, and any losses thus also

- 231 -

only amount to 60% of the value. The Claimants’ cannot claim any losses suffered by

Andes or AEC.

600. The Respondent also reiterates its argument that compensating the Claimants on
the basis of 100% of fair market value would result in unjust enrichment, as the
Claimants had already been paid for a 40% interest in Block 15 and would consequently
be paid twice. In addition, the Respondent points to the international law principle that

would not allow the Claimants to take advantage of their own wrongdoing.

601. Turning to New York law, the Respondent maintains that there is no requirement
that would oblige a New York court to render the Claimants’ illegal assignment void.
The Respondent asserts that the New York courts would not ignore the governing law
clause and would therefore acknowledge that Ecuadorian law governs the Participation
Contract, Block 15 and operations in Ecuador. However, it also contends that under New
York law (i) an illegal assignment or contract is not automatically void, (ii) the Claimants
would be prevented from benefitting from their own wrongdoing (citing Southwestern
Shipping Corp. v. National City Bank 6 NY.2d 454), and (iii) contract invalidation is not
self-executing and therefore requires a judicial pronouncement which has not been
obtained. In addition, the Respondent considers that New York courts are reluctant to
invalidate contracts that reflect the free will of the parties on the basis of illegality under

foreign law and cites Peregrine Myanmar Ltd. v. Segal 89 F.3d 41 in support.

602. In response to the Claimants’ submissions on New York law, the Respondent

suggests that New York courts have interpreted “void” to mean “voidable,” citing

- 232 -

Lynbrook v. Cadoo 252 NY 308 and St. George Seaport Assoc. v. CSX Realty Inc. 1991

US Dist LEXIS 15463.

603. Finally, the Respondent notes that Article 79 of the HCL and Clause 16 of the
Participation Contract cannot be viewed in isolation and the Caducidad provisions must
be taken into account when considering the overall position. In relation to this, the
Respondent rejects the Claimants’ set-off proposal, stating that the options available to it

following an unauthorized assignment are to declare Caducidad or do nothing.

(b) The Claimants’ Additional Submissions

604. In their Additional Submissions, the Claimants assert that under both Ecuadorian
and New York law, an unauthorized assignment would be null and void or without effect

and, consequently, the Claimants continue to own 100% of the value of Block 15.

605. This assertion is based on the application of Article 79 of the HCL. The
Claimants draw on the expert evidence and the parties’ submissions to demonstrate
agreement that the consequence of Article 79 is that the transfer “does not exist” and has
no legal effect. The Claimants also point out that the Caducidad Decree itself states that,

under Articles 9 and 10 of Ecuador’s Civil Code, acts prohibited by law are null.

606. The Claimants contend that the nullity imposed by Article 79 is automatic and
mandatory. They reject the Respondent’s contention that a judicial declaration is
required to effect the nullity. The Claimants consider that Article 79 imposes an

“essential element” of the solemn formality of a public deed that is required to give “life”

- 233 -

to the agreement and that, without Ministerial authorization, the transfer would be

considered automatically “inexistent”.

607. In relation to New York law, the Claimants’ position is that a New York court
would apply Ecuadorian law under the governing law clause of the Farmout Agreement
and consequently find that no assignment had occurred. The Claimants also note that a
New York court would invalidate an assignment if it purports to assign rights that are
subject to a non-assignment clause (citing Al/husen v. Caristo Const. Corp. 303 NY 446
and a number of other cases as authority). As Clause 16.1 contained a non-assignment
provision, the Claimants assert that New York law would not recognize an assignment in

breach of this clause.

608. The Claimants point out that while any assignment may be invalid under New
York and Ecuadorian law, any other provisions in the Farmout and Operating
Agreements remain in effect between OEPC and AEC, citing both New York law

authorities and Article 8.05 of the Farmout Agreement in support of this position.

609. The Claimants also maintain that, regardless of the effectiveness of any
assignment, there is no contractual privity between AEC and Ecuador, meaning that AEC
could never recover its losses from Ecuador. All AEC has ever owned are contractual
rights against OEPC, and any action for the recovery of loss can only be brought against
OEPC. As such, the Claimants insist that they remained at all times the 100% owner of
the Participation Contract and responsible for all obligations thereunder. Consequently,
under international law, the Claimants consider that they are entitled to receive as

damages 100% of the contract value The Claimants also reiterate earlier submissions

-234-

regarding the effect of the Chorzow case on the effect of private contractual rights held
by third parties and rejected the Respondent’s position on the application of international

law.

610. Finally, the Claimants emphasize that awarding 100% of the damages claimed
would not result in a windfall for the Claimants, as they remain liable to account for 40%
of any compensation to Andes under the February 2006 Andes Letter Agreement. In
response to the Respondent’s argument that they had already been paid for a 40%
interest, the Claimants state that they have only received payment for oil delivered and
not for future oil. Rather, according to the Claimants, an award of less than 100% would
unjustly enrich the Respondent who seized 100% of the operations and would leave the

Claimants “woefully short” as they would still have to account to Andes.

611. The Claimants suggest that Article 79(2) means that Ecuador is entitled to set-off
an amount equal to a transfer fee, a second fee in lieu of renegotiation of the contract, and
a fine for non-compliance with a contractual and statutory requirement. The Claimants

contend that this amount would be between US$1,071,000 and US$11,771,000.

4 The Tribunal’s Analysis and Conclusion
(a) Introduction

612. The Tribunal has considered very carefully the extensive learned written and oral
submissions of both parties on this issue, including the Additional Submissions provided
in November 2011 and the representations made to the Tribunal at the hearing in London

on 12 April 2012.

- 235 -

613. The Tribunal will now deal with the central issue which, in its view, after the
parties’ arguments have been stripped of their complex legal ramifications, comes down
to the following: does the execution by OEPC of the Farmout Agreement with AEC on 1
October 2000 (together with the Joint Operating Agreement) allow Ecuador, following
caducidad, to compensate OEPC for 60% only of its interest in Block 15 or is it legally
obliged to compensate OEPC for 100% of its interest in Block 15, being precisely what it

has acquired upon the issuance of the Caducidad Decree?

614. In other words, the key issue to be addressed in this section is whether any
assignment to AEC of the 40% beneficial interest in Block 15 was actually effected by
the Farmout Agreements (i.e., the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating
Agreement) or whether any such purported assignment was void and therefore without
legal effect. If the former, OEPC would be entitled to recover 100% of the established
value of Block 15 under the relevant principles of international law; if the latter, it could

recover 60% only.””

615. Before considering this issue, it is apposite to repeat the governing law clause

(clause 7.02) of the Farmout Agreement:

This Agreement shall be governed by and construed, interpreted and applied in
accordance with the laws of the State of New York, United States of America,
excluding any choice of law rules or conflict of law principles which would refer
the matter to the laws of another jurisdiction, except to the extent that the laws of
Ecuador require application of the laws of Ecuador to the Participating

  

7” Under International law, the owner of a beneficial interest in contractual rights is able to bring its own
claim for compensation. Where the beneficial interest has been transferred, the nationality of the Claimant
will be tested by reference to the beneficial owner, rather than the nominal owner of the legal title (see
Saghi v. The Islamic Republic of Iran Case No. 298, 29-Iran.U.S.CT.R. §§18-26).

- 236 -

Agreements and Block 15 or other property situated in or operations or activities
conducted in Ecuador.

616. Consequently, in determining this issue, the Tribunal must consider whether a
valid assignment of an equitable interest took place under the Farmout Agreement by
reference to both New York law and the Ecuadorian law applicable to the Participation
Contract. Both parties acknowledge that this was the correct approach.” In this light, the
Tribunal must then consider the relevant contractual provisions, including the non-
assignment clause in Clause 16.1 of the Participation Contract. The Tribunal notes that,
as mentioned by the Respondent in its Additional Submissions, while the application of
New York and Ecuadorian law is relevant to whether the assignment was valid, domestic
law is not relevant to the subsequent determination of compensation which is governed

by international law, as set out below.

(b) — Ecuadorian Law

617. The Tribunal first considers whether the assignment was valid under Ecuadorian
law. In this connection, the Tribunal recalls the terms of Clause 16.1 of the Participation

Contract. It reads as follows:

“Transfer of this Participation Contract or assignment to third parties of the
rights under the Participation Contract, must _have the authorization of the
Corresponding Ministry, in accordance with existing laws and regulations,
especially the provisions contained in Art. 79 of the Hydrocarbons Law and
Executive Decrees No. 809, 2713 and 1179.” (Emphasis added)

78 See Claimants’ Brief, 3 November 2011, paras 15-17 and Respondent’s Brief, 3 November 2011,
paragraphs 55-57.

- 237 -

618. The laws of Ecuador require the application of the HCL to the Participation
Contract, including the application of Article 79 to any assignment of rights under that
Contract. Article 79 states:

Art. 79. The transfer of a contract or the assignment to third parties of rights

derived from a contract shall _be null and void _and_shall have no validity
whatsoever if there is no prior authorization from the Ministry of Energy and
Mines, without prejudice to the declaration of caducidad as provided for in this
Law .... (Emphasis added)

619. As clause 7.02 of the Farmout Agreement expressly includes the laws of Ecuador
to the extent that they require application “to the Participating Agreements and Block
15,” it is evident that Article 79 of the HCL must be taken into account when determining
whether a valid assignment occurred under the Farmout Agreement. The HCL
categorically states that any assignment of rights under the Participation Contract is null
and void and shall have no validity whatsoever unless authorized by the Ministry of
Energy and Mines. On its face, therefore, the assignment that purportedly occurred under
the Farmout Agreement was invalid. The assignment therefore had no legal effect and
OEPC retained 100% of both the legal and beneficial ownership of all rights in the
Participation Contract. As noted further below, Article 79 of the HCL serves to
invalidate the assignment, not the Farmout Agreement itself which remains a valid

contract as between OEPC and AEC.

619(bis). There are two further points to stress with regard to the application of Article
79. The first is that the invalidity of any purported assignment does not affect the right of
the State to declare caducidad. In other words, the breach identified in paragraphs 301 to

339 above still occurred, even if the assignment itself is deemed invalid. The second

- 238 -

point is that Article 79 of the HCL is concerned with the legal effect of the assignment
itself; it does not purport to invalidate either the Farmout Agreement under which OEPC
had an obligation to obtain any necessary government approvals for the assignment or the

Joint Operating Agreement.

620. In its Additional Submission of 3 November 2011, the Respondent stated that
under Articles 1698 and 1699 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code, the lack of ministerial
authorization for the assignment created an “absolute nullity” which requires a judicial
declaration in order to have effect. In other words, the assignment is not null and void
until an Ecuadorian judge has declared it so. At the hearing of 12 April 2012, the

Respondent reiterated this submission with much emphasis.”

621. The Claimants, in their Reply Submission of 22 November 2011, stated that the
assignment lacked an essential element required for “life” and was therefore “inexistent”
under the doctrine of “ineffectiveness” articulated by the Ecuadorian Supreme Court. As
such, no judicial declaration was required. At the hearing of 12 April 2012, the

Claimants reiterated their submission with no less emphasis.*°

622. Although not expressly stated in the Ecuadorian Civil Code, the Ecuadorian
Supreme Court has confirmed on a number of occasions that Ecuadorian law recognizes
automatic nullity or “inexistence”. It is common ground between the parties that when

the Ecuadorian Supreme Court has issued three consistent decisions on a precise point,

” Hearing Transcript (12 April 2012) in particular at pages 25-51.

®° Hearing Transcript (12 April 2012) in particular at pages 134-175.

- 239 -

the law on that point is considered settled and becomes binding on lower courts. It

becomes what, in some jurisdictions, is referred to as a “jurisprudence constante.”

623. The Tribunal, in the present case, has been referred to more than three decisions
of the Ecuadorian Supreme Court where the concept of automatic nullity or inexistence
was judicially recognized.*! Although the Respondent averred that the “‘inexistence”
category applied only to a limited body of real estate transactions requiring the execution
of a public deed, as discussed below, there is nothing in the general definitions set out in

the case law to support such a narrow application of “inexistence”.

624. Of the four cases presented to the Tribunal on this issue, the most extensive — and
in the Tribunal’s view, the most useful — discussion of the categories of ineffectiveness is
contained in the Supreme Court decision of 16 May 2001." This was the first and
seminal discussion of this doctrine in the cases provided to the Tribunal. This case is
particularly important as the Supreme Court sets out in its own words the difference
between the categories of inexistence, absolute nullity and relative nullity, and

summarises Ecuadorian doctrine on the matter. In this decision the Court states:

“This Chamber has examined on several occasions the question relating to the
ineffectiveness of a juridical act. The doctrine distinguishes three types of
ineffectiveness: 1. Maximum ineffectiveness or inexistence, when the act does

8 In fact, the Tribunal was referred to four decisions. The Tribunal notes that it was supplied by the parties
with English translations of these four decisions. There was never any dispute between the parties as to the
accuracy of these translations. See CA-662 (Drs. Galo Galarza Paz, Santiago Andrado Ubidia, and Ernesto
Alban Gémez), CA-660 (Drs. Galo Galarza Paz, Santiago Andrado Ubidia, and Ernesto Alban Gémez),
CA-658 (Drs. Bolivar Guerrero Armijos, Olmedo Bermeo Idrovo and Bolivar Vergara Acosta), CA-659
(Drs. Galo Galarza Paz, Santiago Andrado Ubidia, and Ernesto Alban Gomez).

  

 

© CA-662.

- 240 -

not have the essential requirements for it to have a life. The inexistent act cannot
be cured and does not need to be invalidated; 2. absolute nullity, when the act is
capable of producing some effects in certain special conditions. There is an
appearance of act until its nullity is declared. Absolute nullity cannot be cured
but must be invalidated, i.e., declared; 3. relative nullity, which implies that the
act is said to be valid and is only invalidated as of the day on which it is voided.
The relatively void act can be validated.”**

625. The question before this Tribunal is whether the assignment falls within the first
category (inexistence) or the second category (absolute nullity). As Article 79 of the
HCL is clear that there is no possibility of retrospective cure, the third category of

“relative nullity” cannot apply, nor did either party suggest otherwise.

626. It is the Tribunal’s view that the intended assignment that occurred under the
Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement undoubtedly meets the criteria
expressed in the above quotations for “inexistence”. Article 79 of the HCL is key - it
stipulates that ministerial authorization is an essential element to give life to any
assignment of rights in the Participation Contract — without this authorization, an
assignment has “no validity whatsoever’. Indeed, counsel for the Respondent admitted
that this authorization was an “essential requirement” during the 12 April 2012 hearing,
although in the Respondent’s submission, it was not one that constituted inexistence.™
Where the law itself stipulates that an act has “no validity whatsoever” there is no need
on its face for the assignment to be declared invalid by a judge, because it could never be

valid in the first place — it lacked an essential element required for life. Therefore, both

§3 Supreme Court of Ecuador, 16 May 2001 at page 1528. CA-662 (Claimants’ translation of RLA-348).
(Emphasis a

 

Hearing Transcript (12 April 2012), page 32 line 22 to page 33 line 2.

-241 -

elements of “ineffectiveness” identified by the Supreme Court have been satisfied: the
attempted assignment (1) lacked an essential element required to give it life; and (2) as

noted above, this defect cannot be cured.

627. In the same 16 May 2001 decision, the Supreme Court held that inexistence
applied because the contract was not executed using the required form (a public deed). In
supporting its decision the Court quoted Columbian scholars who have stated that
required elements for life in the context of contracts are “expressed will, the consent, an
object, and the solemn form.”*° Although the Respondent attempted to argue that the
Farmout Agreements did not fall within any of these criteria, it failed to appreciate that it
is not the contracts — the Farmout Agreements or the Joint Operating Agreement — that
are at issue here. The issue is the validity of the assignment sought to be accomplished
by these Agreements. Therefore applying a contractual analysis is inappropriate.
Instead, this Tribunal must consider the essential elements for the assignment to have life

in the present circumstances.

628. As noted above, Article 79 of the HCL is categorical in expressing, not only the
illegal act, but also the consequence of the illegality. Significantly, a similar provision
(Article 1745 of the Civil Code) was being applied by the Supreme Court in the above
case (and in others discussed below). Article 1745 provides that, where the law requires
a public deed, contracts signed in another form “will be deemed as non-executed or

signed”. Thus, the consequence of the illegality is specified. The result of the Court’s

§5 Supreme Court of Ecuador, 16 May 2001 at page 1529. CA-662 (Claimants’ translation of RLA-348).

- 242 -

decision that such contracts are “inexistent” is that Article 1745 is given effect without
the need for a judicial declaration. In other words, where the law itself clearly states that
the contract is deemed to be unexecuted, and therefore has no life, there is no requirement
for judicial confirmation. Similarly, under Article 79, the law itself has deemed that an
unauthorised assignment has no validity whatsoever, and therefore has no life. The
logical consequence of this provision is that no further action is required to invalidate an

unauthorised assignment.

629. This should be the end of the analysis. However, for completeness, the Tribunal
notes that it also does not accept the Respondent’s characterisation of “absolute nullity”
as meaning that the assignment is essentially effective (or valid) until declared invalid by
a judge. Not only would such a finding leave this Tribunal in direct contravention of
Article 79 of the HCL, it is clear from the case law presented to the Tribunal that an
action subject to absolute nullity cannot produce a “valid” act. As noted above, the 16
May 2001 decision states that “there is an appearance of act until nullity is declared.”*°
In other words, no actual act has occurred — only the appearance of an act. This is
consistent with the notion that an absolute nullity cannot be cured and the requirement in
Art 1699 of the Civil Code that a judge “shall” declare the nullity (i.e., there is no

discretion).

86 Supreme Court of Ecuador, 16 May 2001 at page 1528. CA-662 (Claimants’ Translation RLA-348).

-243 -

630. Ina further decision of the Ecuadorian Supreme Court dated 29 August 2001,°”

the Court (being comprised of the same three judges that decided the 16 May 2001 case)
endorsed its definition of inexistence provided in the above decision, noting (as it did in
the 16 May 2001 decision) that inexistence occurs where “the act lacks the essential
requirements in order for it to have life and, therefore, cannot be validated, nor does it

need to be invalidated.”** The language used is identical to the 16 May 2001 decision.

631. In the 29 August 2001 case, the parties had agreed to terminate a “promise to
purchase” agreement, but the Court held that the promise to purchase agreement had not
been properly executed as was therefore “‘inexistent.” As such, the parties were unable to
terminate it. In relation to absolute nullity, the Court quoted one of its earlier decisions,

stating that:

“In the same way, if a Judge accepts the validity of a mutual dissent...
pertaining to a null contract, he would be providing effectiveness to that
contract, since that is why parties could avail themselves of the rights
produced by it if it were valid, but by acting in this way the judge would
have violated section 10 of the Civil Code, which says: “In no case may the
Judge declare valid an act that the law decrees to be null and void.” It
should be noted, in order to avoid confusion, that this is different from the
situation of contracts that are possibly and relatively null ... Likewise, if a
legal act suffers from absolute nullity, even though it enjoys the b1

of validity with regard to third parties while there is no enforceable
judgment declaring its nullity, however the act lacks its structural elements.
thereby the legal effects it was intended to produce had it been signed in a

valid manner, are not produced”.

*” CA-660.
§§ Supreme Court of Ecuador, 29 August 2001 at page 22. CA-660. (Emphasis added)

* Supreme Court of Ecuador, 29 August 2001 at page 23. CA-660. (Emphasis added)

- 244 -

The last underlined passage is dispositive of the issue in this case if absolute nullity were
to apply.

632. This decision makes it clear that a null act produces no legal effects, even before a
judicial declaration is obtained. As such, an agreement to assign without authorisation
produces no actual assignment and a judicial declaration does not reverse the assignment
— a valid assignment never occurred. There is only an “appearance of an act” until a
judicial declaration is issued. This may lead to a “semblance of validity with regard to
third parties”. These statements reinforce the conclusion that no actual assignment
occurred and that OEPC remained the owner of 100% of all rights in the Participation
Contract, regardless of its agreement to assign a 40% beneficial interested to AEC.
Hence, pursuant to Article 79 of the HCL, an unauthorised assignment had “no validity

whatsoever”, even under the absolute nullity doctrine.

633. Article 10 of the Civil Code quoted in the above passage from the 29 August 2001
case is notable: “In no case may the Judge declare valid an act that the law decrees to be
null and void.” If this Tribunal were to award only 60% compensation as requested by
the Respondent, it would be acting in direct contravention of this Article by treating as
valid an act that the law decrees to be null and void. The very wording of Article 10
demonstrates that the Ecuadorian authorities specifically contemplated situations like the

present case — where the law itself (not a judge) decrees something to be null and void.

634. In summary, it is clear from the case law that, regardless of whether the
assignment falls into the category of “inexistent” or whether it falls into the category of

“absolute nullity”, no valid assignment occurred and OEPC remained the 100% owner of

- 245 -

all rights in the Participation Contract. This conclusion is consistent with the application

of the HCL.

635. The parties also provided the Tribunal with the Supreme Court decisions of 7
June 2001 and 20 February 2002,” both of which affirm but discuss only briefly the
categories of “inexistence” and “absolute nullity”, doubtless because the Court had firmly
established the principles relating to inexistence in its decision of 16 May 2001. Both
cases relate to real estate contracts and therefore focus on the formal requirements for
executing such contracts. For the avoidance of doubt, as noted above, the Tribunal
reiterates that in the present case it is the validity of the assignment that is under scrutiny,
and not the validity of the Farmout Agreement or the Joint Operating Agreement. The
Tribunal’s findings on the validity of the assignment do not affect other obligations that
might arise between the parties to the Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating
Agreement (such parties being different to those in the present arbitration), nor does it
affect the ability of AEC to seek damages from OEPC for a failure to comply with the
terms of those Agreements, such as obtaining necessary government consent for the

assignment. °

636. It is important to stress that the Tribunal’s analysis of the position under
Ecuadorian law is consistent with the position of both parties prior to the Additional

Submissions. It is clear to the Tribunal that, prior to the Additional Submissions, not

°° CA-658 and CA-659.

°" As events have unfolded, AEC has no need to pursue this option in virtue of the agreement it reached
with OEPC which is referred to in paragraph 655 below.

- 246 -

only the Claimants” but also the Respondent and all of its legal experts on Ecuadorian
law considered that any unauthorized assignment would have no legal effect whatsoever
(i.e., would be automatically void). Indeed, in its closing oral submissions at the March
2009 hearing, counsel for the Respondent contended that “[Article 79] says that... the
assignment to third parties of rights derived from a contract shall be null and void, and
shall have no validity whatsoever if there is no prior authorisation from the Ministry. If
this ... unauthorized transfer is null and void, that means that it does not exist. It does

not produce legal effects.”

637. On the following day, the Respondent again repeated that “ ... if there is no

authorization, then there is no transfer et

confirming precisely what it had affirmed in
its Reply Memorial on Liability that “ ... such a transfer will simply be deemed null and
void as_a matter of Ecuadorian law.” (Emphasis added) Attempts during the 12 April
2012 hearing by the Respondent’s counsel to explain these statements as referring to

retrospective nullity (that is, the transfer would be null retrospectively if so declared by a

judge) were wholly unpersuasive.”°

* See, inter alia, Professor Hernan Pérez Loose, Fifth Expert Report, at page 18, paragraph 34.

°S Hearing Transcript (20 March 2009) at pages 200 and 201. See also at pages 204 and 205.

 

* Hearing Transcript (21 March 2009) at page 37.
°5 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Liability and Counterclaim (16 June 2008) at page 66, footnote 260.

°© Hearing Transcript (12 April 2012) at pages 140-145 and 203.

-247 -

638. Moreover, the Respondent’s main legal experts on Ecuadorian law, at the earlier
stages of this arbitration, also opined that any unauthorized assignment would be

automatically void and have no legal effect whatsoever.

639. Professor Aguilar, in one of his reports, stated categorically that “for the
assignment to have legal effect, the Hydrocarbon law establishes an additional
requirement to those set forth in the civil legislation: the ministerial authorization.”°” In
the same report, he also stated that “the Hydrocarbon Law establishes that absent the
ministerial authorization, the rights assignment contract lacks value, regardless of
whether the title has been delivered or not” and that the “contract ... does not produce

998

effects due to a lack of authorization from the relevant Ministry. During his oral

evidence, he testified that the “transfer of rights is null, undoubtedly.”

640. Professor Merlo, another one of the Respondent’s expert on Ecuadorian law, was
no less categorical on this issue when he gave evidence before the Tribunal. Answering
in Spanish, his native tongue, he stated “Y mds atin el articulo 79 dice que no tiene

ningun valor, se declara nulo, de pleno derecho.”' (Emphasis added)

°7 Fourth Aguilar Expert Report (English translation) (19 September 2008) at page 10, paragraph 31.
°8 Thid, at p. 10, paragraphs 32 and 33.
°° Hearing Transcript (19 December 2008) at page 1586.

1 Thid (Spanish) at page 1586 (Translation: “Particularly Article 79 says that it has no value. It is declared
null and void as a matter of law,” at page 1513 of the English Hearing Transcript (19 December 2008).

 

- 248 -

641. The Tribunal further notes that, in its Submission of 3 November 2011, the

Respondent translates “automatic” as “de pleno derecho”.\"!

642. The Tribunal also notes, as stressed by the Claimants at the 12 April 2012
hearing, that most of these opinions of the Respondent and its experts “were not taken in
the heat of argument, extemporaneously or by way of improvisation ...” 102 While this in
no way rises to the level of an estoppel, it does, to a certain extent, undermine the
credibility of the position which Ecuador later adopted on this crucial issue when the
matter was the subject of further attention by the Tribunal. That final position of the
Respondent was summarized succinctly in its written submissions of 3 November 2011
as follows: “Ecuadorian law has not adopted the notion of “inexistence” of acts or

contracts.”!°

643. It is clear to the Tribunal that the Respondent’s position prior to November 2011
is flatly inconsistent with the Respondent’s later argument that a judicial declaration is
required to nullify the unauthorized assignment. The Tribunal does not consider that this
later argument is correct. Its earlier position — that the assignment is automatically
invalid as a matter of Ecuadorian law — is consistent with the both the statutory evidence
and the case law presented to the Tribunal. Article 79 of the HCL is clear that any

unauthorized assignment is null and void and shall have no validity whatsoever.

tor dent’s 3 ber 2011 Submission, at page 22, h 5.2
'© Hearing Transcript (12 April 2012) at page 141.

1 Respondent's Brief of 3 November 2011 at page 24, paragraph 79.

- 249 -

644. Moreover, at a general level, it seems that Ecuadorian law would not in any case
recognise that an assignment has occurred unless relevant conditions precedent (such as
required consents) had been fulfilled. In this regard, the Tribunal recalls the evidence of

the Claimants’ expert on Ecuadorian law, Dr Hernan Pérez Loose, who opined:

The transfer or assignment of legal title was necessarily and inexorably subject to
fulfilment of a condition precedent [i.e. authorisation from the Ministry] ... Under
Ecuadorian law, while the condition precedent is pending, the right affected by said
type is not even given legal effect, since the obligee only has a legitimate
expectation of acquiring it, obviously if the condition is confirmed.'“

( New York Law

645. As noted above, by virtue of the governing law clause of the Farmout Agreement,
and as acknowledged by the parties, New York law is also relevant to the interpretation
of the Farmout Agreement and therefore as to whether a valid assignment took place.
The Tribunal considers that the application of New York law results in exactly the same
conclusion as the application of Ecuadorian law. First, it is clear that New York law does
not recognize an assignment in breach of a valid non-assignment clause.'> As Clause
16.1 of the Participation Contract contains a non-assignment clause clearly stating that
any unauthorized assignment is null and void, New York law would not recognize any

purported assignment where such consent had not been obtained.

646. Secondly, where the governing law of the assignment is a foreign law, New York

courts (like other Anglo-American jurisdictions) apply the governing law of the contract

1 Prof. Hernan Pérez Loose, Fifth Expert Report, at page 18, paragraph 34.

105 Allhusen v. Caristo Const. Corp. 303 NY 446, 103 N.E. 2d 891 (N.Y. Ct. App. 1952)

- 250 -

containing the non-assignment clause when interpreting that clause. As Clause 7.02 of
the Farmout Agreement states that mandatory Ecuadorian laws governing the
Participation Contract apply, the New York courts would give effect to such laws,
including the HCL, when considering the validity of the assignment. The Tribunal does
not accept the Respondent’s argument that the New York courts are reluctant to
invalidate contracts on the basis of illegality under foreign law. The only case cited by
the Respondent in support of this argument! concerned a share transfer (not an
assignment of rights) and the Court simply stated that the relevant government entity was
entitled to bring a case in the courts of Myanmar or any other court around the world, if it
considered that the said share transfer had infringed the Joint Venture Agreement to
which it was a party. The New York Court in that case did not consider that any such
dispute needed to be decided as part of the case before it. This case provides no support

for the sweeping generalization of the Respondent.

647. New York courts commonly apply foreign laws where the relevant contractual
provision so provides,'”’ and there is no reason to suggest that they would fail to do so in
relation to the assignment sought to be effected by the Farmout Agreement which

requires the application of Article 79 of the HCL.

15 Peregrine Myanmar Ltd. v. Segal 89 F.3d 41 (2d. Cir. 1996).

'°7 As noted by the Claimants at footnote 8 of their Reply Brief, 22 November 2011, Korea Life Ins. Co. v.
Morgan Guar. Trust Co. of N.Y., 269 F.Supp.2d 424, 441 (S.D. N.Y. 2003) (RLA-338) and JPMorgan
Chase Bank, N.A. v. Controladora Comercial Mexicana S.A.B. DE C.V., 920 N.Y.S.2d 241 (N.Y. Sup. Ct.
2010) (RLA-340) are examples of the New York courts applying foreign law.

- 251 -

648. The Tribunal also rejects the Respondent’s contention that the New York courts
have interpreted the phrase “null and void” as meaning “voidable at the direction of the

protected party.”!°8

In Lynbrook v. Cadoo, cited by the Respondent in support of its
contention, the Court held that “[t]he word ‘void’ is sometimes used in statutes in the
sense of ‘voidable’”!” It by no means held that “void” is always to be interpreted as
“voidable.” | Moreover, this case concerned the application of “village law” in
determining the validity of a vote on a town planning matter, and had absolutely nothing
to do with an assignment of rights. Similarly, St. George Seaport Assoc. v. CSX Realty
Inc.""° (also cited by the Respondent) did not establish that void is interpreted by the New
York courts to mean voidable with respect to the legality of assignments. The Court’s
decision in that case concerned the interpretation of a particular statutory provision as it
related to a property transaction and must be considered specific to that set of

circumstances.

(d) Findings
649. As the Tribunal found earlier in this Award, the purported assignment on 1
October 2000 by OEPC to AEC by operation of the Farmout Agreement and the Joint

Operating Agreement of rights derived under the Participation Contract was never

18 Ecuador's Reply to Claimants’ Brief in Response to Tribunal’s Request of 6 October 2011, 22
November 2011, paragraph 19.

109 952 NY 308, 312 (NY 1929). (Emphasis added)

"1991 US Dist LEXIS 15463.

- 252 -

authorized by the Ecuadorian Ministry of Energy and Mines and was thus in breach of

Article 74.11 of the HCL.

650. It follows that, pursuant to New York and Ecuadorian law, the purported
assignment by OEPC to AEC of rights under the Participation Contract pursuant to the
Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement is null and void and has no

" and the Tribunal so finds. Under the doctrine of inexistence and

validity whatsoever'!
under New York law, there is no requirement that the Court must first declare the
assignment to be invalid. Indeed, even under the doctrine of absolute nullity, any
purported assignment is not considered “valid” prior to a declaration of nullity — there is
only the “appearance” of an act. As such, the purported assignment of rights under the
Farmout Agreement and the Joint Operating Agreement was not valid and produced no
legal effect. It must therefore be disregarded by the Tribunal for purposes of determining
the compensation to which the Claimants are entitled.!!? Consequently, the Tribunal

finds that OEPC continued to own, as of the date of the Caducidad Decree, 100% of the

rights under the Participation Contract.

651. The Tribunal accordingly concludes that the Respondent is obliged to compensate
the Claimants for 100% of their interest in Block 15 which it acquired upon the issuance

of the Caducidad Decree.

"! See Article 79 of the HCL.

'? There can be no doubt that the purported assignment of rights by OEPC to AEC is also in breach of
Article 74.11 of the HCL.

- 253 -

652. For the avoidance of doubt, there is no inconsistency between the Tribunal’s
earlier conclusion that OEPC acted in breach of the HCL and Clause 16.1 of the
Participation Contract in purporting to assign rights in Block 15 without authorization
and its conclusion here that the assignment was invalid. Article 79 of the HCL itself
makes it clear that the fact that an unauthorized assignment has no validity does not
negate the breach caused by a purported assignment: “... shall have no validity
whatsoever ... without prejudice to the declaration of caducidad as provided for in this
Law.” Moreover, the fact that AEC and OEPC acted as though the assignment had taken

place prior to the declaration of caducidad does not somehow cause an invalid assignment

to become valid.

653. The conclusions of the Tribunal in this section are sound under the principles of
public international law to be applied when determining damages. Both parties referred,
in particular, to unjust enrichment and to those principles contained in the Chorzow

Factory case.

654. In relation to unjust enrichment, there was produced to the Tribunal the letter
agreement of February 22, 2006 between OEPC and Andes whereby OEPC is obliged to
compensate Andes to the level of 40% of any compensation it receives from action taken

against Ecuador regarding the termination of the Participation Contract.''? Even without

"3 ©.425. Clause 2(g) of the Agreement states:
“If Occidental receives any monetary award from the Government of Ecuador as a result of

the Government's actions to enforce caducity and terminate Occidental’s contract with
respect to Block 15, Occidental agrees that the Company is entitled to a 40% share in the net

-254-

this letter agreement, the Tribunal notes that the invalidity of the assignment under New
York and Ecuadorian law does not mean that AEC (or Andes) may not have recourse
against OEPC under the Farmout Agreement. As mentioned earlier, the unauthorised
assignment does not invalidate the Farmout Agreement as between the assignor, OEPC
and the assignee, AEC nor is the legal position affected by the fact that the assignor and
the assignee actually implemented inter se parts of the legally invalid and unauthorised
assignment. OEPC promised to deliver certain rights to AEC under the Farmout
Agreement, but due to its failure to secure authorisation from the Ministry it was in
breach of that promise. This breach of contract may form the basis of a claim by AEC
(or Andes) against OEPC. These factors weigh heavily against any unjust enrichment
arguments raised in respect to OEPC’s entitlement to receive compensation for 100% of

the interests in the Participation Contract.

655. In this respect, by far the greater risk of unjust enrichment lies at the door of
Ecuador. Ecuador would be unjustly enriched if only obliged to compensate for 60% of a
100% unlawful taking. Ecuador stated in its Additional Submissions that a declaration of
nullity could be sought by it if AEC or Andes attempted to bring an action against

Ecuador in relation to its purported 40% beneficial interest,!'*

effectively ensuring that
Ecuador would only ever pay a maximum of 60% compensation for a 100% unlawful

taking.

 

amount received, after all costs and expenses of the Caducity Proceedings have been
reimbursed or paid (in calculating such amount there shall be no double counting).”

"4 Respondent's Brief, 3 November 2011, paragraph 27.

- 255 -

656. As a matter of international law, any liability that OEPC might have to AEC or
Andes under various other agreements (including the Farmout Agreement) does not
affect the Claimants’ right to receive compensation from Ecuador. Ecuador cannot
discount OEPC’s claim by reference to liabilities that may be owed to third parties such
as AEC. This principle is clearly recognised in the Chorzow Factory dictum at page 26 to

which both parties referred and which the Tribunal will quote again:''°

This principle ... has the effect, on the one hand, of excluding from the damage
to be estimated, injury resulting for third parties from the unlawful act and, on
the other hand, of not excluding from the damage the amount of debts and other
obligations for which the injured party is responsible. The damage suffered by
the Oberschlesische in respect of the Chorzow undertaking is therefore
equivalent to the total value—but to that total only—of the property, rights and
interests of this Company in that undertaking, without deducting liabilities.”
(Emphasis added)

657. Similarly, the Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s suggestion that the
principle nemo auditor propriam turpitudinem allegans (preventing a party from taking

® The nemo auditur

advantage of its own wrongdoing) is applicable to this issue.!!
principle cannot turn an invalid assignment into a valid one. The question addressed in
this section is whether AEC actually acquired ownership of any rights in the Participation
Contract as a matter of law (both Ecuadorian and New York) and the nemo auditor

principle is not relevant to this issue. The separate question of the quantification of

damages and, in particular, any consideration of the Claimants’ contribution to the

"5 This principle was confirmed in Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. The Argentine

Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3), Award of May 22, 2007 (CA-8).

"6 See Ecuador’s Brief on the effect of Claimants’ unauthorized, illegal assignment of rights arising out of
the Participation Contract, 3 November 2011, paragraphs 51-55.

- 256 -

damages it suffered as a result of the Respondent’s breach are examined elsewhere in this

Award.

658. Before closing its conclusions on this issue, the Tribunal notes that the
Respondent has objected that the Claimants did not have the standing to claim damages
beyond their “remaining” 60% interest in Block 15, that the Claimants’ interest amounts
to 60% of the value of Block 15 and that no willing buyer would pay a price based on
100% of the value for Block 15. In view of the Tribunal’s conclusion in relation to the
invalidity of the assignment as set out above, this objection of the Respondent has
become moot. Also moot is the Respondent’s contention that there is a risk of double
jeopardy as AEC has no standing to sue Ecuador directly for compensation given that it

holds no rights — beneficial or otherwise — in the Participation Contract.

F. The Fault of the Claimants Prior to the Caducidad Decree
L The Respondent’s Position

659. The Respondent posits that any recovery by the Claimants should be reduced in
order to reflect the Claimants’ reckless conduct which violated the laws of Ecuador and
which, it maintains, provoked the Respondent’s decision to declare caducidad, thus

terminating the Participation Contract and resulting in the Claimants’ alleged losses.

660. The Respondent submits that any damages awarded to the Claimants should be

“substantially reduced” on account of the Claimants’ contributory fault.

- 257 -

2 The Claimants’ Position

661. Assuming a finding that they were negligent in failing to obtain prior ministerial
authorization, the Claimants argue that the damages they seek should not be reduced
because any such negligence did not cause their losses. This, they aver, is an issue of
causality. The Claimants reiterate that the Respondent’s totally disproportionate action
(i.e. caducidad) was in breach of the Treaty and international law and must be considered

as the sole and exclusive cause of their resulting losses.

3. The Tribunal’s Analysis
662. As the Tribunal commences its analysis of this last threshold question, it is
important to recall that, earlier in the present Award, the Tribunal has already found the

following:

e by virtue of the Farmout Agreement, executed on 1 October 2000, OEPC purported

to transfer rights under the Participation Contract to AEC;

e this transfer of rights required prior ministerial authorization which was neither

requested nor obtained by OEPC;

e the Claimants failed to give a copy of the Farmout Agreement to the Respondent in

the fall of 2000;

e it was only in the spring of 2004 that the true nature of the Farmout Agreement
became known to Ecuador when unsigned but true copies of the Farmout
Agreement and of the Joint Operating Agreement, also executed on 1 October 2000,

were provided to the audit firm of Moores Rowland who had been retained by the

- 258 -

DNH to conduct an audit of OEPC; these two Agreements were provided by

Moores Rowland to the Respondent in July 2004;

failure by OEPC to disclose the true nature of the Farmout Agreement to Ecuador
and to obtain ministerial authorization in 2000 was a “grave mistake”; OEPC, while

not acting in bad faith, was negligent;

OEPC thus breached Clause 16.1 of the Participation Contract and was guilty of an
actionable violation of Article 74.11 of the HCL which, as one option, allowed the

Minister to declare the caducidad of the Participation Contract;

the Caducidad Decree, issued, according to its terms, because of the breach of
Clause 16.1 of the Participation Contract and the violation by OEPC of Article 74
of the HCL, was a disproportionate sanction by the Respondent in the particular

circumstances of this case; and

the Caducidad Decree was issued in breach of Ecuadorian law, and in violation of

the Treaty and customary international law.

The Tribunal now has to determine whether the damages caused to the Claimants

by the wrongful act of the Respondent should be reduced because, as the Respondent

argues, “the Claimants’ own wrongful conduct directly contributed to caducidad.”

In support of its submission, the Respondent invokes the legal principle of

“contributory negligence” on the part of the Claimants.

- 259 -

665.

The Tribunal’s analysis commences with a reference to Article 39

of the

International Law Commission’s Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally

Wrongful Acts which is invoked by both parties. It provides:

666.

Article 39. Contribution to the injury
In the determination of reparation, account shall be taken of the contribution to the

injury by willful or negligent action or omission of the injured State or any person
or entity in relation to whom reparation is sought. (Emphasis added)

Extracts in the International Law Commission’s Commentary to Article

pertinent, including the following:

667.

Article 39 deals with the situation where damage has been caused by an
internationally wrongful act of a State, which is accordingly responsible for the
damage in accordance with Articles 1 and 28, but where the injured State, or the
individual victim of the breach, has materially contributed to the damage by some
willful or negligent act or omission. (Emphasis added)

39 are

The Tribunal also refers to Article 31 of the International Law Commission’s

Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, which states:

668.

Article 31. Reparation

1. The responsible State is under an obligation to make full reparation for the injury
caused by the internationally wrongful act.

2. Injury includes any damage, whether material or moral, caused by the
internationally wrongful act of a State.

The following extract from the International Law Commission’s Commentary to

Article 31 is also noted:

It is true that cases can occur where an identifiable element of injury can properly
be allocated to one of several concurrently operating causes alone. But unless
some part of the injury can be shown to be severable in causal terms from that
attributed to the responsible State, the latter is held responsible for all the
consequences, not being too remote, of its wrongful conduct. (Emphasis added)

- 260 -

669. The Tribunal must therefore decide, on the basis of the totality of the evidence
before it, whether there is a causal link between the negligent failure of OEPC in October
2000 to disclose the true nature of the Farmout Agreement to Ecuador and to request and
obtain prior ministerial authorization from the Minister for the transfer of certain rights in
the Participation Contract to AEC and the declaration of caducidad by the Respondent on

15 May 2006 and, through the latter, with the damages resulting from caducidad.

670. The Tribunal notes that it is not any contribution by the injured party to the
damage which it has suffered which will trigger a finding of contributory negligence.
The contribution must be material and significant.!!7 In this regard, the Tribunal has a

wide margin of discretion in apportioning fault.''*

671. The Tribunal recalls the terms of Clauses 21.1.1 and 21.1.2 of the Participation
Contract, which state that “this Participation Contract shall terminate”, inter alia:
21.1.1 By a declaration of forfeiture [caducidad] issued by the Corresponding
Ministry for the causes and following the procedure established in Articles seventy

four (74), seventy five (75) and seventy six (76) of the Hydrocarbons Law, insofar
as applicable.

21.1.2 Due to a transfer of rights and obligations of the Participation Contract
without prior authorization from the Corresponding Ministry.

47 MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7), Decision
on Annulment of 21 March 2007 at paragraph 101.

"8 Ibid.

- 261 -

672. OEPC thus agreed to a contractual framework with Ecuador that explicitly
authorized caducidad upon a violation of Article 74.11 of the HCL. By agreeing to
Clauses 21.1.1 and 21.1.2 in the Participation Contract and then failing imprudently and
negligently to obtain ministerial authorization as required, OEPC exposed itself to a

serious risk that caducidad could be declared.

673. Paraphrasing the words of Article 39 of the International Law Commission’s
Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts and _ its
commentary, the Tribunal must determine whether this unlawful act of OEPC contributed
to its injury in a material and significant way, or was it a minor contributory factor which,
based on subsequent events such as the VAT Award, cannot be considered, legally, as a

link in the causative chain.

674. Both parties, in support of their respective positions, have quoted extensively to
extracts of the 1974 seminal thesis of Professor Brigitte Stern, a member of this Tribunal,
entitled “Le préjudice dans la théorie de la responsabilité internationale.” The Tribunal
agrees that Professor Stern’s thesis, particularly Chapter II entitled “Application nuancée
des régles normales de la causalité,” is very instructive to and informs its decision on this

issue.

- 262 -

675. In a section of this chapter of her thesis entitled “Acte de la victime justifiant
partiellement V'acte de l’Etat,” Professor Stern refers to the cases of Delagoa Bay

Railway'" and Lillie Kling v. Mexico'” as authorities for the following proposition:

Il y a enfin un certain nombre de circonstances dans lesquelles l’acte de la victime
ne justifie que partiellement I’acte de I’Etat et ot il faut donc considérer qu’aussi
bien l’un que I’autre sont intervenus de fagon complémentaire dans la production
du dommage.

[Translation: Finally, there are a certain number of circumstances in which the act
of the victim only partially justifies the State action, and in which as a result it must
be concluded that both the former and the latter operated in a complementary
fashion to produce the damage.]

676. The words of the Tribunal in Delagoa Bay Railway are particularly pertinent to

the present case:

Toutes ces circonstances qui peuvent étre alléguées a la charge de la compagnie
concessionnaire et 4 la décharge du gouvernement portugais atténuent la

responsabilité de ce dernier et justifient_[...] une réduction de la réparation 4
121
allouer.

[Translation: All these circumstances that can be put forward against the
concessionaire and to the credit of the Portuguese government lessen the

responsibility of the latter and justify [...] a reduction in the damages to be
granted.] (Emphasis added)

677. In Lillie Kling, the presiding commissioner opined that “it is impossible not to

consider that the action of the [Mexican] soldiers [the shooting and killing of an

"° Delagoa Bay Railway Arbitration (Award of 29 March 1900), reprinted in H. Lafontaine, Pasicrisie
Internationale (1902) 397.

120 Tillie S. Kling (U.S.A.) v. The United Mexican States (Award of 8 October 1930), reprinted in Reports
on International Arbitral Awards (2006), Volume IV, 575.

"2 Delagoa Bay Railway Arbitration (Award of 29 March 1900), H. Lafontaine, Pasicrisie Internationale
(1902) at page 402.

- 263 -

American] was caused by the shots fired in the air [...] in a very imprudent manner” by
some of the victim’s companions. This “imprudence” was thus taken into

consideration by the Commission to reduce the amount of the indemnity.

678. The Tribunal agrees that an award of damages may be reduced if the claiming
party also committed a fault which contributed to the prejudice it suffered and for which
the trier of facts, in the exercise of its discretion, considers the claiming party should bear

some responsibility.'?*

679. In the present case, as noted earlier, OEPC had agreed in the Participation
Contract that, if it failed to obtain prior ministerial authorization to transfer rights under
the Participation Contract to AEC, it ran the risk that the Respondent would declare the
caducity of the Participation Contract. Since it did not seek nor obtain the required
authorization, the Tribunal has found that it acted negligently and committed an unlawful
act. The Claimants’ fault prevented the Respondent from exercising, in a formal way, its
sovereign right to vet and approve AEC as the transferee of those rights and, even more
importantly on the facts of the present case, to vet any other unknown investor to which

AEC could eventually transfer its rights.

'22 Tillie S. Kling (U.S.A.) v. The United Mexican States (Award of 8 October 1930), reprinted in Reports
on International Arbitral Awards (2006), Volume IV, at page 575.

'23 This is also the basis of the tribunal's ruling in MTD Equ
25 May 2004 at paragraphs 242 and 243 that “the Claimants
that case, that “part” was quantified as 50% of the damages.

 

y Sdn Bhd. v. The Republic of Chile, Award of
hould bear part of the damages suffered.” In

      

- 264 -

680. In the view of the Tribunal, the Claimants should pay a price for having
committed an unlawful act which contributed in a material way to the prejudice which

they subsequently suffered when the Caducidad Decree was issued.

681. In considering the extent of the contribution of the Claimants’ negligence to their
injury, the Tribunal notes that the issuance of the Caducidad Decree which ensued, as the
Tribunal has found, was a disproportionate sanction and a measure tantamount to
expropriation of the Claimants’ substantial investment in Ecuador. The totality of the
Claimants’ damages were caused by Caducidad. The Tribunal must now determine to
what extent and in what proportion the Claimants’ unlawful act in 2000 contributed to

lessen the responsibility of the Respondent.

682. The Tribunal recalls that, in the fall of 2000, AEC was an entity already present
and active in Ecuador and thus well known to the Respondent and, in particular, to

PetroEcuador.

683. If OEPC had sought the Minister’s consent in October 2000, in all likelihood it
would have obtained it and it is probable that the Respondent would not have declared
“Caducidad” in 2006. In other words, without the violation of the law by OEPC,
Caducidad may not have happened. In this connection, the Tribunal recalls that the
violation of the law by OEPC was invoked by Ecuador as the principal legal basis for the

Decree.

684. On the other hand, as noted earlier in the present Award, the publication of the

VAT Award in favour of the Claimants and the social unrest directed against OEPC

- 265 -

which ensued were also causes which, in the view of the Tribunal, contributed in a

material and significant way to the declaration of Caducidad.

685. In other words, it is a conjunction of different factors which, taken together, in a
complementary manner, were the causes of the decision of the Respondent to declare
Caducidad. The difficult task of the Tribunal in this case is to weight the relative causal
link of this series of causes on the Caducidad Decree and, as a consequence, on the

damages caused to the Claimants.

4 The Tribunal’s Conclusion

686. The Tribunal agrees with the ICSID Annulment Committee in the MTD Equity
case that “the role of the two parties contributing to the loss [is] [...] only with difficulty
oy 124

commensurable and the Tribunal [has] a corresponding margin of estimation.

However, the Tribunal must reach a decision and it has.

687. Having considered and weighed all the arguments which the parties have
presented to the Tribunal in respect of this issue, in particular the evidence and the
authorities traversed in the present chapter, the Tribunal, in the exercise of its wide
discretion, finds that, as a result of their material and significant wrongful act, the
Claimants have contributed to the extent of 25% to the prejudice which they suffered

when the Respondent issued the Caducidad Decree. The resulting apportionment of

4 MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. v. The Republic of Chile, Decision on Annulment of 21 March 2007 (ICSID) at
paragraph 101.

- 266 -

responsibility as between the Claimants and the Respondent, to wit 25% and 75%, is fair

and reasonable in the circumstances of the present case.

G. Remaining Quantum Issues
L. Introduction

688. Now informed by its conclusions in respect of the four threshold issues which it
has analyzed in the previous Sections of this Award, the Tribunal will determine the

quantum of the damages which the Respondent owes to the Claimants.

689. There are several remaining fundamental issues associated with the determination
of quantum in the present case. As will be seen, these issues include, first and foremost,
both the appropriate standard of reparation as well as the appropriate method of

valuation.

690. Both parties agree that one method of valuation is the discounted cash flow
(“DCF”) method!> which involves the application of a number of variables including (i)
the exact production profile, (ii) reserve adjustment factors, (iii) oil price projections,
(iv) the appropriate discount rate, and (v) capital expenditures and operating expenses.
The Claimants also present a claim for consequential damages which they allegedly
suffered following the Caducidad Decree on account of their “ship or pay” contract with

OCP, a claim for employee termination costs and a claim for a stranded cargo.

"5 The Claimants assert that, in this particular case, the DCF method is the only method that should be

used, whereas, as noted later in this chapter of the Award, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal should
also examine comparable sales.

 

 

 

- 267 -

691. At the outset of its analysis, the Tribunal wishes to acknowledge the assistance
which has been provided to it in the determination of the quantum of the Claimants’
damages by counsel for both parties as well as the reports and testimony of the parties’

quantum experts, Professor Joseph P. Kalt on behalf of the Claimants, and Mr. Daniel

Johnston on behalf of the Respondent.

692. More particularly, the Tribunal recalls that, during its deliberations, it sought the

assistance of the parties’ experts. In this connection, as mentioned earlier, on 11 March

2011, it issued Procedural Order No. 9 which reads, in relevant parts, as follows:

2 EXPERT ASSISTANCE

2.1 The Tribunal invites the experts, Professor Kalt and Mr. Johnston, to
confer and produce jointly a report estimating the fair market value of
Block 15 as of 16 May 2006, using the discounted cash flow method.

2.2 In estimating this value, the experts shall make the following
assumptions:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

That the risked reserves of Block 15 as of 15 May 2006 consisted
of approximately 240 million barrels of oil (the “production
profile’).

That approximately 33.4 million barrels of oil should be
deducted from this production profile, representing reserves in
the Edén-Yuturi, Paka Sur and Paka North fields, classified as
“probable” rather than “proved”.

That a further [to be determined by the experts] million barrels of
oil should be deducted from this production profile, representing
the value of the proved reserves that a willing buyer could not
have developed due to the absence of the two rigs withdrawn by
OEPC prior to 15 May 2006.

With respect to items (b) and (c) above, the experts will
determine the impact of these deductions on the operating
expenditures (see item (h) below).

That the following reserve adjustment factors should be used:

o 100% for proved reserves

- 268 -

o 50% for probable reserves
© 25% for possible reserves

(f) That the future NYMEX based-WTI prices should be used as the
basis for the forecast of crude oil prices from May 2006.

(g) That a discount rate of 12% should be used.
(h) That the twelve months of operating costs incurred directly prior

to 15 May 2006 (i.e. May 2005 to May 2006) should be used to
forecast operating expenditures.

(i) That an amount of $243 million should be used as capital
expenditures.
Gj) That no examination of comparable sales should be undertaken.

693. The President of the Tribunal, on 21 March 2011, clarified assumption 2.2(a) in

an email to the parties which reads, in relevant parts, as follows:

With respect to the specific issue raised by the parties in connection with paragraph
2.2(a) of the Procedural Order, the Tribunal is of the view that a clarification is
required. The Tribunal confirms that the experts shall assume that the risked
reserves of Block 15 as of 15 May 2006 consisted of approximately 240mmbo
before deducting from that figure the actual production between | January and 15
May 2006 as well as any adjustment already acknowledged by the Claimants.

694. The experts, on 11 April 2011, submitted a joint report to the Tribunal in which,
in accordance with the instructions of the Tribunal set forth in Procedural Order No. 9,
they opined and agreed as to the fair market value of Block 15 as of 16 May 2006 (the
“Joint Expert Report’). The Tribunal will refer later in this chapter, as necessary, to the

Joint Expert Report.

695. As provided for in Procedural Order No. 9, the parties, on 18 April 2011,

submitted comments to the Tribunal on the Joint Expert Report.

- 269 -

696. The President of the Tribunal, on 29 April 2011, informed the parties that the

Tribunal had decided that a one-day hearing was necessary in order “to examine the

experts on their Joint Report and hear the parties’ representations”.

697. On 13 May 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 10 which provided, in

relevant parts, as follows:

The purpose of the present Order is to provide the parties with the Tribunal’s
instructions with respect to the organization of the hearing to be held in
Washington, D.C. on 30 June 2011 (the “Hearing”).

The Hearing is a continuation of the Tribunal’s consultation with the parties’
quantum Experts, whose assistance, as noted earlier, has been required.

The Tribunal recalls the following passages from the Experts’ Joint Report :

6. [...] [W]e agreed, based on our joint review of each other’s
damage models, that it was possible to identify and harmonize
otherwise minor methodological and modeling differences. As
a result, we are here able to employ a common model and
present its results to the Tribunal.

7. [...] [W]e also reached agreement on the most reasonable
approaches and methodology for calculating fair market value
consistent with the Tribunal’s instructions. [...]

L.]

26. [...] We are certainly willing to make our model available
and/or to perform any additional calculations with that model
that the Tribunal may request.

Against this background, the Tribunal requests that the Experts confer again and
produce jointly to the Tribunal, by 10 June 2011, a supplemental report
addressing (i) the Respondent’s comments of 18 April 2011 and its letter of 27
April 2011, and (ii) the Claimants’ comments of 18 April 2011 and their letters
of 25 and 28 April 2011.

The parties may submit comments to the Tribunal on the Experts’ supplemental
joint report by no later than 17 June 2011.

The Tribunal requests that Professor Kalt and Mr. Johnston be present at the

Hearing in order to assist the Tribunal and answer questions which may be put
to them by members of the Tribunal.

- 270 -

698. The experts, on 10 June 2011, submitted a supplemental joint report to the
Tribunal in accordance with the instructions of the Tribunal set forth in Procedural Order
No. 10 (the “Supplemental Joint Expert Report”). Again, the Tribunal will refer later in

this chapter, as necessary, to the Supplemental Joint Expert Report.

699. On 17 June 2011, the parties submitted their comments regarding the

Supplemental Joint Expert Report.

700. On 20 June 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 11 which provided, in

relevant part, as follows:

The experts, Prof. Kalt and Mr. Johnson, to the extent that they consider that either
party, in its last comments, has raised issues which were not addressed earlier, are
required to confer again and produce jointly to the Tribunal, by 24 June 2011,
another report addressing such new issues.

In addition, in order to further assist the Tribunal in its continuing deliberations,
recalling again the following passage from the Experts’ Joint Report of 11 April
2011:

26. [...] We are certainly willing to make our model and/or
to_perform any additional calculations with that_model that_the
Tribunal may request. (Emphasis added)

reiterated in para 7 of the Experts’ Joint Report of 10 June 2011, the Tribunal
requests the experts to present to the Tribunal and to the parties alternative
calculations of the fair market value of Block 15 as of 16 May 2006 (see Table 3, at
para 30 of the Experts’ Joint report of 10 June 2011) reflecting, in turn, all of the
following, separately and cumulatively:

i. the full effect of the rig delay case based on the NSA Delay Case (See
Respondent’s Comments of 17 June 2011 at pp 6-12);

ii. the addition of $20 million to the twelve months of OEPC’s operating
costs prior to 15 May 2006 in order to forecast operating expenditure
(See Respondent’s Comments of 17 June 2011 at pp 12-15); and

- 271 -

iii. the deduction of an additional .38 million barrels of oil from the OEPC
production profile representing reserves in the Limoncocha well LC-
103 which should have been classified as “probable” rather than
proved.”

These alternative calculations are required by the Tribunal as its members continue
their preparation for the hearing of 30 June.

701. The experts, on 24 June 2011, submitted a second supplemental joint report to the
Tribunal in accordance with the instructions of the Tribunal set forth in Procedural Order
No. 11 (the “Second Supplemental Joint Expert Report”). The Tribunal will refer later in

this chapter, as necessary, to the Second Supplemental Joint Expert Report.

702. Finally, as contemplated by Procedural Order No. 10, the Tribunal held a one-day
hearing in Washington, D.C. on 30 June 2011. The experts were then examined by the

Tribunal which also heard the parties’ representations.

703. After this hearing, the Tribunal continued its deliberations both as to the liability

and quantum issues.

2 Fair Market Value (“FMV”)

(a) The Claimants’ Position

704. The Claimants submit that international law governs the proper remedy for the
Respondent’s Treaty breaches, and that the appropriate standard of reparation under
international law is compensation for the losses suffered by the victim. Under

international law, the Claimants add, FMV is the appropriate measure of damages.

705. Regarding FMV per se, the Claimants contend that the standard for valuing the

net present worth of Block 15 as of the date of expropriation is “the price that a willing

- 272 -

buyer would pay to a willing seller in circumstances in which each had good information,

each desired to maximize his financial gain, and neither was under duress or threat.”

(b) The Respondent’s Position

706. The Respondent does not disagree with the Claimants that, in the event of a
finding by the Tribunal that there has been an expropriation of the Claimants’ investment
(which the Tribunal has found), Article III of the Treaty is controlling, i.e.
“[c]ompensation shall be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated
investment immediately before the expropriatory action was taken or became known,

whichever is earlier”.

( The Tribunal’s Conclusion

707. The Tribunal agrees with the parties. Having found earlier in this Award that the
Claimants’ investment in Ecuador has not been accorded fair and equitable treatment by
the Respondent and has been expropriated by the issuance of the Caducidad Decree, the
Tribunal will now determine, as mandated by Article III of the Treaty, the fair market
value of this investment. The Tribunal agrees with and adopts the definition of FMV

which Professor Kalt has explained as follows:

Measurement of fair market value in a context such as at hand here properly entails
consideration of market outcomes. Specifically, the fair market value today of a
stream of net revenues (i.e., gross revenues minus attendant costs) that can be
earned from operation of a multi-year project such as OEPC’s development of
Block 15 entails assessment of the amount that a willing buyer would reasonably
be expected to have to pay a willing seller to induce the seller to give up its rights
to those net revenues. Here, Occidental is in the position of a seller in the sense
that we seek measurement of the amount Occidental would reasonably have been

- 273 -

willing to accept to be voluntarily bought out of the instant contract and associated

income-generating opportunities, as opposed to having had that contract and those
ee A . 126 wo

opportunities involuntarily terminated by Ecuador.“ (Emphasis in original)

3. The Discounted Cash Flow (“DCF”) Method

708. The Tribunal is of the view that, in this case, the standard economic approach to
measuring the fair market value today of a stream of net revenues (i.e., gross revenues
minus attendant costs) that can be earned from the operation of a multi-year project such
as OEPC’s development of Block 15 is the calculation of the present value, as of 16 May
2006, of the net benefits, or “discounted cash flows”. These net cash flows are
appropriately determined by calculating the flow of benefits (“cash flows”) that the
Claimants would have reasonably been expected to earn in the “but for” state of the
world in which the termination of the Participation Contract hypothetically did not occur
relative to the actual cash flow that the Claimants will derive subsequent to the
termination. The difference between these two cash flow streams (the “but for” state of
the world with no termination less the actual state of the world with contract termination),
discounted to the date of the actual contract termination, is the economically appropriate
and reliable measure of the cumulative economic harm suffered by the Claimants as a

consequence of the contract termination.

709. Using a DCF model as the starting point for measuring FMV, the Tribunal further

observes that the analytical framework for determining FMV in the present circumstances

126 Expert Report of Joseph P. Kalt dated 17 September 2007 at paragraph 14. See also the Tribunal’s
Comments supra at paragraphs 540, 541and 563.

-274-

requires several steps. These steps are clearly summarized by the Respondent. The
Claimants agree. They are:
(a) Determination of the size of the reservoir (project the number of barrels
that are in the field);

(b) Creation of a production profile (establish the number of barrels that can
be produced each year economically);

(c) Assignment of risk adjustment factors (“RAFs”) to the reserves (to reflect
the risk that certain reserves categories will not produce the amount of oil
projected);

(d) Application of a price forecast (multiplication the number of barrels in the
production profile by a projected price of oil, subtraction of the costs to

produce those barrels); and

(e) Application of a discount rate (to reflect, among other things, the time-
value of money and business and country risks).

4 Volume and Production Profile of Block 15

710. The most important component of the DCF model in the present case is the
determination of the volume and production profile of Block 15. The evidence proffered
by the parties on this item is voluminous. The Tribunal will endeavour to summarize and

analyze this evidence.

(a) The Parties’ Expert Reports

@ NSAI Expert Report dated 17 September 2007

711. For the Claimants, Netherland, Sewell & Associates Inc. (“NSAI”) provided its
first expert report by way of a full independent estimate of all the gross Block 15 reserves
as of 30 April 2006. The Tribunal notes that this study was carried out using the 1997

definitions for oil and gas reserves adopted by the Society of Petroleum Engineers and

- 275 -

the World Petroleum Council, which represent the industry accepted standards for

reserves classification.

712. In this report, NSAI estimated the gross Block 15 reserves as of 30 April 2006 at
320 million barrels.'?” The Claimants then subjected this estimate of reserves to standard
OEPC risk analysis and their expert, Professor Kalt, determined that NSAI’s reserve

estimate equalled approximately 240 million barrels of oil as of 1 January 2006.'7*

(ii) RPS Scotia’s Expert Report dated March 2009

713. In this report submitted on behalf of the Respondent, RPS Scotia averred that
NSAI’s non-producing and undeveloped reserves utilised in Professor Kalt’s economic
model were overstated. It concluded that the Block 15 gross risked reserves were, as of
30 April 2006, 132.8 million barrels for the RPS Scotia Base Case’”” and 134.0 million
barrels for the RPS Scotia Acceleration Case'*’. Unrisked reserves were 199.2 million
barrels for the Base Case and 202.2 for the Acceleration Case. This compared with the
NSAI/OEPC gross risked and unrisked reserves of 228.6 million barrels and 320.7

million barrels, respectively, for Block 15 as of 30 April 2006.

"27 See NSAI Expert Report dated 17 September 2007 at paragraph 183.
128 Expert Report of Joseph P. Kalt dated 17 September 2007, Exhibit | at page 14.

'° Defined by RPS Scotia as a “forecast which follows as closely as possible the capital schedule used in
the Kalt model. [...] RPS eliminated certain cases in the NSA project set which it believes a prudent
operator would not execute. In order to match the Kalt capital schedule, eight additional projects were
eliminated.” See RPS Scotia's Expert Report dated March 2009 at page 27.

'3 Defined by RPS Scotia as a forecast which “used all of the projects that ‘made the cut’ in RPS Scotia’s

opinion, including the eight projects discussed above”: see RPS Scotia’s Expert Report dated March 2009
at page 27.

- 276 -

(iii) RPS Scotia June 2009 Report Entitled “Ecuador Block 15 Reserves
Certification and Plan of Development Study as of January 1, 2009”

714. The Tribunal notes that this report (the “RPS Scotia June 2009 Reserves
Certification”) was obtained by the Claimants on discovery. It was made for
Petroamazonas’ business and reporting purposes and not for this arbitration.
Petroamazonas, an Ecuadorian entity, is required under Ecuadorian law to report to the
DNH annually on reserves and other matters, and to certify that its estimates are correct.
The Claimants maintain, that this report confirms NSAI’s reserve estimates. According
to the Claimants, if adjusted to 1 May 2006, the RPS Scotia June 2009 Reserves
Certification yields an estimate of 227.1 million barrels using the Claimants’ reserve
adjustment factors, which the Claimants maintain, is “remarkably similar” to NSAT’s

risked estimate of 228.6 million barrels as of 30 April 2006.

(iv) | RPS Scotia’s Rebuttal Expert Report dated September 2009

715. In this report, submitted on behalf of the Respondent, RPS Scotia opined that a
substantial number of wells had to be eliminated from its June 2009 Reserves
Certification and from NSAI’s estimate. The reserves from these wells, argued RPS
Scotia, is greater than would have been actually recoverable in Block 15 because, for
example, the Claimants double-counted barrels and included projects that did not meet
the minimum economic threshold. In addition, RPS Scotia maintained that the
Claimants’ damages model rests on production plans that were not approved by
Ecuadorian authorities as well as a drilling schedule that no reasonable buyer would have
considered since the drilling rigs required to accomplish that schedule simply did not

exist.

-277-

(v) NSAI Supplemental Expert Report dated 12 June 2009
716. This supplemental report by NSAI on behalf of the Claimants was carried out for
the purpose of:
e evaluating the sufficiency and reliability of the RPS Scotia Report
of March 2009 which estimated significantly lower reserves for
Block 15 than did the initial NSAI Report;

e assessing the merits of RPS Scotia’s numerous criticisms of NSAI’s
methodology and reserves estimates; and

e confirming the accuracy of NSAI Report’s gross (100 percent)
reserves estimates based on production and operational data
provided by Ecuador for Block 15 for the time period May 2006

through March 2009.
717. In this supplemental report, NSAI affirmed that RPS Scotia did not estimate
Block 15 reserves using commonly accepted oil industry practices. In particular, RPS
Scotia did not conduct its own independent analysis of Block 15 data but rather relied
upon the work of NSAI, Petroamazonas and Occidental. Thus, this represented an audit,
not a separate free-standing analysis. NSAI also considered that RPS Scotia’s well-by-
well reductions to NSAI’s reserves estimates were not technically justified. It opined that
production data since May 2006 confirmed the accuracy of NSAI’s initial production

forecast of 17 September 2007, to wit risked reserves of 240 million barrels of oil as of 1

January 2006.

(b) The Tribunal’s Conclusion

718. The Tribunal has considered carefully the written reports of the parties’ experts as
well as their oral evidence. The Tribunal has also considered the parties’ submissions

regarding the risked reserves of Block 15. As noted earlier, this is the most significant

- 278 -

component in the application of the DCF model in the present case. In reaching its
conclusion on the volume and production profile of Block 15, the Tribunal has made the

following findings.

719. From the outset, the Tribunal observes that NSAI’s estimate of reserves in its 17
September 2007 Report in the form of a production forecast is standard in the industry.
The Claimants, in order to create a risked production profile, applied the standard risking
percentages used by the company and its affiliates in their ordinary course of business

around the world.

720. The Tribunal is well aware that the Respondent, relying on the two reports of its
expert, RPS Scotia, has represented that there were “numerous deficiencies in the

131

production profile advanced by Claimants’ and that their production profile was

“simply not achievable.”'*?

721. However, the Tribunal recalls that RPS Scotia’s Rebuttal Expert Report of
September 2009 was seriously challenged by the Claimants. In the view of the Tribunal,
the strongest point made by the Claimants’ expert, NSAI, in its Supplemental Report is
that the Petroamazonas’ reserve estimates of June 2009 carried out by RPS Scotia very

much confirm the NSAI estimates initially put forward by the Claimants.

'5! See footnote 1, item (1), in the Respondent’s Annotated Damages Tables of 20 February 2010.

' Ibid.

- 279 -

722. The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants. However, as will be seen later, these
reserve estimates, in the opinion of the Tribunal, must be adjusted because the Claimants’
damages model rests on some production plans which were not approved and

assumptions which were not realistic.

723. In criticising Mr. Johnston’s use of the RPS Scotia production profile, Professor

Kalt stated:

Johnston Approach: As shown in Table 2, Mr. Johnston’s use of the RPS Scotia
production profile is the largest source of difference between his and my NPV
determinations. This highlights the importance of assuring that the underlying
reserve estimates used for the purposes of a DCF analysis are reasonable and
supported by available data.

The RPS Scotia estimate of gross risked reserves, relied upon by Mr. Johnston,
however, is only 131 mmbbl. This 131 mmbbl figure is dwarfed by the
aforementioned risked reserves figure of 294.3 mmbbl (as of December 31, 2006)
which Ecuador reported itself as operator of Block 15 in PetroEcuador’s 2007-
2011 Five Year Plan. Thus, Ecuador’s own reserves estimates are approximately
two and a quarter times the level proffered by RPS Scotia_and_used_by Mr.
Johnston in his testimony here on behalf of Ecuador. This disconnect in the
estimates of underlying reserves undermines the reliability of the RPS
Scotia/Johnston results.

The low risked-reserve estimates used by Mr. Johnston are the product of RPS
Scotia's reserves estimation methodology and its application to those reserves of
reserve adjustment factors (“RAFs”) taken directly from the aforementioned SPEE
survey. These survey results represent, at best, general rules of thumb. They differ
substantially from the risk factors actually used by Block 15 operators. °°
(Emphasis added; footnotes omitted)

724. The RPS Scotia June 2009 Reserves Certification obtained by the Claimants

during the discovery phase of the arbitration obviously presented the Respondent with a

'3 Rebuttal Expert Report of Joseph P. Kalt dated 12 June 2009 at paragraphs 62-64. The Tribunal finds
Professor Kalt’s criticism very sound.

- 280 -

dilemma. The Respondent chose not to challenge the accuracy of these estimates.
Rather, it took the legal position that it is impermissible for a party to refer to post-

valuation evidence.

725. In this connection, the Tribunal notes that RPS Scotia, in its September 2009
Rebuttal Expert Report submitted on behalf of the Respondent, referred to and relied

upon its June 2009 Reserves Certification Report to Petroamazonas. It said:

Finally, as developed in Section 5 of this report, RPS Scotia was retained by
Petroamazonas in December 2008 to conduct a six-month detailed reserves
certification study of Block 15, separate and apart from RPS Scotia’s involvement
in this arbitration proceeding. The cost of the study was $1.3 million and a final
report was provided to Petroamazonas in July 2009. The results of that study have
becn incorporated into this report and are presented in Section 5.0 of this report.

726. The Claimants submit that it is permissible, as the Respondent’s expert has done,
to utilize post-valuation date data to verify or otherwise check assumptions made in the
DCF model. The Tribunal agrees. The tribunal in the Starrett Housing award opined
that the tribunal appointed-expert could rely on events subsequent to the date of
expropriation to test his assumptions as long as those assumptions were reasonably

135

foreseeable on the date of valuation.~° This is precisely what the Claimants’ expert did

in the present case.

'4 Rebuttal Expert Report of RPS Scotia dated September 2009 at paragraph 50.

'85 Starrett Housing Corporation et al. v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, Award of 14 August 1987, reprinted

in 4 Iran-US C.T.R. 112 at pages 123-124.

- 281 -

727. In the circumstances, the Tribunal accepts, subject to the two adjustments
hereinafter explained, that the risked reserve estimates of the Claimants, as of 1 January
2006, were approximately 240 million barrels of oil. The risked reserve estimates of the
Claimants, when adjusted for production that occurred from 1 January to 15 May 2006,

yield total risked reserves of 227 million barrels of oil as of 16 May 2006.'*°

728. As foreshadowed earlier, there remain two important areas of dispute between the
parties which, in the opinion of the Tribunal, are pertinent to its determination of the

Claimants’ reserve estimates as of the date of the Caducidad Decree.

729. Firstly, the Respondent contends that some reserves in the fields of Edén-Yuturi,
Paka Sur, Paka Norte and Limoncocha should be eliminated because, although they were
submitted by OEPC to the DNH for approval on 1 December 2005 in its Second
Amended Development Plan, approval had not yet been granted on the date of the
Caducidad Decree. These reserves, says the Respondent, total 33.7 million barrels that

should have been classified as “probable,” and not as “proved.”

730. The Claimants acknowledge that the development of these fields had not been
approved by the DNH as of the date of the Caducidad Decree,'*” but they maintain that
this was due to the fact that in the months prior to caducidad, the DNH approval process

slowed down considerably. They also submit that the Edén-Yuturi Development Plan

'86 See, in this regard, the Joint Expert Report at paragraphs 9-10. See also the Supplemental Joint Expert
Report at paragraph 12.

 

'57 See NSAI Expert Report dated 17 September 2007 at page 3, note (1).

- 282 -

was actually approved by the DNH in March 2007 when it was presented by

Petroamazonas on the basis of OEPC’s own operator studies.

731. In order to decide this issue, the Tribunal recalls that “proved” reserves are those
which, by analysis of geologic and engineering data, can be estimated with reasonable
certainty to be commercially recoverable from known reserves. The development of the
wells at issue in Ecuador was undisputedly subject to approval by the DNH. The fact is
that this plan was not approved by the time the Caducidad Decree was issued. Thus, a
willing buyer could not have started drilling these wells the day after the Caducidad

Decree.

732. The Tribunal is not satisfied, on the basis of the record, that the failure of the
DNH to approve the work programmes and budgets related to the plan at issue was

influenced by the strained relationship between OEPC and Ecuador at that time.

733. In the circumstances, the Claimants’ production profile will accordingly be
reduced to account for the barrels of the oil reserves in the Edén-Yuturi, Paka Sur, Paka
Norte and Limoncocha fields which should have been classified as “probable” rather than
“proved.” As a corollary of this adjustment, the Tribunal will be required to consider
the impact of this reduction in connection with the Claimants’ forecast of operating

expenses.'”

'88 See, in this regard, the Joint Expert Report at paragraphs 11-12. See also the Supplemental Joint Expert
Report at paragraphs 8-10 and the Second Supplemental Joint Expert Report at paragraphs 11-13.

 

 

'89 See, in this regard, the Joint Expert Report at paragraphs 17 and following.

 

- 283 -

734. Lastly, the Respondent contends that the Claimants’ production profile should
also be adjusted to reflect the release by OEPC of two rigs prior to the Caducidad

Decree.'“”

735. The Claimants reply that “[they] are entitled to assume that Block 15 drilling
would have taken place as if there had been two rigs on the block on May 16, 2006.”

(Emphasis added)

736. The decision by the Claimants to release two drilling rigs and withdraw their
Development Plan in April 2006 because of the enactment of Law 42 may have been
driven by valid economic considerations, but a reliable DCF calculation cannot rest on
“as if’ assumptions. In the words of the Claimants’ expert himself, Professor Kalt, the
inputs used as the basis for a DCF analysis cannot be based on speculation or wishful

thinking.'“!

737. In the circumstances, the Claimants’ production profile will be further reduced to
account for the “impact of delaying” caused by the lack of drill rig availability that a
willing buyer would have encountered the day after the Caducidad Decree due to the

absence of two drilling rigs.!? Again, the Tribunal will also be required to consider the

‘4 The Tribunal notes that NSAI’s estimate of the number of wells for drilling from May to December
2006 was based on OEPC’s drilling schedule during the previous two years.

'4! Rebuttal Expert Report of Joseph P. Kalt dated 12 June 2009 at paragraph 53.

' See, in this regard, the Joint Expert Report at paragraphs 13-15, in particular footnote 2. See also the
Supplemental Joint Expert Report at paragraphs 22-29 and the Second Supplemental Joint Expert Report at
paragraphs 5-6.

- 284 -

impact of this reduction in connection with the Claimants’ forecast of operating

expenses.'*3

738. In summary, and after factoring into the DCF model the two adjustments set out
above, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimants have otherwise met their burden of
proof with respect to their production profile as of the date of the Caducidad Decree.
The Block 15 risked reserves on 16 May 2006 total 208.9 million barrels of oil as
calculated by the parties’ experts, Professor Kalt and Mr. Johnston, following instructions

from the Tribunal.'“*

s Reserve Adjustment Factors (“RAFs”’)

739. When reserves are estimated, it is standard practice in the oil industry business to
adjust them according to their category in order to estimate future productions. Such
estimates are used in the actual planning and operation of oil extraction, as well as for

financial reporting purposes including future profit forecasts.

740. The Claimants point out that the Respondent’s expert witness on this issue,
Mr. Wiggins, agreed with Professor Kalt that, in a fair market valuation, the hypothetical
willing seller’s ordinary course of business assessment of its reserve adjustment factors

and other parameters should be used.

'43 See, in this regard, the Joint Expert Report at paragraphs 17 and following.

 

'4 See, in this regard, the Joint Expert Report at paragraphs 9 and 16 and the Supplemental Joint Expert
Report at paragraph 12.

- 285 -

TAL.

742.

743.

In the words of Professor Kalt:

I note, however, that it is appropriate to use RAFs developed in the normal course
of business of operating and evaluating particular assets. In this case, I have
adopted the risking factors of 100% for proved, 50% for probable, and 25% for
possible reserves, as developed in the course of business by OEPC. M45

Mr. Wiggins gave evidence to the same effect:

Q: [...] So now looking at the willing buyer side of the equation, a willing buyer
would look at the operating history of the fields. Isn’t that right? The willing
buyer would look at the production history of the fields, the reserves, that it is
buying. Isn’t that right.

A: Yes.'4°

The Tribunal notes Professor Kalt’s conclusion:

[...] In this case I have adopted the risking factors of 100% for proved, 50% for
probable, and 25% for possible reserves, as developed in the course of business by
OEPC. I note that these RAFs are conservative from the perspective of the risking
factors used by Ecuador itself as operator of Block 15 in the post-termination
period. For example in the 2007-2011 Five Year Plan, Ecuador adopts risking
factors of 100%, 75% and 50%, respectively. I summarize these factors in Table 4
below:

Table 4

Reserve Adjustment Factors

 

 

 

 

 

Category OEPC Ecuador RPS Scotia
Proved 100% 100% 56-100%
Probable 50% 75% 0-38%
Possible 25% 50% 0-25%

 

 

 

 

145

Rebuttal Expert Report of Joseph P. Kalt dated 12 June 2009 at paragraph 65.

'46 Hearing Transcript (7 November 2009) at page 142.

- 286 -

 

744. The question for the Tribunal is whether to adopt the RAFs of Professor Kalt,
which, as he notes, are more conservative than those actually used by Ecuador, or take
the RPS Scotia’s RAFs, which are based on a composite of figures taken from surveys
conducted by the Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers (“SPEE”) and selected
industry overviews by the investment banks Donaldson, Lufkin, and Jenrette (“DLJ”) and
Credit Suisse First Boston (“Credit Suisse”). It appears to the Tribunal that RPS Scotia’s
resulting RAFs are inconsistent with the normal course of business RAFs employed in

relation to Block 15 by OEPC and Ecuador as shown in Professor Kalt’s Table 4.

745. The Tribunal is of the view that the Claimants have established that their

consistent operational approach to RAFs is reasonable.

746. The RPS Scotia approach was compiled from a number of sources including
RAFs taken from the SPEE survey, the results of which, as Professor Kalt pointed out,
“represent, at best, general rules of thumb [and] differ substantially from the risk factors

actually used by Block 15 operators”.!47

747. Professor Kalt pointed out in his criticism of the RPS Scotia RAFs that the DLJ

and Credit Suisse estimates were dated from 1999 and 2001 respectively, and that the

'47 Rebuttal Expert Report of Joseph P. Kalt dated 12 June 2009 at paragraph 64.

- 287 -

lack of information regarding the sources of the DLJ and CSFB data as well as their

vintage made it difficult to evaluate their applicability in the present context.'*

748. The Tribunal agrees with Professor Kalt. It makes eminent good business and
legal sense to use OEPC’s RAFs. The Tribunal will therefore use the following reserve

adjustment factors in its calculation of the fair market value of Block 15:
e 100% for proved reserves
e 50% for probable reserves
e 25% for possible reserves

749. The Tribunal recalls that, pursuant to its Procedural Order No. 9, the parties’
experts were instructed to use these reserve adjustment factors for the purpose of

estimating the fair market value of Block 15.

6. Oil Price Projections

750. If the DCF analysis is to serve its purpose, the other parameters used in the model,

such as the projected price of oil, must be based on objective and reliable data.

751. Once the revenue generated by OEPC’s share of Block 15 production has been
calculated, the DCF method requires that the forecasted production stream be multiplied

by the realized price of the oil produced. In the present case, this means using a forecast

'48 Rebuttal Expert Report of Joseph P. Kalt dated 12 June 2009 at paragraph 67.

- 288 -

of Block 15 crude oil prices based on market conditions existing at the time of the

termination of the Participation Contract, i.e. 15 May 2006.

752. The Tribunal notes that the Claimants’ expert, Professor Kalt, has used, to effect
his calculation, the NYMEX-based WTI (West Texas Intermediate) prices. This
approach, he says, is “common, reliable and conservative” and is recognized “as the most

reliable basis for projecting prices of crude oil.”

753. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s expert, Mr. Johnston, on the other hand,
also uses NYMEX futures pricing which he combines with an average of price forecasts
published by SPEE. Mr. Johnston gives NYMEX a 60% weight and the SPEE figures a

40% weight.'°°

754. Having considered the experts’ and the parties’ written and oral submissions, the
Tribunal, for the reasons which follow, has reached the conclusion that Professor Kalt’s
NYMEX futures price “strip” method offers the proper and methodologically sound
assessment of actual market expectations and is to be preferred over Mr. Johnston’s

weighted NYMEX and SPEE approach.

755. The Tribunal considers that Mr. Johnston’s approach provides an unreliable basis
for determining value, principally because it evidently entails a form of double-counting.

As Professor Kalt says:

'49 Expert Report of Joseph P. Kalt dated 17 September 2007 at paragraph 63.

150 Expert Report of Daniel Johnston dated 9 March 2009 at paragraph 52.

- 289 -

The double-counting effect arises because, if futures marketplace participants rely
on SPEE figures in forming their expectations regarding future oil prices, those
expectations have already been factored into the actual prices yielded in NYMEX
trading.'*!

756. The Tribunal further notes that, SPEE itself, in its 2006 Survey, explicitly warns

against use of its data for the very purpose for which Mr. Johnston uses it. It writes:

The SPEE does not endorse the use of the Survey results, either in whole or in part,

as a valuation guideline. Neither the Survey nor its contents are intended to dictate

Fair Market Value parameters. 152

757. Finally, the Respondent’s assertion that NYMEX prices are not used for actual
transactions does not seem well-founded. The U.S. Federal Department of the Interior,
for instance, observes that the use of NYMEX in its royalty contracts has several
advantages, including the fact that the volume of transactions and the number of

participants is so large that, in theory, no one entity could manipulate the resultant price.

758. The Tribunal will therefore use the future NYMEX based-WTI prices as the basis
for its forecast of crude oil prices from May 2006 in the calculation of the fair market
value of Block 15.'°? The Tribunal recalls that, pursuant to its Procedural Order No. 9,
the parties’ experts were instructed to use these prices for the purpose of estimating the

fair market value of Block 15.

'S! Rebuttal Expert Report of Joseph P. Kalt dated 12 June 2009 at paragraph 79.

'S2 See SPEE 2006 Survey at page 3, as quoted in Rebuttal Expert Report of Joseph P. Kalt dated 12 June

2009 at paragraph 82.

'5 See Expert Report of Joseph P. Kalt dated 17 September 2007 at paragraph 62, as well as Exhibit 1 at
page 10.

- 290 -

7. Discount Rate

759. The DCF analysis requires that future cash flows be converted to current dollar

cash flows using an appropriate discount rate.

760. The Tribunal notes that the parties’ experts, Professor Kalt and Mr. Johnston,
disagreed initially on the proper discount rate to be applied in the instant case given the
risk characteristics and the time profile of the Block 15 project. Professor Kalt, in his
initial expert report, used a rate of 9.18%, which represents the WACC of OEPC’s parent,

OPC, in its worldwide operations. Mr. Johnston adopted a 15% discount rate.

761. At the end of the day, after having exchanged briefs and rebuttal expert reports,
the Claimants, in their Skeleton Submission, wrote that they were prepared to accept
“that the Tribunal may reasonably use either the 10% discount rate that Petroecuador has

used or the 12% rate that both parties have used”.

762. In fact, the Tribunal notes that Petroamazonas, in both its 2007-2011 and 2008-
2012 Five Year Plans filed with the Ecuadorian Ministerio de Minas y Petréleos, used a
discount rate of 12% which, it stated, reflected the financial, country and industry

: 5
risks.’

763. The Tribunal sees no point in debating the matter further since, in its view, it also

considers that a 12% discount rate is appropriate in the circumstances.

'4 RPS Scotia also used a 12% discount rate when it calculated the value of reserves cash flows in its
estimate of reserves for Petroamazonas.

- 291 -

764. Therefore, the Tribunal will use a discount rate of 12% in its determination of the
fair market value of Block 15. The Tribunal recalls that, pursuant to its Procedural Order
No. 9, the parties’ experts were instructed to use a discount rate of 12% for the purpose of

estimating the fair market value of Block 15.

8 Operating (OPEX) and Capital (CAPEX) Expenditure Forecasts

765. The differences between the parties regarding operational and capital

expenditures are summarized below.

766. As to OPEX, the Claimants have based their forecasts through 2019 on their

actual 2005 expenditures.

767. The Respondent, on the other hand, has used the first four and a half months of
OPEX in 2006 to forecast operational expenditures through the life of the Participation

Contract.

768. The Claimants maintain that the Respondent’s approach creates “a forecast in
which costs are significantly and unwarrantedly high year after year” since “[t]hat portion
was, on a monthly basis, higher than the remainder of expenses which were scheduled to

be incurred between May 16, 2006 and year-end”.

769. The Respondent criticizes the Claimants’ approach since, it says, “OEPC’s 2005

costs [...] are lower and inflate Claimants’ DCF valuation”.

770. Neither approach of the parties finds favour with the Tribunal. While the

Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that OEPC’s most recent operating costs are the best

- 292 -

evidence of its likely costs going forward, it is of the view that a period of 4/2 months is
too short to provide a reliable forecast. Twelve months of operations would be more

reliable.'*°

771. The Tribunal will therefore use the twelve months of OEPC’s operating costs
incurred directly prior to the Caducidad Decree, i.e. May 2005 to May 2006, as a
reference period to forecast operational expenditures. As noted above!™, it will be
necessary to adjust the calculation of these expenditures on account of expenses directly
related to those reserves which have been subtracted from the Claimants’ production

profile.

772. The parties’ experts, at the request of the Tribunal pursuant to its Procedural
Order No. 9, considered this reference period and opined jointly that, on that basis, the
operating costs used in the DCF analysis to forecast the Claimants’ operational

expenditures should be approximately $151 million.'”
773. Asto CAPEX, the parties disagree only as to whether they should be risked.

774. The Claimants maintain that capital expenditures are properly risked in a DCF
analysis, whereas the Respondent argues that all projects should be accounted for on a

“fully funded” basis.

'S5 See D.1. Heather and G.B. Wiggins, “How to Bid Successfully in a Changed Marketplace” in Oil & Gas
Journal (2001), reprinted by LexisNexis at page 3.

156 See supra at paragraphs 733 and 737.

 

'57 See paragraph 21 and Table | on page 6 of the Supplemental Joint Expert Report; see also paragraphs 8-
10 of the Second Supplemental Joint Expert Report.

- 293 -

775. The Claimants maintain that, like other oil and gas companies, they risk their
capital in the course of their business planning and evaluation. Referring to their many
years of experience in developing Block 15, the Claimants only included a portion of the

CAPEX ($243 million) in their DCF model.'**

776. The Respondent, while it recognizes that an oil field operator “might risk capital
expenses in the ordinary course of business,” says “[this] is not true in a DCF analysis,
which by necessity is frozen in time.” The Respondent concludes: “Having claimed
credit for [this] production, the parties must also accept all of the capital costs required to

fund it.”

777. Having reviewed the evidence on this issue, the Tribunal has decided to give more
weight to the Claimants’ approach based as it is on their many years of Block 15
operations. The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that, in a dynamic business such as
oil exploration, all projects cannot be accounted for on a fully-funded basis. Some of
their capital costs must be risked and the Tribunal finds that the use of a portion of the

CAPEX in the DCF model is appropriate.

778. As to the appropriate figure of capital costs which should be used by the Tribunal
in its DCF analysis, the Tribunal accepts the joint conclusion of the parties’ experts that,

in addition to the costs of $243 million'®? which represent drilling-related capital costs

'58 According to the experts, these capital costs represent drilling-related capital costs only (see Joint Expert
Report at paragraph 22).

‘9 Adjusted by the experts to take account of certain delays in drilling and reclassification of reserves (see
Joint Expert Report at paragraph 21).

- 294 -

only, the facilities-related capital costs associated with the base production profile of 240
million barrels, to wit $203 million, should also be incorporated in its cash flow

analysis. 60

9. Use of Comparable Sales
779. The Tribunal recalls that it has formed the view that the discounted cash flow
method is the most widely used and generally accepted method in the oil and gas industry

for valuing sales or acquisitions.

780. The Respondent submits that the examination of comparable sales is also critical
“because it allows the evaluator to test the reasonableness of the DCF assumptions

against market conditions.”

781. The Claimants maintain that it is inappropriate to use a comparable sales analysis
in this case. They write: “Each oil and gas property presents a unique set of value
parameters: size, quality of oil, type of contractual relationship, environmental or
remedial obligations.” There is also the difference in oil prices which, the Claimants

submit, can make the comparable unreliable.

  

'© See Joint Expert Report at paragraph 22. The Tribunal has noted that Mr. Daniel Johnston, in an
Appendix to the Second Supplemental Joint Expert Report, questions OEPC’s risking methodology which,
he concludes, “understates drilling costs, potentially overstates reserves and certainly overstates fair market
value” (at page 13). The Tribunal notes however that at the Hearing on 30 June 2011, Mr. Johnston
acknowledged that had an alternative approach been adopted in this regard, it would not have yielded
anything beyond a “fairly modest” difference (see Hearing Transcript of 30 June 201 lat pages 54-55)

  
   
 

- 295 -

782. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s expert, Mr. Daniel Johnston, in his own
publication, acknowledges the difficulty in finding truly comparable situations.'°! SPEE

also recommends caution with the use of alternate methods of valuation.’

783. The Tribunal has reviewed the parties’ competing submissions in respect of this
issue. The Tribunal finds very convincing Professor Kalt’s demonstration that the
comparable sales approach of the Respondent’s expert, RPS Scotia, is unreliable in this

3
case.'®

784. The Respondent submits that the EnCana sale “as of 30 August 2005” to Andes of
its shares in AEC which, as the Tribunal recalls, held a 40% economic interest in the
Participation Contract, “presents a unique situation.” The Tribunal agrees that this

“comparable” needs to be addressed separately.

785. The Claimants disagree with the Respondent. They argue that the Supplemental
Indemnity Agreement (“SIA”) was a negotiated figure arrived at under the threat of
caducidad. The Claimants also rely on Professor Kalt’s Rebuttal Expert Report to

buttress their submission that the EnCana sale is “an inapt choice for a comparable

analysis”. tot

'! David Johnston and Daniel Johnston, Introduction to Oil Company Financial Analysis (2006, PennWell)
at page 24.

1 SPEE, Perspectives on the Fair Market Value of Oil and Gas Interests (2002) at page 43.

‘© Rebuttal Expert Report of Joseph P. Kalt dated 12 June 2009 at paragraphs 120-145, as well as Rebuttal

Figures 5-9.

‘+ Rebuttal Expert Report of Joseph P. Kalt dated 12 June 2009 at paragraphs 146-154.

- 296 -

786. There is no doubt that the EnCana sales contract and its Appendix 1, the SIA, was
executed at a time when caducidad was very much under consideration by the
Ecuadorian authorities, to wit 30 August 2005. In fact, the Tribunal notes the obvious
reference to “caducidad” in the SIA as well as the following provision in the preamble to

the SIA:

Whereas, Seller and EnCana agree to indemnify Purchaser or its permitted assignee
as provided for in this Agreement in the event the relevant Governmental
Authorities take certain actions with respect to the Block 15 Contract.

787. Having considered the parties’ arguments and the evidence of their respective
witnesses and experts, the Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that “each oil and gas
property presents a unique set of value parameters”. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes
that it can derive no assistance from an analysis of the seven transactions which the

Respondent has submitted as comparable sales.

788. As for the EnCana sale, the Tribunal has decided that it is not a useful comparable
and thus should not be taken into consideration in the determination of the fair market
value of the Participation Contract, mainly for the following reasons: (i) the important
difference in oil prices between 30 August 2005 and 15 May 2006; and (ii) the inclusion
of non-Block 15 assets (Tarapoa, Block 14, Block 17 and the Sherepino Block) in the

August 2005 transaction.

10. Consequential Damages

789. The Claimants allege that they have also suffered consequential damages as a

result of the Caducidad Decree. They claim:

- 297 -

(i) OEPC’s ship-or-pay commitments of $194 million owed to OCP S.A. under
the Initial Shipper Transportation Agreement (the previously-defined

“ISTA”);
(ii) employee severance costs for early termination of $7 million; and

(iii) a stranded cargo, valued at $1 million, which the Claimants were forced to

abandon at the time of the Caducidad Decree.

(a) Preliminary Issues

790. There are two preliminary issues with respect to the Claimants’ claims for
consequential damages. The Respondent maintains that such claims are not recoverable
under international law or Ecuadorian law. The Claimants disagree. They argue firstly
that the remedies for any violation of the Treaty is “by necessity” governed by

international law because every treaty breach is a breach of international law.
791. The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants. Numerous tribunals have so held.'®

792. The availability of consequential loss in international law is uncontroversial. The
starting point is the principle of “full reparation”, expressed by the Permanent Court of

International Justice in the Chorzéw Factory case as follows:

165 See, e.g., Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8), Award of 6 February
2007 at paragraph 352; Watkins-Johnson v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, Award of 27 July 1989, reprinted
in Iran-U.S. C.T.R., volume 22 (1990) 218 at paragraphs 114-117; Uiterwyk v. The Islamic Republic of
Iran, Partial Award of 6 July 1988, reprinted in 19 Iran-U.S. C.T.R. 107 at paragraph 117.

- 298 -

[R]eparation must, so far as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal
act and reestablish the situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that
act had not been committed.’

793. This principle is now also embodied in Article 31 of the International Law
Commission’s Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts

which, as previously observed, states:

Article 31. Reparation

1. The responsible State is under an obligation to make full reparation for the injury
caused by the internationally wrongful act.

2. Injury includes any damage, whether material or moral, caused by the
internationally wrongful act of a State.

794. Marboe states simply:

According to the Principle of full reparation [...] consequential damage must [.
be taken into account.'°

 

795. As to the standard of causation, Marboe concludes that the “direct/indirect”
dichotomy is now seen as unhelpful in international law, and instead “[i]nternational

practice seems so far to have relied on two main criteria: ‘causality’ and ‘provability’”.'°*

796. Marboe categorizes “liability to subcontractors,” for instance, as an “accepted”

head of consequential loss in international law, subject to the caveat that the quantum of

1° Case concerning the Factory at Chorzéw (Claim for Indemnity) (Merits), P.C.LJ. Series A, No. 17
(Judgement of 13 September 1928) at page 47.

‘7 Trmgard Marboe, Calculation of Compensation and Damages in International Investment Law (Oxford
University Press, 2009) at paragraph 5.394; see also ibid. at paragraph 7.16.

168 Thid. at paragraphs 5.395-5.397.

- 299 -

such liability must be proved with sufficient certainty.'

In this connection, Marboe
notably refers to the previously-cited ICSID case of Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine
Republic, in which the “potential liability” of the plaintiff to subcontractors (that is,

liability under claims that might be made in the future) was the subject of an award.

797. Therefore, the Tribunal accepts the submission of the Claimants that, in principle,
consequential damage is a valid head of loss in international law. In this regard, the
Tribunal recalls that even the Respondent, in its written submissions, conceded that
“consequential damages are compensable under international law under certain

circumstances.”

798. Furthermore, the Claimants argue that, even if Ecuadorian law applied, they
would be entitled to consequential damages. The Respondent, however, contends that
consequential damages are by definition “indirect” damages and hence unrecoverable
under Ecuadorian law. In the words of the Respondent’s expert, Dr. Alfredo Corral
Borrero, under Ecuadorian law, “the debtor has no indemnification obligations for
mediate or indirect damages that might have been caused to the creditor.” (Emphasis in
original) But the Tribunal also notes that the Claimants’ expert on this issue, Dr. Pérez
Loose, explained that, under Ecuadorian law, compensation must “retur[n] the obligee to
the economic situation he should have been in were it not for the act attributable to the
liable party.” It is thus clear that Ecuadorian law does not bar the recovery of

consequential damages in a situation such as that which obtains in the present case.

169 Thid. at paragraphs 5.404-5.407.

- 300 -

(b) The Claimants’ Position

@ Ship-or-Pay damages

799. As mentioned earlier in this Award'”, in order to transport production from
various fields in eastern Ecuador, including from Block 15, to the port of Balao, Ecuador

contracted with a consortium of companies to build and operate the OCP pipeline.

800. To finance the construction and continued operation of the pipeline, OCP S.A.
entered into a number of transportation contracts with individual shippers (the

previously-defined “ISTAs”), including with OEPC.

801. The ISTAs provide that, for a certain period, the shippers pay a monthly tariff rate
sufficient to cover the costs of the pipeline. In addition, the ISTAs contain a provision
known as a “ship-or-pay” requirement whereby a shipper is responsible for paying tariffs
based on a certain minimum level of throughput even if the shipper’s actual production is

insufficient to meet this minimum level.

802. From the date of the Caducidad Decree and the resulting termination of the Block
15 Participation Contract, OEPC continues to bear the contractual obligation to pay

tariffs pursuant to the ship-or-pay requirement under its ISTA with OCP S.A.

803. The Claimants claim damages from the Respondent in respect of a portion of
these tariffs. That portion is the difference between (i) tariffs for oil that OEPC cannot
ship because of the Respondent’s breach (i.e. the full extent of OEPC’s ship-or-pay

See supra at paragraph 143.

- 301 -

commitment, because it can ship no oil); and (ii) tariffs for oil that OEPC could not have
shipped in any event (i.e. because of its inevitable non-use of some capacity due to Block

15 production levels falling short of its total ship-or-pay commitment).

(ii) Employee Termination Costs
804. As a direct result of the Caducidad Decree, say the Claimants, they had to pay
approximately $7 million in employee severance costs for early termination of the

Participation Contract.

805. While the Claimants acknowledge that they would have had to pay some of these
costs at the conclusion of the Participation Contract in 2019, they state that “it is

Ecuador’s burden to demonstrate how much of the $7M claimed should be reduced.”

(iii) | Value of a Stranded Cargo

806. According to the Claimants, at the time of the Caducidad Decree, OEPC had a
“cargo at the port of Esmeralda which it was forced to abandon”. They aver that by the
terms of the Caducidad Decree, the title to all of OEPC’s assets in Ecuador passed to the

Respondent, including this stranded cargo which they value at $1 million.

(© The Respondent’s Position
@ Ship-or-Pay Damages
807. The Respondent submits that the Claimants’ claim for this head of damages

should be dismissed on the following five grounds:

First, Claimants’ claim fails for lack of causation. The Ship-or-Pay expenses
were based, required, and caused by Claimants’ own obligations towards OCP
S.A., not by the Caducidad Decree. As explained in prior submissions, claims
for payments made in fulfillment of contractual obligations that are res inter alios

- 302 -

acta with respect to the respondent State are commonly rejected by international
tribunals on grounds of lack of causation and/or remoteness.

Second, it remains undisputed that (i) to be compensable, damages have to be
foreseeable, and (ii) the Ship-or-Pay costs were not foreseeable at the time the
Participation Contract was executed in May 1999. As Mr. Rivkin reminded the
Tribunal at the damages hearing, “the OCP pipeline was constructed in 2001-
03,” i.e., more than two years after the Participation Contract. In 1999, the OCP
pipeline project did not even exist, nor had any contracts related to the OCP been
entered into.

Ecuador already noted in its Rejoinder on Quantum that “Claimants have
remained silent” on the issue of foreseeability of their Ship-or-Pay damages.
Claimants’ continued silence is an implicit recognition that their claims fails for
lack of foreseeability.

Third, Claimants do not dispute that they had a duty to mitigate their Ship-or-Pay
costs. They have remained silent, however, as to their wilful assumption of risk
in relation to the Ship-or-Pay costs. Ecuador pointed out numerous times that
despite contemplating in the OCP contract the risks of “Upstream Expropriatory
Action” and “Equity Expropriatory Event,” Claimants failed to secure a
contractual provision allowing termination of the OCP contract, or the
suspension of tariff payments, in the event of caducidad. Consistent with
international law, this Tribunal should not protect Claimants against willingly
taken investment risks.

Fourth, Claimants are still at a loss to satisfy their burden of proof. In particular,
Claimants do not dispute the inherently speculative nature of their claim.
Nothing prevents Claimants from finding someone else to take over their
shipping commitment. In fact, Claimants’ shipping contract expressly allowed
them to assign their Ship-or-Pay rights. Were Claimants to prevail on this claim
and, thereafter, sell their OCP capacity, they would be unjustly enriched.

Finally, Claimants have inflated their Ship-or-Pay claim by (i) estimating their
costs on the basis of an incorrect assumption of reserves; and (ii) failed to take
into account OEPC’s release of rigs immediately prior to caducidad, which
would have diminished Block 15’s production and its ability to allocate oil
towards its OCP capacity even if caducidad had not been declared. (Emphasis in
original)

(ii) Employee Termination Costs

808. The Respondent avers, principally, that OEPC would have had to pay employee

termination costs, in any event, at the conclusion of the Participation Contract in 2019

and that, therefore, such costs were not caused by the Caducidad Decree. In other words,

- 303 -

such costs would have been incurred in the normal course of business at the expiration of

the Participation Contract’s contractual term.

809. In addition, says the Respondent, employee termination costs are part of the
operational costs (OPEX) for the last year of contract performance and accordingly
should have been included in the Claimants’ DCF analysis. The Claimants have failed to
factor in these costs which would have reduced the value a willing buyer would have paid

for Block 15 as of May 2006.

810. Finally, the Respondent argues that, by seeking to shift to it the burden of proof as
to how much of the $7 million claimed “would have had to be paid and when,” the

Claimants have recognized that they have not been able to meet their burden of proof.

(iii) | Value of a Stranded Cargo

811. According to the Respondent, the Claimants were not obliged to abandon any
cargo as a result of the Caducidad Decree. The Claimants, the Respondent says, have
failed to satisfy their burden of proof. They have not adduced any evidence, the

Respondent maintains, of the existence of the cargo or its value.

(d) The Tribunal’s Conclusions

@ Ship-or-Pay Damages

812. At the outset, the Tribunal notes that, quite properly, the Claimants have included
their ship-or-pay payments as costs in their DCF model since, had there been no
Caducidad Decree, they would have made those payments to OCP S.A. in order to ship

the oil produced in Block 15.

- 304 -

813. In addition to arguing that consequential damages are not recoverable under
international law nor under Ecuadorian law, arguments which the Tribunal disposed of
earlier, the Respondent raises several defenses to this claim:
(i) there was a lack of causation, because the ship-or-pay losses were
caused by the Claimants’ obligations to third parties;
(ii) the losses were not foreseeable;
(iii) the Claimants’ quantification of these losses is wrong, because it is
based on incorrect assumptions of reserves and a failure to account for the
two missing rigs;
(iv) the Claimants have failed to mitigate these losses;
(v) the Claimants were contributorially negligent in failing to negotiate
terms with the other OCP parties that would protect them from caducidad or
similar events; and
(vi) finally, these losses are speculative, because the Claimants can still
assign OEPC’s ship-or-pay rights, and if they did so a damages award
would leave them unjustly enriched.
814. After having considered carefully the parties’ written and oral arguments in
respect of these several defenses, the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that the
Claimants’ claim for “ship-or-pay” damages fails principally on account of the

Respondent’s defenses iii) and vi) set out in the previous paragraph. Put simply, the

Tribunal concludes that the Claimants have failed to discharge their burden of proof.

815. The Claimants have admitted that their release, prior to the Caducidad Decree, of
two drilling rigs in Block 15 impacted negatively their production of oil. Yet, they failed
to take account of the impact on production of these released rigs in the calculation of

their ship-or-pay damages.

- 305 -

816. The Tribunal has ruled earlier in this Award that the absence of these two rigs
necessitated an adjustment to OEPC’s production profile. To be logical, the absence of
these two rigs also requires an adjustment by the Tribunal to the quantification of post-
caducidad ship-or-pay losses. The evidence in the record as to the precise level of that
adjustment is, to say the least, unclear. The Claimants have failed to meet their burden of
proof and left the Tribunal to speculate as to the calculation of the necessary adjustment.

This the Tribunal will not do.

817. The Claimants have also failed to satisfy their burden of proof when they were
met by the Respondent’s argument that, since the ISTA with OCP S.A. allowed them to
assign the ship-or-pay rights, the Claimants would be unjustly enriched if, after having

prevailed on this claim, they were able to sell some or all of their OCP capacity.

818. While there is a possibility that the Claimants may not be able to assign any of
their OCP capacity in the future!”', the Tribunal cannot rule out the possibility that other
oil producers who have also contracted with OCP will, in the future, until 2019, use the

Claimants’ capacity in the OCP pipeline.

819. This leads the Tribunal to conclude that the Claimants’ claim for ship-or-pay
damages is inherently speculative. There is no satisfactory evidence in the record which
allows the Tribunal to value the possibility of an assignment in the future. The Tribunal
therefore finds that the Claimants’ claim for ship-or-pay damages fails for lack of proof

and their claim for $194 million is accordingly denied.

'! Except to the extent of $6.1 million which they have already deducted from their claim.

- 306 -

(ii) Employee Termination Costs

820. The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the employee termination costs
payable in 2019 cannot be attributed to the Caducidad Decree. The Tribunal also agrees
that the Claimants should have included in their DCF analysis, as part of their operational
costs (OPEX) for the last year of the Participation Contract, these employee termination

costs.

821. By factoring in these costs and using Professor Kalt’s economic model, “the FMV
impact of Termination Costs in 2019 would be $7.6M.” These costs will thus be

incorporated into the Tribunal’s DCF analysis.!”*

(iii) | Value of a Stranded Cargo

822. The Tribunal has noted Mr. Ellis’ statement that OEPC “had to abandon” a cargo
which reverted to the Respondent upon the Caducidad Decree. However, the Claimants
have been unable to refer to any contractual provision under the Participation Contract to

support Mr. Ellis’ statement.

823. In addition, the Claimants’ claim also fails for lack of sufficient and satisfactory
evidence as to both the existence and the value of the cargo. The Claimants’ claim of

$1 million is therefore denied.

' See Joint Expert Report at paragraph 23.

- 307 -

i. Calculation of Damages

824. Using the economic model agreed by Professor Kalt and Mr. Johnston, the
Tribunal, informed by all the findings that it has made in the present Section of its Award
and assisted by Professor Kalt and Mr. Johnston’s agreed calculations, determines that
the Net Present Value of the discounted cash flows generated by the Block 15 OEPC
production as of 16 May 2006 is US$ 2,359,500,000 (US Two billion, three hundred fifty

nine millions and five hundred thousand dollars).!73

825. Having determined earlier that the Claimants’ damages should be reduced by a
factor of 25% because of their own wrongful act which contributed in a material way to
the damages which they subsequently suffered when the Caducidad Decree was issued
on 15 May 2006, the Claimants’ damages for the expropriation by Ecuador of their
interest in the Participation Contract amount to US$ 1,769,625,000 (US One billion,
seven hundred sixty nine millions, six hundred twenty five thousand dollars)'”* which the

Tribunal orders the Respondent to pay.

12, Interest

826. The Tribunal must now determine the interest to be awarded to the Claimants, i.e.
the rate, whether simple or compound interest will be awarded, and the period during

which interest will accrue.

"3 See Table | provided by the parties’ experts, Professor Kalt and Mr. Johnston, at the hearing on 30 June
2011.

"4 US$ 2,359,500,000 — US$ 589,875,000 (25%)= US$ 1,769,625,000

- 308 -

(a) The Claimants’ Position

827. The starting point is to identify what the Claimants have sought with regard to
interest. Their Request for Arbitration claimed an award, inter alia, “[d]irecting
Respondents to pay Claimants interest on all sums awarded, in amounts to be determined

at the hearing [...]”.

828. In their Memorial on Damages, the Claimants sought compound interest and
indicated that Professor Kalt “used a conservative rate in calculating interest: the monthly
rate paid on U.S. Government T-bills compounded on a monthly basis. As of the date of

this filing that interest rate was 4.188%.”

829. Professor Kalt calculated interest in his DCF model at the monthly interest rate
paid on U.S Government Treasury Bills compounded on a monthly basis from the day
after the expropriation date of 15 May 2006, i.e. 16 May 2006.75 Claiming interest from
the expropriation date accords with the normal principle usually applied in cases of
expropriation, since it is from that date that the deprivation has been suffered. This

principle is supported by the doctrine and the jurisprudence of international tribunals.'”°

830. In their Memorial on Damages, the Claimants requested that interest calculated on
the basis above be awarded “through the date of full and effective payment” of any
damages awarded by the Tribunal.

175

Appendix | and Rebuttal Witness Statement of Joseph P. Kalt dated 12 June 2009 at paragraph 11.

"6 See e.g. Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) v. The Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No.
ARB/84/3), Award of 20 May 1992 at paragraph 234.

- 309 -

(b) The Respondent’s Position

831. Although the Respondent has not specifically challenged the Claimants’ approach
to calculating interest, reference was made by the Respondent to a recent award by an

ICSID tribunal where Ecuador was also the respondent.!””

In this award, the tribunal
applied Ecuadorian, not international law, noting that the “prohibition of compound
interest contained in the local law must be enforced”. Reference to this award was made
by the Respondent in this case to support a different point, namely its submission that the

Claimants’ claim for consequential damages should be rejected as it cannot be awarded

under Ecuadorian law. As seen earlier in this Award, this submission ultimately failed.

832. Mr. Johnston, on behalf of the Respondent, provides as follows: “Just as
Claimants have accounted for interest (at 5% annually) from caducidad to the effective
date of Dr. Kalt’s rebuttal witness statement (June 12, 2009), I have calculated interest
from May 16, 2006 to June 12, 2009.” 8 Mr. Johnston then sets out the following

table:’”

"7 Duke Energy Electroquil Partners & Electroquil S.A. v. The Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No.
ARB/4/19), Award of 18 August 2008.

"8 Rebuttal Report of Daniel Johnston dated 8 September 2009 at page 5.

" Ibid.

- 310-

Johnston Damages Valuation

(as of May 16, 2006)

 

 

 

Block 15 OCP Ship-or-Pay Termination Total
Production
Costs
$MM $MM $MM
$MM
$1,500 $133 $8 $1,641

 

 

 

 

 

Johnston Damages Valuation

(as of June 12, 2009)

 

 

 

Block 15 OCP Ship-or-Pay Termination Total
Production
Costs
$MM $MM $MM
$MM
$1,743 $154 $9.3 $1,906

 

 

 

 

 

833. It is not possible to calculate the precise components of Mr. Johnston’s
calculations but it appears from the above that he has generally followed Professor Kalt’s
approach, albeit by applying an annual rate of 5% as opposed to the monthly rate paid on

U.S. Government T-bills.

-311-

( Recent Trends in Relation to Interest in ICSID Awards

@ Simple v. Compound Interest

834. The traditional norm was to award simple interest. However, this practice has
changed and, in fact, most recent awards provide for compound interest.'*° This practice
accords with the Chorz6w principle as an award of compound interest will usually reflect

the actual damages suffered.'*!

835. An analysis of recent interest awards demonstrates that in 2007, all tribunals,

expect one, awarded compound interest. In the 2008-2009 period, six out of ten

183

tribunals awarded compound interest. Several more recent cases have also awarded

compound interest. 184

836. Of the four tribunals which awarded simple interest in the 2008-2009 period, only

one case was in relation to damages awarded for expropriation, namely Saipem S.p.A. v.

'89 Peter Muchlinski, Federico Ortino & Christoph Schreuer, The Oxford Handbook of International
Investment Law (Oxford University Press, 2008) at page 1107.

'8! The situation was helpfully summarized in Compajita de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal
S.A. v. The Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Award of 20 August 2007 at paragraphs
9,2.1-9.2.8.

' Karl P. Sauvant, ed., Yearbook on International Investment Law and Policy 2009-2010 (Oxford
University Press, 2010) at page 156.

"8 Thid.

184 See El Paso International Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15) (31 October
2011) at paragraph 746; Impregilo S.p.A v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/17) (21 June
2011) at paragraph 382; Joseph Charles Lemire v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18) (28 March 2011)
at paragraphs 360-361; Alpha Projektholding GMBH v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/16)
(8 November 2010) at paragraph 514 and Gemplus S.A. and Talsud S.A. v. The United Mexican States
(ICSID Case Nos. ARB(AF)/04/3 and ARB(AF)/04/4) (16 June 2010) at paragraphs 16-26.

-312-

The People’s Republic of Bangladesh.'*° That case arose from a prior ICC award that
had been declared non-existent by the courts of Bangladesh, an act which among others,
the ISCID tribunal held amounted to an illegal expropriation. In the ICSID arbitration,
the claimants claimed the amount awarded to it by the ICC tribunal plus interest. The
claimants requested that simple interest be awarded up until the date of the expropriation
(being the interest awarded in the ICC award) with compound interest to accrue from that
date. However, the tribunal was not prepared to award interest going beyond that
allocated by the ICC arbitrators and a simple rate was subsequently awarded for the entire

interest period.

837. Simple interest was awarded in Desert Line Projects LLC v. The Republic of
Yemen.'*© In this case, the claimant had claimed compound interest on the damages
awarded at a rate of 7%. The respondent argued, inter alia, that compound interest could
not be awarded on the basis that (i) international tribunals generally rule against the
award of compound interest; (ii) the award of compound interest was contrary to Yemeni
law; (iii) and the claimants had not advanced any reason for an award of compound
interest.'*’ The tribunal considered that the appropriate rate of interest was a simple rate

of 5% per annum.'** No reasons were provided in this regard.

'85 ICSID Case No. ARB/0S/7.
'8° ICSID Case No. ARB/05/17.
'87 Award of 6 February 2008 (ICSID) at paragraph 294.

188 Thid. at paragraph 295.

- 313 -

838. Simple interest was also awarded in the case Duke Energy Electroquil Partners &
Electroquil S.A. v. The Republic of Ecuador'® referred to earlier, where the tribunal
applied the domestic Ecuadorian law to the issue of interest. In that case, the tribunal
tuled that the Government breached both Ecuadorian law and the U.S.-Ecuador
investment treaty. However, the damages awarded related to the breach of contract
claims under Ecuadorian law only and no additional damages were awarded for the
breach of international law. It was not an expropriation case. The tribunal further
observes that in that case, the respondent had objected to the use of compound interest on
the ground that it is prohibited under Ecuadorian law and added that, even under
international law, an award of compound interest would not be in conformity with earlier
decisions in investment disputes. In reliance on Compajiia del Desarrollo de Santa
Elena, S.A. v. The Republic of Costa Rica’, in particular, as well as on Autopista

191

Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela” and Marvin

Roy Feldman Karpa v. The United Mexican States'””, it noted that compound interest

may be awarded for expropriation but not for contract claims.’ The tribunal agreed

with the respondent’s argument in favour of simple interest.!°*

189 Supra note 177.

'° ICSID Case No. ARB/96/I.

'°! ICSID Case No. ARB/00/S.

'® ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1.
'3 Supra note177, at paragraph 432.

'4 Thid. at paragraph 457.

-314-

839. The fourth award where simple interest was awarded, which is the case of Duke
Energy International Peru Investments No. 1, Limited v. The Republic of Peru”, was in
relation to claims regarding tax stabilization where the rate stipulated by the national tax

authority for tax refunds applied.

840. In summary, it may be seen that compound interest is the norm in recent
expropriation cases under ICSID. The Tribunal sees no reason to depart from the norm

and from the basis pleaded by both parties

(ii) Interest Rate

841. Of the six tribunals who awarded compound interest rates in 2008-2009, the
majority applied the U.S. 6 month LIBOR rate though a “commercially reasonable rate”
and a “reasonable rate” were also used.'®° More recent cases have either adopted a fixed

percentage or a LIBOR plus margin rate.!°”

842. In the present case, the Claimants have requested the US Government Treasury
bill rate which reflects a prudent, risk-free and conservative re-investment practice. As

noted earlier, at the time of filing their Memorial on Damages, that interest rate was

'®5 ICSID Case No. ARB/03/28.

'6 Karl P. Sauvant, ed., Yearbook on International Investment Law and Policy 2009-2010 (Oxford
University Press, 2010) at page 156.

'°7 See El Paso International Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15) (31 October
2011) at paragraph 745 (LIBOR plus 2%); Impregilo S.p.A v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/17) (21 June 2011) at paragraph 383 (6%); Joseph Charles Lemire v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No.
ARB/06/18) (28 March 2011) at paragraph 356 (LIBOR plus 2%); Alpha Projektholding GMBH v. Ukraine
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/16) (8 November 2010) at paragraph 514 (9.11%) and Gemplus S.A. and Telsud
S.A. v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case Nos. ARB(AF)/04/3 and ARB(AF)/04/4) (16 June 2010) at
paragraphs 18-7 (2%).

- 315 -

4.188%. The Respondent’s expert, on the other hand, has applied an annual interest rate
of 5% which, at the time of filing his report, was very similar to the monthly rate paid on
U.S. Government T-bills as calculated by the Claimants’ expert. The Tribunal therefore

considers that a 4.188% annual interest rate is reasonable in the circumstances.

(iii) | Compounding Intervals

843. There are no general rules regarding the compounding intervals.'°*

844. Of the six tribunals who awarded compound interest rates in 2008-2009, two
awards compounded annually and the remaining four compounded semi-annually.'”°

~ : rae
More recent awards have also favoured annual or semi-annual compounding.”

845. In the present case, although monthly compounding has been used by the
Claimants’ expert, Professor Kalt, with no apparent objection by the Respondent’s expert,
Mr. Johnston, the Tribunal is of the view that granting monthly compounding would be
unduly favourable to the Claimants in view of recent trends in investment arbitration. It
may be argued that, given this decision, semi-annual compounding would be appropriate,
as the interest rate adopted by the Tribunal is not high. However, not without hesitation,

the Tribunal has decided, in its discretion, that annual compounding is appropriate, given

'8 Trmgard Marboe, Calculation of Compensation and Damages in International Investment Law (Oxford
University Press, 2009) at paragraphs 6.210-6.212.

' Karl P. Sauvant, ed., Yearbook on International Investment Law and Policy 2009-2010 (Oxford
University Press, 2010) at Table 1 “Damages” at pages 165 and following.

°® The El Paso Award (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15) compounded semi-annually, as did the Lemire v.
Ukraine Award (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18).  Impregilo (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17), Alpha
Projektholding (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/16) and Gemplus and Talsud (ICSID Case Nos. ARB(AF)/04/3
and ARB(AF)/04/4) all provided for annual compounding of interest.

- 316 -

the large amount of the Award and the number of years that have passed since the

violation.

(d) The Period during which Interest Must Accrue

846. It is undisputable that the period during which interest must accrue begins on 16

May 2006, the day after the expropriation, as in Professor Kalt’s DCF calculation.

847. Furthermore, the Tribunal concludes that (as requested by the Claimants) interest
should run until the date of payment of the present Award, in accordance with established
practice as illustrated, for example, by the cases Walter Bau Ag (in liquidation) v. The

202

Kingdom of Thailand®', RSM Production Corporation and others v. Grenada” and

Desert Line Projects LLC v. The Republic of Yemen?

() The Tribunal’s Conclusion

848. For all of these reasons, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants are entitled to pre-
award interest at the rate of 4.188% per annum, compounded annually from 16 May 2006
until the date of the present Award. The Tribunal observes that this approach is
consistent with the terms of the BIT, which expressly provides at Article III for “interest

at a commercially reasonable rate from the date of expropriation.”

20! Award of 1 July 2009 (UNCITRAL).
202

ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6.

°° ICSID Case No. ARB/O5/17.

-317-

849. As noted above, the Claimants did not specifically distinguish between pre-award
and post-award interest, requesting that interest be awarded on the basis proposed by the
Claimants up to the date of full and effective payment. It is not uncommon for tribunals

to distinguish between pre- and post-award interest™

and in the present case it seems
appropriate to do so, given the current LIBOR interest rates, used as a base rate by banks
and other financial institutions, are very low; but, of course, the rates will fluctuate before
the Award is settled. In the circumstances, and since the Tribunal cannot predict when
the Respondent will settle the sums which it has been ordered to pay to the Claimants, the

Tribunal considers that it would be fair to order that post-award interest should accrue in

favour of the Claimants at the U.S. 6 month LIBOR rate compounded on a monthly basis.

13. Ecuadorian Taxes

850. The damages sought by the Claimants in this proceeding have been calculated by
the Claimants on an after-tax basis. More particularly, the Claimants have deducted the
following from their damages calculations: (i) Ecuadorian income tax, (ii) labor
participation or “utilidades” tax, (iii) an asset-based tax, and (iv) the ECORAE tax, which

is a per-barrel assessment on oil.

851. During the quantum phase of this proceeding, the Claimants have sought

confirmation on the part of the Respondent that it will not seek to collect taxes on any

2 Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7) (9 November 2000) at
paragraph 97; Metalclad Corporation v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1) (25
August 2000) at paragraph 131; and ADC Affiliate Ltd. and ADC & ADMC Management Ltd. v. The
Republic of Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16) (27 September 2006) at paragraph 522.

- 318 -

award that the Claimants may receive. In response, the Respondent asserts that the

Claimants’ request for such confirmation is irrelevant and speculative at best.

852. The Claimants accordingly submit that “the Tribunal may need to determine
damages on a pre-tax basis.” (Emphasis in original) Alternatively, the Claimants make
the following request:

If the Tribunal awards damages on an after-tax basis, Claimants request that the

award explicitly state that taxes have already been deemed to have been paid to

avoid future litigation over these issues. In the event that the Tribunal awards

damages based on the Treaty and those damages are no different in quantum

from the contract damages, the Tribunal could award damages solely to

Occidental Petroleum Corporation. OPC is not an Ecuadorian entity and is not

subject to Ecuadorian tax or labor participation claims.
853. The Tribunal observes that both Professor Kalt and Mr. Johnston have indicated
that their respective quantum calculations have been made on an after-tax basis. In the

circumstances, the Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the Claimants’ request is

speculative and premature. The request is accordingly denied.

H. The Tribunal’s Findings in connection with the Respondent’s Counterclaim

854. In this arbitration, the Respondent, as noted earlier, has put forward a
counterclaim on the basis of the four following allegations:
(i) malicious prosecution (abuso del derecho) in relation to this
ICSID proceeding;

(ii) breach of Clause 22.2.1 of the Participation Contract regarding
waiver of the right to use diplomatic or consular channels;

(iii) the Claimants’ destructive and unlawful conduct following the

Caducidad Decree, including lost Block 15 production due to the
release of drilling rigs and damage to data and software; and

- 319-

(iv) the Claimants’ failure to pay the required assignment fee and
negotiate a new participation contract more favourable to the
Respondent.

855. Each of these four allegations is addressed in turn next.

L. The Respondent’s Allegation that the Claii Initiated and Pr 1
this Case in Bad Faith

856. This allegation on the part of the Respondent is expressly based on the contention
that the Claimants have launched the present proceeding knowing that their claims in
relation to the Caducidad Decree are objectively baseless and cannot succeed. However,
as set forth earlier in this Award, the Tribunal has already concluded that notwithstanding
OEPC’s breach of Clause 16.1 of the Participation Contract and its actionable violation of
Article 74.11 of the HCL, the Caducidad Decree was not a proportionate response in the
particular circumstances and that it was accordingly issued in breach of Ecuadorian law,
in breach of customary international law, and in violation of Article II.3(a) of the Treaty.
The Tribunal has also concluded that the Respondent had breached Article III.1 of the

Treaty.

857. In the circumstances, it follows that this proceeding as brought by the Claimants
cannot be deemed to have been baseless or otherwise malicious or abusive. The

Respondent’s allegation and counterclaim in this regard accordingly fails.

2 The Respondent’s Allegation that OEPC Breached Clause 22.2.1 of the
Participation Contract Through its Use of Diplomatic Channels

858. The Tribunal recalls that Clause 22.2.1 of the Participation Contract provides as

follows:

- 320 -

In the event of controversies that may arise as a result of the performance of this

Participation Contract, in accordance with Ecuadorian law, Contractor expressly

waives its right to use diplomatic or consular channels, or to have recourse to any

national or foreign jurisdictional body not provided for in this Participation

Contract. Lack of compliance with this provision shall constitute grounds for the

caducidad of this Participation Contract.
859. The Claimants have argued that the Respondent’s counterclaim in this regard fails
because Clause 22.2.1 cannot be invoked to prevent OEPC from seeking government
assistance to remedy violations by the Respondent of international law and that, in any
event, the Respondent has failed to produce evidence of any requests by the Claimants
for assistance from the U.S. Government in connection with the threatened caducidad
dispute. The Claimants also aver that since the Respondent participated in discussions of
the VAT dispute with the U.S. Government prior to the commencement of the VAT

arbitration in 2002, the Respondent cannot now in good faith claim that these very

discussions are in breach of Clause 22.2.1.

860. The Tribunal has found no evidence in the voluminous record of this case that the
Claimants ever sought assistance from the U.S. Government in connection with the
caducidad dispute through diplomatic channels in breach of Clause 22.2.1. The
Respondent’s counterclaim in this regard accordingly fails.

3. The Respondent’s Allegation of Destructive and Unlawful Conduct on the
part of the Claimants

861. In the third head of its counterclaim, the Respondent seeks damages for losses it
allegedly suffered as a result of the Claimants’ “destructive actions” regarding Block 15.
These “destructive actions” consist of the release by the Claimants shortly before the date

of the Caducidad Decree of two drilling rigs required to maintain production levels at

- 321-

Block 15, the deactivation of 108 software programs used to operate Block 15 and the
Unified Fields, as well as the deletion of “approximately 3,705 gigabytes of data from the
Block’s computer system.” These actions, the Respondent contends, resulted in damages

of over $80 million.

862. The Claimants reject the Respondent’s allegations of “destructive actions.” With
respect to the release of the drilling rigs, the Claimants maintain that nothing in the
Participation Contract or the HCL required OEPC to maintain at the site such equipment
that was no longer in use. And in connection with the deactivation of Block 15’s
operational software, the Claimants submit that OEPC took all steps necessary to ensure
the smooth transition of Block 15 from OEPC to PetroEcuador, and that any ensuing
difficulties were the result of PetroEcuador’s own failure to plan adequately for the

transition.

863. This counterclaim will now be considered and analyzed in more detail.

(a) Lost Block 15 Production Due to Release of Drilling Rigs

864. As found earlier in this Award, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the release of the
drilling rigs by OEPC prior to 15 May 2006 was dictated by anything other than
economic considerations. It was certainly not caused by the Caducidad Decree or,

indeed, any wrongful action on the part of the Respondent.

865. On the basis of the evidence which it has analyzed, the Tribunal concludes that

the Respondent has not discharged its burden of proving that, by releasing the two rigs on

- 322 -

3 January 2006 and 15 April 2006, the Claimants caused damages to the Respondent.

This counterclaim accordingly fails.

866. As was seen earlier in the Tribunal’s determination of quantum, the absence of
these two rigs has been taken into consideration in the calculation of the fair market value

of Block 15.

(b) Damages to Data and Software

867. The Claimants maintain, essentially, that the software licenses for the Block 15
operations are intellectual property owned by them and that they were perfectly justified
to cancel these licenses. Such licenses, say the Claimants, cannot be equated with
“equipment, tools, machinery or installations” referred to at Clause 5.1.21 of the

Participation Contract.

868. Although the Tribunal is of the view that, in today’s modern world of electronic
technology, software licenses are “tools” which needed to be transferred to the
Respondent under clause 5.1.22 of the Participation Contract following the Caducidad
Decree, there is no evidence in the record that the Claimants destroyed any software data
in retaliation for the declaration by the Respondent of Caducidad. Accordingly, the

Respondent’s counterclaim in this regard fails.

4 The Respondent’s Allegation that the Claimants Failed to Pay the
Assis Fee and to N jate a New Participation Contract More
Favourable to the Respondent

869. The fourth and final head of the Respondent’s counterclaim, based on the

allegation that the Claimants failed to pay the assignment fee and negotiate a new

- 323 -

participation contract more favourable to the Respondent in accordance with Article 79 of
the HCL, is no longer pursued by the Respondent. This appears logical. The Tribunal so

notes and thus need not make any ruling.

VII. COSTS
870. The Claimants submit that, as the ultimate successful party, they should recover
from the Respondent all of their legal costs as well as the fees and expenses of the

Tribunal and the administrative charges of ICSID.

871. The Tribunal, for the following reasons, has formed the view that it would not be
appropriate in the circumstances of this lengthy and complex arbitration to grant the

Claimants’ prayer.

872. The Tribunal recalls, in particular, that it dismissed the Claimants’ Application for

Provisional Relief.

873. The Tribunal also recalls that, while the Respondent’s challenge to the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal was dismissed earlier and, in the present Award, the Claimants have been
awarded significant damages, the Tribunal has found that the Claimants breached Clause
16.1 of the Participation Contract and were guilty of an actionable violation of Article
74.11 of the HCL, which violation contributed to the prejudice which they suffered when

the Caducidad Decree was issued.

874. Thus, in the exercise of its discretion, the Tribunal decides that each party shall

bear its own legal costs and that the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the

-324-

administrative charges of ICSID shall be borne equally as between the Claimants and the

Respondent.

875. Inclosing, the Tribunal acknowledges the quality of the extensive written and oral
submissions of both parties in respect of the myriad of factual and legal questions which

were raised in the course of these lengthy and very complex arbitral proceedings.

VIII. AWARD
876. For all of the foregoing reasons, and rejecting all submissions and contentions to
the contrary, the Tribunal DECLARES, AWARDS and ORDERS as follows in respect of

the issues arising for determination in these proceedings:

(i) Ecuador acted in breach of Article II.3(a) of the Treaty by failing to accord
fair and equitable treatment to the Claimants’ investment, and to accord the

Claimants treatment no less than that required by international law;

(ii) Ecuador acted in breach of Article III.1 of the Treaty by expropriating the
Claimants’ investment in Block 15 through a measure “tantamount to

expropriation”;

(iii) | Ecuador issued the Caducidad Decree in breach of Ecuadorian law and

customary international law;

(iv) | OEPC breached Clause 16.1 of the Participation Contract by failing to

secure the required ministerial authorization for the transfer of rights under the

- 325 -

877.

Farmout Agreement; as a result of this breach, the damages awarded to the

Claimants will be reduced by a factor of 25% (see subparagraph (v));

(v) Claimants are awarded the amount of US$ 1,769,625,000 (US One billion,
seven hundred sixty nine millions, six hundred twenty five thousand dollars), as
calculated in paragraph 825 of this Award, for damages suffered as a result of the

breaches set out above in subparagraphs (i), (ii) and (iii);

(vi) | Ecuador is ordered to pay pre-award interest on the above amount at the
rate of 4.188% per annum, compounded annually from 16 May 2006 until the date

of this Award;

(vii) | Ecuador is ordered to pay post-award interest from the date of this Award

at the U.S. 6 month LIBOR rate, compounded on a monthly basis; and

(viii) Ecuador’s counterclaims, except that counterclaim specified in sub-

paragraph (iv) above, are dismissed; and

(ix) | Each Party is ordered to bear its own costs of the proceedings and the
Claimants and the Respondent are ordered and mandated each to pay half of

ICSID’s and the Tribunal’s costs of and incidental to the proceedings.

In accordance with Article 48(4) of the ICSID Convention, Arbitrator Stern

dissents from the above majority and her statement of dissent is attached.

- 326 -

[See attached dissenting opinion] [signed]

Professor Brigitte Stern David A.R. Williams, Q.C.

Date: 24 September 2012

[signed]

L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C.
President
Date: 20 September 2012

