 

Neutral Citation Number: [2005] EWCA Civ 1116

Case No: A3/2005/1121
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE

PEAL (CIVIL DIVISION
FROM QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
Mr Justice Aikens

   

Royal Courts of Justice
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL

 

Date: 09/09/2005
Before :

LORD PHILLIPS OF WORTH MATRAVERS, MR
LORD JUSTICE CLARKE
and
LORD JUSTICE MANCE

Between:
Occidental Exploration & Production Company Appellant
- and -
The Republic of Ecuador Respondent

Mr Christopher Greenwood QC and Mr Toby Landau (instructed by Messrs Debevoise &
Plimption Lip) for the Appellant
Mr David Lloyd Jones QC and Mr Simon Birt (instructed by Messrs Weil Gotshal &
Manges LIp) for the Respondent

Hearing dates : 20, 21, 22 July 2005

Approved Judgment

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Occidental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of

Ecuador
Lord Justice Mance:

Outline

1. This is the judgment of the Court. The appeal, from a judgment and order of Aikens J

dated 29th April 2005, concerns the extent to which the English Courts may under
s.67 of the Arbitration Act 1996 consider a challenge to the jurisdiction of an award
made by arbitrators appointed under provisions to be found in a Bilateral Investment
Treaty. The Treaty was signed on 27th August 1993 between the United States of
America (“USA”) and the Republic of Ecuador (“Ecuador”). It contained provisions
“concerning the encouragement and reciprocal protection of investment” in each
country by the nationals and companies of the other. These included a provision
(Article VI) whereby, in the event of an “investment dispute”, such nationals and
companies could enjoy direct dispute resolution rights against the other country. One
of the options provided was arbitration subject to the Arbitration Rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law (“UNCITRAL”), as here occurred.
The arbitration was between Occidental Exploration and Production Company
(“Occidental”), a Californian corporation, and Ecuador. There was a distinguished
panel of arbitrators consisting of the Honourable Charles N. Brower, Dr Patrick
Barrera Sweeney and, as chairman, Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia. Their final
award was dated 1‘ July 2004.

2. Regarding the place of any arbitration, the Treaty says only that it “shall be held in a
state that is a party to the New York Convention”. There are over 130 such states. But
Article 16(1) of UNCITRAL, to which the Treaty refers, provides that

“Unless the parties have agreed upon the place where the
arbitration is to be held, such place shall be determined by the
arbitral tribunal, having regard to the circumstances of the
arbitration”.

Occidental and Ecuador were unable to agree upon a place, and the arbitrators by
decision dated 1 August 2003 determined that it should be London. The factor
“tipping the balance” in favour of London (over Washington D.C.) was its
“perception .... as being neutral”. Hearings were actually held in Washington, but the
award dated 1“ July 2004 records the place of arbitration as London.

3. By their award the arbitrators determined the dispute in favour of Occidental, save on
one point relating to whether there had been expropriation, which was not in the event
relevant to the result. Ecuador by claim form dated 11 August 2004 seeks to have the
award set aside under both ss.67 and 68 of the 1996 Act. Also on 11 August 2004,
Occidental issued a claim form seeking, in the event of a challenge to the award by
Ecuador and if necessary, to re-visit the point on expropriation. But by application
notice dated 24 November 2004 Occidental raised a prior objection, that Ecuador’s
challenge requires the English court to interpret provisions of the Bilateral Investment
Treaty between the USA and Ecuador, in contravention of a rule of English law
making such an issue “non-justiciable”. Colman J directed the trial of a preliminary

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Occidental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of

Ecuador

issue relating to that objection. Before Aikens J the objection was abandoned as
regards the points raised under s.68. By his judgment and order under appeal, Aikens
J also decided it against Occidental as regards the points raised under s.67. Aikens J
was not, and we are not, concerned with the merits of Ecuador’s challenge under
either of ss.67 and 68.

Occidental’s investment

The investment to which Occidental’s claim related arose under a contract dated 21
April 1999 with Petroecuador (a state-owned corporation of Ecuador). Occidental
thereby obtained the exclusive right to carry out hydrocarbon exploration and
exploitation in Block 15 of the Ecuadorian Amazon basin region. Occidental assumed
virtually all the costs, and received in return a percentage of the oil produced and the
right to export it. The percentage was determined under an elaborate formula in clause
8.1 of the contract known as “Factor X”.

The costs incurred by Occidental involved it in paying VAT. As an exporter, it sought
reimbursement of this VAT from the Ecuadorian tax authority, the Servicio de Rentas
Internas (“SRY”). At first, in respect of periods from July 1999 to September 2000,
this was afforded by SRI, but thereafter and in respect of subsequent periods it was
refused. SRI initially justified its refusal on the ground that Factor X had been
calculated on a basis covering Occidental’s potential VAT liabilities. Latterly
(although Ecuador suggests that the arbitrators failed to appreciate this) the
justification advanced by SRI and Ecuador changed and was and is that VAT refunds
are only available to exporters of “manufactured” products, within which description
it is contended that the crude oil exported did not fall.

The Bilateral Investment Treaty

6.

The judge summarised the scheme of the Treaty:

“14. ..... (1) The Preamble sets out the aim of the Treaty, which is to promote
greater economic cooperation and investment between the Parties, but on a
defined and agreed basis.

(2) Article I sets out various definitions. "Investment" is
defined broadly.

(3) Article II sets out the basis on which each Party will permit
and treat investment ..... It also provides that the Parties will
ensure that investment will have fair and equitable treatment
according to international law standards.

(4) Article III deals with expropriation or nationalisation of
investments.

(5) Article IV deals with transfers, particularly of funds.

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

  

(6) By Article V the Parties agree to consult promptly to
resolve any disputes in connection with the Treaty.

(7) Article VI deals with the resolution of "investment disputes”
between a State Party and a national or company of the other
State Party. Its terms are central to this application ......

(8) Article VII concerns the resolution of disputes between the
two Parties to the treaty, ie. USA and Ecuador. If necessary,
disputes are to be submitted to an arbitral tribunal, for binding
decision "in accordance with the applicable rules of
international law".”

(9) Article X deals with the tax policies of each Party and
provides that each Party should strive to accord fairness and
equity in the treatment of investments of nationals and
companies of the other Party. It states that the provisions of
the Treaty, in particular Articles VI and VII will nevertheless
apply to matters of taxation only to a certain extent, as set out
in the Article. This Article gave rise to argument about its
scope in the arbitration between Occidental and Ecuador.”

7. More specifically, Articles II, V, VI, VII and X of the Treaty provide:

“T1.3(a) Investment shall at all times be accorded fair and
equitable treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security and
shall in no case be accorded treatment less than that required
by international law.

(b) Neither Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or
discriminatory measures the management, operation,
maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion or
disposal of investments. For purposes of dispute resolution
under Articles VI and VII, a measure may be arbitrary or
discriminatory notwithstanding the fact that a party has had or
has exercised the opportunity to review such measure in the
courts or administrative tribunals of a Party.

V. The Parties agree to consult promptly, on the request of
either, to resolve any disputes in connection with the Treaty or
to discuss any matter relating to the interpretation or
application of the Treaty.

VI.1. For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a
dispute between a Party and a national or company of the other
Party arising out of or relating to (a) an investment agreement
between that Party and such national or company; (b) an
investment authorization granted by that Party's foreign

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

  

investment authority to such national or company; or (c) an
alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty
with respect to an investment.

2. In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the
dispute should initially seek a resolution through consultation
and negotiation. If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, the
national or company concerned may choose to submit the
dispute, under one of the following alternatives, for resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party that is
party to the dispute; or

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed
dispute-settlement procedures; or

(c) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

3. (a) Provided that the national or company concerned has
not submitted the dispute for resolution under paragraph 2 (a)
or (b) and that six months have elapsed from the date on which
the dispute arose, the national or company concerned may
choose to consent in writing to the submission of the dispute
for settlement by binding arbitration:

(i) to the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes ("Centre") established by the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States, done at Washington March 18, 1965
("ICSID Convention"), provided that the Party is a party to
such Convention; or

(ii) to the Additional Facility of the Centre, if the Centre is not
available; or

(iii) in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL); or

(iv) to any other arbitration institution, or in accordance with
any other arbitration rules, as may be mutually agreed between
the parties to the dispute.

(b) Once the national or company concerned has so consented,
either party to the dispute may initiate arbitration in accordance
with the choice so specified in the consent.

4. Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any
investment dispute for settlement by binding arbitration in
accordance with the choice specified in the written consent of
the national or company under paragraph (3). Such consent,
together with the written consent of the national or company

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Occidental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
Ecuador

when given under paragraph (3) shall satisfy the requirement
for:

(a) written consent of the parties to the dispute for purposes of
Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre)
and for purposes of the Additional Facility Rules; and

(b) an "agreement in writing" for purposes of Article II of the
United Nations Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York,
June 10, 1958 ("New York Convention").

5. Any arbitration under paragraph 3(a) (ii), (iii) or (iv), of this
Article shall be held in a state that is a party to the New York
Convention.

6. Any arbitral award rendered pursuant to this Article shall be
final and binding on the parties to the dispute. Each Party
undertakes to carry out without delay the provisions of any
such award and to provide in its territory for its enforcement.

7. In any proceeding involving an investment dispute, a Party
shall not assert, as a defense, counterclaim, right of set-off or
otherwise, that the national or company concerned has received
or will receive, pursuant to an insurance or guarantee contract,
indemnification or other compensation for all or part of its
alleged damages.

8. For purposes of an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this
Article, any company legally constituted under the applicable
laws and regulations of a Party or a political subdivision thereof
that, immediately before the occurrence of the event or events
giving rise to the dispute, was an investment of nationals or
companies of the other Party, shall be treated as a national or
company of such other Party in accordance with Article 25 (2)
(b) of the ICSID Convention.

VII.1 Any dispute between the Parties concerning the
interpretation or application of the Treaty which is not resolved
through consultations or other diplomatic channels, shall be
submitted, upon the request of either Party, to an arbitral
tribunal for binding decision in accordance with the applicable
tules of international law. In the absence of an agreement by
the Parties to the contrary, the arbitration rules of ....
UNCITRAL, except to the extent modified by the Parties or by
the arbitrators, shall govern. .....

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Occidental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
Ecuador

X 1. With respect to its tax policies, each Party should strive to
accord fairness and equity in the treatment of investment of
nationals and companies of the other Party.

2. Nevertheless, the provisions of this Treaty, and in particular
Article VI and VII, shall apply to matters of taxation only with
respect to the following:

(a) expropriation, pursuant to Article III;
(b) transfers, pursuant to Article IV; or

(c) the observance and enforcement of terms of an
investment agreement or authorization as referred to in Article
VI (1) (a) or (b),

to the extent they are not subject to the dispute settlement
provisions of a Convention for the avoidance of double taxation
between the two Parties, or have been raised under such
settlement provisions and are not resolved within a reasonable
period of time.”

The award

8. On 4 April 2002 Occidental gave notice to Ecuador that a dispute had arisen, and,
after allowing six months to lapse, on 11 November 2002 Occidental wrote
consenting in writing to the submission of the dispute to arbitration under
UNCITRAL rules, as provided in Article VI.3(a)(iii) of the Treaty. Occidental alleged
breaches of Articles II.3(a) and (b) and III.1. The arbitrators were appointed. In
September 2003, Ecuador raised objections to any consideration by the tribunal of
Occidental’s claims on three grounds. The first was that, following the refusal of
reimbursement of VAT, Occidental had brought proceedings in Ecuador under
Ecuadorian law. The tribunal decided that this did not preclude Occidental’s separate
claim in the arbitration, and this is no longer in issue. The second was that
Occidental’s claims, relating as they did to matters of taxation, were precluded by
Article X. This, in Ecuador’s submission, limits the application of Article VI to the
three categories of complaint specified in Article X.2(a), (b) and (c) and even then
only permits jurisdiction subject to the closing caveat in Article X.2. The third (linked
with the second through Article X.2(a)) was that the claim that there had been any
expropriation was on any view “inadmissible” (i.e. evidently unfounded).

9. The tribunal agreed with Ecuador in relation to the third objection. But it nevertheless
rejected the second objection. It did so, first, on the ground that the claim could,
because of the arguments founded on Factor X, be regarded as involving “the
observance and enforcement of terms of an investment agreement or authorisation as
referred to in Article VI(1)(a) or (b)”. Ecuador asserts that no such basis for
jurisdiction was ever suggested by Occidental, whose claims were expressly limited to
alleged breaches of rights conferred or created by the Treaty under Article VI.1(c).
The second ground on which the tribunal rejected the second objection was, it would

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

seem, that Article X.2 is not an exclusive definition of the circumstances in which
matters of taxation can give rise to arbitration under Article VI, and that Article X.1
may be relied on in arbitration in areas outside the three areas covered by Article
X.2(a), (b) and (c). Ecuador wishes to challenge this interpretation of Article X.

Having held that it had jurisdiction, the tribunal considered the merits of Occidental’s
claims, apart from that based on expropriation. It found that Occidental was entitled to
the refund of all VAT paid as a result of the importation or local acquisition of goods
or services used for the production of oil for export, and awarded it compensation of
US$71,533,649 together with interest totalling US$3,541,280. It made certain other
orders (some of which Ecuador seeks to challenge, under s.68 of the Arbitration Act
1996, as beyond the tribunal’s powers under UNCITRAL rules, although that
challenge gives rise to no issue before us).

The issues

11.

Before us, the issues have mirrored those argued extensively before Aikens J. In bare
outline, Mr Greenwood QC for Occidental submits that Ecuador’s challenge to the
tribunal’s jurisdiction under s.67 raises issues upon which English Courts cannot or
should not adjudicate. First, it would require the Court to enforce or interpret the
terms of the Treaty, contrary to a principle stated in J H Rayner (Mincing Lane) Ltd.
v. DTI (“the Tin Council case”) [1990] 2 AC 418. Secondly and in any event, it would
require the Court to “adjudicate upon the transactions of foreign sovereign states”
contrary to a wider principle of “judicial restraint or abstention” stated by Lord
Wilberforce in Buttes Gas and Oil Co. v. Hammer [1982] AC 888, 931G. The first
principle may be viewed as a particular concretisation of the second wider principle.
In support of these submissions, Mr Greenwood suggests (though less emphatically
than before the judge) that the rights and duties in issue in the arbitration should be
seen as state rights — Occidental was in other words claiming no more than to enforce
the rights which the United States of America would have in international law against
Ecuador in respect of any breach of the Treaty towards a United States national or
company. But, assuming that Occidental was in the arbitration claiming in its own
right, Mr Greenwood submits that any adjudication by an English Court upon the
question whether the arbitrators acted within their jurisdiction would still depend
upon the application or interpretation of an international treaty and be impermissible.
The underlying rationale of the House of Lords authorities which, on his case, lead to
this conclusion is, he submits, judicial restraint in the national and international
interests, reinforced in the specific area of unincorporated treaties by the
constitutional consideration that it is for Parliament, and not the United Kingdom
Government or the Courts, to introduce new law at a domestic level. As to the need
for the judicial restraint, he submits that a decision on the scope of the matters
submitted to arbitration could involve a decision upon the scope of the rights
enforceable not just by Occidental but necessarily also by the USA, and could have
international implications.

Mr Lloyd Jones QC for Ecuador submits in response that the Court is concerned with
an agreement to arbitrate, arising in a manner contemplated by the Treaty but

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

nonetheless separate from the Treaty and made between different parties, only one of
them party to the Treaty. English law having become the curial law of the arbitration
(albeit only as a result of a decision of the arbitrators pursuant to the terms of the
agreement to arbitrate), he submits that neither of the principles which Mr Greenwood
invokes should be understood as precluding the English Court from considering and
determining an objection to the arbitrators’ jurisdiction under s.67 of the Arbitration
Act 1996, even if this would involve construing those parts of the Treaty (particularly
Articles VI and X, and possibly also Article III) at which it is necessary to look in
order to determine the scope of the matters falling within the scope of Ecuador’s offer
to arbitrate which Occidental accepted.

With regard to the nature of the rights pursued in the arbitration, the judge concluded
that investors like Occidental were not enforcing rights of the USA, but were given
“the right to pursue, in their name and for themselves, claims against the other State
party” (paragraph 61). He then held, and this was not in issue before us, that
Occidental’s substantive claims were governed by principles of international law (in
the same way that any claims arising between the USA and Ecuador would be). He
held that the arbitration agreement coming into existence between Occidental and
Ecuador was likewise subject to international law. This is in issue before us, although
neither side suggests that the answer is crucial to its own case. Finally, the judge held,
and it is common ground before us, that the arbitral procedure was governed by the
law of England as the law of the place of arbitration. Hence, the possibility of
applications under the Arbitration Act 1996. Turning to the issues of justiciability, the
judge did not consider that examination by the Court of Ecuador’s challenge under
s.67 to the arbitrators’ jurisdiction would “infringe any of the “rules” of non-
justiciability .... set out by Lord Oliver” in the Tin Council case (paragraphs 72 to
81). He accepted the distinction advanced by Mr Lloyd Jones between adjudication
upon rights operating purely at the international level and adjudication upon
international rights intended to be exercised in a tribunal subject to control under
municipal laws; and he considered that s.67 gave a “foothold” in domestic law to
challenge the jurisdictional ruling of the tribunal.

The nature of the rights to which Occidental’s claim relates

14.

In support of the proposition that Occidental was enforcing rights of the USA under
the Treaty, Mr Greenwood referred us to the traditional position regarding the
protection of nationals under international law. This was summarised by the
Permanent International Court of Justice in the Case of the Mavrommatis Palestine
Concessions (1924) PCIJ Rep Series A, No. 2:

“Tt is an elementary principle of international law that a State is
entitled to protect its subjects, when injured by acts contrary to
international law committed by another State, from whom they
have been unable to obtain satisfaction through the ordinary
channels. By taking up the case of one of its subjects and by
resorting to diplomatic action or international judicial
proceedings on his behalf, a State is in reality asserting its own

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

rights — its right to ensure, in the person of its subjects, respect
for the rules of international law.

The question, therefore, whether the present dispute originates
in an injury to a private interest, which in point of fact is the
case in many international disputes, is irrelevant from this
standpoint. Once a State has taken up a case on behalf of one of
its subjects before an international tribunal, in the eyes of the
latter the State is sole claimant.”

One feature of the traditional protection is that it is up to the protecting State of the
injured national whether and how far to make it available. This was put starkly in the
Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Co. Case (Belgium v. Spain) [1970] ICJ Rep
44, paras. 78-79:

“The Court would here observe that, within the limits
prescribed by international law, a State may exercise
diplomatic protection by whatever means and to whatever
extent it thinks fit, for it is its own right that the State is
asserting .....

The State must be viewed as the sole judge to decide whether
its protection will be granted, to what extent it is granted, and
when it will cease. It retains in this respect a discretionary
power the exercise of which may be determined by
considerations of a political or other nature, unrelated to the
particular claim”

See also Oppenheim’s International Law (9" Ed.) Vol. | para. 410.

Bilateral investment treaties such as the present introduce a new element, and create a
“very different” situation (cf Zachary Douglas in The Hybrid Foundations of
Investment Treaty Arbitrations (2003) BYIL 151, 169). The protection of nationals is
crystallised and in the present Treaty expanded to cover every kind of investment
“owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the other
Party” (Article 1), but the investor is given direct standing to pursue the State of the
investment in respect of any “investment dispute”. An investment dispute is defined
as

“a dispute ..... arising out of or relating to (a) an investment agreement between
that Party and such national or company; (b) an investment authorisation granted
by that Party’s foreign investment authority to such national or company; or (c)
an alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to
an investment”.

Under the present Treaty, a dispute may thus arise out of or relate to (a) a commercial
agreement, (b) an executive authorisation or (c) an alleged breach of a Treaty right.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

Article VI(3)(a) of the present Treaty provides the investor with various ways in
which to pursue an investment dispute — (i) by use of International Centre for the
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”), provided the State is a party to the
relevant Convention, (ii) by use of the Centre’s Additional Facility, if the Centre is
not itself available, (iii) by UNCITRAL arbitration, as here occurred, or (iv) by using
any other arbitration institution or rules agreed between the parties to the dispute.

Where a dispute arises out of or relates to a commercial agreement made with the
investor, it would seem to us both artificial and wrong in principle to suggest that the
investor is in reality pursuing a claim vested in his or its home State, and that the only
improvement by comparison with the traditional State protection for investors is
procedural. It would potentially undermine the efficacy of the protection held out to
individual investors, if such protection was subject to the continuing benevolence and
support of their national State. Douglas, at p.170 in the article already cited, draws
attention to arbitrations where the national State by intervention or in submissions
opposed its investor’s claims or the tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear them; but, if the
claims were the State’s, such opposition should have been of itself fatal.

In the case of a claim of type (c) - and probably also (b) — any substantive right would
have to be found in the Treaty. The Treaty would have to be regarded as conferring or
creating direct rights in international law in favour of investors either from the outset,
or at least (and in this event retrospectively) as and when they pursue claims in one of
the ways provided. These alternative analyses are advanced by Douglas at pp.182-4.
The former analysis is in our view natural and preferable, but it does not matter which
applies.

That treaties may in modern international law give rise to direct rights in favour of
individuals is well established, particularly where the treaty provides a dispute
resolution mechanism capable of being operated by such individuals acting on their
own behalf and without their national state’s involvement or even consent.
Oppenheim's International Law (9" Ed.), para. 375 put the matter in this way in 1992:

“States can, .... and occasionally do, confer upon individuals, whether their
own subjects or aliens, international rights strictu sensu, ie rights which they
can acquire without the intervention of municipal legislation and which they
can enforce in their own name before international tribunals”,

See also Oppenheim, para. 7, as well as McCorquodale, The Individual and the
International Legal System in Evans’ International Law (OUP) (2003), pp. 304-6.
Most frequently cited in this connection is the Permanent Court of International
Justice’s Advisory Opinion in the Jurisdiction of the Courts of Danzig Case (1928)
PCIJ Rep Series B No. 15, p.l, considering the effect of a treaty (the
Beamtenabkommen) made on 22 October 1921 between Poland and Danzig. The
Beamtenabkommen regulated the employment conditions of Danzig railway
employees who had, after the First World War, passed into the service of the Polish

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

20.

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

Railways Administration. Poland’s contention that this treaty only created inter-State
rights was rejected. The Court said that:

“Tt may be readily admitted that, according to a well established
principle of international law, the Beamtenabkommen, being an
international agreement, cannot, as such, create direct rights
and obligations for private individuals. But it cannot be
disputed that the very object of an international agreement,
according to the intention of the contracting Parties, may be the
adoption by the Parties of some definite rules creating
individual rights and enforceable by the national courts. That
there is such an intention in the present case can be established
by reference to the terms of the Beamtenabkommen. (pp.17-
18)”

The Court thus looked at the intention of the States making the treaty and held, in that
light, that the Beamtenabkommen “constitutes part of the provisions of the “contract
of service”, that is “the series of provisions which constitute the legal relationship
between the Railways Administration and its employees”; and that the relevant
officials could sue the Administration direct in the Danzig courts. In the more recent
LaGrand Case (2001) 40 ILM 1069, the International Court of Justice held that article
36(1)(b) of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, requiring prison authorities
to “inform the person concerned without delay of his rights under this subparagraph”
creates “individual rights”. By this we read the Court as meaning rights of the person
concerned operating independently of and not derivative from any rights of such
person’s national state (even though that state, Germany, was invoking such rights
under the compulsory jurisdiction article of the relevant Optional Protocol). In the
area of human rights a number of treaties provide individuals with rights of access to
vindicate the protection afforded by the treaty. The European Convention on Human
Rights is thus enforceable by victims of the breach of such rights, and “any person,
non-governmental organisation or group of individuals” may seek to establish that he
is a victim by bringing a direct claim before the European Court of Human Rights in
Strasbourg (cf article 34 of the Convention).

Turning therefore to the present Treaty, its language makes clear that injured nationals
or companies are to have a direct claim for their own benefit in respect of all three
types of claim specified in (a), (b) and (c). The natural conclusion is that all three
types of claim are capable of pursuit by investors in their own right. As Douglas puts
it in his article at p.182:

“The fundamental assumption underlying the investment treaty
regime is clearly that the investor is bringing a cause of action
based upon the vindication of its own rights rather than those of
its national State.”

We note that this is how the matter is also seen by the authors of a number of recent
international arbitration awards, faced with arguments relying on the Barcelona
Traction case to limit or control the protection available to investors under bilateral

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Occidental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of

21.

Ecuador

investment treaties. We will not cite all of them. But in Enron Corporation v. The
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3; January 14. 2004) the tribunal said
that the Barcelona Traction case “has been held not to be controlling in investment
claims such as the present, as it deals with the separate question of diplomatic
protection in a particular setting” (para. 38) and that:

....What the State of nationality of the investor might argue in a given case to
which it is a party cannot be held against the rights of the investor in a separate
case to which the investor is party. This is precisely the merit of the ICSID
Convention in that it overcame the deficiencies of diplomatic protection where
the investor was subject to whatever political or legal determination the State of
nationality would make in respect of its claim” (para. 48).

Similar statements appear in LG&E Energy Corporation v. Argentine Republic 1CSID
Case No. ARB/02/1; April 30, 2004, para. 52, in GAMI Investments Inc. v. United
Mexican States NAFTA Final Award 15 November 2004, para. 30, in Camuzzi
International S.A. v. The Argentine Republic ICSID Case No. ARB/03/2; May 11,
2005, paras. 138-145, where the tribunal observed that diplomatic protection “cannot
be considered the general rule in the system of international law presently governing
the matter, but as a residual mechanism available when the affected individual has no
direct channel in its own right”, and in Camuzzi International S.A. v. The Republic of
Argentina ICSID Case No. ARB/03/7, para. 44, where the tribunal said of the
Barcelona Traction case that:

“.... this decision of the International Court of Justice referred particularly to the
protection that could be expected by the shareholders in this case, but specifying
that they can enjoy other protection, if there is a specific agreement in this
regard. In this case, this is precisely the situation. There is an applicable
international juridical agreement. This agreement is the Treaty and according to
it, Camuzzi has the right to request, directly and immediately, the protection of
its rights by accessing the Tribunal.”

Finally, we mention Gas Natural SDG S.A. v. The Argentine Republic ICSID Case
No. ARB/03/10, where the tribunal stated:

“The scheme of both the ICSID Convention and the bilateral investment treaties
is that in this circumstance, the foreign investor acquires rights under the
Convention and Treaty, including in particular the standing to initiate
international arbitration.” (para. 34)

Mr Greenwood relied on the decision and reasoning of another distinguished
arbitration panel (Sir Anthony Mason, Judge Abner J. Mikva and Lord Mustill) in The
Loewen Group, Inc. v. USA (2003) 42 ILM 811. Claims were made by a Canadian
company (“TLGI’) for discrimination by the USA contrary to article 1102 of the
North American Free Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”). Subsequent to the arbitration
hearing on their merits, TLGI filed for relief under Chapter 11 of the United States

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

22.

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

Bankruptcy Code, and a reorganisation plan was approved, whereby (a) immediately
before TLGI went out of business, it assigned the claims to a new Canadian
corporation (“Nafcanco”), (b) the rest of its business operations were then reorganised
as a new United States corporation, which owned and controlled Nafcanco. The
claims were Nafcanco’s only asset and their pursuit its only business. All of the
benefits of any award in favour of Nafcanco would have enured to the new United
States corporation (i.e. as Nafcanco’s parent and controller). The arbitrators held that
their jurisdiction to determine the claims before them had ceased, since the real
claimant was now a United States corporation. They applied the general principle of
international law, whereby there must be “continuous national identity from the date
of the events giving rise to the claim ... through the date of the resolution of the claim
.....”. They recognised that NAFTA allowed an individual investor to “make a claim
on its own behalf and submit the claim to international arbitration” (paragraph 223)
and that “As claimants have been allowed to prosecute claims in their own right more
often, provision has been made for amelioration of the strict requirement of
continuous nationality” (paragraph 229). But they found no such ameliorating
provision in NAFTA, and they rejected any resemblance between, on the one hand,

“rights of action under private law aris[ing] from personal obligations (albeit
they may be owed by or to a State) brought into existence by domestic law and
enforceable through domestic tribunals and courts”

and, on the other hand,

“NAFTA claims [which] have a quite different character, stemming from a
comer of public international law in which, by treaty, the power of States
under that law to take international measures for the correction of wrongs done
to its nationals has been replaced by an ad hoc definition of certain kinds of
wrong, coupled with specialist means of compensation” (paragraph 233).

The arbitrators concluded that:

“There is no warrant for transferring rules derived from private
law into a field of international law where claimants are
permitted for convenience to enforce what are in origin the
rights of Party states” (paragraph 233).

The award on this point in Loewen is controversial (cf The Hybrid Foundations of
Investment Treaty Arbitrations (2003) BYIL 151, especially 175-6). But we do not, in
any event, consider that its reasoning or decision affects the proper conclusion
regarding the nature of the rights capable of pursuit by investors under the present
Bilateral Investment Treaty. The provisions of NAFTA, although it is a trilateral
investment treaty, appear for present purposes to be materially the same as those of
the present Treaty, but even the tribunal in Loewen accepted that the claimant was
pursuing claims “in its own right” and “on its own behalf’. The statement that
NAFTA “claimants are permitted for convenience to enforce what are in origin the
rights of Party states” was said in a context where the tribunal was concerned to

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

emphasise that the rights (to whomsoever they belonged) remained subject to
international law principles governing continuity of nationality. It is reading too much
into this compressed language to conclude that the tribunal meant that the rights
enforced remained simply and solely the rights of the States, which claimants were
being given some form of power to enforce, as third parties or attorneys. But, if the
tribunal in Loewen meant to suggest that the rights conferred under a bilateral (or
multilateral) investment treaty such as the present remain of the same character as the
rights identified by the Permanent Court of International Justice in Case of the
Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions or by the International Court of Justice in the
Barcelona Traction case, we would respectfully disagree with its analysis.

Non-justiciability

23.

We turn to the core aspect of Mr Greenwood’s case, non-justiciability. The wider
basis on which this is asserted was identified by Lord Wilberforce in Buttes Gas. The
civil claims pursued between private individuals or concerns in that case were not
founded on any investment treaty, or even on any private law contract referring to the
provisions of any treaty. But the defence of justification raised by Mr Hammer and
Occidental as defendants (in response to Buttes Gas’s libel claim) and Occidental’s
counterclaim for conspiracy to defraud could, on the unusual facts of that case, only
have been decided by considering a range of extremely contentious international
matters: an allegation that the Ruler of Sharjah had back-dated a decree extending his
territorial waters; a claim to sovereignty by the Government of Iran made subsequent
to such decree; instructions to the ruler of Umm al Qaiwain by the United Kingdom
political agent; intervention by Her Majesty’s naval, air and military forces then
operating in the relevant area under treaty arrangements; and further intervention by
the Iranian Government. In the single full speech given by Lord Wilberforce, these
issues were held to be non-justiciable, on the basis of a general principle of English
law that “the courts will not adjudicate upon the transactions of foreign sovereign
states” (p.931G and 932A). This was explained as a matter of “judicial restraint or
abstention” and to be “inherent in the very nature of the judicial process” (p.931G and
932A). In applying this principle to the facts of the case, Lord Wilberforce said “the
important inter-state issues and/or issues of international law which would face the
court”:

“.....have only to be stated to compel the conclusion that these are not issues
upon which a municipal court can pass. ...... [T]here are ..... no judicial or
manageable standards by which to judge these issues, or to adopt another
phrase ....., the court would be in a judicial no-man’s land: the court would be
asked to review transactions in which four sovereign states were involved,
which they had brought to a precarious settlement, after diplomacy and the use
of force, and to say that at least part of these were “unlawful” under
international law. I would just add ..... that it is not to be assumed that these
matters have now passed into history, so that they now can be examined with
safe detachment.”

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Occidental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of

24.

25.

26.

Ecuador

We note in parenthesis that the House did not have to address what would have
happened to the libel claim, if Buttes Gas had insisted on pursuing it, after it was held
that the defence of justification was non-justiciable — though Lord Wilberforce
commented that “this would seem unjust”. The injustice was avoided since Buttes was
held to its offer to abandon the libel claim in this event.

In British Airways Board v. Laker Airways Ltd. [1985] AC 58, Lord Diplock, with
whose speech all other members of the House agreed, said that:

“The interpretation of treaties to which the United Kingdom is a party but the
terms of which have not either expressly or by reference been incorporated in
English domestic law by legislation is not a matter that falls within the
interpretative jurisdiction of an English court of law.”

This was however in the context of a claim that the US Government had been in
breach of treaty obligations (so that the considerations later identified in Buttes Gas
were potentially in play). The case was not concerned with a situation where the
interpretation of treaty wording may be relevant to the construction of an agreement
with a private party, or with any investment treaty. In Westland Helicopters Ltd. v.
Arab Organisation for Industrialisation [1995] QB 282, international arbitration
proceedings under a joint venture agreement had led to an award in Westland’s favour
against the Organisation. The award was converted into a judgment and Westland
obtained garnishee orders nisi against six London banks. Colman J was faced with a
claim by an Egyptian intervener to be the same as (or a successor to) the Organisation
by virtue of domestic Egyptian laws. The justification for such laws was in issue but
was said by the intervener to lie in an international law principle of necessity which
was in turn said to be invoked by breach by the other member states setting up the
Organisation of the treaty by which it was set up. Colman J held such issues to be
non-justiciable.

On the other hand, in Kuwait Airways Corporation v. Iraqi Airways Company (Nos. 4
and 5) [2002] 2 AC 883, the House of Lords held that the principle in Buttes Gas did
not prevent the English courts from identifying the plain breach of the United Nations
Charter involved in Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait and subsequent expropriation of the
Kuwait civil aviation fleet. The problems of adjudication confronting the court in
Buttes Gas were absent, the standard to be applied was clear and manageable and the
outcome not in doubt: see at paras 25, 113, 125 and 146 per Lords Nicholls, Steyn,
Hoffmann and Hope. Lord Steyn regarded the proposition that Buttes Gas established
“an absolute rule ..... that courts in England will not adjudicate upon acts done abroad
by virtue of sovereign authority” as “too austere and unworkable an interpretation of
the Buttes case” (p.1101E).

The narrower and more clear-cut basis on which Mr Greenwood advances his case
was stated in the Tin Council case. The International Tin Council (“ITC”) was a body
constituted by an international treaty not incorporated into law in the United
Kingdom. The ITC was also created a legal person in the United Kingdom by article 5

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Occidental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of

27.

Ecuador

of the International Tin Council (Immunities and Privileges) Order 1972 made under
the International Organisations Act 1968. The ITC in its form as a legal person in the
United Kingdom - rather than the states who were its members and the parties to the
international treaty - was held accordingly to be the contracting party in the contracts
it had entered into with the appellant companies. There was no basis in English law
for holding the member states liable for its debts, and, even if in international law any
such basis had existed, there would have been no basis for enforcing such a liability in
a United Kingdom court. If under international law the (unincorporated) treaty made
the ITC the agent of its members when contracting, this too was a liability which a
United Kingdom court could not enforce, if it could not be found in the 1972 Order. A
claim for the appointment of a receiver over ITC’s assets, including any claims it
might have under the treaty to be indemnified by its members in respect of its
liabilities to the appellants, failed for similar reasons.

The two main speeches, with which the three other members of the House of Lords
agreed, were delivered by Lords Templeman and Oliver. Lord Templeman’s speech
stresses the inability of United Kingdom courts to enforce unincorporated “treaty
rights and obligations conferred or imposed by agreement or by international law”
(see e.g. pp.476H-477A and 480D-E), although it suggests that such courts might look
at an unincorporated treaty “for the purpose of resolving any ambiguity in the
meaning and effect of the Order of 1972” (p.481G). Lord Oliver expressed himself
more widely at pp.499F-500D:

“Tt is axiomatic that municipal courts have not and cannot have
the competence to adjudicate upon or to enforce the rights
arising out of transactions entered into by independent
sovereign states between themselves on the plane of
international law. That was firmly established by this House in
Cook v Sprigg [1899] A.C. 572, 578, and was succinctly and
convincingly expressed in the opinion of the Privy Council
delivered by Lord Kingsdown in Secretary of State in Council
of India v Kamachee Boye Sahaba (1859) 13 Moo. P.C.C. 22,
75:

‘The transactions of independent states between each other
are governed by other laws than those which municipal
courts administer: such courts have neither the means of
deciding what is right, nor the power of enforcing any
decision which they may make.’

On the domestic plane, the power of the Crown to conclude
treaties with other sovereign states is an exercise of the Royal
Prerogative, the validity of which cannot be challenged in
municipal law: see: Blackburn v Attorney-General [1971] 1
W.L.R. 1037. The Sovereign acts

‘throughout the making of the treaty and in relation to each
and every of its stipulations in her sovereign character, and
by her own inherent authority; and, as in making the treaty,
so in performing the treaty, she is beyond the control of

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

  

municipal law, and her acts are not to be examined in her
own courts:’ Rustomjee v The Queen (1876) 2 Q.B.D. 69,
74, per Lord Coleridge C.J.

That is the first of the underlying principles. The second is that,
as a matter of the constitutional law of the United Kingdom, the
Royal Prerogative, whilst it embraces the making of treaties,
does not extend to altering the law or conferring rights upon
individuals or depriving individuals of rights which they enjoy
in domestic law without the intervention of Parliament.
Treaties, as it is sometimes expressed, are not self-executing.
Quite simply, a treaty is not part of English law unless and until
it has been incorporated into the law by legislation. So far as
individuals are concerned, it is res inter alios acta from which
they cannot derive rights and by which they cannot be deprived
of rights or subjected to obligations; and it is outside the
purview of the court not only because it is made in the conduct
of foreign relations, which are a prerogative of the Crown, but
also because, as a source of rights and obligations, it is
irrelevant.”

28. However, he continued at pp.500D-501B by recognising some exceptions:

“These propositions do not, however, involve as a corollary
that the court must never look at or construe a treaty. Where,
for instance, a treaty is directly incorporated into English law
by Act of the legislature, its terms become subject to the
interpretative jurisdiction of the court in the same way as any
other Act of the legislature. Fothergill v Monarch Airlines Ltd
[1981] A.C. 251 is a recent example. Again, it is well
established that where a statute is enacted in order to give effect
to the United Kingdom’s obligations under a treaty, the terms
of the treaty may have to be considered and, if necessary,
construed in order to resolve any ambiguity or obscurity as to
the meaning or scope of the statue. Clearly, also, where parties
have entered into a domestic contract in which they have
chosen to incorporate the terms of the treaty, the court may be
called upon to interpret the treaty for the purposes of
ascertaining the rights and obligations of the parties under their
contract: see, for instance, Philippson v Imperial Airways Ltd.
[1939] A.C. 332.

Further cases in which the court may not only be empowered
but required to adjudicate upon the meaning or scope of the
terms of an international treaty arise where domestic
legislation, although not incorporating the treaty, nevertheless
requires, either expressly or by necessary implication, resort to
be had to its terms for the purpose of construing the legislation
(as in Zoernsch v Waldock [1964] 1 W.L.R. 675) or the very
rare case in which the exercise of the Royal Prerogative directly

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Occidental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of

29.

30.

Ecuador

effects an extension or contraction of the jurisdiction without
the constitutional need for internal legislation, as in Post Office
v Estuary Radio Ltd [1968] 2 Q.B. 740.

It must be borne in mind, furthermore, that the conclusion of an
international treaty and its terms are as much matters of fact as
any other fact. That a treaty may be referred to where it is
necessary to do so as part of the factual background against
which a particular issue arises may seem a statement of the
obvious. But it is, I think, necessary to stress that the purpose
for which such reference can legitimately be made is purely an
evidential one. Which states have become parties to a treaty
and when and what the terms of the treaty are are questions of
fact. The legal results which flow from it in international law,
whether between the parties inter se or between the parties or
any of them and outsiders, are not and they are not justiciable
by municipal courts.”

The unenforceability in the United Kingdom of unincorporated treaties under the
reasoning in the Tin Council case was at the heart of the further decisions of the
House of Lords in R .v Home Secretary, ex p. Brind [1991] 1 AC 696, especially at
pp.748B and 762C-D per Lords Bridge and Ackner and R v. Lyons [2003] 1 AC 976,
especially paras. 27, 79 and 104 per Lords Hoffmann, Hobhouse and Millett. Lord
Hoffmann referred to the Tin Council case as establishing that the English courts
“have no jurisdiction to interpret or apply” unincorporated international treaties. Mr
Lloyd Jones referred us to Lord Steyn’s suggestion in Jn re McKerr [2004] 1 WLR
807 that the reasoning, though not the actual decision, in the Tin Council case would
one day receive “comprehensive re-examination”. But, like Aikens J, we would
regard any root and branch re-examination of its reasoning as a matter for a higher
Court.

In ex p. Brind, the House again acknowledged that reference might be made to an
unincorporated treaty (in that case the European Convention on Human Rights) to
resolve an ambiguity in English primary or secondary legislation (pp.748B-C, 760G-
761E and 763C, per Lords Bridge, Ackner and Lowry); and there are a number of
modern authorities where English Courts have been assisted in one context or another
in deciding upon the proper approach under English law by having regard to treaties
or principles in international law: see e.g. A v. Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2004] UKHL 56; [2005] 2 WLR 87, per Lord Bingham at paras. 19 and
68; R (European Roma Rights Centre) v. Immigration Officer at Prague Airport
[2004] UKHL 55; [2005] 2 WLR 1, per Lord Steyn at paras. 44-45 and Baroness Hale
at paras. 98-100. In the Kuwait Airways case, a critical feature of the House of Lords
decision was the provisions of the United Nations Charter and Security Council
Resolutions; and Lord Steyn at para. 114 rejected as “marching logic to its ultimate
unreality” Iraqi Airways’s submission that, because these were unincorporated, they
must be disregarded.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

31.

32.

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

English courts are not therefore wholly precluded from interpreting or having regard
to the provisions of unincorporated treaties. Context is always important. Philipson v.
Imperial Airways, to which Lord Oliver referred in the Tin Council case, was itself a
case where the English courts interpreted such provisions in an international
convention in order to arrive at the meaning of a domestic law contract for carriage by
air: see per Lord Atkin at pp.346-9, Lord Russell at p.353 (though he found the
meaning of the relevant convention unclear, and ended up applying the domestic
principle of contra proferentem) and Lord Wright at pp.364-9. In Arab Monetary
Fund v. Hashim (“AMF y. Hashim”) [1991] 1 AC 114, 166B, Lord Templeman
himself pointed out that “passages extracted and amassed from a lengthy speech” -
that of Lord Oliver in the Tin Council case — “deal with different issues and different
facts”. The present case concerns very different issues from those in play in either the
Tin Council case or AMF v. Hashim. Mr Greenwood in argument described the
principles in both Buttes Gas and the Tin Council case as “carving out a small and
carefully circumscribed sphere”. We need therefore to consider with care the proper
scope and application in the present context of general statements expressed in
different contexts. In The Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament v. The Prime Minister
(“the CND case”) [2002] EWHC 2759 QB a Divisional Court presided over by Simon
Brown LJ (as he was), identified the principle under discussion as a principle:

“whereby the court has no jurisdiction to declare the true interpretation of an
international instrument which has not been incorporated into English
domestic law and which it is unnecessary to interpret for the purposes of
determining a person’s rights and duties under domestic law”.

The question arises whether in the present case there is a sufficient foothold of the
nature contemplated by these last words.

The answer to this question can in our view only be found by taking into account,
first, the special character of a bilateral investment treaty such as the present and,
second, the agreement to arbitrate which it is intended to facilitate and which is both
recognised under English private international law rules and (since England is the
place of arbitration) subject to the Arbitration Act 1996. The Treaty involves, on any
view, a deliberate attempt to ensure for private investors the benefits and protection of
consensual arbitration; and this is an aim to which national courts should, in an
internationalist spirit and because it has been agreed between States at an international
level, aspire to give effect - compare the reasoning of the Permanent Court of
International Justice in the Jurisdiction of the Courts of Danzig case, cited in
paragraph 19 above. The present Treaty holds out to investors on a standing basis the
right “to choose to consent in writing to the submission of the dispute for settlement
by binding arbitration” in any one of four specified ways (although the fourth, as
pointed out, involves further agreement); and, once such consent is given, “either
party to the dispute may initiate arbitration in accordance with the choice so specified
in the consent”. The Treaty expressly goes on to provide that the consent of the
relevant State “hereby” to the submission of any investment dispute for settlement by
binding arbitration in accordance with the choice specified in the relevant investor’s
written consent, together with the investor’s written consent when choosing such
arbitration, shall satisfy the requirement for written consent under the ICSID

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

33.

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

Convention and for “an ‘agreement in writing’ for purposes of Article II of the [New
York] Convention .....”; and that any arbitration shall be held in a State party to that
Convention. This purpose can only be fulfilled, in a legal system with a dualist
approach to international law like the English, if the operation of the mechanism for
consensual arbitration in the Treaty does in fact generate an “agreement in writing”.
The application of the New York Convention depends on such an agreement, and the
provisions of the Arbitration Act 1996 (ss.100-104) relating to the enforcement of
foreign arbitral awards give effect to this requirement in English law. We would not
in the circumstances accept Mr Greenwood’s submission that the consensual aspect of
the arbitration contemplated in Article VI of the Treaty is a matter of mere form. It
must, as it seems to us, have been intended to give rise to a real consensual agreement
to arbitrate, even though by a route prescribed in the Treaty.

Further, as Mr Greenwood accepts, the agreement to arbitrate which results by
following the Treaty route is not itself a treaty. It is an agreement between a private
investor on the one side and the relevant State on the other. The question may then
arise: under what law is that agreement to arbitrate to be regarded as subject, applying
the principles of private international law of the English forum? Mr Lloyd Jones
argues that the arbitration agreement coming into existence between Occidental and
Ecuador is subject to Ecuadorian law (with matters of procedure being subject to the
law of England as the place of arbitration). His proposition is that Ecuadorian law has
the closest and most real connection with any agreement to arbitrate between a US
investor and Ecuador, while United States law would have the closest and most real
connection with any agreement to arbitrate between an Ecuadorian investor and the
USA. He points out that UNCITRAL article 1(2) contemplates that there may be
“provisions of the law applicable to the arbitration from which the parties cannot
derogate”, and that the normal position with arbitration agreements is that they are
subject to some national law. But, dramatic though the expansion has been in recent
years in the number of bilateral investment treaties, there is very limited authority
anywhere on the nature or effect of arbitrations under such treaties. It is common
ground that English private international law recognises an agreement to arbitrate
substantive issues such as the present according to international law (cf Orion v.
Belfort [1962] 2 LR. 257, 264, per Megaw J, Dicey & Morris, The Conflict of Laws
Vol. 1, para. 16-031 and Mustill & Boyd's Commercial Arbitration (2" Ed.) pp.80-
81), and it is also clear that the present is such. (The words “in accordance with the
law” in s.46(1)(a) and “the law determined by the conflict of laws rules which it
considers applicable” in s.46(3) of the Arbitration Act 1996 are capable of having this
broad meaning, and s.46(1)(b) now adds further to the flexibility of arbitration, by
permitting an agreement to arbitrate issues in accordance with other, non-legal
considerations.) All this being so, we would be minded to accept that, under English
private international law principles, the agreement to arbitrate may itself be subject to
international law, as it may be subject to foreign law. That possibility also appears to
us to have been embraced as long ago as 1962 by Megaw J in Orion v. Belfort
(above). And, if one assumes that this is possible, then that is the view that we would,
like the judge, take of this particular arbitration agreement. Although it is a
consensual agreement, it is closely connected with the international Treaty which
contemplated its making, and which contains the provisions defining the scope of the
arbitrators’ jurisdiction. Further, the protection of investors at which the whole
scheme is aimed is likely to be better served if the agreement to arbitrate is subject to

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

34.

35.

36.

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

international law, rather than to the law of the State against which an investor is
arbitrating.

In the light of the preceding paragraph we have some reservations about one aspect of
the judgment of Hobhouse J (as he then was) in Dallal v. Bank Mellat [1986] 1 QB
441. At pp.456B-D, in relation to the principles applicable to consensual arbitration,
he may be read as having insisted that any agreement to arbitrate must be subject to
the proper law of a municipal legal system, rather than international law. We note that
Mustill & Boyd does not read Hobhouse J as requiring more than that any choice of
international law to govern an agreement to arbitrate should be express. We are
however unclear why even this should be necessary. We add that the issue in Dallal
was whether an adjudication of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal should be recognised as
a decision by “a court of competent jurisdiction” for the purposes of the principle in
Henderson v. Henderson (1843) 3 Hare 100. Hobhouse J in the event recognised it
for such purposes on an alternative basis, drawing on the analogy of a “statutory”
arbitration. At pp.458A-D, he may on one reading still have thought it necessary to
identify some validating municipal law. But he went on to refer to authorities
recognising the competence of international tribunals established by treaty or by State
acquiescence to adjudicate in other countries upon issues affecting the nationals of,
and choses in action sited within, such States (see pp.458A-462E); and to say that
“’... competence can be derived from international law and international comity
requires that the courts of England should recognise the validity of the decisions of
foreign tribunals whose competence is so derived” (p. 461H). We note that in R v.
Lyons, Dallal v. Bank Mellat was considered and was treated, at least by Lord
Hoffmann, as if concerned simply with a decision of a tribunal set up under an
international treaty without any municipal legal authority (cf p.996D-F). Dallal v.
Bank Mellat was distinguished not on the ground that decisions of the European Court
of Human Rights could not bind because, in English eyes, the Court was no more than
a body set up under an international treaty, but because (a) the issues were different
and in any event (b) such decisions could not override an Act of Parliament. If
English law recognises the binding force of a “quasi-statutory” adjudication at the
international level, it is, in our view, hard to see why it should not be possible for a
State and an investor to enter into an agreement to arbitrate of the type contemplated
by the present Bilateral Investment Treaty subject to international law.

However, if this is not possible and any such agreement must, under English private
international law, be subject to a municipal law, then, since the present agreement was
clearly intended to be binding, it must be subject to Ecuadorian or United States law.
There is no reason to doubt that it would be valid and enforceable as intended under
either or both of these laws. But, bearing in mind that it would be an agreement by a
United States investor relating to an investment in Ecuador and to an alleged breach
of duty by Ecuador towards the investor in Ecuador, we would (on the present
hypothesis) accept Mr Lloyd Jones’s submission that the governing law would be that
of Ecuador.

Ultimately, however, we do not consider that it matters what law governs the
agreement to arbitrate. The strength or otherwise of Mr Greenwood’s submissions that
the English court cannot or should not entertain a challenge to the arbitrators’

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

37.

38.

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

jurisdiction under s.67, because this would involve considering, construing and
applying the Treaty provisions regarding jurisdiction, cannot depend critically upon
whether or not the agreement to arbitrate is subject to international or Ecuadorian law.
Even if it were generally subject to Ecuadorian law, it would not be possible to
consider, construe or apply the Treaty provisions regarding jurisdiction without taking
into account its international legal meaning as between Ecuador and the USA.

The question thus squarely arises whether the principles in either Buttes Gas or the
Tin Council case preclude the English Court from considering a challenge to the
jurisdiction of the arbitrators, when the determination of this challenge would involve
construing the Treaty provisions by reference to which their consensual jurisdiction is
defined. Mr Greenwood submits that nothing in the Treaty itself can affect the
application of such principles. They are domestic legal principles, not dependent upon
or capable of being altered by treaty, still less by a Treaty to which the United
Kingdom is not party. He submits that, since the jurisdiction of the arbitrators is to be
ascertained by examination of the Treaty, any determination of the extent of their
jurisdiction will also reflect or bear on the proper scope of the issues which the two
States have agreed to discuss or resolve between themselves under Article V of the
Treaty and which, if no such resolution is achieved, either State is able to refer to
inter-State arbitration under Article VII. But that does not, we think, make the subject-
matter of the dispute between an investor and a State the same as any dispute (if any)
that may exist between the two States. And, even if it does, we consider that Mr
Greenwood’s submissions fail to recognise the combined force of the two factors
mentioned in the first two sentences of paragraph 32 above. The case is not concerned
with an attempt to invoke at a national legal level a Treaty which operates only at the
international level. It concerns a Treaty intended by its signatories to give rise to
rights in favour of private investors capable of enforcement, to an extent specified by
the Treaty wording, in consensual arbitration against one or other of its signatory
States. For the English Court to treat the extent of such rights as non-justiciable would
appear to us to involve an extension, rather than an application, of existing doctrines
developed in different contexts. Mr Greenwood highlights the possibility that a State
might be upset by a decision interpreting a bilateral investment treaty, and drew our
attention to a letter of protest dated 1 October 2003 by the Swiss Government
following SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA v. Pakistan ICSID Case
ARB/01/13. But the Treaty itself provides for separate dispute resolution between a
private investor and either of the States party to it, both of whom must be taken to
have been content to accept any such risk. And the argument anyway carries him too
far. Société Générale de Surveillance SA v. Pakistan was a decision not of a court, but
of an ICSID arbitration tribunal to which the State had on any view agreed. Further,
recourse to a court, when and if permissible, would (one hopes) be likely to correct
any error in interpretation, rather than to perpetuate or introduce one. It is not without
irony that Ecuador is here seeking (without any protest by the United States) to invoke
the Court’s jurisdiction, while Occidental is resisting it.

In the case of an ICSID arbitration, no recourse to the English court is currently
possible under the Arbitration Act 1996: see the Arbitration (International Investment
Disputes) Act 1966 s.3(2). The ICSID scheme also differs in having its own
enforcement mechanism, so that the New York Convention is inapplicable. Neither of
these factors suggests to us that the English Court should refrain from exercising

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

39.

40.

Al.

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

jurisdiction under s.67 in respect of an arbitration conducted under Article VI.3(a)(iii)
and UNICITRAL rules.

Mr Greenwood also referred us to the provisions in the Treaty for inter-State
arbitration. We would agree that it is highly probable that courts could not exercise
jurisdiction over an inter-state arbitration under Article VII (because it would not be
based on an agreement to arbitrate within the meaning of the Arbitration Act 1996 or
of the New York Convention and/or because of s.9(2) of the State Immunity Act
1978). But again this has in our view no bearing on the question whether the English
Court can and should exercise jurisdiction over an investor-State arbitration under
Article VI.

Nonetheless, we shall consider further whether there is any basis for the principles in
Buttes Gas and the Tin Council case to apply having regard to the terms and effect of
the Treaty and to what has taken place consequent upon it. Here, the provisions of the
present Treaty between the two States contemplate and have led, as between one of
the States and an investor, to an agreement - recognised under English private
international law principles - to arbitrate a dispute which may cover the interpretation
of any aspect of the Treaty, including aspects going to the arbitrators’ jurisdiction.
That agreement to arbitrate, recognised under English private international law, gives
rise to rights between the parties to it, including the right to have disputes arbitrated
within its terms and not to have disputes arbitrated which fall outside its terms.

We see no good reason why any arbitration held pursuant to such an agreement, or
any supervisory role which the court of the place of arbitration may have in relation to
any such arbitration, should be categorised as being concerned with “transactions
between States” so as to invoke the principle of non-justiciability in Buttes Gas. No-
one suggests that any of such issues was non-justiciable before the arbitrators,
whether they were issues going (a) to their jurisdiction or (b) to the substance of the
investor’s claims. It is apparent that such arbitrations have become frequent, and that
the majority have led to published awards, of which we have been shown a
considerable number. Appeals on the substance of such awards could not come before
an English court under s.69(1) of the Arbitration Act 1996 except in so far as they
were regarded as raising a question of law within the meaning of that section. But it is
not suggested that there is any equivalent limitation of the issues of jurisdiction which
may normally be raised in court under s.67. If issues regarding jurisdiction are
justiciable before the arbitrators, we do not find it easy to see why they should be
regarded as non-justiciable before the English Court. It is true that, on our preferred
view, the present agreement to arbitrate was subject to international law, and that any
doctrine of non-justiciability operates, of its nature, in domestic rather than
international law (cf Bank Nacional de Cuba v. Sabbatino 376 U.S. 398). But the
issues of jurisdiction, with which the arbitrators were entrusted, were from a technical
viewpoint issues which a court of law would also appear qualified and able to
determine. Differing views may, perhaps, be held by some as to whether the carefully
thought out scheme of the Arbitration Act 1996 now fulfils all the (it may well be,
differing) needs or desires of all who resort to English arbitration subject potentially
to the English Courts’ jurisdiction under the Act. But this case is not a forum for
arguing about such matters, and it has not been argued as if it were. This case

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

42.

43.

44.

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

concerns not the scheme of the Arbitration Act 1996, but whether there is a general
principle of non-justiciability in English law which precludes the conventional
operation of the Act, for reasons of constitutional propriety or because of wider
considerations of judicial restraint, having regard to inherent limitations in the judicial
role and/or to this country’s national and international interests.

As to judicial restraint, we accept that the resolution of the present issues of
jurisdiction is not likely to be as clear-cut as was the case with the different issues of
international law in the Kuwait Airways case. But nothing appears to have been or to
be likely to be involved in the resolution of the present issues which could make them
remotely comparable in difficulty of manageability or resolution or in sensitivity to
the issues in Buttes Gas. It is also inherent in the Treaty itself that issues of
jurisdiction involving one State will be determined in the absence of the other, by an
independent arbitration tribunal. We cannot see how the objection to their being
raised in court under s.67 can in these circumstances be said to depend on any
limitation “inherent in the very nature of the judicial process”. We find it equally
impossible to see how the objection could be said to raise any considerations relating
to this country’s national and international interests remotely equating to those found
in Buttes Gas.

Mr Greenwood sought to support his submissions on non-justiciability by reference to
the decision of the International Court of Justice in East Timor (Portugal v. Australia)
(1995) ICJ 90. The Court there refused, in the absence of Indonesia as a party, to
entertain a claim brought by Portugal challenging Australia’s right to conclude a
treaty with Indonesia to delimit the continental shelf in the area of the Timor Gap.
Portugal’s claim was based on the proposition that it alone remained in law the
administering power in respect of East Timor, despite the Portuguese authorities’
withdrawal from East Timor in 1975 followed by Indonesia’s intervention in and
control of East Timor since 1975. Portugal’s claim against Australia necessarily
depended upon showing that Indonesia had acquired no legal status in respect of East
Timor and that Australia and Indonesia therefore had no right to enter into the Treaty.
The very subject-matter of Portugal’s claim was the lawfulness of Indonesia’s
conduct. But the Court also made clear that it was “not necessarily prevented from
adjudicating when the judgment it is asked to give might affect the legal interests of a
State which is not party to the case” (para.34). Further, the position is clearly quite
different where, as here, a Treaty between two States makes clear that an investor
national of one of the States may pursue direct rights against the other, without the
involvement, presence or even consent of his own national State. Where the Treaty
contemplates and provides for dispute resolution means of this nature, the principle of
international law to be found in the East Timor Case cannot help in either
international or national law to identify whether or when a national court may
appropriately exercise a supervisory jurisdiction provided by the relevant procedural
law.

Mr Greenwood also held out to us, briefly, the spectre of an English Court having to
reconsider the correctness of an arbitration panel’s ruling on the validity of the Treaty.
Although there is no such issue in this case, in another case an issue might, he
observes, arise about, say, duress or the completion and validity of the Treaty. We

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Occidental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of

4S.

46.

47.

Ei

 

leave aside the improbable nature of such an issue. Even so, we question the example
of duress, because that would appear likely only to make the Treaty voidable, and so
not to affect the jurisdiction of an arbitration agreement arising from the operation of
its terms. It is, we suspect, even conceivable that a valid agreement to arbitrate could
result from the operation in good faith of the terms of a Treaty which for some reason
subsequently proved not to have been validly executed. However that may be, (a) we
are not persuaded that it would necessarily be incongruous for an English Court to
reconsider even an issue of validity, if the arbitrators had done so, and (b) if it would
be incongruous, the reason could well be that, in this particular context as opposed to
the present, the principle in Buttes Gas did apply.

As to the narrower principle of jurisdiction stated in the Tin Council case, Mr Lloyd
Jones submits that the present situation is on all fours with Philipson v. Imperial
Airways. The judge did not go so far, pointing out that in Philipson there was “a
Municipal law contract”. But, as we have observed, under English private
international law, an agreement to arbitrate may be subject not merely to English, but
also to any foreign law or to public international law. The mere fact that the
agreement was here subject to international law does not seem to us to differentiate
the present case from Philipson.

A more compelling distinction between this case and Philipson is perhaps that the
contract in Philipson was entirely independent of the Treaty, and, since it simply
incorporated Treaty concepts or terms, independent of the Treaty’s validity in
international law. That brings one back to the position, already discussed, of a
challenge to jurisdiction based on a contention that the Treaty was for some reason
invalid. The spectre briefly conjured up and argued by Mr Greenwood in this regard
relates to a different kind of jurisdictional issue from the present. The present
jurisdictional issues arise under an agreement to arbitrate which both parties to the
arbitration accept to have been validly made and implemented. The English Courts,
which under the relevant English law principles of private international law recognise
the agreement, are being asked to interpret its scope in order to give effect to the
rights and duties contained in the agreement to arbitrate. That in our view satisfies
both the essential elements of the Philipson case, and the criterion for jurisdiction
identified in the CND case.

On no view do we regard it as a critical distinction that one party to the present
arbitration was a State, Ecuador. Indeed, one may argue that the presence as party to
the arbitration of the State arguing (and indeed raising) the relevant jurisdictional
issues makes it easier, rather than more difficult, to contemplate an English Court
ruling on the interpretation of the scope of the arbitration provisions in the Treaty.
And we consider that the fact that the States party to the Treaty deliberately chose to
provide for a mechanism for dispute resolution which invokes consensual arbitration,
with its domestic legal connotations, is a factor which should make the English Court
hesitate long about subjecting such arbitration proceedings to special principles of
judicial restraint developed in relation to international transactions or treaties lacking
any foundation or incorporation in domestic law.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. Occidental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of

48.

49.

Ecuador

These considerations are by themselves in our view sufficient to decide this appeal in
Ecuador’s favour. But Mr Lloyd Jones also advances two fall-back arguments. The
first is based on evidence that, under Ecuadorian law, the Treaty is self-executing, and
becomes part of Ecuadorian law — indeed at a level superior to that of any ordinary
domestic law. On that basis, he submits that, even if the agreement to arbitrate was
not itself a sufficient justification for an English Court to consider the scope of the
arbitration contemplated by the Treaty, the incorporation into Ecuadorian law
removed any objection. He referred to AMF v Hashim, where the English Court was
able to recognise the existence of the AMF, because it had been incorporated in the
United Arab Emirates. But matters of status and contract are subject to different
principles in private international law. If the agreement to arbitrate had been subject to
Ecuadorian law, Mr Lloyd Jones’s argument could have had force. As it is, it seems to
us of no assistance to Ecuador.

Mr Lloyd Jones also suggests, with reference to Jones v. The Ministry of the Interior
(the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) [2004] EWCA Civ 1394; [2005] 2 WLR 808, that it
would be an infringement of the right of access to the courts under article 6 of the
European Convention on Human Rights, if the issue of the arbitrators’ jurisdiction
could not be raised under s.67 of the Arbitration Act 1996. We find it unnecessary to
go into this very briefly argued suggestion, which has on its face some implausibility
in the case of a State claiming to be protected in respect of its supposed human rights.

The judge’s approach and further considerations

50.

Sl.

The judge took a different route to the same conclusion. He considered, firstly, that
s.67 by itself confers on Ecuador a right to challenge the jurisdiction of the arbitrators,
and, secondly, that the exercise of considering the arbitrators’ jurisdiction is no
different in kind from that undertaken by Hobhouse J in Dallal v. Bank Mellat.

As to the first point, we would agree with Mr Greenwood that there is a potential
problem about treating s.67 as by itself conferring a right for the purposes of
satisfying the test suggested by Simon Brown LJ in the CND case. It is not so much
that s.67 is procedural, although Simon Brown LJ was probably focusing on
substantive rights. It is rather that the prior question arises whether s.67 is itself to be
read as subject to any principle of non-justiciability, and this question has, we think,
to be answered by looking more widely than at s.67 alone. Mr Lloyd Jones does not
suggest that s.67 is in mandatory terms, capable by themselves of overriding any
principle of non-justiciability. Bearing in mind its use of the word “may”, its language
could be read as subject to such principle, particularly when s.81(1) provides that
“Nothing in this Part shall be construed as excluding the operation of any rule of law
consistent with the provisions of this Part ....”. So it is necessary to look beyond s.67
in order to determine whether the principle of non-justiciability extends to prevent an
English Court considering arbitrators’ jurisdiction in circumstances such as the
present.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

52.

53.

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

Turning to the judge’s second point, in our view Dallal and later authority considering
it do offer some further support to Ecuador’s case on this appeal. It is true that
Hobhouse J was not concerned with any challenge to the jurisdiction of the Iran-
United States Claims Tribunal over the issues which it determined; and it is also true,
as already observed, that on one reading of his judgment he was concerned to find a
basis in municipal law for any recognition of that Tribunal’s adjudication (cf
pp.456B-C and 458A-D). On the other hand, he was on any view prepared to look at
unincorporated international treaties and at State conduct or acquiescence in order to
determine whether to recognise the Tribunal’s competence and decision; and R v.
Lyons throws no doubt on the legitimacy of this (cf paragraphs 30-32 above). At
p.462D Hobhouse J pointed out that, in determining whether the Tribunal’s
adjudication was a decision by a “court of competent jurisdiction” for the purposes of
the principle in Henderson v. Henderson, all he was doing was “giving effect to an
English procedural remedy in respect of a procedural complaint that is recognised by
English law”. Neither judicial restraint nor the unincorporated nature of the relevant
treaty or international law prevented him doing this. Once again, this demonstrates
that, given the right context, the English Court can and will have regard to an
international treaty and general international law. As in Dallal, so here Ecuador is
seeking a procedural remedy which is on its face available in respect of proceedings
over which the English Courts have been given, under the Arbitration Act 1996, a
certain (albeit limited) supervisory jurisdiction. In our view, although Dallal is not
direct authority on the present point, it shows that the principle of non-justiciability is
not, in any of its aspects, absolute, and need not and should not be applied over-
rigidly. We add that the more stress is laid, as Mr Greenwood sought to do, on the
relatively formal way in which consensus to arbitrate was achieved under the present
Treaty, the closer the analogy between the present arbitration and the “statutory”
arbitration which Hobhouse J identified in Dallal.

The fact that the Treaty is at pains to bring about an award capable of enforcement
under the New York Convention is in our view a still more significant factor. The
Convention provides both for recognition and enforcement and, under Article V, for
limited circumstances in which recognition and enforcement “may be refused, at the
request of the party against whom it is invoked” if that party provides appropriate
proof of such circumstances. These include that:

“(a) ..... the said agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have
subjected it, or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the country
where the award was made; or ......

(c) The award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within
the terms of the submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters
beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration, provided that, if the
decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from those not
so submitted, that part of the award which contains decisions on matters
submitted to arbitration may be recognised and enforced; or

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

54.

55.

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

(d) The composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not
in accordance with the agreement of the parties, or, failing such agreement,
was not in accordance with the law of the country where the arbitration took
place; ....”.

These provisions, relating to recognition and enforcement and to the circumstances in
which the same may be refused, are reflected in English law in s.103(1) and (2)(b), (c)
and (d) and (4) of the Arbitration Act 1996. In a judgment in Dardana Ltd. v. Yukos
Oil Co. [2002] 2 LLR. 326, with which the other members of the Court agreed, Mance
LJ rejected (at p.333) an argument that the word “may” in s.103(2) had a “permissive,
purely discretionary, or [as he saw it] arbitrary, force”. The word “may” in that
subsection must also have been intended to reflect the corresponding word in the New
York Convention.

The present Treaty expressly contemplated the application of the New York
Convention. It seems to us that all concerned must be taken to have understood that
the usual grounds for opposing recognition and enforcement would apply, including
any grounds based on want or excess of jurisdiction by the arbitrators, to which s.103
of the 1996 Act gives effect. The wider doctrine of non-justiciability, inspired by the
United States “political question” doctrine and introduced into English law in Buttes
Gas, cannot be regarded as directed to or as undermining this point. The narrower
doctrine, based on the principle that international agreements do not create direct
rights and obligations in favour of private persons and recognised in English law in
the Tin Council case, is well established in international law — see the Jurisdiction of
the Courts of Danzig case. But that case also shows that the position is quite different
in international law where two States have deliberately agreed to confer rights
intended to be enforceable domestically on private persons. Viewed in that context,
we see no incongruity in a conclusion that the consensual arbitration intended under
the Treaty carries with it the usual procedural and supervisory remedies provided
under English law as the relevant procedural law. That being so, we do not see any
sensible basis for suggesting that there is or should be any difficulty about an English
Court, in the context of an English award, determining the scope of arbitrators’
jurisdiction under s.67 or (in the case of an application to enforce) under s.66. It is
also to be noted that, under s.66, the English Court is given no option at all but to
refuse enforcement, if “the person against whom it is sought to be enforced shows that
the tribunal lacked jurisdiction to make the award”. Mr Greenwood suggests valiantly
that a sensible distinction might, if necessary, be drawn between the “proactive”
intervention involved under s.67 and the “reactive” involvement of a court under ss.66
and 103. That would be a quite inadequate basis for the application of what is said to
be a fundamental, or even constitutional, principle regarding non-justiciability in the
one context but not in the other. We do not consider that anything in English law
compels so unsatisfactory a conclusion. We also note that we were shown cases in
which courts in other countries have exercised or assumed that it was open to them to
exercise equivalent supervisory power to review the jurisdiction of arbitrators
appointed under investment treaties — see e.g. Czech Republic v. CME Czech Republic
B.V. (Svea Court of Appeal, Sweden; 15 May 2003), especially at pp.69-71 and
Canada v. S.G. Myers, Inc. (Kelen J, Canadian Federal Court; 13 January 2004),
especially paras. 33-35. We were not shown any authorities to contrary effect.

Judgment Approved by the court for handing down. oO

56.

jental Exploration & Production Company v. The Republic of
lor

  

For completeness, we mention one further minor point. The Treaty provides, as one of
the available dispute resolution methods, recourse to the courts or administrative
tribunals of the State party to the dispute. In a country like Ecuador with a monist
system, under which the Treaty was self-executing at a high constitutional level, it
would not even require legislation to enable investors, if they wished, to pursue the
State in its own courts on any of the Treaty grounds. The scope of the concept of
“investment dispute” in Article VI and of the protection afforded by Article X would
then be determined by a domestic State court. This possibility is at least to be borne in
mind when considering whether the English Court should regard as non-justiciable a
similar issue, when sought to be raised (here by the State itself) on a challenge to the
jurisdiction of an arbitration panel appointed under an agreement reached as
contemplated by the third of the available dispute resolution means.

Conclusions

57.

58.

We accept that the English principle of non-justiciability cannot, if it applies, be
ousted by consent. We are however concerned with issues regarding its proper scope
and interpretation in a novel context. The considerations which we have identified in
paragraphs 51-56 above all militate against an understanding of that principle, in
either of its aspects, which would tend, if anything, to undermine the chosen scheme
of those involved. They reinforce the conclusion that we would, for reasons
summarised in paragraphs 31-47 above, anyway reach.

For these reasons, we would conclude that the judge reached the correct conclusion
and would dismiss Occidental’s appeal in respect of Aikens J’s determination of the
preliminary point in favour of Ecuador.

