INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT
DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the annulment proceeding between

OCCIDENTAL PETROLEUM CORPORATION
OCCIDENTAL EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION COMPANY

-and-
THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award
(Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules)

Members of the Committee
Prof. Juan Fernéndez-Armesto, President
Judge Florentino P. Feliciano, Member of the Committee
Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno B., Member of the Committee

Secretary of the Committee
Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Representing the Claimants Representing the Respondent
Mr. Donald P. de Brier Dr. Diego Garcia Carrién
Ms. Laura C. Abrahamson Procurador General del Estado
Occidental Petroleum Corporation
Occidental Exploration and Production Company Mr. George von Mehren
Mr. Stephen P. Anway
Mr. David W. Rivkin Squire, Sanders (US) LLP
Ms. Marjorie J. Menza
Ms. Ina C. Popova Prof. Eduardo Silva Romero
Mr. Benjamin M. Aronson Prof. Pierre Mayer
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP Mr. José Manuel Garcia Represa
Dechert LLP

Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel

Ms. Carmen Martinez Lopez
Mr. Ian Redfearn

Covington & Burling LLP

Date: September 30, 2013

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Table of Abbreviated Terms 3
Table of Cited Decision 5
I. Procedure 8
Il. Clai ” Ar; 9
Ill. Respondent’s Arguments 13
IV. The Committee’s Analysi 17

Continuation of the Provisional Stay of Enforcement
B. Power of Annulment Committees to Condition the Stay of Enforcement............ 19
Posting of a Security by the Republic of Ecuador uu... ccc eens 20
V. Decision 28

 

Arbitration Rules

BIT or US — Ecuador BIT

CAA

CAITISA

CEA
CENTRE

Claimants or Occidental

Claimants’ Reply

Claimants’ Request

Doc.
EEA
Farmout Agreement

Hearing

ICC
ICSID

ICSID Convention

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

TABLE OF ABBREVIATED TERMS

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

Ecuador Bilateral Investment Treaty signed on August 27, 1993;
entered into force on May 11, 1997

Claimants’ Legal Authority on Annulment

Commission for the Integral Citizens’ Audit of the Treaties of
Reciprocal Protection of Investments and of the International
Arbitral System on the Subject of Investments established by
Executive Decree 1506 and signed by the president on May 6,
2013

Claimants’ Exhibit on Annulment

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and
Production Company

Occidental Petroleum Corporation’s and Occidental Exploration
and Production Company’s reply dated April 22, 2013 to the
Republic of Ecuador’s observations of April 5, 2013

Occidental Petroleum Corporation’s and Occidental Exploration
and Production Company’s request to terminate the stay of
enforcement of the award, or in the alternative, that the Committee
impose conditions on any continued stay of enforcement of
Claimants’ Award against the Respondent, dated February 13,
2013

Document submitted as an exhibit or legal authority

Respondent’s Exhibit on Annulment

Agreement between the Andes company and Occidental

The ad hoc Committee’s hearing held in Paris on May 13, 2013 on
the stay of enforcement of the award

International Chamber of Commerce
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between
States and Nationals of Other States dated 18 March 1965

LAM
LIBOR
p.
para(s).

Respondent or Ecuador or
the Republic

Respondent’s Rejoinder

Respondent’s Response

Span.Transc.
Transc.
UNCITRAL

VAT Agreement

VAT Award

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

Line

Ecuadorian Law on Arbitration and Mediation

London Inter Bank Offered Rate

Page

Paragraph(s)

The Republic of Ecuador

The Republic of Ecuador’s rejoinder dated May 6, 2013 on
Occidental Petroleum Corporation’s and Occidental Exploration
and Production Company’s reply of April 22, 2013

The Republic of Ecuador’s observations dated April 5, 2013 on
Occidental Petroleum Corporation’s and Occidental Exploration
and Production Company’s request to terminate the stay of
enforcement of the award

Spanish translation of the transcript of the Hearing

Transcript of the Hearing

United Nations Commission On International Trade Law

Occidental’s and Ecuador’s agreement for the payment of the VAT
Award

UNCITRAL Award in favor of Occidental

Amco I

Amco IT

Azurix

Burlington

CDC

Chevron

CMS

Continental Casualty

Duke Energy

Electroquil

Enron I

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

TABLE OF CITED DECISIONS

Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia, \CSID
Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee setting aside
the Award rendered on the Merits dated May 16, 1986

Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia, \CSID
Case No. ARB/81/1, Interim Order No. | concerning the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award dated March 2, 1991, 9 ICSID Rep. 59
(2006)

Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12,
Decision on the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated
December 28, 2007

Burlington Resources, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, CSID Case No.
ARB/08/5, Procedural Order No. | concerning provisional measures
dated June 29, 2009

CDC Group ple v. Republic of Seychelles, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/14, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for
Annulment of the Republic of the Seychelles dated June 29, 2005

Chevron Bangladesh Block Twelve, Ltd. and Chevron Bangladesh
Blocks Thirteen and Fourteen, Ltd. v. People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, YCSID Case No. ARB/06/10, Procedural Order
concerning provisional measures dated April 14, 2007

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/O1/8, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a
Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated September 1, 2006

Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case
No. ARB/03/9, Decision on Argentina’s Application for a Stay of
Enforcement of the Award dated October 23, 2009

Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. I Ltd. v. Republic of
Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/0/28, Decision on the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award dated June 23, 2009

Duke Energy Electroquil Partners and Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of
Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/19, Award dated August 18, 2008

Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation)
and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/3, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a

Enron II

Kardassapoulos

Lemire

Libananco

MINE

Mitchell

MTD Equity

Perenco

Pey Casado

Repsol 1

Repsol II

Rumeli

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated October 7, 2008

Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation)
and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/O1/3, Decision on the Claimants’ second Request to Lift
Provisional Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated May 20, 2009

Joannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, YCSID Case No. ARB/05/18,
Decision on Applicant’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement
of the Award dated November 12, 2010

Joseph C. Lemire v. Ukraine, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/18, Decision
on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated February 14, 2012

Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case
No. ARB/06/8, Decision on Applicant’s Request for a Continued Stay
of Enforcement of the Award dated May 7, 2012

Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of
Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Interim Order No. | concerning
Guinea’s Application for Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated
August 12, 1988

Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case
No. ARB/99/7, Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award
dated November 30, 2004

MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile,
ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7, Ad hoc Committee’s Decision on the
Respondent’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the
Award dated June 1, 2005

Perenco Ecuador Limited v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No.
ARB/08/6, Decision on Provisional Measures dated May 08, 2009

Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of
Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on the Republic of Chile’s
Application for a Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated May 7,
2010

Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador), 1CSID Case No. ARB/O1/10, Procedural Order No. 1
concerning the Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated December 22,
2005

Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador), 1CSID Case No. ARB/O1/10, Procedural Order No. 4
concerning the Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated February 22,
2006

Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri

Sempral

Sempra II

Transgabonais

Wena

Vivendi IT

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/16, Decision
on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated March 19, 2009

Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/02/16, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a
Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated March 5, 2009

Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/02/16, Decision on Sempra Energy International’s Request for
the Termination of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated
August 7, 2009

Compagnie d’Exploitation du Chemin de Fer Transgabonais v.
Gabonese Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/5, Decision on the Stay
of Enforcement of the Award dated March 13, 2009

Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No.
ARB/98/4, Procedural Order No. 1 of the Ad Hoc Committee
concerning the Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award
dated April 5, 2001

Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on the
Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of
the Award dated November 4, 2008

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

L PROCEDURE

On October 9, 2012, the Republic of Ecuador filed with the Secretary-General of ICSID an
application for the annulment of the Award rendered on October 5, 2012 in the present
case. Ecuador’s application included a request under Article 52(5) of the ICSID
Convention for a stay of enforcement of the Award, pending a decision by the Committee
to be constituted on the application for annulment.

The Secretary-General of ICSID registered the application on October 11, 2012 at the same
time notifying the parties, pursuant to Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, that
enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed.

On January 18, 2013, the ad hoc Committee was constituted in accordance with Article
52(3) of the ICSID Convention. Its members are: Prof. Juan Fernaéndez-Armesto
(Spanish), President, designated to the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators by the Kingdom of
Spain; Judge Florentino P. Feliciano (Philippine), designated to the ICSID Panel of
Arbitrators by the Republic of the Philippines, and Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno B. (Costa
Rican), designated to the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators by the Republic of Costa Rica; all
members appointed by the Chairman of ICSID’s Administrative Council.

On February 13, 2013, the Claimants filed a request that the provisional stay of
enforcement of the Award be lifted.

On March 25, 2013, the Committee held its first session with the parties by telephone
conference. During the teleconference, the Claimants were represented by
Mr. David W. Rivkin and Ms. Marjorie J. Menza, from Debevoise & Plimpton LLP;
Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel and Ms. Carmen Martinez, from Covington & Burling LLP and
Ms. Laura C. Abrahamson, Associate General Counsel, Occidental Petroleum Corporation.
The Republic of Ecuador, in turn, was represented by Ms. Christel Gaibor and
Ms. Diana Moya Davalos, from Ecuador’s Procuraduria General del Estado,
Messrs. George von Mehren and Stephen P. Anway, from Squire Sanders (US) LLP and
Professors Eduardo Silva Romero and Pierre Mayer, from Dechert LLP. All three
members of the Committee, Prof. Juan Fernandez-Armesto, Judge Florentino P. Feliciano
and Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno B., and the Secretary of the Committee, Mr. Gonzalo Flores,
ICSID, participated during the teleconference.

During the session, the parties confirmed that the Committee had been properly constituted
in accordance with the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules and that they
had no objection to the appointment of any of its members. During the session, the
Committee and the parties considered the Agenda adopted by the Committee and a joint
communication from the parties of March 18, 2013, reflecting their agreements and
disagreements on the different Agenda items. Audio recordings of the session were made
and deposited in the archives of ICSID and circulated to the parties and the Committee
members. Verbatim transcripts were also made, with the agreement of the parties, from the
audio recordings, which were also circulated to the parties and members of the Committee.

On April 10, 2013, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 1.

1

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

Pursuant to the schedule agreed upon by the parties, on April 5, 2013 the Republic of
Ecuador filed observations to Claimants’ request to terminate the stay of enforcement of
the Award; on April 22, 2013 Claimants filed a reply to the Republic of Ecuador’s
observations of April 5; and on May 6, 2013 Ecuador filed a rejoinder to Claimants’ reply.

As directed in Procedural Order No. 1, a one-day hearing on the matter of the stay of
enforcement of the Award was held on May 13, 2013at the ICC Hearing Center in Paris,
France. The three members of the Committee, Prof. Juan Fernandez-Armesto,
Judge Florentino P. Feliciano and Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno B., attended the hearing.
Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Secretary of the Committee, was also present at the hearing.

During the hearing, Claimants were represented by Messrs. Donald P. de Brier and Gerald
Ellis and Ms. Laura C. Abrahamson, from Occidental Petroleum Corporation;
Messrs. David W. Rivkin, Benjamin M. Aronson and Geoffroy Goubin and
Ms. Marjorie J. Menza, from Debevoise & Plimpton LLP; and by Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel
and Ms. Carmen Martinez Lopez from Covington & Burling LLP. The Republic of
Ecuador was represented by Dr. Diego Garcia Carrién, Procurador General del Estado;
Ms. Christel Gaibor and Ms. Diana Moya, from Procuraduria General del Estado;
Messrs. George von Mehren, and Stephen Anway, from Squire Sanders (US) LLP;
Professors Eduardo Silva Romero and Pierre Mayer, Messrs. José Manuel Garcia Represa
and Alvaro Galindo, and Ms. Audrey Caminades, Ms. Celia Campbell, Ms. Ménica Garay
and Ms. Kattia Hernandez Morales, from Dechert LLP.

During the hearing, Mr. Rivkin addressed the Committee on behalf of the Claimants.
Dr. Garcia Carridn, Messrs. von Mehren and Anway and Professors Silva-Romero and
Mayer addressed the Committee on behalf of the Republic of Ecuador. Both parties made
extensive opening and closing submissions on the issue of the stay of the Award.

Pursuant to the instructions of the President of the Committee, both parties submitted
simultaneously, on May 24, 2013, comments on Claimants’ Exhibit on Annulment 69A.

IL. CLAIMANTS’ ARGUMENTS

Claimants request that the automatic provisional stay granted to Ecuador pursuant to
Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention be lifted, or in the alternative, that the Committee
impose conditions on any continued stay of enforcement of Claimants’ Award against the
Respondent.'

According to Claimants, Ecuador’s illegal seizure of Block 15 was its largest expropriation
ever and reflects the largest expropriation found in ICSID history. The size of the Award
simply reflects the value of Block 15, which the Tribunal unanimously held was illegally
seized. At the time of the expropriation in 2006, 13 years remained on the contract.
Claimants had invested US$ | billion in Block 15 to recover the available reserves. The
prices used in the expert reports were based on 2006 prices, around US$ 50/barrel. Oil
prices have nearly doubled since then, more than doubling the profits. Ecuador simply
cannot be permitted to complain that, because it illegally expropriated such a large and

Claimants’ Request, para. 2.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

profitable investment, it deserves special protection from its consequences.” Claimant
avers that Ecuador has earned enormous cash flows from its illegal seizure of Block 15 —
over US$ 2.05 billion in profits from Block 15 in 2012 alone.*

15. Claimants acknowledge that ad hoc committees asked to continue a stay have typically
done so, but frequently condition continuing the stay on the posting of security. However,
Claimants stress that the texts of the Convention and the Arbitration Rules provide no basis
for a presumption in favor of continuing the provisional stay of enforcement. To the
contrary, under both the Convention and the Rules, the stay is only automatic for 30 days at
the start of the annulment proceeding.’ Ad hoc committees have routinely rejected
arguments that parties are automatically entitled to a continued stay.*

Conditions

16. Claimants add that because the Committee has broad discretion in determining whether to
continue the stay “if the circumstances so require”, it necessarily follows that the
Committee has the power to impose conditions on such continuation, such as security. °
This discretion to impose conditions is further proven by Rule 54(3), which provides that a
Committee “may at any time modify or terminate the stay” — if a Committee can modify a
stay, the Rules provide for something other than an “either/or” (stay or not stay) decision.
Modifying a stay necessarily includes the power to condition a stay."

17. Claimants aver that no ad hoc committee has ever denied that Article 52(5) of the
Convention grants committees the power to impose conditions of the continuance of a
provisional stay. Only one committee, MINE, declined to rule on whether ad hoc
committees have the power to impose conditions. All other published decisions recognize
that committees have the power to impose conditions on the continuance of stay.*

Claimants’ Reply, para. 85 — 86.
Claimants’ Reply, para. 95.
Claimants’ Reply, para. 14-15.

Quoting Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Decision
on Applicant’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated May 7, 2012
(“Libananco”), para. 43, Ioannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/18, Decision on
Applicant’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated November 12, 2010
(“Kardassapoulos”), para. 26 and Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/16, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the
Award dated March 5, 2009 (“Sempra I”), para. 27; Claimants’ Reply, para. 21.

6

 

Claimants’ Reply, para. 24.
Claimants’ Reply, para. 25.

Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision on the
Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated November 30, 2004 (“Mitchell”), MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and
MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile, \CSID Case No. ARB/O1/7, Ad hoc Committee’s Decision on the
Respondent’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated June 1, 2005 (“MTD
Equity”), Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on the Continued Stay
of Enforcement of the Award dated December 28, 2007 (“Azurix”), Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation
(formerly Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/O1/3, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the

8

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

Committees, after determining whether to continue a stay, have repeatedly imposed
conditions on that continuance, including bank guarantees,’ bonds,'° escrow deposits'! and
written undertakings.'? Of the 21 ad hoc committee decisions determining whether to
continue the stay, 13 imposed conditions on the stays of enforcement.'* Security was
denied in eight cases,'* but these denials were based on reasons and circumstances that do
not exist in this case.

 

Award dated October 07, 2008 (“Enron I’), Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v.
Republic of Chile, \CSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on the Republic of Chile’s Application for a Stay
of Enforcement of the Award dated May 7, 2010 (“Pey Casado”), Continental Casualty Company v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Decision on Argentina’s Application for a Stay of
Enforcement of the Award dated October 23, 2009 (“Continental Casualty”), Libananco; Claimants’
Reply, para. 35.

° — Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision of
the Ad Hoc Committee Setting Aside the Award Rendered on the Merits dated May 16, 1986 (“Amco I’);
Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia, \CSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Interim Order No.
1 Concerning the Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated March 2, 1991, 9 ICSID Rep. 59 (2006) (“Amco
IT’); Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Procedural Order No. 1
of the Ad Hoc Committee concerning the Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated
April 5, 2001 (“Wena”); CDC Group plc v. Republic of Seychelles, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/14, Decision
of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment of the Republic of the Seychelles dated June
29, 2005 (“CDC”); Kardassopoulos; Joseph C. Lemire v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18, Decision
on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated February 14, 2012 (“Lemire”).

1° Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), I\CSID Case No.
ARB/O1/10, Procedural Order No. | concerning the Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated December 22,
2005 (“Repsol I’) and Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador),
ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/10, Procedural Order No. 4 concerning the Stay of Enforcement of the Award
dated February 22, 2006 (“Repsol IT”).

mn

  

Sempra I and Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16,
Decision on Sempra Energy International's Request for the Termination of the Stay of Enforcement of the
Award dated August 7, 2009 (“Sempra IT’).

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Decision on the
Argentine Republic's Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated September 01,
2006 (“CMS”), Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of
Enforcement of the Award dated November 4, 2008 (“Vivendi II”), Duke Energy International Peru
Investments No. 1 Ltd. v. Republic of Peru, \CSID Case No. ARB/0/28, Decision on the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award dated June 23, 2009 (“Duke Energy”), Compagnie d’Exploitation du Chemin de
Fer Transgabonais v. Gabonese Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/5, Decision on the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award dated March 13, 2009 (“Transgabonais”), Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim
Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/0S/16),
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated March 19, 2009 (“Rumeli”).

‘5 Claimants’ Reply, para. 46.
Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4,
Interim Order No. 1 Guinea’s Application for Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated August 12, 1988
(“MINE”), Mitchell, MTD Equity, Azurix, Enron I and Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly
Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O1/3,
Decision on the Claimants’ Second Request to Lift Provisional Stay of Enforcement of the Award dated
May 20, 2009 (“Enron II”), Pey Casado, Continental Casualty, Libananco.

4

20.

21.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

In Claimants’ submission, the risk of non-compliance was key in the vast majority of ad
hoc committee decisions on stay of enforcement. The overwhelming weight of Ecuador’s
public statements suggests that it will not comply with the Award if annulment were
denied, and the Response provides no additional assurance that Ecuador will comply.
Ecuador also has a substantial record of non-compliance with past decisions and awards by
arbitral tribunals.'° Furthermore, since 2005, Ecuador has progressively outlawed all
international investment arbitration by both Constitutional amendment and amendment to
the Law on Arbitration and Mediation concerning its natural resources, making immediate
execution of this Award doubtful if not impossible.'°

Claimants do not disagree that the closing of international markets to Ecuador, based on its
credit risk, may make obtaining a bank guarantee impractical. While Claimants continue to
request a security for the full amount of the Award, in the alternative the security could
take different forms. Since Block 15 produces enormous profits for Ecuador, a part of that
profit could be used to secure the Award:

- In a first alternative, Ecuador should deposit 50% of the Award amount plus interest
(US$ 1.15 billion) in an escrow account held at a mutually agreed upon international
bank, with the remaining 50% to be deposited over time in monthly installments
spread over 10 months, or approximately US$ 115 million per month;

- Under a second alternative, Ecuador should make four deposits on a quarterly basis
into an escrow account, each deposit amounting to US$ 507.5 million.”

Interest Insufficient

If the Committee continues the stay without conditions it will severely interfere with
Claimants’ right to an immediately payable Award. Even though post-award interest is
available here, it does not fully compensate Claimants for the delay in payment.
Occidental Petroleum Corporation has achieved a return of 12.6% on capital it employed
during 2012, a rate that far exceeds the pre- and post-award interest granted to Claimants in
the Award.'*

Summing up, Claimants request that if the Committee grants Ecuador’s application to
continue the stay of enforcement, it be conditioned upon the provision of a proper security:

- The posting of the full amount of the Award plus the post-award interest to date into
a mutually agreed-upon escrow account, pledged in favor of Claimants and under the
direction of the ad hoc Committee;

- Or either of the two alternatives outlined in the previous paragraphs."

Claimants’ Reply, para. 44.
Claimants’ Reply, para. 73.
Claimants’ Reply, paras. 97 — 98.
Claimants’ Request, paras. 88 — 89.

Claimants’ Reply, para. 104.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

20

21

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

The CAITISA Decree

Claimants explain that on May 6, 2013, the Government of the Republic of Ecuador issued
the CAITISA Decree, which created a “Comision para la Auditoria Integral Ciudadana de
los Tratados de Proteccién Reciproca de Inversiones y del Sistema de Arbitraje
Internacional en Materia de Inversiones”.

Claimants argue that by subjecting the Award to scrutiny by this Government-sponsored

ission and a public pronc by that C ission as to its validity and
legality, the CAITISA Decree confirms the inevitability of an Ecuadorian court reviewing
and rejecting the Award. The creation of the CAITISA Commission underscores the risk
that Ecuador will not comply with the Award if its annulment application fails. The
establishment of an official Commission to review the validity and legality of an ICSID
Award cannot be reconciled with Ecuador’s obligations under Articles 53 and 54 of the
ICSID Convention.”

 

Ill. |. RESPONDENT’S ARGUMENTS

Respondent avers that committees have repeatedly recognized that a party’s right to seek
an annulment of an award is of critical, systemic importance to the ICSID system. For that
reason, ICSID committees have continued the stay of enforcement in all 22 cases in which
it has been requested to date*'. This — Ecuador adds — is hardly the case to break that line
of precedent. Claimants are anticipatorily seeking to collect billions of dollars from a
sovereign nation on the basis of a decision rendered by a sharply-divided Tribunal, but the
majority’s decision is profoundly flawed — as forcefully explained by Professor Brigitte
Stern in her dissent.”

Respondent submits that its annulment application is made in good faith, and not dilatory
in nature, and that it would suffer immediate, irreparable and/or catastrophic
consequences should the stay be lifted; it explains that the amount of the Award represents
almost 9% of Ecuador’s 2012 annual budget, 59% of the country’s 2012 annual budget for
education and 135% of the country’s annual healthcare budget.”

No Power to Request Security

As regards the Claimants’ request for Ecuador to provide security, such request, in
Respondent’s opinion, is doomed, because the Committee does not have the power to grant
it. Ad hoc committees do not have any explicit, or even implied, power to condition the
continuation of a stay for the following six reasons:**

Claimant’s letter dated May 24, 2013, p. 1 — 2.

There is a very recent decision which decided differently, which the parties had the opportunity to

briefly comment on. See footnote no. 50 infra.

2

23

24

25

Respondent's Response, paras. 2-3.
Respondent's Response, para. 36.
Respondent's Response, para. 43.

Respondent's Response, paras. 57 — 76.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

- The Convention does not expressly grant ad hoc committees the power to order
security when deciding whether or not to stay an award; Arbitration Rule 54(3) does
not necessarily include the power to condition a stay;”°

- The power cannot be implied, by the discretion given to ad hoc committees to stay
the enforcement “if it considers that the circumstances so require”; the discretion is
limited to the decision whether or not to grant the stay — and does not extend to the
imposing of conditions;

- The request for the posting of security is indisputably a request for provisional
measures, and under the Convention a provisional measure may solely be
recommended, as can be clearly derived from Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules;

- Furthermore, ad hoc committees’ power to recommend provisional measures was
expressly considered and rejected during the negotiation of the Convention;

- Article VI of the New York Convention expressly empowers the judicial authority to
request adequate security; given that the New York Convention was already in effect
at the time when the ICSID Convention was drafted, it can only be assumed that
such a provision for security would have been considered and in turn discarded by
the drafters of the Convention;

- Previous decisions of committees granting the stay, but conditioning it on the
provision of security are not binding, are not convincing and were issued in cases
where the debtor did not dispute the power of a committee to do so.

27. In light of the above, Ecuador submits that the Committee has no choice but to examine
anew the issue whether it has the power to order the posting of security as a condition for
the continued stay of enforcement.

28. In the alternative, even if the Committee were to find that it has the power to grant
Claimants’ request for security - which Ecuador denies — the creditor must establish all
requirements for interim measures to be granted: urgency and fumus boni iuris. And
Claimants have failed to prove these requirements.”*

Merits

29. In any event, Ecuador argues that Claimants’ request for posting of security is wholly
lacking in merit. Claimants will not be severely prejudiced by the continued stay, because
as per the Award they will be collecting post-award interest at the US LIBOR rate
compounded on a monthly basis.” And a mere risk of non-compliance cannot justify a

°6 Respondent’ Rejoinder, para. 30.

27 In Amco II, Wena, CDC, and Kardassopoulos, the power of the Committee was merely assumed; Amco
1, Repsol II and Lemire were not published; Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 47.

°8  Respondent’s Response, paras. 78 - 81.

2° Respondent's Response, para. 97.

30.

31.

30

31

32

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

request for security, because granting the creditor’s request for security would go beyond
counterbalancing the alleged effect of a stay: it would improperly put the creditor in a
better situation than it was prior to the annulment application, and penalize the debtor.”

Respondent submits that the posting of security would only be appropriate where the
creditor’s chances of enforcement deteriorate with time. Claimants, however, have not
even attempted to establish that their chances of enforcement are better now than they
would be at the end of the annulment proceeding.**

Respondent dismisses Claimants’ allegations that it will not pay the Award as no more than
speculation about Ecuador’s possible intentions:

- Claimants’ reliance on alleged public announcements by Ecuador does not establish
that Ecuador will not comply with the Award;

- Claimants’ reliance on Ecuador’s alleged failure to comply with the VAT Award
does not establish that Ecuador will not comply with this Award; in this context,
Respondent complains that Claimants have produced correspondence between
Claimants’ in-house counsel and the Procuraduria which was clearly stamped
“confidential and privileged;”*

- Claimants’ reliance on Ecuador’s alleged failure to comply with other decisions of
other tribunals does not establish that Ecuador will not comply with this Award; not
a single concluded investment case against Ecuador has resulted in enforcement
proceedings; Ecuador has been found liable in two cases and complied with the
resulting payment obligations;**

- Claimants’ reliance on Ecuadorian law does not establish that Ecuador will not
comply with the Award; the real state of affairs in this matter is that Ecuadorian law
does not subject ICSID awards to judicial review; Claimant’s allegation based on
Ecuador’s denunciation of the Convention and BITs or amendment to its statutes or
Constitution is therefore irrelevant;** the accién extraordinaria de proteccién
provided for in Article 94 of the Ecuadorian Constitution is not applicable to ICSID
awards;* Ecuador does not maintain that its obligation to abide by and comply with
an award under Article 53 is conditional upon recourse by the award creditor to a
domestic enforcement procedure;*°

Respondent's Response, para. 105, Rejoinder, para. 77, by reference to MINE.

Respondent's Response, para. 109.

Respondent’s Response, para. 130; Rejoinder, para. 100. Respondent’s request that the documents be

stricken from the record was withdrawn: Transc. p. 254, 1. 2-7.

Respondent's Rejoinder, footnote 150.
Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 108.
Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 112.

Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 114.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

- Claimants’ reliance on alleged steps to make enforcement outside Ecuador more
difficult for Occidental does not establish that Ecuador will not comply with the
Award.

Finally, Ecuador argues that the posting of a security is not an option which is open to it,
because it will cause catastrophic, immediate and irreparable harm, requiring the freezing
of US$ 2.3 billion, even if the security takes the form of a bank guarantee. No
international bank would provide Ecuador with a guarantee without Ecuador actually
escrowing most if not all of the moneys. As a consequence, the result will be the same as if
the stay had been lifted.*”

As regards Claimants’ request that the revenues derived from Block 15 be earmarked for
payment of the Award, Respondent avers that this is not the way Ecuador — or any other
government — treat revenues earned by the State. Ecuador pools its revenues from various
sources to satisfy the nation’s urgent needs.**

Summary

The Committee faces two alternatives: either grant the stay without security, which would
cause Claimants no prejudice in the unlikely event that the Award were sustained; or grant
the stay conditioned on the posting of security which would cause Ecuador irreparable
harm that no repayment or returning of funds could ever repair. In Respondent’s view, the
balancing of the parties’ interest weighs in favor of Ecuador.”

Summing up, Ecuador requests that the stay be continued and that Claimants’ request for
the posting of security be dismissed.“

The CAITISA Decree

The Respondent submits that the CAITISA Decree is irrelevant to the Committee’s
decision. CAITISA is simply a study group to be formed for the purposes set forth in the
CAITISA Decree, which does not affect the enforcement of awards rendered against
Ecuador.**

Respondent's Response, paras. 190 — 198.
Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 22.
Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 58.
Respondent's Response, para. 202.

Respondent's letter dated May 24, 2013, p. 2-3.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

4B

44

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

IV. THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

On October 5, 2012 the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Award in the present case, with a
Dissenting Opinion by one of its members. In essence, the decision awarded Claimants:

- the amount of US$ 1,769,625,000 for damages suffered;
- pre-award interest at the rate of 4.188% since May 16, 2006;

- post-award interest from the date of the Award at the U.S. 6 month LIBOR rate,
compounded on a monthly basis.

On October 9, 2012 the Republic of Ecuador submitted an application for the annulment of
the Award, which included a request for a stay of enforcement, pending a decision by this
Committee. In accordance with Article 52(5) of the Convention:

“if the applicant requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his
application, enforcement shall be stayed provisionally until the Committee
rules on such request”.

Consequently, the enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed by the Secretary-
General of ICSID.

On February 13, 2013 the Claimants filed a request for the lifting of the provisional stay.
Initially Claimants requested that the provisional stay should be lifted or alternatively that
any continued stay be conditioned on Ecuador providing proper security.“* During the
procedure, Claimants’ emphasis shifted to the alternative prayer: in the Reply” and during
the hearing,“* Claimants only requested that Ecuador provide adequate security; if the
Committee grants Ecuador’s application to continue the stay, it should be conditioned upon
the posting of a sufficient security.

Respondent replied requesting that the stay be continued, and that Claimants’ request for
the posting of security be dismissed.

Both parties asked for the costs to be borne by the counterparty.

To decide the issues raised by Claimants and Respondent, the Committee will first address
the question of whether the provisional stay of enforcement should be lifted. It will come
to the conclusion that the stay should continue (A). Thereafter, it will briefly analyze
whether Annulment Committees have the power to condition the stay of enforcement (B)
and then decide whether in the specific circumstances of the case, Ecuador should be
required to provide security (C).

Claimants’ Request, para. 104.
Claimants’ Reply, para. 104.
Counsel for Claimants: Transc. p. 100, 19 - 21.

43.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

A. Continuation of the Provisional Stay of Enforcement

Article 52(5) of the Convention provides:

“(5) The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so require, stay
enforcement of the award pending its decision. If the applicant requests a stay of
enforcement of the award in his application, enforcement shall be stayed
provisionally until the Committee rules on such request”.

According to this provision, the Committee has the power to either lift the provisional stay
of enforcement of the Award or order the continuation of the stay, pending the
Committee’s decision on annulment, “if it considers that the circumstances so require”.
The Committee’s decision is not final: it “may at any time modify or terminate the stay at
the request of either party” (Rule 54(3) of the Arbitration Rules).

The Respondent submits that in the past no committee has ever decided to lift the
provisional stay pending annulment proceedings, even when award creditors requested
termination of the stay”. Respondent avers that this Committee should not deviate from
these precedents, because Ecuador has a prima facie good faith case for annulment and
would suffer immediate, irreparable and catastrophic consequences if the stay of
enforcement were lifted.“°

Claimants acknowledge that committees have typically decided to continue the stay, but
add that the legal texts provide no basis for a presumption in favor of continuing the
provisional stay of enforcement.*’ Notwithstanding this lack of presumption, Claimants
are not actively requesting a lifting of the stay — their final prayer for relief is that the
lifting should be conditioned upon Ecuador posting proper security.

The Committee agrees with Claimants that an award debtor is not entitled to a continued
stay of enforcement, that there is no basis for a presumption in favor of continuation of the
stay, and that both under the Convention and the Rules, the stay is only automatic for a 30-
day period at the start of the annulment proceedings (Article 52(5) of the Convention and
Rule 54(2) of the Arbitration Rules). The word “may” in Article 52 also clearly indicates
that the Convention leaves it to the Committee’s broad discretion to decide whether to
continue the stay.

Considering the circumstances of the case, and applying the above-described principles, the
Committee finds that the appropriate decision is that the stay should continue.

The ICSID Secretariat has noted that as of June 30, 2012 there had

There is now one precedent where the stay was lifted, which both parties had the chance to comment

: See footnote No. 50 infra.

Respondent's Response, para. 32.
Claimants’ Reply, para. 13.
See Enron I, para. 22.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

“been a total of 24 requests for the stay of enforcement in the 53 registered
annulments, 22 of which have led to Committee decisions. All 22 decisions granted
the stay of enforcement.”

50. The prevailing practice in prior annulment cases has been to grant the stay of
enforcement”. Although this practice does not create a presumption for continuation, and
a committee is entitled to deviate from it, “if it considers that the circumstances so require”,
the Committee finds that in this case there is no reason to deviate from the standard
practice.

B. Power of Annulment Committees to Condition the Stay of Enforcement

51. Respondent submits that committees do not have the power to condition the continuation of
the stay to the providing of security by the debtor. In essence, Ecuador argues that the
Convention does not expressly grant such power to committees, and that this power cannot
be implied.*!

52. Claimants disagree. Committees have broad discretion in determining whether to permit
continuation of the stay. It necessarily follows that committees have the power to impose
conditions on such continuation, such as security.”

53. The Committee does not have to address, at this time in the procedure, the difficult issue of
whether or not committees have the power to condition the continuation of the stay on the
posting of security by the Respondent. The Committee will analyze in the following
section Claimants’ request that the stay of enforcement be made conditional upon the
posting of security and will come to the conclusion that hic et nunc the factual situation
does not justify that such condition be imposed*’. Since the Committee will come to the
conclusion that in the present circumstances no condition is required, the question of
whether or not the Committee has the power to impose such condition has become moot.

54. The Committee will address the issue of its powers to condition stay of enforcement on the
posting of a security by the award debtor, if and when this issue becomes material, upon a
fresh request by the Claimants, arguing that new circumstances merit a revision of the
Committee’s present decision.

* — ICSID Secretariat: “ d Paper on i for the inistrative Council of ICSID,” dated

August 10, 2012, Doc. CAA 32.

*° Claimants have brought to the Committee’s attention a very recent decision of March 22, 2013,

rejecting Paraguay’s Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award issued in the case of
SGS Societé Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of Paraguay, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/29; See
Claimants’ letter to the Committee of June 27, 2013. The Respondent commented on this decision by letter
of July 1, 2013 and explained that it was issued under very specific circumstances. The existence of one
exception does not vary the conclusion that the current standard is for committees to grant continuance of.
stays of enforcement.

5! Respondent’s Response, para. 54.

* Claimants’ Reply, para. 24.

% See paras. 96 et seq. infra.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

4

58

56

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

Cc. Posting of a Security by the Republic of Ecuador

Claimants have advanced two essential reasons, to convince the Committee that it should
only lift the stay upon the posting of a security by the Republic: the first is that Occidental
has a present right to the Award and to use the funds from the Award (a) and the second is
that there is very substantial risk that Ecuador will not comply with the Award (b).

a. First argument: “Cash is king”

Claimants argue that they have a present right to cash the amounts established in the Award
and to use these funds for their own benefit. As Claimants’ former Executive Vice
President stated in his Witness Statement “cash is king”: Occidental is achieving a return
of 12.6% on capital employed during 2012, a rate which exceeds the post-award interest
granted, which is capped at U.S. 6 month LIBOR rate.** Postponement in payment is
causing Claimants’ additional harm.

Respondent disagrees.

The Committee has full understanding that Claimants would prefer to have the amount
awarded in cash, investing the funds in their own business and obtaining a high rate of
return. The problem with this argument is that it is unconnected to the issue of whether the
stay should be conditioned on the posting of security. If the Committee were to order that
the Republic constitute an escrow account for the full amount of the Award — as requested
by Claimants — the moneys would be deposited with an international bank, and accrue
normal deposit interest rates, which typically are lower than six month LIBOR. Occidental
would not be authorized to touch the funds until the annulment had been decided, and
consequently the problem of unavailability of funds, and the low post-award interest rate
would not be solved.

Posting of a security does not solve, and does not even mitigate, the “cash is king”
problem. Only immediate enforcement would solve this problem.

b. Second argument: The Risk of non-Compliance with the Award

The Parties’ Arguments

Claimants’ main argument is the allegation that there is a serious risk that the Respondent
will not comply with its obligation to pay the Award and that a stay subject to the condition

of proper security becomes necessary to guarantee enforcement.

Respondent disagrees: the mere risk of non-compliance could not justify the granting of a
request for security” and, furthermore, Claimants speculate on Ecuador’s non-compliance

Doc. CEA 15.
Claimants’ Request, paras. 85 — 89.

Respondent's Response, para. 102.

20

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

on the basis of grossly incorrect or irrelevant facts.” Furthermore, the posting of a security
would require the Republic to freeze US$ 2.3 billion, an amount which represents almost
9% of Ecuador’s 2012 budget. The deduction of this amount from other budgetary items
will cause the Republic catastrophic, immediate and irreparable harm, and in practical
terms the end result would be the same as if the stay had been lifted.”

Compliance of Awards under the Convention

62. The possibility that parties dishonor awards issued under the Convention was a risk
foreseen by its drafters. They were adamant that the Convention should not become a
paper tiger and inserted into the Convention various rules, with the aim of safeguarding
that awards are duly complied with.

63. The fundamental principle is contained in Article 53, which orders that each party shall
abide by and comply with the terms of the award, once the stay of enforcement has been
lifted.

64. This treaty obligation also binds the Republic of Ecuador.”

65. If, notwithstanding this treaty obligation, an investor who is an award creditor under the
Convention is not readily paid by the State which is the award debtor, the award creditor
may seek enforcement of the award in any Contracting State. Article 54(1) of the ICSID
Convention creates a specific treaty obligation for each Contracting State to “recognize” an
ICSID award as binding “as if it were a final judgment of a court in that State”.

66. This obligation is also binding on Ecuador.

Posting of Security under Article 52(5

67. The Committee agrees with the Respondent that the intrinsic risk of non-compliance is
addressed in Articles 53 and 54 of the Convention, and that under normal circumstances
the procedure set forth in the Convention for recognition, enforcement and even forcible
execution should not be altered because a stay of enforcement is being sought. In normal
circumstances, conditioning the stay on the posting of security would go beyond
counterbalancing the effect of the stay: it would put the award creditor in a better situation
than it was prior to the annulment application, because it would provide the creditor with
a form of conditional payment in advance."!

68. The above conclusion applies in normal circumstances: when there is full expectation that
the award debtor State will comply with its treaty obligation, and duly pay the award, once
57 Respondent's Response, para. 110.

°8 Respondent's Response, paras. 190-198.

*° Notwithstanding the fact that in 2009 the Republic of Ecuador denounced the ICSID Convention: in
accordance with Article 72, withdrawal from ICSID does not affect the obligations arising out of consent to
the jurisdiction of the Centre given before the notice of withdrawal was received by the depositary.

© See MINE, para. 22, MTD Equity, para. 30, Mitchell, para. 32, Enron I, para. 33.

6! Mitchell, para. 31.

21

69.

70.

71.

72.

oy

Lemi
8

ot

6

6

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

the annulment request has been adjudicated. If there is however an objective risk that the
State will not honor its commitments, ad hoc committees have consistently found that
security is appropriate to provide assurance that the award debtor will comply with the
award if it is ultimately upheld.”

Respondent has averred that forcible execution of an award rarely occurs in the territory of
the sovereign award debtor, given that most public assets cannot be seized under the law of
a sovereign State. Respondent would seem to imply that the legal regime in the award
debtor State is irrelevant. This of course is not so. The risk of non-compliance must be
measured in the jurisdiction of the debtor State itself, applying the law of the land. An
award creditor who is the beneficiary of an ICSID award has the legitimate expectation that
the State will honor its obligations “as if [the award] were a final judgment of a court in
that State” [art. 54(1)], without the creditor having to seek forcible execution in other
jurisdictions.

Application to the Present Case

Claimants argue that there is an increased risk that Ecuador will not comply with the
Award, and that it has been proven by facts that Ecuador has:

- Publicly taken the position that it will not comply with the Award;

- Refused to comply with an earlier BIT award in favor of Occidental and other BIT
awards against it;

- Openly challenged the binding authority of arbitral tribunals on Ecuador;

- Consistently resisted payment of its international financial obligations; and

- Failed to comply with its international obligations under the ICSID Convention.“
The Committee will analyze these averments in more detail.

in Ecuador

 

Claimants have drawn the Committee’s attention to certain public announcements by
Ecuador’s President, by Attorney-General Diego Garcia Carrién and by Minister of
Foreign Affairs Ricardo Patifio, and to a resolution passed by the National Assembly,
which allegedly prove an increased risk of non-compliance of the Award.°° The Claimants
aver that these statements may have “created an atmosphere of hostility towards the ICSID
system, Claimants and the enforcement of the award.”

Amco I, CDC, CMS, Vivendi II, Sempra I, Duke Energy, Transgabonais, Rumeli, Kardassopulos,
ire.
Respondent's Rejoinder, at footnote 133.

Claimants’ Request, para. 33.
Claimants’ Request, paras. 34 — 41.
Transc. p. 58,1. 19-11.

22

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

73. It is true that these public statements criticize, sometime in harsh tones, the Award and
certain experts who acted on Claimants’ behalf. But these are political, not legal
statements, and none goes as far as stating that Ecuador will not comply with its
international obligations.” What is relevant is what Ecuadorian law says.

Ecuador’s Domestic Laws

74. Claimants argue that Ecuador’s internal laws cast serious doubts on its likelihood to
comply with its international obligations. Claimants submit that Ecuador has never
enacted enabling legislation for Article 54 of the Convention, that it amended its
Constitution outlawing non-regional investment arbitration, that it revised its Arbitration
and Mediation Law to prohibit all international arbitration that affect national interests, and
that the Constitutional Court concluded that 12 BITs, including the Ecuador-U.S. BIT
involved in this arbitration were in fact unconstitutional.

75. Against this argument, in its Rejoinder dated May 6, 2013 and signed by Dr. Diego Garcia
Carrién, the Procurador General del Estado™ the Republic of Ecuador made the following
statements:

- “The real state of affairs on this matter is that Ecuadorian law does not subject
ICSID awards to judicial review. Claimants’ allegation base (sic) on Ecuador’s
denunciation of the Convention and BITs or amendment to its statu[tles and
Constitution is therefore irrelevant;”””

- “Tn all these proceedings [Enron I and II, Sempra and Vivendi] Argentina maintained
before the ad hoc committees ‘that its obligation to abide by and comply with an
award under Article 53 is conditional upon recourse by the award creditor to a
domestic enforcement procedure under Article 54’. Ecuador does not maintain such
a position...””!

76. The statements made by its Procurador General are binding upon the Republic, and give
Claimants full reassurance:

- That Ecuadorian law does not subject ICSID awards to judicial review in Ecuador
and

°T See, e.g., President Correa’s phrase: “nosotros, patriotas con el Ecuador en el centro del alma

seguiremos luchando por no pagarle un solo centavo del pueblo ecuatoriano a una transnacional abusiva
que traté de estafar a nuestro pais, compatriotas,’ Doc. CEA 59, or the resolution of the Asamblea
: “Convocar a todas las funciones del Estado y al pueblo Ecuatoriano a mantenerse férreamente
movilizados por encima de cualquier interés politico 0 corporativo, para afrontar por los medios
legitimos y del derecho nacional e international se consume esta amenaza a la dignidad y soberania
nacional,” Doc. CEA 37.

 

8 Claimants’ Request, paras. 64 — 80.

© And co-signed by the Counsel for the Republic of Ecuador.

7 — Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 108; footnotes omitted.

7 Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 114; footnotes omitted.

23

77.

78.

79.

80.

n

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

- That Enforcement of ICSID awards in Ecuador are not subject to a domestic
enforcement procedure,

- In summary, that Ecuador’s domestic law fully complies with the Convention.

Based on this declaration, the Committee accepts that Ecuador’s internal laws and practice
respect the treaty obligations deriving from Articles 53 and 54 of the Convention and that
Ecuadorian law does not subject ICSID awards to judicial review. Consequently, and
contrary to Claimants’ arguments, ICSID awards cannot be subject to judicial review under
Article 41(c) of the LAM,” under Article 414 of the Code of Civil Procedure or under
Article 94 of Ecuador’s Constitution. The legal regime in Ecuador has not changed with
regard to the enforcement of ICSID awards in general, and this Award in particular.

Claimants have also raised the issue that the U.S. — Ecuador BIT has been declared

i 1 by the Republic’s Constitutional Court. The Republic has explained that
Article 422 of the Ecuadorian Constitution forbids Ecuador to submit to international
arbitration fora and acknowledged that the Constitutional Court has found that certain
BITs, including the U.S. - Ecuador BIT, are unconstitutional. But Ecuador clarified during

the hearing:

“Esta decisién o esta opinién de la Corte constitucional no implica que los tratados
hayan salido del ordenamiento juridico ecuatoriano. Los tratados siguen siendo
aplicados en el orden juridico ecuatoriano. La consecuencia es que el Ejecutivo tiene
el deber, la obligacién de denunciar los tratados de conformidad con la disposicién
del tratado respectivo y de conformidad con el derecho internacional.” ”

 

The Republic has thus officially acknowledged that the decision adopted by its
Constitutional Court, declaring the unconstitutionality of the U.S. —- Ecuador BIT does not
affect the validity and enforceability of the Award.

Summing up, although the Committee takes note that the government of Ecuador has
forcefully rallied against the propriety of the Award, and may have created a political
atmosphere which is hostile to the ICSID adjudication system, there has not been any
change in the legal regime applicable to the enforcement of ICSID awards, and the very
Procurador General del Estado has vouched that such awards are not subject to judicial
review in the Republic. As Procurador Garcia Carrién himself said during the hearing:

“El laudo es una aberracién jurfdica y como tal debe ser y es rechazado por la
Repiblica del Ecuador. Esta critica sin embargo no quiere decir, como ya la dijera
expresamente en su momento, que Ecuador haya dejado o vaya a dejar de cumplir
con_sus_obligaciones internacionales. De hecho Ecuador y sus agencias han

Article 41 LAM explicitly submits to treaty obligations: “Sin perjuicio de lo dispuesto en los tratados

internacionales...”

B

Counsel for the Republic of Ecuador: Span. Transc. p. 273, 1. 12 — 20. See Transc. p. 266, 1. 21 —p.

267, 1. 7: “This decision or this opinion by the Constitutional Tribunal does not imply that treaties have
now been cut out of the legal corpus in Ecuador. They continue to be part of the legal body. The
consequence is, however, that the Executive has the obligation of denouncing those treaties in keeping with
their own provisions and in keeping with the provisions of international law”.

24

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

cumplido todos y cada uno de los Laudos que han sido dictados en arbitrajes
internacionales en su contra.””*

81. Given these statements and facts, the Committee must conclude that as of now no
deterioration in the likelihood of enforcing an ICSID award in Ecuador has occurred.

The CAITISA Decree

82. Claimants have also drawn the Committee’s attention to the so called CAITISA Decree. In
Claimants’ opinion, this Government-sponsored commission is empowered to subject the
Award to scrutiny as to its validity and legality. In Claimants’ view, this would confirm
the inevitability of an Ecuadorian court reviewing and rejecting the Award. Respondent
disagrees, and labels the CAITISA commission simply as a study group.

83. The Committee has reviewed the CAITISA Decree” as published in the Ecuadorian
Official Gazette. The CAITISA Commission is an official commission, formed by four
representatives of the State, four experts and four representatives of social movements
(Article 6). The purpose of the Commission is to submit investment arbitration to an
“auditoria integral ciudadana” (Article 2), with a time period of eight months (which can
be extended once — Article 5). The Commission’s task is to evaluate and examine a very
wide number of issues relating to investment arbitration in general, and to specific
investment awards in particular (Article 3.5).

 

84. The Republic has explained that the CAITISA commission is simply a study group, and
that the result of its audit will not increase the risk of non-compliance with investment
arbitration awards. The Committee has no reason to doubt the Republic’s statements. That
said, the Committee notes that the CAITISA Decree includes, among the powers of the
commission, the right to evaluate

“la validez...de los laudos y decisiones emitidos por los 6rganos y
jurisdicciones que son parte del sistema de arbitraje internacional en materia
de inversiones que han conocido procesos arbitrales en contra del Ecuador,
con el fin de determinar la legalidad, legitimidad y licitud de sus
decisiones...” (Article 2 iii).”°

85. The Committee acknowledges that, in accordance with the Convention, the validity of
ICSID awards can only be challenged under the procedures established in the Convention,
and expects that the powers granted to the CAITISA Commission will not be used to

™  Span.Transc. p. 116, I. 10 — 19, emphasis added. See Transc. p. 111, 1. 17 =p. 112, 1. 3: “This Award

is a legal aberration, and as such it must be and is being rejected by the Republic of Ecuador. This
criticism, however, does not mean, as I already had the opportunity of saying in the past, that Ecuador does
not wish to abide by its international obligations. As a matter of fact, Ecuador, and all of its agencies have
always fully abided by all of the international awards against it”.

78 Doc. CEA 69 A.

 

7 Transc. p. 63, 1. 3 — 8: “[tJhe validity ... of the awards rendered by investment arbitration tribunals in
ses against Ecuador [...], for the purpose of determining the legality, legitimacy, and lawfulness of those

 

decisions...

25

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

undermine the general treaty obligations assumed by the Republic under the Convention in
general, and with regard to the Award in particular.

86. The Committee expects the Republic to keep it informed regarding any development in
Ecuadorian law or judicial practice, which potentially could affect the continuing validity
of the statements made by the Procurador General de la Repiblica in the Rejoinder,” and
of any report issued by the CAITISA commission which could have an impact on the
Award or on the present procedure.

Ecuador’s Alleged Failure to Comply with Awards

87. Claimants have also alleged that Ecuador has failed to comply with an UNCITRAL Award
in favor of Occidental, the so called VAT Award, and with other decisions by ICSID
Tribunals.”

88. The real situation in fact is much more nuanced.

89. Occidental and Ecuador signed an agreement for the payment of the VAT Award, the so
called VAT Agreement, in which both parties agreed that Ecuador would pay US$ 133
million. Ecuador disputed whether it owed an additional amount of US$ 32 million, the
Republic deposited such amount in an escrow account, and this new dispute was submitted
to a fresh arbitration, which has not been finally solved (there still being an annulment
procedure pending).

90. The episode surrounding the VAT Award proves the contrary to that what the Claimants
are alleging: it shows that Ecuador respected and duly paid/deposited in escrow the
amounts awarded to Occidental in the VAT Award.

91. As regards other investment arbitrations, not a single concluded case against Ecuador has
resulted in enforcement proceedings. Ecuador has been found liable in one case (further to
the VAT Award)” and has complied with the resulting payment obligations.*° In a number
of other cases, the claims were discontinued following the parties’ settlement.*'

92. The Claimants have drawn the Committee’s attention to certain pending arbitral
proceedings, in which the Republic has allegedly not complied with provisional
measures.” The Republic rejects the allegation.** Although States are expected to comply

™ See para. 76 supra.

8 Claimants’ Request, paras. 42 - 48.

® Duke Energy Electroquil Partners and Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No.

ARB/04/19 (“Electroquil”), See Doc. EEA 50.

8 Acknowledged by Claimants: Transc. p. 87, 1. 9-11.

S| See Respondent’s Rejoinder, footnote 150, with a list of cases and chart in p. 104 of Ecuador's

Opening Memorial.

® Perenco Ecuador Limited v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Provisional

Measures dated May 08, 2009 (“Perenco”), Doc. CAA 20, Burlington Resources, Inc. v. Republic of
Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Procedural Order No. 1 concerning provisional measures dated June
29, 2009 (“Burlington”), Doc. CAA 4, Chevron Bangladesh Block Twelve, Ltd. and Chevron Bangladesh

26

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

with provisional measures issued by investment tribunals, whether in individual cases a
State has complied or not with such orders is irrelevant for the issue under discussion:
whether the risk of non-enforcement of the Award in Ecuador has increased.

Enforcement Outside Ecuador

 

93. Claimants also allege that Respondent has taken steps to ensure that it will be difficult for
Claimants to locate assets outside the Republic on which to enforce the Award if Ecuador
does not voluntarily pay:

- Since its last default in 2008, international capital markets have remained closed to
Ecuador;

- Ecuador is exporting 60% of its petroleum to Chinese state-owned enterprises;

- Ecuador is planning to sell or liquidate the bank it owns in the U.S. — Pacific
National Bank, its largest asset in the U.S.

94. The Respondent has explained that what happened in 2008 was not a repudiation of bonds:
the 2008 buy-back auction was a voluntary process and no claim ever has been brought
against Ecuador for this reason.*° The Chinese companies buying the oil belong to the
same group as Andes, the company with whom Occidental signed the so called Farmout
Agreement, and in any case is a short term contract. And the sale of the Pacific National
Bank was the consequence of an order issued by the U.S. Federal Reserve.*°

95. In view of Respondent’s explanation, the Committee is satisfied that none of Respondent’s
actions denounced by Claimants, had the purpose of making enforcement of the Award
more difficult, by hiding assets or by transferring such assets to jurisdictions where
enforcement of ICSID awards de facto or de iure is less likely.

4k

96. Summing up, the Committee comes to the conclusion that Claimants have not been able to
prove that there is substantial risk that Ecuador will not comply with the Award:

- It is true that in Ecuador the political reaction against the Award has been vocal and
highly critical, but it is also true that the public declarations stopped short of an
announcement that the Republic would not comply with its international treaty
obligations.

 

Blocks Thirteen and Fourteen, Ltd. v. People's Republic of Bangladesh, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/10,
Procedural Order concerning provisional measures dated April 14, 2007 (“Chevron”), Doc. CAA 8.

Respondent’ s Response, para. 141.
Claimants’ Request, paras. 81 — 84.
Respondent’ s Response, para. 155.

Respondent's Response, para. 188.

27

97.

98.

99.

101.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement

- It is true that the Republic has denounced the Convention and that the Constitutional
Court has declared the U.S. — Ecuador BIT unconstitutional, but it is also true that
the Procurador General de la Repiblica, acting on behalf of the Republic, has
vouched that under Ecuadorian law ICSID awards issued under the protection of the
Convention can be enforced without subjecting those awards to domestic judicial
review and without the award creditor having to submit to any domestic enforcement
procedure.

The Claimants have also not been able to prove that the Republic is trying to hide its assets
or to move such assets to more favorable jurisdictions, with the aim of hindering the
Claimants’ eventual enforcement outside Ecuador.

Claimants have failed to prove that, if the annulment decision confirms the validity of the
Award, Claimants’ rights to enforce the Award, either in Ecuador or in any other
Contracting States to the ICSID Convention, have actually deteriorated or that there is a
risk that they will deteriorate in the future.

That said, should the Respondent’s future conduct become of such nature as to materially
increase the risk of non-compliance with the Award (should the Committee deny
annulment), Claimants may request that the Continuation of the Stay granted by this
Decision be terminated, as permitted by Rule 54(3) of the Arbitration Rules.

Subsidiary Argument

In view of the above, it is not necessary for the Committee to analyze Respondent’s
argument that posting of the security would require Ecuador to freeze US$ 2.3 billion, an
amount which represents almost 9% of Ecuador’s 2012 budget, or Claimants’
counterargument that in reality the amount of the Award only represents a small proportion
of Ecuador’s windfall profits from Block 15.

Vv. DECISION

For the reasons given above, the Committee unanimously decides:

1. The stay of enforcement of the Award shall for the time being continue
unconditionally;

2. The decision on costs is reserved for a later stage of the proceedings.
On behalf of the Committee
[signed]

Juan Fernandez-Armesto
President

28

