INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT
DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the annulment proceeding between

OCCIDENTAL PETROLEUM CORPORATION
OCCIDENTAL EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION COMPANY

-and-
THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11

Decision on the Request to Modify the Decision on the Stay
of Enforcement of the Award
(Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules)

Members of the Committee
Prof. Juan Fernéndez-Armesto, President
Judge Florentino P. Feliciano, Member of the Committee
Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno B., Member of the Committee

Secretary of the Committee
Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Representing the Claimants Representing the Republic of Ecuador
Mr. Donald P. de Brier Dr. Diego Garcia Carri6n
Ms. Marcia E. Backus Procurador General del Estado
Occidental Petroleum Corporation
Occidental Exploration and Production Company Mr. George von Mehren
Mr. Stephen P. Anway
Mr. David W. Rivkin Squire Patton Boggs (US) LLP.
Ms. Marjorie J. Menza
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP Prof. Eduardo Silva Romero
Prof. Pierre Mayer
Ms. Laura C. Abrahamson Mr. José Manuel Garcia Represa
O'Melveny & Myers LLP Dechert LLP

Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel
Three Crowns LLP

Ms. Carmen Martinez Lopez
Covington & Burling LLP

Date: September 23, 2014

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

 

Clai ” Ars

Respondent’s Arguments

 

The Committee’s position

Uk ww

INTRODUCTION

1. The Tribunal issued its Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award [“Decision on Stay”] on
September 30, 2013, holding unanimously that “the stay of enforcement of the Award shall for the
time being continue unconditionally” and reserving the decision on costs for a later stage in the
proceedings.

2. On August 1, 2014 Claimants filed a letter requesting that the Committee reconsider and modify
the Decision on Stay [“Claimants’ Request”]. On August 28, 2014, the Republic of Ecuador
answered Claimants’ Request with a letter requesting the Committee to deny Claimants’ Request
[“Ecuador’s Answer”]. The arguments raised by the Parties in their recent letters are summarized
in the following sections.

CLAIMANTS’ ARGUMENTS
3. Claimants request that the Decision on Stay be reconsidered and modified within certain limits.

4. According to Claimants, the collection of a US$11.5 million judgment by the Ecuador National
Court of Justice [the “Tax Judgment”] is imminent. The Tax Judgment derives from an income
tax assessment issued in 2001 by Ecuador’s Servicio de Rentas Internas [“SRY’] against Occidental
Exploration and Production Company [“OEPC”]. OEPC challenged the assessment before the
National Court of Justice and the Constitutional Court, but both courts dismissed the case in favor
of the SRI.

5. Claimants allege that they have requested Ecuador to temporarily suspend the enforcement of the
Tax Judgment until the Committee renders a final decision on this case. However, Ecuador has
refused to do so.

6. Claimants acknowledge that the merits of the Tax Judgment are beyond the scope of the
Committee’s jurisdiction, but argue that the decision is a “clear violation of Ecuador’s tax laws and
represents yet another infringement on the rights of OEPC”'. Thus, Claimants request that the
Committee modify the Decision on Stay so that, if Ecuador takes steps to enforce the Tax Judgment
against OEPC, Claimants can enforce a portion of the Award equivalent to the amount of the Tax
Judgment or any other amount that Ecuador may seek in respect to the Tax Judgment.

7. Claimants support their request alleging that the Arbitration Rules vest the Committee with
jurisdiction to lift the stay at any time in its absolute discretion and point to language of the
Tribunal in the Decision on Stay: “ [t]he Committee’s decision is not final: it ‘may at any time
modify or terminate the stay at the request of either party’”.

8. Furthermore, Claimants raise fairness and prejudice arguments.

9. First, Claimants recall that it is neither fair nor appropriate for Ecuador to enforce a US$11.5
million tax claim against OEPC while OEPC is stayed from collecting its Award of more than
US$2.3 billion (including interest) against Ecuador. Thus, if Ecuador enforces the Tax Judgment,
Claimants should at least be entitled to set off that portion of the Award against the amount
Ecuador seeks.

' Claimants’ Request, p. 2

18.

Second, given the respective amounts of the Award and the Tax Judgment, and the fact that
Claimants have been precluded from enforcing the Award for almost two years, the prejudice
suffered by Claimants in delaying the enforcement of the Award far outweighs any inconvenience
to Ecuador by delaying enforcement of the Tax Judgment or by allowing a set off of the claims.
Furthermore, Claimants aver that so long as the Award remains outstanding, they run the risk that it
might not be satisfied. Such risk will be mitigated — to a very small extent — by the limited
modification of the Decision on Stay.

Therefore, Claimants request that the Committee exercise its discretion to modify the Decision on
Stay, precluding Ecuador from enforcing the Tax Judgment, while Claimants remain unable to
recover the amount owed under the Award.

RESPONDENT’S ARGUMENTS

Respondent submits that Claimants’ request is ill-founded and must be rejected by the Committee
for five reasons:

First, Respondent alleges that not every circumstance justifies the lifting of a stay of enforcement.
Even though Respondent acknowledges that the Committee has discretion to lift the stay of
enforcement, the Committee has established the standard for doing so: an increased risk of non-
compliance with the Award’. Respondent argues that Claimants do not even purport to establish an
increased risk of non-compliance with the Award.

Furthermore, Respondent avers that the Committee’s mission is strictly to assess whether the
Award should be annulled and decide whether its enforcement should be stayed, but it has no
power to verify whether Ecuadorian Courts correctly applied Ecuadorian law.

Second, Respondent alleges that Claimants’ request is based on misrepresentations that the
decisions that led to the Tax Judgment and the Tax judgment itself infringe Ecuadorian Law.
Ecuador also submits that Claimants cannot rely in their request on a tax dispute over which they
themselves have admitted that the Committee has no jurisdiction.

 

Third, Ecuador submits that Claimants’ argument that they would suffer prejudice if their request is
denied has already been dismissed by the Committee, because:

 

— Delays in the enforcement of an award resulting from annulment proceedings cannot be
attributed to the award debtor because they are inherent to the ICSID system;

— The delay in enforcement can be remedied by the awarding of post-award interest;

— Claimants boast of being financially robust; thus, any delay in the enforcement of the
Award for the sum of approximately US$11 million will not cause them irreparable harm.

Fourth, Respondent submits that Claimants’ fairness argument is cynical:

 

— Ecuador had a right to request a stay of enforcement of the award and, under Ecuadorian
Law, the Tax Judgment must be executed;

— There is nothing unfair regarding the execution of the Tax Judgment, while using the
ICSID system to circumvent paying taxes or executing res judicata judgments is an abuse
of process and, thus, both inequitable and unfair.

Fifth, Respondent emphasizes that Claimants no longer pursue the escrowing of the amount granted
under the Award, but the enforcement of a portion of such Award. According to Respondent, no

? Respondent cites to Decision on Stay, §99.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

ad hoc committee has ever lifted a stay up to a certain portion of the amount of the corresponding
award regardless of the actual committee’s decision, and Claimants have failed to establish any
legal basis on which the Committee could do so.

Therefore, Ecuador requests that the Committee dismiss Claimants’ Request and issue a cost order
in favor of Ecuador.

THE COMMITTEE’S POSITION

On October 5, 2012 the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Award in the present case. In essence, the
decision awarded Claimants:

— the amount of US$ 1,769,625,000 for damages suffered;
—  pre-award interest at the rate of 4.188% since May 16, 2006;

—  post-award interest from the date of the Award at the U.S. 6 month LIBOR rate,
compounded on a monthly basis.

On October 9, 2012 the Republic of Ecuador submitted an application for the annulment of the
Award, which included a request for a stay of enforcement, and the enforcement of the Award was
provisionally stayed by the Secretary-General of ICSID.

On February 13, 2013 Claimants filed a request for the lifting of the provisional stay. Claimants
requested that the provisional stay should be lifted or alternatively that any continued stay be
conditioned on Ecuador providing proper security. Respondent replied requesting that the stay be
continued, and that Claimants’ request for the posting of security be dismissed.

On September 30, 2013 the Committee issued its Decision on Stay:
“I, The stay of enforcement of the Award shall for the time being continue
unconditionally;
2. The decision on costs is reserved for a later stage of the proceedings.”

Claimants now request that
“the Committee modify the Stay Decision, so that, if Ecuador takes steps to enforce
the US$11.5 million Tax Judgment against OEPC, Claimants would have the right to

enforce a portion of the Award equivalent to the amount of the Tax Judgment or any
other amount that Ecuador may seek in respect of the Tax Judgment.”

The Committee’s powers

Article 54(3) of the Arbitration Rules provides:
“(3) If a stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to paragraph (1) or continued
pursuant to paragraph (2), the Tribunal or Committee may at any time modify or

terminate the stay at the request of either party. (...)”.

According to this provision, the Committee has the power to modify its Decision on Stay of the
Award in the course of the annulment procedure. This provision must be read in conjunction with

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

* Art. 52(5) of the Convention:
enforcement of the award pending its decision. If the applicant requ

Article 52(5) of the Convention®. Thus, the Committee may modify its Decision on Stay “if it
considers that the circumstances so require.”

Analysis

Claimants submit that a hypothetical future enforcement of the Tax Judgment merits the immediate
modification of the Decision on Stay, while Respondent denies that a modification of the Decision
on Stay is justified, and adds that Claimants have not even purported to establish that the possible
enforcement of the Tax Judgment entails an increased risk of non-compliance.

The Committee agrees with Respondent that the enforcement by the Republic of Ecuador of an
unrelated Tax Judgment is a sovereign action over which the Committee has no jurisdiction, and
that such action does not imply that the Republic will not comply with the Award, if the decision of
the Committee is to uphold it. There is no evidence that the decision to enforce or not to enforce
the Tax Judgment will result in a material increase of the risk of non-compliance with the Award.

The risk of non-compliance is not the only circumstance which can justify a decision by the
Committee to amend or to lift its Decision on Stay. The Committee is authorized to do so “if it
considers that the circumstances so require”. Reasons of fairness and justice may also form part of
the circumstances taken into account.

Claimants acknowledge that Ecuador has yet to take steps to enforce the Tax Judgment; they
simply voice the risk that Ecuador may do so in the future. Given these facts, the Committee finds
that it is premature to take any decision with regard to Claimants’ request to amend the Decision on
Stay.

Notwithstanding the above, the Committee recalls the principle of non-aggravation of the dispute,
which requires parties to a dispute submitted to international law to abstain from any action,
regardless of its nature that may aggravate or extend the controversy pending before the tribunal’.

The Committee expects both parties to adhere to such principle, while the Committee finalizes its
task of deliberating and drafting its decision. Consequently, Ecuador is requested to inform the
Committee in advance, before adopting any action to enforce the Tax Judgment against any of the
Claimants or their assets.

On behalf of the Committee

[signed]

Juan Fernandez-Armesto
President

 

The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so require, stay
's a stay of enforcement of the award in his

 

application, enforcement shall be stayed provisionally until the Committee rules on such request.”
See e.g. the decision by the Permanente Court of International Justice in the case of The Electricity Company of
Sofia - Belgium v. Bulgaria PCI, Ser. A/B, No. 79, 1939.

