INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

OI European Group B.V.
v.

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25) — Annulment Proceeding

 

DECISION ON STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

Members of the Committee
Alvaro Castellanos Howell, President of the Committee
Piero Bernardini, Member of the Committee
David Pawlak, Member of the Committee

Secretary of the Committee
Sara Marzal Yetano, ICSID

 

April 4, 2016

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

I

II. THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES ON THE STAY OF ENFORCEMENT

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 3

 

A. THE APPLICANT’S POSITION. 4
i. There is no risk of non-compliance by Venezuela with the Award in the event it is not
annulled, and, in addition, such failure to honor the Award should not be presumed...
ti. There is a risk that Venezuela will not be able to duly recover its funds if the stay i:
terminated 8
tii. The Application for Annulment is not dilatory...
iv. Terminating the stay of enforcement of the Award would cause significant and irreparable

 
 

 

 

damage to Venezuela 9
v. Ol would not be prejudiced if the stay of enforcement of the Award continues pending a
decision on the h 10

 

vi. The ad hoc Committee should reject OI’s request to condition the continuation of the stay
on the posting of a security 10

B. THE RESPONDENT ON ANNULMENT’S POSITIO! 11
i. There is a substantial risk of non-compliance with the Award by the Applicant . 12
ii. The Application for Annulment and the accompanying stay of enforcement request are

 

 

 

 

 

dilatory 14
tii. The recoupment of any payment by the Applicant in satisfaction of the Award (if the Award
is subsequently annulled) is IS
iv. The termination of the stay would not cause irreparable prejudice or have “catastrophic
consequences” for the Applicant IS
v. The Respondent on Annulment would suffer significant prejudice if the stay of enforcement
were allowed to continue 17

 

vi. If the provisional stay is not terminated, its continuation should be conditioned on the
provision of a bond or security by the Applicant

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ill. ANALYSIS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE
i. Risk of non-compli
ti. Risk of non-recovery.
tii. Whether the Application for Annulment is well founded or dilatory...
iv. Irreparable harm
v. Prejudice if the stay of enforcement of the Award continues pending a decision on the
I
vi. Continuation of the stay conditioned on the posting of a security.....
IV. DECISION 30

 

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

This decision is issued on the request of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(“Venezuela” or “the Applicant”) to stay the enforcement of the Award rendered on
March 10, 2015 (the “Award”) pending the annulment proceeding in the case O/
European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/11/25).

After recalling the procedural history (I), and summarizing the parties’ positions (II),
the ad hoc Committee will present its analysis (III) and decision (IV).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On July 7, 2015, Venezuela filed with the Secretary General of ICSID an application
for the annulment of the Award in the present case (the “Application for Annulment’).
Venezuela’s Application for Annulment included a request under ICSID Convention
Article 52(5) for a stay of enforcement of the Award, pending a decision by the
Committee to be constituted on the Application for Annulment.

The Application for Annulment is based on the grounds that: (a) the Tribunal was not
properly constituted (ICSID Convention Article 52(1)(a)); (b) the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers (ICSID Convention Article 52(1)(b)); (c) there was a serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure (ICSID Convention Article 52(1)(d));
and (d) the Award failed to state the reasons on which it is based (ICSID Convention
Article 52(1)(e)).

On July 17, 2015, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application for
Annulment and at the same time notified the parties that enforcement of the Award was
provisionally stayed, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2).

On October 13, 2015, the ad hoc Committee was constituted in accordance with ICSID
Convention Article 52(3). Its members are: Dr. Alvaro Castellanos Howell
(Guatemalan) President, designated to the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators by the Republic
of Guatemala; Prof. Piero Bernardini (Italian), designated to the ICSID Panel of
Arbitrators by the Italian Republic, and Mr. David Pawlak (American and Irish),
designated to the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators by the Slovak Republic; all members were
appointed by the Chairman of ICSID’s Administrative Council. On that same date, OI
European Group B.V. (the “Respondent on Annulment” or “OI’) and the Applicant
(together, the “Parties”) were duly informed of the commencement of the annulment
proceeding.

On October 14, 2015, OI sent a letter noting that the Applicant bears the burden of
specifying the circumstances that require the continuation of the stay of enforcement
and that it had failed to provide any type of justification for its request in its Application
for Annulment. On this basis, Respondent on Annulment argued that the stay of
enforcement should be discontinued or allowed to terminate automatically within 30
days of the constitution of the ad hoc Committee.

On October 26, 2015, pursuant to the schedule determined by the ad hoc Committee,
as subsequently amended by the Parties, the Applicant filed a first submission in

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

support of its request to maintain the stay of enforcement (the Applicant’s “First
Submission”); on November 12, 2015, the Respondent on Annulment filed
observations on Applicant’s first submission (the Respondent on Annulment’s
“Observations”); on November 25, 2015, the Applicant filed a second submission on
the stay of enforcement of the Award (the Applicant’s “Reply”); and on December 8,
2015, the Respondent on Annulment filed its rejoinder (the Respondent on
Annulment’s “Rejoinder”).

By letter dated October 27, 2015, the ad hoc Committee notified the Parties that, as
contemplated by Arbitration Rule 54(2), the ad hoc Committee decided to maintain the
provisional stay on the enforcement of the Award until it has had an opportunity to
review the Parties’ submissions and to issue a further decision on the matter.

On December 9, 2015, the ad hoc Committee held its first session. Given that the
Parties had not agreed to hold the first session on any of the dates proposed by the ad
hoc Committee within the 60-day period envisaged in ICSID Arbitration Rule 13, and
had not agreed to extend such 60-day period, as permitted by ICSID Arbitration Rule
13, the ad hoc Committee held its first session without the Parties by teleconference.

On December 15, 2015, the ad hoc Committee issued Procedural Order No. 1.

On December 20, 2015, the ad hoc Committee notified the Parties that the ad hoc
Committee deemed that two rounds of written submissions provided ample opportunity
for the Parties to present their observations on the issue of the stay of enforcement, and
declined the Applicant’s request for an additional round of oral submissions.

 

On March 2, 2016, the ad hoc Committee informed the Parties by e-mail that, in
accordance with Section 16.5 of Procedural Order No.1, it had decided not to consider
the Respondent on Annulment’s letter of February 26, 2016, and requested the Parties
to abstain from presenting further unsolicited submissions, consistent with the ad hoc
Committee’s direction in its letter of October 27, 2015.

THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES ON THE STAY OF ENFORCEMENT

The following is a summary of the Parties’ positions on the stay of enforcement of the
Award.!

The Applicant’s position

The Applicant requests the continuation of the stay of enforcement of the Award until
the ad hoc Committee renders a decision on the Application for Annulment.

As a preliminary matter, the Applicant states that under the ICSID Convention the
obligations and responsibilities of ad hoc committees do not include ensuring

' This summary does not intend to be a detailed and exhaustive description of all of the Parties’ arguments. Its
objective is merely to establish the general context for this decision.

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

 

compliance with the decision they issue.? The Applicant argues that this has been

acknowledged in a number of cases, citing El Paso v. Argentina and MINE v. Guinea.>
For the Applicant, it is on this basis that the specific rules on the stay of enforcement
of awards should be interpreted.*

17. Contrary to what the Respondent on Annulment argued in its October 14, 2015 letter,
the Applicant contends that, according to ICSID Arbitration Rules 54(2) second
sentence and 54(4), OI has the burden of proving the circumstances that would justify
the lifting of the stay of enforcement of the Award, since it was OI who first challenged
the provisional stay granted by the Secretary-General.> The Applicant considers that
OTF has not been able —and is not able— to prove any of the circumstances that would
justify the exceptional and burdensome termination of the stay of the enforcement of
the Award and that therefore the ad hoc Committee should reject OI’s request in
limine.®

18. Furthermore, citing the decisions issued in Elsamex v. Honduras, Occidental v.
Ecuador, Venezuela Holdings v. Venezuela and Victor Pey Casado v. Chile,’ among
others, the Applicant contends that there is an unquestionable trend in the decisions of
prior ad hoc committees to maintain the stay of enforcement of awards, to the point
where it would become “almost automatic,” unless the party requesting the termination
proved exceptional circumstances.*

19, The Applicant sustains that in the present case there is no reason or circumstance
authorizing the ad hoc Committee to terminate the stay of enforcement. In particular,
the Applicant asserts that: (i) there is no risk of non-compliance by Venezuela of the
Award in the event it is not annulled, and, in addition, such failure to honor the Award
should not be presumed; (ii) there is a risk that Venezuela will not be able to duly
recover its funds if the stay is terminated; (iii) the Application for Annulment is not
dilatory; (iv) terminating the stay of enforcement of the Award would cause significant

 

 
 

2 Applicant’ n, 27. Applicant’s Reply, $f 24, 98-101.
3 Applicant’s First Submission, footnote 18. Applicant’s Reply, footnote 34, {ff 99-100. El Paso Energy
International Company v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No ARB/03/15, Decision on the Stay of the
Enforcement of the Award (14 November 2012) [hereinafter El Paso v. Argentina, Decision on Stay]; Maritime
International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v. Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Interim
Order No. 1 Guinea’s Application for Stay of Enforcement of the Award (12 August 1988) [hereinafter MINE v.
Guinea, Decision on Stay].
icant’s First Submi

 

     

n, { 27.

n, {if 7-9. Applicant's Reply, i 5-9.

*s Reply, {1 10.

7 Elsamex, S.A. v. Republic of Honduras, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/4, Decision on the Continuation of the Stay
of Enforcement (7 January 2014) [hereinafter Elsamex v. Honduras, Decision on Stay]; Occidental Petroleum
Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/06/I1, Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award (30 December 2013) [hereinafter Occidental v.
Ecuador, Decision on Stay]; Venezuela Holdings B.V. and others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/07/27, Procedural Order No. 2 (28 July 2015), Victor Pey Casado and President Allende
Foundation v. Republic of Chile, 1CSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on the Republic of Chile’s Application
for a Stay of Enforcement of the Award (5 May 2010) [hereinafter Victor Pey Casado v. Chile, Decision on
Stay].

® Applicant’s Reply, {| 13-23. See also Applicant's First Submission, {f 26-36.

  

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

and irreparable damage to Venezuela; and (v) OI would not be prejudiced if the stay of
enforcement of the Award continues pending a decision on the annulment.

Furthermore, the Applicant (vi) rejects OI’s request that the ad hoc Committee require
Venezuela to provide a security as a condition to the maintenance of the stay.
According to the Applicant, the ad hoc Committee should reject this request, not only
because the ICSID Convention does not grant this power to ad hoc committees, but also
because, even if they had the power, the present case does not fulfill the requirements
necessary to grant such a measure.

The following is a brief summary of the Applicant’s arguments justifying each one of
these assertions.

There is no risk of non-compliance by Venezuela with the Award in the event it is not
annulled, and, in addition, such failure to honor the Award should not be presumed

The Applicant cites S.S. Wimbledon? to argue that international tribunals cannot base
their decisions on presumptions that States will not comply with their international
obligations. !°

The Applicant stresses that Venezuela has fully and constantly complied with its
international obligations, despite economic difficulties,'' and points out that Venezuela
has recently paid an amount in excess of USD 5.2 billion in connection with PDVSA
(Petréleos de Venezuela, S.A.) bonds.'? The Applicant also asserts that Venezuela has
never failed to comply with any obligation under the ICSID Convention and has
repeatedly affirmed that it will continue complying with it.!°

The Applicant rejects the list of “factors” that OI identifies to justify the alleged risk of
non-compliance of the Award. Among other things, the Applicant argues that the
statements made in 2012 by late President, Mr. Hugo Chavez—and quoted by OI to
prove that Venezuela will not comply with the Award—are cited out of context, since
such statements were clearly made in connection with the denunciation of the ICSID
Convention that was taking place at that time. Also, the Applicant notes that under
international law unilateral statements of officials cannot generate international
obligations for States unless made with clear intention to bind the State. The statements
made by Mr. Chavez were of a political nature, not legal statements, and subsequent
events show that Venezuela has never failed to comply with the ICSID Convention. '*

The Applicant also rejects OI’s argument that Venezuela has avoided compliance with
every single arbitral award recently rendered against it under the ICSID Convention or
the ICSID Additional Facility Rules. For the Applicant, contrary to what is argued by
OI, the fact that Venezuela has initiated annulment proceedings and interpretation or

° SS ‘Wimbledon’, United Kingdom and ors v Germany, Judgment, (1923) PCI Series A no 1, ICGJ 235 (PCU
1923), 17th August 1923.

10 Applicant’s First Subm
1" Applicant
2 Applicant
3 Applicant

 

ion, { 37. Applicant’s Reply, | 26.
s First Submission, [ 38. Applicant’s Reply, 26.
s Reply, 27.
s Reply, { 26.

   
  

4 Applicant’s Reply, 29.

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

26.

27.

28.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

revision proceedings in relation to such awards, as well as the fact that certain investors
have initiated local proceedings for the enforcement of awards against Venezuela, do
not imply that Venezuela is refusing to comply with such awards. The Applicant notes
that exactly the opposite is true: resorting to post-award proceedings in accordance with
the ICSID Convention is a confirmation of Venezuela’s willingness to follow the ICSID
Convention. Furthermore, the Applicant contends that the existence of enforcement
proceedings outside Venezuela cannot be attributed to the latter and, in any event, is
irrelevant for the purpose of deciding on the stay of enforcement of the Award in the
present case. '*

The Applicant further argues that the denunciation of the ICSID Convention is also
irrelevant for the present purposes and cannot be interpreted as an indication of non-
compliance. On the contrary, for the Applicant, the fact that Venezuela denounced the
ICSID Convention in 2012 and nevertheless continues to follow all existing
proceedings under the Convention is strong evidence to certify Venezuela’s strict
compliance with its international obligations. !

Additionally, the Applicant rejects OI’s argument regarding Venezuela’s failure to
make advance payments in certain proceedings. For the Applicant, the relevant issue
is that in the present case Venezuela has never failed to comply with any of its payment
obligations. In the other cases cited by OI, Venezuela has stated the reasons for which
it discontinued advance payments and such reasons have nothing to do with this case.
In any event, according to the Applicant, compliance with advance payment requests is
an issue related to the distribution of costs included in the calculations of amounts
payable by the parties upon termination of the proceeding and not related to the
termination of the stay.!”

Finally, the Applicant also responds to OI’s argument that the local courts in Venezuela
have confirmed that its domestic laws do not comply with the ICSID Convention
provisions regarding the finality of awards. The Applicant contends that, on the
contrary, the position of Venezuelan courts clearly shows that Venezuela is committed
to complying with awards in the terms of ICSID Convention Articles 53(1) and 54(3). 18
Furthermore, according to the Applicant, “to date there is no award under the ICSID
Convention whose enforcement was attempted in Venezuela and that could not be
enforced therein.” !

'5 Applicant’s Reply, {ff 30-36.

'6 Applicant’s Reply,
"7 Applicant’s Reply,
'8 Applicant’s Reply, 19

I

[ 38.
{91 39-40.
[ 42-52.

'9 Applicant’s Reply, | 47.

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

29.

30.

31.

iii.

32.

20 Applicant’s First Submis:

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

There is a risk that Venezuela will not be able to duly recover its funds if the stay is
terminated

The Applicant states that ad hoc committees have held that a significant factor in favor
of maintaining the stay of enforcement is the difficulty for the respondent State to
recover the amount paid under an award if it is later annulled.” In support of this
contention, the Applicant cites the decisions of the CMS v. Argentina, Enron v.
Argentina and El Paso v. Argentina ad hoc committees.”!

In this sense, the Applicant claims that Venezuela would be forced to incur significant
legal costs in order to recover the payments.”* Furthermore, the Applicant argues that
there is a possibility that a third party might seize any amount paid under the Award,
thus making it impossible for Venezuela to recover such amount should the Award be
annulled.”

In response to OI’s statements regarding the creditworthiness of its group of companies,
Applicant points out that OI has not provided any evidence proving such
creditworthiness and that, in any event, the financial position relevant in this case is
Ol’s, not that of the entire group of companies. Additionally, Applicant notes that OI
could simply cease to form part of the business group to which it currently belongs.”4

The Application for Annulment is not dilatory

The Applicant rejects OI’s argument that the Application for Annulment is dilatory and
stresses that the ad hoc Committee should not analyze the merits at this stage of the
proceeding.”> The Applicant recognizes that the dilatory nature of an application for
annulment is a relevant factor for the ad hoc Committee to decide on the stay of
enforcement. However, the Applicant argues that the analysis of the dilatory nature of
such application must not imply an analysis on the merits.2° For the Applicant, the
standard applicable is “extremely high” since the dilatory nature of the application must
be “manifest,” that is, the application itself “must contain irrefutable evidence of its
manifest abuse, that it was filed for the sole purpose of postponing enforcement and
that it is not based on the grounds set forth in the Convention.”?”

 

 

ion, {if 18-20.

 

2! Applicant’s First Submission, {[ 18-20. CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic. CSID Case
No. ARB/O1/8, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the
Award (1 September 2006) [hereinafter CMS v. Argentina, Decision on Stay]; Enron Corp. & Ponderosa
Assets, LP. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No ARB/O1/3, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request
for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award (7 October 2008) {hereinafter Enron v. Argentina, Decision
on Stay] and El Paso v. Argentina,

2 Applicant’s First Submission, { 21.

23 Applicant’s First Submission, | 22.

2 Applicant’s Reply, 155.

25 Applicant’s First Submission, {| 40, 44-49.

26 Applicant’s Reply, (57-61. Applicant’s First Submission, | 44.

27 Applicant’s Reply, 1 62-66.

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

The Applicant contends that this extremely high standard has not been met in this case
since OI has not invoked any elements allowing the ad hoc Committee to determine
whether the Application for Annulment is of a dilatory nature without conducting an
in-depth analysis of its merits.

Furthermore, the Applicant claims that its Application for Annulment is lawful and
substantiated, containing rigorous support for each one of the multiple grounds for
annulment, each of them discussed in full adherence to the ICSID Convention.”®

Finally, the Applicant also responds to OI’s argument regarding Venezuela’s so called
“dilatory tactics” in other arbitral proceedings, arguing that all the examples cited by
OI constitute the lawful and legitimate exercise of the rights established in the ICSID
Convention and its Arbitration Rules, which therefore cannot constitute a “pattern” of
dilatory behavior. Moreover, the Applicant states that simply pointing out the
unsuccessful outcome of some of those examples is utterly insufficient to constitute
such a pattern.”

Terminating the stay of enforcement of the Award would cause significant and
irreparable damage to Venezuela

The Applicant states that the termination of the stay of enforcement of the Award would
cause irreparable harm to Venezuela since it would be required to divert a significant
amount of the public funds for the payment of the Award. For the Applicant, this means
that a series of basic services provided by the State to its population (such as health,
education, and housing) would be left with less funding.*”

The Applicant also points out that the termination of the stay would force Venezuela to
incur significant legal costs to defend itself against OI’s attempt to enforce the Award
while the annulment proceeding is still pending.*!

According to the Applicant, the irreparable harm risk is clear because “there are several
grounds for nullity duly justified in the Application” and the Award “is highly likely”
to be annulled.”*” Additionally, a State — as opposed to a private company — will not
be able to cure the damage suffered by charging interest and, therefore, the risks
affecting Venezuela are not comparable to the risks alleged by OI.**

Finally, the Applicant contends that OI’s argument regarding the amount of
compensation due under the Award, as compared to Venezuela’s gross domestic
product, contradicts OI’s argument regarding the risk of non-compliance with the
Award. For the Applicant, OI’s invocation of this argument amounts to recognizing
that Venezuela is creditworthy enough to comply with the Award.**

28 Applicant’s Reply, 14 70-77.

 

Reply, (9 78-83.
First Submission, i] 12-13.
First Submission, {| 12.

 

* Applicant’s Reply, 14 85, 87.
33 Applicant’s Reply, 11 88, 89.
4 Applicant’s Reply, 1 91.

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

40.

vi.

Al.

42.

43.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

OI would not be prejudiced if the stay of enforcement of the Award continues pending
a decision on the annulment

The Applicant argues that the maintenance of the stay would not cause any actual,
certain or real damage to OI since the time elapsed between the rendering of the Award
and the actual payment of any awarded amount—if the Award is not annulled—would
be covered by interest due to OI in accordance with the challenged Award.** In support
of this argument, the Applicant cites the decisions by the ad hoc committees in Victor
Pey Casado v. Chile and in Azurix v. Argentina.*©

The ad hoc Committee should reject OI’s request to condition the continuation of the
stay on the posting of a security

The Applicant argues that, in contrast to the New York Convention, the ICSID
Convention does not include a provision expressly authorizing ad hoc committees to
condition the stay of the enforcement of an award on the posting of security by the party
that submitted the application for annulment.*’ In support of this argument, the
Applicant cites the ad hoc committee’s decision in Azurix v. Argentina.** Additionally,
the Applicant also rejects that such power can be implicitly derived from the ICSID
Convention and Arbitration Rules and rejects that there is a “jurisprudence constante”
on the matter, as alleged by OL”?

Citing Libananco v. Turkey,*° the Applicant contends that the ad hoc Committee does
not have the power to recommend the posting of a guarantee as a provisional measure
either, since such power is only vested in arbitral tribunals, but not ad hoc committees.
In this regard, the Applicant highlights the fact that ICSID Convention Article 47 is not
included in the list of provisions that, according to ICSID Convention Article 52(4), are
applicable mutatis mutandis to annulment proceedings.*!

Even if the ad hoc Committee were to consider that it has jurisdiction to condition the
stay on the posting of a security, the Applicant claims that OI has not met the burden
of alleging and proving the minimum requirements that must be satisfied for a
provisional measure to be granted in this case. On the contrary, the Applicant states
that it has been shown that there is no need or urgency to recommend that a security be
posted and that the adoption of such measure would not help to prevent any irreparable
harm to OI. In fact, the Applicant contends that Venezuela would be the one suffering

35 Applicant’s First Submission, {{ 23-25. Applicant’s Reply, 111 92-95.

36 Applicant’s Reply, 1 93-94. Victor Pey Casado v. Chile, Decision on Stay and Azurix Corp. v. Argentine
Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award (28
December 2007) [hereinafter, Azurix v. Argentina, Decision on Stay].

57 Applicant’s Reply, $4 102-104.

38 Azurix v. Argentina, Decision on Stay.

» Applicant’s Reply, 1 106-109.

*” Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Decision on Applicant's
Request for Provisional Measures (7 May 2012) [hereinafter, Libananco v. Turkey, Decision on Stay].

+1 Applicant’s Reply, Mf 110-123.

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

 

irreparable harm since it would have to incur in significant costs in order to provide
such security.”

44. Furthermore, for the Applicant, the posting of a bond would unfairly place OI in a better
position than that it enjoyed prior to the Application for Annulment, thus worsening the
situation for Venezuela.* In this regard, the Applicant cites the decisions issued by the
ad hoc committees in Patrick Mitchell v. the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MINE
v. Guinea and Victor Pey Casado v. Chile.

B. The Respondent on Annulment’s Position

45. The Respondent on Annulment argues that the ordinary meaning of ICSID Convention
Article 52(5) and ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2) confirms that specific circumstances
must exist that require the stay of enforcement. In the absence of such circumstances,
the ad hoc Committee should not stay the enforcement of the Award pending its
decision on annulment. Citing several previous ad hoc committees, such as SGS v.
Paraguay, Sempra v. Argentina, and Victor Pey Casado v. Chile,** among others, OI
contends that a continued stay of enforcement is the exception rather than the rule —
which in OI’s view is consistent with the extraordinary nature of the annulment
remedy.*°

46. For the Respondent on Annulment, it is the party requesting the continuation of a
provisional stay who bears the burden of demonstrating that there are specific
circumstances that require its continuation.*’ In support of its position, the Respondent
on Annulment cites Professor Schreuer’s commentary as well as the decisions of the ad
hoc committees in SGS v. Paraguay, Kardassoupoulos v. Georgia, Victor Pey Casado
v. Chile, Vivendi v. Argentina (Vivendi II) among others.*® The Respondent on
Annulment also points out that its position on the burden of proof is consistent with the

* Applicant’s Reply, IM 124-140.

+3 Applicant’s Reply, Mf 141-146.

+ Applicant’s Reply, {ff 141-143. Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of Congo, ICSID Case No.
ARB/99/7, Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award (November 30, 2004), [hereinafter, Patrick
Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of Congo, Decision on Stay]; Victor Pey Casado v. Chile, Decision on Stay;
MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Stay.

+5 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. The Republic of Paraguay, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/29,
Decision on Paraguay’s Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award (22 March 2013)
[hereinafter SGS v. Paraguay, Decision on Stay]; Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, CSID
Case No. ARB/02/16, Decision on the Argentine’s Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of
the Award (5 March 2009) [hereinafter Sempra v. Argentina, Decision on Stay]; Victor Pey Casado v. Chile,

 

46 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {ff 16-25.

+7 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {| 27-37. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, {ff 12-40.

+8 SGS v. Paraguay, Decision on Stay, loannis Kardassopoulos and Ron Fuchs v. Georgia, ICSID Case Nos.
ARB/05/18 and ARB/O7/15, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award (12
November 2010) [hereinafter Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, Decision on Stay]; Victor Pey Casado v. Chile,
Decision on Stay, Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on the Argentine’s Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of
Enforcement of the Award rendered on 20 August 2007 (4 November 2008).

ll

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

47.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

ad hoc Committee’s decision regarding the timetable for the Parties’ submissions on
this issue.”

The Respondent on Annulment rejects the Applicant’s argument that there is a trend in
the decisions of prior ad hoc committees to maintain the stay of enforcement of awards,
to the point where it would become “almost automatic.” According to OI, the Applicant
wrongfully bases its argument solely on the outcome of the decisions on provisional
stays of enforcement in other cases, without scrutinizing the circumstances that led to
those outcomes and without taking into consideration that in many instances the
continuation of the stay was conditioned on the applicant furnishing a security or a
guarantee of compliance with the award.°°

The Respondent on Annulment contends that the Applicant has established none of the
five factors that previous ad hoc committees have taken into account when deciding
whether to continue the stay. In particular, OI argues that the Applicant has failed to
prove: (i) the absence of circumstances indicating that there is a risk of non-compliance
with the Award; (ii) the absence of circumstances indicating that its attempt to annul
the Award and its request to maintain the stay merely seek to delay the enforcement of
the Award; (iii) the lack of prospects for recoupment of the relevant payment if the
Award is subsequently annulled; (iv) that lifting the stay of enforcement would have
“catastrophic consequences” for it; and (v) the lack of prejudice to the Respondent on
Annulment that would result from the Applicant’s delayed compliance with the Award.
Even assuming arguendo that circumstances justifying a continuation of the provisional
stay did exist, the Respondent on Annulment contends that (vi) such continuation
should be conditioned on the provision of a bond or security by the Applicant.

The following is a brief summary of the Respondent on Annulment’s arguments in
support of each of these assertions.

There is a substantial risk of non-compliance with the Award by the Applicant

Contrary to what is argued by the Applicant, the Respondent on Annulment contends
that the risk of non-compliance by the Applicant with the Award is a crucial factor in
deciding on the Applicant’s request.*! According to OI, this is supported by prevalent
annulment decisions, such as Sempra v. Argentina and CMS v. Argentina.>*

The Respondent on Annulment argues that there is a very real prospect of the Applicant
not complying voluntarily with the Award and points to a list of factors that illustrate
this risk. Among others factors, the Respondent on Annulment refers to certain
statements made in 2012 by the former President of Venezuela, Mr. Hugo Chavez, that

“© Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, | 38. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, #¥f 19-22.

5 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, | 23.

5! Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {{{ 43-44. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, {ff 59-66.
5 Sempra v. Argentina, Decision on Stay; CMS v. Argentina, Decision on Stay.

12

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

would allegedly indicate that the Applicant does not intend to comply with the ICSID
Convention.*

Contrary to what is argued by the Applicant, OI contends that these statements are
legally binding and cannot be dismissed as merely political in nature, as confirmed by
the Nuclear Tests case, as well as CMS v. Argentina.** Further, in response to the
Applicant’s argument that such statements were made in connection with the
denunciation of the ICSID Convention, the Respondent on Annulment notes that some
of the declarations by Mr. Chavez were made after such denunciation.»

The Respondent on Annulment also points out that Venezuela has initiated annulment
proceedings and interpretation or revision proceedings against all of the awards
rendered against it in recent years under the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional
Facility Rules. For the Respondent on Annulment, this factor, coupled with the fact
that the claimants in at least three of such arbitral proceedings have had to initiate
enforcement proceedings in various jurisdictions, implies that the Applicant does not
intend to honor the Award.*°

Additionally, the Respondent on Annulment refers to the 2012 letter from the Applicant
signed by the current President Maduro denouncing the ICSID Convention.
Respondent on Annulment contends that such letter contained an open and vocal attack
on the ICSID system which further indicates a substantial risk of non-compliance with
the Award.*”

Citing SGS v. Paraguay,** the Respondent on Annulment contends that another factor
that would illustrate the risk of non-compliance is the Applicant’s systematic refusal to
make advance payments in a whole category of arbitration cases “on the basis of its
own self-serving interpretation of the ICSID Convention and in clear violation of the
principle pacta sunt servanda.”*?

Furthermore, the Respondent on Annulment asserts that the Applicant’s courts have
repeatedly concluded that decisions of international courts and tribunals, such as ICSID
awards, can be subjected to judicial review and that they cannot be enforced in
Venezuela if the Applicant’s courts consider that such awards are contrary to the
Venezuelan Constitution.” For the Respondent on Annulment, these domestic court
rulings, in violation of the provisions regarding the finality, recognition and
enforcement of ICSID awards contained in ICSID Convention Articles 53 and 54,
indicate a risk of non-compliance with the Award, as confirmed by a number of

53 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {ff 48-50.

54 Respondent on Annu!

ment’s Rejoinder, {11 76, 79-86. CMS v. Argentina, Decision on Stay.

55 Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, 77.

56 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {ff[ 52-53. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, {{{ 87-90.
57 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, | 54. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, {if 91-92.

58 SGS v. Paraguay, Decision on Stay.

5 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {| 55-59. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, {| 93-97.
© Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {{f{ 63-80. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, {ff 99-108.

i
i
i
i

13

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

 

annulment committees, such as the ad hoc committees in Kardassopoulos v. Georgia
and Occidental v. Ecuador.°!

57. Finally, the Respondent on Annulment refers to indicia of the Applicant’s taking
measures to shield its assets in foreign jurisdictions from enforcement proceedings.”
As examples, the Respondent on Annulment refers to press reports regarding
Venezuela’s gold reserves and its oil-refining corporation in the United States, Citgo
Petroleum Corporation.® For the Respondent on Annulment, this is another factor that
should be taken into account by the ad hoc Committee in deciding on the stay of
enforcement, as confirmed by the ad hoc committee in Azurix v. Argentina.

ii. The Application for Annulment and the accompanying stay of enforcement request
are dilatory

58. Citing Victor Pey Casado v. Chile, Patrick Mitchell v. Congo and Libananco v. Turkey,
the Respondent on Annulment asserts that the dilatory nature of the Application for
Annulment is highly relevant to the ad hoc Committee’s decision on whether to
continue the stay of enforcement.®

59. The Respondent on Annulment rejects the “excessively high threshold” argued by the
Applicant and contends that dilatory applications are those “that are ‘manifestly
abusive,’ ‘made for an improper purpose’ or based on a pretext while in fact primarily
intended to delay the proceedings.”®’ For the Respondent on Annulment, this is not an
exhaustive test. Rather, the ad hoc Committee must look at the totality of evidence
before it and consider all relevant circumstances when making its decision.*

60. To prove the dilatory nature of the Application for Annulment, the Respondent on
Annulment first contends that the Applicant has deliberately embarked on a dilatory
strategy in other ICSID or ICSID Additional Facility proceedings. In this regard, the
Respondent on Annulment asserts that the Applicant has not voluntarily complied with
at least five of the awards recently rendered against it but, instead, has initiated post-
award proceedings seeking to stay the enforcement and thus further delay the payment
of compensation. Furthermore, the Respondent on Annulment notes that in the last
six years the Applicant has requested the disqualification of an arbitrator in either
ICSID or ICSID Additional Facility proceedings on no less than nineteen (19)
occasions.”°

° Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, Decision on Stay; Occidental v. Ecuador, Decision on Stay.

© Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, 81.

© Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, ff 112-114.

© Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, (¥[ 110-111. Azurix v. Argentina, Decision on Stay.

© Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {ffl 83-84. Victor Pey Casado v. Chile, Decision on Stay; Patrick
Mitchell v. Congo, Decision on Stay; and Libananco v. Turkey, Decision on Stay.

© Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, { 139.

© Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, { 138.

© Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, 8 December 2015, | 138.

© Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {ff 92-96. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, {if 142-143.
% Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, { 98. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, f[ 144-145.

14

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

61.

62.

iii.

64.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

The Respondent on Annulment argues that this “pattern of behavior” is relevant for the
ad hoc Committee’s decision on the stay of enforcement.’! Also, according to the
Respondent on Annulment, Venezuela’s conduct is motivated by the fact that, due to
its poor credit rating, it is “much cheaper for the Applicant to avoid having to pay for
the investments that it expropriates for as long as possible rather than attempting to
secure credit from lending institutions or friendly States.”””

Additionally, the Respondent on Annulment contends that even a cursory review of the
Applicant’s Request for Annulment and the request to lift the stay of enforcement
makes it clear that none of the grounds invoked by the Applicant can be taken
seriously.”

 

Ther ip of any p by the Applic in satisfaction of the Award (if the
Award is subsequently annulled) is guaranteed

The Respondent on Annulment argues that there is absolutely no risk that the Applicant
would be unable to recoup any payment it makes to OI, in the unlikely event that the
Applicant succeeds in its Application for Annulment. The Respondent on Annulment
maintains that it has conducted itself throughout the proceedings as a model litigant
who has abided by all procedural obligations. The Respondent on Annulment stresses
that, more importantly, it is a member of a corporate group with market capitalization
of several billions of US dollars.”

In response to the Applicant’s arguments on this issue, the Respondent on Annulment
maintains that it has adduced factual evidence that demonstrate the vast solvency and
liquidity of the corporate group of which it is a member. Additionally, the Respondent
on Annulment contends that the Applicant’s arguments regarding the possibility of the
group’s funds being affected by acts of a third party and regarding the group’s
continued creditworthiness in the future are mere speculations. ”°

Further, the Respondent on Annulment notes that the ad hoc Committee could address
any recoupment concerns by conditioning the continuation of the stay on the
Applicant’s paying the sum into an escrow account and empowering the escrow agent
to release the funds to OI if, and only if, the ad hoc Committee rejects the Application
for Annulment.’°

The termination of the stay would not cause irreparable prejudice or have
“catastrophic consequences” for the Applicant

The Respondent on Annulment rejects the Applicant’s argument that the termination of
the stay would cause irreparable harm because it would force Venezuela to direct public

7! Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, { 141.
% Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, { 85.

3 Respondent on Annul
4 Respondent on Annul

ment’s Observations, ff] 86-91. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, ff 147-156.
ment’s Observations, | 102.

5 Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, | 44.
% Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, J 103. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, 43.

i
i
i
i
i
i

15

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

67.

70.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

funds towards the payment of the Award instead of towards other public matters. For
the Respondent on Annulment, this argument is not supported by any case law and is
contrary to the obligation of a State that has committed an internationally wrongful act
to make reparation.”

Furthermore, the Respondent on Annulment contends that, even if the Applicant’s
argument is interpreted as a claim that the satisfaction of the Award would lead to
“catastrophic consequences,” such a claim would also not be supported by the case law.
In that regard, the Respondent on Annulment points out that in CDC v. Seychelles the
ad hoc committee held that the perpetration of catastrophic consequences upon the
award debtor by the lifting of the stay of enforcement of the award was a relevant
consideration, but noted that specific evidence and data must be supplied to substantiate
such claim.”®

The Respondent on Annulment contends that the Applicant’s argument must also be
rejected for practical reasons. For OI, it is a truism that a State debtor in an ICSID
arbitration will pay compensation out of public funds that could be used for another
purpose — that alone, given it is true of every case, cannot provide a basis on which a
stay of enforcement is continued.”

Further, the Respondent on Annulment notes that the Applicant has had the benefit of
the expropriated plants for more than five years, and has taken for itself the hundreds
of millions of dollars of profits they have generated during that time. Additionally, the
Respondent on Annulment points out that the Applicant has repeatedly promised to pay
the compensation that was due, and therefore cannot now maintain that it would suffer
prejudice by paying.*?

Finally, given that the sum that the Tribunal ordered to be paid is only 0.09% of the
Applicant’s official gross domestic product for 2014, the Respondent on Annulment
argues that no catastrophic consequences will flow from its paying the requisite sum of
compensation immediately.*' In reply to the Applicant’s contention that this argument
is contradictory with OI’s approach in this case, the Respondent on Annulment points
out that it has never maintained that the Applicant is soon to become insolvent. Rather,
the Respondent on Annulment’s position is that the Applicant will not comply
voluntarily with the Award, has limited assets abroad and has a growing list of creditors
pursuing those assets.®?

7 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {| 105. Respondent on Annulment, {ff 47-52.

8 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {| 106-107. CDC Group PLC v. Republic of the Seychelles,
ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14, Decision on Whether or Not to Continue Stay and Order (14 July 2004)
hereinafter, CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on Stay].

9 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, { 108.

*° Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, { 111.

8! Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {ff 108-113.

® Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, 53.

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

71.

72.

vi.

2.

74,

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

The Respondent on Annulment would suffer significant prejudice if the stay of
enforcement were allowed to continue

The Respondent on Annulment argues that further delaying the payment of the Award
is in and of itself a prejudice sufficient to warrant the discontinuance of the stay.
However, the Respondent on Annulment contends that this prejudice increases
manifold due to the consequences that the delay has in this case.** In this regard, the
Respondent on Annulment notes that a continuation of the stay would force OI
“backwards in the queue of creditors that are seeking to enforce international awards
against the Applicant’s assets.”*+ Further, the Respondent on Annulment contends that
“the pool of assets against which the multiple awards might be enforced is limited and
dwindling and therefore every day of delay directly reduces the likelihood of OI being
able to enforce the Award.®>

According to the Respondent on Annulment, this prejudice cannot be offset by post-
award interest and, in any event, OI’s entitlement to post-award interest should not be
a relevant consideration in the ad hoc Committee’s analysis on the stay of enforcement,
as confirmed by the ad hoc committees in Kardassopoulos v. Georgia and Sempra v.
Argentina.®©

 

If the provisional stay is not termi d, its i ion should be ditioned on
the provision of a bond or security by the Applicant

The Respondent on Annulment argues that if the ad hoc Committee decides to maintain
the stay of enforcement in this case, it should do so only upon the provision by the
Applicant of a financial security from which the Respondent on Annulment can obtain
full satisfaction of the Award if the Application for Annulment is rejected. That
security should consist of a deposit in an escrow account covering the full amount of
the Award, and the corresponding interest until the date of the deposit. Alternatively,
the Respondent on Annulment contends that the Applicant should furnish an
unconditional and irrevocable first demand bank guarantee issued by a solvent and
reputable international bank (with no principal establishment in the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela and acceptable to the Respondent on Annulment) for the total amount of
the Award plus the corresponding interest accrued up to the date the guarantee is
issued.*”

The Respondent on Annulment contends that the power to condition the stay of
enforcement on the provision of a bond or security is implicitly contained in ICSID
Convention Article 52(5) as confirmed by ample case law.** In support of this, the

8 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, { 116.

* Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, #¥{ 117.

85 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, J 117. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, 4 116-127

8 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {ff 118-122. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, { 126.
Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, Decision on Stay and Sempra v. Argentina, Decision on Stay.

*7 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, { 131. Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, { 174.

88 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {ff 126-130 and 132-133. Respondent on Annulment’ s Rejoinder,
4 161-163.

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

75.

76.

77.

78.

Ill.

79.

80.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

Respondent on Annulment cites Enron v. Argentina, Libananco v. Turkey, Sempra v.
Argentina, Repsol v. Ecuador, Kardassoupolos v. Georgia, Lemire v. Ukraine and
Adem Dogan v. Turkmenistan, among others.*?

Furthermore, the Respondent on Annulment maintains that there are no “special
circumstances” in this case that would militate against the posting of a security by the
Applicant, and that the main elements that have led previous annulment committees to
require the posting of a security are all present in this case.*°

Citing Professor Schreuer’s commentary and the ad hoc committees in Wena Hotels v.
Egypt and CDC v. Seychelles,*! the Respondent on Annulment argues that conditioning
the stay of enforcement on the provision of a security would be an appropriate way of
balancing the rights of the Parties in this case.°*

In response to the Applicant’s provisional measures arguments, the Respondent on
Annulment contends that such arguments are “inconsequential and irrelevant to the
present dispute” given that at no stage in the present exchange of pleadings has OI
requested provisional measures.”>

Contrary to the Applicant’s claims, the Respondent on Annulment contends that
conditioning the provisional stay on the provision of a security or bond would not place
the Respondent on Annulment in a better position than the one in which it currently
finds itself. In this regard, the Respondent on Annulment argues that a condition of
security would merely balance the benefit the Applicant would enjoy if granted a stay
of enforcement. Further, OI maintains that the posting of security is a suitable
safeguard in the present case, where there are strong indications that the Applicant will
not voluntarily comply with the Award. Finally, the Respondent on Annulment also
notes that, in the circumstances, the posting of security would counter-balance the
detriment caused to it by the delay created by a stay. °*

ANALYSIS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

The Parties have had a full opportunity to be heard and the ad hoc Committee is
adequately prepared to render this Decision.

Pursuant to ICSID Convention Article 53, arbitral awards are final and binding.
According to such Article, an award “shall be binding on the parties;” it “shall not be
subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except for those provided for in thfe]

® Enron v, Argentina, Decision on Stay; Libananco v. Turkey, Decision on Stay; Sempra v. Argentina, Decision
on Stay; Repsol YPF Ecuador, S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), 1CSID Case No.
ARB/O1/10, Procedural Order No. 1 (22 December 2005); Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, Decision on Stay;
Joseph Charles Lemire v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/18, Decision on Annulment (16 July 2013); Adem
Dogan v. Turkmenistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/9, Decision on Stay of Enforcement (24 November 2014).

% Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, | 134.

°! Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, ff 182-183. CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on Stay.

°3 Respondent on Annulment, {ff 164 and 166-173.

i
fl

°2 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {ff 139-146.
fl
fl

° Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, {ff 165 and 176-208.

18

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

Convention;” and the parties “shall abide and comply with the terms of the award
except to the extent that the enforcement shall have been stayed.”

Notwithstanding the finality and binding nature of an award rendered under the ICSID
Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules, a party to an arbitration under said
Convention has the right to request annulment of the award, but only under the specific
grounds provided for in ICSID Convention Article 52. A request for annulment is a
fundamental right which is an integral part of the ICSID system.

The grounds contemplated in ICSID Convention Article 52 characterize a request for
annulment as an exceptional remedy; therefore, it does not constitute an appeal or a
means to request the review of the merits of the case. ICSID Convention Article 53(1)
is categorical: “The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to
any appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for in this Convention...”
(highlighted text by the ad hoc Committee).

The Parties do not dispute the principles of finality and the binding nature of an award
and the exceptional nature of the annulment mechanism. These principles derive from
ICSID Convention Articles 52 and 53, and, as such, must be considered in the
interpretation and application of the provisions related to the issue of the stay of
enforcement.”

The rules regarding the stay of enforcement of an award are contained, in particular, in
ICSID Convention Article 52 and ICSID Arbitration Rule 54, and are reproduced in
pertinent part as follows.

ICSID Convention Article 52(5) provides:

The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so require, stay
enforcement of the award pending its decision. If the applicant requests a
stay of enforcement of the award in his application, enforcement shall be
stayed provisionally until the Committee rules on such request.

ICSID Arbitration Rule 54 provides:
Stay of Enforcement of the Award

(1) The party applying for the interpretation, revision or annulment of an
award may in its application, and either party may at any time before the
final disposition of the application, request a stay in the enforcement of part
or all of the award to which the application relates. The Tribunal or ad hoc
Committee shall give priority to the consideration of such a request.

(2) If an application for the revision or annulment of an award contains a
request for a stay of its enforcement, the Secretary-General shall, together
with the notice of registration, inform both parties of the provisional stay of
the award. As soon as the Tribunal or ad hoc Committee is constituted it

°5 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Article 31.

19

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

 

shall, if either party requests, rule within 30 days on whether such stay
should be continued; unless it decides to continue the stay, it shall
automatically be terminated.

(3) If a stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to paragraph (1) or
continued pursuant to paragraph (2), the Tribunal or ad hoc Committee may
at any time modify or terminate the stay at the request of either party. All
stays shall automatically terminate on the date on which a final decision is
rendered on the application, except that a ad hoc Committee granting the
partial annulment of an award may order the temporary stay of enforcement
of the unannulled portion in order to give either party an opportunity to
request any new Tribunal constituted pursuant to Article 52(6) of the
Convention to grant a stay pursuant to Rule 55(3).

(4) A request pursuant to paragraph (1), (2) (second sentence) or (3) shall
specify the circumstances that require the stay or its modification or
termination. A request shall only be granted after the Tribunal or ad hoc
Committee has given each party an opportunity of presenting its
observations.

(5) The Secretary-General shall promptly notify both parties of the stay of
enforcement of any award and of the modification or termination of such a
stay, which shall become effective on the date on which he dispatches such
notification.

87. Under ICSID Convention Article 52(5), an ad hoc committee’s decision to continue a
stay depends on whether “it considers that the circumstances so require.” The ICSID
Convention provides no further specification or guidance regarding the circumstances
or criteria that are relevant to the ad hoc committee’s determination, or the relative
weight to be given to such circumstances. Rather, as further addressed immediately
below, the determination regarding the stay is left to the discretion of the ad hoc
committee.

88. The ad hoc committee in Libananco v. Turkey determined that:

The exercise of the discretion of the Committee depends on the
circumstances surrounding the Stay Request and, therefore, the granting of
a stay of enforcement or its continuation should in no way be regarded as
automatic. The Committee is aware that some ad hoc annulment
committees have considered that, ‘absent unusual circumstances, the
granting of a stay of enforcement pending the outcome of the annulment
proceedings has now become almost automatic’. However, this does not
follow from the ICSID Convention or the Arbitration Rules, and the
Committee considers that its decision should be based on an assessment of
all relevant circumstances.”°

° Libananco v. Turkey, Decision on Stay, 43.

20

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

89.

90.

91.

92.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

The ad hoc Committee in the instant case agrees with the reasoning cited in the
preceding paragraph. The aforementioned provisions of the ICSID Convention and the
ICSID Arbitration Rules lead this ad hoc Committee to a fundamental conclusion, set
forth at the outset, that the continuation of the stay of enforcement in the ICSID system
is far from automatic. ICSID Convention Article 52(5) provides that the stay shall
continue if an ad hoc committee considers that “the circumstances so require.” Said
article does not use other less categorical verbs, such as “recommend,” “deserve,”
“justify” or similar words, but resorts to the imperative verb “require.”*” And the
expression “if it considers” leaves wide discretion to an ad hoc committee to evaluate,
case by case, if those circumstances are present or not, in order to continue a stay of
enforcement, notwithstanding the binding and final nature of the awards.

 

The ad hoc committee in Kardassopoulos v. Georgia indicated:

Consonant with the extraordinary nature of the annulment remedy, the stay
of enforcement is an exception to the ICSID enforcement regime. Stay of
enforcement during the annulment proceeding is by no way automatic, quite
to the contrary, a stay is contingent upon the existence of relevant
circumstances which must be proven by the [party requesting the stay].°*

The above reasoning is in conformity with decisions of other ad hoc committees. For
example, the ad hoc committee in Sempra v. Argentina held that:

Against that background, the view of the present Committee as to the
prerequisites for granting a stay can be summarized as follows. An ICSID
award is immediately payable by the award debtor, irrespective of whether
annulment is sought or not. A stay of enforcement should not in any event
be automatic, and there should not even be a presumption in favour of
granting a stay of enforcement. This follows, in the Committee’s opinion,
from the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of Article 52(4)(sic) of
the ICSID Convention, which authorizes the Committee to stay
enforcement of the award pending its decision ‘if it considers that the
circumstances so require’. Although the ICSID Convention does not give
any indication as to what circumstances would warrant a stay, it is
nonetheless clear from this language that there must be some circumstances
present that speak in favour of granting a stay. As a consequence, it cannot
be assumed that there should be a presumption in favour of a stay or that
the primary burden is placed on the award creditor to show that continuation
of the stay should not be granted.”

The ad hoc Committee now addresses the issue of burden of proof. The Applicant
claims that, unless the Respondent on Annulment proves that there are exceptional
circumstances that require lifting the provisional stay, such stay should be

° Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, 15.
°8 Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, Decision on Stay, 4 26.
%® Sempra v. Argentina, Decision on Stay, 27.

21

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

93.

94.

95.

96.

100 Applicant’s First Submi

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

maintained.'°° The Respondent on Annulment argues that the Applicant is wrong.'°!
The Applicant argues that the Respondent on Annulment’s letter of 14 October 2015 is
a request under Arbitration Rules 54(2) second sentence, to which Arbitration Rule
54(4) makes reference, so that it is the Respondent on Annulment that has to prove the
circumstances requiring termination of the stay since it first challenged the provisional
stay. 102

The ad hoc Committee does not accept the position asserted by the Applicant. That is
why, on 15 October 2015, the ad hoc Committee requested Venezuela to present its
written arguments in favor of the continuation of the stay of enforcement no later than
26 October 2015. After such first submission of 26 October 2015, the Respondent on
Annulment filed its Observations on the Applicant’s Request for Continuation of the
Stay of Enforcement, of 12 November 2015; then, the Applicant’s Reply of 25
November 2015 was presented to the ad hoc Committee, and finally, the Respondent
on Annulment submitted its Rejoinder on the Stay of Enforcement, of 8 December
2015.

The ad hoc Committee proceeded to organize such rounds of submissions because, in
its opinion, in order to decide on the continuation of the stay of enforcement of the
Award, the ad hoc Committee has to be fully satisfied that the circumstances of the
particular case so require. The ad hoc Committee, therefore, based on the preceding
statements and the relevant provisions of ICSID regime governing stays of
enforcement, finds that it is for the party seeking the continuation of the stay to show
that such circumstances exist, and thus, that the stay of enforcement of the Award
should be continued. The Applicant bears the burden of proof that there are
circumstances in the instant case that, in the discretion of this ad hoc Committee,
require the continuation of the stay of enforcement.

As described in paragraph 19 above, the Applicant asserts in particular that: (i) there is
no risk of non-compliance by Venezuela with the Award in the event it is not annulled,
and, in addition, such failure to honor the Award should not be presumed; (ii) there is
a risk that Venezuela will not be able to duly recover its funds if the stay is terminated;
(iii) the Application for Annulment is not dilatory; (iv) terminating the stay of
enforcement of the Award would cause significant and irreparable damage to
Venezuela; and (v) OI would not be prejudiced if the stay of enforcement of the Award
continues pending a decision on the annulment. Each Party has addressed these
circumstances in its respective submissions to the ad hoc Committee.'

Accordingly, in the subsections that follow the ad hoc Committee undertakes a concise
review, one by one, of the circumstances argued by Applicant in this case, in order to
determine whether the Applicant has met its burden of proof, such that the continuation
of the stay of enforcement is required. As a matter of clarification, the ad hoc
Committee recognizes that the Applicant addressed those circumstances as grounds

 

n, {if 7-9. Applicant's Reply, {if 5-9.

‘0! Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, { 8.

12 See {17 of this De

sion.

 

103 See, for example, Section II (B), (C), (D), (F) and Section III of the Applicant’s First Submission; and {{ 40 of
the Respondent on Annulment’s Observations.

22

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

97.

98.

99.

100.

104 Applicant’ s
Applicant's First Submi:

105

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

that, in its view, provide no basis for the ad hoc Committee to terminate the stay of
enforcement. But this ad hoc Committee has already stated that the burden of proof
resides with the Applicant to demonstrate that there are circumstances that require, at
the discretion of this ad hoc Committee, the continuation of the stay of enforcement,
and not the contrary.

Risk of non-compliance

The Applicant suggested in its First Submission that the ad hoc Committee should not
take into account the existence of a risk of non-compliance with the Award when
deciding whether to lift the stay of enforcement.!° Furthermore, the Applicant asserts
that the ad hoc Committee should not doubt that Venezuela will comply with the Award
given its policy of strict compliance with all of its international obligations. '°°

This ad hoc Committee agrees with the Respondent on Annulment that the risk of non-
compliance by the Applicant with the Award is a relevant circumstance in deciding on
the Applicant’s request for the continuation of the stay of enforcement. In this regard,
the Respondent on Annulment relies on prior decisions regarding the issue of stay of
enforcement, such as in Sempra v. Argentina and CMS v. Argentina.'°

The Respondent on Annulment states in both its initial Observations and its Rejoinder
that as regards the existence of a substantial risk of the Applicant’s non-compliance
with the Award, there are at least eight factors that illustrate such risk. It devotes many
pages in both its Observations and Rejoinder to address these factors. !°”

Such eight factors are:

i) The Applicant did not reply to the Respondent on Annulment’s letter requesting
it to comply with the Award;

ii) The Applicant’s own high ranking officials have expressly stated that the
Applicant will not comply with ICSID decisions or with the ICSID Convention;

iii) The Applicant has avoided compliance with every recent arbitral award
rendered against it under the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Additional
Facility Rules;

iv) The Applicant has openly and vociferously attacked the ICSID system;

v) The Applicant has failed to comply with its ICSID-related payment obligations
in numerous cases;

  

106 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {f 43, 44.
°T Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, {{{ 58-115; Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, 43-82.

23

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

101.

104.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

vi) The Applicant has raised arguments in the enforcement proceedings initiated by
the Respondent on Annulment in the United States that further confirm the
Applicant’s unwillingness to comply with the Award;

vii) The Applicant’s domestic legal system is contrary to ICSID Convention
Articles 53 and 54;

viii) The Applicant is taking measures to shield its assets from enforcement
proceedings in foreign jurisdictions.

The Applicant stated in its Reply that “none of the speculations or fallacies invoked by
OI to cast doubts on the Republic’s willingness to comply with the Award are
admissible. There is no risk for OI that the Republic will fail to comply with the Award
in the unlikely event that the Award is not annulled by the ad hoc Committee.” !*

Notwithstanding such conclusion on the part of the Applicant, this ad hoc Committee
does not agree that the factors argued by the Respondent on Annulment shall simply be
taken as fallacies and speculations. It is not for the ad hoc Committee, as correctly
argued by the Applicant, to assume or presume that the Award in the instant case will
not be fulfilled. But that is not to say that the ad hoc Committee shall not direct its
attention to the factors that could raise reasonable concerns in connection with
compliance with the ICSID Convention, and as stated before, in particular, its Articles
53 and 54.

After careful analysis of the arguments presented by the Applicant, particularly those
emphasized in its Reply, the ad hoc Committee takes the view that the evidence with
respect to some of these factors pose a question of risk of non-compliance with the
Award. The ad hoc Committee is concerned specifically about factors ii), iv) and vii)
in connection with the fulfillment of ICSID Convention Articles 53 and 54. As regards
the Respondent on Annulment’s factor ii)! (“the Applicant’s own high ranking
officials have expressly stated that the Applicant’s will not comply with ICSID decisions
or with the ICSID Convention’), the ad hoc Committee notes that other annulment
committees have taken statements of State officials into account when assessing the
likelihood of future compliance with awards by the State. In CMS v. Argentina, the ad
hoc committee considered statements made by former Ministers of Justice and Finance
of Argentina to the effect that adverse ICSID awards would be subject to the review by
the Argentine Supreme Court in contravention of ICSID Convention Article 54.!!°

Moreover, the ad hoc Committee is persuaded, as argued by the Respondent on
Annulment in its Rejoinder, that, contrary to what the Applicant states, it is well
established under public international law that statements of high-ranking
governmental officials, especially, a Head of State, are legally binding. The ad hoc

108 A pplicant’s Reply, 54.
109 See qi] 51-52 above.
110 CMS v. Argentina, Decision on Stay, 1 46-47.

24

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

105.

106.

108.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

Committee finds the judgments of the International Court of Justice cited by the
Respondent on Annulment to be particularly pertinent.!!!

In connection with factor iv) (“the Applicant has openly attacked the ICSID system’),
the ad hoc Committee has noted that, as mentioned by the Respondent on Annulment,
the Applicant’s letter denouncing the ICSID Convention states that “the provisions of
the [ICSID] Convention have become unconstitutional under Venezuelan law.” More
than that, the ad hoc Committee considers of particular relevance, in the present
context, the reference made in said letter to the fact, also mentioned by Respondent on
Annulment, that ICSID is a “biased” institution favouring companies and private
entities to the detriment of the sovereign States.'!? Such letter is Exhibit RA-08.!!

Even if only one of a number of arguments explaining the decision to denounce the
ICSID Convention, the gravity of this accusation raises concerns in regard to the
prospects of compliance by the Applicant with ICSID Convention Articles 53 and 54
should the Award not be annulled, considering that under ICSID Convention Article
72, the State’s obligations (as well as its rights) are not affected by its denunciation.

Finally, regarding the factor presented by the Respondent on Annulment under item vii)
(“the Applicant’s domestic legal system is contrary to Articles 53 and 54 of the ICSID
Convention”) above, the ad hoc Committee cannot find any evidence in the record
supporting the fulfillment of an ICSID award in Venezuela, as argued by the Applicant.
To the contrary, some of the aspects underlying this factor vii) are supported by the
evidence. The Applicant itself made reference to a decision of the Constitutional
Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice of 2008 that appears in the file under OI-17B,
which is a decision that confirms that the conditions for arbitration provided by a treaty
have to be “not contrary to the Constitution.” That same decision states at its page 24
that the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice of Venezuela may
“confirm and enlarge upon the considerations made in Decision No. 1942/03,” which
also appears in the record under Exhibit OI-14.!!+

Accordingly, in connection with the three factors addressed above, the Respondent on
Annulment has shown valid grounds for concerns for this ad hoc Committee about the

‘11 Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, {{[ 80, 81, and footnotes 84, 85, 86.

112

Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, {{ 91.
‘13 The third paragraph of the letter states:

 

La piedra angular de este profundo proceso de devolucion de

soberania al pueblo de la Reptiblica Bolivariana de Venezuela, fue la aprobacién mediante referéndum popular
de la Constitucién de 1999, la cual en su Articulo 151 reza que en los contratos de interés piiblico, si no fuera
improcedente de acuerdo con la naturaleza de los mismos, se consideraré incorporada, aun cuando no
estuviere expresa, una cldusula segtin la cual las dudas y controversias que puedan suscitarse sobre dichos

contratos y que no llegaren a ser resueltas amigablemente por las partes contratantes, s
tribunales competentes de la Repiiblica, de conformidad con sus leyes, si
puedan dar origen a reclamaciones extranjeras, con lo cual las dispo:
CIADI] cayeron en el dominio de la inconstitucionalidad.” (Emphasis
“Although it is a decision issued in a single-instance proceeding, not subject to appeal and binding on the

14

ern decididas por los
1 que por ningiin motivo ni causa
jones del mencionado Convenio [del
added by this ad hoc Committee).

 

   

 

 

parties, which must fully comply with it (Article 53 [of the ICSID Convention]), the enforcement in the
Contracting State is carried out in accordance with the norms of that State. Therefore, this Chamber considers
that a decision that violates the C. ion of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would be unenforceable in
the country. This could give rise to an international claim against the State, but the decision would be
unenforceable in the country, in this case, Venezuela.” Cited in Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, 4103.

 

25

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

45 See q 29 of this De
416 See 30 of this Decis

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

validity and binding nature of ICSID awards in Venezuela, under ICSID Convention
Articles 53 and 54, and the Applicant, in turn, has not met its burden of proof of
demonstrating an absence of risk of non-compliance such that the continuation of the
stay is warranted.

Risk of non-recovery

After due consideration of the arguments presented by the Applicant, and the counter-
arguments presented by the Respondent on Annulment, in their respective two rounds
of submissions, the ad hoc Committee is not persuaded that the asserted difficulty or
impossibility for Venezuela to recover any amounts eventually paid out to the Award
creditor if the Award is annulled is a circumstance requiring the continuation of the
stay.

 

It is true, as argued by the Applicant, that ad hoc committees under the ICSID
Convention have held that a significant factor in favor of maintaining the stay of
enforcement is the difficulty for the respondent State to recover the amount paid under
the award if it is later annulled. In support of this, the Applicant cites the decisions of
the ad hoc committees of CMS v. Argentina, Enron v. Argentina and El Paso v.
Argentina.''>

The Applicant also argues that there is a possibility that a third party to this case might
seize any amount paid under the Award, thus making it impossible for Venezuela to
recover such amount if the Award is annulled. '!®

In conducting the assessment the risk of non-recovery by the Applicant, some ad hoc
committees have considered the profile of the claimant in order to evaluate such risk.
For example, the ad hoc committee in Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of
Congo signaled that since the claimant was a natural person, whose assets and activities
were difficult to localize, the circumstances posed difficulties for recoupment.!!”

  

In the instant case, it has been demonstrated in the record that OI is a large international
company with the considerable solvency and liquidity of the corporate group of which
it is amember.''® The argument that the Respondent on Annulment may cease being a
member of such group has not been evidenced, but is only speculative. There is nothing
in the record that suggests to this ad hoc Committee that the Respondent on Annulment
would refuse reimbursement of any payment in the event the Award is annulled, nor is
there persuasive evidence that a third party’s possible attachment of its assets may affect
the company to such extent as to impede payment to Venezuela if the ad hoc Committee
were to annul the Award.

 
 

n.

417 Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of Congo, Decision on Stay, { 24.
48 See Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, { 103, referring to “Form 10-K Owens Illinois, Inc. Annual
Report,” United States Securities and Exchange Commission, 10 February 2015.

26

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

114.

iii.

115.

116.

118.

119.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

Again, the ad hoc Committee does not find convincing evidence of actual
circumstances related to the issue of non-recovery that, in itself, requires a continuation
of the stay of enforcement.

Whether the Application for Annulment is well founded or dilatory

Regarding the issue of whether the Application for Annulment is well founded or
dilatory, the ad hoc Committee agrees with the statements made by other annulment
committees that the merits of an annulment application are not relevant for purposes of
the decision on whether or not to grant the stay, or the continuation of the stay. An
appropriate inquiry is, however, whether the application is manifestly dilatory.'!?
Likewise, the mere fact that the application is not dilatory is not sufficient to grant the
extension of the stay.!7°

Having reviewed the Application for Annulment by Venezuela, the ad hoc Committee
does not find that the arguments or allegations of the Applicant in support its
Application for Annulment could be considered manifestly unfounded or merely efforts
to delay the enforcement of the Award. However, this finding does not dictate that the
stay automatically should be maintained. This is so for at least two reasons. First, this
ad hoc Committee agrees with the Applicant that at this stage of the annulment
proceedings it is not for the ad hoc Committee to decide on whether the Application for
Annulment is well founded or not, apart from its screening for manifest abusiveness.
Second, a serious good faith application is the least that can be expected from an
applicant, and nothing in the ICSID Convention expresses, or allows an understanding,
that compliance with or fulfillment of that minimum duty requires the extension of the
stay.

Irreparable harm

The Respondent on Annulment maintains that the Applicant has failed to prove that
terminating the provisional stay would cause it irreparable prejudice or “catastrophic
consequences.”

The Applicant’s main argument is that, if the stay is terminated, then Venezuela will
need to divert a significant amount of its public funds for payment of the Award. If so,
those public funds, so much needed in Venezuela for essential services, such as health,
education and public security, would not be available, and therefore, such public
services will not be adequately supported, affecting the needs of the population. '*! The
ad hoc Committee notes that should the Award be confirmed, payment of the Award
amount, whether voluntary or as a result of its enforcement, would in any case come
from public funds.

While that much is obvious, the Applicant also has not established in the evidence that
the termination of the stay would necessarily result in the deductions from the specific

419 Elsamex v. Honduras, Decision on Stay, {1 96, 97.
20 §GS v. Paraguay, Decision on Stay, 94.
21 Applicant’s Reply, | 89.

27

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

120.

122.

123.

124.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

budgetary items involving the “people’s needs” that the Applicant cites as the basis for
its claimed irreparable harm, as opposed to deductions, if any, from other budgetary
items. !”?

This ad hoc Committee agrees with the Respondent on Annulment’s reasoning that the
Applicant’s argument, given is breadth and systemic implications, is unconvincing. “If
the Applicant were right in this proposition, Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and
Arbitration Rule 54 (1) would be dead letter provisions. That would contravene the
public international law principle of effete [sic] utile (ut res magis valeat quam pereat),
also called the principle of effectiveness.” !”>

Furthermore, the ad hoc Committee has taken note of evidence in the record, as
highlighted by the Respondent on Annulment, of the Applicant’s stated intention to pay
compensation, and the Applicant’s having offered in July 2011 a payment of USD 100
million.'** Furthermore, the Applicant does not appear to contest the Respondent on
Annulment’s position that for several years since October 2010 the plants in question
have generated substantial revenues.!?> These elements of the record further militate
against the Applicant’s contention that the lifting of the stay will result in irreparable
harm.

In the absence of any special circumstances duly evidenced in the record of the
proceeding, this ad hoc Committee is not persuaded that the Applicant’s argument of
irreparable prejudice in the event of termination of the stay constitutes adequate
circumstances under ICSID Convention Article 52(5). Furthermore, the ad hoc
Committee concurs with the Respondent on Annulment that the Applicant did not
provide evidence of irreparable harm, even less, of catastrophic consequences.

Prejudice if the stay of enforcement of the Award continues pending a decision on
the annulment

The Applicant argues that the maintenance of the stay would not cause any actual,
certain or real damage to the Respondent on Annulment, since the time elapsed between
the rendering of the Award and the actual payment of any awarded amount —if the
Award is not annulled— would be covered by interest due to OI in accordance with the
Award. In support of this argument, the Applicant cites the decisions by the ad hoc
committees in Victor Pey Casado v. Chile and in Azurix v. Argentina.'

This ad hoc Committee is persuaded by the argument made by the Respondent on
Annulment, both in its Observations and the Rejoinder, that delay in the payment of the

'22 Cf. 4 67 of this Decision.

123

Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, {| 50.

'24 Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, J 11, citing Of European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25, Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, 29 March 2013, paras 14, 89 and 283
(Exhibit O1-42); and Second Witness Statement of Mr Enrique Machaen, | July 2013, Summary of Meeting
held on 11 July 2011 (Exhibit O1-36).

125

Respondent on Annulment’s Observations, {| 109.

126 See { 37 of this Decision.

28

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A l Proceeding

 

125.

126.

128.

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

Award amounts, covered by interest, does not constitute the only potential prejudice in
the event the provisional stay is maintained:

[I]nternational tribunals have issued numerous awards in recent years that
have ordered the Applicant to pay (often vast) sums of compensation to
claimants for its multiple violations of international law. Several of those
awards are currently the subject of enforcement proceedings. Further, the
Applicant is the State with the largest number of ICSID arbitrations pending
against it —-some or all of which may create yet further award debts and
further enforcement claims on the Applicant’s domestic and foreign asset
holdings. In this context, maintaining the Provisional Stay would force the
Respondent on Annulment backwards in a long queue of creditors... Thus,
every day of delay that the Committee sanctions by way of a continuation
of the Provisional Stay directly reduces the likelihood of the Respondent on
Annulment being able to enforce the Award...'?’

The Applicant’s argument based on the payment of interest does not address, in the
view of this ad hoc Committee, the fact that there is a growing list of cases where the
Applicant has been ordered to pay significant sums of compensation. '?* This growing
list of cases appears to be undisputed by the Applicant, putting the Respondent on
Annulment in a long line of creditors undertaking efforts to collect award amounts
against the Applicant.

The ad hoc Committee notes that also in this case, as in all other alleged circumstances
previously examined, the Applicant has been unable to convincingly show that
circumstances exist which, according to Article 52(2) of the Convention, require a
continuation of the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award.

The ad hoc Committee’s analysis may therefore end here with the decision that the
provisional stay is to be lifted given the absence of circumstances requiring its
continuation. As stated in paragraph 19 of this Decision, the Applicant asserted that:
(i) there is no risk of non-compliance by Venezuela of the Award in the event it is not
annulled, and, in addition, such failure to honor the Award should not be presumed; (ii)
there is a risk that Venezuela will not be able to duly recover its funds if the stay is
terminated; (iii) the Application for Annulment is not dilatory; (iv) terminating the stay
of enforcement of the Award would cause significant and irreparable damage to
Venezuela; and (v) OI would not be prejudiced if the stay of enforcement of the Award
continues pending a decision on the annulment. As regards each of these contentions,
the ad hoc Committee expressed, one by one, why it was not convinced that there are
circumstances that merit, under ICSID Convention Article 52(5), the continuation of
the stay of enforcement of the Award.

Taking into account that the Applicant has not discharged its burden of proving that
there is any circumstance that requires the continuation of the provisional stay, this ad

27 Respondent on Annulment’s Rejoinder, {| 118 (b).
28 See Section II.C.(i) of the Respondent on Annulment’ s Observations, and Section III.A.(ii) of the
Respondent on Annulment’ s Rejoinder.

29

OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25)—A li Proceeding

 

Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award

hoc Committee is convinced that it must terminate such provisional stay, and so it
decides.

vi. Continuation of the stay conditioned on the posting of a security
129. Due to the decision this ad hoc Committee is taking in the present case, there is no need
to consider the Respondent on Annulment’s request to condition the continuation of the

stay on the posting of a security.

Iv. DECISION

130. Based on the above considerations, the ad hoc Committee:

1. Rejects the request from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to continue the stay
of enforcement of the Award rendered on March 10, 2015, in ICSID Case No.
ARB/11/25, OI European Group, B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

2. Declares that the provisional stay is terminated, and therefore, orders the lifting of
such provisional stay effective as of the date hereof.

3. Reserves its decision on costs arising out of the Request for a subsequent stage of
the proceedings.

[signed]

Dr. Alvaro Castellanos
President of the ad hoc Committee
Date: April 4, 2016

[signed] [signed]
Dr. Piero Bernardini Mr. David Pawlak
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee
Date: April 4, 2016 Date: April 4, 2016

30

