In the matter of an arbitration under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

between

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING
Claimant

THE REPUBLIC OF BELARUS

Respondent

DECISION ON CLAIMANT’S
INTERIM MEASURES
REQUEST

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
Juan Fernandez-Armesto (Chairman)
Stanimir Alexandrov
Brigitte Stern

ADMINISTRATIVE SECRETARY

Bianca McDonnell

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

WHEREAS

1. This arbitration arises between OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING [“Manolium” or
“Claimant’”] and the REPUBLIC OF BELARUS [“Belarus” or “Respondent”] under
the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union dated 29 May 2014 [the “EEU
Treaty”]. Claimant and Respondent shall be jointly referred to as the “Parties”.

2. On 11 November 2017, Claimant sent its Notice of Arbitration. On 15 December
2017, Respondent sent its Response to the Notice of Arbitration.

3. On 10 May 2018, Claimant filed its Statement of Claim.
4. On 11 June 2018, Respondent filed its Application for Bifurcation on Quantum.

5. On 1 August 2018, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Decision on Bifurcation
deciding not to bifurcate the quantum phase of the proceedings.

6. On 28 July 2018, Claimant submitted its Interim Measures Request [“Claimant’s
Request”) which forms the basis of this Decision, along with CWS-1 and CWS-2
of Mr. Andrey Dolgov.

7. The Tribunal provided the Respondent until 21 September 2018 to respond to
Claimant’s Request!. In the meantime, the Tribunal directed the Parties to refrain
from adopting any measures which may result in the aggravation of the dispute or
altering the status quo’.

8. On 12 September 2018, Respondent informed the Arbitral Tribunal that the

9. On21 September 2018, Respondent submitted its Response to Claimant’s Interim
Measures Request [“Respondent’s Response” or “Response”] and RWS-1, a
witness statement of Mr. Vikentiy Koroban.

10. On 28 September 2018, the Tribunal granted Claimant’s request to respond to
Respondent’s Response and RWS-1, which it alleged contains incorrect and
misleading information‘.

1 Communications A 9 of 30 July 2018, RS-9 of 31 July 2018, A 10 of 1 August 2018, and A 11 of 3
August 2018.

2 Communication A 10 of 1 August 2018, para. 3; Communication A 11 of 3 August 2018, para. 4.

3 Communication RS-11, p. 2.

4c ication C-25 of 25 2018: C ication A 13 of 28 2018.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

On 5 October 2018, Claimant submitted its Comments to Respondent’s Response
to the Claimant’s Interim Measures Request [“Claimant’s Comments”] and
marshalled CWS-3 of Mr. Leonid Vladimirovich Torot’ko and CWS-4 of
Mr. Andrey Dolgov>.

On 12 October 2018, Respondent submitted its Observations on Comments to
Response to Interim Measures Request [“Respondent’s Observations”).

 

After considering the Parties’ submis
Decision.

‘ions, the Tribunal now issues the following

THE DECISION

This Decision concerns Claimant’s request that the Tribunal issue interim
measures concerning investigations in Belarus, against Claimant and its affiliate
Manolium-Engineering, and their current and former officials, which Claimant
alleges have the potential of aggravating the dispute and violating the integrity of
the arbitral proceedings.

Claimant requests the Arbitral Tribunal to issue an order directing Respondent to®:

- Abstain from initiating criminal proceedings and/or suspend any current
criminal proceedings against the former and current officials of Claimant
and Manolium-Engineering until the completion of the arbitration [“Order
Against Criminal Proceedings”);

- Refrain from contacting the shareholders, officials and employees of
Claimant and Manolium-Engineering, without the consent from Claimant
and prior authorization of the Tribunal [“Order to Restrict
Communication”);

- Avoid any other actions that could further aggravate the dispute and violate
the integrity of the arbitral proceedings [“Non-Aggravation Order”).

Respondent, on the other hand, asks that Claimant’s Request be dismissed in its
entirety, and reserves the right to recover costs incurred in connection with the
Request on an indemnity basis’.

The Tribunal will provide the factual background to the Orders (1.), then address
the Parties’ positions (2. and 3.) and finally take a decision (4.).

FACTUAL BACKGROUND
There are three main series of events underlying Claimant’s requested Orders: the

Tax Evasion Investigation (A.), the Insolvency Proceeding (B.), and the interview
of Mr. Koroban (C.).

5 Communication C-26.
© Claimant’s Request, para. 59; Claimant’s Comments, para. 55.
7 Respondent’s Response, paras. 97-98; Respondent’s Observations, paras. 45-46.

20.

21.

a

    

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

A. Tax Evasion Investigation

In March 2017, eight months prior to Claimant sending the Notice of Arbitration,
the Inspectorate of the Ministry of Taxes and Levies of the Republic of Belarus
for the Minsk Region conducted a tax audit of Manolium-Engineering®. The audit
was published on March 24, 2017 and found that Manolium-Engineering owed
11,826,511.43 Belarusian rubles in unpaid taxes and 2,698,691.64 in fines®.

On 15 June 2017, the tax inspector — in accordance with the requirement under
Belarusian law’ — notified the Department for Financial Investigations of the
Belarus State Control Committee [Department for Financial Investigations”]
about Manolium-Engineering’s non-payment of tax, identifying the names and
positions of the individuals whose actions or failure to act may have caused the
non-payment of tax!!. The letter identified Manolium-Engineering’s Directors,
Mr. Andrey Dolgov and Mr. Aram Ekavyan, the Director of Manolium-
Processing (which is the owner of Manolium-Engineering), who are both
residents of Russia’.

Upon receipt of the information from the Tax Inspector, the Department for
Financial Investigations initiated pre-investigation inquiries to determine whether
sufficient evidence exists to initiate criminal proceedings against the managers or
other officials of Manolium-Engineering for tax evasion [“Tax Evasion
Investigation” ]°.

® Doe. C-186.

8 Doc. C-186, p. 8.

10 Respondent’s Response, fin. 5.
1 Doc. R-1.

2 Doc. R-1, p. 2.

B Re

jent’s Response, para. 16, citing the Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Belarus,

Articles 166(3) and 167(1).
4 Doc. R-2.
1 Doc. R-2, p. 2.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING V. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

24.

25)

26.

 

6 Doc.
Doc.
8 Doc.
® Doc.
® Doc.
21 Doe. R-5, p. 2.

» Doc. C-199; Doc. C-200 and WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-2, para. 3.

  

SPU
Rhye

 

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

aT:

28.

 

B. Insolvency Proceeding

29. Claimant and Mr. Dolgov jointly own Belarusian Foreign Enterprise Manolium-
Processing [“BMP”], a separate legal entity for which Mr. Dolgov was the
general director between 2002 and June 20167.

30. In November 2016, a voluntary liquidation procedure was commenced for BMP.
by Claimant, Mr Dolgov, and other shareholders”®. However, on 3 March 2017, a
private third-party creditor submitted an application to the Economic Court of the
City of Minsk [the “Court”] seeking to commence insolvency proceedings in
telation to BMP’, putting the voluntary liquidation procedure on hold.

31. On14 April 2017, the Court granted the creditor’s application, ordering the
liquidation procedure to be replaced by insolvency proceedings, and appointed an
insolvency administrator [“Insolvency Proceeding”]”®.

32. On 19 February 2018, an expert was appointed by the Court to examine the
circumstances of BMP’s insolvency’, in order to assist the administrator in
ascertaining whether insolvency was deliberately caused by the officers of the
entity, a determination required under Belarusian insolvency law>®. In July 2018,
the expert report was submitted to the Court and a hearing was held on 7 August
201871. The expert found that the management bodies of BMP had knowingly and
deliberately entered into transactions on disadvantageous terms causing detriment

2
4

25 Respondent’s Observations, paras. 8-9.

26 Respondent’s Observations, para. 10.

27 Respondents Observations, para. 10.

28 Respondent’s Observations, para. 10.

2° Doc. R-10, p. 1.

3° Respondent’s Observations, para. 11, citing Insolvency Law of the Republic of Belarus, Art. 77(1).
31. Doc. R-10, p. 1.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

to the company’s solvency and economic position>*. The expert appeared to have
found evidence that the insolvency was intentional, obstructing the ability for
creditors to recover losses*?.

33. During the hearing the Court directed the insolvency administrator to**:

“... send the case files to the Minsk Prosecutor’s Office to arrange for the
consideration of whether there are indications of false insolvency, deliberate
insolvency, concealment of insolvency or obstruction of recovery of the
creditors’ losses, subject to informing the court of the decision taken; based
on the results of the liquidation procedure, submit to the economic court by
21 December 2018 a report complying with the requirements of Article 149
of the Law of the Republic of Belarus “On Economic Insolvency
(Bankruptcy)”.

34. On 30 August 2018 the Administrator sent materials from the insolvency case file
to the Minsk Prosecutor’s Office*>. On 7 September 2018 the Minsk Prosecutor’s
Office sent the files to the Department of Financial Investigations, which on
11 September 2018 transmitted the files to the relevant territorial office to
commence the investigation*®.

 

32 Doc. R-10, p. 2.

33 Doc. R-10, p. 2.

34 Doc. R-10, p. 3.

35 Respondent’s Observations, para. 15.

36 Respondent’s Observations, paras. 15-16.
37 Claimant’s Comments, para. 11, citing Third WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, paras. 19-20.
38 Claimant’s Comments, para. 12, citing Third WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, para. 18.

39 Claimant’s Comments, para. 13, citing Third WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, paras. 19-20.

  

36.

Sue

38.

39:

40.

Al.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

C. Mr. Koroban’s Interview

Mr. Vikentiy Koroban is the former Deputy Director of Manolium-Engineering.
He provided RWS-1 which was marshalled by Belarus with its Response.

In July 2018, Mr. Koroban was interviewed at the Minsk City Executive
Committee [“MCEC”] by representatives of Respondent’s counsel, as part of the
Respondent’s preparation of its Statement of Defence in the present arbitration”.

Subsequently, Mr. Koroban had a telephone conversation with Mr. Leonid
Torot’ko, who he used to work with at Manolium-Engineering, and discussed the
meeting at the MCEC*. The Parties and the witnesses disagree on the content of
that conversation: in particular, how the interview at the MCEC came about (a.),
and whether Mr. Koroban’s actions indicate a fearfulness of repercussions within
Belarus (b.).

The interview at the MCEC
() Mr. Torot’ko’s version of events

Mr. Torot’ko is a former colonel in the Belarusian Ministry of Internal Affairs and
has previously worked at Manolium-Engineering with Mr. Koroban; he is
currently employed by Centrobeton, the director of which is Mr. Dolgov’s son.

Mr. Koroban told him that he was “summoned” to the MCEC and questioned
about the circumstances of Claimant’s investment project in Belarus, such as the
legality of Manolium-Engineering’s operations, the sufficiency of funds for
investment under the Investment Contract, and whether Mr. Dolgov bribed
Belarusian government officials*’.

(ii) Mr. Dolgov’s recount

Mr. Dolgov states that he was informed by colleagues of Manolium-Engineering
that Mr. Koroban was summoned to the MCEC alongside representatives of a
foreign law firm and asked questions related to Claimant’s investment in
Belarus**.

Tt is not clear from the submissions or exhibits the relationship between BMP and Centrobeton.
41 Claimant’s Comments, para. 13, citing Third WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, paras. 21-22.

® WS V. Koroban, RWS-1, para. 8.

“3 WS V. Koroban, RWS-1, para. 9; WS L. Torot’ko, CWS-3, para. 15.

44 WS of L. Torot’ko, CWS-3, paras. 10, 14.

4 WS of L. Torot’ko, CWS-3, paras. 15, 18.

46 WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-2, para. 3.

42.

43.

44,

45.

46.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

However, when he called Mr. Koroban in the presence of Claimant’s Counsel,
and asked that he tell him about the meeting at the MCEC, Mr. Koroban‘”:

“.., informed me that actually, nobody had "summoned" him and that he had
come to the MCEC for his own business and accidentally witnessed the
di ion of the arbitration p ings by the MCEC's rep i

In addition, [he] stated that no representatives of an international law firm
together with an interpreter were present at the MCEC and that nobody
asked him about his work at Manolium-Engineering, the project related to
the Investment Contract in Minsk and whether I had offered any bribes to
representatives of the governmental authorities of the Republic of Belarus”.

Mr. Dolgov’s reaction was the following**:

“I was absolutely shocked by the fact that the man with whom I had worked
for such a long time and who had been my deputy, offered me, quite
unexpectedly, the version of events completely different from the version
that he had offered to L. Torot’ko ...”

On the same day, 20 July 2018, Mr. Dolgov — quite upset by Mr. Koroban’s
recollection of the meeting — sent Mr. Koroban the following text message, in
which he shows his disbelief:

“Vikentiy Vaclavovich! Telling lies at your age is not a nice thing to do!
This is what I think! I apologize!”

(iii) Mr. Koroban’s version of the MCEC interview

Mr. Koroban says he attended the MCEC voluntarily and without coercion, and
discussed the circumstances of this arbitration®®. He states that during a
conversation with Mr. Torot’ko, he mentioned that he5!:

“... had been into the office of MCEC and overheard MCEC staff discussing
the dispute relating to the Claimant. Contrary to what is suggested in the
WS, I did not tell Mr Torotko or anyone else about meetings with foreign
lawyers, let alone meetings in the presence of an interpreter. Nor did I say
(nor could I have said) to Mr Torotko that I had been asked whether
Mr Dolgov had bribed representatives of the Belarus state authorities”.

Further, Mr. Koroban states that when Mr. Dolgov asked him about the meeting at
the MCEC, he answered that he*?:

“...had not gone there, because I did not wish to discuss this topic with
him”.

47 WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, paras. 10-12.
+8 WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, para. 13.

* WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, para. 13.

50 WS of V. Koroban, RWS-1, para. 8.

5! WS of V. Koroban, RWS-1, para. 10.

52 WS of V. Koroban, RWS-1, para. 13.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

47. Inaddition, Mr. Koroban says that Mr. Torot’ko said*:

“... it was a mistake for [Mr. Koroban] to have gone to MCEC, hinting that
now Mr Dolgov and [Mr. Koroban] would face a threat of criminal
prosecution. Mr Torotko said he would call Mr Dolgov about this”.

48. Regarding his safety, Mr. Koroban says™:

“Mr Dolgov asserts that I am concerned about my safety in the Republic of
Belarus. This is not true. I am not worried for my safety. The only one who
has ever told me about potential criminal prosecution was Mr Torotko, as I
describe in paragraph 11 above”.

b. Alleged coercion of Mr. Koroban

49. Mr. Dolgov asserts that the only explanation for Mr. Koroban’s alleged
contradictory behaviour is**:

“...that V. Koroban worries about his own safety in the Republic of Belarus
and, for this reason, changes his testimony all the time”.

50. Mr. Torot’ko shares the same feeling*®:

“T believe that such a behavior is very strange. It is quite possible that V.
Koroban is afraid of something and, hence, does not know how to behave: at
first, he called me and told me about the circumstances of his meeting at the
MCEC, and then started to deny them. However, I remember everything he
told me and everything I stated above very well”.

51. In addition, Mr. Torot’ko denies hinting the possibility of criminal prosecution to
Mr. Koroban, as alleged by Mr. Koroban*’:

“T don't understand what V. Koroban had in mind when he said that I had
hinted to him a threat of criminal prosecution. I haven't worked with
government authorities for a long time and, therefore, could not have
threatened him with a criminal prosecution even in theory.

We did discuss the possibility of a criminal liability but only in the context
of the fact that Belarus sometimes initiates criminal cases against
businessmen in order to exert pressure on them and, so long as V. Koroban
was summoned to the MCEC, we may well expect that criminal case will be
initiated against management of Manolium-Engineering”.

2. CLAIMANT’S POSITION

52. Claimant avers that the requested interim measures fulfil the requirements under
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules of 2013 [“UNCITRAL Rules”], and are

5 WS of V. Koroban, RWS-1, para. 11.

5 WS of V. Koroban, RWS-1, para. 15.

58 WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, para. 14,

56 WS of L. Torot’ko, CWS-3, para. 26.

57 WS of L. Torot’ko, CWS-3, paras. 22-23.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

necessary to avoid harm to Claimant which could not be adequately repaired with
an award of damages**.

Claimant avers that the following rights are under threat*?:

- Right to the procedural integrity of the overall proceedings;

- Right to the non-aggravation of the dispute; and

- The equality of the Parties in the proceeding.

Claimant avers that Respondent is attempting to take justice into its own hands by
key individuals involved in the investment project, about issues

directly related to this dispute®. Claimant states that Respondent’s

intimidating Claimant’s witnesses and former employees, putting the procedural
integrity of this arbitration at threat®!.

  
 

  

Respondent is circumventing the arbitral process by using its law enforcement
agencies and domestic criminal procedures to search for harmful information
about Claimant, which it intends to use as evidence in this arbitration™.

This way of behaving is contrary to Respondent’s obligations in this arbitration,
as acknowledged in Quiborax v. Bolivia, where the tribunal found that the
potential criminal proceedings against witnesses violated the integrity of the
arbitral proceedings®.
Respondent cannot be permitted to gain an unfair advantage in the arbitration by
using its criminal powers

64

 

Claimant supports its position with the following arguments: that

was likely motivated by an improper purpose (A.), that Mr. Koroban
was coerced to testify for Respondent (B.), and that the Tribunal should look at
Belarus’ behaviour in past cases to establish a modus operandi (C.).

 

 

 

A. Improper! of key witnesses

Claimant avers that the Belarusian authorities are considering initiating a criminal
case in order to collect evidence outside of this arbitration and/or to pressure
Claimant and its witnesses®.

58 Claimant’s Request, para. 30.

°° Claimant’s Reques

para. 31.

 

© Claimant’s Request, paras. 34-35.
1 Claimant’s Request, para. 32.
© Claimant’s Request, para. 37.

63

Claimant’s Request, para. 36, citing Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kaplin

v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/2. Decision on Provisional Measures of 26
February 2010, paras. 141-148 (Ex. CL-71).
® Claimant’s Comments, paras. 16-17.

65

Claimant’s Request, para. 13.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

60.

 

61. Claimant states that even after its Interim Measures Request, Respondent has

continued to use its police powers to intimidate witnesses”°.

   

 

62. Claimant avers that this is strong evidence that Respondent is attempting to
contact and intimidate Mr. Dolgov, by intimidating his family members, present
and former colleagues and other affiliated persons’°.

© Claimant’s Request, para. 8.

87 WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-2, para. 5.

8 Claimant’s Request, para. 12.

© Claimant’s Request, para. 10.

® Claimant’s Comments, para. 10.

71 Claimant’s Comments, para. 10.

? Claimant’s Comments, para. 11, citing Third WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, paras. 19-20.
® Claimant’s Comments, para. 12, citing Third WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, para. 18.

7% Claimant’s Comments, para. 13, citing Third WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, paras. 19-20.
% Claimant’s Comments, para. 13, citing Third WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, paras. 21-22.
76 Claimant’s Comments, para. 15.

12

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

Claimant additionally questions the motivation for Respondent’s demand that
Mr. Dolgov include his address in his witness statement, averring that this
indicates that the Respondent is preparing some action against Mr. Dolgov outside
of this arbitration”.

B. Coercion of Mr. Koroban

Claimant points to the questioning of Mr. Koroban, where he was allegedly asked
if Mr. Dolgov bribed government officials, to suggest that Respondent is using its
powers to collect evidence from Claimant’s former employees outside of the
arbitral process”*.

According to Claimant, the facts of the meeting at the MCEC and Mr. Koroban’s
contradictory behaviour demonstrate witness coercion and an attempt to pressure
and intimidate Mr. Koroban into silence”, and that Mr. Koroban’s cooperation
was done out of fear for his well-being; demonstrating the need for granting
Claimant’s Request*’.

Claimant additionally points to the following three inconsistent statements in Mr.
Koroban’s witness statement:

First, Mr. Koroban states that he attended the MCEC voluntarily*!:

“I voluntarily and without coercion came to the Minsk City Executive
Committee (“MCEC”) and discussed the circumstances relating to this
arbitration”.

Second, two paragraphs later he asserts that he was in the MCEC and overhead
the MCEC staff discussing the arbitration*”:

 

 

“T mentioned in the conversation to Mr Torotko that I had been into the
office of MCEC and overheard MCEC staff discussing the dispute relating to
the Claimant”.

Third, when discussing the matter with Mr. Dolgov over the phone he denied that
the meeting at the MCEC had occurred*?:

“Mr Dolgov also was interested if I had been to MCEC in connection with
the arbitration and asked what I had discussed there. I said I had not gone
there, because I did not wish to discuss this topic with him”.

Claimant avers that Mr. Koroban’s contradictory testimony should not be
believed**, and the evidence indicates that he was summoned to the MCEC to

7 Claimant’s Request, para. 19.

8 Claimant’s Request, para, 17.

” Claimant’s Request, para. 18.

®° Claimant’s Comments, para. 35. Claimant’s Comments, para. 51, WS of L. Torot’ko, paras. 21-23, 26.
8! WS of V. Koroban, RWS-1, para. 8.

® WS of V. Koroban, RWS-1, para. 10.

® WS of V. Koroban, RWS-1, para. 13.

“ Claimant’s Comments, para. 22.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

discuss the arbitration with Respondent’s representatives and counsel**. If
anything, Mr. Koroban’s witness statement shows that Respondent’s conduct has
already had an adverse effect on him, who as a permanent resident of Belarus is

susceptible to pressure from the Belarusian authorities**,

   

C. Belarus’ repeat modus operandi

Claimant points to various instances of Belarusian authorities initiating “baseless”
criminal cases and jailing key witnesses in commercial disputes, to allege that the
actions towards Claimant and its affiliate companies and individuals, are
indicative of Belarus’ modus operandi when engaged in commercial disputes with
companies*’.

 

For example, just this year Respondent arrested Michael Furman, an official from
a Russian company Grand Express, after it brought an ICSID claim against
Belarus (Grand Express v. Belarus)**. Mr. Furman was arrested in Athens
International Airport at the request of Belarusian law enforcement authorities.
However, the Greek judiciary overturned the arrest warrant, finding that the
criminal proceedings brought by Belarus were based upon artificial grounds, and
ordered Mr. Furman’s release*?.

Further in 2013, Vladislav Baumgertner the CEO of a Russian company Uralkali,
was invited to Belarus by the Prime Minister to discuss a commercial dispute
arising out of a joint venture with a Belarusian state-owned entity”.

After the meeting with the Prime Minister of Belarus, Mr. Baumgertner was at the
airport of Minsk when he was handcuffed by Belarusian law enforcement
authorities and taken to detention facilities, where he spent one month, before his
pre-trial restriction was changed to home detention under 24-hour supervision of
the Committee of the State Security of the Republic of Belarus®!. He was charged
with abuse of power and seeking gain at the expense of the Republic of Belarus”.

After a three month delay and several rounds of negotiations, Belarus eventually
agreed to extradite Mr. Baumgertner (after the initiation of fictitious criminal
charges in Russia) on the condition that the loss of approximately USD 1.5 - 2
billion which Belarus had allegedly incurred, be compensated, and after Uralkali’s
leading shareholder Mr. Suleiman Kerimov agreed to sell his shares”.

Claimant additionally notes that the European Parliament recently condemned
Belarus’ “repressive and undemocratic policy towards journalists, lawyers,

85 Claimant’s Comments, para. 33.

86 Claimant’s Request, para. 38; Claimant’s Comments, paras. 20-22.
*7 Claimant’s Comments, paras. 36-49.

88 Claimant’s Comments paras. 47-49.

®° Claimant’s Comments para. 48.

° Claimant’s Comments paras. 37-40.

°1 Claimant’s Comments paras. 41-44.

° Claimant’s Comments para, 42.

°3 Claimant’s Comments para. 45.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

political activists and civil society actors”**. Claimant avers that Respondent’s
pressure of Mr. Koroban and other witnesses and representatives should not come
as a surprise, in light of Belarus’ long track record of abuse”.

RESPONDENT’S POSITION

According to Respondent, Claimant’s Order Against Criminal Proceedings is

   

In any event, Respondent avers that Claimant has failed to meet the requirements
set out in the UNCITRAL Rules for the granting of interim measures (A. — C.),
and Claimant has brought its Request as an abuse of process (D.):

A. Noprima facie case

Claimant has not satisfied the burden of establishing that the Tribunal has prima
facie jurisdiction or a prima facie case on the merits”.

B. Nocurrent or imminent harm likely to occur

Respondent avers that Claimant’s Request fails to meet the applicable legal test
under Art. 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules!™. Respondent argues that Claimant has
failed to provide the Tribunal with the accurate standard for granting interim
measures under Art. 26 of the applicable UNCITRAL Rules, relying instead on
less onerous tests adopted by tribunals on the basis of an older version of the
tules!°!| Respondent states that regardless of which standard is applied,
Claimant’s request for interim measures still fails‘.

Claimant has not established that the Order Against Criminal Proceedings is
necessary to prevent “current or imminent” harm that is “likely” to occur under
Article 26(2)(b) of the UNCITRAL Rules!(a.). And Claimant has failed to
provide any concrete evidence to support its position that the pre-investigation
inquiries were improper (b.), especially considering that a measure such as the

4 Claimant’s Comments para. 49, citing Ex. C-213.
% Claimant’s Comments para. 50.

96 Respondents Response, para. 76.

77

58 Respondent's Response, para. 6.

°° Respondent’s Response, paras. 61-63.

100 Respondent’s Response, para. 3, 90; Respondent’s Observations, para. 4.
101 Respondent’s Response, para. 46; Respondent’s Observations, para. 4.
10? Respondent’s Response, para. 46.

103 Respondent’s Response, para. 77.

82.

83.

85.

86.

87.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

one requested by Claimant, should only be granted in exceptional circumstances
and where absolutely necessary!™.

No urgency

Respondent states that the requirement of urgency fails, as the pre-investigation
inquiries were commenced |, around months prior to the
commencement of this arbitration’. Claimant fails to substantiate how i

or any of the other factual circumstances on which
it relies, have changed the status quo ante existing at the time the arbitration was
commenced. This supports the Respondent’s position that the Order Against
Criminal Proceedings is not urgent!©.

No harm
Belarus argues that all of Claimant’s evidence is based only on hearsay and
opinion evidence’; and thus, it fails to satisfy the high standard of proof required
to establish the occurrence of intimidation’, or satisfied the high burden of proof
under Art. 26(3)(a) of the UNCITRAL Rules!®.

Particularly, as regards to:

() NI duce te Tox Evasion
Investigation does not pose any risk to Claimant’s rights in the arbitration, or
inhibit Mr. Dolgov’s or Mr. Ekavyan’s ability to effectively participate in the
arbitration!°.

   

Respondent’s investigations were conduct
faith and Claimant’s request should be dismissed!"*.

Further, Respondent’s request for Mr. Dolgov’s address cannot possibly be
regarded as proof of an attempt by Respondent to plan action against Mr. Dolgov

104 Respondent’s Response, para. 87, citing Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses
Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1, Decision on Provisional
Measures, 8 April 2016, Ex. RL-26, para. 190; Hydro S.r.l. and others v. Republic of Albania, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/15/28, Order on Provisional Measures, 3 March 2016, Ex. CL-77, para. 3.16, Ex. CL-77.
105 Respondent’s Response, para. 55.

106 Respondent’s Response, para. 84.

107 Respondent’s Observations, para. 3.

108 Respondent’s Response, para. 80.

109 Respondent’s Response, para. 88.

110 Respondent’s Response, paras. 56, 83.

111 Respondent’s Response, paras. 23, 55.

112 Respondent’s Response, para. 79.

113 Respondent’s Response, para. 23.

114 Respondent’s Response, para. 79.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

outside of the arbitral process; to the contrary, Claimant’s suggestion is ludicrous
for the following reasons!!>:

- First, it was Claimant’s suggestion to include in Procedural Order No. 1
para. 35, the requirement that a witness must include its address in its
witness statement!'®.

- Second, Respondent already had Mr. Dolgov’s address,

 

88. (ii) Es during the Insolvency Proceeding was carried
out in goo. as a result of a proceeding commenced by a private third-party
company, and pursuant to the legitimate directions of the Court'!®. Furthermore,
the concerned routine matters irrelevant to this dispute, since BMP is a
separate legal entity engaged in a variety of activities primarily consisting of
leasing property, which are unrelated to Manolium-Engineering and to this
arbitration, and| dealt with the reasons for BMP’s insolvency".

89. According to Respondent, the fact that concerned Mr. Dolgov
is logical considering that he was the General Director of BMP during the time in
which the conduct occurred'?°. Claimant’s assertion that

indicate a forthcoming attempt by
Respondent to umproperly contact Mr. Dolgov, are ungrounded and speculative!!.

90. PY not because Respondent was attempting to
intimidate Claimant, but because they played a key role in the events leading to
BMP’s insolvency!”

91. Respondent alleges that Claimant falls manifestly short of fulfilling the high
burden of proving an attempt to intimidate Mr. Dolgov or Claimant by the

92. (iii) The interview with Mr. Koroban. Respondent argues that Claimant has
misrepresented the nature of Mr. Koroban’s meeting with the MCEC and his

115 Respondent’s Response, para. 43.

116 Respondent’s Response, para. 42.

117 Respondent’s Response, para. 43.

118 Respondent’s Observations, paras. 5, 10, 18.

119 Respondent’s Observations, para. 6.

20 Respondent’s Observations, para. 21.

11 Respondent’s Observations, para. 21.

12 Respondent’s Observations, para. 22. Ms. was the chief accountant of BMP; Ms.

was a party to lease agreements with BMP under which she leased premises to BMP at an alleged inflat
price; Mr. [J (Mr. Dolgov’s cousin) was the CEO of Centrobeton, the entity which received
interest-free loans from BMP; and the liquidator of Oktan-AZS-Service, a company which also received
interest-free loans from BMP.

23 Respondent’s Observations, paras. 26-27, citing Churchill Mining and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v.
Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/14 and 12/40, Procedural Order No. 14, 22 December
2014, paragraph 72, Ex. RL-25: “[ajn allegation that the status quo has been altered or that the dispute
has been aggravated needs to be buttressed by concrete instances of intimidation or harassment”.

17

93)

94.

OS:

96.

97.

98.

90!

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

subsequent phone conversation with Mr. Dolgov, in order to paint the Respondent
in a bad light'”*, and has failed to establish any basis on which the Order to
Restrict Communication should be granted!”>.

Claimant’s conclusion that Mr. Koroban’s accounts are contradictory is based on
the assumption that Mr. Koroban was under an obligation to report fully and
accurately to Mr. Dolgov and Mr. Torot’ko!?®. The fact that Mr. Koroban chose
not to, does not justify Claimant’s far-reaching conclusion that Mr. Koroban is
acting “out of fear for his well-being” or calls “into serious question the veracity
of his testimony”!?’.

In addition, Mr. Koroban has confirmed that he came to the MCEC voluntarily
and without coercion and that he is not worried about his safety!?8. Claimant’s
failure to support its accusations about the pressure on Mr. Koroban is manifest!??.

In any case, Mr. Koroban is not a shareholder, official or employee of Claimant,
and has not been employed by Claimant for four years, thus not correlating with
Claimant’s requested Order to Restrict Communications'°.

(iv) Claimant’s reference to unrelated domestic criminal proceedings is an attempt
to fill the gaping hole in its non-existent evidence!?!. These speculations are of no

 

relevance to the arbitration, especially since a

C. Orders are disproportionate

In regard to the requirement of proportionality under the UNCITRAL Rules,
Respondent states that Claimant fails to apply the correct test!*?.

But even under the less burdensome proportionality test cited by Claimant, the
“balance of inconvenience” would still fall strongly in favour of not granting the
Orders'34, because if Claimant's Request is granted, it would interfere with

dent’s ign right to i igate and p criminal conduct on its
territory.

 

Respondent avers that it has the right to exercise its normal sovereign functions on
its territory, as long as it acts in good faith and respects Claimant’s rights'3°
Respondent cites to decisions of various arbitral tribunals, which have held that a

14 Respondent’s Response, para. 91.

5 Respondent’s Response, para. 91.

26 Respondent’s Observations, para. 37.

27 Respondent’s Observations, para. 37, quoting Claimant’s Comments, para. 35.
28 Respondent’s Observations, para. 38, quoting WS of V. Koroban, RWS-1, paras. 8, 15.
29 Respondent’s Observations, para. 40.

130 Respondent’s Response, para. 36; Communication RS-12, para. 4.

131 Respondent’s Observations, para. 41.

132 Respondent’s Observations, para. 41.

133 Respondent’s Response, para. 86.

134 Respondent’s Response, para. 88.

135 Respondent’s Response, para. 87.

136 Respondent’s Response, para. 47.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

  

State has the right to conduct normal processes of criminal, administrative and
civil justice within its territory!*’, as long as such powers are exercised in good
faith and whilst respecting the rights of the claimant'**. This position is not
contradicted in the authorities relied upon by Claimant, which only granted
interim measures when the proceedings were commenced in bad faith or hindered
the claimant’s ability to participate in the arbitration:

- In Quiborax v. Bolivia the criminal proceedings were commenced because
the claimant had initiated the arbitration!*°;

- In City Oriente v. Ecuador the criminal proceedings were being used by
Ecuador to secure payment on the basis of a domestic law, which was
precisely the subject of the dispute in the arbitration'?;

- In Hydro y. Albania the tribunal found that the possible incarceration of two
of the claimants in Albania posed an imminent risk on their ability to
participate in the arbitration!’

100. According to Respondent, the authorities cited differ to the present case for the

101.

13

following two reasons:

- First, s in the present case, thus,
the Request fails for lack of necessity, urgency and proportionality under the
UNCITRAL Rules!*?; and

  

- Second, Respondent has proven that all its investigations were carried out in
faith; therefore, Belarus should not see its right to conduct the normal
processes of domestic justice restricted, as it would disproportionately harm
Respondent’s sovereign interests; more so, when the rights of third parties
—such as BMP’s creditors — require protection!*4.

 

 

In relation to Claimant’s Non-Aggravation Order that Respondent be directed to
“refrain from any other actions that could further aggravate the dispute and violate
the integrity of the arbitration proceedings”, Respondent repeats that Claimant has
failed to show how such an order is necessary, urgent or proportionate, as none of
the events have aggravated this dispute, altered the status quo or affected the
rights of the Claimant in this arbitration in any way!'*’, Further, Claimant has not
explained the need for such a broad and vague order, considering the Parties’

” Respondent’s Response, paras. 47-48, citing SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA v. Pakistan, Ex.

RL-22, p. 301 and Quiborax v. Bolivia, Ex. CL-71, para. 123.

138
139
140
ui

142
143
144
14s

Quiborax v. Bolivia, Ex. CL-71, para. 123.
Respondent’s Response, para. 50.
Respondent’s Response, para. 51.
Respondent’s Response, para. 52.
Respondent’s Response, para. 54.
Respondent’s Response, para. 92.
Respondent’s Observations, para. 34.
Respondent’s Observations, para. 3.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

general right to the non-aggravation of the dispute and integrity of the arbitral
proceedings!*°,

D. Abuse of process

102. Respondent states that the Tribunal has discretion to refrain from issuing interim
measures if a request is made in bad faith to delay the proceedings or to harass the
opposing party!*”, which is precisely what has occurred in the present case:

103. (i) Claimant has intentionally distorted the facts and failed to disclose relevant
information in order to present the Respondent in a poor light and mislead the
Tribunal!48; Claimant was aware of the court ruling ordering the commencement
of the Insolvency Proceeding since 16 August 2018'4°; however, Claimant did not
notify the Tribunal or Counsel for the Respondent of its alleged concerns, instead
waiting for the investigations to take their natural course so as to accuse the
Respondent of acting against the Tribunal’s directions!*°.

104. (ii) Claimant is attempting to interfere with Respondent’s legitimate preparation
and gathering of information and evidence for its Statement of Defence!*!:
Claimant knew of the Tax Evasion Investigation since at least summer of 2017,
yet failed to raise it with the Tribunal until eight months into the arbitration,
indicating that Claimant’s real motive for submitting the Application is to
interfere with Respondent’s preparation of its Statement of Defence, not to protect
the procedural integrity of the arbitration or any other rights that Claimant alleges
are under threat!>?,

105. (iii) Claimant is trying to use these arbitral proceedings to avoid any
investigations or inquiries into their wrongdoings, however irrelevant they are to
this dispute!*>. Respondent submits that this is an abuse of process: interim
measures cannot give a party immunity from any type of state control and a carte
blanche for breaking the law'*4, Respondent quotes the tribunal in Quiborax v.
Bolivia which held that!*5:

“... the international protection granted to investors does not exempt
suspected criminals from prosecution by virtue of their being investors”.

46 Respondent’s Response, para. 95.

47 Respondent’s Response, para, 64.

48 Respondent’s Response, para. 65.

49 Respondent’s Observations, para. 30.

'50 Respondent’s Observations, paras. 30-31.

'5! Respondent’s Response, para. 93; Communication R-10, 2 August 2018, p. 2.

452 Respondent’s Response, para. 65.

'53 Respondent’s Observations, para. 33.

'S4 Respondent’s Observations, para. 33.

55 Respondent’s Observations, para. 33, quoting Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan
Fosk Kapliin y. Plurinational State of Bolivia, CSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional
Measures of 26 February 2010, para. 164, Ex. CL-71.

20

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

4. DISCUSSION

106. In this section, the Tribunal discusses and rules on the three requested interim
measures submitted by Claimant under Art. 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules.

107. Claimant requests the Arbitral Tribunal to issue an order directing Respondent

to!56

Abstain from initiating criminal proceedings and/or suspend any current
criminal proceedings against the former and current officials of Claimant
and the companies affiliated with Claimant until the completion of the
arbitration [“Order Against Criminal Proceedings”];

Refrain from contacting the shareholders, officials and employees of
Claimant and Manolium-Engineering, without the consent from Claimant
and prior authorization of the Tribunal [“Order to Restrict
Communication”); and

Refrain from any other actions that could further aggravate the dispute and
violate the integrity of the arbitral proceedings [“Non-Aggravation
Order”).

108. Under the UNCITRAL Rules, the Arbitral Tribunal is empowered to grant an

interim measure, defined as

157.

“.., any temporary measure by which, at any time prior to the issuance of the
award by which the dispute is finally decided, the arbitral tribunal orders a
party, for example and without limitation, to:

(a) Maintain or restore the status quo pending determination of the dispute;
(b) Take action that would prevent, or refrain from taking action that is

likely to cause, (i) current or imminent harm or (ii) prejudice to the arbitral
process itself”.

109. To grant the requested interim measures, Claimant’s bears the burden of proving
that!*;

“(a) Harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages is likely to
result if the measure is not ordered, and such harm substantially outweighs
the harm that is likely to result to the party against whom the measure is
directed if the measure is granted; and

(b) There is a reasonable possibility that the requesting party will succeed on
the merits of the claim. The determination on this possibility shall not affect
the discretion of the arbitral tribunal in making any subsequent
determination”.

'56 Claimant’s Request, para. 59; Claimant’s Comments, para. 55.

'57 Art, 26(2).

‘SS UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 26(3)(a), (b).

21

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

110. For the reasons discussed below, the Arbitral Tribunal has decided that under the
current factual circumstances the requested interim measures are either moot or
unnecessary and therefore dismisses the Request. Nevertheless, the Tribunal
considers it necessary to remind the Parties of their implicit duties which are
fundamental to investment arbitration proceedings and must be respected by both
Parties. The Tribunal will establish its reasons for dismissing each requested order
(A. — C.), and then restate the duties of the Parties (D.).

A. Order Against Criminal Proceedings
111. For the first order, Claimant requests the Arbitral Tribunal order Respondent to'?:
- Suspend any current criminal proceedings against the former and current
officials of Claimant and Manolium-Engineering until the completion of the
arbitration (a.); and/or
- Abstain from initiating criminal proceedings (b.).

112. Claimant avers that Respondent is using its police powers to take justice into its

  
  
   
  

. Claimant
is intimidating Claimant’s witnesses and
procedural integrity of this arbitration at

states that Respondent’s

former employees and putting
threat!

113. Respondent replies that the requested Order Against Criminal Proceedings is moot
since

114. Respondent adds that, even if |, the requested
Order should still fail as Claimant has not established that it is necessary to
prevent current or imminent harm that is likely to occur’, or satisfied the high
burden of proof under the UNCITRAL Rules!™.

a. Order to suspend criminal proceedings

115. The Tribunal notes firstly that contrary to Claimant’s assertion, there are no
‘criminal proceedings’ pending against any former or current official of Claimant
or Manolium-Engineering. However, there are two investigations which were
brought by Belarus to ascertain whether criminal proceedings should be brought —
the Tax Evasion Investigation (i.) and the Insolvency Proceeding (ii.).

159 Claimant’s Request, para. 59.

160 Claimant’s Request, paras. 34-35; Claimant’s Comments, para. 10.
161 Claimant’s Request, para. 32.

12 Respondent's Response, para. 76;

163 Respondent’s Response, para. 77.

164 Respondent’s Response, para. 88.

22

116.

EAs

118.

Ts.

120.

121.

=

122.

 

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

The Tribunal will examine the circumstances of these investigations to determine
whether:

- Claimant has established that it is likely to suffer current or imminent harm
or prejudice to the arbitral process itself that would not adequately be
reparable by an award of damages if the measure is not ordered; and

- The investigations were brought for an improper purpose, in bad faith, or
were conducted in violation of Claimant’s rights, so as to justify an order
restricting Respondent from initiating any criminal proceedings against the
former and current officials of Claimant and Manolium-Engineering until
the completion of this arbitration.

(i) The Tax Evasion Investigation

Based on , the Tribunal
agrees with Respondent that the requested Order Against Criminal Proceedings is
moot.

In any case, Claimant has failed to discharge its burden of proving that the Tax
Evasion Investigation was conducted in bad faith or violated the Claimant’s
tights, which could justify a showing of likely imminent harm to Claimant or
prejudice to the arbitral process itself, which would not be adequately reparable
by an award of damages.

The Tax Evasion Investigation was commenced by Belarusian authorities prior to
the initiation of this arbitration and after a tax audit of Manolium-Engineering
published in March 2017 found that Manolium-Engineering owed unpaid taxes
and fines'®.

Based on this finding, an investigation was commenced to ascertain whether the
non-payment of taxes amounted to a criminal offence.

  

Belarus has a sovereign right to investigate alleged tax evasion of companies
operating within its territory. If this right is misused to intimidate relevant
witnesses through a domestic investigation, Claimant has the burden of proving it
through concrete evidence!®”.

Claimant, however, has produced _no_evidence showing that

eyond a legitimate exercise of this sovereign right:

 

165 Doc. C-186, p. 8.

165 Doc. R-2, p. 2.

167 Churchill Mining and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/14
and 12/40, Procedural Order No. 14, 22 December 2014, paras. 72, 87, RL-25.

23

173.

124.

125.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

The alone are insufficient to justify Claimant’s allegation of attempted
intimidation. In the absence of such evidence, an order to restrict Respondent’s
sovereign right to investigate criminal conduct is not warranted, as Claimant has
failed to discharge its burden of proving the first element required by
Art. 26(3)(a), that harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages is likely
to result if the measure is not ordered, and such harm substantially outweighs the
harm that is likely to result to Respondent if the measure is granted.

(ii) The Insolvency Proceeding

The second investigation is an Insolvency Proceeding against Belarusian Foreign
Enterprise Manolium-Processing (BMP), jointly owned by Claimant and
Mr. Dolgov!®. The Insolvency Proceeding was set in motion after an application
by a private third-party creditor’. This is significant, as it does not support an
argument of an illegitimate use of Respondent’s policing powers.

Further, the procedures that followed appear to have been a legitimate
investigation in accordance with Belarusian insolvency law, which mandates an
enquiry as to whether insolvency was deliberately caused by the officers of the
entity!”: the expert appointed by the administrator found that the management
deliberately entered into transactions on disadvantageous terms causing detriment
to the company’s solvency and economic position!”!, then the Minsk Prosecutor’s
Office initiated an investigation to ascertain whether there was any evidence of
false insolvency, deliberate insolvency, concealment of insolvency or obstruction
of recovery of the creditors’ losses‘”*, the result of which should be rendered by
21 December 201817.

 

168 Respondent’s Observations, paras. 8-9.

169 Respondent’s Observations, para. 10.

17 Respondent’s Observations, para. 11, citing Insolvency Law of the Republic of Belarus, Art. 77(1).
11 Doc, R-10, p. 2.

™ Doc. R-10, p. 3.

13 Doc. R-10, p. 3.

174 Claimant’s Comments, para. 11, citing Third WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, paras. 19-20.

24

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

 

127. Claimant fails to provide evidence other than a witness statement of Mr. Dolgov,
of how was made in bad faith,
with an intent to intimidate any of these individuals or put the arbitration’s
procedural integrity at threat, so as to justify an order to prevent an imminent
harm!78_

128. The Tribunal finds that Claimant has failed to discharge its burden of proving the
first element required by Art. 26(3)(a), that harm not adequately reparable by an
award of damages is likely to result if the measure is not ordered, and that such
harm substantially outweighs the harm that is likely to result to Respondent if the
measure is granted.

b. Request to abstain from initiating criminal proceedings

129. Claimant additionally requests that the Tribunal order Respondent to abstain from
initiating criminal proceedings until the completion of this arbitration.

130. The Tribunal respects the sovereign right of a State to investigate criminal
conduct occurring within its territory'”’. This right does not disappear by virtue of
an international arbitration, nor does the international arbitration automatically
shield a claimant from investigation of any alleged breaches of the State’s
domestic criminal law'®°. As tribunals have consistently held, an order that
restricts the investigation or prosecution of suspected criminal conduct should
only be ordered if it is absolutely necessary!*!.

175 Claimant’s Comments, para. 12, citing Third WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, para. 18.

176 Doc. RY, p. 2.

177 Doe. R 9, p. 1; Claimant’s Comments, paras. 13-14, citing Third WS of A. Dolgov, CWS-4, paras. 19-
22.

178 Claimant’s Request, para. 32.

179 Sergei Viktorovich Pugachev v. The Russian Federation, UNCITRAL. Interim Award of 17 July 2017,
para. 272, Ex. CL-69; Hydro S.r.l. and others v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/28, Order
on Provisional Measures of 3 March 2016, para. 3.14, Ex. CL-77.

180 Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kaplin v. Plurinational State of Bolivia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures of 26 February 2010, para. 164, Ex. CL-

181 Hydro S.r.l. and others v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/28, Order on Provisional

Measures of 3 March 2016, para. 3.16, Ex. CL-77; Sergei Viktorovich Pugachev v. The Russian
Federation, UNCITRAL. Interim Award of 17 July 2017, paras. 272, 298, Ex. CL-69; Teinver S.A.,

25

131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

a

136.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

Arbitral tribunals have found that only certain circumstances warrant the granting
of an interim measure to prevent or discontinue criminal proceedings initiated by
the State; such as, where the criminal proceedings aggravated or extended the
dispute, or where the State has taken justice into its own hands!**. However, in the
present case, the Claimant has not established that the Tax Evasion Investigation
or the Insolvency Proceeding, have any correlation to this arbitration or put
Claimant’s rights in this arbitration at risk, which would justify an order to estop
Respondent from commencing new criminal proceedings until the end of the
arbitration.

 

  

 

Claimant has not proved that it is likely to suffer a harm that is not adequately
reparable by an award of damages if the measure is not ordered, which would
substantially outweigh the harm that is likely to result to Respondent if the
Tribunal restricts its sovereign right to conduct criminal investigations.

If a situation arises where criminal proceedings are commenced against Claimant,
and Claimant considers that it is at risk of current or imminent harm or that its
rights in the arbitration or the arbitral process are at risk of prejudice'**, Claimant
is directed to raise its concerns before the Tribunal.

 

B. Order to Restrict Communication

 

In its Order to Restrict Communication, the Claimant requests that the Tribunal
order the Respondent to:

“Refrain from contacting the shareholders, officials and employees of
Claimant and Manolium-Engineering, without the consent from Claimant
and prior authorization of the Tribunal”.

Claimant states that Respondent’s questioning is intimidating Claimant’s
witnesses and former employees, putting the procedural integrity of this
arbitration at threat!*,

Clinant overs ht

was likely motivated by an improper purpose’, and additionally
questions the motivation for Respondent’s request that Mr. Dolgov include his
address in his witness statement, alleging that this shows that Respondent is
preparing action against Mr. Dolgov outside of this arbitration'*®.

 

 

Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/09/1, Decision on Provisional Measures, 8 April 2016, Ex. RL-26, para. 190.

12

City Oriente Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador

(Petroecuador), CSID Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on Provisional Measures of 19 November 2007,
paras, 61-66, Ex. CL-72; Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals $A. and Allan Fosk Kaplin y.
Plurinational State of Bolivia, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures of 26
February 2010, paras. 133, 141-142, Ex. CL-71.

"3 UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 26(2)(b).

'4 Claimant’s Request, para, 32.

185

Claimant’s Request, para. 8.

'86 Claimant’s Request, para. 19.

26

137:

138.

139:

141.

=

142.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING Vv. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

As the Tribunal has already dealt with
in the prior section (supra paras. 118 — 123), and
in relation to the Insolvency Proceeding (supra paras. 124 — 128), it
will now address the questioning of Mr. Koroban (a.) and Respondent’s request
that Mr. Dolgov provide his address in his witness statement (b.).

  

Questioning of Mr. Koroban

The Tribunal notes that there are two contradictory versions of the former Deputy
Director of Manolium-Engineering, Mr. Koroban’s, meeting at the MCEC. The
version provided by Mr. Koroban, and the version provided by Mr. Torot’ko and
Mr. Dolgov.

It is Claimant’s case that the Order to Restrict Communication is necessary as
Mr. Koroban’s contradictory versions of events is evidence of coercion, and an
effort by Respondent to pressure and intimidate him into silence!®’. As a resident
of Belarus, Mr. Koroban’s cooperation was motivated by a fear of criminal
prosecution and a fear for his well-being, despite his allegation to the contrary!®.
Further, Claimant alleges that Mr. Koroban’s meeting with the MCEC shows that
“Respondent is using its powers to collect evidence from Claimant’s employees
outside of the arbitral process”!®°.

. On the other hand, Respondent states that Mr. Koroban has not been employed by

Manoloium-Engineering for at least four years, thus not correlating with the
requested Order as formulated'*°. Respondent states that Claimant has failed to
establish any basis on which the Order to Restrict Communication should be
granted!®!, or adduce any concrete evidence in support of its accusations about the
pressure on Mr. Koroban'®?. The fact that Mr. Koroban’s first-hand account of his
visit to the MCEC contradicts subsequent conversations with Mr. Torot’ko and
Mr. Dolgov, does not justify Claimant’s far-reaching conclusion that Mr. Koroban
is acting “out of fear for his well-being” or calls “into serious question the
veracity of his testimony”.

The Tribunal agrees with Respondent that Claimant has failed to provide concrete
evidence in support of its allegations, which it must in order to discharge its
burden of proof'**.

The Tribunal notes that whilst there are inconsistencies between Mr. Koroban’s
witness statement and the witness statements of Mr. Dolgov and Mr. Torot’ko,
contradictory witness statements does not provide evidence of witness
intimidation. Claimant has failed to substantiate its allegations of coercion and

187 Claimant’s Request, paras. 18, 38; Claimant’s Comments, paras. 20-22.

188 Claimant’s Comments, para. 51.

189 Claimant’s Request, para. 17.

190 Respondent’s Response, para. 36.

191 Respondent’s Response, para. 91.

1 Respondent’s Observations, para. 40.

183 Respondent’s Observations, para. 37, quoting Claimant’s Comments, para. 35.

1°4 Churchill Mining and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/14
and 12/40, Procedural Order No. 14, 22 December 2014, paras. 72, 87, RL-25.

27

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

witness intimidation with anything other than the speculations of Mr. Dolgov and
Mr. Torot’ko, that Mr. Koroban’s inconsistent behaviour (which in itself is only
supported by hearsay testimony) can likely be attributed to his fear “of
something”!°.

143. In Mr. Koroban’s first-hand account, he tes that he attended the MCEC
voluntarily and without coercion and that he is not worried about his safety!°°, In
the absence of stronger evidence to contradict these statements, Mr. Koroban’s
witness statement is to be believed.

   

 

144. In regard to Respondent’s ability to contact other shareholders, officials and
employees of Claimant and Manolium-Engineering, the Tribunal notes that
Respondent has a sovereign right to conduct normal State functions in good faith
and whilst respecting the rights of Claimant!®’, and a Tribunal should not restrict
the exercise of sovereign powers, in the absence of convincing evidence that such
powers are being exercised in bad faith or in violation of the other party’s rights.

 

145. In conclusion, Claimant has failed to es

   

ablish that Respondent’s

putting the procedural integrity of
this arbitration at threat. The Tribunal thus finds that in respect of its Order to
Restrict Communication, Claimant h led to satisfactorily discharge its burden
under the UNCITRAL Rules, of establishing that it is likely to suffer a harm that
is not adequately reparable by an award of damages if the measure is not ordered,
which would substantially outweigh the harm that is likely to result to Respondent
if the measure is granted.

 

 

 

 

  

b. Request for Mr. Dolgov’s address

146. Claimant additionally questions the motivation for Respondent’s demand that
Mr. Dolgov include his address in his witness statement, averring that this
indicates that the Respondent is preparing some action against Mr. Dolgov outside
of this arbitration'*.

147. Respondent strongly denies Claimant’s allegation, replying that it was merely
requesting compliance with PO No. 1 para. 35, and in any case, Respondent
already has Mr. Dolgov’s address
-

148. The Tribunal finds Respondent’s position to be more convincing.

95 WS of L. Torot’ko, CWS-3, para. 26.

96 WS of V. Koroban, RWS-1, paras. 8, 15.

"7 SG Société Générale de Surveillance SA v. Pakistan, Ex. RL-22, p. 301 and Quiborax v. Bolivia, Ex.
CL-71, para. 123.

8 Claimant’s Request, para. 19.

' Respondent’s Response, paras. 41-43.

28

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

C. Order for Non-Aggravation

149. In its third and final order, Claimant requests that the Tribunal order Respondent
£0200.

“Refrain from any other actions that could further aggravate the dispute and
violate the integrity of the arbitral proceedings”.

150. As the Tribunal will discuss below, it is widely accepted that parties in an
investment arbitration have a general duty not to engage in conduct which may
aggravate the dispute2°!. As outlined by the tribunal in Amco v. Indonesia, within
arbitral disputes exists a7:

“... good and fair practical rule, according to which both Parties to a legal
dispute should refrain, in their own interest, to do anything that could
aggravate or exacerbate the same, thus rendering its solution possibly more
difficult”.

151.

The Tribunal confirms that both Parties should refrain from any conduct which
could have the effect of aggravating the dispute or violating the integrity of the
arbitral proceedings.

152. Considering that the duty to not aggravate the dispute is a general duty implicit in
the arbitral process, the Tribunal does not consider it necessary to make a specific
order in this regard.

153. Ifthe Parties require guidance as to whether any future action could aggravate the
dispute or violate the integrity of the arbitral proceedings, they are encouraged to

contact the Tribunal ex ante and request additional guidance.

D. General duties of parties in investment arbitration proceedings

 

154. Notwithstanding the above decision, the Tribunal wishes to remind the Parties of
the four duties that are implicit in all investment arbitration proceedings, which
both the State and investor must respect at all times:

- The duty to not aggravate the dispute (a.);
- The duty to not obtain evidence improperly (b.);
- The duty to not unduly influence witnesses (c.); and

200 Claimant’s Request, para. 59.

2° City Oriente Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21. Decision on Provisional Measures of 19 November 2007,
para, 57, Ex. CL-72; Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kaplin v. Plurinational
State of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures of 26 February 2010,
paras, 133-135, Ex. CL-71; Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/5, Procedural Order No. 1 of 29 June 2009, paras. 62-64, Ex. CL-73.

22 Amco Asia v. Indonesia, Decision on request for provisional measures of 9 December 1983, ICSID
Reports, 1993, p. 412, cited in Quiborax S.4., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kaplin v.
Plurinational State of Bolivia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures of 26
February 2010, para. 135, Ex. CL-71.

29

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

- The duty to not put undue pressure on anyone related to the investor,
including its directors, shareholders or employees (d.).

155. Respect for these duties becomes particularly paramount in investment arbitral
proceedings, due to the inherent power imbalance between a State, endowed with
a wealth of special sovereign powers, and a foreign investor who does not have
equal power and is subject to the control of the State when operating within its
jurisdiction.

156. When agreeing to arbitrate a dispute, a State has agreed to cede part of its
sovereignty to be subject to the arbitration’s procedural rules and the authority of
the arbitral tribunal. By doing so, the State and foreign investor agree to comply
with the duty to arbitrate fairly and in good faith, whilst respecting the procedural
integrity of the arbitration and avoiding conduct which upsets the balance of
equality between the parties”.

a. Duty to not aggravate the dispute

157. Parties to an investment arbitration must always observe the duty to not aggravate
the dispute and to maintain the status quo ante, the legal situation existing prior to
the institution of the arbitration. The Permanent Court of International Justice first
recognized the duty on parties to not aggravate the dispute or take action that
impairs the rights of the other party, when in 1939 it issued provisional measures
against Bulgaria and in favour of Belgium".

158. Since then, arbitral tribunals have consistently confirmed this duty, under which
parties must abstain from any action which might aggravate or extend the dispute,
alter the status quo, or take justice into their own hands”.

b. Duty to not obtain evidence improperly

159. Parties in an investment arbitration have a duty to not obtain evidence through
improper means. This is derived from the obligation to arbitrate fairly and in good
faith?°, and the principle of equality of arms implicit in all international
arbitrations between a State party and a foreign investor?””.

283 Art, 17(1), UNCITRAL Rules 2010. See also Methanex Corporation v. United States of America
(UNCITRAL), Final Award of the Tribunal on Jurisdiction and Merits, para. 54, Part II - Chapter I — p.
26; T. Wilde, “Equality of Arms in Investment Arbitration: Procedural Challenges”, in Yannaca-Small,
K, “Arbitration Under International Investment Agreements: A Guide to Key Issues”; Oxford University
Press (2010).

2 Electricity Company of Sofia and Bulgaria (Belgium v. Bulgaria), Judgment of 5 December 1939,
PCI series A/B, No 79, p. 199.

205

 

City Oriente Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador), \CSID Case No. ARB/06/21. Decision on Provisional Measures of 19 November 2007,
para. 57, Ex. CL-72; Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kaplin v. Plurinational
State of Bolivia, CSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures of 26 February 2010
paras. 133-135, Ex. CL-71; Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No.
ARB/08/5, Procedural Order No. 1 of 29 June 2009, paras. 62-64, Ex. CL-73.

206 Tibananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8), Decision on
Preliminary Issues, 23 June 2008, para. 78 (“Nor does the Tribunal doubt for a moment that, like any

30

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

160. The duty to not obtain evidence improperly requires a Respondent State to abstain
from the use of special domestic powers, for example, to investigate suspected
criminal conduct, or conduct intelligence for national security purposes, to obtain
evidence to defend itself in an investment arbitration. Whilst the capacity for a
foreign investor to obtain evidence from a State party through improper means is
significantly reduced, the duty not to engage in improper activities applies equally
to a foreign investor.

161.

As expressed by the tribunal in Methanex v. USA?®:

“As a general principle, therefore, just as it would be wrong for the USA ex
hypothesi to misuse its intelligence assets to spy on Methanex (and its
witnesses) and to introduce into evidence the resulting materials into this
arbitration, so too would it be wrong for Methanex to introduce evidential
materials obtained by Methanex unlawfully”.

162. This duty to not obtain evidence through improper means is reflected in the IBA
Guidelines on the Taking of Evidence, whereby arbitral tribunals are empowered
to exclude evidence for compelling reasons of “fairness or equality of the
Parties”?. Further, Art. 17(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules provides that the
Tribunal must treat the parties with equality and maintain procedural fairne:

 

 

“Subject to these Rules, the arbitral tribunal may conduct the arbitration in
such manner as it considers appropriate, provided that the parties are treated
with equality and that at an appropriate stage of the proceedings each party is
given a reasonable opportunity of presenting its case. The arbitral tribunal, in
exercising its discretion, shall conduct the proceedings so as to avoid
unnecessary delay and expense and to provide a fair and efficient process for
resolving the parties’ dispute”. [Emphasis added]

ce Duty to not unduly influence witnesses

163. It is a basic premise of both domestic and international dispute resolution that
parties have a duty to refrain from any behaviour which could be seen as an
attempt to exert undue influence or pressure on a witness or a potential witness.
This could be regarded as a general principle of law recognized by civilized legal
systems?!°,

 

other international tribunal, it must be regarded as endowed with the inherent powers required to preserve
the integrity of its own process — even if the remedies open to it are necessarily different from those that
might be available to a domestic court of law in an ICSID Member State.”). See also Cementownia
"Nowa Huta" S.A. v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/06/2), Award, para. 153.

207 See Methanex Corporation v. United States of America (UNCITRAL), Final Award of the Tribunal on
Jurisdiction and Merits, para. 54, Part II - Chapter I — p. 26; T. Wailde, “Equality of Arms in Investment
Arbitration: Procedural Challenges”, p. 161 in Yannaca-Small, K. “Arbitration Under International
Investment Agreements: A Guide to Key Issues”; Oxford University Press (2010).

28 See also Methanex Corporation v. United States of America (UNCITRAL), Final Award of the
Tribunal on Jurisdiction and Merits, para. 54, Part II - Chapter I — p. 26.

209 TBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence, Article 9.2.(g).

21° Art. 38(1), Statute of the International Court of Justice.

31

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

164. As stated in the UNCITRAL Rules, a party must be given a reasonable
opportunity to present its case?!!. To do so, a party must be able to adduce witness
statements.

165. It is imperative to the functioning of any system of justice, that witnesses feel as
though they are able to give free and accurate testimony. Any attempt by a party
to hinder a witnesses’ liberty to testify freely, whether it be through intimidation,
coercion, or undue pressure in any form, constitutes a violation of the duty to
arbitrate in good faith, and a violation of the procedural integrity of the
arbitration?!?.

 

166. In Quiborax v. Bolivia, the tribunal found that the domestic criminal proceedings,
which appeared to be motivated by the investment arbitration, restricted the ability
for certain witnesses to testify in the arbitration, and thus constituted a threat to
the procedural integrity of the arbitration?'>. The tribunal additionally stated
that?!4:

“Even if no_undue_ pressure is i on_ potential wit the very
nature of these criminal proceedings is bound to reduce their willingness to
cooperate in the ICSID proceeding. Given that the existence of this ICSID
arbitration has been characterized within the criminal proceedings as a harm

to Bolivia, it is unlikely that the persons charged will feel free to participate
as witnesses in this arbitration”. [Emphasis added]

167. Ifa witness is unable or unwilling to testify due to actions of the other party, this
will violate the party’s right to be heard and to present its case before the tribunal.

d. Duty not to exert pressure on claimant or its representatives

168. Underpinned by the obligation to arbitrate fairly and in good faith, and the right to
the procedural integrity of the arbitration, is the principle that a party shall have
the opportunity to access arbitration and present its claim, free from all forms of
coercion and undue pressure?!>.

169. Parties thus have a duty to refrain from any behaviour which could be seen as an
attempt to exert any form of undue pressure on the other party or its
representatives.

170. A State has a reinforced duty to abstain from using its authority as a sovereign
power to exert pressure on a foreign investor or its current and former personnel,

21 Art, 17(1), UNCITRAL Rules 2010.

22 Art. 17(1), UNCITRAL Rules 2010; Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk
Kaplin y. Plurinational State of Bolivia, CSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures
of 26 February 2010, para. 123, Ex. CL-71; T. Wilde, “Equality of Arms in Investment Arbitration:
Procedural Challenges”, in Y: Il, K. “Arbitration Under

A Guide to Key Issues”; Oxford University Press (2010).

213 Respondent’s Response, para. 50.

24 Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kapliin y. Plurinational State of Bolivia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures of 26 February 2010, para. 146, Ex. CL-

 

71.
215 Art. 17(1), UNCITRAL Rules 2010.

32

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

including its directors, shareholders, employees, affiliate companies, or legal
representatives, in an attempt to dissuade the bringing of a claim, impair the
procedural rights of the Claimant in the arbitration, or deter a potential witness’ or
legal counsel’s participation in the arbitral process in support of the foreign
investor. In Hydro v. Albania, the tribunal found that the possible incarceration of
two of the claimants in Albania posed an imminent risk on their ability to
participate in the arbitration"®.

171. Further, as outlined by the tribunal in Quiborax v. Bolivia?'?:

“Bolivia has the sovereign power to prosecute conduct that may constitute a
crime on its own territory, if it has sufficient elements justifying prosecution.
Bolivia also has the power to investigate whether Claimants have made their
investments in Bolivia in accordance with Bolivian law and to present
evidence in that respect. But such powers must be exercised in good faith
and ing Claimants’ rights, including their prima facie right to pursue
this arbitration”. [Emphasis added]

172. Any attempt by an investor or a State party to unduly coerce or exert pressure on
the other party, would constitute a breach of the duty to arbitrate fairly and in
good faith, and would violate the procedural integrity of the arbitration, and could
hinder the right for the party to have its request for relief fairly considered by the
Tribunal?!*.

26 Hydro S.r.l. and others v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/28, Order on Provisional
Measures of 3 March 2016, para. 3.29, Ex. CL-77.

217 Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kapliin v. Plurinational State of Bolivia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures of 26 February 2010, para. 123, Ex. CL-
71.

218 See for example, Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kaplin v. Plurinational
State of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures of 26 February 2010,
para. 141, Ex. CL-71; City Oriente Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del
Ecuador (Petroecuador), 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on Provisional Measures of 19
November 2007, paras. 133, 141-148, Ex. CL-72 and Hydro S.r.l. and others v. Republic of Albania,
ICSID Case No. ARB/15/28, Order on Provisional Measures of 3 March 2016, paras. 3.18-3.20, Ex. CL-
71.

33

T7533
174.

175:

176.

177.

178.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Claimant’s Interim Measures Request
December 07, 2018

For all the foregoing reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal decides:

Not to grant Claimant’s request that Respondent be ordered to abstain from
initiating criminal proceedings and/or suspend any current criminal proceedings
against the former and current officials of Claimant and the companies affiliated
with Claimant until the completion of the arbitration.

Not to grant Claimant’s request that Respondent be ordered to refrain from
contacting the shareholders, officials and employees of Claimant and Manolium-
Engineering, without the consent of Claimant and prior authorization of the
Tribunal. Respondent, however, is invited to:

 

- (i) refrain from ing current shareholders, officials and empl of
Claimant and Manolium-Engineering without the presence of their lawyers;
and

- (ii) refrain from contacting any person who has appeared as a witness or
expert for Claimant for the purpose of discussing her or his testimony.

To order generally that both Parties refrain from any action or conduct that could
result in the aggravation of the dispute or a violation of the integrity of the arbitral
proceedings; if in doubt whether a specific action or conduct might result in the
violation of the above order, both Parties are recommended to approach the
Tribunal ex ante and request additional guidance.

The Tribunal expects that the Parties will continue to respect their duties in the
arbitration at all times, as detailed in paras, 154-172 supra.

The decision on costs is reserved,

On behalf of the Arbitral Tribunal,

 

34

