In the matter of an arbitration under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

between

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING
Claimant

THE REPUBLIC OF BELARUS

Respondent

DECISION ON BIFURCATION

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
Juan Fernandez-Armesto (Chairman)
Stanimir Alexandrov
Brigitte Stern

ADMINISTRATIVE SECRETARY

Krystle M. Baptista Serna

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Bifurcation
August 1, 2018

1. On June 11, 2018, Respondent filed its Application for Bifurcation on Quantum
[the “RfB”]. Respondent alleges that its RfB meets the criteria for granting
bifurcation, based on three arguments!:

1) Bifurcation will reduce the number of issues to be considered in the quantum
phase’; the Republic of Belarus is confident that it has a strong case on both
jurisdiction and liability and believes that its objections will dispose of the
claim’; even if the Tribunal does not dismiss the claim at the first stage, the
Tribunal’s decision on liability will significantly narrow the scope of the
issues to be addressed at the quantum stage’;

2) The facts and issues relevant to jurisdiction and liability are distinct from the
facts and issues relevant to the quantum proceedings®; thus, there would be a
benefit in having the Tribunal’s findings of fact before instructing the
experts®;

3

Bifurcation will foster fairness, economy and efficiency in managing these
proceedings’; the quantification of Claimant’s damages claims will be a
complex and time consuming exercise, thus Respondent would be prejudiced
if it had to invest substantial time and resources into quantifying claims that
may fall away at the jurisdiction and liability phase’.

2. Claimant submitted its Observations on the Application for Bifurcation on
Quantum [the “Answer”] on June 25, 2018. Claimant opposes bifurcation and
demands that the quantum be heard together with the merits of the dispute?
because:

- Bifurcation will cause undue delay and additional cost to the Parties'®; and

- The quantification of damages in this arbitration is not complicated and the
record is not as voluminous as to warrant a bifurcation of the proceedings on
quantum'’,

3. The procedural calendar allocates one month after Claimant’s Answer for the
Tribunal to issue a decision on bifurcation. On July 24, 2018, the Tribunal sent a
letter to the Parties informing them that deliberations were still ongoing and that it
would issue a decision in the course of the following week!” Therefore, this
decision is rendered within the time period announced in communication A8.

' REB, paras.
? REB, para:
5 REB, para:
* REB, para
> REB, paras. 77-80.
© REB, para. 23.

: REB, paras. 81-85.

 

 

° Answer, para. 14.

'° Answer, paras. 15-18.
" Answer, para. 13.
"Communication A8.

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING v. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Bifurcation
August 1, 2018

The Tribunal has carefully examined the Parties’ arguments and, on balance, sees
advantages in not bifurcating the proceedings:

The Tribunal acknowledges that, if the dispute were to be bifurcated, Respondent
would in the first phase avoid the need for an expert report; and that if Respondent
were successful on jurisdiction or merits, no expert report would ever be required.
But this advantage is off-set by the contrary scenario: if the Tribunal were to grant
bifurcation and then find for Claimant on jurisdiction and merits (even if
partially), the procedure would continue into a second phase, devoted exclusively
to the calculation of damages. Such second phase would cause unnecessary delay
and unwarranted increase in costs.

The Tribunal is also not convinced by Respondent’s argument that the facts and
issues relevant to jurisdiction and liability are distinct from the facts and issues
relevant to the quantum proceedings; as the case has been pleaded, the Tribunal
sees a close relationship between both sets of facts and issues.

Respondent also asserts that bifurcation will foster fairness, economy and
efficiency in managing these proceedings, the quantification of Claimant’s
damages claims being a complex and time-consuming exercise. The Tribunal is
unpersuaded: the expert report submitted by Claimant is not overly complex, and
is based on straightforward methodology for the calculation of damages and lost
profits.

For the above reasons, and considering the principles of procedural economy and
cost efficiency, the Tribunal decides not to bifurcate the proceedings.

Consequently, the procedural calendar established in Timetable B.1 will be
followed, adding one week to each Parties’ deadline to submit their main
pleadings, in order to compensate for the Tribunal’s delay in rendering this
decision. The Tribunal hereby reissues Annex I to Procedural Order No. 1, which
is attached.

On behalf of the Arbitral Tribunal,

Juan Fernandez-Armesto
Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal

OOO MANOLIUM-PROCESSING V. REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Decision on Bifurcation
August 1, 2018

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 1 - ANNEXIT

TIMETABLE B.1

The following timetable shall apply in the event that objections to jurisdiction are raised in
response to the Statement of Claim, and there is a request for bifurcation which is DISMISSED.

 

 

 

 

 

Date / [Period of Time] Party / Tribunal Description
Wednesday, August 1, 2018 Tribunal Decision refusing
[+3 weeks from Observations on bifurcation
Request for Bifurcation]
Thursday, November 1, 2018 Respondent Statement of Defense
[+3 months and one week from
decision refusing bifurcation]
Tuesday, January 15, 2019 Claimant Statement of Reply
[+2,5 months and one week from
Statement of Defense]
Friday, March 29, 2019 Respondent Rejoinder on the

[+2,5 months and one week from
Statement of Reply]

Merits

 

Wednesday, May 22, 2019
[+2 months before the Hearing]

Claimant & Respondent

Witness notification

 

Monday, June 24, 2019
[+5 weeks before the Hearing]

Parties

Parties to agree on the
index of hearing
bundles

 

Monday, July 1, 2019

Parties and President of the

Pre-Hearing

 

 

. ‘ Tribunal (unless full Organizational
Be tec liaalioiiiolete a Tribunal is requested by Meeting
either Party)
Monday, July 29 — Aug. 2. 2019 All Hearing

[+4 months from Rejoinder on the
Merits]

 

 

 

 

