ICSID Case No. ARB/10/14
OPIC Karimum Corporation

Claimant

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Respondent

 

DECISION ON THE PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY
PROFESSOR PHILIPPE SANDS, ARBITRATOR

 

Issued by
Professor Doug Jones

Professor Guido Santiago Tawil

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Janet M. Whittaker

 

Representing Claimant

Dr. Sabine Konrad,

K&L Gates LLP

OpernTurm

Bockenheimer Landstrasse 2-4
60305 Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY

Ms. Lisa M. Richman

K&L Gates LLP

1601 K Street NW

Washington, DC 20006

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Date: May 5, 2011

Representing Respondent

Dra. Margarita L. Mendola Sanchez
Procuradora General de la Reptiblica

Av. Los Ilustres, cruce con calle Francisco
lazo Marti

Edificio Procuraduria General de la
Reptblica

Piso 8., Urb. Santa Ménica

Caracas 1040

VENEZUELA

Mr. George Kahale III, Mr. Eloy Barbara de
Parres, Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila,

and Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
101 Park Avenue

New York, NY 10178

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

I. INTRODUCTION

A. REQUEST FOR ARBITRATION AND CONSTITUTION OF THE TRIBUNAL

1. On May 28, 2010, OPIC Karimum Corporation (Panama) (“OPIC” or “Claimant’’)
filed a Request for Arbitration under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (“Convention”) against the

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

2. On June 16, 2010, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for

Arbitration pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention.

3. In its Request for Arbitration, Claimant proposed that the Tribunal be composed of
three arbitrators pursuant to Article 37(2)(b) of the Convention, one appointed by
Claimant, one appointed by Respondent, and the president of the tribunal appointed by the

agreement of the parties.

4. Absent an agreement between the Parties with respect to a method of appointment,
Claimant, by letter of August 17, 2010, informed the Centre that, under Rule 2(3) of the
ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules’), it elected the
formula provided for in Article 37(2)(b) of the Convention. In its letter, Claimant

appointed Professor Guido Santiago Tawil, an Argentine national, as arbitrator.

5. On August 18, 2010, the Secretariat informed the Parties that Professor Guido
Tawil had accepted his appointment and circulated a copy of his signed Arbitration Rule

6(2) declaration dated August 17, 2010.

6. On September 14, 2010, Respondent appointed Professor Philippe Sands, a
national of the United Kingdom and France, as arbitrator. On September 23, 2010, the
Secretariat informed the Parties that Professor Sands had accepted his appointment and

circulated a copy of his signed Arbitration Rule 6(2) declaration and attached statement.

7. By letter of October 4, 2010, Claimant sought clarification of two points contained
in Professor Sands’ Arbitration Rule 6(2) declaration regarding: (i) his appointments by
Respondent’s counsel, Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP; and (ii) his
appointments by Respondent, Venezuela. On October 5, 2010, Professor Sands responded

to Claimant’s queries.

8. In the absence of an agreement between the parties about the president of the
tribunal, on November 30, 2010, the Secretary-General informed the parties that she
intended to propose to the Chairman that he appoint Professor Doug Jones, a national of
Australia and a member of the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators designated by Australia, as the
president of the tribunal. Neither party having indicated that it had a compelling objection
to the appointment of Professor Jones, on December 29, 2010, the Secretary-General

confirmed that the Chairman would proceed with his appointment.

9. The parties were informed on January 5, 2011, that the three arbitrators had
accepted their appointments as arbitrators and that, therefore, pursuant to Arbitration Rule
6, as of that date, the Tribunal was deemed constituted and the proceeding to have begun.

A copy of Professor Jones’ Arbitration Rule 6(2) declaration was circulated to the Parties.

B. PROFESSOR SANDS’ ARBITRATION RULE 6(2) DECLARATION

10. Professor Sands attached a statement to his Arbitration Rule 6(2) declaration of

September 21, 2010. In that statement, Professor Sands disclosed the following:

“To the best of my knowledge I am not aware of any past or present
professional, business or other relationship with the Claimant or

Respondent.

Within the past three years I have been appointed to serve as arbitrator in
two other ICSID cases by a party that is represented by the law firm Curtis

Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP. Both cases are pending.

Within the past three years I have been appointed to serve as arbitrator by
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in two related cases, neither of which
is currently pending: in the first case (under the arbitration rules of Nova
Scotia) the tribunal has not been fully constituted and appears to be
dormant, in the other (under the UNCITRAL Rules) the tribunal ruled by

unanimous decision that it did not have jurisdiction.

Since first accepting appointment as arbitrator in an ICSID case, in 2007, I
have declined to accept any new instructions to act as counsel in any new

investment treaty arbitration brought under the ICSID Convention.

I am not aware of any circumstance that might cause my reliability for

independent judgment to be questioned by a party.”
C. REQUEST TO DISQUALIFY PROFESSOR SANDS

11. On October 18, 2010, prior to the constitution of the Tribunal, Claimant requested
the disqualification of Professor Sands pursuant to Arbitration Rule 9(1), on grounds that
Professor Sands’ appointments by Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP and
Venezuela “taint his independence in this matter and indicate a manifest lack of Professor
Sands’ ability to be relied on for independent judgement as required under Articles 14(1)

and 57 of the ICSID Convention.”!

12. By letter of January 5, 2011, following the constitution of the Tribunal, the
Secretary-General invited Claimant to confirm whether it intended to pursue its proposal
to disqualify Professor Sands. On January 17, 2011, Claimant confirmed its intention to
pursue its proposal to disqualify Professor Sands and submitted an amended copy of its
October 18, 2010 letter that was revised to reflect: (1) that information in the earlier letter
“concerning the proposed unification of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the
Republic of Bolivia was incorrect;” and (2) “to reflect additional information that has
come to OPIC’s attention in the interim concerning the connection and affiliation between

Bolivia and Venezuela.”

13. On January 20, 2011, the President of the Tribunal, having consulted with
Professor Tawil, set a timetable for the parties to submit observations and Professor Sands

to furnish an explanation as provided for under Arbitration Rule 9, as follows:

e February 4, 2011—Respondent to submit a reply to Claimant’s disqualification
proposal;

e February 18, 2011—Professor Sands to furnish any explanation; and

e March 2, 2011—The Parties to submit any further observations, including

comments arising from Professor Sands’ explanation.

14. Upon request by the Claimant, Professors Jones and Tawil extended the time for

the filing of Claimant’s final observations to 9 March 2011. Subject to this extension,

Claimant’s Proposal to Disqualify Professor Sands dated October 18 (“Original PTD”), p. 1.

each of the Parties filed submissions regarding the proposal to disqualify and Professor
Sands furnished an explanation within the time limits established in the letter of January

20, 2011.

IL. THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS AND PROFESSOR SANDS’
EXPLANATION

A. CLAIMANT’S SUBMISSIONS

15. Claimant asserts that the standards under Articles 14 and 57 of the Convention

require that arbitrators be both impartial and independent. ~ In Claimant’s view, the

requirement of impartiality implies the “‘absence of a bias or predisposition toward one of

the parties.””*

16. Claimant alleges that it is not necessary to prove an actual bias or conflict of
interest; rather, in Claimant’s view, “[w]hat matters is that the appearance of bias or of a
conflict is sufficient in the eyes of a reasonable, informed third person that is in the

4

position of the party challenging the arbitrator.” Claimant further asserts that

“‘Trjeasonable doubt’ regarding the arbitrator’s independence or impartiality is therefore
sufficient to meet the manifest standard ...”.°

17. Claimant references the standards set forth in the International Bar Association
Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration dated May 22, 2004 (“IBA
Guidelines”).° Claimant acknowledges that the IBA Guidelines do not have binding status,
but submits that they provide persuasive authority, including in ICSID arbitrations. 7
Claimant relies, in particular, on Sections 3.1.3 and 3.3.7 of the IBA Guidelines’ “Orange
List.”* Section 3.1.3 provides that justifiable doubts about an arbitrator’s impartiality or

independence may arise where an arbitrator has been appointed by a party in two or more

Claimant’s Amended Proposal to Disqualify Professor Sands dated 17 Jan. 2011 (“Amended
PTD”), p. 3. Claimant’s Further Observations Concerning Its Proposal to Disqualify Professor
Sands dated Mar. 9, 2011 (“Claimant’s Further Observations”), p. 3.

Claimant’s Further Observations, pp. 3-4.

Id., p. 4. See also Amended PTD, p. 3; Claimant's Further Observations, p. 12.
Claimant’s Further Observations, p. 5.

Amended PTD, p. 4; Claimant’s Further Observations, pp. 5—7.

Amended PTD, pp. 3—

 

; Claimant’s Further Observations, pp. 5-7.

Claimant’s Further Observations, p. 6.

instances within the last three years. Section 3.3.7 provides that such doubts may also
arise when an arbitrator has received more than three appointments by the same counsel

within the past three years.

1. Professor Sands’ Alleged Relationship with Respondent and Respondent’s
Counsel

18. Claimant alleges that Professor Sands:

e “currently is sitting in six (6) pending ICSID cases, of which he has received three
(3) of his appointments from the Curtis Mallet law firm;

e has sat in eight (8) treaty arbitrations as a whole in the last three years, of which
five (5) appointments have come from the Respondent or the Curtis Mallet firm;

e discloses publicly only nine (9) total arbitrations in which he has sat, of which five

(5) appointments have come from the Respondent or the Curtis Mallet firm.”?

19. Claimant argues that Professor Sands’ appointment in this case “would be on the
threshold of exceeding the ‘Orange List’ guidelines on an individual basis and,!° when
viewed in combination, as is appropriate under the circumstances in light of the many
points of connection between Professor Sands and the Respondent and its counsel, the
proposed appointment in effect exceeds the ‘Orange List’ threshold, giving rise to
justifiable doubts that would lead an informed, reasonable person to conclude that the

appointment is inappropriate under the circumstances,”!!

20. Specifically Claimant claims that “”’[i]f Professor Sands is permitted to continue to

sit as an arbitrator in this proceeding, he will have been appointed in five (5) arbitration
proceedings within the last three years by either the Curtis Mallet firm or by Respondent,
which represents more than half of his publicly disclosed appointments. Moreover, this

represents six (6) instances of appointments of Professor Sands by either Respondent or

the Curtis Mallet firm.”!”

Id., pp. 1-2. See also Amended PTD, p. 3.

10 Claimant acknowledges that a situation falling within Section 3.3.7 is not in issue because Professor

Sands has not been appointed more than three times in three years by Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt &
Mosle LLP. See Claimant’s Further Observations, p. 6.

 

Amended PTD, p. 4. See also Claimant's Further Observations, pp. 6-7.

Claimant’s Further Observations, p. 7.

21. Claimant argues that “Respondent would like the Tribunal to ignore the
mathematics involved because they are not in its favour, the fact remains that multiple
appointments by the same party or counsel create a potential for undue influence and for
an unfair advantage for the appointing party or counsel.”'? Claimant alleges that “[t]hese
appointments suggest that there is, at a minimum, an ongoing professional and business
relationship between Professor Sands and the Curtis Mallet firm as well as a prior
relationship between Professor Sands and the Respondent. In particular, Professor Sands
cannot be relied upon to exercise independent judgment because he is beholden to the
Respondent and the Respondent’s law firm for a significant number of his arbitration
appointments (and therefore presumably his compensation) ...”. 4

22. In particular, Claimant relies on four criteria used in Suez, which it alleges show
that the alleged connections between Professor Sands and Respondent give rise to a

manifest lack of independence and impartiality, as follows:'°

(1) The proximity of the connection.

Claimant asserts that, by virtue of his appointments, “the connection between

Professor Sands and the Respondent and its counsel is direct.”'

See also Claimant's Further Observations, p. 7. Claimant distinguishes the cases cited by
Respondent to support its case that Claimant's challenge should fail because allegedly the arbitrator
challenged in those cases had fewer relevant appointments. See Claimant’s Further Observations,
pp. 8-9. In particular, Claimant distinguishes the proposal to disqualify Professor Sands in
Tidewater Inc. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/5, Decision to
Disqualify Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator dated Dec. 23, 2010 (“Tidewater”) (alleging that
Tidewater (i) involved fewer appointments by Venezuela and the relevant law firm, (ii) those
appointments were made over a longer period, and (iii) that Professor Stern has “nearly four times
as many investment treaty arbitration appointments as Professor Sands.”) See Claimant’s Further
Observations, pp. 8-9.

Amended PTD, p. 2. See also Claimant's Further Observations, p. 2.
1s Amended PTD, p. 5.
6 Id., p.5.

(2) The intensity or frequency of any interactions.

Claimant asserts that “the alleged connection demonstrates a frequency of
interaction and contact between Professor Sands and the Respondent or its counsel es
“Professor Sands appears to rely on the Respondent or its counsel for a substantial amount
of his arbitration appointments.” !* The “proximity and intensity/frequency criteria
therefore suggest that Professor Sands would have a compelling reason to be partial

towards Respondent’s positions in this arbitration.” !?

(3) The degree of dependence of an arbitrator upon a party for any benefits.

Claimant acknowledges that the two cases in which Professsor Sands was
appointed by Venezuela have concluded or are inactive.” Notwithstanding, Claimant
alleges that, by virtue of his appointments by Respondent or its counsel, “Professor Sands
derives a direct and financial benefit or advantage from, and appears to be dependent on
the Respondent or its counsel as a result of the alleged connections.”?! Further, Claimant
argues that “it stands to reason that his financial compensation as an ICSID arbitrator is
sufficiently impacted by the repeated appointments by the Respondent and the Curtis
Mallet firm.”” Claimant asserts that this “creates the appearance of dependence as well as
creates a financial incentive — and thus a concern that he cannot be ‘relied upon to exercise
independent judgment. 723

Claimant alleges that “these facts suggest the possibility of a dependence or
conflict ... inasmuch as the possibility exists that Professor Sands has a financial incentive
to continue to make decisions that benefit clients of the Curtis Mallet firm, including
Respondent, to ensure that he will be selected by that firm and its clients as an arbitrator in
future matters.”** Claimant asserts that the “cluster of appointments by Respondents and

the Curtis Mallet firm and the accompanying financial and other incentives” “give[s] rise

v Amended PTD, p. 5.

8 Id.

® Id.

20 Amended PTD, p. 6.

2 Id., p.5.

2 Claimant’s Further Observations, p. 2.
8 Amended PTD, p. 6.

* Id.

to justifiable doubts with respect to his ability to reach a free and independent judgment,

threatening the Claimant’s right to legal security.””°

Claimant acknowledges Professor Sands’ statement that he acts as an arbitrator in
non-ICSID cases that cannot be disclosed. However, Claimant argues that “OPIC cannot
be expected to meaningfully evaluate, speculate or guess how many arbitral appointments
have not been disclosed ... . OPIC’s assertion that Professor Sands lacks independence or
impartiality is therefore based on and restricted to Professor Sands’ disclosed or public

. 9526
appointments.

(4) The materiality or significance of any such benefits.

Claimant argues that “the connections are material to and significantly affect the

compensation that Professor Sands earns as an arbitrator, particularly given his statement

concerning his withdrawal as counsel in ICSID arbitrations wet

Claimant contends that in evaluating the materiality of the income received from
appointments by Respondent or Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP, “[a]ny

undisclosed cases and assertions as to the income derived from them, must remain outside

the consideration of the unchallenged arbitrators.”

2. Venezuela’s Relationship With Bolivia

23. Claimant asserts that “the substantial financial support provided by Venezuela to
Bolivia and the considerable influence of the Venezuelan government on Bolivia ... creates

the appearance of a very close connection and affiliation between Bolivia and Venezuela.”

Claimant's Further Observations, p. 3. Claimant also alleges that the appointments at is
“particularly problematic because Professor Sands identifies that he no longer acts
ICSID arbitrations, given the financial implications of that decision. Where an arbitrator also
accepts appointments as counsel in ICSID proceedings, the majority of that individual’s
compensation can be expected to be derived from acting as counsel. Such professionals, therefore,
are independent from any fees received from serving as arbitrators. On the other hand, where an
ICSID arbitrator’s career is focused on serving as an arbitrator, given the financial (and other)
implications, clusters of appointment by a particular law firm or party must be viewed with great
caution and skepticism and may lead to the appearance of a lack of independence and impartiality.”
See Amended PTD p. 2. Relatedly, Claimant alleges that “Professor Sands appears to derive a
substantial amount of his income from his ICSID arbitration appointments.” See Amended PTD, p.
9,

    

See Claimant’s Further Observations, pp. 8-9.
Amended PTD, p. 6.

See Claimant’s Further Observations, p. 10.

Claimant acknowledges that “the information about financial support is based on
insufficiently detailed information,”” but relies on the following assertions in support of

its contention:

e “Venezuela is financing and supporting the Republic of Bolivia in its
nationalization plans, especially with regard to the oil industry ...,” as well as
financing other projects.*°

e According to cables obtained by Wikileaks, “Venezuela generally was interfering
with Bolivia’s internal affairs.”*!

e Venezuela and Bolivia are among a group of nations that agreed to implement a

single regional currency called the “Sucre.”*?

24. Claimant asserts that this affiliation between Venezuela and Bolivia “means that
another ICSID case in which Professor Sands was appointed by Bolivia within the last
three years should count as an additional connection point between him and _ the

Respondent.”*

25. In conclusion, Claimant asserts that “[i]n a situation such as this one where 50%
(or even 2/3rds when one considers the connection between Bolivia and Venezuela) of an

34

arbitrator’s appointments stem from one law firm and one state,” there is a substantial

appearance of dependence on Respondent and its counsel.” This allegedly “indicates a

manifest lack of the qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article 14 ww

B. RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS

26. Respondent contends that under Articles 14 and 57 of the Convention, the standard
applicable to proposals for disqualification in ICSID proceedings is the “manifest” lack of
independence or impartiality. Respondent further asserts that “[a] proposal for

disqualification must be based on objective facts which, from the point of view of a

Amended PTD, p. 8.

* Id., pp. 6-7.
a Id., p.7.

» Id.

8 Id. p.8.

s Id.

* Id.

reasonable and informed third person, evidently and clearly show a manifest lack of the
9936

qualities described above.
27. Respondent contends that the IBA Guidelines “are only a guide, and are not
mandatory in ICSID proceedings.” 7 Respondent also contends that, even if a situation
falls within the Orange List, disqualification is not automatic.** It is also necessary for
other objective elements to exist “which, in the eyes of a reasonable and informed third

party, evidently show that the arbitrator in question lacks independence or impartiality.”*°

1. Professor Sands’ Alleged Relationship with Respondent and Respondent’s
Counsel

28. In Respondent’s view, “[iJt is clear that there is no objective evidence whatsoever
that can lead an independent and informed third party to conclude that it is clear, evident
and obvious that Professor Sands’ independence and impartiality should be questioned by
virtue of the[] appointments.”””
29. As an initial matter, Respondent asserts that Claimant inflates the percentage of
Professor Sands’ appointments by Respondent and Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

LLP “to its convenience.”*!

Respondent notes that of the seven ICSID cases in which
Professor Sands was designated, “he was appointed by Respondent or by Curtis’ clients on
only three occasions (in two by Curtis’ clients and in one, OPIC, by Respondent) — and
not four.” Accordingly, “if the purpose is to determine the real percentage of ICSID
cases in which Respondent or Curtis’ clients have appointed Professor Sands as arbitrator,

43

that percentage would be 42%,”” and not 50% or nearly 50%. Respondent also asserts

Respondent’s Answer to Claimant’s Proposal to Disqualify Professor Sands dated Feb. 4, 2011
(“Answer to PTD”), pp. 2-3, 6-7.

¥ Id., p. 3.

* Id., pp. 3, 7.
» Id., p. 4.

“ Id.,p. 11.

“ Id., p. 4.

* Id., p. 6.

8 Id., pp. 4-5.

that Claimant, when taking into account the number of appointments disclosed by

Professor Sands, “exaggerates its arguments by counting a single appointment twice.”

30. Respondent argues that, in any event, “[t]he artificial use of percentages does not
constitute objective evidence for determining whether a person enjoys the qualities
required to serve as arbitrator in an ICSID proceeding 78

31. Respondent argues that Claimant creates a new situation that is not contained in the
IBA Guidelines and “confuses the origin of the appointments by adding the cases in which
Respondent and Curtis’ clients have appointed Professor Sands in arbitral proceedings in
general.” 6 Respondent also contends that “[t]o support this argument, Claimant
speculates — without any real knowledge — that Professor Sands is not participating in any
other arbitral proceedings that are not public or that have not been disclosed by Professor
Sands in his declaration ...”.“”

32. Respondent states that, even if the situation at hand falls within Section 3.1.3 of the
IBA Guidelines’ Orange List—through the appointment of Professor Sands by Venezuela
in the Nova Scotia commercial arbitration and in the related UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules case—‘this does not prove anything beyond the fact that a situation triggering
disclosure exists.”** Respondent contends that Claimant “offers no other objective fact or
evidence that may lead a reasonable and informed third party to conclude that it is clear,
obvious and evident that, as a result of Professor Sands’ appointments by Respondent and
Curtis’ clients in prior proceedings, one must doubt his impartiality or independence in the
present case. On the other hand, objective facts prove that Professor Sands’ actions in
those cases, and in others where he has participated, have been totally independent and
impartial.”

33. Respondent alleges that Claimant makes “injurious speculations,” ~° but fails to

offer any objective evidence that Professor Sands has a financial incentive to continue to

4 Answer to PTD, p. 6.
6 Id., p.5.

“6 Id.

" Id.

“ Id., p.7.

* Id.

*° Id., p. 8.

make decisions that benefit clients of the Curtis Mallet firm, including Respondent, to
ensure that he will be selected by that firm and its clients as an arbitrator in future

matters.” Respondent contends that “ICSID tribunals have previously dismissed similar

speculations in proposals for disqualification.”

34. Respondent contends that “‘it is entirely inappropriate to make accusations pointing
to the existence of ‘financial incentives’ without any objective evidence.”** Respondent
claims that, in any event, “[t]here is clear evidence to conclude that Professor Sands does

not depend economically on Respondent’s and/or Curtis’ appointments.”

In particular,
Respondent notes Professor Sands’ other professional activities referred to in his
curriculum vitae and asserts that “[w]e cannot but assume that Professor Sands receives
economic remuneration for activities other than his participation as an arbitrator in ICSID

cases.”

35. Respondent states that Section 3.3.7 of the IBA Guidelines’ Orange List is not
applicable because clients of Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP have not
appointed Professor Sands as an arbitrator in more than three cases; Respondent states

that, in fact, Claimant acknowledges this to be the case.

36. Respondent disputes Claimant’s contention that the four criteria used in Suez are
met here. Specifically:
(1) The proximity of the connection.

Respondent asserts that any connection between Professor Sands and Respondent
or Curtis “is limited to his appointment to act as a judge in disputes against third parties.”

Respondent contends that “[a]s was recently established in an ICSID decision, ‘... multiple

Answer to PTD, pp. 8, 10-11.

* Id., p. 8.
8 Id., p.9.
“ Id.

Id., p. 10 (noting that Professor Sands has been appointed by clients represented by Curtis, Mallet-
Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP in three cases).

Id. (“[A]lthough Claimant resorts to Section 3.3.7 of the Orange List as a basis for its Proposal, it
acknowledges that such scenario has not materialized, forcing it to create a new scenario which is
not contemplated in the Guidelines — nor in any other source of law — to support its groundles:
Proposal.”)

 

appointments as arbitrator by the same party in unrelated cases are neutral, since in each

case the arbitrator exercises the same independent arbitral function’ 27

(2) The intensity or frequency of any interactions.

Respondent states that “‘it is untenable to say that the relationship between
Respondent and/or Curtis and Professor Sands is ‘intense’.”** The connections with
respect to each of Respondent and Curtis are limited to appointments in two cases, in
which there was “an inquiry regarding his availability to serve as arbitrator, and in one of

the cases, to the participation via conference call in the tribunal’s first session.”””

(3) The degree of dependence of an arbitrator upon a party for any benefits.

Respondent asserts that “Claimant has provided absolutely no objective evidence
that would lead a reasonable and informed third party to conclude that Professor Sands is

financially dependent on Respondent and/or Curtis.”

(4) The materiality or significance of any such benefits.

Respondent asserts that, “if all of Professor Sands activities are taken in to account,
his participation in two active cases (or three, counting OPIC) cannot be considered

material.”°!

2. Venezuela’s Relationship With Bolivia

37. Respondent asserts that “Claimant’s Proposal is based on pure speculations of
economic dependence and arguments, without any factual or legal support, that the

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the Plurinational State of Bolivia are not sovereign

62

and independent States. According to Respondent, “the speculations of economic

dependence have been completely disproved by Professor Sands in the Comments, and the

Answer to PTD, p. I (citing Tidewater { 60).
Id., p. 12.

Id. (noting that the one of the two cases in which Professor Sands was appointed by Respondent
concluded in the jurisdictional phase and the other is inactive; the appointments by clients of Curtis,
Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP are in recently initiated cases).

“ Id.
“ Id.

Respondent's Final Observations to Claimant’s Proposal to Disqualify Professor Philippe Sands
dated Mar. 9, 2011 (“Respondent's Final Observations”) at J 2.

14

factual basis used by Claimant to sustain its argument of unification is no more than a bad

internet joke made on April Fools’ Day in the Unites [sic] States of America.”

C. PROFESSOR SANDS’ EXPLANATION

38. In his explanation of February 17, 2011, Professor Sands refutes Claimant's factual
allegation that he “cannot be relied upon to exercise independent judgment because he is
beholden to the Respondent and the Respondent’s law firm for a significant number of his
arbitration appointments (and therefore presumably his compensation).”™

39. Specifically, Professor Sands confirms that: (i) he is a tenured professor of law at
University College, London and in that role receives a salary and pension; (ii) he receives
additional income from academic and other writings; (iii) is a practising barrister, in which
capacity he acts as counsel in eight of the sixteen cases at the International Court of Justice,
as well as in a number of inter-State arbitrations before the Permanent Court of Arbitration
and other arbitral institutions, and acts for more than twenty different clients and law firms;
(iv) he sits as arbitrator in non-ICSID arbitrations that are not disclosable; (v) he has never
been instructed on any matter by the Respondent, or by the law firm that represents it in
these proceedings; and (vi) he declines instructions and arbitral appointments in

significantly more cases that he accepts.

40. Professor Sands also explains that during the calendar year 2010 “the proportion of
[his] total income that was obtained from sitting as an arbitrator was less than 5.89%.”

Accordingly, “[t]he assertion of being ‘beholden to the Respondent and the Respondent’s

law firm for ... compensation’ is not supported by the facts.”°

41. As concerns his two appointments by Respondent, Professor Sands remarks that
these appointments relate to the same facts and effectively are the same case as the arbitral

tribunal in the case under the arbitration rules of Nova Scotia was never constituted, he

Respondent's Final Observations at 2. Respondent contends that Claimant’s assertions in
Claimant’ s Initial PTD that Venezuela and Bolivia had allegedly announced a unification plan—
such that the one appointment of Professor Sands by Bolivia should also be counted for purposes of
this proposal to disqualify—were based on “a spurious and insulting joke” contained in an article
published in the United States on April Fool’s Day. See Answer PTD, p. 13.

Sands Explanation of Feb. 17, 2011.
® Id.

never claimed any fee, and it was superseded by the UNCITRAL case in which

jurisdiction was rejected unanimously on the basis that the proper forum was ICSID.

42. Professor Sands further states that “the suggestion that Bolivia and Venezuela are

not sovereign, independent States is wrong as a matter of law and fact.”

43. Finally, Professor Sands states that having carefully reviewed the observations of
both parties, and having regard to the facts and applicable standards, “I had no doubts as to
my independence or impartiality when accepting appointment ..., and I continue to have no

doubt today.”

Il. ANALYSIS OF THE TWO MEMBERS

44. In order for Claimant’s proposal to disqualify Professor Sands to succeed it must
establish a manifest lack of ability on his part to exercise independent judgment in this
matter. As is helpfully pointed out by the learned Tribunal members in Suez,” a reading
of both the English and Spanish versions of Article 14(1) of the Convention requires that
the two standards of independence and impartiality be applied when determining whether
Professor Sands manifestly lacks the characteristics of someone who may be relied upon

to exercise independent judgment for purposes of the proposal to disqualify him.”

45. There thus exists a relatively high burden for those seeking to challenge ICSID
arbitrators. The Convention’s requirement that the lack of independence be “manifest”
necessitates that this lack be clearly and objectively established. Accordingly, it is not

sufficient to show an appearance of a lack of impartiality or independence.

46. Decisions on challenges to ICSID arbitrators based upon multiple appointments of
an arbitrator by a party or counsel represent a smaller number of the publicly available

challenge decisions, compared to other bases for challenge.

Sands Explanation of Feb. 17, 2011.
” Id.
See Convention, Articles article 14(1) and 57.

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and InterAguas Servicios Integrales del Agua
S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Cases No. ARB/03/17 and ARB/03/19, Decision on the
Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral Tribunal, Oct. 22, 2007.

” See Suez | 28.

47. We have reviewed with interest the decision of the remaining arbitrators on the
proposal to disqualify an arbitrator in Tidewater.”' It is suggested by the arbitrators in that
decision that multiple appointments as arbitrator by the same party in unrelated cases are a
neutral factor in considerations relevant to a challenge. ”” We do not agree. In our
opinion, multiple appointments of an arbitrator by a party or its counsel constitute a
consideration that must be carefully considered in the context of a challenge. In an
environment where parties have the capacity to choose arbitrators, damage to the
confidence that investors and States have in the institution of investor-State dispute
resolution may be adversely affected by a perception that multiple appointments of the
same arbitrator by a party or its counsel arise from a relationship of familiarity and
confidence inimical to the requirement of independence established by the Convention.
The suggestion by the arbitrators in Tidewater that multiple appointments are likely to be
explicable on the basis of a party’s perception of the independence and competence of the
oft appointed arbitrator is in our view unpersuasive. In a dispute resolution environment, a
party’s choice of arbitrator involves a forensic decision that is clearly related to a
judgment by the appointing party and its counsel of its prospects of success in the dispute.
In our view, multiple appointments of an arbitrator are an objective indication of the view
of parties and their counsel that the outcome of the dispute is more likely to be successful

with the multiple appointee as a member of the tribunal than would otherwise be the case.

48. That the issue of multiple appointments raises a concern in the context of
independence and impartiality was reflected in the IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest
in International Arbitration by the Council of the International Bar Association.” The
Orange List of the IBA Guidelines provides a non-exhaustive enumeration of specific
situations which—depending upon the facts of a particular case—may give rise to
justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence. Disclosure of
circumstances falling within the Orange List is required. The Orange List includes
circumstances where an arbitrator has within the past three years been appointed as

arbitrator on two or more occasions by one of the parties,” or where the arbitrator has

Tidewater v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/5, Decision on Claimant's
Proposal to Disqualify Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator, dated Dec. 23, 2010 4 60.

° Id.

International Bar Association Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration dated
May 22, 2004

Id., section 3.1.3.

within the past three years received more than three appointments by the same counsel or
the same law firm.” We accept that the IBA Guidelines are not conclusive for the
purposes of the decision that we are required to make on this challenge, and that the
examples contained in the IBA Guidelines are both non-exhaustive and not in themselves
decisive of whether or not the standards set out in the guidelines for impartiality and
independence of arbitrators have been met. The IBA Guidelines do, however, indicate
that multiple appointments represent an issue relevant to impartiality and independence

: soe : «76
and, in our opinion, are correct in so doing.

49. That this is the case in international commercial arbitration, in our view, suggests
that this requirement of impartiality and independence also applies in investor-State

disputes, where the need for independence is at least as great.

50. We have, therefore, approached our consideration of Claimant’s proposal to
disqualify Professor Sands on the basis that multiple appointments of an arbitrator by a
party or its counsel is a factor which—contrary to the view expressed in Tidewater—may
lead to the conclusion that it is manifest that the arbitrator cannot be relied upon to

exercise independent judgment as required by the Convention.

Sl. Professor Sands has had two previous appointments by Respondent but those
appointments relate to the same facts and were made in what is effectively the same case.
As he explains, the arbitral tribunal in the case under the arbitration rules of Nova Scotia
was never constituted and it was superseded by the case under the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules, in which jurisdiction was unanimously rejected on the basis that the proper forum
was ICSID. We are, therefore, of the view that the multiple appointments by Respondent

of Professor Sands do not present an issue with respect to his independence in this case.

52. As we have noted, the examples contained in the IBA Guidelines regarding
multiple appointments, and the periods of time within which they are made, are neither
binding upon us nor decisive of themselves in determining impartiality or independence
under those guidelines. In any event, we do not believe that, in this situation, there is a

basis for regarding Respondent’s multiple appointments of Professor Sands alone as

 

Id., section 3.3.7.

In our view, absent exceptional circumstances, multiple appointments by counsel and parties should
be considered separately, not cumulatively.

sufficient to demonstrate the manifest lack of qualities necessary for Claimant’s proposal

to disqualify to succeed.

53. This leaves the question of Professor Sands’ appointments by Respondent’s
counsel, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP. Here the position is that Professor
Sands has been appointed in two unrelated cases involving Turkmenistan. Again, these
two appointments by Respondent’s counsel do not in our view reach the level of multiple
appointments that would by themselves demonstrate the manifest lack of independence

required to be established for a successful proposal to disqualify under the Convention.

54. The parties’ submissions in relation to the four criteria set out in the Suez case have
been considered by us carefully. These are helpful criteria but are of necessity applicable
in a variety of circumstances and the utility of their application to a challenge solely based

upon multiple appointments is in our view limited.

55. Further, we are unpersuaded by Claimant’s submissions regarding the alleged
financial dependence of Professor Sands upon either Respondent or Respondent’s counsel.
It is clear that Professor Sands has extensive independent income sources unrelated to fees
derived from his appointments as arbitrator in investment arbitrations. Even assuming that
this criterion could be helpful in making a judgment regarding his independence, the
material provided does not establish any significant dependence by him upon income

derived from those appointments.

56. Further, we are not persuaded that the material provided by Claimant regarding the
relationship between Bolivia and Venezuela establishes Claimant’s proposition that
appointments of Professor Sands by Bolivia must be considered when assessing his
independence or impartiality in this case. Accordingly, we do not regard as relevant any

appointment of Professor Sands by Bolivia in unrelated proceedings.

57. Therefore, we find that Claimant has failed to establish the requisite manifest lack
of independence by Professor Sands and conclude that the proposal for disqualification

submitted by Claimant must be dismissed.

IV. DECISION ON THE PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY

58. For the foregoing reasons Claimant’s proposal to disqualify Professor Sands dated
January 17, 2011 is dismissed.

59. The determination and attribution of costs in connection with this Decision is

reserved for decision by the Tribunal at a later stage of the proceedings.

60. As from the date hereof, the suspension of the proceeding pursuant to Arbitration
Rule 9(6) is hereby terminated.

sae rag ne an
P r Doug Jones Professor Guido Santiago Tawil
President Arbitrator

20

